THE HEADS OF REASONS, FOR WHICH A General Council of PROTESTANTS ought to
be called together in England.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by E.P. for Nicolas Bourne and are to be sold at his shop at
the South entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1641.

THE HEADS OF REASONS, for which a general Council of Protestants ought to be
called together in England.
IT may be made good first, That a general Council of Protestants will be not
only most useful unto the whole Church of God, but even very necessary both
to the same and to all Protestants States, and most of all to the Church and
State of England at this present time. Secondly, That the wavof calling it
together in Great Britain will be easy. Thirdly, And that the manner of
proceeding therein toward the redressing of public evils, will be safe and
sure, without all apparent difficulties. Therefore it must be concluded, that
the purpose of calling such a meeting at this time, ought to be taken to heart
by the Church and State of Great Britain. And to make the former propositions
good, that the latter may be inferred, let us consider the particulars thereof.

Of the first.
First, the great usefulness of such a Council will be, that on the one side
the Gospel of Jesus Christ considered in it self, then the Churches of God
professing that Gospel, and with these all the public States, wherein these
Churches dwell, will receive thereby incredible advantages, and on the other
side the superstitions and errors of Popery, the heresies of other Sects, which
more secretly undermine the truth, and the open scandals and disputes, which
disturb the peace of many men's consciences, which trouble and divide the
Churches, and breed in end all these confusions, and disorders which shake
public States, will be abolished and taken out of the way.

And to make this more plain, it may in due time by Gods grace be made
apparent to the full, that,

The Gospel of Christ in it self considered, will by such a meeting receive
these advantages.

1. Matters of chief doubt necessary to be decided (lest Atheism and
Libertinisme increase more and more still, as they begin in many parts) may be
cleared.

2. Fundamentals of Christian truth and faith, may be fully and invincibly
settled by common consent.

3. The public profession of Divine worship may be brought to some Religious
uniformity, so far as is expedient for the amiable correspondency of several
Churches one with another, and is sit for the edification of all Christians.

4. The means of propagating the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ toward those
that are yet in darkness, and destitute of true and sufficient helps to
attain assuredly to salvation may be agreed upon, and set a foot for the
advancement of Gods glory.

The Churches making profession of the Gospel, may by this means receive
these advantages.

1. All the evil intelligences which now are between the Churches by reason
of mistakings and superfluous disputes will be taken away, when parties shall
come to understand one another meaning rightly.

2. The brotherly affections of mutual love and care for one another
edification, and preservation in the fear of God (which is the true badge of
Christ's Disciples) will be taken up and begotten in the hearts of upright
Divines who now are at a doleful distance: by reason of misunderstandings, and
evil surmises risen amongst them.

3. The Churches will increase in number, and all the members thereof being
taught by their Leaders, to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace
and love, after this meeting will grow in knowledge, and in godly zeal to all
virtue.

4 A spiritual correspondency for mutual communion of Holy things, belonging
to the public good of Religion, may be by this means settled betwixt the
Churches and afterward entertained, from whence incredible comforts will arise
to every one in particular, and to all an general which truly profess
Religion.

The States wherein the united Churches do dwell may receive from hence these
advantages.

1. Within themselves they will be more settled in quietness then heretofore
they have been, and in all likelihood attain to a full and constant peace one
toward another.

2. Together with inward peace all the blessings attending the same in plenty
and prosperity will follow.

3. In respect of those that are without, they will be in safety from the
practices of evil instruments which have been sent amongst us, and set a
work, or have set themselves for their own ends politickly a work; to work
the division of Protestants, and by their division their overthrow.

4. If they be assaulted, as now they have been a long while ago, more for
their Religion then for any other cause, they will receive strength and
assistance one from another, and not be so far divided in Councels as
hitherto they have been to their own overthrow.

These are the advantages on the right hand, which by this Council will
clearly redound unto the Gospel, to the Churches, and to the States
Protestants.

The advantages on the left hand are no less if not far more apparent; for
by this means,

The superstitious fooleries and errors of Popish Religion, together with the
tyrannical practices, usurpations and pretentions of Papists against
Protestans will be brought to naught, and loose clearly all the advantages
which hitherto they have had against the Churches, and so the greatest blow
that ever was yet given unto Popery, will by this means be given to it. Which
is a thing so clear that no rational man can doubt of it, if he but a little
consider that although the meeting should not yet (as it needs not) be called
to condemn Popery, yet if it but shows forth the truth of God, in that
wherein it is fundamentally professed by Protestants, and sets their
Churches in some kind of union amongst themselves, and brings their
intentions to some good and easy correspondency, for the future manifestation
and advancement of the Gospel toward those that are kept in ignorance and
spiritual slavery by the Pope: it will make him fall from his usurped Throne
to the ground, and his whole imaginary Religion with him into contempt, even as
Satan fell from heaven like lightning, when Christ sent forth his seventy
disciples, which preached the Gospel. As for the Heresies of other Sects which
secretly undermine the fundamentals of saving truth, and sound government;
these do as much harm in corrupting the minds of simple ones in the dark, as
the Papists do openly by violence and other practices upon the affections of
men that are wise after this world. Therefore to cut these short of the
advantages which they now take from our distractions, this meeting may greatly
serve. For if the truth of fundamentals once be evidently cleared, then a
course may besettled, to deal both by authority with those that are impudently
blasphemous, scandalous and refractory, against the clearly fundamental truth
of Gods word, and likewise by treaties in all lenity and long-suffering with
careful instruction and Council, to give satisfaction to the scrupulous
consciences of the weaker sort; by which means the force of their seduction
will come to an end. For now they prevail only, because no such course is
taken by common consent: And no such course can be taken by common consent,
except it be done with common advice; and this cannot be done, except a
General Council of Protestants be called to consult upon the matter.

The last advantage of the left hand redoundeth to the Gospel, to the
Churches, to the States, and to every particular person therein all at once.
For the removing, first of needless disputes; which upon this meeting will
infallibly (if it be well ordered) follow, will prevent contentiousnesse, and
strife of parties. And if this be prevented, public scandals will of
themselves cease, so far as they proceed from that licenciousnesse, and
inordinate course which men take to offend one another in the way of partiality
and contradiction. Which way being once stopped, the wel-spring of a thousand
public evils will be dried up; and if there were none other motive to induce
his Majesty, and the Church and State of England, to call such a meeting of
Protestant Divines but this alone: namely that the fountain of such bitter
waters of strife may be dried up, it would be sufficient to draw them to this
resolution, whether they look in particular to themselves at this time, or in
general to the whole States of Protestants, wherein their safety is involved.

And from hence arises, if not an absolute, yet a very urgent necessity of
making use of this council at this time; because if now it be either
absolutely, or at least very urgently necessary, not only by reason of Gods
express and general Commandment to this effect, but also by reason of
public and private calamities, distractions and scandalously pernicious
disorders more frequent now, then at others times, to aim at the seeking of
peace in the profession of his Gospel. And if this peace cannot truly be
sought for, or any ways obtained or hoped for, without such a meeting of
Protestants; then it follows that such a meeting is at this time, if not
absolutely, yet very urgently necessary.

But this may easily be made manifest, that without such a meeting, a true and
settled peace of Protestant Divines and Churches, cannot be obtained, according
to Gods Commandment, for the advantage of the Gospel, and the safety of their
public States: therefore it must also be concluded, that the aim of calling
such a meeting, is not only most useful, but also either absolutely, or at
least very urgently necessary.

Much could be said of this, either absolute or at least very urgent necessity
of procuring peace and unity, as well amongst Protestants in general, as in
particular amongst the Churches of Great Britain, and of the peculiar
advantages, which those of Great Britain should gain more then others, by
calling a meeting of Protestants to that effect, but now I will surcease from
this subject, and leave the matter to the more serious consideration of the
judicious and pious Reader, who can discern what the true causes and remedies
of public evils are, and how the safety of the Church and State of England at
this time cannot be procured without some especial relation, which it must
have toward other Protestant Churches and States.

Of the second.
To show that in England such a meeting may easily be called together, I must
in the first place presuppose that the State will be free from troubles and
dangers of war, and that there is a willingness in the King and Clergy to
have it called, and then in the second place it must be made apparent, 1. That
the minds and dispositions, of the chief of all Protestant parties, are now
sufficiently prepared to embrace and entertain with gladness such a motion,
if it should be proposed unto them in a convenient way by any one of eminent
Authority, which is able to be at some extraordinary charges to that effect.

2. That the most judicious Protestant Divines and Statesmen in every party do
judge such a meeting to be not only useful, but necessary to make an end of
our divisions.

3. That not only the most judicious, but even almost all such as are of any
note, have given already their consent and advice toward such a meeting; and
amongst these all the truly peaceable and godly wish earnestly for the calling
of it together, ever since the Evangelicall States of Germany have made a
Decree in the year 1634 that at some time convenient, when the affairs of the
Empire should settle a little, such a meeting should be called.

Now seeing that time is not yet come in Germany, nor like to come in have, and
nevertheless on all sides the necessities of such a remedy, to cure public
evils grow daily greater and greater. Therefore the Church and state of
England, is to be entreated for its own safety and peace, and for the love of
Gods glory, to help the public good in this behalf.

4. That the further preparatives, namely to call,

1. Those that are to be called. 2. To deal particularly with them, that they
may be preinformed of the scope and manner of treating intended. And 3. To
order and preconceive the whole way of proceeding toward a full and happy
conclusion of the treaty; such as may be without exception on all sides, will
not require above a years space, after the resolution is once taken to call the
Counsel together. All which may be made palpably and particularly, manifest in
a very short space, if it once appear, that this motion is not slighted. And
if it be slighted, I do hereby declare that I have washed mine hands in
innocence, and cleared my conscience from that guilt, which will lie heavy
upon those, who are incendiaries of strife, or accessory thereunto, or being
able, will not help to redress and to heal the breaches of Sion, which
strife and ambition have made and augment daily.

Of the third,
To show that the manner of proceeding in such a meeting of Protestanes may be
such as will certainly without all apparent difficulty reach the ends,
wherefore it ought to be called: We must conceive what the properanddirect
scope of the coming together of this Counsel should be: How the Divines
should be brought together? how, when they are come together he that calls
them should deal with them, to oblige them to the scope for which they meet?
What they should treat off? how they should severally conceive, and jointly
confer their thoughts? how the general conclusion, and consent of all their
resolutions is to be taken up and ratified? and lastly Low the same is to be
introduced into all the Churches; for their mutual union, peace, and
edification?

Of these heads to speak but a word, conceive thus of each.

1. First, the scope for which the Council should be called, should not be
directly to decide matters of particular controversy, or to make
determinations and Decrees, whereunto the consciences of all men, as by
absolute command of that Assembly should be obliged implicitly to submit their
belief, and blindly to give obedience, but rather to declare their meanings,
only concerning the union of Protestants in fundamental truths and forms of
Doctrines most necessary for edification, and to give their advices concerning
the way of uniting Protestants in the public profession of those truths, and
in the means of peaceable government for mutual edification in time to come,
and for taking away of scandals, and preventing of the causes of future
breaches.

2. The way of bringing them together must be by entreaty made to the
Superiors of all parties, requiring that they would send, some able judicious
and godly men sit to give counsel in such cases. And to make this entreaty
effectual, some sit Messenger, or Messengers must be used to insinuate the
purpose of their calling together unto the State whence they are called, lest
jealousies rise and hinder the proceeding of the work.

3. When they are come together, they are to be obliged unto the scope of their
meeting by a solemn form of Oath, binding them first to sincerity in repect
of their meanings, which are to be declared in the presence of God, and then to
certain other conditions not to be refused by any; whereby the danger of rash
contradictions, needless disputes, and frivolous tergiversations in profitable
matters may be prevented, and the true manner of their treaty limited within
due bounds.

4. The subjects whereof they should treat are the particulars, contained
under the ends heretofore named, whereof a list must be made, with a clear
demonstration of the coherence of every Subject with another; and of the
importance of every one for the attaining of the chief end to which it must be
referred in the consideration which is to be taken of it.

5. The manner of conceiving severally and conferring jointly their thoughts,
must be done in write.

Therefore to conceive their determinations and counsels, the subjects of
meditation are to be given to every College apart in write, by way of question
proposed: whereunto the manner of answearing is to be prelimited, in respect of
the grounds whence the answer is to be taken; of the form, how it should be
set down, and of the end to which it is more distinctly to be referred. And to
confer their determinations and counsels jointly, it may be done by a
Committee of some few, which he who calls them together, may appoint. And
this Committee should contract the variety of all the answers, to so few
heads as may be, without omitting any thing which may be thought material.

6. The general consent of all their resolutions is to be gathered from their
own declarations into one sum, yet by distinct heads of matters set down.
And it should be given to every one severally to be perused, before it be
ratified, as an Act of the Council. And when all are willing to acknowledge it
as their own Act, then it should be subscribed.

7. The manner of introducing the Acts of such a Council in all particular
Churches, should be determined in the Council it self, showing what course
should be taken every where to acquaint the Ministers therewith in all
Churches, so as they may receive full satisfaction in case of any doubt, and
have no cause to complain, that a yoke of humane constitutions is put upon
them, by the authority of some few, or that they are too much limited in that
liberty, which Christ gives to his Servants in the Gospel, to prophecy and
practice things tending to private or public edification. All this may be done
without the formalitie and trouble of many Sessions, and public meetings
which might perhaps breed some inconveniences here needless to be mentioned.

Lastly, the charges will not be a great burden to England, although it should
bear the same all alone, and although the meeting should last a year or two:
but it may be made good, that in one year space and sooner also, the work may
be done. And that most of the Protestant States will be willing to send their
own Divines, at their own charges. And no doubt a free contribution will
easily be obtained of all good Protestants, to bring such a happy work to
pass.

FINIS.

