Knaves and Fools IN FOLIO.

Discovered, and then Advised, that once at the last they will grow both wise
and honest.

Or, A Means to undeceive, and so to beget a right understanding and judgment
throughout the three Kingdoms, hitherto deluded by the aforesaids.

Dedicated with all respectivenesse both for discovery and caution against the
aforesaids, to all the wise and honest of the three Nations, whom we highly
prize and honor, especially the Honorable City of London, whose goodness,
piety, easy betrust, and credulity of such unworthies, has been too much
wrought upon and abused by depraved Politicians of all sorts.

In which Tract is showed the wickedness of the one side in their several
pretenses, and the weakness on the other side, in being through too much
credulity surprised and circumvented by such pretenders, who intend not what
they pretend; but bave their own self ends to compass under such pretexts. --
Conceived very useful to be taken knowledge of, by all sorts whatsoever. For
that we hope the Reader will find himself fully satisfied thereby, which may
probably much check, if not totally break the neck of this Uncivil Civil
War.

The deaf Adder will not hear, charm thou never so wisely, nor will fools
brayed in morters, forsake their follies. But rebuke a wise man and he will
love thee, -- whereas a fool rebuked will hate thee. The Contents of the Book
are in the next Page.

LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons for R. H. In Queens-head-Alley. 1648.

The Contents of the Book in general are about diverse errors and mistakes of
the people concerning the Kingdom, the Parliament, the King, and lastly
themselves in particular, fully cleared, and all, or most of their Objections
answered.
The several particular Contents are as follows.

1. THat the State at large is King, and the King so called is but its Steward
or highest Officer; also not selfely highest, but made so by the favor of the
people, in opposition to particulars, not the general, see Sect. 46. 58, 59.
2. That the welfare of the same State in Peace, Justice, and safety, etc. is
the end of the said Steward and Officer, and so is it the Highest power and so
King and Sovereign of all Deputy-powers whatsoever, etc. see 46 58 59. 3. The
peoples error in their vast acceptance of the title, King of England, etc.
cleared at Sect. 63. the margent also. So concerning his Dues or Rights any
way, as the Crown, Throne, Scepter, etc. see 53 ^'th margent, so all of 58. 4.
The peoples unjust Objections and Exceptions against the Parliament answered,
and their just ones complied too, and provided for, at 29. 30. 47, 48. to 56,
57. As for Royallists and Malignants in special. See 55. 5. That the
Parliament (as they say) has wronged them more then the King: and that they
are as very slaves as the King can or will make them, etc. see the next before:
so also in full, sect. 71. 6. Till the King come home (as they say) no Peace
nor settlement will be. Answered at -- 72. 7. Their mistakes and errors about
the Treaty; also the wicked policy of some to deceive the simple about the
same, discovered: see Sect. 21. and Isewhere. 8. That they, (as they say) fight
for the Kingdom and themselves, and not against, etc. In fighting for the King
against the Parliament; also that they ought to fight for the Kings Rights,
Dues, and cs. the Covenant likewise binding tbem thereto. -- 73. 9. They fight
against the Parliament as wrongers of the King and themselves, etc. 74. 10.
Concerning Religion, so Independents and Sects, the peoples mistakes and
exceptions about them, cleared, sect. 54. see the margent also. 11. Diverse
Quaeries concerning Treason, Rebellion, and disobedience, in relation to the
State at large, the Parliament, the King, and the Army; also concerning sideing
with, or against any of them, or newtralizing, usefully resolved, satisfied,
and cleared, from sect. 59. to 63. 12. An addition of some Quaeries or
Particulars more concerning the next aforesaid Subject, set down, because
omitted there, as at sect. 65, 66, 67. 13. The title King not rightly
translated from any Language: see sect. 63. all the margent. 14. Also who are
Murderers and Thieves in this War; who not, see sect. 68, 69. 15. An
application to the Parliament, at sect. 64. 16. Another to London, at sect. 63.
TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IF our Adversaries write all, or any thing, and we nothing at all, the
conquering Sword will be conquered by the Pen; so also, Justice, Piety, and
Purity by pravities -- It may not be, which rather then it shall, we the
meanest of many, have in love to justice, and integrity, for the common good of
this our distracted and almost destroyed Nation, adventured the combat: For we
expect rather wicked (though weak Sophistical, and brangling) oppositions,
then a genuine Reply, or Compliance.

So rest I thine, S. H.

GOod Reader, our earnest desire to give full satisfaction, has enlarged the
Margin, which I pray thee fail not to read, lest thou come short of our
intention, -- thine instruction --

Knaves and Fools In Folio Discovered and advised.
SECTION I.
I Always took Men for Men, till now of late; and now I find them Fiends, and
Monsters, and withal monstrous Fools: Monsters they are, as murdering men
like themselves, and in murdering themselves also, by in enforcing others
defensively to kill them; which in the inforcer, is murder, in the enforced
killing: I say, unjust offenders or defenders, are murderers: But the just
offender, or defender, may kill, but cannot murder.

2. But to the point, There is a crew of Lunsford, Langdale, Goring the
Monopolist, Culpepper, Hopton, Glenham. etc. Under the Kings, the Princes, or
Dukes names, (which the silly people idolatrize) they proclaim, summon, or
demand Forts, Towers, Towns, Castles, etc. And bribe for them, write letters,
give commissions, and all is for themselves, etc. Will the Lords of their own
yield them up to the treacherous Steward, their right and might, etc?
crafty knaves and traitors lately returned into the Kingdom, who formerly
pretended the King, but intended themselves only; so politickly to deceive the
people, they made use of the Kings name to draw the people on their side, who
thought they fought for the King, but it was to raise the fortunes of these
fellows, by raising themselves. And thus those crafty knaves caused the poor
ignorant sottish people to murder one another to make themselves great; for
which the Fools were jeered by these Knaves, etc. And withal these Knaves
applauded and magnified themselves for this their act of gullery and knavery.

3. The same persons are now come again to act the second, yet The Scot will
also gull fools under the same pretenses, and then Beavers must veil Bonnets
to Blew-caps.
the same part or Tragedy, to the same Tune, under the same pretenses for the
King, Liberties, Laws, etc. But it is for the same end of selfeinvestment and
advancement, as before unto their own, and above their own if they can.

4. For they (Demetrius-like) care not a Rush for Diana: so, nor they for the
King, but to King themselves. Or, as the one lived by making silver Shrines,
and these by Shrines of Silver.

5. For what is the King, or Diana to either of them, but as conducing?

6. What mad fools are all sorts to be so gul'd, and led by the nose, and
jeet'd at for their folly? to think these Rake-shames, who fought against the
Kingdom, as before, under pretense for the King, (a fine piece of As against
the Kingdom, the Kings King, etc.
treason) yet all to bring about their own ends, as to advance themselves over
the Kingdom, and King it both over it and the King; yet show the King to the
people. Who but fools, I say, can think these fight for the King, etc. and not
for themselves? And how agrees it with the duty of faithfulness to the
Kingdom (their Mother) to fight for the King her servant (did they truly so)
against it See to it ye fools what you do, they have no commission from the
King, nor can the King give Commission, -- would he give it.
or her, and so against their own also, in conclusion.

7. Is it possible? Can Libertines settle the Liberties of others? or the
irreligious Religion? Can the godless be for God? Can contraries concentrize?
etc.

8. Their return now, is but to serve their own turn, though their pretenses be
as before: It Is only, I say, to cause the people (under color as for the King,
Religion, and Liberties) to aid them (to the murdering of one another) to help
them to their lands, livings and Do fools, do, spoil your grain, and so your
gain, by rampant horsemen. Sowed you to reap so? Do, send them money and means
to enable them to take away your means, etc.
means, as also their preferments, offices, Monopolies again, etc.

9. Fools that you are, besides the aforesaids, it is also to conquer you by
your selves, by your follies, etc. As by your ignorance, credulity, and easy
betrust, and then to rule over you as Conquerours, and put all on the King, as
if only his doings; for which they are hypocritically sorry, but cannot help
it, though they be the only helpers and hurters, as having power, but not wit,
but wilfulness.

10. You have fought against them formerly for the kingdom, and your selves;
as, for your Religion and Liberties, etc. Why fight you for such as fought
against you, and you against them in the foresaids? and they have still the
same intention^ you fools, see you not your folly? Will not braying in a
mortar make you leave it, and grow wise? I see you have no other eyes but eyes,
etc,

11. The King fought against you in the same particulars, and you against him
by way of defense, for your selves. He fights still, yet more covertly and
cunningly, against you, for the same ends; and by you, to end you, and begin
himself anew.

12. Why fight you not against him, as before? Or why fought you against him
before? Or why, of all whyes, fight you now for him, or on his side, against
your selves, and your posterities? Sure you are besides your selves, that you
thus side not with your selves, but against, etc.

13. Fools of all sorts, what think you? Will not the King and Are not those
Clergymen, so all sorts traitors, that betray their country so? Are they not
murderers that give way to the peoples murdering for their own ends; how then
to plot all? etc.
these Traitors, these Prevaricators, etc. be revenged on all sorts, Presbyters
as Independents, Layicks as Clergymen, for outing him the Viceroy, and these
his vicious Royalists, and his pragmaticall Prelates? Do Presbyter, do, flatter
thy self, as Agag, the fear of death is past: But know (young man) for all
this, thou shall come to judgment; and as thy sword has made many a woman
childlesse, so shall thy mother be chidlesse this day -- Precipitation waits on
prostraters, etc.

14. And you Citizens, as civilly and demurely as you look, it will not do, you
have had a finger in the pie, etc. It Is you monied the Armies, and the Scots
against the King: so against the Prelates, and that Faction; it will fraction
you, if ever they come to be whole again: they may Come in, my Lord, come in:
but for I this Jael drives tbe nail into his Temples.
smile on you, and you may (Agag-like) flatter and befoole your selves with the
fear of death is past; but be sure they will smite you under the fifth rib.

15. And what can you expect from such Leaders and Commanders as aforesaid, but
to be led like slaves, or beasts, and commanded like fools? What are the
Citizens as very fools as the fool? For shame, learn wit and wisdom, or
suffer like wiseakers, etc.

16. For my part, I did never see such adventurous fools in all my life, that
will hazard Life, Liberties, and Religion, etc. on bare words; of the woordy,
of irreligious Rakeshames, that helped to perjure it in the North, and call God
to witness it, that they intended no such thing as raising of Arms, though
raising of Arms was their only intention.

17. Words and Mottoes for God, Religion, etc. are but words, and words are
made of lettetrs, and yet letters are lets to the Opinion pinions up judgment.
understanding of many, when they look at them, and not to things, to realties,
etc.

18. You fools of all sorts, Is it nothing to engage Life, Liberty and
Religion on bare words of such Recreants? What, for nothing? Are the aforesaids
things of no value? In other matters you will not trust the Trusty without
security, no not with trivials, and will you trust the trustlesse with life,
Religion, livelihood, and liberties? You fools, why engage you, or think to
engage, before they engage sufficient security, that these things (they having
victorized) you shall have without any intrusions to your hurt or confusion,
etc. You Calves, will you go like Oxen to the slaughter, or like Fools to the
stocks with laughter? etc.

19. Well, the King they will have home, I that they will, and so Note. If he
come in a conqueror, there is no law but lust, no lives, liberties, religion,
or estates, but ad placitum. Then the Militia his, he will master all at his
pleasure; with the Navy he will bring in Forraigners to force all, and he will
garrison all Countries with his Faction, and enforce the Countries to pay for
the rods that must whip them. And he and his Queen will jeere, scorn, and
insult over the foolish English, and make them work to maintain their
revelling, etc. He will also disarm all, and only Arm his party: Then will he
do with you, so yours, to take your Sons and Daughters, your Fields and
Vineyards as he pleases.
will you: more knaves and fools are you both. Nay, are you not mad men as
well as fools? Will you have him home without cautions and security from him
and them, against his and their beslaving you? If you bring him home like a
Conqueror, it is you the Conquerours are conquered, and leave your posterities
slaves, and capable of cursing you their foolish fathers, etc. I have told you
before, and now tell you again, They pretend the King only to draw you on, but
only intend themselves, etc.

20. Was Kent never conquered hitherto? And shall their follies now foil and
conquer them? Fools, be wise for shame, know and be certain, See Sect. 44. if
fit to treat with. So Sect. 46. Is not the Kingdom Lord and King, etc. Se
Sect. 46. Is it for the honor of the guiltless Lord to treat with his guilty
servant? I am abasht at its baseness, etc.
that you be secured (and that not with words, for they are wind) of safe and
just conditions before you entertain him, that so you and your posterities may
live free, according to your birthrights, and not as slaves. Remember the
Northern protestations and oaths broken, being so solemnly taken at his
coronation; do they not crown all for fools that trust any further then
groundedly secured?

21. To treat with, is the pretense, but the intention is to make use of the
ignorant and giddy-brain'd idolatrizing people, to throng in threans and
multitudes to him, and so overpower themselves and theirs; yea, the whole
kingdom with their weight and levity. He will then scorn to treat or entreat,
but will entreat all his opposers as his deposers. How think you fools? will
that be? Surely to your not being; when it will be too late to help either
your selves or your posterities, etc.

22 Oh but the Citizens, no, nor the Countries, will not fight against Kent,
Essex, nor any the Countries, they will rather fight for them, etc. But know
they what is for them? -- See Sect. 24, 27, 33.

23. What, are the grave Citizens such fools, what if against Kent or Essex be
for them, however for the kngdome: how then, I say?

24. Is all Kent or Essex, or the Countries thus befooled? I cannot think it;
but admit so, we ought be against them in all unjustnesse or endangerings to
themselves or the kingdom; and in being against, we are for. Fools know, it is
not words, or expressions, or oculars define, but things, natures, intentions,
intrinsiques, and occults.

25. We ought also to be for our selves, and ours in safety and justice, so for
the kingdom, and that first of all, though against the Countries, if so it
were; but so it is not, but for them. Also -- etc.

But Kent and the Countries promise well in such and such particulars as
appears by their petition and its Comment. The Comment speaks commendably,
and better then the Petition, what then? These are but words, who shall secure
us, that, that is their intentions only? May it not be to insinuate, and so by
degrees (in the interim) to gather company to side with them, and stave off all
opposers: for who would not side with, and who will oppose such petitioners,
such Commenters, if their aims reached not beyond their words and promises?

26. And therefore yet again, who but fools would side with them, etc. such
and such being their Leaders, Heads and Commanders? and who but Fools, Knaves,
or both, would not oppose them, having such petitionary commands, and
prostrating Commanders, -- except they change their Commanders, so their
commands and demands, of forcibly bringing in the King; they are not to be
communed with, but commined rather, etc.

27. If you will not be against the Countries, but for them, then open their
understandings by discovering the adversaries cunning pretenses and deceits,
and the error of some particulars in their petitions, Let the righteous smite
me, and it shall be a kindness: let him reprove, and it shall be an excellent
oil.
etc. Oppose them in this sense, for their own and the kingdoms good. Better
are the rebukes of a friend, then the kisses of an enemy.

28. Blandishments blind fools, but friendly checkes open the eyes of the
wise. -- But who is so faithful to give them, or so wise to accept of them?

29. Well, but the Parliament has abused you and them, etc. as you object and
except; but admit so, so now you will not comply to them any longer, but defy,
etc. What then? Will you right you self the wrong way? Will you out of the
Frying pan into the fire? Is not pinching better then fleying? etc. But know
fools, the Parliament is forced for necessity and policy sake, to do many
things they would nor, and deny many things they would grant, and to conceal
many discoverables, because time is not yet for them: and you are brainlesse,
ignorant, opinionated, and wilful withal; and so not able to bear or digest
them, though for your good, such is your badnesse.

30 Has the Parliament wronged you? Admit so, what then? will you accept
therefore no righting at all, nor any right things from them? Sure in not
complying to you in your preposterous pretended treaty with the King, intended
fiding with him to inslave your selves and your posterities, and the whole
kingdom; they have righted you, and complied to you, in that they have not
complied to you for your destructions, by murders, loss of friends, husbands,
parents, children, also in that they would preserve your grain, your fruit on
the ground, which the rampant horses would have ground to powder for you, and
against you, etc.

31. In short, be wise at last, suspect and search into the pretenses of your
suggesters and prompters of such petitions, they have their own ends, not
yours, except your ending. Remember what your Commanders are, and their ends,
etc. many their Officers are for plunder, and what is yours, more then for you,
etc. Clergymen are many of them great cheaters of the people for their own
ends, urging (Demetrius like) Diana, Diana; so they the King, God, Religion,
Liberties, and against the Parliament, but all is for you to fight to force
them under the ground aforesaid, till you are groundless, etc.

32. Enforce not the Parliament by importunities, (as Phaeton did Phoebus) for
the guidance of the Suns Chariot; it is beyond your management, keep in your
orbs and spheres of understanding and reaches, lest you be out-reacht, yea
lest you out-reach your selves, which is soon done by reachlesnesse and
ignorance, etc.

33. But yet again, the City will not fight against the Country, lest the
Countries combine against them. A fine pretense and a foolish fear, because
the greater fear should fear away the less. As for aiding, or being against,
what is so, see before at Sect. 27. Inform them well, and you shall form them
anew, and they shall find it is for them. Am I against my father, or am I not
rather for him, if in his error, wilfulness, or passion, he were ready to
perpetrate murder, or treason, etc. if I disarm and withstand him, judge your
selves, do not I save him? So the designed object also from destruction, etc.

34. There Is no such for's, as such againsts, etc.

35. And why rather fear you not this greater fear, that for want of aiding
the Army against (as you say) but I say for the Countries against the Goreans,
and all disloyal treacherous Royalists) why cast you not? I say, the Army may
be cast, and the Royalists remain victors, where are you then? when the whole
kingdom (out of weakness some, out of wickedness other some, shall
overwhelme you like an inundation or deluge, who shall then check them from
giving you check-meat by plunderings and massacres, and what not? etc.

36. But these adverse youngsters will politickly pretend, they only intend to
stand on their guard, and to defend, not offend, and fools like themselves,
think this is very fair, as foul as it is; but may it not be to ingratiate
themselves into the opinion of weaklings; why, they are honest men, defense is
according to Nature, and Reasons law: but may they not intend also by this to
make us secure and improvident on purpose to surprise us? may it not be to gain
time to multiply their multitudes ad infinitum, and then overpower and finite
us? Is it wisdom in war to believe suggestions? Does not Nature and reason
teach us also to secure our selves? And how shall that be, but by dissipating
them at first, not suffering them to body or numerous it. The nature and
malignity of their petition, the nature, and composition of the leaders and the
led, shows that their glistering pretenses are not gold (though gilded) but
lead; their words, expressions, and postures, shows their intended prostration
of us, etc. though we know also they will by these courses prostrate themselves
and their own in conclusion; who offends them, so, as such offensive defense
need be? Does not their arming enforce arming? Does not their universal
violence (as they will have the King home fas aut nefas) import them virulent?
and what may be presaged from such depraveds, but pravities? much more may be
inferred from the contents of their discontented petition; so from the leaders
and the led, so from their words, expressions, and postures; but comprehensive
understandings will save us the labor, and incomprehensive or wilful ones,
will make us labor in vain, etc.

37. Lastly, comes Sinon, a slye fellow, a Grecian traitor Scotes, darkness,
-- Clandestiner. Idam,
Sinon, or Scotos, the Scot, or the Clandestiner, he comes mouthing it, Breach
of Covenant, breach of Covenant. It Is queried, In what? He bawles out, Oh
Templum Domini, Templum Domini, Religion, the Kirk, Gods honor, worship,
service, suffer insufferables, Sects also must be diffected, and his King
erected in his rights, etc. and our State dejected, or else all is not right,
etc.

38. But oh the hypocritical villainy of this cheating world, Religion, with
the rest aforesaid, are made the Bawds to all villainy; Oh shame to all such
Atheistical, inhumane, and barbarous Barbarians, for they care not for
Religion nor the rest, a rush, but as religious oculars are conducing to their
occults -- their Clandestines, etc. their ends are our endings and the
beginnings of themselves; it is plunder, the milk and the honey, and the
clusters of our Canaan Grapes they gape after; yet our fools are foild with
these follies, and herein also to trust the trustlesse, with Life, Liberty, and
Lands, on any terms, their security being only a few -- pious -- pretenses,
which possesses with a security like to that of foolish Lakish, a retchlesse
City, -- and so a City soon wrackt, etc.

39. Well, well, we have broken the Covenant about Religion, How trow? Why, we
Presbyter it not? Answ. Nor should we as qualified, for it is contrary to Gods
word, so to the covenant which enjoynes the nearest to Gods word, which
Presbytery as quallified is not, as qualified it may, so we except against our
excepters, and require their compliance, etc. But does the covenant allow to
invade? and that also without covention or conviction? etc. in what conventicle
was this Doctrine forged, trow? etc.

40. Surely if the Covenant be strictly seen into, we shall be forced to call
our Clandestiner to an account, that we may see into Synon, or the Trojan
horse, etc.

41. His next reason of invasion, is the Kings erection, and our States
dejection: That is, the Scots own Kinging it over us, under pretense of the
King, -- a fine piece of gullery.

42. Well, how proves the Scot we have broke this Covenant? oh well enough,
well enough. Its so indeed, if his ill enough be well enough. Thus he proves
it, we are to maintain His Majesty in all his Might and Mightiness; Is not
this proof sufficient? are we not gone by this? Well, thus we yet recover our
selves; Does not the Scot deal Divel-like? For the Devil says to Christ, cast
thy self down; yet thou shall not be cast, for God has promised that the
Angels shall secure thee, etc. But oh, Sir Sinon, Satan leaves out (in his or
thy ways) So our Clandestiner (Devill-like) deviates the Kings Highway, which
is, -- as the King continues us in our Religion and Rights, etc. How now
Clandestiner, is this done? how is it then, we are undone? For what means all
the yellings and bleatings over the Kingdom, etc. Of infinites, for murders,
massacres, and undoings? etc. How does Synon, or our Senate, or our Synod: so
our City, yea all the Cities and Countries in England; yea each Individual
answer this. I am at a stand, etc. yet I will stand to it. Had the Covenant
been absolute, oh Scot, it had been so much the more desolate, like thy self
that urgest it. For to Is not the covenanting to protect blood-shedders,
bloodshedding in the Covenanters and protecters? sure it is, or nothing is
sure. What had Saul done to lose the Kingdom, etc. oh consider, -- can or do
his finites parallel our infinites. Are dumb Divines of God? O profitlesse
Prophets.
covenant to protect him in all his greatness, who by thy own confession is
guilty of infinites of bloodshed, I ask thee? What are intentionall bloody,
and knowing blood-shedders, and that of Infinites, contrary to oath and
betrust? are they not mighty Mrs and Trs? Resolve my weak judgment, and
scrupilous conscience, for so thou art bound in conscience to do. Did not the
Prophets of old say, Thou art the man. And again, thou have done foolishly;
therefore the Lord (that is Justice) has rent away thy Kingdom from thee.
Thou David have slain Vriah, and drab'd his wife -- retaliation shall
retaliate, the sword for the sword, and thy ten Wives for his one, and that
occulalry for thy occults, etc. So shall justice also retaliate a Jezabel,
though a Queen, for a Naboth, though a Naball. For as the Dogs lickt the blood
of Naboth, so shall they that of Jezabel.

43. To except against us for this quereing and alleging Scripture to
satisfy our scrupulous conscience, is against Scripture and Religion, and so
against God: and what is that but irreligion and atheism, and what are such but
such, etc.

44. But our Covenant is first both in place and worth, also absolute in
rendering and in nature, for rights of Kingdom and Parliament; if conscience
you make as you urge and pretend, why then do you so unconscionably invade the
Rights of either, for the unrighteous? Your own position as before, the Kings
guiltiness allows not his erection to the prostration of both States. Again,
the Kings supportment in his height and privileges, are but respective, and so
of no respect, if forfeited. Consider, can respectives both in nature and in
rendering answer to absolutes in both? being forfeited also as before, etc.

45. Oh English, oh Scot, oh all sorts, consider, what fell on the Jewish
Nation for that their 12. Tribes did not call Saul to an account for some
trivial wrong done to a paltry Pagan City; did not 3. years of famine fall on
them, because Saul's plottings for their destruction, and the blood he shed was
not answered for. Sure Saul would not punish himself; who then but the 12.
Tribes should have done it? which, cause they did not, they are punished till
Readiness 7. sons, expiated for all, and so retaliated satisfaction in being
hanged up by the Gibeonites; which City demanded Justice, and petitioned not
for Saul's supportance against justice, much less for his honor and greatness.
Oh wise-headed Gibeonites, -- oh foolish and giddi-brain'd English, oh depraved
Scot, etc.

46. Thus much for Land men; let us now see if Seamen have more wit, or more
honesty, so have any thing to say to this business. Oh madness, there is
nothing but weaknesses or wickednesses in this world; for Seamen say the same,
and so Land and Sea and Air, are I think nothing but air. Well, I will land
the Seamen, and refer them for We say as much for the Army, if you will not
help them for their own sakes, yet help them for the Kingdoms sake, your
King: if the end of Governors be King of all Governors.
what I have said to the Land-men, and so let them go. For I resolve on
brevity; for to say again what I have said, is to present you with Coleworts
twice sodde, only hints, the Reader cannot do less then comment. I conclude
then, is it not madness and folly, if the Parliament have offended you, or you
are offended with it, you will (like Will: Summers) strike who ever is next you.
Is it not Treason to strike at the Kingdom, which is the King King and yours?
If you know it not, are you not weak? If you know, yet will not know, are you
not wicked? Is it not a striking against the Kingdom, not to strike its
strikers, or to bring in it is Viceroy to strike and conquer it? but you
neither see, nor intend any such thing; ah weakness, etc. Your intentions we
know not, but your actions portend no less; will you King the Viceroy above
the Roy? Is a people for a King, or a King for a people? Whether is the means
or the end King? whether is physic or health King? If the Parlaiment have
wronged you, right your selves in a fair way, so as you may not wrong the
Kingdom, like a foolish fellow; who says, the Mr. of the ship has wronged
him, and to revenge himself, will drown the ship, that he may drown his
Master, though withal he drown himself and all the rest in it, etc.

47. It may be I have suffered by the Parliament as much as any; what then? I
will not (Will: Somers-like) strike my next man or any, much less my Lord and
King the Kingdom; no, I will suffer again and again, yea to death, yea death
it self, rather then endanger or be the death of my Lord. I scorn to Traitor
or Rebel it so: so I will not oppose my wrongers, to the wronging of my Lord;
yea I will help them to the righting of him, etc. And if I cannot right my
self without wronging my Lord, I will never be righted, yet count I am right,
etc.

48. Oh but some will newtralize it, and not take part with either, but defend
against both; or if they offend any, it shall be the State who Are not these
Traitos to K. Salus?
have offended them, etc. But are these sayings for Seniors, for sage, wise,
and grave Governors, or for any? If you travel, and some of the foremost of
your company are set on by thieves and rogues, etc. will you newtralize it? Are
not those Thieves and Murderers that oppose not Thieves and Murderers to
their power? For by not helping, you help to rob and kill, the robbed and
killed, etc.

49. What if your Parents and Masters, under whose roof you live, so owe duties
to them answerably; If these were set on, will you newtralize also, and only
sefly defend? is not this murder and theft, as before, if they miscarry: so is
it not treason in nature and reason to Parents and Pay masters, or Maintainers,
to whom you are engaged in all faithfulness and loyalty, and so to leave them,
will you to them turn Loyallists and treacherous?

50. Again, if they are conquered, are not you your selves conquered? they help
you as well as themselves: and does not retaliation and relation, so duty and
reason, say the same concerning you?

51. Know you not oh weaklings, that you are more engaged to the Kingdom then
any child or servant can be to his Father or Master; For parents and children
are parted often times you see to take the Kingdoms part, to part it from
dangerous encounters.

52. Sure, in a journey I will help my enemy, how then him who is not mine:
but I am his, and malign him I know not why nor wherefore; for he has done me
no hurt, nor will, but much good, had I the goodness to acknowledge it. Does
he not help me, and fight for me, in fighting for himself; yet for want of
help may be conquered, and then the conquest of me is more probable and easy.
Well fool, fight The maligned Army.
for thy enemy (if so) that is engaged on thy side, and side with him that he
may be thy friend; fight then for thy friend, whose enemy thou art, etc. that
he may continue thy friend. But yet if thou be so malicious, thou will not
fight for either, fight yet with them, though not for them, yet for thy self
and thy Father and Mr. in company, etc.

53. Thus fight with, or for Parliament and Army, though they be So the
Kingdom.
thy enemies, or thou art theirs, according to the premises, apply and save me
the replication. -- Fight with, or for them, as it conduces to the Kingdom.

54. But the Army is a company of Sectaries, Independents, etc. Truly thou
know not well what thou say, if well and wisely examined what a Sectarist
is: so, nor an Independent; nor will I now engage to In the Prelates time they
were puritans, men of tender consciences, etc. -- faithful to death.
tell thee: but be it as thou say, yet thou say nothing to the purpose. Oh
madness; what is this to thee in this case? one has thrown down Baals altar,
Ergo, Gideon the son of Joash must dye: but the wiser Joash answered those
fools, if Show Baals order, or leave your bauling,-show us the same of God,
etc. --
Baal be a God, and be offended, he will right himself. Sure if the Mahumetan
Turk were faithful to our State, and would fight to deliver it, I would fight
with him Sectarists and Independents so called, have saved the king dome and
City, for none else would, etc.
and for him: and owe we not him also thanks, honor, and reward? Different
religions, nor irreligion, quit not humanity and justice.

God by Romans 14. enjoynes them to be Sectaries and Independents, till
convinced, and joys in it, if in sincerity; see and be satisfied. Why
condemnest and judge thou him Let each one be persuaded in his own
conscience, -- note it in his own,-not any others. -- If the doubter be
damned,-force not the doubter, lest thou damn him and thy self. Is it nothing
to condemn and damn?
? he is Gods servant, not thine; Thou shall not answer for him, therefore be
answered: and suffer him to Independent it, as well as he thee to Presbyter it,
is it not just? Thou unjust one, who denies him this liberty? -- yet wilt
licentiate, etc. Promulgators against fundamentals, I am against: -- but yet
reservedly, -- to hold, none can withold: so I am against prophaners and
blasphemers! what would thou more? Know weaklings, know that the beauty of
sincerity and justice, love, peace, and humanity; though accompanied with
errors in Religion, not against: so also with many occular deformities and
seeming giddinesses, and fooleries -- are preferrable before a forced and
ignorant Classicke, beauty, and order, etc. without sincerity or any the rest
aforesaid, etc. -- why -- art thou against -- what God is for?

55. But are not such Royallists, so, all sorts under what notion soever,
Traitors, Murderers, thieves, etc. that fight against themselves and their
posterities, and against the Kingdom, their Sovereign, etc. under pretense, as
for its Steward, the King, etc. Does not shame and infamy attend them, besides
base slavery? to them and theirs, etc. And though you be offended at the
Parliament; yet why against your selves and yours, and the Kingdom? and yet why
also against the Parliament? you say they have taken your estates, etc. -- Oh
fools, have you neither wit nor honesty to reason wisely and rightly? Fool
know, they act but secondarily, also justly and inforcedly; Is it not the King
and your This is spoken only to Malignants who have forfeited all.
selves by the Scots own sayings, (for all they seem to stand so for the
King) who have plundered you of your estates by turns, and now you would turn
it upon the State. Why charge you not the King as do his own Countrymen?
Does not the scot charge him as the Original cause of all the blood shed, etc.
in the 3. Nations, know its a Nation of Divines thus charge him, discharge him
if thou can. If he be the first cause, thou art the second, for seconding
him against hoth States, the large and contract, Kingdom and Parliament: -- so
the Parliament: justly for thy treachery to the whole, and in behalf of it,
did force from Shall a murderer co^demn the Judge or Executioner for taking
life or estate? whereas himself is the condemner and executioner of himself
by the^.
thee but part of thy estate, to help to secure what thou would have
betrayed; whereas thou have forfeited all, yea, life also. Fool, or Knave, or
both, art thou not engaged to them for thy life, and the remainder of thy
estate, all being at their command (considering how forfeited) in behalf of
the Kingdom thy Sovereign? Learn wisdom and honesty hence-forward to
acknowledge what is right, and their goodness to one so unrighteous, and make
amends for future, by dedicating thy life and estate to the State, for the
State, etc. Fight against the Stewards, yea all Stewards for thy Sovereign,
the Kingdom, thy King, etc.

56. But many are desperate; for the Parliament (as they say) has abused them,
and oppressed them more then ever the King did, and they are as very slaves under
them, as the King can make them, -- and yet they have been as faithful and
deserving of the Parliament as can be; having ventured limbs, life, liberty
and estate, -- also, such and so much wages is due to them, but not a penny can
they get, though they, so their wives and children are ready to famish; also
they are contemned, slighted, and villified, etc. If it be so as before, its a
hard and urging case, etc. For men are but men, not Gods, etc. It becomes not
the fountain of Justice to send out such foul streams; nor to be the cause of
such floods of tears, nor of rending and tearing complaints, etc. Yet here
answer thee, as at Sect. 47. whether repair for satisfaction, -- and implore
them to do as they would be done by.

58. If the rising of the people be not from some of the grounds following.
Quaere.
As first, The licentiat reading of lying Ballets and books to defame the State
and the Army, and so to incense the people against both -- also to divide the
people amongst themselves, -- which is most infamous -- in so famous a Citiie,
to suffer such insufferables, -- and implies, as if they fided with such base
ones -- against both States -- which is not only great weakness, but
wickedness also, -- may they be accepted for Protecters of Parliament and
Kingdom, -- which prostrate both as before?

Another thing that befooles the people -- and so cause them ^o rise against --
Parliament and Army -- yea themselves and theirs is, Ignorance of the Kings
state, degree and condition, etc. and an opinion of him beyond what is, etc.
which we intend to resolve by Quaeries in due season; only one or two instances
here, etc. -- under the notion (King) and other titles of sacred Majesty, etc.
-- They are besotted to an Idolatrizing, as if rahter a God then a man. -- Also
as if all were his own selfely -- cause King relates not, as does Steward,
which sends to a Lord; See sect. 46. where the end of Kings is K. as justice,
safety, peace, etc. of the people, etc.
whereas all his Titles, Glories, Crown, Throne, Scepter, etc. -- are the
States at large, and his only by way of steward-ship and Deputi-ship; As are
the Sword, Cap of Maintenance, so train of Officers, the Cities, not the
Majors.

This ignorance, crafty knaves (especially depraved Clergymen, and men of lost
fortunes make use of, to incite the people for their own ends, as at Sect. 6.
and 8. -- But our loyalty to our Lord Salus enjoins a plain discovery of all
particulars concerning him, to prevent (if it were possible) murders,
massacres, etc. --

Quaere, if it be not treachery, not to treat hereof? or to entreat amiss
Quaere.
the intreater thereof, etc.

The Parliament and peoples rights also are not known, which cleared, would
clear all, etc. and make all clear up, etc.

Pressures from Parliament (as said to be) incite also, so want of justice,
etc. the remedies known, the cure may be easy, if care be.

The bounds of obedience, so of Treason and rebellion (not by lawless law
only, but) by law rational and so binding, are not knowns, and so the ignorant
are bound to their good behavior against all good behavior, etc.

59. Is this or that treason, etc. against the K. Steward of the kingdom,
Queries concerning rebellion and treason: so of disobedience.
as selfly considered? (so much in every man's mouth) or not rather, as he
relates to the State at large, his Lord, so it is for his Lords sake, not his.

Quaere also, If it be not as he continues in his sphere of government, or
Quaere. The State at large.
rather in the execution of government, according to the will of his* Lord
expressed in his Laws, -- so in all faithfulness to him, etc.

Quaere. -- If out of his sphere he be not a private man, etc. so not obeyable,
but resistable, etc. St. Paul, I knew him not to be Gods high Priest. Quaere.
Why? Because his actions were below his place as a Judge. Ignorant he could
not be, that he was the high Priest, etc.

60. If to raise Arms against the kingdoms Army, the Kingdom being King, by
Sect. 46. if it be not treason? the said Army continuing Quaere.
faithful to the kingdom, in its defense, is it not to take up Arms against
the kingdom itself?

61. If an abusing the Army, it continuing faithful before, be not an affront
to the Kingdom which is King?

62. If newtralizing, that is, not helping, siding, and taking part Quaere.
with the Army against the Kingdoms enemies, be not treason to the kingdom?
how then to take part against it? to suppress or enslave it, by raising Forces
of their own Faction, to keep it under, -- or to leave the Kingdom naked to
self insurrections, or foreign invasions, etc. -- also to have brought the
King forcibly home, to have born out, and colored all their designs, etc --
inforcings, -- etc.

If it be not lawful to make the foresaid quaeries, and the like, without
Quaere.
querelous inquisitions and exceptions?

63. Oh thou City of London, so all the Cities and Countries of England
Application.
etc. yea each individual man therein, read reason, and call to mind, as thus,
These Rakeshames that pretend the King, intend themselves, and are the same
that fought against us as before, to inslave us, and we against them for our
liberties, etc. why expended we our blood and means? What, to yield and
entertain them at the last? Much better might we have yielded at first, and
spared all, then now at the last; -- seeing also by our affronts, their revenge
is aggravated to the uttermost, even to the nullifying our Religion, and
enforcing upon us a Regiment, or imperious government under its name; so our
lives, liberties, and estates are gone, and we are in their hands like Rogues
and Gally-slaves. King of England -- etc. befools -- fools -- the wise have
eyes. -- Lord Mayor of London -- etc. Are they any any more then Titles? -- Is
not each ones life, land, liberty, and estate his own by Law and Nature? Its
only the highest Title of honor allowed by the State, -- So Prince of Wales,
Earl of Essex, etc.
As for the King we now understand our selves better then before, he is by
Sect. 58. the kingdoms Steward, the peoples and kingdoms welfare, (as the end
of Kings and all Governors) is Lord and King. He has also forfeited all by
his faithlesnesse to his Lord -- he is to the kingdom, as is the Lord Mayor to
the City, and no more, chief Deputy Governors both of them, yet not by any
selfnesse, but as in favor conferred on, by and for the State, the City. The
Lord Mayor is by R^x King of the City, in respect of all subordinate Rulers: 32
Kings, that is, Lieutenant Governors of C^ties, Joshua conquered on this side
Jordan. May the Mayor take up Arms against the City, or rob them by Sea or
Land, or rebel and traitor them, or burn their houses? etc. And must the
Citizens for all that, petition, entreat, and treat with their abusive
treacherous servant? etc. Is not the Mayor a traitor, a rebel, for so doing?
Apply them, etc. Rex. is Ruler, not King -- So by Rex all are Kings, or none
are -- etc. It Is falsely translated Ki^g^ or applied only to one more then
another: the word will not bear any thing but Ruler, yet that will hardly be
ruled; nor will the Hebrew or Greek bear the translation (King) at all, etc.
Why then to these more then others? Ruler is also unruly, -- so not right, as
too selfly -- Steward sends to a Lord, etc.
May the Mayor master the City? will the Citizens side with him against
themselves? -- has he any commission to kill, rob, rape? etc.

As for the Parliament and Army, if they have wronged us, yet will not we wrong
the kingdom to right our selves of them, -- but let us help them all we can; if
not for themselves, yet for our selves, so ours, etc. Yet, why not the Army for
themselves also, seeing they have done us no hurt? Newtrality will nullify us
in our Religion, Liberties and Lives; we have experience of their trustiness:
and we have experience (except we want sense) of the perfidiousnesse and
treachery of the other Armies, they are genera^ly Atheists, their commanders
men of no Religion, only politic pretenders to deceive: their actions and
designs define them as before. -- As for the Army if Sectaries, if
Independents, etc. yet we know not well, if so, because the true definition of
either is not agreed on. However, what is it to us? If faithful to us and the
State, it is to God, not to us. They suffer us to Presbyter it; Justice
requires, we suffer them to Independent it. Destroyers of Fundamentals, so
Blasphemers, they allow not of, often declared by them -- Thus qualified, how
is it we allow not of, them? seeing God himself does, by Romans 14. Well, let us
weigh all aforesaid, and let us immediately send them all the help we can, if not
for their sakes, yet for our own, and ours, and the Kingdoms, to set a period
to these troubles, etc. For if the adverse Army have the better, we have the
worst of it. We are politickly called Fomenters of War: we must be wise, and
not fear words, we must foment, (if foment they call it) that is, we must stir
up and second defensively, against such offenders, who would surprise us, by
preventing resistance; by such aspersions they foment all they can, by raising
the Countries, to raise them, to the Countries razing. If we foment not just
defense against their unjust offense, we are great ofders.

In short, let us not traitor it to our King the Kingdom, nor to the
Parliament, nor the Army, wherein they continue faithful, etc. so nor to our
selves, nor ours: but now before we part, resolve, to dissolve these fomenters,
these Achans, these troubles of Israel, etc. And let us learn to bear (till we
know how to help it) lesser injuries from Parliament and Army, if so' rather
then the great, intolerable, the inexpressables from the other side, etc. and
consider, and do not we our selves foment our own miseries? there was
likelihood of a period before this, but we cry out of Parliament and Army, for
not settling the kingdom, and that they do nothing thus long, when as we our
selves breed and In that Some amongst us in plotting against the State, the
Army and Independents, so called, -- and inviting in the Scots -- also fiding
it with the Roy and his Royalists, etc. - Lastly, to force home the King, under
pretense of a Treaty.
increase new work, new troubles to them and our selves.

And now, Oh State Representative, a word or two to you, and I have done, only
to mind and hint you, for more (sure) I need not do, if you be noble minded,
generous and genuine; but if contrary, as ignoble, etc. What shall be done to
set you right? I tax not, but preventively caution; Remember the universal,
natural, rational precept, Do as you would be done to, etc. Is not this
enough to Naturalists, Moralists, Gentiles? How then, if Christianity be added?
Shall it add nothing? If deducted, less you cannot be, and be men, etc.
Statues you may be, but not Statute-makers -- except as before. -- Would you be
abused, or treacherized with in the least of your trusts? Surely no; then do
not so; Would you not traitor and skellom, and base fellow, that fellow that
should so abuse you in the meanest betrust? etc. If so, infer, Which you may
lose in a moment, cause you are momentary. Also, are they of moment, like your
honor, fame, so the love and welfare of your friends and posteririties, and
your quitting them from slavery? Consider, etc.
what is due in just retaliation for failing in the greatest betrusts mortality
is capable of? as of Life, Livelihood, Liberties and Religion, etc. See to it,
O see to it, I speak only to the guilty, if any be: blemish not, nor bespot
your Honors -- by treacherous aspersions, etc. though many be laid upon you,
never the like on any Parliament before, and that without control -- or
commination, yet let it not be justly. Remember the love of the people in
choosing you, so of their great hopes and joy in your faithfulness; forfeit them
not, we entreat you, but free your free choosers, so all your friends, so your
own posterities, that they may bless you in future times, and your names and
remembrances may be famous for ever; else, infamy for ever attends you: so the
cries and curses of your choosers, so of your children and posterities, so of
all your friends and kindred, yea of the whole kingdom or people your true
King, who made you what you are, and commissioned you, etc. but not to commit
them, etc. On beslave not, nor vassalage your Lords, to any their Stewards.
Consider and digest what I say, and digress not, etc. --

O let not any insinuations, flatteries, hopes, promises, Or in your power to
keep, as to give, etc. I add to the aforesaid cautions, nor let envy, hate,
malice, or revenge -- to -- or against any, -- hurt the General, quit thy self
if thou can, if not, reserve it till thou can not offend.
preferments, or dishonorable honors circumvent you, and so beg^t contempt and
jeering from your circumventers. Is there any thing so comfortable and
cheering, as a clear conscience, even as a moralist, etc. None can give you,
or prefer you, but you must first enable them by giving to, and preferring
them; reserve rather then give to such, to receive again, and so to be
beholden, and give thanks for what is your *own. But what are such givers and
receivers -- also -- receivers, again, from such; given to, givers? etc. -- of
what also is neither the givers nor receivers own but their Lords, the
Kingdoms, their King? What I say, are such, etc. etc. but etc. -- Oh consider,
consider, etc. and comply to justice, equity, and all honorable things. Honor
your selves by your wisdoms and fidelity, as you have done, which prefer as
more noble, and withal immortal, in that it shall live when you are dead --
before all other base and by-ends -- which shall when you are gone, infamous
you; and leave a base and sordid stench of you, to all eternity, etc. -- Give
foreign States cause to honor you, and make not your selves a jeering stock
to the whole world, till it come to a proverb, As ill as an Englishman, -- as
base as a Britain, etc.

How wisely and ably did the Holland State quit themselves of their Tyrannous
King, and continue faithful to the people that followed them, and govern them
with peace and love, cause with justice, protection and safety? Sure the same
ways would have had the same effects with us. What shall I say? It Is with the
latest, but not too late, if this you will do. Inform the people aright of
their own rights, yours and their Viceroyes, when at the rightest, -- also as
now, postur'd, qualified, and conditioned with all kind of wrong doings, to a
most righteous people to him; Why spare you, or fear you to speak? May, yea,
does it not betray us? If we have, do, and must venture our lives, what is it
(if just and right, and withal conducing) shall silence us? Had Hester been
silent, where O let not one woman put down so many men for courage and
faithfulness, etc. being also not so engaged as are you.
bad she and hers been? You have fought against, and dare you not speak, nor
give way to speak against, in what is just, -- also when it is for the Kingdom
and the people, etc. Conducingly, give way, and you shall find men will speak
out. Justice and your engagements, the Kingdoms welfare, and to prevent its
illfare, claims this at your hands, and we dare, however, quaere, if it be not
treachery to the Kingdom, the people in general (our General or King, etc.)
Not to allow the exhibiting of the aforesaids, as conducing to their delivery,
etc. the children are come to the birth, give strength to bring forth? Now we
have done, and deliver up what is said, with our selves, to the judgment of
the ingenuous. And the blessing of God be with you, etc.

DIXI.

Postscripts.
THis Book lying by me some time after it was written (by reason of some
hindrances) it has now furthered it self with the addition of some second
thoughts, I hope very conducing as to the general, -- so to particulars, etc.
--

Is not treason, the betraying of just trusts and engagements? Is not Quaere
again. Of Treasons.
that of a Kingdom the greatest trust? Are not all sorts engaged to the
Kingdom, before the Steward, or any? Nay, are they engaged to the Steward at
all, but for the Kingdoms sake? And is not their failing it alone (how then in
siding with the Steward, or any against it) the greatest treason?

What is it then in the Steward most engaged by oath, betrust, and allowance,
not only to fail or neglect, but to endeavor his uttermost against his Lord
in the highest degree?

False Trusts, Oaths, etc. to fail for true and just ones, is not treason,
but faithfulness and justice, -- as, to fail the Steward in behalf of his
Lord. --

If it be not treason to prefer any selfe-end, or any one, as the Steward
Quaere.
called King, or his sons called Prince or Duke, or any one, or any thing
whatsoever, yea though it be Religion, Gods worship, or Service, as called, or
indeed, etc. before the general good, to its sufferance, -- cause it is King
and Sovereign, and God himself preferres it before the aforesaids, -- ^s I
will have mercy before Sacrifice, etc. -- the Sabbath is for man, -- in
humanities, etc.

Traitors (however smiled on) are smit with contempt as the basest of men, and
are not trusted of their Trusters, but in cases of necessity, and that with
much fear and jealousy, etc.

See to this all sorts, from the the Throne to Threshold, -- it imbaseth the
best: See to it, I say, Parliaments, Kings, Princes, Peers, Priests, etc. the
corruption of the best is worst of all.

66. Oaths, Covenants, etc. in behalf of the Steward, against his Lord Of
Oaths, Covenants, etc.
the kingdom, binds not, all sorts are bound to break them, except they will
bind themselves to be Traitors, Murderers, and Thieves.

67. Rebellion is to resist just Governors in their just Governments,
Rebellion.
disobedience is the same: else it is none.

their Lords Salus, and his Laws, and their ends of Government, Justice, and
Protection, be not the greatest Rebels? -- Oft-times they rebel first and
most, and yet tax the faithful to their Lord, for Rebels, cause they side not
with them in their rebellion against their Lord.

Will the Steward urge his Lords servants to keep false Oaths and Trusts to
him against his Lord, and yet he makes no reckoning of true ones? Sure he, by
unjustly accusing of them, he justly accuses himself much more.

68. Murder is without just cause to kill, or nor to save if we can -- what
Murder.
is it then in the most engaged Stewards to save and protect -- yet contrarily
to murder, or endeavor the murdering of their Lord Salus, and his faithful
servants, -- cause they will not side with them against their Lord, etc.

What is it also in the servants that side with them against their Lord to
ruinate him, -- so his faithful servants, is it not murder as well as treason?

The justly enforced to kill, either in defense of their Lord Salus, or of
themselves, though they kill, I say, -- yet they murder not, etc.

69. Has the same definition or bounds that murder has, the unjust Theft and
Robbery, Of War.
sides taking is theft, the other is none.

The name and countenance of war quits not, nor qualifies it from murder and
theft on the unjust side, -- it aggravates rather by its continuance -- and
violent perpetrations, -- also as done with defiance, and a high hand, openly,
etc. as if justifiable, as also by the Steward against his Lord, etc.

Names. Titles, etc. of Kings, Princes, etc. with the rest, alter not natures:
-- but engagements make the aforesaids more unnatural and greater Treasons,
Thefts, Murders, etc.
yea, each individual, and apply as cause i^, and for future, -- let it lessen
thee to lessen the aforesaid offenders, etc.

Object.
the Parliament makes of them, -- etc. -- by imprisonment, by plunderings and
contempts, etc.

Answer.


Yet all sorts by the Scots position, may charge their sufferings originally on
the King.




Scarce any commodity exempted, and all in time would have come under the
Monopolists. But all this is forgot.
a piece for the needless freedom, called the new Corporation, etc. and the
rest of which were coming on ad infinitum. -- And amongst the rest Pole and
Ship Money as Capitals? Was it nothing to quit thee of the charge, attendance,
trouble and vexation, etc. one way or other, to an undoing thee in thy estate,
and in the peace of thy mind, etc. By the Staring Star Chamber, and the
High Commission, etc. What say thou to the vexations suits, troubles, and
attendance at Doctors Commons, twixt the Parson and thy person, about trivials,
-- as Holy Days keeping, or not, -- besides infinites more, which I need not
stand to name.

Did not the Court of Wards keep watch and ward over thee? Now thou may do
as much by it, etc.

Have thou forgot the German Horsemen, projected for thy projection and
perpetual inslavement, and not for a present defense, as are ours. The Spanish
Navy had the same intention, and had done the deed, if Note. All these
purposel^, intentionally, -- not enforced thereto. Hurrying it in the popular
streets in their popular Chariots and stateliness.
the Hollanders had not undone it, etc. -- Privy-Seales for money,-and the
prison for non-payment thereof, oppressed the able and rich circularly, -- etc.
And all these not for thy just and necessitated defense, but for thy offense,
as on purpose to raise a stock, a Magazine of money and means from thy self, to
provide Scorpions to whip thee. So manicles and Fetters for a Turkish
inslavement, also to support (him that should be) thy protector, in all
Revellings, Maskings, Pleasures, Plays and Delights, etc. by the ruin of thee
and thine, -- whilst thou and thine thus oppressed, are pining and languishing
with grief and pressures, etc.

Scots in this, that the King (the Kingdoms Steward) is cause of all: for if
he had not done the aforesaids, these after necessitated doings by them had
never been done -- So when thou accusest them, thou do implicitly accuse the
accuser and misuser of them and th^e, as the original cause of all.

Wars, Bloodshed, Loss of Estates, Plunderings, ^olland pays ^xcise without
exception
loss of trade, -- So excise, etc. that thou so exceptest against?

Lay it then where it should be, and not upon the immediate occular,
isntrumental, enforced Afflicters of thee, -- to whom no question its an
affliction, thus to afflict thee, etc.

The spirited man chooses to yield to this, rather then to his -- insulting
adversary.
shirt, and so strip thee to nakedness if thou defendest not, -- another keeps
back, or lays claim to thy Land, and estate, and will unstate thee, if thou
defendest not. -- Yea also it may be, though thou defendest, -- his might will
outright thee, and the expenses may exceed the principal, that it had been
better to have yielded at first. -- But who knows the issue of things? It may
be thou might on easy terms have recovered all, of others, then, others
have done so. -- Adventures must be adventured on, or else we must give up our
rights, as our Cloakes and Clothes, etc. to each unrighteous challenger, which
no spirited man can yield to. -- Adventure we not our lives, and all we have,
on darings, challenges, and abuses, rather then be out-braved and insulted
over? A stomackfull resistance and defense is an honor, and it often prevents
offenses, etc.



thy Lord the Kingdom, if his Stewards contrary to his will (who provided them
for thy protection, and to do thee justice) abuse thee, -- right thy self of
the Steward as thou can, without wronging thy Lord; -- see for further
satisfaction at Sect. 47.

Sect. 64. 56. etc.

etc. as great offices, places, incomes, etc. -- as Colonels in the War, --
keepers of Towns, Cities, Castles, -- Houses, Parkes, and Forests: -- Also
great advancements by Bishops Lands, -- and lastly by depraved injustice,
oppression, corruption, and bribery, etc. These last are justly exceptable
against, if high and heinous, etc. -- Trivials must not be too much pressed -- or
censured: -- thou can not Angelize men. David -- that man of men -- bid --
Mephibosheth -- and Ziba divide the Land, -- whereas the whole was
Mephibosheths, etc. -- But let us examine the other; -- which before I do, I
will place thee (their accuser) in their places, -- cause by reflection -- thy
accusation will be the better judged of, etc. -- Lets now see how thou can
come off, etc.

etc. places -- before-named, so the keeping of Castles, Towns, Towrs and
Forts, -- were in thy disposure by -- consent of the Kingdom -- as -- are many
places in the hands of each Lord Major, By custom and consent of the City.
-- etc. -- but in special in the hands of the King, when time was, -- its not
then -- a power usurped so far as conferred -- by consent, by way of betrust
-- etc. -- Does not nature -- and reason first accommodate ones self -- and
theirs -- as nearest, before remotes -- provided they supply those places with
-- persons -- faithful, and each way fitting. -- If this they fail of, they
are faulty, -- for they ought prefer the universal, in justice, -- safety, --
and rights, -- before selfe-ends that are not right. -- Said not Solomon to his
Queen, thou shall have sons to make Rulers over all Lands? -- Did not Eli
and Samuel make their sons Priests -- and Judges, -- and they might -- had
they been right; why should not honor -- pleasure -- and profit -- be theirs,
seeing conferred on them (provided universally improved) as upon, or to others.
-- Who is it, that having -- friends, -- kindred, or children, -- would not do
the like? -- as -- for the adventurous and faithful in the Wars, -- they are
worthy of it, -- so are the States, if they -- would improve themselves worthy
for the universal. -- Is not his Excellency the Lord Fairfax -- so Lieutenant
General Cromwell -- worthy of their conferred honors -- and remembrances? --
Nature, reason, -- justice, -- and policy of State, enjoyne honors -- and
rewards -- to all deservers, Men are men, and need encouragement, etc.
-- and the State as Judges ought to consider of it, and perform accordingly
to all, -- and I would they did; -- no State, no Prince, but does, will, may,
yea ought to do it, etc.

or discrimen the Parliaments and Kings actions? etc.

Those of the King -- what he did, -- and that not of necessity, etc. -- Note.
Went he not against Scotl. with force to have settled Episcopacy, etc.
but of a high hand -- and with intention, etc. -- projecting the utter
beslavement of the people or Kingdom, -- and to have also -- ruined Religion,
-- and only allowed some Complements and Ceremonials, which he would have
called Religion -- to have deceived weakelings therewith. -- They are I say
apparent at Sect. 71. to F: Those of the Parliament at Sect. 71 -- from F: to
72.

is just and approveable, and of thee to be approved of, -- what is beyond I
disapprove, but its not easily apparent what they are: -- but this remember, --
that both of thy enforced suffering, -- so of thy unjust suffering by them, the
Scots make the King the original cause of all, -- sc -- by his still
continued, -- offensive, contending Note.
for the command of thy life, liberty, estate, and religion, etc. Rememher the
Instance before in a Law suite, and answer thy self.
He is at this instant, the cause of defense, -- and so of thy pressures in
expenses, fears -- and inforcements -- etc. which by the Scots account -- thou
oughtst put on his account, and not on the enforced defensive State -- except
thou and thine would be unstated for ever.

absolute freemen, -- both in lives, -- eestates, liberties -- It conduces to
their honor, end, and betrust,-so to the happiness of their posterity,
kindred, and friends, etc.
and religion. -- As for Religion, if they -- allow liberty -- of conscience,
which in conscience -- they ought, by Romans 14. to allow us, let each be
persuaded in his own conscience, etc. so by many other places is allowable,
with the cautions at Sect. 54. Thou have no cause to except at what God
accepts, except thou will except against him. -- Is It not fair (thou excepter)
that thou shall enjoy thy liberty -- to Presbyter it? etc. Wilt not thou
retaliate, -- and allow -- as thou art allowed?

Parliament and King aforesaid, thou may gather, thou art as was the
Israelites' twixt -- Solomon -- and Rehoboam, Solomon had used them hardly, --
but Rehoboham projected to prostrate them, to bow and bend them, so as to make
them plyant to his tyranny, -- he would whip with Scorpions, -- and his little
finger -- should be more oppressing then his Fathers whole body. -- Is it not
so 'twixt Parliament and King? the Parliament have enforcedly oppressed thee, --
and so far is just on their side, -- and must as a fore, be charged on the K.
not them: -- but their voluntaries are like those of Solomon's, -- the Sea the
K. at Sect. 71. to F. Parliament Sect. 71. at F.
Kings are like the Intentionalls of Rehoboam. -- Admit both sides -- cannot be
avoided, -- is it not wisdom to lessen our enemies, -- and wisely -- take part
with the lesser, -- to overthrow the greater? -- which alone we cannot do;
which done, we have but -- one enemy, as Solomon's -- hard usages to contend
with. -- Consider what I have said, and be wise, -- 'twixt Solomon, -- and
Rehoboam you may be ruined, -- if you side with both: -- so if you side it
strongliest with Rehoboam, The K. fetches in Scots and Foreigners against us.
-- you fide with your ruin also: -- but break Rehoboam to pieces, -- and my
life for thine we shall all piece -- together again -- in peace and plenty,
etc.

This lastly remember, the Parliament has quit thee from all, as at 71. E. to
F, etc. is it nothing? -- But what did the King ever do for thee, show if thou
can?

Its yet objected, -- no peace or settlement will be till the King come 72.
Object.
-- home and be settled. --

Its 'cause thy brain and wit is unsettled, -- and 'cause knaves and Answer.
fools -- suggest severalls to thee, out of which thy weakness cannot wind:
-- but of what nature soever thy thoughts are, or their suggestions be -- see
to the contents of the particulars, -- and so to their answer -- and call to
mind -- all other particulars in this book not referred to. -- Help to settle
it by sideing with Solomon against Rehoboam, -- as thou have read in the
instances foregoing, -- for thy self (if not for theirs --) so for the
Kingdom, etc. which is thy King, etc. How would thou have him come home; --
what like a Conqueror? If so, thou art a slave according to -- Sect. 71. E. to
F. See more under treaty, and take heed he conquer you not by yielding, that
may be won by smiles and wiles, which could not be by force and blows.

-- Yet again, thou say, thou fightest for the Kingdom, thy self, and 73.
Object.
thine, -- in fighting with, -- and for the King against the Parliament; also
that by Covenant, etc. thou oughtst to fight for the King, his Rights and Dues,
etc.

What thy intentions are -- I know not, but thy actions in fighting Answer.
for the King, etc. are absolutely against the Kingdom, thy self, and thine,
see 71. to F. etc. See also the discrimen 'twixt Parliament and King, see at
Sect. 71. O. to 72.

For the Covenant, -- thou art mistaken, -- its for the King respectively --
see Sect. 42. to 44. -- and for the Kingdom the Parliament, See Covenant the
3. it self.
so each particular as thy self and thine, so each one, -- its absolute, see
Sect. 44.

Thou yet wilt fight against the Parliament as wrongers of the Kingdom, Ob. 74.
the King, thy self and thine?

Truly -- I cannot see how they can wrong the King, what ever they Answ. If by
the Scots sayings he be guilty of the blood shed in the 3. Nations, its well
near 3. or 400000. lives, are they not so many murders?-for one Nabal -- a
Iezabel: how then?
do to him, -- has he not forfeited all?-has he not only -- wronged, -- but
sought the ruin of all? -- what says lex talionis to this? -- I am silent, --
be thou judge, -- can the end do the means any wrong, -- to use it any way for
its conducement, no juster and better way being? -- By this argument, if thou
oughtst fight against them as wrongers of him, which they are not, -- why then
not against the King, which is so in the highest degree, and that of his King,
as at Sect. 71. to F. Why also not for them against him, by the argument at
Sect. 71. O. to 72. --

I have been large, cause I would meet with all objections, -- -and exceptions,
-- and so satisfy circularly, -- which I hope I have done,-and 75.
so I conclude with invocation and application as follows. --

I do then implore all sorts, even from the highest to the lowest, -- -as the
most honorable Senate and City, -- and the Worthies of the Synod: -- so all
Countries, Cities, Townes-and Villages; yea each Individual, -- remember and
consider what I have said, and refresh memory by review of the Contents, -- all
your scruples -- (except you will find or make knots in bul-rushes) are
satisfied and cleared, -- you may tush, pish, slght, -- and wrangle, -- but
answer you cannot, -- so must of necessity -- contend against the light of
nature, reason -- and justice, -- and what are such, -- etc? -- newtralize not,
as it conduces to the universal, -- but help Parliament and Army, and so
your selves -- against the King the Kingdoms Steward -- and servant,-so any
other, etc.-much more Let not Judge Ienkin's book, nor any such deceive you, it
savors of much weakness, or wickedness, or both, -- It Is easily answered had
we leisure.
take heed,-you take not up Arms against Parliament, or Army,-or any that is
faithful to -- his, and your King, the Kingdom, in behalf of the Kingdoms
Steward or any, etc.

Land-men, -- Seamen, -- so all sorts of either -- defame not your names, and
so your posterities-with the aspersions of
treacheries,-rebellions,-murders,-robberies, and rapes As any these things are
acted, etc.
, etc. For all are guilty in the aforesaids- that-neutralize it in King Salus
behalf, much more that rise against -- King Salus, etc. Take heed of the
depraved of the Clergy Those that are good of the^ I honor.
, who define the aforesaids amiss in behalf of the King? -- also of their
crying up, great is Darius and Diana, -- 'cause they -- (as the Demetrians)
live by -- one or both -- its their own ends they aim at,-and neither King
Darius, nor the Goddess Diana -- they care for, but as conducing, etc.

The same ends they have to deceive the devoutly religious, -- but
unprincipled, So the devout yet iggnorant noble women were stirred up against
Paul under pious pretenses.
-- as Templum Domini -- the Church: so Gods Ministers, likewise Religion, --
Gods -- honor, -- worship, -- service, but define all these amiss, -- so
outing of all but themselves, as Sects, Independents, etc. but it may be,
cannot, or will not describe a right what are Sects -- outable, -- but for this
see to Sect. 54. and be satisfied.

Their-suggestions-are not their ends, -- their ends are to end -- all their
opposers, and non-complyers under those pretences-of Sects, Independents,
Seperatists, etc. that come not under them,- 'cause they loose the Sovereignty
over them, -- and the sallarie of their means.

It is strongly conjectured, were it not for these sufferings, by their
separation,-they would suffer them with silence, etc. would the State confer on
them 2. or 300. l. a year certain, to officiate,-etc. you should find all
these winds and storms allaid, and they would be calmed,-when they see the
confluence of their auditory conferred nothing,-nor the others declining them
lost them not any thing, etc.

Consider, oh consider then, and do as did the Israelites in case of 76.
the Levites,-delay not, free your selves immediately,-and right your wronged
King Salus, against the treacherous, perfidious,-hypocritical, irreligous-Scot
Where are the wits of our wits, and wise ones, are they -- seers -- that see
nothing? thinks any one the wily pretending Scot -- will come in for any ones
end but his own? will he raise the King, but to be raised by him? will he not
confluent with numbers, having two garrison Towns for his inlets, -- truly he
designs to undermine -- and bring the English to canvesse breeches, -- and
wooden shoes -- etc.
:-so all others,-under what name and title soever,-settle the Kingdom, -- so
your selves, in an assured-safety, -- justice, peace, and rights. I say delay
not, ob State, -- oh Army,-and City, -- consider Discover the Scotch treachery
to all the Countries -- cause it to be read in Churches.
how to raise all Countries (under apparent and just grounds)-as one man (for
present dispatch of these troubles) against the Scot, so all other enemies, and
lie not lingering under languishing and disquieting uncertainties,-be not
be-fool'd, with Letters and Declarations -- from any, -- know you not who,-and
what they are? -- Know you not also that the Traitors, Hopton,-so the rest, may
thus write, and the other must put too his hand and seal, -- be it one, be it
all, its all to no purpose-with the wise and knowing, etc. I may infinite it,
but this is enough, if any thing will serve.

Only Reader I find it a common error, that many Zealots eager of the common
good,-spend themselves for it,-so many continued useful books are writ,-and
by the Athenian Readers eagerly read over,-that done, he has done with the
book,-and there is an end of all. Its also (cause little) pamphleted, and under
that notion, slighted, so it serves him not for any use, -- no not when he has
most use of it, as being lost, -- also lost to his memory: so that if he be
tray^ered or rebelled,-etc. he know not their bounds, -- so is bound hand and
foot. --

Few also inform their children -- or friends, so that in a moment ignorance
-- betrays all sorts; -- whereas the wise, that they may not be surprised, --
would read, to remember -- and dispose of, so -- as may be always in a
readiness to redress the errors of ignorance, etc. -- Let this Memento
admonish thee for future, -- and I have my desire, if thou have the benefit,
which is the end of my writing, etc.

Nay Reader, over shoes, over boots, -- if thou will excuse method, 77.
-- thou shall have matter (which is more material) in its stead. -- We could
methodize also, would time allow us; but It will not, so we must as we may. --
A few Miscelanies more, and I have done, -- with things that have, and if not
looked to, will undo us. -- 78. Pity and compassion.


Pity and compassion are most human passions, yet often the most inhumane, cause
not manlily managed; cannot we pity? but we must precipitate the All for one.
'Cause it is called pity, and complemented with seeming, circumvents judgment.
universe -- for urius? -- this is more cruel then cruelty it self, -- but
its unnatural names and occulers, deceive our occults and understandings, etc.
The present obvious object is most possessing to the dispossessing of all the
absents. --

I have heard of one that has been charged with the bloodshed of 3. Nations,
-- which may amount to some 2. or 300000. -- of the people his Creators --
etc.? -- This Officer being also further engaged by oath and betrust to protect
them -- yet in cold blood, projected To Command all that was theirs.
their prostration, that he might out them of their lives at his pleasure.

Yet this offending Officer -- seeming sorrowful (yet not for his sins, for he
goes on, -- but) at some respective suffering, for positively its none, --
except great attendance and a plentiful Table be a suffering, etc. -- But he
seems moved I say at his ill condition, -- not at his ill conditions, and its
like in a cruel pity, to procure his enlargement, and the peoples confinement.

But can the engaged (by choice, oath, betrust, love, and relations) to do
Justice, and right? do this to their loving choosers? Does not the Covenant
also bind our State and the Scot, so all to maintain the Kingdoms rights?
and what are they, -- but justice, -- and satisfaction; what can, -- for what
cannot be satisfied for? -- Is not the innocence -- and honor of the Nation --
a-Right? why should any thing be done to its dishonor: -- so the States. --
Will the State unstate us of all? -- is it done like a State?

Did, -- or could he sorrow and repent it were well: -- but its no Murdered.
satisfaction. -- Considering the infinites, finited by him, -- and his
engagements as before to the contrary, -- as to protect, etc.

If each not so engaged -- should murder one, and then suffer some Those were
not their brothers keepers as was he.
restraints, or suppose repent, must this procure their enlargement, -- then
let us all murther-one-by-one till we have gone the round.

Manasses repentance -- if real, is not to our point, I will not examine it,
-- reason and justice allows it not, -- so then nor God.

I can oppose with examples: -- but the power is in reason, which examines them
all, etc.

See at Sect. 42. 45. concerning retaliation of this kind, -- and comply -- to
justice and reason.

Sensiblenesse and pitty-doe well,-but to be insensible of the most pitiful
object that can be objected, does ill, -- and to manage these As so many
murders.
humane and feminine passions -- man like, does best of all. -- Sure Samuel --
was pitiful, -- yet he hewed Agag in pieces: and David, pitiful, yet
delivered he up 7. of Saul's innocent sons to the Gibeonites for the Gibbit,
etc.

None has power to quit or qualify but the wronged, -- who cannot 'cause they
are not, and who are, cannot, -- cause -- they may not. -- Nature, reason,
justice, and the Covenant, -- besides the end of Governors, all I say, demand
Justice, how comes it then we are justled out of it? oh irreligious,
atheistical, inhumane and bloody Nation, to drink and swallow down at a
draught so much blood, and never reluctate.

Justice -- and retaliation -- in and by justice, is not cruelty, its -- 79. Of
cruelty.
cruelty -- not to be so cruel, it multiplies offenders, and murders the
offended.

Samuel nor David, as before were not cruel, in satisfying Justice, though the
act seem cruel.

Justice is the Queen of virtues, injustice is the Queen of vices. The first
establishes, the latter demolisheth Thrones. Much may be said 80. Justice.
of the aforesaids, but we have transgrest beyond pardon; yet if murders may
be pardoned, what may not? -- However will not our zeal for the common good
procure a pardon? etc.

81 We could not have conceived, had we not said one word of the Kings
subordination, as Servant, Officer, or Steward, to the State at large, that
there is no understanding so short, but would selfly (at one present
apprehension) have comprehended and reached it, but we find it other wise,
etc.-But now that which we have said, seconding their capacities, how can we
question it, but that each one is fully satisfied; which if yet they be not, no
endeavor shall be wanting of our side, etc. Would God they would not in
weakness or wickedness be wanting to themselves and theirs, so to their
native country, their true King.

We shall then define a King, -- which rightly done, will right all
understandings but unrighteous ones.

A true and righ^ King then, (to whom the title may be rightly applied, is such
a one -- who by a right self-power selfly commands, and is selfly obeyed.

82. A right self-power -- is not any self-power unjustly enforced, gained,
Note.
or usurped. Which is thiefe-like, and Tyranny, though called Conquest.

Note again, A Self-power, not Deputative, -- Kings it. -- Selfs, are --
Parents and Pay-masters, and just Conquerours, etc. By this no Deputy powers
can be rightly called Kings.

All are Deputy-powers that are not Self-powers, as before, etc.

Who is King then? whether he that does and ought execute the laws, The wills
of The Laws are the wills of the State at large, or the people, etc.
others, and that for Them, not Himself: Or, those that set those Laws, also,
enjoins him an Oath to execute them, and none other? Also for Themselves, not
Himself. And do also allow Honors and Revennues respectively, as the said
Laws are looked to, not over-lookt Judge all men of what we say.

Find me any other use of a King, or any Governor, if you can, -- then
Justice, Safety, and the Welfare of the People, etc. This lost, he is useless.
For what says our Savior? Salt which has lost his savor, is useless, and
so good for nothing, but, etc.

Just Conquerours are, Who defensively conquer their unjust offending
adversaries. These set their own Laws, and so command, and are obeyed Selfly:
and are justly Masters of Liberties, Livelihoods, and Lives of the conquered.
And this is our just right at this time, over those Scots we have conquered in
this their unjust Invasion. But had they conquered us, it were Thief-like
Murder and Theft, as it is nevertheless in all they kill or take.

83. Will you have Scripture to second our Arguments in behalf of the Kinghood
of the State at large. Whether (says our Savior, so St. Paul) is greater,
Woman or Man? the Sabbath or Man, for whom both Woman and the Sabbath are made?
Whether is greater, the God, or the Temple which sanctifies it? Apply, between
the State and the King, etc.

84. Lastly, will you have an Argument from the State or Parliament? Do they
not (King) the State at large, and Servant, and Officer the King, in their
taking up Arms in loyalty to their said Lord and King the Kingdom, against
the King, so called, for his disloyalty to the said State? And does not this
taking up Arms against it, accuse him of, etc. etc. etc.

We from the premises quaere it, If Justice and Loyalty can allow any
Self-titles of Kings, etc. to any Deputy powers, to defeat the State at large
of its Kinghood, -- Yea, to its Serviling to its Servant? to the hazarding of
Life, Liberty, and Estate. Consider of it, O States, consider of it, Steward
sends to a Lord, Viceroy to a Roy.

Much more I could have said in point of Reason, to a full satisfaction of all
scruples and objections; but we have not time to do it, so must contract our
selves, though for contract understandings, we wish we could have enlarged, etc.

85. But we have Atheistical, (yet hypocritical) adversaries to deal
withal, who will pretend Religion, etc. -- These, however, presume to conquer
us by Scripture, though they cannot by Reason, and to subdue all our Reasons,
yea our Reason, our Sense and our Senses thereby, so they fetch out of
Scripture all that seemingly makes against us, in behalf of the King, of
rather themselves under color of his name, and then demand of us, what we can
say to this, to that? etc. Yet the particulars are answered, might we exhibit
them.
Bidding us quit our selves, if we can. It were infinite to answer to all
particulars, which cause we cannot, we will discharge our selves by one
general Position, which shall prostrate all their positions, etc. We then say,
this of Kings and Governors, is a point Rational, and of the Senses, and not
of Faith: and as so, it falls under their Regiment for trial, and not under
that of Faith. So then, whatsoever is brought out of Scripture, and however
rendered, must have a construction that agrees with, and overthrowes not,
neither Justice, Reason, nor the Senses, etc. -- This is enough in it self,
however, it is as much as time will allow us to say at this present, etc. only
we remember thee of our Saviors and St. Paul's sayings, at Sect. 83. so at 42.
45. which are as rational (though in Scripture) as are these.

86. But yet again, they have not done with us: For if neither Reason nor
Scripture will do the deed, -- Lawless Law shall, -- So Judge Jenkins comes
marching on furiously, Jehu-like, so as he admits of no opposition, -- and now
are we (conceived) put to flight, yet are we not fled, nor will so much as turn
our backs, etc. but keep both our station and posture -- and so make head
against all his impostures, as follows.

We have not time, I say, to deal with each of his particulars, which had we,
we would, etc. -- so we must, as we may. We therefore in our General
Position, as before, answer, and so put to silence all, he or any one can say,
etc.

We then say, Law, so called, is the Creature of its Creator the State at
large, made for its service, (and not to its dis-service, much less to servile
it) by the States) the said States Commissioners, and that is way of Justice
and Safety, so all other accommodations of the said State, and not to the King
or any other against it. -- Now if a Law (so called) which should be made, as
before, for the use of the State at large, by the said States, trusted to make
laws, in behalf of their Lord, and not in behalf of any his servants against
him, if they shall, I say, make, and so call that a Law, which is not so, as
being quite contrary to their betrust, and the end of Law, as in accommodation
of some of their servants, against their Lord. -- Quaere. If it be not absolute
treachery in them to betray the liberties and rights of their Lord, to any of
his Servants, etc. -- nay we say then, it is no law, though made as before also,
called so, and complemented with If a known long practiced Physician prepare
(as he calls it) physic for his patient, and ceremonies it with the
complements of a vial or galli pot, and all other circumstances, can all this
make it physic? if apparently destructive to its ends, and in stead of saving
will kill, may not such Physic be killed, etc. Apply, etc.
ceremonials to make it pass so, -- we say again, it is no law, so binds no^,
nor may, nor can, nor shall it bind the Lord, or any of his retainers, so as to
be abused, by any his servants, except in behalf of the said Lord, which just
necessity warranting, -- is -- sufferance, no abuse.

In short, we care not what Judge Jenkins, nor any, or the law it self (so
called) says or does, or would do, as to bind us to Kings, or any Governors
(alias the kingdoms and peoples Stewards, and Servants)) if contrary or
destructive to its ends, -- the freedoms and rights of the General, etc.
whereas it ought rather to bind all Kings and Governors (who are indeed most
bound) to accommodate the LORD The State at large.
GENERAL, though to their own selfe-sufferings, etc. Thus much in short, to
Law, so to Judge Jenkins his large and famoused Law-piece, most infamous, in
that he aims to treacherize it to his Lord and King, the State at large, etc.
and servile him to his servants, etc. Thus our just, our rational, and as so,
our true and lawful definitions of treason and rebellion, etc. stand good,
against Judge Jenkins his unjust, irrational, and destructive (and therefore
illegal) though called legall-definitions, etc.

87. Only I will tell thee, thou have now no color of ignorance left to
prevaricate etc. nor to bear out thy former perpetrations, Forgo them then,
and once at last turn wise and honest: all thy undertakings against, or neglect
of thy Lord Salus, must now needs proceed from impudence, not impotence, --
thou now know what the King, so called in reality, is. I hope, nor Titles,
nor Names, nor rich Raiment, nor a great Train, or State, shall now deceive
thee; Nothing can make a man more then a man, less they may. A Magazine is the
richest place indeed, -- but let each fetch away his treasure, what is it?

88. I am not factious, nor partial, I am against both, Parliament and King,
as they forfeit their ends and betrusts, and are against the kingdom. And I am
for one or both as they are faithful to their Trusts, etc.

89. More I hope I need not say, but yet if any shall in pretense of love and
duty to the King (so called) alias the kingdoms Steward, be so treacherous to
the Kingdom their true King, so to themselves, their posterities, kindred and
friends, to oppose us, in defense of the said King or Steward, against the
kingdom, we heartily desire them to decline all base and treacherous ends to
the aforesaids. And if it be only their injuditious judgments (after all we
have said) they will rectify them; and let them with ingenuity pursue the
acquiring and purchasing the truth with us, as we will with them; and let the
convinced comply. And we further heartily entreat them, that they would, as
beseems the civil (if they will needs reply) perform it not perfunctorily, but
with Nervous and strenuous Arguments, not idle and fallacious to abuse the
people, and lose time, and as if they sought rather a vainglorious conquest,
then the true glory of truth. -- Also that it may be without scurrillity or
contempt, and they shall be answerably dealt with. For we hold exclamations,
jeerings and contempts, to proceed of ill natures, ill educations, or
weakness, etc. like Schoole-boyes, who when (...) weak in dispute, do in
wickedness fall to scolding and fifty-cuffs, etc.

Dixi. Only, If nothing will do, we are undone, and so are most of our undoers.
FINIS.
AN APOLOGY.
AS we have Cautioned in case any write against us, etc. So we hold it
necessary also, to say something; lest any one in a pretense of love and
loyalty to the King or Kingdoms Steward, although it may be Demetrian
self-love, and not to Diana,-also, hate to Paul, etc. may be the true ground,
and not love to the King: -- but admit, love, etc. to him -- its not right nor
just in opposition to his King, the Kingdom. -- However, least they should in
a purposed revenge upon us, under the pretenses aforesaid, suggest.

This man writes against the King; also dishonours him, etc. by mean Objection.
expressions and rendrings; also intimates this or that of him, etc. Also the
title is tart and offensive.

To the aforesaids I answer as follows. To the last, first. If the Title
Answer.
should offend thee; yet be not offended, -- For thou either have, or wilt
find, that those who conspire against the Welfare, Crown, Peace, and Dignity
of our Sovereign Lord King Salus, are far worse then Knaves, for they are
Traitors; why then should we fear to offend them? And those who are ensnared or
deluded by them; may they not, rightly (at the least) be called Fools.

And to the former objection, I answer, I do not intentionally to wrong,
dishonor, or abate any thing of the S^ewards just Dues and The neglect of
others necessitates us.
Rights, -- but what I must do of necessity in defense and vindication of King
Salus. And if so he suffer, it is sufferable; -- what also, if it be his
insufferables, are the cause of his sufferings? But there is not any thing his
due, in opposition to the Kingdoms sufferance, in safety, justice, and Rights,
-- for if more be given him, then his due, to the wronging of the universal,
-- so particulars, -- in their Rights of Justice and safety, etc. Reason,
Justice, and necessity require, a reducing all to rights, that so he may have
his own due, and not beyond; especially to the encroachment upon what is his
Lords, the Kingdoms. However, if he should lose any of his just Rights for
Salus sake, its just and right. -- But if it be conscience and justice in any
thus to plead for his Rights; How is it, they plead not for the Rights of Here Is
adoo about the King the King, with pretenses of love and loyalty to him, etc.
-- Well, -- now we have showed you the true and right King, -- make good your
precences, -- else you are only a Pretender.
the true King indeed? to whom they are first and principally bound in nature
and reason, -- so by Covenant the 3d etc. -- So it appears to be craft, not
conscience.

Nor do we intimate any thing injuriously against him, for Deserts are no
injuries; -- only we infer, from the Scots sayings, and their taking up Arms
against him, -- so from our States taking up Arms also, and traytering those
that side with him against the States: and thus both States Actions are
directions and Warrants for us, what we may say and do; For, if we are
enjoined to fight against him, -- sure its as he is, etc. etc. etc. -- Sure
also, we are enjoined, and so may speak and write as well as fight, -- the
last being the lesser of the two, and contained in, the Greater -- fighting,
etc. -- being also never forbid, -- and were we forbid, we conceive
forbiddings cannot justly discharge us of our just duties to our Lord and King
the State. -- Again, to forbid us, were to forbid the Covenant, which also
enjoynes us, as does reason and justice also, to support the Kingdoms rights
first and absolutely. The Stewards secondarily, respectively and conducingly:
-- but what rights are due, to universal wrong-doers?

Now the kingdoms Rights are safety, peace, and justice, -- so to have its
honor maintained, and its innocence cleared, -- though the Steward should
suffer in his honor or any way, for the accommodation thereof, -- how then if
the sufferance be just? -- For the means must suffer for the End, and any way
is just, that necessarily conduces to it. And how can we be able to make good
the Covenant, except the means that conduces thereto be allowed? that is, to
speak, write, and act any right things in behalf thereof, and to oppose any
its opposers whosoever. -- Also to render the Steward in such expressions, as
that his condition and place may be plainly distinguished from that of his
Lords, -- who must be allowed rendrings thereafter, that his dues may be
rendered him.

Again, we are necessitated to what we have done, and its our offensive
Adversaries that write all this, not we, by enforcing us to write it; -- Shall
any one or any thing bind us from defending our King, being clearly convinced
hereof, and that it is our duty and high time to speak? God forbid.
for if treacherous books be writ, and opinions held so generally to the ruin
of King Salus, is it not treachery in all, not to bestir themselves (in their
power and place) in his behalf? And shall such wicked treacherous ones go
unpunished? and shall the loyal Defenders (forced by such disloyal offenders)
suffer, etc. -- truly, better is expected, etc. though we will not presume to
say what.

So now we have done, and appeal to justice and ingenuity, hoping our love,
duty and zeal to our Lord, King Salus (which in the presence of God, is our
only aim) will save us from any rigid censures, of any our trivial slips and
failings in his behalf, etc. In which we being Humanes, -- must needs humanize
it. -- If now we suffer by injurious Censures, etc. its as Martyrs, etc.

Two Cautions for thy better understanding this Book, which should have been
placed at the beginning.
Reader,
1. WHerever thou read or hear the expressions, Kingdom^, People, State
at large, or Salus Populi, etc. thou would in thy mind, put in their places
Kings, Prince, Sovereign, yea Emperor, or Gods Anointed, etc. or any rendrings
as high as thou can; for there is none higher, but God Himself; not
Religion, his honor, worship, service, etc. -- as see in Quaere, before 66.
also at 83. So, Salus is Head, Chief, etc. And so do thou apply in thy
thoughts, -- so in thy actions, etc. This we say is the right King, to whom the
Name is due, -- and to whom thou owe more then thou can pay, and for whom
thou may pay any one, be it whom it will, if justly occasioned in his behalf.

2. Again, wherever thou hear or read the Titles, King, Prince, Gods
Anointed, Sac^ed M^jestie, or Sovereign, etc. in their stead, conceive in thy
mind, Stew^rd, Servant, or Officer to the aforesaid Lord and King, for (...)
right, by all the preceding arguments. The Contents will send thee whereto make
good both the aforesaids. Val^.

A further Addition or continuation of the Contents of the Book for better
direction, and satisfaction, which through have were left out at the first.
17. THe Scots chief arguments for their Invasion, answered at Sect. 37. to 45.

18. The Scots charge the King with the bloodshed of 3. Nations, -- so do
they charge -- him also in their taking up Arms against him, etc. by both
which they accuse him, so and so, etc. -- From whence may much be inferd, --
and this amongst the rest, that the welfare, justice, peace, and safety of the
State, is -- King, Chief, etc. and the King a servant thereta, -- Sect. 55.

19. Some causes of the Peoples rising, etc. explained at Sect. 58. to 59.

20. Of oaths, etc. made to the King, when binding, when not, at Sect. 66.

21. An answer in behalf of the State, to a Catalogue of Exorbitances charged
upon them, -- Sect. 71. at M,

22. The State and King discrimen'd, showing what the King has done, -- and
intended to do against the kingdom, but not any thing freely, for its good.
Also, what the State has done for us -- and what accidentally against us.
examined at Sect. 71. all, especially at O. and S.

23. Pity and Compassion at Sect. 78. Cruelty, -- at Sect. 79. Justice, -- at
Sect. 80. rightly defined.

24. A true King, t^uly defined. -- Sect. 81. to 83.

25. The State at large proved King, chief, head, etc. by Scripture, -- which
is reason also, -- and the King -- (so called) is the said Kings Steward -- and
Servant, etc. 83. -- the end there, being King and Chief, etc. -- the Means,
-- Meaner, -- as -- servant, to the Lord, its end.

26. All that may be collected out of Scripture, in behalf of the King, --
answered in a position, at Sect. 85. --

17. Judge Jenkins, all of him in the Kings behalf, -- answered by a Position,
Sect. 86.

FINIS.

