Deliramenta Catarrhi: OR, THE INCONGRUITIES, IMPOSSIBILITIES, and ABSURDITIES
Couched under the Vulgar Opinion of DEFLUXIONS.
The Author, That great Philosopher, by Fire, Joh. Bapt. Van Helmont, etc.

The Translator and Paraphrast Dr. CHARLETON, Physician to the late KING.

(...).

. Arist. de Caelo. 1. cap. 10. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for William Lee at the
sign of the Turks-head in Fleet Street. 1650.

The Translator to the Judicious and (therefore) unprejudicate Reader.
SO malevolent, severe, and uncharitable have the Censures of many (yet such
only, I conceive, whose parcel-literature, and incapacity of the more solid
and weighty Notions of Philosophy, delivered in most proper and significant
language, have depraved their Appetite of Knowledge, and made them fit to
digest nothing, but crude Sallads gathered in the Poets Elysium, and soft
Romances, oyled with the effeminate Extracts of the Stage, and spiced with some
new French-English idioms) been of my precedent exercise; that the World might
expect from me rather a Vindication of that, then the Publication of a second,
of the same kind. But as I ever levelled my endeavors at a far nobler end, then
the nothing of vulgar Applaus: so also have I declared the temper of my Genius
to be too Stoical, to feel the weak assaults of that cowardly Pygmie,
detraction; whom hansomly to overcome, is to scorn. For common observation
will justify, that no man ever entered the lists with that ignorant Bugbear,
but lost much by the encounter: his judgment inevitably receiving such
VVounds, as the reputation of his Courage could never cure, or compensate.

Nor shall I at all recede from this Maxim, though I here adventure to
profess, that next to the discharge of that duty, which, as a Scholar, I owe
unto the Public, in the Explanation, Improvement, and Communication of
obscure Truths; the most forcible motive, that incited me to bestow a few
recreative hours on the Translation, and marginal Paraphrase of this piece of
Helmont, was to have an opportunity of letting these Semi-criticks know: that
though they have privately accused, yet would it have stood more with their
Honor publicly to have convicted me of such improprieties of expression, or
unnatural perversions of my Authors sense, as might make me alter any thing of
moment in the former, or change my style in the present discourse.

For though I am sufficiently conscious to my self of more defects, and greater
unevenness of my Pen, then the acutest of my Calumniators can discover; and do
account it more noble to detect my own, then others Frailties: yet I dare
appeal to the sober Decision of any, whose Studies hold any proportion with the
Subject, (and such only can I allow for competent Judges) whether the fine and
mysterious nature of many things, treated of in that discourse, might not have
suffered a gross Eclipse, if dressed in a meer-English veil? Whether it be a
Crime in me to trace the footsteps of those Worthies, who have infinitely botb
enriched and ennobled our Language, by admitting and naturalizing thousands of
foreign Words, providently brought home from the Greek, Roman, Italian, and
French Oratories; which, though in the untraveld ears of our Fathers they would
have sounded as harsh, as St. Paul's (...) Ineffabilia verba. 2. Cor. 12. c.
ver. 4.
; yet have a few years made so familiar unto us, that now even Children speak
much of Latin, before they can well read a word of English? And to draw in to
the Center of the scandal, whether I have merited the Epithet of (...) Qui
venustatem verborum, non sensuum acumen insectatur.
of one that praefers the noveltie, or affected elegance of the Phrase, to the
nerves and importance of the sense; merely because I rendered some Physical
Notions in terms most amply and adequately exhibiting their qualities; and
those no other, but such as are most frequent in the Schools: and attempted to
paint the beauty and life of Helmonts spruce Conceptions, in Colors most
strong and natural; though borrowed from the more praecise, distinctive, and
emphatical Tinctures of foreign Artists?

I can not but applaud the Spirit, and happy Fancy of this Tetrastick,
Legisti nostros? risisti, Romule, libros? Casp. Hofmannus in praefatione sua ad
lib. de Generat. Homin.

Ut vidi, ut risi, Romule Dive, tuos.
Quae Causa effectus paris in tam dispare causa?
Risisti ingenium tute, ego stultitiam.
And when any of the tribe of Zoilus shall show us something of their own, I
may perchance be furnished with an opportunity of Applying them.

But lest I fall upon a Parergie, and loosly deviate into that sinister path,
which my resolutions abhor; I return directly to my duty, which is to give the
impartial Reader the Reason, which persuaded me to exhibit my Explanation of
Helmonts unfrequent, and new coined, or new-applied Terms of Art, in Latin.
In a word, I conceived that the Quality of the Subject, intimated by each of
those paradoxical Appellatives, being such as falls under the comprehension of
none, but the leading part of learning, and chiefly those, who have more then
looked into the mysterious Temple of Aesculapius, did necessarily require it:
and that no English, how plain soever, could have driven their ample meaning
into those skulls, which are so thick, as not to admit it in Latin.

As concerning the Verity of these Paradoxes, inspersed upon the ensuing
Treatise, though I have formerly declared my Aversation to attempt any
Commentary on, or decisive Assertion of any of his Innovations; in regard I
ever found his reason stronger at Demolishing the Doctrines of the Ancient
Pillars of our Art, then Erecting a more substantial and durable Structure of
his own, his Wit more acute and active at Contradiction, then his judgment
profound and authentic at Probation: yet shall I usurp the liberty to say,
that many of the Grounds of his quarrel against the Schools, in this
particular of Catarrhs, are sufficiently justifiable; and that if any member in
the whole body of Physic needs to have its errors purged, stupidity corrected,
distortions rectified, and leanness reformed, doubtless this Capital one of
Defluxions may chiefly deserve the industry of the present, and grateful
improvement of the future Age. Nor should I have only said it, had not my
expectation, that some more judicious and elegant hand will shortly set about
that so necessary, charitable, and honorable task, whispered me, that this
difficult, and (therefore) infinitely desiderable piece of knowledge, would
unavoydably have suffered irreparable detriment, disparagement, and obscurity
from the Contagion of my unequal undertaking. And I am bold to promise, that
if any sober mind, imbued with that useful Lesson of Aristotle, Metaphysicorum
lib. 3. cap. 1. and de Coelo lib. 1. cap. 10.
(...), shall come to the dispute, denudate of all interest, and purged from
all the dreggs of Adhaerence to either side; he shall soon be convicted, that
in all that long flux of time betwixt the days of Hippocrates and us, no one
(at least that ever came to our view) among the numerous swarm of Pathologists
Writers on the Diseases and Symptoms incident to the body of man.
, has discoursed of the nature and causes of such Diseases as are in vulgar
practice confidently referred unto the Distillation of Rheums from the head
upon parts of inferior situation, with such clear and uncontrollable reasons,
as not to have left very large gapps, for the easy illation of these scruples
and objections raised by Helmont against them. In brief; whoever shall so far
contribute toward the advance of his own knowledge, as to receive the
Arguments here opposed to the traditional Theory of Catarrhs, with that equal
justice of improving them to that height, with which they are offered; will, I
doubt not, afford us his concurrent vote: that the chief impediment to their
prevailing upon the belief of many dissenters, will be their Novelty. For
hardly do we part with those Doctrines, which instilled into our tender and un
wary years, have grown up together with our understandings, and hold our
credulities enslaved to an implicit conformity, by the tyrannous title of
Praescription. A deplorable remora to the timely exantlation of Truth, long
since discovered and complained of by the grave and yet most acute Stagirite,
in these words: Metaphysic. lib. 2. cap. 3.
(...). Quemadmodum enim consuevimus, ita judicamus dici debere, and quae
praeter haec non apparent similia; sed quia non consuevimus, ignotiora and
magis peregrina. Consueta enim notiora sunt. I shall here so far exercise your
Candor and Patience, as to tolerate a short Digression (though pertinent and
material) concerning this Cardinal cause of (...), or Indocibility. The
Description of this vice of the mind, since most ample and elegant, I shall
borrow from that Noble Enquirer into Truth, Mr. Hobbs, in his inestimable
manual of Human Nature. If the minds of men (says he) were all of white Paper,
they would, for the most, be equally disposed to acknowledge whatsoever should
be in the right method, and right ratiocination, delivered unto them: but when
men have once acquiesced in untrue opinions, and registered them as authentical
methods in their minds; it is no less impossible to speak intelligibly to such
men, then to write legibly upon a piece of Paper already scribled over. The
immediate cause therefore of Indocibility, is Prejudice; and of prejudice,
false opinion of our own knowledge. The Natural Reason of it I shall adventure
to deduce from the slender stock of my own Philosophy. We judge of the truth or
falsehood not only of things subject to the apprehension of sense, but also of
Philosophical and Religious opinions, as we have been accustomed from the
minority of our Understandings: and although many times we are greatly deluded,
yet cannot the arm of the strongest reason bend us from our accustomed
judgment. The ground of this is, that not only the Cur solitae opiniones
placeant: insolitae, etsi firmioribus rationibus bus innixae, displiceant.
Images, or bare Ideas (I mean not those intentionall species, so much talked
of in common Philosophy, for I believe I could prove that there are no such in
Nature) of those things have an existence in the brain; but certain Notes or
marks of Rejection or Approbation are also superadded unto them, and deeply
impressed upon the brain. These Images therefore being again offered unto the
mind, we perceive not only the things themselves; but at the same instant, even
without any haesitancy or accurate examination, yea though most convincing and
firm arguments are sometimes brought to the contrary, with great violence, we
approve or reject them according to the conformity or disproportion of those
Notes formerly registered. The remove of which obstruction shall be the constant
business not only of my studies, but also of my earnest prayer.

Quae in Schola and Cathedra aliquando praeter tationem, plerumque ad acuenda
ingenia juvenrutis, in theoria proponuntur, sunt toleranda: quae vero in praxi
in perniciem aegrorum praescribuntur, potius execranda and damnanda, quam
admittenda esse, existimo.

Quid verum, atque decens curo, and rogo, and omn is in hoc sum.
Condo, and compono quae mox depromere possim.
Ac ne forte roges, quo me duce, quo lare tuter?
Nullius addictus jurare in verba magistri,
Quo me cunque rapit tempest as, deferor hospes.
Nunc agilis fio, and mersor civilibus undis,
Virtutis verae custos, rigidusque satelles.
Nunc in Aristippi furtim praecepta relabor:
Et mihi res, non me rebus subjungere conor.
Poeta Philosophus ad vada Maeandri concinuit.

VV. CHARLETON.

The Errors of Physicians Concerning DEFLVXIONS.
The Summary.
1. WHo is the Lord paramont of Diseases and Nature, 2. Some suppositions, by
way of premises. 3. The conclusion. 4. Proved from experiments. 5. The
explication of the Position. 6. The Lungs the part which first dies. 7. Why the
Author deserted the Schools. 8. The forerunner of miseries to old men. 9.
Purging medicaments, why destructive to old men. 10. The testimonies that
Physicians give of their own ignorance, Fatal: because too late. 11. That
Axiom of Physicians desumed from the use of things beneficial and hurtful,
worthy their blushes. 12. Errors of Physicians. 13. The ground of Paracelsus
his inconstancy. 14. The Generalogy of a Catarrh, or Rheum, like an old wives
fable. 15. Diseases imputed to Catarrhs. 16. How great calamity arifeth to
mankind from thence. 17. By what means they make the sick their perpetual
slaves. 18. The ordinary subtersuge of the Schools. 19. Thirteen Positions. 20
Nineteen Conclusions emergent from those Positions. 21. By a sufficient
enumeration of Parts. 22. A Dilemma. 23. Some Absurdities. 24. Ignorance in the
Schools, the sole Mother of Catarrhs. 25 The same Ignorance, the fountain of
Absurdities in their method of Cure. 26. Shame, the Cause of the Schools
instability, 27. A deniail of principles granted in the Schools 28. Whence heat
is de^ived to the Liver. 29, The proof from unsuccessefull remedies. 30. the
Toothache examined. 31. The digestion of the Tooth and Nails, different from
the Digestion of all other parts. 32. A Catarrh upon the inward parts,
demonstrated impossible, 33. The Pose, or Cold in the head, described. 34.
Absurdities dependent on the opinion of a Catarrh falling upon the stomach. 35.
An enquiry concerning the dropping of Rheum upon the Lungs. 36. What distills
from the (...), in the beginning of a Cold, and what in the continuance. 37. An
Argument ab im^^ssi i^ against the Cause of the Cough, delivered by the
Schools. 38. The original of the matter causing affections of the Lungs,
declared. 39 The vanity and infertility of remedies, from want of knowledge.
40. The decoctions of China, Zarza, etc. neither dry up excrementitious humors,
nor prevent their generation. 41. Some Absurdities growing upon this root. 42.
What s to be observed in Affections of the Lungs, 43. The doctrine of the
Schools, concerning the motion of the Lungs, false. 44. The use of he Lungs,
not yet known to the Schools. 45. 21. Peremtory reasons against the vulgar
opinion of the use of the Lungs. 46. The error of the Schools, concerning the
use of the Midrife, confirmed by 8. Arguments 47. 7. Conclusions ensuing
thereon. 48. Why the remedies of Physicians are inefficacious and barren. 49
That the means vulgarly used for the prevention and restraint of Catarrhs, are
mere fopperies, and dreams worthy only the heads of old women. 50. Galen
wholly ridiculous in his Books of the conservation of health. 51. The Ignorance
of the Schools, right worthy our pity and tears. 52 The dissection of a living
Dog, has deceived the Schools. 53. A new Error, concerning Lohochs, or
Lambativ medicaments. 54. They depend on the supposition of a Falsity. 55. Some
probations. 56. Whence the delusion of Catarrhs was first introduced. 57. The
refutation of an unreasonable and wild persuasion. 58 What that is, which
imposes upon our sense, under the delusive disguise of a Destillation. 59.
What the second and succeeding matter. 60. Men's ignorance of the Latex, or
fountain o^ serous humors, has been the basis to the opinion of Catarrhs. 61.
Preoccupation. 62. The torture of night. 63. The inconstancy of Paracelsus. 64.
Those liquid parts, which are not yet made communicants of vitality in our
bodies, hold no correspondence with the stars. 65. The marrow not accountable
amongst the liquid parts of the body.

SEasonable it is for us, now to declare, that the large Catalogue of Diseases,
imputed to a destillation of Rheum, from the head even to the extremity of the
toes, without any obstacle impeding the descent, is an old wives fable,
invented by the common adversary of mankind, on purpose, lest the Causes of
Diseases being known, their Remedies might at the same time be revealed.
However it may be, yet at lest is it hence manifested, that the Schools are,
even to this very day, seduced by the errors of the Gentiles, in the point of
the Generation of Rheum, its defluction, manner, way, matter, means, places,
and organs; as also of its Revulsion and Remedies. For false and absurd must
that superstructure be, which is founded on an absurd and impossible Principle.
For which reason, the vain and ridiculous hope, which is erected upon Cauteries
and Fontanels, is in like manner staggered and ruined: as I shall, in
convenient place, demonstrate.

Nature herself is the sole Aesculapius of diseases: and the Physician no more
but her Adjutant; according to that 1.
worthy Maxim of Hippocrates. But the sense of that relates only to such
diseases, which nature, by her own single power, usually cures. But when she
has been so fataly foiled, that she cannot by her own strength arise again to
maintain the conflict; the Physician, elected by the immense benignity of the
Almighty Lord of Nature, and in whose balance all diseases carry the same
weight, (i. e.) are equaly curable (such is he, who has, among a multitude of
others of the same order, obtained some one Universal Medicine) remains no
longer her servant: but is become her Interpreter, Rector and very potent Lord.
Let the name of my Lord Jesu be exalted to eternity, who ever vouchsafes his
munificence to Little ones, abjected in their own humility! For the Nature of a
sick man being the chief receiver of Morbifick impressions, and the sensitive
mover toward the contrary; the Patient must, then at least, when the diseases
entertained become prevalent, yield to their conquering sword, or at best, in
the future, live a Calamitous death, unless he shall be relieved and restored
to his primitive integrity, by the auxiliary hand of the Physician. Yet is it
not in the lot of every Physician, to arrive at Corinth, to ascend to that
excellent knowledge: but his only, who has the happy qualifications of a
Vocation, Election, Exercitation, and Commission. For in the less accomplished
days of Hippocrates, the transcendent virtues of Catholic medicines remained
in the darkness of undiscovery (and in truth, even in our brighter days, they
continue but jejune, and eclipsed with prejudice and derision, amongst vulgar
Physicians) upon which consideration, he is deservedly to be excused, in that
he conceived the whole business of the conquest of diseases to lie upon the
shoulders of Nature, as being the sole protectresse of life.

Again, I have elsewhere showed, that, even from the first moment of the
conception of an Embrion, there is assigned 2.
to every peculiar member one Implantate or Originary Spirit, as immediate
president and Governor thereof, and another Influent Spirit, deradiant from
the heart, as the excieator and assistant of the former; which yet is not
determined to perfection, nor individually disposed, unless first subdued to a
qualification requisite by the praeparatory power of the Implantate. I have
also taught, in another place, that every member enjoyes the capacity of
Vegetation, according to the virtue of its peculiar Ferment originally
inoculated into its principles; and that, for this reason, there can be no
expectance of any transmutation, conductive to a new generation, unless by the
mediation of that Ferment.

And from hence, by natural consequence, we may understand, that all
vegetation is made by the spirits; and that so all debility of digestion in the
members does depend upon the diminution of the spirits and their peculiar
Ferment, according to that in sacred Writ: My spirit (the involucrum or
conservatory of the Ferment) shall be attenuated and (therefore) my days
shortened. So that a member, which in its integrity affords no visible
excrement, must produce a large and constant source of unnatural humor, when
once wounded, injured, diminished, or impeded in the vigor of its appropriate
Ferment. And, finally, it follows from hence, that according to the degrees of
the injury and variety of Causes inferring that injury; there must be generated
a difformity and dissimilitude of excrements respectively.

Diseases, therefore, have their origin, not from one fountain, particularly
from the Head (from whence the 3.
Schools wildly imagine all Catarrhs to drop down) but from a single Idiopathy,
or proper indisposition of every part, superinduced upon the topicall or
domestic Ferments. Thus, to example, Wounds, long after their sanation, break
4.
forth again, and frequently introduce durable Ulcers, and Apostems: and upon
change of Weather, many years after their perfect consolidation, fall into a
reincrudescence, and freshly renew their torture. Thus Coughs, Pleurisies,
Spittings of blood, and Erisypelous tumors, or inflammations, have their set
vicissitudes, and, after considerable intermissions, reinvade. For some
excessive montain Cold, or other Damp suddenly surprising, the nightly Aer,
marish or uliginous Fog, or malignant Fume belched from the acide bowels of
Mines, does frequently, with one assault, so violate and ruin the Ferments of
the brain, or Lungs, that from thenceforward, during the whole after-life, they
become the too fertile magazines of various excrements. After this manner also
in the eyes, ears, teeth, jaws, etc. Excrements (not such as the mucous or
slimy excretions of the brain) are ordinarily occasioned by the irregularity or
diminution of the Ferments peculiar to those parts. So Coughs and Asthmas, or
difficulties of respiration first begin: and persever by a continued Ferment.
Not, in sooth, by reason of 5.
a viscid Phlegm dropping continually from the head; but engendered in the
womb of the Lungs, by a violation of their domestic Ferment. For the Lungs
more easily submit to the invasion of any foreign injury, then the other
parts of the body: in regard, the Lungs is of all members the first that grows
old, decayed, and dies. As is manifest 6.
from the Cough generally infesting old men, and from the rattling in the
throats of all dying men, though they perish by any other disease, and not by
affections of the Lungs. For this is proper to the Lungs, in this respect, that
they continually suck in crude Aer, and being near to the heart oppressed,
lavishly expend their own strength, and by reason of that exhaustion, decay
much the sooner.

In the first place I dissent from the Schools, because I very well know this
kind of vitiosity in nature to belong to 7.
the parts containing, and not to the humors contained. For excrementitious
humors of this kind contained, are certain productions, which are begotten by
the Archeus, or vital president of the particular parts, depraved by some
noxious inquination precedent.

In the second, I dissent from them also in this point, 8.
that I stand assured, that this evil is topicall and primary, and not
communicated by Deuteropathy or consent with the head. For the Coughs of old
men, which for the plurality discourage all hopes of restoration, arise from
this root; that in the lowest and smallest branches of the Respiratory Artery,
or pipe of the Lungs, there does constantly reside such a quantity of
excrement, generated in the Lungs, which does not only obstruct the tubes or
conduicts: but also, by the contagion of its presence, deprave and diminish the
Local Ferment; whereupon there is hourly produced a new source or supply of
excrements, as the plentiful maintenance of Coughs, which in men once entered
the calamitous confines of old age, are hardly cured, by remedies known to
vulgar heads: in regard such remedies neither arrive at the part affected, nor,
in troth, are they endowed with any restauratory faculty. These kinds of
excrementitious humors, therefore, are no other but topicall defects of the
parts misaffected: and every particular part has its particular debility,
whether innate or acquisite, from a diminution of its vegetative Ferment.

And thus it is evident, that the various streams of excrements 9.
flowing from the various parts of the body, are all derived from this one
fountain.

On these firm grounds I apprehend, first, That all repetitions of Purgations,
in these affections, are frustraneous and hurtful: in respect, they level
their power only against the productions, or Effects, and not against the
Causes; and chiefly because such viscid excrements, seated remotely from the
stomach, are too stubborn and refractory to yield to the laxative operation of
Purgers. You may pleas to add, that although Laxatives may seem to have
afforded ease and relief, for a day or two after their use; insomuch as the
mass of crude and inconfected blood in the mezaraick veins being voided by
stool, there must of necessity succed the more sparing dispensation of blood
through the body, and penury of nourishment in the Lungs, and by consequence a
less quantity of excrement be rejected: yet do they, by substracting from the
necessary aliment of the whole, and by leaving behind them an evil tincture in
the instruments of common digestion, every day more and more infringe the
universal economy of the body, and impugn the conserving vigor of nature.

This when Physicians darkly, as through a veil, discover, 10
and remain ignorant, that they have afforded no benefit to their Patients, by
the exhaustion of the laudable juces of the body, and the diminution of
natural vigor; they at length remit them to the sober rules of Diet, and
kitchen physic, as the only hopeful means of their recovery, and so leave
them, by the painful use of Fontanels, and reiterated moderate Purges, to run
out their remaining sands, medicaly (i. e.) miserably. By which Concession,
first, they insinuate that wholesome and moderate diet is to be preferred to
most of those unfaithful medicaments of the shops: and upon the testimony of
their own unhappy experience, conclude, that the Patient ought to abstain from
them, as hurtful, and at best but rarely to be used. Our wish is, that now,
after so many destructive exhaustions of sick men's strength, they would sit
down contented, and in the future no more attempt, by the same fruitless
means, to dreigne the hopes, bodies, veins, strength, and purses of the sick.
At lest, I wish, that they would be mindful of their own Axiom, wherein they
unanimously consent, That the chiefest indication of the cure, is to be desumed
from the benefit or harm which things already used have introduced. Which
rule, although it be worthy the blushes of learned men, and only fit for the
conformity 11.
of Empyricks: yet, it may be wished, that, by the instruction thereof, they
would be reclaimed from the practice of their former errors, and no longer in
Coughs and Consumptions return to those inefficacious remedies, which they have
observed, never to have been beneficial to any. For then would all Purgatives,
Phlebotomy, Errhines, Errhinum est medicamentum, quod naribus inditum, ex
cerebro, sine sternutatione, humores and praesertim pituitam evacuat.
Apophlegmatismes, Apophlegmatismi sunt remedia, quae in ore aliquandiu
detenta, ejusque cavum leniter ferientia, per emissaria palati, capiosam
pituitam e cerebro deducunt; quaesensimpostea frequenti sputatione facile
excluditur.
Lambatives, drinks of China, Zarza, Sassafras, Cauteries in the Coronal
suture, and other deceitful remedies of the same order, be wholly laid aside,
which are brought into use by Physicians, that they might not appear to have
received their fees for nothing. It is also to be wished, they had suffered
themselves to be instructed from their own practice, that while they pointed
their endeavors directly against the Ablation, Revulsion, Derivation, and
precaution of secundary Effects, viz. the Excrements wept from the injured
Archeus of the particular part: they at the same time tacitly confessed, that
they neither understood their originals, nor set about the Cure of them,
according to the just method of beginning at the remove of their primary
Causes. And they had farther discovered, that a medical Course of Diet, is but
a wild, languid, invalid and indeed desperate kind of remedy; and Kitchen
Aphorisms too contemptible a militia to encounter so formidable an Adversary,
already entered upon the borders of life, and ready to dissolve the discordant
Harmony of the whole Composition, by the general diffusion of its tyranny. No
wonder therefore, if the Common people, observing the vanity of such Cures,
have taken occasion to create this proverb, The best physic, is to take no
physic.

More then once have I lamented, out of a deep Commiseration 12.
of the hard Condition of man, while I read over whole Centuries of the
Councels of Physicians, and chiefly their Commentaries on the 9. Rhas. ad
Almansorem, where they run over all diseases of the body, from the Crown of
the head to the sole of the foot; that digging into the Center of each disease
(as they believe and glory) and there exploring the Grandfather, or
procatarctick Cause thereof, they ever and anon lay the blame on some one
singular distemper, either natural or acquired: but yet with such a reserve of
uncertainty, that they dare not precisely determine, whether they ought to
account that distemper for the disease, or only for the Antecedent Cause of
the disease, about which they Consult. But to prevent mistake, and to be sure
of the right, generally in all infirmities they accuse both heat and cold. For
example, in most, they cry out upon a Frigidity of the stomach, either
solitary, or combined with an excessive Heat of the Liver; whence they foretell
Catarrhs to be engendered, and maladies of those parts, upon which such rheumes
shall be rained down: and this hint they pursue unto the exploration of the
nature not only of very many Internal, but also of most External and Cutany
defects. And with such Theorical and Practical decretals do the schools season
the brains of their Disciples. For thus are infirmities of the eyes, ears
jaws, tongue, teeth, chest, arms, loins, and thighs, charged upon the account
of Catarrhs. Thus have Coughs, Consumtions, difficulties of respiration,
Pleurisies, Inflammations of the Lungs, Apoplexies, Palsies, sudden Deaths,
Impostumes, Spittings of blood, found their pedigrees deduced from
Distillations. Thus finally, is the stomach infested with Vomiting,
Nauseounesse, dejection of Appetite, and debility of Concoction: as also the
Liver and Spleen become misaffected. For crude and indigestible Phlegm being
dropped down from the retort of the Head, Obstructions, Hardnesses, Dropsies,
Apostems, Schirrous tumors, Fevers, torments of the bowels, etc. are listed
under the conduct of Catarrhs.

To which Epidemick tradition of Catarrhs, Paracelsus, though otherwise above
modesty triumphing in his invention 13.
of Tartars, and the 3 first Hypostaticall Principles, Princ pia Hypostatic a
sunt, quae majori v^ ac efficacia prae reliquis pollent; unde in Schola
HermeticaCheironia virilia, virtuosa dicuntur, suntque Sulphur, Mercurius, and
Sal. Sal est principium hypostaticum, cum vi fermentandi and coagulandi. Ejus
signatura est, ut intrinsecus sit fusil^, metallorum instar and fixus: ex
trinsecus autem combustibilis et incinerabilis. Sulphur principium est
hypostaticum, cum vi maturandi, tingendi, homogenea attrahendi, heterogenea
repellendi, tendendi a centro ad circumferentiam, and vicissim. Hujus signatura
est, ut intra sit fixum, oleaginosum sive pingue: extra inflammabile esse and
fugitivum. Flamma quippe est Sulphur volatile. Mercurius est principium
hypostaticum, cum vi vegetativa et instaurativa. Hujus signatura interna est
sovere ignem potentem: externa vero est liquidum, glutinosum, incombustibile
and frigidum esse. Joh. Raicus tract. de podagra.
does 14.
frequently subscribe, and always openly acknowledge the name of Defluxion
(flussen) staggering into self-contradiction, under the drunken guidance of
that great Lady, Incertitude.

And this fabulous scene of Defluxions, which indeed is very well worth our
serious tears, do the Schools so polish and trim up, and deliver from hand to
hand down to posterity; that it now dares plead prescription, and usurp the
sacred dignity of truth: yea common Idiots, by their own infirmities made
passive Physicians, tire my ears with a tedious lecture of their Catarrhs.
Whereupon, since it is a task extremly difficult, and such as my Genius
abhorrs, to root out a customary doctrine from the minds of men unacquainted
with more rational ways of learning, and in the place thereof, implant the
seeds of solid truth; chiefly when vulgar heads are of that temper, that, like
new vessels, they hardly part with that odor, wherewith they were first
seasoned: it is my custom, even among persons of honor, to affect silence,
not to preach upon the disease, or its Causes, several kinds, and remedies; but
quietly concealing my detestation of the easy theory of the Schools, and
dissembling an ignorance of all, go away as consenting to whatever has been
said. Yet, in some places, I adventure to leave a hint, that I am otherwise
instructed, that Fools are not constellated to a capacity of medicinal
Principles, nor my self to be their Paedagog. At best, I cannot but admire,
that no man has hitherto, after so long a revolution of time, ever discovered,
and made animadversions on the palpable and superlative ignorance of
Physicians: but that the grey-haired dreams of the Grecians have drawn the
whole Christian World after them, into a servitude. Vocabulum hic ab authore
usurpatum, est Latria; (...) autem exprimit nedum cultum divinum, quo sensu
legitur apud Job. Evangel. cap. 16. (...) ast etiam servitutem, suxta illud
Sophoc. in Ajace, (...): and illud proverbium Phocylid. (...), tempori servire.
that is ridiculous, lying, and pernicious to humane society. To particular;
they generally conclude that the head from whence their Nilus of Defluxions
does originally spring, is a Cold Distemper of the stomach, and an hot
distemper of the Liver: and that the greatest part of mankind is in subjection
to this tyranny. The manner of its generation they deliver thus; That the
stomach, incessantly, during the whole act of Concoction, receiving an access
of immoderate heat from the Liver, must of necessity, all that while, send up
whole clouds of vapors into the brain: and that by reason the brain is, by
its native temperament Cold, and set, like a cover over a boiling pot, or the
head of an Alembick, in the highest region of the body; all those vapors that
ascend into it, are again condensed into Water; Which, since according to the
propensity of its nature, it must tend downwards, does afford an ample source
to distillations, and a general maintenance to most diseases. That if this
torrent fall down upon the eyes, ears, palate, teeth, etc. those parts have
very good reason to bewail, and with plenty of rheum lament their unkind
destiny, in being so near neighbors unto, and lying within reach of this
tyrant, the Brain: but if upon the Lungs, it is quickly the inevitable 15.
occasion of Coughs, Difficulties of respiration, and in fine of Consumtions,
of palpitations or tremblings of the heart, and so of immature death. But if
the stream be turned upon the stomach, then does the stomach suffer the just
punishment of its former distemper, by admitting debility of Concoction,
Crudities, Vomits, Orexies (...), cibi appetentia proprie dicitur; quo sen^u et
Juvenal. usurpavit pro vehementi edendi aviditate, rabidam facturus orexim.
or insatiate Appetites, Swounings, fainting Pains of the mouth of the stomach,
Obstructions, Laskes, durable Fluxes of the belly, violent ejections of Choler
upward and downward, fits of the Colic, Atrophies, or universal leanesse from
decay of Nutrition, Dropsies, Schirrous tumors, and all other defects of the
instruments official to common Digestion: yea Fevers, Putrefactions of the
blood in the veins, as also stones of the Spleen, Calculi enim quandoque in
Liene reperiuntur, materia hac tartarea longa die in e^dem coacervata, and
ratione interni and nativi coagulationis principij, in lapideam indurata
duritiem. Hi autem ante mortens vix deprehenduntur, et medicinam spernunt.
Kidneys, and Bladder, have their ordinary materials from the slime of this
Defluxion. That if these rivulets creep into the inmost closets of the brain,
then sudden death, Apoplexies, and Palsies immediately ensue: but if in the
hinder part of the head, by the neck they chanee to wander into the Nerves,
Arteries, and Muscles, then must Gouts, Palsies, Pleuresies, and Convulsions of
the receiving parts, unavoidably be introduced: yea all Chirurgicall defects,
as Pains, Apostems, and the numerous progeny of Ulcers, do they father upon
Catarrhs.

That if this deluge be not evacuated and dreigned by some of the forementioned
sluices, but becomes a standing pond, from whose oppression the brain is not
able to deliver it self, neither by the Aquaeducts of the nostrils, nor the
laborious pump of Coughs: Oh! then instantly follows, a stupid drowsiness, an
inexpugnable propensity to out sleep Endymion, remitte ocu'os ad page 68. in
tract. de magnetica vulner. curat. and ibi fuse explicatum invenies, quid apud
medicos designatur per Catochen.
Catoches, a Lethargy, Vertigo, Apoplexy, loss of Memory, and perdition of
Senses.

For besides these forementioned distempers of Heat and Cold, and Defluxions
necessarily resulting from thence; the Books, Orations, Councels,
Conversations, Chairs and Practices of Physicians sound of nothing: and so the
whole bulk of the Art of healing, seems, now a days, to be moved upon the
slender hinges of Purgations, Phlebotomy, Scarifications, Baths, Sweatings,
Cauteries, and, in short, upon no other then the diminutions of strength, and
emaciations of the body, or exsiccations of Rheumes. 16.


To which end, they impose upon their Patients, the decoctions of the roots of
China, Zarza, and the wood of Sassafras, brought from the East Indies, upon
design of drying up the luxuriant moisture of the brain: for the most part
measuring the extent of the Pharmaceuticall and Diateticall Theory, by the rule
of Heat and Cold.

And by this means, they never release the sick out of their hands: but
perpetually oblige them, like purchased 17.
Bondslaves, to the irksome observance of their Precepts; though with manifest
despair. In regard, while Physicians remain ignorant of the fundamentals and
Causes of the disease, and by the light of their own unsuccessfulnesse read the
vanity of their Operations, they must stand convicted of the impossibility of
the Sanation: upon this ground, that the natural Frigidity of the stomach,
does Antipractically, or by Counter violence, impugn the Heat of the Liver;
and so those remedies which would be beneficial to the stomach, must prove
offensive and dangerous to the Liver, and so transpositively.

All which impostures, since they conspire to the extirpation of the race of
Adam, to the desolation of Commonwealths, 18.
and utter oblivion of familyes; I could not but think it my duty (what in me
lay) wholly to subvert and dismantle this exsecrable heresy of medical
Doctrine: and so much the more compulsion had I upon my conscience to attempt
it, in consideration that this Pestilence has possessed the heads of our
Europeans, ever since the days of Galen, until now. Proprio didactro, inquit
Helmontius; (...) enim sonat idem, quod minerval latin, five praemium
doctrinae.
For rich men learn this Doctrine from the costly dictates of their Purses, and
what they have learnt, they soon communicate to others: and thus all diseases
have their stories written in the monstrous Romance of Defluxions. Against
which I shall declare, by Positions granted in the Schools.

1. The stomach of man, during life, is actually Warm, and its interior
membrane or Coat bedewed with a certain 19.
moisture.

2. And impossible it is, that any aquous humidity should be actually seething
in the body, and not at the same time send forth plenty of Vapors from it self.

3. The superior way from the stomach, is the Gullet, or oesophagus, being a
membrane round long and hollow, as a Pipe or Cane, extended from the stomach
even up unto the jaws, and in substance the same with the interior Coat of
the stomach.

4. This Gullet, by the privilege of its native constitution, is ever actually
moist, and constantly (except at times of swallowing) actually shut (otherwise,
distorted in avoydance of a Vacuum, it would laterally fall together, no
otherwise then a bladder that wants some guest to fill its Cavity:) and the
sides thereof mutually meet and touch each the other, by the compulsion of that
necessity of Nature, which forbids a Vacuity. For the Gullet containg in it,
neither meat, drink, nor aer, would of necessity be empty, should it remain
open. But that it is not open, is evident from this, that otherwise, at the
swallowing down of every morsel of our Diet the Aer, which would be beneath
the morsel, and oppose the descent thereof, were the morsel proportionate in
gravity to the renitency of the Aer, must be rammed down into the cavity of
the stomach; and so there must follow for every morsel swallowed a Belch, or
redischarge of that aer, by the superior outlet of the stomach. Finally, since
the membrane of this Gullet is always moist, the sides thereof would of
necessity fall together, if not distended by some force: which is never
observed in the dissections of dead, nor could be of any use in living bodies.

5. The mouth of the stomach is shut up by a Natural motion, and not by a
Voluntary.

6. And Anatomy affords no other knowledge of the Gullet, more then that it is
narrow, locked up beneath by the Pylorus or inferior orifice of the stomach, and
in the neck of man on all sides compressed by very many vessels circumjacent.

7. The Gullet neither sucks in, nor contains any Aer: for by reason of its
proper motion, natural to it as a moist membrane, and want of any body to
distend it from within, it falls together on all sides.

8. The Gullet is not opened longwayes, but during the descent of Aliment.
Which if very dry, makes a stand in the passage, nor easily descends, unless
driven down by liquor superadded: which could not be, if the Gullet contained
aer beneath the morsel, unless there followed a Belch upon the deglutition of
each morsel. Yet the top of the Gullet, about the Larinx or head of the
windpipe, is commonly open.

9. The lower end of the Gullet is contracted by an aliene power, and is
therefore never opened but by the violence of some aliment or other tenent,
either entering into, or expulsed from the stomach: Or upon the knocking of
Hunger, it may be unlocked by a strange key, i. e. not by its own motion, since
the humidity of its sides naturally disposes them to Concidence, or falling
together.

10. No Aer, and much less Vapor, arises out of the stomach, and ascends,
without giving the loud report of a Belch.

11. Though that heat, which is necessary to the stomach, immediately causes
the exhalation of vapors: yet it follows not, that the same heat should
protrude those vapors upward, with so great violence as is required to break
open the door of the stomach, being fast locked, and distend the Gullet, since
any one of these contradictory Theses being conceded, it will be a genuine
inference, that every man must be troubled with continual belchings.

12. In the stomach, as in all other vessels moderately hot, every watery
vapor does sooner, upon the lest compression, return to its primitive
consistence, and unite again in drops; then to be of power sufficient to
elevate and distend a closely compressed membrane of considerable magnitude.
Where we observe, by the by, That Vapors are not the Cause of Belchings: but
only the Gas silvestre, Gas bifurcatum, ab Helmontio nostro fabricatum inveni:
primum scilicet Aquae, sive Meteoron; secundum sylvestre. Ga. Meteoron designat
Aquam, in vaporem, per geniale aeris frigus (ubi omnia eo semel deducta
consumuntur, and in pristinum aquae elementum retrocedunt) resolutam. Quinam
vapor alterius utique sortis est, quam vapor per Calorem suscitatus: eo itaque
respectu, paradoxi licentia, in nominis mage convenientis egestate, halitum
illum Gas nominavit Author, non long a Chao veterum secretum. Gas autem
sylvestre, est spiritus quidam naturae hominis plane hostilis, atque a
prunoribus nondum cognitus; qui nee vasi^ cogi, nec in corpus visibile reduci,
nisi extincto prius semine, potest. Corpora enim continent hunc spiritum, and
quandoque tota in ejusmodi forum halitum abscedunt: non quidem quod actu insit
ipsis (siquidem detineri non posset, imo totum concretum avolaret) sed est
spiritus concretus, and more corporis coagulatus, excitaturque acquisito
Fermento, ut in vino fermentante, omphacio, pane, hydromellite, itemque ruber
ille ex Chrysulca operante eructatus: vel additamento peregrino, ut ex auro,
adjecto sale Armeniaco: vel tandem per aliquam Dispositionem Alterativam,
qualis est Assatio, respectu pomi. Hujus autem ignoti hospitis tum ortus, tum
hostilitatis atque implacabilli ferociae, quae nobis insidiatur capitaliter,
exegesi ulterius paulo inhaerendum: ea potissimum relatione, ut nedum Quidditas
atque Nativitas hujus Gas innotescant ijs, quibus contigerit nondum omnia
Helmontij mysteria perlustrare; sed etiam ut istud epitheton (sylvestre) non
incongruenter illi appensum commonstretur. Primo itaque quoad essentiam ejus
quidditativam; meditare, turpiter admodum esse delusos qui credidere Gas uvarum
est vini spiritum in musto. Gas enim uvarum and musti, ex fermento ebullitionis
concept^ excitatum, est tantum in via ad vinum; non autem Vini, in suajam
dignitate constituti spiritus. Intercedens enim inter utruneque Fermentalis
Dispositio, rem praecedentem disponit in sui transmutationem, ut inde aliud ens
fiat. Siquidem extra dubitationis aleam est, omnem transmutationem formalem
praesupponere Fermentum corruptivum. Secundo, quoad Nativitatem Gas in uva;
nota. Vua ill^sa asservatur and exsiccatur: si vero pellis ejus semel fuerit
disrupta, and vulnerata, illa mox fermentum ebullitionis concipit, hincque
transmutationis initium. Vina ergo Vvarum, pomorum, baccarum, mellis, itemque
stores and srondes semel discerpta atque contusa, fermento arrepto, bullire ac
ferve e incipiunt; unde Gas. Vltimo, quantum ad ejus Malitiam ac feritatem
attinet, oenopoli sciant, vinorum Gas, si multa vi intra cados coerceatur, vina
furiosa, mala atque n^civa reddere. Quapropter and morbidum Gas, ^va affatim
comesta, pluries aegritudines anxias c^ncitavit. Siquidem Fermenti spiritus
tumultuantur, and cum digestioni nostrae sint inobedientes, spiritui Vitali se
per vim associant, imo si quid sudore tenus excerni sit paratum, id sua
fermeati aciditate grumescunt, atque insignes pariunt moleflias, tormina,
diarrhaeas, dysenterias. Sed Etymi Gas explicationi satis superque hactenus
insudatum.
or a certain Wild spirit exhaling from some aliment.

13. That granting a Natural spirit of the yet imperfect blood in the Liver,
all the veins, by reason of their constant heat, would either about the parts
of the Liver, or in their capillary branches, generate Catarrhs, which the
Schools have baulked in their hunting of diseases.

The Conclusions erected on the premised Concessions.
FRom these Positions, confessed by general Consent, and demonstrated by the
ocular evidence of Anatomy, it naturally follows, in the first place

1. That no vapor can ascend from the stomach to the head; and the material
Cause of Catarrhs, vulgarly believed, must fail, and the very groundwork of
the doctrine of Defluxions be demolished.

2. If so great a mist of ignorance has surrounded the world in things
manifest and obvious to the observation of sense: what Cimmerian blindness may
not be suspected, in the common theory of such things as lie more deep and
abstruse, and therefore have their Causalites only discernable by the optics
of the most acute Reason?

3. That submitting our belief to the doctrine of the Schools, a healthy and
hot stomach would generate more and greater showers of Catarrhs, then an
unhealthy, weak and cold one; which is point blanck contratry to the opinion
commonly embraced.

4. That, in order to the Cure of Defluxions, according to the consequence of
their theory, we ought to endeavor the Refrigeration, rather then the
Calefaction of the stomach.

5. That all men would of necessity be equaly obnoxious to Catarrhs, and so
continually infirm.

6. Upon this ground, that all men have their Gullet, Brain, and Stomach
actually hot, equaly moist, and constituted in the same Figure.

7. That every man would naturally, like swine, belch at every step he treads:
since the indesinent heat and moisture must unavoydably transmit continual
Clouds of vapors from the stomach.

8. That although we should descend to allow, that a vapor exhaled from the
stomach might be of force sufficient to distend the Gullet; yea and be
evaporated without ructation: yet would it remain of exceeding difficulty to
infer an apprehension, that this vapor would not sooner be discharged by the
annexed and open tubes of the mouth and nostrils, then make a long and
difficult progress up to the brain, by the narrow Meanders and blockt up
avenews of a membrane. That this Vapor, steaming up from the furnace of the
stomach, would necessarily carry along with it a fulsome Hautgoust of the meat
then suffering the act of Concoction, by the variety of ungrateful odours
acquaint the nose with the unsavory story of its various mutations, and be
horridly offensive both to our selves and company: and thus if all those
frequent belches were thus strongly perfumed by Corruption, our very breath
also, continually blasted with them, would save us the trouble of foreign
poisons, disparage the fatal emislions of the Basilisck, and be as dangerous
to Conversation, as the fumes of the Lago di Tripergola Avernus, Gr. (...), quo
nullae aves accedunt, ob tetrum ejus odorem: propter quam graveolentiam, etiam
hic descensus ad inferos olim esse credebatur. Gas sylvestre.
in Campania, or the sulphurous farts of our Grandmother, when delivered from
the Colic, by the Crisis of an Earthquake.

9. That since the Material cause of belching is a nimble Wild spirit, arising
for our Aliment, and far more subtle then a vapor; but yet does never invade
the Brain, unless, upon shutting the mouth, it chance to advance to the
forepart of the head, through the funnell of the palate, and be thence exploded
by the nostrils: assuredly, much less can vapors, that are more gross and
corporeal, ascend so high as to insinuate themselves into all the narrow creeks
and intricate Cells of the brain.

10. That these volatile and fugitive spirits, the causers of ructation, are
never carried in a direct path, up to the region of the brain; but in an
oblique, leading through the organ of smelling: and therefore they never afford
an odor, or become subject to the perception of the odoratory nerves, but when
the mouth is shut, at the instant of their eruption; much less can a vapor
from the stomach, by its own spontaneous motion, arrive at the remotest closets
of the brain.

11. That though we condescend, that Vapors, the material cause of Catarrhs,
may in some degree arise up to the head, at least to the organ of smelling: yet
can we not conceive, that this can happen, but when the mouth is shut; and so
whoever gapeth, can never be infected with Defluxions, and by inference, to
keep the mouth open, at the time of ructation, is a most easy and infallible
precaution of the generation of rheums.

12. That since two bodies cannot so far rebel against the conserving Laws of
Nature, as mutually to penetrate each the others dimensions, in one and the
same place; and since the passage from the jaws up into the brain is exceeding
narrow, oppleted (for there is no vacuity in those organs) barrocadoed above
and so impervious (for our very breath, though violently compressed by stopping
of the mouth and nostrils, cannot force open a way into the castle of the
brain:) therefore cannot a vapor, arising from the stomach, approach the basis
of the brain. By example, a Cane or hollow Tube, that is closely luted in the
upper orifice, held in an erect position over a steam of hot vapors, does not
admit them to ascend through its perforation, by reason of the Aer, wherewith
it was before possessed.

13. Granting, that a vapor may clime upwards; yet would it not meet with any
Plane or Concave, upon which it might, by Condensation, be reunited into drops:
and much less any part of such figure, which resembles the head of an
Alembick, or Pot-lid. But in the basis of the brain, whether we gratis allow a
vapor to ascend, is a narrow place, called the Pelvis, or brain tunnell; which
sends two small tubes, or outlets, toward the nostrils, and as many backward
toward the neck. Which two posterior cavities only could the ascendent vapor
insinuate it self into; and those two are ever repleted with a muccous or
viscid excrement, and perpetually, by a kind of guttulous distillation,
discharge it down into the Palate, as the proper Emunctories or dreignes of the
brain, destined to the evacuation of the slimy redundant humors. And therefore
albeit we concede, that a vapor can ascend so high: yet nevertheless can we
find no place for the Concretion of a Catarrh.

14. Should a vapor, if the exhalation of any such from the stomach be
possible, ascend so high as this slender Tunnell of the brain; yea should it,
in so small a place, be condensed into rheum, and that rheum drop down again
together with the Muccus, or indigenary excrement: yet would it prove of much
less offense or danger, then that muccus, the ordinary excrement of the brain.
All which the Shools themselves have by Anatomy discovered, and may (pleas them
to suffer the easy trouble of a serious pensitation) assuredly know to be
inevitable: but, alas! they have eyes, and see not; they have ears, and, we may
justly fear, they will not hear.

15. That although the material Cause of Ructation be the Gas of our aliment,
and impregnated with the particular odor thereof: yet the vapor of any meat
whatever is converted into no other, then an insipid and harmless Water. By
example, let any slimy juice, or spitle be artificially distilled, in any
vessel, by a most gentle heat, exactly proportioned to the same degree, which
is in the stomach of a living man: yet, undoubtedly, shall you draw off
nothing, but an insipid and thin Water, wholly devoyd of the least glutinosity;
and less any salt, acid, or sharp Catarrh.

16. That albeit the muccus, or phlegmatic excrement of the brain, fall down
upon the jaws, and frequently introduces various misaffections upon them,
according to its various indispositions or deflexions from its natural
constitution: yet neither the matter, nor defluxion thereof can endure the
reason of a Catarrh; no more then the Urine, drop by drop trickling down from
the kidneys into the bladder, ought to be esteemed a Catarrh. Wherefore, if
this muccus, whether insipid, salt or sharp, whether fluid or thick, dropping
down upon those parts, which, as peculiar Emunoctries, are naturally ordained
to the evacuation of it, may not be accounted a Catarrh, however evil Accidents
it impresse upon those parts; so neither the urine, though it deprave the
integrity of the bladder.

17. How much less ought the defluxion of any ^^ctitious humor, or imaginary
excrement, whose nativity and transm^ssion are delivered to be by a manner,
means, places, and voyages, naturally impossible, to be accounted a Catarrh?

18. If the Brain, while it enjoys the influence and irradiation of vital
heat, be not actually cold: without doubt, the reason of the Condensation of
vapors into rheum, must be staggered into an impossibility. But if it be, by
some degrees, less hot then the other parts of the body: must we then be
driven upon this absurdity, that a vapor does, as if endowed with sense and an
arbitrary power of Election, enquire out and pitch upon the coldest part, as
most accommodate to its future reduction into a humor? because, by the dictates
of natural propensity, it rather desires by coagulation to be returned into
its primitive, then by resolution to continue in the present condition?

19. Or is it driven on by the crowd of other vapors, and on all sides
recoyled from the hotter parts of the body, up to the brain, as to the coldest?
if so, there would be a continual tempest in the soundest bodies, and naught
but Lepanto Gusts, and Catarrhs in the best temperd heads: which to believe, is
a madness beyond the power of Hellebor, and a dotage too absurd to be excused
by the largest candor.

20. But laying aside these Positions (which can, upon no necessity of nature,
be verified) as worthy only a short confutation; we come now to prove, that
should all the demands of the schools, hitherto mentioned, be freely granted
them: yet could they be of no advantage, as to the manifestation of the
Cardinal point in controversy, viz. the manner, reasons, and ways of the
Defluxion of Catarrhs.

21. For first these rivulets of rheum cannot make their progress to the
outward parts of the head, betwixt the skull and skin: since, indeed the
Schools themselves declare, that Vapors, the Antecedent matter of Catarrhs, do
mount up from the Stomach to the Basis, or lowest part of the brain, and there
fix upon a Plane (imaginary, nor ever yet discovered by any Anatomist) in whose
lower superficies they instantly enterprise condensation, and then, immediately
after concretion, be rained down, like a malignant milldew, upon the members
subjacent. Far distant, in sober truth, from this, that this foreign
adversary, this mere excrement, an obscure alien to the brain, and sole
occasion of so many and incorrigible infirmities, having in the lowest Plane of
the brain transformed it self into Water; should thence either penetrate
through the very substance of the brain, in the gross disguise of Water: or at
length return again to invest it self in the thinner dress of a vapor, and
wantonly take up quarters in the forementioned Plane.

22. Not in the form of a vapor; for if a vapor flying up from the stomach,
arive at the bottom of the brain, and by the native cold of that part be
concreted (as they say) into Water: beyond all dispute, by reason of the same
opportunity of cold, it will continue Water, nor ever in that place be reduced
back into a vapor again; until Nature her self run mad, and fall upon
contradictory operations, such as shall out do the confusion of her primitive
Chaos.

23. If therefore, this Vapor be once changed into Water, by the inevitable
activity of local Cold, it is too hard for the most incircumspect credulity to
be persuaded, that this Water, of known hostility against the native economy
of the head, should be kindly invited, nay gredily drawn into the most secret
and otherwise inaccessible closets thereof: much less that it can attain so
great thinness and subtility, as, notwithstanding the resistance and
compressive endeavors of non admission made by the parts invaded, to pierce
through the very body of the Brain, its Membranes, Sutures, Skull, and
Periostion, or coat environing the skull; then stop at the weaker
counterscarfe of the skin, and there begin its defluxion. And, beside many
other inevitable absurdities, this Water can be at most but a kind of
Rainwater; and therefore wholly unfit to be made a source of viscid Catarrhs,
whose duration depends on their glutinosity: yea Catarrhs arising from this
aqueous original, would, upon the first access of heat, vanish by
transpiration, sooner then the thinnest sweat; unless the Galenists can show,
how water made of vapors exhaled from the stomach, does for ever after become
fixed; as also, that by touching only upon a certain Plane (which the
dissecting knife has never yet lighted upon) in the head, it does acquire a
salt and sharp tincture. Again, the skin surrounding the skull, being far more
rare and porous then the skull (through which it is allowed to pass, by
transudation) must, according to the rules of probability, give way to the
extermination of this water, either by insensible transpiration, or by sweat,
much sooner, then imprison it so closely, as to force it, by seeking other
vents, to introduce those various maladies vulgarly imputed thereunto. To which
we may add, that the skin obtended upon the skull, does most closely and
tenaciously adhere unto it; nor can the single declivity of the place suffice
to the diffusion of the rheum, and the violent avulsion of the skin from the
bone. Moreover this Water, generated of vapors steaming from the stomach,
ought, of unexcusable necessity, to have some internal Pulsor, or Driver, to
ram it through the substance of the brain, membranes, skull, and periostion.
But this driver must not be heat; for then would it cease to be Water, and in a
moment, reassume the consistence of a vapor: which is wildly imagined to be
condensed into water, by the frigidity of the brain. Further, Catarrhs are
observed to be most frequent in old and infirm bodies, and Climates most
infected with Cold: Wherefore this driver, in all probability, must be Cold,
(which sober Philosophy affirms to cause a Constriction and fastness in the
parts) whose business is to protrude this water through the brain, and in
sooth in the gross form of Water; contrary to the ordinary energy of natural
qualities. And this impulsive force must be either in the Water, bred of mere
vapors fuming from the stomach; or in the brain, by which it is compelled,
together with its membranes and skull, to open at the advent of this Water.
Finally, since this kind of rainwater, made out of condensed vapors, is
conceived to hang in pendulous manner on the Iowest superficies of the basis of
the brain; nor can be there detained in any quantity above a drop or twain, at
most (for the narrowness of the Cavity forbids the admission of more) it must
necessarily, either immediately fall downward in successive drops: or the brain
must constantly play the spung, and imhibe it drop after drop, so fast as it is
condensed. Moreover, this excrementitious Water ought to have, besides the
forementioned Driver, a Conductor, which may distend the skin, and in order to
the generation of the Pleurisy cause an avulsion of the membrane lining the
chest from the ribs, as an Harbinger to prepare a lodging for it: and as well
this Conductor, as Driver, ought to be of far more power then our own
indigenary Blas.

24. I shall at length expose at any rate, to common sale, these impostures and
delusive dreams of the Schools: that no man may* the vizard of vulgar credulity
being at the same time detected, longer suffer by the unfortunate purchase of
false wares. Nor could I hitherto sufficiently admire, how the world could be
so grossly cincumvented by the tradition of Catarrhs: in a business, I say,
so foolish, vain, and altogether impossible, that men, the Charter of whose
Creation does entitle them to Reason, should thus prostitute their credultities
to a Legend of Absurdities, nay absolute Impossibilities, and forfeit the
dignity of their transcendent endowment upon the single seduction of only one
idle fault, namely Ignorance. That they upon their lazy and indirect
disquisitions, not finding any Cause, on which to charge their large account of
diseases, have imposed upon the implicit belief of vulgar heads, drowned in a
deluge of stupidity, these ridiculous fictions of Catarrhs.

25. But the sweat, at least, is impregnated with a manifest saltness; upon
which hint, the Latex, apud Helmontium, qui humorum quaternarium adnihilare
penitu*s contendit, est idem aquo us liquor, quem sanguini ubique per omne
venosum genus arctissime associatum, scholae nominarunt Serum; illumque tam
urinae, quam sudoris pariter atque lachrymarum communem secere materiam. De hoc
peculiarem, et nostro quidem judicio sufficientem librum, cui inscriptio Latex
Humor neglectus, panxit Helmont: quo plane ostendit, ingens ab ipsa etiam
natura positum esse, inter urinam and laticem, quem frequenter extravenato
sanguini innatare cernimus, discrimen; tam quoad materiae essentiam, quam usus
utriusque sive destinationes. Scopos autem sive fines, quibus inservire voluit
Laticem, brevi verborum serie sic comprehendam. 1. Latex, ex sua natura pene
insipidus, pro primo scopo habet, ut contemperet cruoris aciditatem, eandemque
arceat; et potissimum post labores, astus, sudo^es perfusos, balnea, etc. nam
in tanta perspirabilitate cruor valde condensaretur, nisi haberet aqueam partem
admixtam pro sudore. 2. Cum in omni crudiori chylo, cremore, and cruore, sit
aliquid excrementum; and cruor sub digerendo salem excrementitium reservet,
etiam dum in purum alimentum convertitur: est ipsi pr^in Latex opportunus
socius, qui in se recipiat hunc salem, eumque everrat. 3. Vt materialiter
causet, ne ullum densioris compaginis residuum, in ultima alimoniae
evaporatione remaneat: Sed simul per Diapnaeam explodatur, ratione Fermenti
arterialis (ut Helmont in Blas Humano) vel ratione sudoris eluatur. Sudor
namque materialiter, nil nisi Latex est, cui accessit Sal superfluus. 4. Cum
oculus liquore opus haberet, ut ejus palpebra innocue moveretur, and
linguasaliva eguit, ut masticatos cibos madore temperaret; absurdumque foret,
totum cibum e massa cruoris humectari: idcirco per venas Latex delatus est,
unde saliva, lacryma, etc. fierent. Nam dum in Anginis, and infami Mercurij
salivatione, plus justo saliva profluit, alvus consueto siccior evadit. Latex
ergo in cruoris massa innoxius vagatur, ad loca opportuna defertur,
distributivae facultati prompte auscultans. 5. Quod suo madore compescat, ne
pulmo de hiscat, siccitate aeris attracti. Ad ipsius autem Authoris libellum
recurrent studiosi, ubi omnium de hoc themate uberiorem doctrinam habebunt.
Latex, or Fountain of serous streams in the body, might with much more
plausible reason have been adopted to the generation of Rheum, as being a very
convenient mother to own such a production: then an imaginary vapor, which
requires to be conducted through so many insensible ambages, and blind
Meanders, and whose possibility of existence cannot be asserted, without the
joint concession of a thousand absurdities, and bold violations of the
unalterable decrees of Nature. For the accustomed saltness of the latex, may
bear the imputation of being the Cause of Pains and other erratick accidents,
with nearer relation to verisimility; then an insipid Water, transmitted
upwards from vapors* which have no real Idea, but in the distracted
imaginations of either the Contrivers, or Abettors of this Fable. Again, when
this Water has traveled through the Brain, Membranes, Skull, and Periostion,
does it then grow weary, feeble, and unable to continue on its progress, and
penetrate the easier perforations of the skin? or has the former laborious
pilgrimage so refracted its power of transudation, and impaired its memory,
that it has forgotten the way? Why does the skin, which by reason of its
numerous evaporatories, or capillary porosities, is ordained to transmit the
grosser matter of sweat, resist the tenuity of that Water, which has so nimbly
run through the impervious skull? But should this Water be once collected into
a pond, under the scalp; then would it either there swell into a tumid
Cataract, or be dreigned downward in a slender thread of successive drops: or
were the collection about the temples, it would soon become subject to the
discovery of our touch: and should it be rained down, yet could it not avoid to
infer a manifest Tumor of insipid water, upon the terminus ad quem, or part
recipient. And if in small quantity, it would soon be discussed by sweat.
However, it can never fall down upon, nor be congregate amidst the Muscles;
since each of them is strongly guarded by the outwork of a particular cross
membrane, wherewith their substance is immediately covered. Besides, there is
neither way for its defluxion from the head, betwixt the skin and periostion;
nor place to entertain it amongst the intercostall Muscles, in order to the
generation of a Pleurisy. For can that insipid Water, which occasioned no pain
or molestation, while it remained under the skin and hair of the head, within
few minutes after its arrival at the intercostall Muscles, kindle a violent
Pleurisy, together with such intolerable torments; and only by its descent
and single gravity avell the Pleura, or lining of the thorax, from the ribs,
which is firmly annexed and immediately adheres unto them by the mediatory
ligation of numerous solid Fibers? Certainly, that immanity and tincture of
implacable tyranny must be acquired from no other impregnation, then what may
accrue unto it during its Defluxion. To proceed, no Catarrh can descend upon
the Teeth, or impeach their Nerves; which on either side from the basis of the
brain are implanted into the mandible: since they are so exactly proportioned
to the diameter of their receptacles, and so entirely fill them up, that there
can remain none the smalest cranny for the intrusion of one drop of rheum; and
much the less for this, that Water cannot enter any small perforation, that is
shut beneath. If so, unfeignedly, we have no weighty engagement lies upon our
reason, to enforce assent; that this rheum should customarily fall foul and
infest one single tooth, and such only as is Carious, or hollowed by
putrefaction. We shall add, that a Catarrh collected into a shower underneath
the scalp, should, according to the vieinity and rectitude of conveyances,
rather stream down upon the Cheeks, then the bottom of the Gums, through their
fleshy Contexture, and persisting non-incorporate to the blood, trace the
impervious paths of the nerves, through the mandible, until it invade some one
particular tooth. Yea though this fantastic deluge might be allowed to drop
down from above, and so be thought the cause of pain, in the upper jawe: yet no
man can swallow so unsavory an absurdity, as that Water, not at all participant
of vitality, can by any means, or at any time, infest the lower. What if this
vagabond rheum chance to decline toward the eyes, or ears? insooth, the
malicious matter thereof must, from the conceited Plane of of the brain, first
pass through the chief Ventricle thereof: and so in that royal place become a
second and more fatal cataract; yea occasion sudden Death more probably, then
an Ophthalmy, or bare inflammation of the eyes. Again, I Ophthalmia est annatae
oculi tunicae inflammatio, a sanguine acri, venulas ipsius distendente, exorta.
Consule practic^s.
well remember, that the seat of a Pleurisy is not betwixt the skin, or
external membrane universally swathing the body, and the intercostall muscles
(whither, notwithstanding, the defluxion might more directly stream down from
the periostion, then toward the internal parts) but either in the very
substance of the oblique muscles; or between those and the Pleura immediately
enshrouding the Chest, from which part the disease has desumed its
denomination. By what sluices therefore can a defluxion be derived from the head
unto this place? I grant, indeed, by way of supposition, that a certain Muccus,
or phlegmatic and glutinous excrement, does, even in Children and men of the
soundest constitutions, slide down by the palate into the stomach: yet this
stands in no relation at all to a Catarrb; nor is that muccus bred from that
cried up vapor of the first concoction; but is an unprofitable Excrement,
begotten a Custode errante, Inaudita prius Helmotij inter Paradoxa, ex professo
ut essentiae, Causae, modique fiendi morborum, novis ejus in Physiologia
theorematis melius accommodarentur, fabricata, haud infimum tenet locum hocce,
de Custode Errante, ingenium. Viautem quam brevissime, and pro captu marginis,
quid sibi voluit per Custodem, et quid per eundem errantem, explicemus;
animadvertendum est, quod Author, cum insignem aquae cataractane e naribus, in
principio Coryze (Frigus nuacuparunt rustici) ordinario effluxisse cerneret; et
uberrimum pariter Mucci proventum a pulmonibus tussiendo explosum: ut
antiquatam, de Catarrho ex vaporibus in planum Cerebri delatis, eodem in loco
rursum concretis, atque dein tandem guttulatim, partim per nervos olfactorios
antrorsum, partim retrorsum per laryngem in exiles pulmonum tubos delabente,
doctrinam pessumdaret; Custodes duos, unum in Cerebro, alterum in Larynge, a
sapiente reram Parente constitutos esse, affirmare ausus est. Priori in
provinciam delegatum est, ut quoties Cerebrum ab externo aliquo malo lacessitum
atque vitiatum fuerit, toties potestate sua alterativa, sive transmutationis
energia, mucilaginosum quoddam Excrementum, ex sanguine in substantiam Cerebri
mox rite assimilando, vel (ut Helmontij verbis utar) ex totalitate Alimenti,
priusquam aleret, fabricet; quo, tanquam lorica, parts frigore perculsae
circumtegantur and ab immani host sartae tectaeque conserventur. Atque hanc
potestatem, Mucci hujus effectricem, Custodis etymo opportune quadrare,
consentaneum est. Alteri, Laryngis nimirum Praesidi, munus fere idem est; puta;
ut quoties aeris inexcusabilis injuria partem utranque, i. e. Cerebrum and
Pulmonem adoriatur, toties e Latice and Cruore crudiori, Muccum etiam quendam,
tanquam vestem, sive interstitium objiciat; in quem aer ferociens, partim
deposita primi ictus inclementia, mitescat. Quamdiu enim Custos recte valet,
atrocitatis aeris victrix superat: dum vero ob perfractum robur, primae suae
destinationi ex voto satisfacere nequit; saltem multum Mucci fabricat, ut
conceptam eluat labem, quam primitus non fuit separando. Sed ah! ubi vel
externa injuria major est, quam quae sinat se sic deliniri; altiusve ferit
ipsam laryngis aut pulmonum substantiam: jam titubat Custos. Nec solum desumit
auxilium abs Latice, Sed ipsam proximi alimenti substantiam alienat,
transmutatque in muccosam collam; unde Phthisis mox sequitur.
by the Guardian of the brain, seduced into a perversion of its office, as has
been clearly declared in convenient place.

I grant moreover, that in the Gout, and other consimilar diseases, frequently
the guilt may be imputed unto a certain salt excrementitious stream, fretting
the parts assaulted: but of such, only the Latex, or source of aqueous
serosisy in the body, is the Mint, Caement, and Supply; and not an ascent of
vapors from the stomach into the brain, not a miscelany of non-existent
juices, nor a feigned Defluxion of Phlegm mixed with Choler.

26. For the Schools themselves, surrounded with shame, that the Head, being on
all sides brimfull of the brains, might be a Magazine for the collection of
Catarrhs, and most Diseases charged upon their Defluxion; have (alack, and alas
for woe) unjustly accused the stomach of continual smoking with vapors, and so
contributing matter to their production: but finding the stomach not-guilty in
healthy men, yet presently, in the Gout, they incriminate upon a Defluxion, and
as benighted in a dark mist of their shame, whisper out this false impeachment,
nor adventure to speak it out, as alleged from the testimony of positive
knowledge. For they at first dash, steal the Question, borrow a kind of
acrimonious Choler, and salt Phlegm from the simple treasury of the blood, and
leave the controversy undecided: whether those Humors are to be derived from
the Liver, separated, by a kind of Critical percolation in the veins, from the
remaining laudible mass of blood, and so excluded and discharged upon the
joints; or whether a certain Water, tartareous Muccus, or other anonymous
Excrement be transmitted thither from the head, underneath the skin. For yet
they remain unresolved; and are the more confounded in this, that they cannot
manifest, what this cunning Separator, or Winnower of various humors, blended
together in one form and consistence; or what that Conductor should be, who
should transport these humors severed from the blood, incontaminate with any
alien tincture in so difficult a passage, where many more solid substances are
to be penetrated, only to the Conjunctures and Articulations: and now select
and pitch upon this, and anon upon another determinate part: but leave
unimpaired the more feeble and supine, and every day make a fresh conquest and
subdue some one new joint; yea invade that member, which is become more capable
of resistance by Nodes and Oppilations. Whatever, therefore, the Schools
dotingly pratle concerning vapors elevated from the stomach, and recondensed
in the brain, as the material Cause of Catarrhs; let all pass for a
Christmasse tale, or drunken Beldams dream.

27. For the stomach is never Cold below its native convenient temper; indeed
the Digestive Ferment Fermentum digestivum, est proprietas quaedam essentialis,
consistens in vitali quadam Aciditate, ad transmutationes ciborum in ventriculo
potens; ideoque and specificae proprietatis. Non est autem fermentum istud
digestivum, in sola Aciditate aliquali fitum. Neque enim acetum, vel jus Citri
farinam fermentat: imo nec farina fermentata proinde est fermentum stomachicum;
sed hoc est Acidum esurinum, stomachicum, specificum and humanum; ita quidem
per singulas brutorum species Specifice distinctum, quod ipsis sit
appropriatum. Mures namque, Glires, and Sues citius fame pereunt, quam
Phaseolum edant. In homine vero plerumque ad Generis amplitudinem aspirat.
Interim plures Caseum horrent, vinum, lac, vel alia spernunt; quia non
conficiunt. Ideoque quaecunque luctantur cum nostra digestione, obversantur
Fermenti illius proprietati specificae, fermentumque conculcare nituntur.
(to which, and not to heat, the Faculty of Concoction ought immediately to be
attributed; as we have in another tract concerning that particular Theme, to
ample satisfaction evinced) may suffer Diminution: nor can the Liver ascend to
an excessive Heat, above that constant degree of Vital flame, which first
entitled it to Animation; for in severity of truth, there is no other heat in
our bodies, but what was first kindled in our heart by that Vestal spark, or
vital light, which immediately and solely constituteth the Essence of Life. And
this the reason is, why every Carcass does suddenly grow cold, as the heart of
Winter, so soon as the Vital flame is extinguished. Princium istud Formale,
cujus beneficio and munere Animalium Corpora, alioqui frigida, concalescunt,
edendisque Vitae actionibus apta redduntur, non esse Calidum innatum, sive
Humidum primigenium insito spiritu and calore undique perfusum, contra
Aristotelem, ejusque (...), acerrime velitatur Author: tradens passim per suas
lucubrationes, pro axiomate aeternae veritatis; quod in cunctis viventibus
insit Lumen quoddam Vitale, immediate and fontaliter a Patre Luminum (Formas
enim rerum omnium immediate a Deo creari, serio docet, in Lib. de Formarum
ortu) dimanans, cordique, dum adhuc esset in utero recens embryonatum, tanquam
proprio conceptaculo implantatum, in quo Vita essentialiter consistit, atque
cujus marcor Senium, extinctio Mortem necessario infert. Inquit enim, de Vita
solerter perorans; Vita est lumen and initium formale, quo res agit quod agere
jussa est. Hoc autem lumen, a Creatore rebus infusum, datur unico instanti;
prout a silice ignis excutitur, sub formae identitate ac unitate clauditur,
perque genera et species est distinctum. Non est autem lumen igneum,
cumbustivum, humidi radicalis consumptivum. Tam in pisce vitale est, quam in
Leone; tamque in papavere, quam pipere. Nec etiam in nobis deficit Calor, ob
humidi radicalis consumptionem: nec vicissim humidum deficit, Caloris defectu;
sed sola duntaxat potestatum Vitalium, adeoque et luminis diminutione and
extinctione. Fusiorem vero Argumenti hujus explicationem me legisse memini, in
tract. Humidum radicale nuncupato; quorsum benevolos, avidosque doctrinae
Helmontij ex instituto remittendos volui.


28. But the offensive Heat of the Liver belongs to it only by Accident. For
example, let a cold Thorn or needle be pricked into any man's finger (an
instance frequently mentioned by me, and largely explained in my discourse of
Fevers) and thereupon shall instantly ensue a violent Pulsation, occasioned by
the pain, an angry Incalescence, and Tumor of the part. Quicquid in sanis edit
actiones sanas: idipsum in morbis edit actiones vitiatas. Spiritus enim iste
calefacit hominem naturaliter in sanitate, idem qui in febribus aestuat. per
exemplum. Spina querna digito infixa, actu et potentialiter frigida, mox in
digito excitat calorem praeter naturam. Non quidem, quod calidi humores
affluant, quasi per spinam eo convocati, expectassent spinae vulnus, and qui
alia^s suis sedibus temperati sedissent. Siquidem cruor vulneri proximus,
primus accurrit, aditum venienti cruori praeripit. Et ipse per se quoque non
calet: Sed ex gratia vitalis spiritus. Itaque inflammatio, and tumor cum pulsa
duro, dolor, and calore, a solo spiritu causaliter; ab infixa vero spina
occasionaliter duntaxat procedunt. Helm. de Febr. cap. 1.
Not because this Thorn is hot, nor that the blood then in vicinity to the
wound had any immoderate offervescence before the infixation of the thorn: but
that excessive Ardor is kindled upon the entrance of the thorn into the flesh.
Now let the same reason hold good, as concerning the Liver; for if that at any
time conceive an unnatural Ardor, it is caused by some Thorn, or foreign
impression which does not indicate, in order to the extinction of that
conflagration, any Refrigeration, but a total Ablation or eradication of it.
For Refrigeration of the Liver is so far from working even a bare palliative
Cure of this Ardor, that indeed it renders the mischief desperate, for the
future.

29. And this, I earnestly wish, the Schools may be pleased soberly to observe;
as also their vain and impossible figment of the Heat of the Liver, and the
manifold Errors in their Method of Sanation, all streaming from this fountain.
May they seriously observe also, how barren and unsuccesseful all such Remedies
have proved, which have been directed (with grief I speak it) to the Head,
Stomach, and Liver, for the Cure of Catarrhs. Manifest therefore it is, that a
Catarrh has, in nature, neither Material Cause for its Generatton, Place for
its Conception, Conduiets for its Traduction, Receptaries for its customary
Admission, nor sufficient activity to make good its Penetration through the
substance of the brain, Membranes, Skull, and Periostion. For where in all this
admirable Fabric of the body can we find, that Nature (whose Providence can be
found no way deficient) has built any house of office, or closestool, merely
for the reception of Preternatural Excrements: nor can it stand with the laws
of verisimility, that a mere excrement generated in any part, should be endowed
with an Arbitrary Power to transplant itself at pleasure from one place to
another. And upon the concession of the doctrine of rheumes, the Trepan would
every day, be of as much use for the letting out of Catarrhs, as to give vent
to the Purulent Effluxions of wounds in the head.

30. But why should a Catarrh cease ^^flow downwards, immediately after the
Tooth, which aked, is pulled out? whither because it has so soon forgotten its
way thither? And if the matter thereof be originally transmitted from below,
whither, I beseech you, in relation to its natural Tendencie, should it then
run? or upon what new part shall that ancient rivulet of rheum be diverted,
which constantly used to creep into the channel of the teeth, and insinuate it
self through those slender perforations, which the Nerves, as well within, as
without, above as below, entirely possess and fill up? Does the stomach,
forsooth, cease, or not dare to continue the exhalation of vapors, and the
communication of the fuel for Catarrhs, after the drawing of a tooth? or does
the whole store of rheum, yea such as shall be generated in the future, flow
forth together with the blood, at the instant of the tooths evulsion? or upon
the generation of flesh in the mortice of the drawn tooth, and so the cutting
off all way of effusion, does the Catarrh dry up? But sure the Catarrh could
not attempt a passage through the rocky and impenetrable substance of the
tooth? If not; what hindered it from swelling, by restagnation, into a necessary
Apostem in the parts adjacent? why does it frequently, when one tooth is pulled
out, find a new channel and drive against another? Does the evulsion of the
first tooth turn the course of the stream upon the second? Does the conductor
of the rheum grow blind, and can no longer find its way to the remaining nerve
of the drawn teeth, or at least to the carnous excrescence that succeeds the
tooth? or can it with more ease drill a hole through a second firm tooth, then
pass the spongy flesh that arises upon the ejectment of the former? why can
it not constantly keep possession of that Current which it self dug? And so
conserve an outlet for it self, before the new tenant of flesh take livery and
seisen? Miserably, insooth, is this rheum deluded by the Surgeon, which
thinking, according to its custom, to invade some one Tooth, and finding it
removed, must be constrained to return back, by the same way it came, and
execute its malice upon some more noble part; which it torments, in revenge of
the affront done by the Surgeon. No tooth, therefore, aketh by reason of a
Defluxion: but because, upon a detection of the Gum, it becomes too sensile; or
that, in another case, the matter of its ultimate or most depurated Aliment,
being defectively assimilated, conceives putrefaction at the root of the tooth:
and hence that intolerable Pain. 31. For the Digestion of the Teeth and Nayls
is distinct from the Digestion of all other parts, in this particular; that the
Digestion of those is performed in domestic vessels, or the very interior
substance of each particular part; but of these in vessels only contiguous to
their roots.

32. But that no Catarrh can fall down upon the Inwards, the Stomach, Lungs,
Liver, Kidneys, etc. is in part already manifested, from that general evidence
alleged against the possibility of its material Cause, ways of
transportation, and manner of production: and may, in part, be evinced from
this, that nothing can fall down upon the Palate, much less into the Stomach,
contrary to our will, but what may instantly be ejected by exscreation. For we
never swallow down the natural Muccus* ordinarily dropping from the head upon
the root of the tongue; but unawares: nor is any Catarrh so far participant of
the power of election, as cunningly to lie in ambush, till we are locked up in
the arms of sleep, and then assault us when we are unfit to endeavor its
evacuation. May all Fables, and Dreams of impossibilities be henceforth utterly
exiled from the Confines of the sacred Art of Healing.

33. Whatsoever, therefore, is distilled from the head upon the jaws; is the
Muccus, or ordinary excrement of the brain, either in its natural and due
constitution: or altered from it, into various irregularities, respective to
the indispositions of the Custos, or Praesident of those parts. But this Muccus
is, in totality of essence, distinct from that Excrement, expectorated from the
Lungs, by Cough. And then, what means this rash inadvertency of the Schools,
when they direct, that, by exact inspection, we examine the spitle by Cough,
whether it be watery, frothy, diaphanous, liquid, white, concreted, yellow,
ash-colored, or tawny? whether round, globular, of a consistence fit for
impetuous defluxion? To what purpose, say I, do they command us to make our
augurie and explorations of the Diseases of the Chest and Lungs; if, as
themselves opinion, those excrements we spit up, be Catarrhs, and originally
derived from the head? For so a rheum, following upon some constipation of the
os Ethmoides, or spongy bone, by the Muccus ordinarily descending into the
nostrils; would be diluted with a crude and aqueous Muccus; for this cause,
that provident Nature would hither send a plentiful torrent of the Latex for
the ablution of that, whose thickness and viscidity caused the obstruction.
And if the material cause hereof be primitively deduced from the stomach; why,
when the spongy bone is obstructed, does the stomach of a man perfectly in
health, grow outrageous, play the tyrant, and oppress the brain with too great
a charge of vapors? How can those vapors, when condensed above the palate,
arrive at the odoratorie Nerves, seated in the forehead, and there put on the
form of a salt water, to wash and rince away the obstruction from the spongie
bone? From whence can vapors, of their own nature, insipid and harmless; in
their short passage only acquire so much salt; which they should melt and
precipitate downwards together with themselves, and, by this new acrimonious
impraegnation, introduce frequent squinancies, and other inflammations of the
throat and jaws?

34. Why does this rheum, elevated formerly from the stomach, and by no other
transmutation, but only a bare Condensation into water (which is demonstrated,
by the mechanic experiments of Pyrotechny, to be necessarily insipid and
gentle) changed from its primitive consistence of a vapor; when once it
falls upon the stomach, occasion so many and grievous mischiefs therein:
which yet not long before, during its commixture with other parts of the Chyle,
was grateful and benefieiall to the same? Whence can it obtain this Hostility?
What, from the Brain, one of the most noble parts of the body, and richly
endowed with vital principles? And if this Vapor has only touched upon the
lowest Plane of the brain (as themselves affirm) and instantly fall down from
thence, so soon, as it multiplies up to the quantity of one single drop; and
since no third place can be found, to deteine each successive drop: therefore
can this perversity, or evil tincture, arise unto this rheum, neither from the
momentany stay in the plane of the brain, nor from the Contagion of any
malignant part, nor finaly from any seminality or infusion of depravity
received from thence. Unless, perchance, they shall be able to give in
evidence, that, besides the bare condensation of the vapor into rheum, there
intervened some Third causality, from which the Acrimony, saltness, and
virulency of the Defluxion was derived: which hitherto they have neglected to
prove.

35. But since the numerous Comments, concerning Catarrhs and Pulmonary
maladies, have grown up into huge Volumes, Councels, and Dispensatories: I
conceive it my proper business to declare, that no theory of the Schools was
ever more full of negligence, absurdity and danger, then this of Defluxions; on
this account, that hitherto they have esteemed no sin more venial, then
Homicide, committed out of incogicancy and circumspection; provided that the
earth cover over their Crimes, and they become excused of murder upon the
allegation of some Axioms of vulgar tradition. And hence, amids my
compassionate meditations, have I thought, that the Devil Consule clarissimum
(...) illum, Dom. Seldom, de dis Syris syntag. 2. cap. 14.
Moloch fits Doctor of the Chair, and has down to our days infatuated the
world with the whimsey of Catarrhs. Whose material Cause, Nativity, Place of
conception, Efficient, manner of Generation, receptary, progress, and
collection, are equally unwarrantable by truth, because absolutely impossible
in nature. These absurd doctrines therefore none has broached and promulgated,
but the old Serpent, the Father of lies; with design to depopulate Humanity.
For whatever distills from the head is the native Muccus and pure Excrement of
the brain, generated within its proper confines; and no forreigner brought in
from the stomach.

36. This Muccus, is constantly white, thick, viscid and innoxious; while the
Custos, or Lord President of the head, continues sober, well disposed, and
conformes its dominion to the wholesome Statutes of its primitive trust: but
when it degenerates into exorbitancies, and irregular operations, and the
powers committed to its administration are perverted into abuses; then does the
Muccus grow unnatural, wild, watery, acute, salt, sharp, yellow, tenacious,
etc. and like a virulent torrent, shower down upon the palate from the funnel
of the brain, by the most convenient and obvious floodgate.

37. For that matter, which in the beginning of a cold, or pose in the head,
trickles down in the form of a thin water, is not simply and merely the muccus:
but salt Latex, wherewith nature endeavors to rince away that excrementitious
Phlegm, which, as a foreign adversary, has encroached upon the spongie bone,
bordering upon the brain, and obstructed its sluices; as I have already hinted.
Nor is that matter, which comes yellow and viscid, in the declination or exit
of a Cold, the same with the first Latex, nor any the smallest measure of time
detained and inspissated in the same place; (as the Schools notwithstanding
confidently teach) since if so, the whole cavity of the skull, though all the
brains were taken out, would not suffice to the reception of so vast a quantity
of Excrement: but this new kind of Muccus is freshly created every successive
moment, and differs from the natural and healthy Muccus, in diversity of
color, stink, viscidity, and acrimony. Besides, its ridiculous to apprehend
this putrid Muccus, under the notion of an excrement well concocted and
inspissated out of the former Latex; which is accidentally advenient,
praeternaturall, and depends upon a foreign vicious causality. Now, that the
Latex makes the first flood in a cold, is manifest from this observation; that
always, for two days, in every cold, the belly is more slow in the exclusion
of its excrements, and the quantity of urine much diminished: which clearly
evinceth that the salt current is in part diverted upon the brain. Again, this
Latex evaporated in a convenient vessel, by a gentle heat, contains nothing
in its consistence, that can be inspissated into a thickness equal to that of
the Muccus: but how much of the Muccus, the Latex shall dilute, and rince away
from the spongy bone, by its thinner stream; exactly so much, and no more of a
mucilage, or glutinous substance, may be found in it.

38. But however it be, and whatever that be which slides down from the Brain
upon the Palate and root of the tongue: yet cannot the least single drop
thereof enter into the Lungs, but before it descend so low, it must endanger
the life by suffocation. For if one drop of liquor, slipping down the aspera
Arteria or Windpipe unawares, whilst we are drinking, threaten the deplorable
Fate of Anacraeon Had we said cross fate, the Epithet had been more genuine,
and had more clearly hinted the preposterous rarity. For how unusual and
unnatural an Accident was it, for the invincible stupidity of a Poet to flow
from his inspiration: and a volatile muse to be condensed into eternal
dullness, by the sprightly fruit of the Vine, the same Inspirer, whose active
flames had so often warmed and exalted her to the sublimity of rapture?
: what would not so great a quantity of rheum, as is frequently rejected by
Cough, even to the filling of several basins in a very short time, do as to
the inference of suffocation? And far from the sober and rational ways of
Probability must his credulity wander, who can submit to a persuasion, that the
sleep of a few short hours can insensibly convey whole basins full of rheum
into the Lungs; and that so impetuous a flood of Phlegm can run down through
the narrow chink of the Epiglottis, or Flap of the Larinx, without the manifest
hazard of praefocation. In the days of yore I ingeniously confess, being
deluded by the sophistry of the schools, during my pedantisme and credulous
pupillage, I disposed my patients, afflicted with affections of the Lungs, into
such a posture, as that laying their faces downward upon their pillows, they
might sleep in a prone position; with design, that the rheum (forsooth) might
run out by the Nostrils, which would otherwise have flowed into the Lungs: and
upon this score, I promised immunity from the peril of Defluxions. But the
following morn derided my ignorance and folly, with an argument borrowed from
the constant perseverance of the Cough and exscreation of rheum. For then did I
discover, that an Orthopnaea, or extreme difficulty of Respiration, which
constrains men to fetch their breath in an erect posture, put but a slight
value upon the doctrine of Catarrhs, and amply convinced it as frivilous and
inconsistent with truth. Since I observed many to be strangled in that prone
and horizontall position; which yet was, with great gravity and confidence,
prescribed by the Schools, as the only barracado, or damm, to intercept the
antecedent matter of the Catarrh. Upon which observation I first built this
justifiable position; that every particular member of the body, once
disaffected, does forge and coin a very great quantity not only of its
natural and ordinary excrement; but also of new, alien, and adverse.

39. Thus from the eyes, according to the variety of their disaffections,
trickle down continued rills of a purulent effluxion, or of salt and corrosive
tears, let forth with out the key of passion: and when the Throat is blockt up
by a squinaney, there continually hangs down a rope of viscid Phlegm from the
tongue. And upon this root grew that branch of my judgment; that the Lungs are
equally subject to the same law, with other members. So that as often as they
are assauled, irritated, injured, wounded, oppressed, or tainted by any
inquination of the aer, or contagion of malignant vapors belched from the
sulphurous and bituminous bowels of Mines: so often must they produce various
testimonials of their present langour, upon the credit of their own
irregularities; and not that, upon any such occasion, those so destructive and
venenate excrements can fall insensibly from the brain (whose integrity of
constitution remains, for the most part, in such Cases, inviolate) and be
received amongst the slender Conduits of the Windpipe. And hence grew my Wonder
also, how the Schools could observe, that the matter running from the nostrils,
in a Cold, did in the declination or Catastrophe much degenerate from what it
was in the Prologue and first act; and imitate the proper and ordinary
excrement of the brain: and yet, at the same time, not discover; that the same
perversion or abuse of power lay in Common to the Lungs, as well as to other
members of the body. According to their rule, whatever is avoided from the he
Lungs, must be fathered upon the brain, must thence fall down insensibly
(ridiculous) into the Windpipe, there, by a certain pepasmus, (...), Maturatio:
ita dicitur humorum praeter naturam, morbos efficientium (...); quasique
Alteratio in meliorem formam; ut (...), est naturalium concoctio* vide
Hippocrat. and Galen. in epidemiis.
or maturation, be stewed into a consistence more sit for its future
exantlation, and all that while be lodged in the small-bored pipes of the
Lungs, without causing any intense Anhelation, or difficulty of breathing. When
(alas) it can escape the observation of no man, that a far greater quantity of
matter is frequently expectorated by Cough, in diseases of the Lungs, in the
space of one month, then the whole cavity of the Chest can contain. Upon
which consideration, we are bold to affirm, That the yellow, ashcoloured, and
fulsom spittle of men in Consumtions, are errors of the Custos, or President of
Vegetation in the Lungs, and materially the blood, degenerated into a white,
yellow, stinking excrement; Custos, qui laryngi and pulmon bus praesidet, ubi
semel insanit, rectoque justitiae de tramite deviat, nedum humorem aquosum e
v^nis advocat sui in auxilium; ast etiam ipsam alimenti proximi substantiam
exhaurit, corrumpit, et in muccum infamem transmutat: tanto viz. viscerls
alimento proximiorem, quanto altius ad colorem ex flavo rutilantem, and
rubedini vicinius accesserit; reditque ab illo lapsu in pristinum, dum a rufo
ad flavedinem paleae, atque inde demum ad albuminie o vi similitudinem proprius
appropinquarit. Hinc vice versa, in Hecticis cruentus evadit muccus, et cinerum
obscurorum colorem assumit: dum ipsamet alimenti substantia abscedit
transmutata, deficientemque ibidem vitae integritatem pandit. Tunc nimirum
faetidus cadaveris incipientis odor in anhelitu, deliquia prodit Archei
Pulmonarij. Sed haec ad mentem Helmontij.
which being thus exhausted, there must of necessity ensue an Atrophy, or
universal Famine in the body.

40. Unsuccessefull, therefore, and deplorable are the Prescriptions of
Cephalic remedies, in diseases of the Lungs; vain are the drinks of cooling
Ptisans, vain are Lambatives, Syrups, and whatever else is swallowed down into
the stomach: as such that must suffer a Castration of their virtues in their
tedious journey, and undergo many formal transmutations, before they arrive at
the part affected.

41. And what can smell more of the Fool, then to give Decoctions of the Indian
Roots, to dry up rheums? for how can China, Zarza, or Guajacum conduce to
exsiceation, when drank in a liquid form? What can they dry up, which would
not be more pernicious and desperate when dried up, then it could be in the
more harmless consistence of a Liquor?

42. Why are such things referred to Exsiccation; which, in the policy of
reason, want only some inhibitive Course to prevent their Causation: and when
they are stolen into existence, require not an evaporation of their liquid and
fugitive parts; but an entire ejection and eradication of their whole? Why do
the Schools, in most of their disquisitions, look only open the effects and
obvious Exteriors: and never pursue their search back to the Causes and more
remote Proto-principles? What though these foreign and barbarous drugs
procure a general sweat, and so diminish the requisite quantity of the Latex,
to the great and almost irreparable detriment of the Patient: do they therefore
strike at the root of the disease, and destroy the Cardinal efficient thereof?
while by a spare diet, and plentiful sweats, they first diminish the necessary
measure of blood; and secondarily cause an unavoydable leanness of the whole
body. All which the Schools have drawn into practice, upon the design of
exsiccation of superfluities; wildly imagining to comprehend, the competent
quantity of blood, Generation of the exotic Excrement, and easy Expulsion of
the same, under the single synonyma of Exsiccation. But (alas) will the radical
indisposition of the Lungs be hereby rectified? will the Transforming Vulcan,
or Frantic Custos, which does there coin loathsome and consumptive Excrements
out of the laudable blood, be by this ineffective means subdued, lulled asleep,
weakened, and reduced to its primitive sobriety, and convenient administration
of its power? which enraged Vulcan does never, no not when the sick are
emaciated to living skeletons, remit or discontinue the execution of its fury.
Turn from us, oh thou soul of goodness! that deplorable Calamity, which the
sottish Sanhedrim of Pagans, and herd of blind Doradoes, pretending to the
sacred mysteries of Physic, which more study their own gains, then the safety
of their afflicted brother, have drawn upon all Christendom.

43. The Cardinal point of the Cure lies only in this; that the irregular and
erroneous impression (which I call, the Factor of corruption, or Vulcan,
resident in the Lungs) be expunged and eradicated. For that's the only Publican,
which by an unsupportable Excise, impoverisheth the whole Commonwealth of the
body, and makes nature bankrupt, by exhausting the stock of aliment from the
membranes, veins, Cartilages of the Windpipe, and all the substance of the
Lungs; and converting the same into sordid and ulcerous excrements, which are
continually pumpt up by Cough. But if there has preceded an eruption of blood
in any vessel of the lungs, if the matter expectorated be sanguine, and the
disease has proceeded to an ulcer; In such a case, learn the right confection
of such admirable Medicaments, wherewith Paracelsus was wont to cure the
Consumption. For those, since being taken inwardly they cure even a Cancer or
any other corroding malignant Ulcer, have more then a pretense to the cure of
Ulcers in the Lungs: And if any medicament drank down into the stomach, do a
cure of an ulcer in the thigh or foot: why should it not do the same in the
Lungs? But what will the Schools do? they continue ignorant of the Causes,
ignorant of the Remedies, and wavering twixt negligence and uncertainty,
suspend all further enquiry; and yet confidently cry down the use of Mercury
diaphoretick, fixed into a sweetness equal to that of Honey; and the volatile
Tincture of Lilium Lilium est Tinctura Paracelsi ex stibio* Nam alcool stibii
in clauso reverberio detinebat per m^nsem, ut evaderet leve, and volaticum,
prime album, inde luteum, ex quo rubrum, and tandem violaceum (quod Lilium
Antiquorum alii nuncupant) ex quo, per vini spiritus ad xx. digitos affusos,
tincturam extrahebat, separatoque postliminio spiritu, Nobilissimam Lilii
Essentiam paratam esse dicebat, in omni morbo praestantissimam. Arcani hujus
praeparationem Paracelsus haufisse videtur ex libris Basilii Valentini Monachi,
de Antimonio; qui extarunt ante plusquam 200 annus.
: as also the Milk or Element of Pearl Lac sive Elementum Perlarum fit, cum
Margaritae in lacteum querdam cremorem (ex quo prius concrevisse merito
credantur) repetitis mult^ties solutionibus, liquoris solutivi evaporationibus,
and spiritus vit^ioli affusione, dissolvuntur. Cum autem Helmontius, ne procis
uniones projecisse videatur, ejusmodi artificium coram mundo propalare recuset;
l^ct^ri, potissimum cui Hermetis adyta intrasse nondum contigit gratum fore
duximus, si rectum ac minime labortosum conficiendi Lac Margaritarum modum,
paginae hujus margini inseramus, parca verborum serie. Margaritas, in
porphyrite in farinam seu laeverem tritas, mitte in cucurbitam. Affunde
menstruum acutum solvens (puta succum Limonum) ut duobus digitis excedat.
Claude vitrom exact. Colloca in cineres calentes, ut solvantur Perlae. Si una
vice id non fit, muta menstruum; donec tota substantia delituerit. Solutiones
distilla ad siccum. Affunde aquam stillatitiam dulcem. Macera: distilla; quod
ter repete, aut donec acrimonia abierit. Calc* huic affunde optimum ex
malvatico vino spiritum. Digere, distilla blande. Read alium: digere,
distilla, idque repete donec oleositas spiritus Perlas in oleum mutaverit. Quod
cum novo spiritu digerere, and per alembicum extrahere queas, tandemque
abstracto spiritu, per se dare. Si Tabulas vis cape quantum vis: affunde
spiritum Vitrioli, and fiet Lac. Ex hoc secedet Calx candida. Abstrahe humorem,
and cum sacchari Chrystallini q s. aqua rosacea soluti, fac Tabulas Perlatas.
.

For unless the whole body throughout be tinged or bedewed with some
supereminent Balsam; seldom or never are internal ulcers brought to
Consolidation. And the Lungs, being a part that first submits to old age and
death, can very hardly make a safe retreat back to their primitive strength,
when once assaulted by any strong infirmity, the Forlorne-hope of Death: but
having their forces once routed, easily resign to the tyranny of the
Conqueror; and therefore seldom receive any recruit or assistance from Common
remedies.

44. Upon the reputation of which reason, has the antique error of the
Schools (who, sooner then they will be brought to acknowledge any deficiency in
their blew and invalid Medicaments, are ready to impeach Nature herself of
imperfection, and transfer the blame upon the most glorious Author of Nature,
by implicit accusing him of improvidence and drowsy omission) succeeded even
down to our days. They positively affirm (forsooth) that the four lobes of the
lungs are, during life, uncessantly expanded and compressed, by a short
vicissitude of contrary motions, like a pair of Bellows, for the use of
Respiration; so that the Aer inspired, is drawn only into the Lungs, but
passes no further into the cavity of the Chest. Which opinion, truly, has
been of bloody disadvantage in the method of healing: though at the same time,
it served the Schools of Physicians for a weak sanctuary, and childish
evasion. For upon the incessant and inexcusable necessity of the Dilatation and
Constriction of the lungs, or perpetual motion of their substance, have they
endeavored to contrive an excuse for their practice: which leaves all Vleers
of the lungs, all Consumptions etc. as desperate, and beyond the art of
Aesculapius. Well a day, as if they could cure an ulcerous inveterate Cancer,
or quiet Fistula of the Anus, or eyes, at pleasure! Which Error I thus
encounter.

45. In the Aer there perpetually sail up and down whole Clouds of dust
atomized; and therefore, by a continual necessity, together with our breath we
suck in whole swarms of these dusty atoms: and by consequence, the whole
cavity of the Chest would in a very short time be filled with dirt, if nature
had not provided us of lungs, in whose narrow Meanders, and almost impervious
porosities, these Atoms of Dust might be stopped and hindered from further
advance. And in this relation, the Lungs have no other way of discharging their
excrements, but by Exscreation; that the dust drawn in together with the Aer,
might be pumpt out of the Pipes of the Lungs, at the same instant the ordinary
excrements of the chest are avoided. A use, indeed, which has hitherto layne
obscure and neglected by the Schools; who have unanimously denied the Lungs to
be pervious. The hair, indeed, wherewith the nostrils are fringed, like a net,
catches all the small fibers or threads of Atoms flying in the aer, and
hinders their further ingresse: and the numerous folds, and annulary Cartilages
of the Aspera Arteria, are like so many labyrinths to arrest and fix the finer
dust, that it sink not to the bottom of the Lungs. In order to our proof,
That the Lungs are immovable, Expansion and Constriction. And therefore the
Lungs of Birds (serving to the same common use of respiration, as well in them,
as Dilatation and Constriction, make up the comparison of a pair of bellows.
Again, the whole fabric of the Lungs consists (viz. the Arteriall Vein, the
Venall Artery, and Aspera Arteria, or Windpipe) of a sanguine Parenchyma, or
blood concreted into a solid mass; and a peculiar Membrane, or scarf
enshrowding all the rest. Now the three Vessels are Canals or Conduits, equally
divaricated and distributed through their whole substance; and the two former
are ever repleted with blood, and therefore absolutely impossible it is sor
them to receive in any of the Aer drawn in by inspiration: but the third is
ever open, filled with Aer, and so incapable of any new inspired aer, until
the aer drawn in at the last dilatation of the Chest, be first discharged down
into the capacity of the Chest; for which reason, undoubtedly the aspera
arteria, as also the Membrane enshrowding the Lungs, are full of small
perforations. For this third Canale, consisting also of Cartilagineous or
gristly rings, made contiguous each to other, by the intervention of a horny
membrane, is ever distended and open; no otherwise then the main trunk of the
Windpipe. The fourth part of the Lungs, is their parenchymatick Flesh,
altogether as incapable to admit the advenient Aer. To conclude, the fifth part
is a membrane, serving as a Coat to invest the whole structure. This summed up
and considered, the result must be; that no part of the Lungs bath any room to
entertain any of the smallest parcel of the Aer brought in by inspiration:
and that no part of them can, without violence and the dilaceration of their
substance, endure the reciprocal motion of Dilatation and Constriction. A
miracle it is to me, I profess, that the Schools, notwithstanding the
uncontrollable evidence of this verity, can yet snort in their inveterate
Lethargy: that though they stand convinced, and allow of all our allegations,
as true beyond all Scepticity; yet do they not, even to this very day, cease
to preach up their absurd opinion, that the Lungs are continually, by a
reciprocation of contrary motions, like those of a pair of bellows, distended
and recompressed. Again, the third of these vessels, or forementioned Tubes
(though we should grant it not to be open at all times, nor can the sides
thereof meet together by concidence, like a bladder, the cartilagineous rings
forbidding it) can receive only such a proportion of new aer, as may respond
to its capacity; but since at every inspiration we draw in so much aer, as must
fill a larger capacity, then the dimensions of the whole Lungs can be extended
unto: it seems of undeniable necessity, that the aer is not inspired only into
the pipes of the Aspera Arteria, of themselves incapable of constriction and
dilatation, but is carried further down, even into the cavity of the Chest. For
Lungs have no motion at all. A principal Argument, for the illustration of this
paradox, is, that in the breast is seated a double membrane, perpendicularly
intersecting the cavity thereof, from the neck down to the midrife, and
therefore called the Mediastinum, or partition wall, provided by nature to
guard the heart from the injuries of aer. This Mediastinum divides the cavity
of the Chest into a right and left. Now manifest Lungs are, for the same
reason, devoyd of all motion. A second Argument, no less obvious or
satisfactory, may be collected from the purulent expectorations in Pleurisies.
For in these diseases are ever rejected by cough such excrements, as were first
generated of blood extravenated and putrified, in the parts adjacent to the
ribs, and membrane enshrowding the hollow of the Chest: and therefore it is of
necessity, that the coat of the Lungs must be full of considerable porosities,
or perforations, which suffice to the easy transmission of blood and thick
purulent matter. All these things the Schools see, know, confess, and write
of: and yet are so effronted by custom, that they adventure to deny, that the
aerattracted by inspiration, is carried through the Lungs down into the hollow
of the Chest; but affirm that the substance of the Lungs is perpetually
agitated, twixt expansion and compression, like a pair of bellows. They
concede, indeed, that the Lungs have many pores or small perforations, through
which the extravenated blood and apostemated matter in Pleurisies are imbibed
and spungd up: but will by no means grant, that the more subtle and
penetrative Aer can be transmitted through those pores into the cavity of the
Chest. Nor is there, why we should wonder at this obstinate infatuation; since
they speculate only dead bodies, in which the pores of the membrane investing
the Lungs are closed up by the condensing hand of death: and the same
constantly happens in the optic Nerves, the spinal marrow, interstice or middle
partition of the heart, and orifices of the mesaraick veins looking into the
guts. The Lungs of any beast float upon the water, while they are boiling
whole, but minced into small gobbets, they presently sink to the bottom: the
reason belongs to the impletion of the Aspera arteria with aer. And if boiling
water (pardon us the impertinency) cannot find access into the substance of
the Lungs, while they are decocted; which way (we beseech you) can the grosser
matter of a frigid Catarrh hope to force an entrance into it, at pleasure? The
same is also demonstrable by an experiment, as easily made as mentioned. Let
any man, by a strong efflation, breath out all the aer in circumference of his
body, near the point of the swordlike Cartilage, above the pit of the stomach:
and again, by as strong inflation, fill his breast with aer, and measure it
measures, that more aer is attracted into the chest by inspiration, then can be
contained in the dimensions of the Lungs. And much more, when he shall allow
for that proportion of aer which tending directly downwards, depresseth the
midrife upon the stomach. Try the same experiment, another way; draw in so much
breath, as you can; then blow it immediately forth into a bladder, and you
shall find, as before, that the quantity of aer inspired does by many degrees
exceed the magnitude of the Lungs. But in the nature and an absolute vacuity
are incompatible. No doubt, but the belly and breast owe their intumescence to
the inspiration of aer; if therefore the Lungs were capable of distension
(which yet seems to us impossible) yet could they not be distended to a
capacity sufficient to admit the tenth part of that aer, which the Thorax upon
inspiration does ordinarily receive; allowing for that aer, which does depresse
the midrife downwards, and remain in the ever distended pipes of the rough
Artery, in avoydance of vacuity. By inference therefore, the motion of the
Thorax does argue the motion of the Lungs unnecessary. Should aer, by the laws
of its constitution, is subject to Dilatation and Compression (as common
Philosophy phraseth it) therefore could not the elevation of the ribs draw in a
sufficient quantity of aer. Yea, since that attraction cannot but be violent
(as being a shift Nature is put upon, for the prevention of a vacuum) i. e. e
diametro adverse to natural and vital motion: it follows, that the motion of
the ribs is not ordained nor conductive to the dilatation of the Lungs. And
since the Lungs have, neither in themselves, nor by insusion from any other
part, any principle or Causalitie of peculiar Motion; other then that dependent
on the motion of the ribs (according to the Schools:) it results a serene and
irrefutable truth, that they have no motion at all; but from the first to the
last moment of Animation, continue quiet, without variation of Figure, or
enlargement and contraction of Dimensions. What clearer manifest of folly and
invincible dotage Diaphragme or midrife does, as prime and sole Efficient,
suffice to the ordinary use of Respiration: and yet anon they fall foul on
their own maxims, and substitute the intercostal muscles, as Coadjutors, or
Auxiliaries, to the performance of that office. Again, there frequently arise
out of the stomach such belchings, as carry along with them the lively
expressions of odours formerly received into the Lungs by inspiration:
therefore are the Lungs and midrife perspirable, that is drild full of small
porosities. In earnest, it is worthy our most passionate tears, that the Schools
have, for so many ages together, unhapily misspent their sweat and oil, in
fripperies, childish pageantry, and composing Romances more wild then those of
the Talmud or Ariosto. I shall urge another easy and familiar experiment; if,
in a prone decumbency, that is lying with your face to the earth, you place one
hand on your belly, and the other on your ribs, and at the same time draw your
breath at a moderate rate, you shall then plainly perceive, that the muscles of
the Abdomen are the only operators in the business of respiration: that the
belly being lifted up, the midrife is drawn downward; and consequently that the
cavity of the Abdomen is by so much enlarged, by how much the plane or diameter
of the midrife (in itself lax and semicircle, when it is drawn downward, and
so much the larger, by how much the more lax the plane of the midrife is. Nay
what is more, if you bind in your ribs with a straight girdle, and then fetch
your breath very gently, you shall sensibly perceive the belly to be
reciprocally elevated and depressed, the ribs all the while remaining quiet,
without any visible motion at all; and by consequence, that the Lungs in this
case, should we grant them to move at other times (which truth forbids) can
remain quiet a whole day together, if the constriction last so long. But in
sighing, oscitation, sternutation, and intense respiration, or panting for
breath (and in no other case) the muscles of the Thorax, running along betwixt
the ribs, are sensibly perceived to officiate, and by a kind of substitute
administration, concur to the action of respiration. For the ribs are
semicircles propendent downward, or arched into a lateral convexity; to each of
which is annexed one of the intercostal muscles, which bend them upward, and by
a kind of familar violence diminish their convexity in the dilatation of the
Chest. And as they become greater, concave, when they are bent into a
diminution of their convexity; in that relation also do they become rounder, as
to the figure of the chest; and so by consequence make the cavity of the thorax
wider. Thus Orthopneumatick Patritius, in hard travale (for the child came
membrane environing her chest, betwixt the seventh and eighth ribs; yet without
any manifest sense of pain (for a greater pain ever obscures a less) any
Aposteme, or other Accident ordinarily subsequent upon wounds or dilaceration
of that so sensible a part. Some few days after her childbed, as often as she
held her breath long, or extended her chest, in singing, panting, etc.
Assellando (obscaenum sane vocabulum, et haud raro pro congressu venereo apud
Martialem, aliosque lasciviores authors usurpatum) hic modestiori quidem
metaphrasi, Panting reddere placuit.
she felt a very large tumor of wind bunch up betwixt her ribs; which sunk down
again, when she compressed it with her hand, and let her chest fall in again at
the efflation of her breath. And from that time to her death, she never slept,
but with a swath drawn hard upon that part of her breast. Which instance puts
it amongst truths most manifest, that the aer attracted by inspiration is
carried through the Lungs into the cavity of the chest. The same have I
observed also in a very Noble Lady, who got this misfortune in her travail;
that whenever she held her breath, she had one side of her throat blown up,
like a bladder distended with aer, to such a monstrous greatness, that no care
or art could Pulmoniacal and Asthmatick Patients, and found, that, for the
plurality, they sleep with great ease and quiet on one side, and can hardly
fetch their breath on the other. For we have no reason to doubt, but this
malady is Idiopathical to the Lungs, i. e. not occasioned by deuterapathy or
consent with any other misaffected part: as also, that in that side of the
Lungs, which respects the prone side on which the sick man then lies, and
which must in that prone position bob and fret against the membrane lining the
chest, those pores are constipated or obstructed, through which the aer used to
be transmitted into the cavity of the chest: and moreover, that the pores of
either Lobe of the Lungs dependent upon or facing the downward side, are either
all, or at lest the greatest part of them (which we may know by observing the
degrees of extraordinary respiration; for the more or less difficulty of
respiration, may be a certain rule to direct our compute of the greater or
lesser number of pores obstructed) by some lapse of providence in disordered
nature, or foreign contingency obstructed. By which Argument it is manifest,
that the Lungs are not Expanded and Contracted, like bellows, but pervious and
transpirable, by reason of their numerous perforations: through which the aer
smoothly gliding into the hollow of the chest, does constantly hold an equal
proportion to the magnitude thereof, as well in its diduction as contraction.
And hence is it, that men sick of diseases in the Lungs draw their breath more
easily when they sit up, then when they lie down: for the Lungs, when they hang
directly downward in a free pendulous position, have on all sides those pores
open and fit for the transvection of aer, which have not yet submitted to the
oppression of obstructions.

48. Beyond all excuse therefore do the Schools err, when they deliver, as an
oraculous truth, that the midrife is the sole and prime Motor of the Lungs;
and, in that relation, the proper and principiative efficient of Respiration.
More particularly, that when the midrife does contract itself toward its own
Center, it then makes the Expiration; but when it relaxes toward the
Circumference, the Inspiration: and so the quantity of aer inspired must in
exact proportion respond to the measure of the midrifes expansion or
relaxation. Our reasons these, 1. Since all voluntary Motion is performed by a
Muscle, as the part solely and principally adapted by Nature to that action, by
a retraction of the tail toward the head thereof; therefore, if their opinion
stand allied to verity, must the midrife be a prime, heteroclite, and most
principal Muscle, and the head thereof seated in its Center. 2. If the midrife
be an organ primarily executive of motion; then, though the Muscles both of the
Abdomen and ribs cease from all Contraction and relaxation of themselves, would
the midrife maintain the successive motions of respiration, by its own single
power: Which experiment positively denies. 3. Yea the muscles of the Abdomen,
which are ordinary muscles, would have no motion proper to themselves, but be
moved, at second hand, by the previous motion of the midrife. 4. Vain and
useless would the contrivement of nature be, and her architecture imperfect in
superfluity, in making the abdominal muscles; and the belly might have as
conveniently been clothed with the single coat of the Carnous Membrane, as
with the bombast and duplications of so many muscles. 5. Since every organ of
Voluntary motion does execute its function by Traction, or drawing the part,
into which its tendon is inserted, toward itself; the breast, according to
this error of the Schools, would be drawn very much inward by the Traction of
the midrife, and the wast convelled into the dwindling figure of an
Houreglasse. Clepsydra in archetypo: quaeest organum quoddam artificiale, quo
ex aqua, de vitro in vitrum deorsum, per exile foramen, guttulatim destillante,
horas metiri solebant antiqui. Hodie vero, hominum ingeniis ad nobiliores
machinationes feliciter provectis, exolescunt Clepsydrae; hisque super venere
Clepsammidia, quibus horas mensuramus per ^ffluxum Arenae: ut and Horologia
Automata, quorum orbiculi serratim dentati (graece (...), ut Arist. Mechanic.)
sese mutuo protrudentes, vel a chalybe arcuatim tenso, and machinae infixo, vel
ponderibus appensis circumgyrantur.
6. Further, the Expiration would not be a quiet or cessation from motion; but
an absolute motion of the midrife contracted. 7. And so the Expiration would,
even in most healthy men, be more difficult and laborious then the Inspiration;
8. Since then the Inspiration would not be a motion, but a relaxion or quiet of
the midrife from its Contraction.

49. Hence upon rational deduction I conclude, 1. That the true and proper use
of the Midrife has hitherto remained unknown. 2. That the use of the Lungs
has never yet been met with, by the too lazy and jejune scrutinies of the
Schools. 3. That the exact manner and reason of Respiration has also escaped
the vulgar exploration of Anthropologists. 4. That Anatomists have never made a
just and perfect discovery, which are the prime and principal instruments of
respiration. 5. That the muscles of the Abdomen do alone suffice to maintain
ordinary and moderate respiration. 6. That the Lungs are never moved by any
natural expansion and Compression of their substance; but serve only as a
sieve, or pecolatory, for the sequestration of the atoms of dust from the most
simple and pure aer, which is immediately transmitted into the concave of the
Chest. 7. That the deplorable difficulty of curing diseases in the Lungs,
especially where their Continuity is infringed, does not arise from this, that
they are uncessantly agitated by a vicissitude of Compression and Expansion,
and in that respect destitute of that rest and quiet, which is necessary to the
consolidation of a disunion (which has ever been alleged and admitted as an
excuse for the languid and ineffectuall operation of vulgar remedies) but from
hence, that the small apertures or extreme orifices of their perforations are
blockt up by obstructions, whose remove is a task too difficult for the infirm
fingers of common pulmonary med^^^ments, and only to be hoped for from the
Herculean energy of some Chymicall Panchreston An universal Medicine.
. To which we may subjoyn, that nothing, besides aer, can arrive at the extreme
pores of the Lungs, and that aer is, by reason of the oppilations, there
arrested, and imprisoned, and does also by degrees exsiecare the obstructing
glutinous humors. From which depraved root there springs up a whole grove of
preternaturall productions which in their maturity put on the destructive
blossoms of Aridity, Acrimony, and Malignity: and in the summer or ripening of
these seeds of evil (which must, alas, be the autumn of life) there must grow
a racemation or bunch of desperate Accidents, such as extreme anxiety in
respiration, Apostems of the Lungs, exesion or corrosion of their vessels,
spitting of blood, ulceration, consumption, and in the catastrophe Death. For
let us suppose, that all the aer attracted by the expansion of the Chest, is
ordinarily transmitted into the capacity thereof, through a thousand minute
tubes or divarications of the Aspera Arteria; and that this just number of
perforations in the Lungs is sufficient to the conservation of health, as to
the interest of respiration: if therefore but a hundred of these be stopped up by
obstructions, then must the party suffering this constipation, become, by one
tenth part, more shortwinded, in long and intense motion, or ascending up hill,
then otherwise he ought to be.

50. From this advantage we have a clear and un-interrupted prospect into the
field of Pulmonary remedies, and may at first glance discover, that Syrups,
Lambatives, Loochs, etc. are lame and despicable reliefes of nature; since they
never arrive at the parts distressed, but are either diverted into the stomach,
intestines and other places wholly unconcerned in their operations; or so
impaired in their activity by a tedious pilgrimage through many Concoctions and
transmutations, that they lose their primitive faculties, and grow too languid
and evirate to encounter the disease. Nay what is more sad, that if they did
arrive in the zenith of their seminal powers and unrefracted qualities at the
camp of the disease: yet, like cowardly and treacherous Auxiliaries, they would
aggravate the charge of Nature, and ruin that part, whose assistance they
pretend. Here also our enquiry meets a hansome argument, why no one of the
forementioned infirmities of the Lungs may hope a Cure from any Plant in the
Physicians garden, or Confection in the Apothecaries shop; unless Fire,
discreetly governed by the learned hand of Chemistry, and blown into a temper
suitable to that Ignis non lucens, or invisible flame irradiating all our
fabric of frigid Clay, shall graduate some medicament into a Noble Entelechie,
and make its balsame friendly and familiar to the principles of life, as
natures own.

51. But as for those Precautions of Catarrbs, which enjoyne the use of
Coriander seed, and other such vain fopperies, after supper, for the prevention
of fumes arising out of the stomach; how much more worthily, in the judgment
of sober reason, do they deserve our pity, then our confidence? For if the
generation of vapors, from their causes (humidity as the material, and the
innate heat of the stomach, the efficient) and their ascension be natural;
what can Coriander do to hinder that these natural effects should not follow
on the neck of their causes? Can Coriander inspersed upon boiling water in any
small neckt vessel, impede the exhalation or ascension of vapors out of the
water? At the same rate let us prise those magnified trifles and serious
nothings of the Schools, when they with great ceremony prescribe, that the
hair must not be kembed, nor the head rubbed at night, but morn (forsooth) not
toward the forehead, but backward; lest Catarrhs, obeying the positional
friction, be drawn forward. Nor do we want just cause for our complaint, that
both Gates leading into the divine Temple of Aesculapius are blockt up by heaps
of frantic Chimaera's and the fabulous traditions of doting beldames; since
the true and proxime causes of diseases have to this very day, remained locked
up in the dark of undiscovery: nor have those Moles in Philosophy ever dug
deep enough into the Center of their Seminalities and first principles, or
sweat sufficiently in their exantlation.

52. For how frivolous is the doctrine of Galen, through all his five books of
the Conservation of health? In all which long and hollow tract you shall hear
of nothing, but the echo's of Baths, Frictions, and Apotherapia Apoteraxia
inscribitur exemplari Elzeviranio; sed vel ex Helmontii calamo ad alia ocyus
festinante, vel compositoris incuria, hoc vitium suam duxisse originem
consentaneum est. Nullum enim vocabulum tale (quod sciam) apud Galenum
reperire^ est: Apotherapia autem quam plurimu in locis ejusdem lib. de Cons.
sanit. usurpatur, cujus proprius scopus est, ut lassitudinem, quae immodico
exercitio succedere solet, admoto oleo, submoveat atque prohibeat. Consul.
Galen. lib. de san. tuend. 2. cap. 6. and 3. cap. 2.
, or Unction after violent and athletick exercise. And though I have with
commiseration observed the poverty and barrenness of Galen generally diffused
through all his longwinded discourses; yet in no one piece of his voluminous
works have I more manifestly taken the altitude of his wit, then where with
extreme seriousness, he prescribes the several distinctions of positionall
Frictions to be used (forsooth) longwaies, transverse, oblique, and circular;
and these, like the ridiculous Ceremonics of Necromancers, to be observed with
punctual and strict obedience, under no less then capital penalty. For Rome
was infested with fewer diseases, and those more gentle and benign, and warmed
herself at fewer funeral fires, in her first five innocent and growing
Centuries; then after she had triumphed over conquered Greece, and among other
Trophies brought home the satall and infectious Libraries of Physicians. And
all Europaeans, who harbor few or no Physicians, will, without any reluctance
to their experience, confirm the same.

53. The Schools with serious gravity wonder, that so vast a quantity of
Muccus, or glutinous gelly, should ordinarily be avoided by stool, upon the
operation of Coloquintida; and yet that the quantity of expectorations in
diseases of the Lung, should be thereby no whit diminished: and so while with
insolent ostentation, they glory that they have found out the Antecedent cause
of Defluxions; at the same time enchanted by the effects of Purgatives, they
will by no force of argument be brought to confess the falsity of their
Phlegmatic axioms. Now Coloquintida, Seammony, Elaterium, etc. dry the body
more in one day, then the Decoction of China can in three months. What benefit
then can, in reason, be hoped from China, where more exsiccating Purgatives
confess their invalidity: and their use must needs be horrid? From this, who
so purblind in his understanding, as not to see, that the paedantick Schools,
adhering to the doctrines of their Ancestors, have set up their rest in this,
that the writings of the ancient Ethnicks ought to be their Ne ultra in
Philosophy; that they are not obliged to any deeper disquisitions, or further
explorations, but only to order their Cures, according to the antique and
thredbare Theorems of Physic. And though they cannot but observe their
Practice shame their confidence, and the success fall short of what their
specious Canons promise: yet do they not blush to veil over their bloody
ignorance, nor feel compunction at their inhumane resolve, that they had rather
their afflicted Patients should still remain suspended betwixt the calamities
of the Disease, on one side, and the more murderous tortures of their Purgers,
on the other; then take the pains to study and explore any more rational and
probable means of their redress. And, sober truth makes me confess it, so
many Myriads of Incogitancies and Absurdities, could never have thus long
continued in the Schools, consisting of men so acute, judicious, prudent, and
experienced (among whom I as willingly as justly confess my self the most
despicable and unworthy) had they been pleased to abate any thing of their
implicit subscription, and recede the lest step from the Axioms of Pagans.
But, alas, they are closely besieged by the grand enemy of primitive truth; who
holds them captived to the tyranny of his Delusions, by the chain either of
Arrogance, Incircumspection, Cruelty, Avarice, Laziness, Stupidity, or, in
fine, of shame to be reformed. Good Jesu! when will thou be pleased to cast
this devil out of the Schools? when will the measure of these fatal evils be
full, and the Vintage of these sour Grapes come; that, at length, by the
comfortable sunshine of thy truth, this Egyptian night may be exhaled, and
this mist of horrid calamities that sits heavy on the heads of all the wretched
sons of Adam, be dispelled? Thy answer is, there can be no remedy for his
blindness, who wilfully and stubbornly shuts his eyes against the light of a
confessed verity. Therefore,

Just God! all things are just, thou do approve;
Thou unmoved Rule of Truth, and Font of Love!
But since we scorned thy wiser Laws to obey
Wee'r made to Fools a Scorn, to Quacks a Prey.
54. Some Anatomists there are who have dissected a living Dog; and when they
came to the Larynx, drenched him with milk, or other broth, tinged with
Saffron or Bole Armeniack, to the end they might perceive whether any part of
the liquor entered the lungs: and found that a very small quantity thereof gave
a tincture to the sides of the Aspera Arteria. On this they cried out, that
there must be an insensible and ordinary descent of excrements from the brain
into the Lungs; and enacted for an established truth, that Lambatives, since
they are carried immediately into the Larynx, and thence slide down into all
the most slender and remote tubes of the Aspera Arteria, must be the sole and
extreme remedy of Consumtions, and the most prevalent means to Consolidate
Ulcers in the Lungs. An experiment, in troth, of very much cruelty to the
Dog; but of far more cruelty and unhappy consequence to Man: since, at the
persuasion hereof, the Schools have delivered it from hand to hand Hic Author
proculdubio allusit ad (...) Antiquorum, a Pausan. sic descriptam. In Academia
Promethei ara est: unde homines in urbem accensas lampadas ferentes decurrunt.
Sequiturque victoria eum qui facem accensam conservarit; nam si extincta
fuerit, alteri succedenti ea traditur: eademque ratione tertio successori, si
secundus non pervenerit ad metam, cum lampade accensa. Quod si nemini ardentem
defer licuerit, palma in medio relinquitur.
down to posterity, as an impraegnable verity; and making erroneous and
unjustisiable inductions upon mistaken and only imaginary positions, have
subscribed unto fopperies so pernicious.

For, First, what can they expect that Syrups and Lambatives should do, in the
slender branches or divarications of the Aspera Arteria, more then inevitably
introduce the mischief of obstructions? To what end, therefore, should these
fulsome Loochs naturally and ordinarily affect that way of descent into the
lungs, or be transmitted thither, or there entertained? since in that place
they can neither be digested, nor changed into good and nutritive or
balsamicall juice; nor yet conduce to the cure of either the purulent
effluxions from ulcers, or viscid Muccus expectorated. And further, if some
part of our liquor should ordinarily drop into the lungs, then would the
ordinary spitle of healthy men savor of the broths eaten, or syrups lickt
down. And although our first spitle sometimes relish of the syrups, or other
liquid remedies, newly swallowed down; yet such arises not from the Lungs, but
Palate and other parts seated in vicinity to the jaws: nor do the succeeding
salivous rejections, for that reason, confess an inquination or tincture of
such Lambatives, as in another case the succeeding spitle returns fuliginous
exhalations or fumes, received into the Lungs, a good while after their first
admission. Again, were this feazible, then would any man, who should lick up
several ounces of Syrup, in one evening, be, ere many minutes, reduced to the
bosom of his cold grandmother, by the inevitable destruction not only of an
Asthma, but even of suffocation ensuing; for a part of those Syrups must fill
up and choke the great pipe or cavity of the rough artery. Seriously, our
wonder may be excused, if we stand amazed, how the Schools, seduced by so blew
and dull an experiment of a Dog, have baulked the observation, that this
colored broth, or Milk died with Saffron, was rapt down in the Larynx, not by
the ordinary way of Deglutition; but unawares and preposterously, the poor
distracted animal howling amids his torments, and so opening the Epiglottis.
Not that the same is done of custom in healthy, or frequently observed in
rheumatick persons. For precisely, if a man in an extreme fit of the stone,
endeavoring to make water, does chance unwittingly to open the porthole of his
arse, and confront an Irish man; must it therefore be the proper function of
the Sphincter of the bladder, when it relaxeth it self, and gives way to the
efflux of the urine, ordinarily also to unlock the sphincter of the port
Aesquiline? For it is no rarity, for parts of the body, when their oeconomie is
infringed and disturbed into tumult and confusion, by excessive pain and
torture, to perform their functions depravedly; and draw other parts also, to
which they are allied by vicinity of situation, or connection, into the same
disorder and irregularity. Their belief had been more securely placed upon
that History of one suffocated with a small fether, and of another with a
hair, unfortunately slipping into the rough artery. For so had they stood
confirmed, without dispute or haesitancy, that the Lungs can never admit any
foreign intrusion, or receive the smallest grain, without considerable
damage and hazardous anxiety; nay that such as are afflicted with difficulty
of respiration, can by no means endure so much as fragrant suffumigations, for
reasons alleged by us, in our discourse de Blas humano Blas importat vim
Motus, tum Localis, tum Alterativi; idque nedum superis, est eti^m inferis.
Blas Humanum vero duplex constituitur apud Helmontium nostrum. Vnum nempe
Natural, quod singulis visceribus, prima ex conformatione, implantatum
radicaliter, per energiam radialem, vel effluvium incorporeum, in parts sui
regimini conf^gnatas, agit streu^e and monarchialiter: hoc est, potestate
absoluta, independenti, non locorum vicmitati, connexion^, aut supinitati
obligata, and quolibet corporis situ aeque truculenter. Per exemplum. In
Foemina hysterica, ex utero (cujus sceptro universam soeminei sexus oeconomiam,
absolute subditam, serio contendit Helmont) inspiratur blas potestativ^^ in
reliqua viscerum, quod situm eorundem primigeneum, figuram, officiae, imo and
crasin etiam nativam mutet penitus, alienetque pro sui arbitrio. Vnde huic
utiqu^ radiali Regiminis actioni, nequaquam autem putaticiis scholarum
vaporibus, humorumve revera non-entium exhalationibus, quocunque etiam miasmate
contagioso impraegnatis, rite condonandas decrevit quaslibet uteri
exorbitationes atque indignationes. Alio^ perinde hujuscemodi Blas Humani
Naturalis effectus, nobis evidenter satis conspiciendos exhibuit ipsa Natura,
in singulis Digestionum officinis. Est namque constans Authoris dogma, Fell and
jecur sua perficere munia, non quidem corporali contactu, congressu, aut
commistione sui; nec denique amplectendo and recipiendo suum intra gremium: ast
per Aporrhaeas incorporeas, influxum radialem, sive Fermentum inspiratum. Fell
enim dimittit fermentale blas in intestina: and jecur suum in venas mesenterii.
Alterum Voluntarium: quod per internum velle sibi motor existit, sive quod
voluntate animalium ad motum localem dirigitur. Huic autem thesi, sat firmo
tanquam fundamini, Helmont superstruxit suum ariem, ad istud scholarum axioma
diruendum, quo incautae admodum docuere; In omni motu locali statuendum de
necessitate primum motorem immobilem* In suo namque tramite, cui titulus Blas
Humanum, ab illo sat demonstratum existimo, aliquid esse in sublunaribus, quod
seipsum localiter and alterative moveat, ab que Coelorum Blas, and motore
immobili naturali. Voluntas enim primum est ejusmodi movens. movetque seipsum
quoque Ens Seminale, tam in seminibus, quam horum constitutis. Hinc insuper
quaecunque Insensitiva moventur, per quandam veluti Naturae Voluntatem
moventur, habentque saas naturales necessitates and fines. Fusior hujus
paradoxi explicatio petatur ab ipso Authore.
.

If therefore Suffumigations and aromatic exhalations, such as promise a
grateful succor to the Lungs in their oppressions, be injurious and
burdensome; what will not grosser and slimy Lambatives do, though we grant them
to arrive at the lower vessels of the lungs, with all their virtue and efficacy
about them? No man, that ever saw but one dissection, will deny, that when ever
any thing is swallowed down into the stomach, at the same instant the Larynx is
shut close by the Epiglottis, or trap door, that carries the figure of an
Ivy-leafe; so that not the smallest atome can slip into the Lungs. And I have
known some men strangled, who had their Epiglottis not shut sufficiently close
but on one side, by reason of a Convulsion of one part, and a resolution or
Palsy of the other.

55. And here we are fallen upon the detection of another collateral Error of
the Schools; in particular, their unadvised Assertion, that Lambatives
swallowed down gently and by degrees, the head being at the same time reflected
into a position looking above the horizon, descend into the Lungs; but not
those, that are swallowed down greedily, and at once. If so, I demand, whether
the dog under the dissecting knife, did lick and by degrees swallow down the
colored liquor; or chop it down at once? To what purpose did the Anatomists
pour it into his throat to be drank at one swallow or gulp, if they knew
before hand, that it could not fall into the Lungs, unless lickt down gently?
But letting this Hypothesis stand, that the Lungs absolutely abhor the
admission of all external things, mere Aer and such as is not incorporated to
Fumes and Exhalations only excepted: and then it will necessarily follow, that
whether any thing be lickt down gently, or drank down ravenously at once; yet
still the President of the Epiglottis, or janitor of the Lungs attends the
execution of his function, and observes the Clausure of the Larynx; since
thereupon depends no less then the hazard of life. This, I conceive, may make
it indubious to the most prejudicate, that Lambatives and syrups, though they
may, by introducing an unctuous surface upon the parts, make them more smooth,
slippery, and so more fit for the rejection of viscid excrements flowing from
the palate and other parts adjacent; yet are they of no small detriment to the
stomach, nor can, in the lest degree, or largest latitude of intention, afford
ease or benefit in affections of the Lungs. But the Schools reply, that the
salivous rheum or defluxion, does insensibly, and by its own spontaneous laps,
or natural tendency, distill into the Larynx; and that, in this relation,
Lambatives must be beneficial and sanative.

56. But neither of these articles can stand; since into what position soever
the neck be disposed, or however inflected, yet the same care and wariness of
Nature to praevent that nothing drop or insinuate into the Lungs, is constantly
continued. I beheld a Tumbler, not long since, stand upon his head, his hands
and feet inverted, and in that posture drink a glass of wine. I appeal to
Anatomy, and willingly submit my hand to the ferula.

57. Many there are, out of whose mouths, while they sleep, run whole torrents
of spitle; who if they chance to sleep in a supine posture, that is on their
backs, it instantly happens, that they must turn themselves on one side, or
awake and sit up, nature being affrighted by the terror of the danger imminent:
and if any of the spitle fall accidentally and unawares into the Larynx;
thenceforward, until all be again exploded, they cough uncessantly. But, to
come home to the center of the business; what comfort or succor can sugar,
mixed with the cadaverous Lungs of a Fox, or imbued with the juice of Coltsfoot,
adfer to the Lungs; when they utterly abhor the intrusion of any forreigner,
admit nothing but Aer unless by accident and ex improviso, and when any thing
is entered into their confines, immediately reject it with great anxiety and
labor? Can such a remedy suffice to the restoration of the decayed Faculties?
Can this cut up Catarrhs by the root, or expunge the seminal miasme, or
original impression fixed upon the Archeus? I profess, on which hand soever I
turn me, on what part soever I place my disquisitions, I cannot discover, that
the Schools war against diseases, with any other weapons, but the wild dreams
of the Gentiles, or strike at any thing beyond their effects and secondary
Productions, leaving the head and principal Causalities unassaulted; and all
this, by reason of their ignorance of the Essence and Causes of Diseases. And
hence has the name of Physician fallen under the facete reprehension of
Comedians, and this proverbial reproach, that Physicians care not what they
should think, what do, or how order their meditations, in order to their
obedience unto that strict Precept: Be ye merciful, as your Father which is in
heaven, is merciful, grown into use. And, as St. Bernard, concerning the Clergy
feeding upon the sins of the people, in respect they live upon no other
revenews, but Alms; so I concerning Physicians. For they consider not, whether
they discharge their duty to the Commandment, or satisfy the debt of Charity;
who banquet and grow fat upon the defections, languors, and infirmities of the
people. Often have I pondered, but discover I cannot, how these Plagues of
Egypt, these clouds of palpable darkness, were introduced upon the Schools;
unless from hence, that being seasoned with evil principles, and infected with
unjustifiable traditions, they frequently met with Affections, which, according
to their outward appearance, and without scruple or stricter indagation, they
instantly referred to the fabulous scene of Catarrhs.

58. For instance, a certain sick person, invaded with a head ach, soon after
feels a dull and ponderous pain in the neck, a difficulty and indisposition to
motion; and the leaden plummets of Morpheus are too light to draw down the
curtains of his eyes; on the neck of these Accidents ensues a manifest pain and
imbecility of the loins, which seems to be traduced down to the thighs, and
thence to make a progress to the legs and feet. Hereupon it is decreed, that
Pain (since an Accident of inhaerence) cannot transmigrate from one subject to
another; unless something Material, successively trickling down from the brain
along the muscles of the spine, and by a spontaneous motion arising from its
own tendency to declivity, remove from a superior to an inferior part: which
may very accommodately make out the received Appellation of a Catarrh. It must
become our method of exploring verity, to examine and detect the dotage and
improbability of this persuasion concerning defluxions, by the judicial test of
Anatomy.

59. For if this dolorifick matter distill, by successive drops, from the brain
by the neck; no man can doubt, but that it must be transported thither, either
through the Ventricles of the brain, or through the substance and membranes of
the brain, or betwixt the Pia and Dura matter, or betwixt the Dura matter and the
Skull, or, in fine, betwixt the Skull and the Skin. For the Consequence is
warrantable from a sufficient enumeration of the parts. But, first, not through
the Ventricles of the brain; since that could not come to pass without the
inevitable introduction of an Apoplexy, or universal Palsy: if the doctrine of
the Schools, concerning the origination of these diseases, stand firm. For if
the matter of the Defluxion be excluded from the cavities in the fore part of
the brain, and thence discharged upon the fourth ventricle, and so carried into
the spinal marrow successively; it cannot but horridly offend those noble
parts, and being an alien and acrimonious excrement, cause desperate and
invincible obstructions, and by consequence an Apoplexy or Palsy. Secondly,
the matter of this Defluxion cannot, per (...), by transudation through the
substance of the brain, be first accumulated between the brain and its thinner
investment, the Pia matter, and thence delaps; so that both Coats may yet keep
their continual distance and separation from the very marrow of the spine: in
regard the defluxion in its descent cannot but commit a divulsion and solution
of unity, in the medullary roots of the nerves, according to their longitude;
(i. e.) as they run out in their distinct disseminations. Which wants not a
multitude of absurdities. In like manner, should the Catarrh be rained down
betwixt the two membranes; each of those slender investments, provided by
nature to envellop the spinal marrow, would be double: which Anatomical
inspection could never yet justify. And should we allow it so to be, it would
not only impede the motion of the Muscles; but also excite extreme torture,
and convulsive retractions of the Nerves. So there lies an Error in the
Thesis; since the Nerve, indeed, is the organ delative of the mandates of the
Will, (i. e.) the mediatory instrument by which the Will transmits her
spiritual Mercuries on an errand to the muscles: but not Executive of Voluntary
motion, (i. e.) not the immediate executioner of the commands given out. More
plainly thus; the Will is Queen Regent; the Animal spirits, the Nuncij, or
Ambassadors; the Nerve, the instrument of their transvection or delation from
the brain, or white hall of the soul, to the member to be employed; and the
muscle, the executioner of her designs. That a Nerve is not the executioner of
Voluntary motion, may be clearly argued from hence; that very few nerves, in
thickness exceeed a thread of double twisted silk. Now a Nerve, being inserted
into the external part of its peculiar muscle, cannot probably convey the
rheum down to the middle of the muscle, without inferring a Palsy of that
part, from its own obstruction, or a convulsion from the aerimony and virulency
of the Defluxion. Again, if they shall affirm, that the Catarrh does trickle
down betwixt the Dura matter and the Skull; I may appeal for decision to
Anatomy, which autoptically demonstrateth, that the perforations of the
spondils of the spine, through which the nerves are threaded in their
elongations from their original, the spinal marrow, are so exactly fitted to
their magnitude, that not a hair can be thrust between, without a sensible
Compression of the nerve; so that, by consequence, there can be no void space
left for the intrusion of a Catarrh into the muscles, from the spinal marrow.
We add, that though our Adversaries could find out a place; wherein this
fictitious rheum may be congregated; or passage for its defluxion upon the
spinal marrow, and diffusion thence through the perforatiens of the spondils
into the muscles: yet, we believe, it would amuse their sophistry, to give a
plausible reason of the succeeding progress thereof, and fully to make out,
how a humor, once delapsed upon a nerve running out betwixt two spondils, can
remigrate, or return back again to invade other nerves successively one after
the other. What, does the wanton rheum grow weary of one nerve, and to
satisfy its desire of change, at pleasure remove to another? It Is a Quaere not
unworthy a substantial determination, how a deluge of salt rheum can stream
along a tender and extremly sensible nerve, without causing a stuper, or dull
insensibility, in that member into which it is inserted? Can it insinuate into
the tendinous head, and thence creep along into the tail of a muscle? Can it
retreat thence again, to assault other muscles successively, as the situation
of the second is more prone or declive then of the former, and that then the
third, etc? or, if there may be a new supply of the defluxion, constantly
succeeding, imagined to flow from parts above, to fresh ones below; how comes
it to pass, that the superior parts, first invaded, obtain an immunity from
the mischief? For since the rivulet of rheum does spring from one fountain,
the brain; and run in one continued Chanel, the spinal marrow: why should it
not rather follow the old tract, then wander into a new, and undergo the
difficulties of forcing, and as it were mining out a fresh current? Why does
it, as if carried on by an adulterous unconstancy, desert its anciently
accustomed bed; and affect the embraces of a fresh, nay frequently a feeble
part? Why does it forsake its frequented quarters, and range in quest of strange
and never yet frequented lodgings? Has it such an Appetite or malicious
propensity inherent, that goads it on to variety of objects, whereon to sat
its hostility? For conclusion; that this Error can expect no sanctuary, in the
possibility of the rheums defluxions between the skull and the skin, and
through the firm substance of the Muscles, each being invested with a tunicle
sufficiently compact and thick: may be amply collected from our precedent
disquisitions.

60. All this being summd up, by the impartial Arithmetic of Reason, and
examined by mature judgment; the total Product must amount to this: that there
can be no way, medium, connection, or dependence, by which a Catarrh may
subsist, in verity. And since no rheum or material principle can be found out
to have descended, even in any of those diseases, for whose sake chiefly the
Schools first invented this Chimera of Catarrhs: Know all the friends of truth,
that as often as any peregrine Aer or blast, any offensive odor, any
putrefactive Ferment, or exotic Seminality is impressed upon, or conceived in
the Influent spirit; so often is that contaminate and degenerate spirit
excommunicated from the participation of Vitality by the severe justice of the
incensed Archeus. And the Genius or disposition of this depraved Seminality
conceived, is of no less power then this, that it can transmit the Influent
spirit, made an alien to its primitive purity by the assumption of an exotic
Ferment, rather to parts seated at distance and in the suburbs, then such as
are neighbors to the Bialto or palace of life. As we shall at large declare in
our discourses of the Gout In tractatu (Volupe Viventium morbus antiquitus
putatus, nominato) ad quem Helmont. suos hic remittit lectores, Arthritidis
naturam, causas, atque nativitatem, breviter ad hunc modum descriptas videre
est. Podagra (inquit) est Character morbidus, seminaliter in spiritu vitae
insertus, qui suae maturitatis terminis, fructum acidum fermentalem gignit,
spermaticis partibus confermentabilem. Non existit ergo Podagra in cruore;
multoque minus in excrementis. Verum Podagrici primum agitantur in praecordijs,
and tom internas potuum atque ciborum, quam externas aeris vicissitudines
sentiunt; imo and saepe has futuras praesagiunt. Quare patiuntur sebriles motus
primum, circa officinam spiritus Vitalis, ac quidem paroxysmi initiis. Etenim
primi motus e praecordiis ascendunt, sedem animae sensitivae adoriuntur.
Conceptus namque in praecordiis Character, Lunae atque Mercurij typos explicat:
atque deinde in cord perficitur. Formatus antem sive maturatus Character,
spiritum ibidem febrilem induit, quatenus inficit. Qui simul atque acorem
symboli vitae five sermentalem concepit, motu febrili abigitur squallens, and
ad loca destinata (crudi viz. spermatis in synenia Articulorum) febriliter
defertor. Spiritus, inquam, sic infectus, et non humor (quod notandum) synoniam
in se transparens, cum Aciditate fermentali coagulat in gr^mum opacum. Ad^o ^t
prae ponticitatis conceptae gradu, calores, delores, tumoresque pedagrae
distinguantur. Laticem vero advocari doforis buccina, and per venas dimitti, ad
eluend^m, certum est. Itaque ron quod dolet, quod tumet, vel ardet, Podagra
est: sed hujus sunt producta. N^que enim per pilam bombardae sublato pede,
ablata est simul podagra, sive Arthritis: siquidem in sensatione per organum
sensus, fit tantum consensus partium, etc. Sed horum s^des esto penes Authorem,
, of the duumvirate Lege jus duumviratus Helmentij.
, and elsewherere. For thus Mercury, externally applied by Unction, subtily
runs through all the body and invades the throat, tongue and teeth. Farther,
when this vitiated spirit arrives at the place, to which it was dispatched;
instantly it there imbueth the nutriment of that part with its putrefactive
Ferment, transplanteth and transformeth it into a conformity or analogy to the
idea of the Seminality: and that nutriment thus inquinated, by successive
expirations or Afflations, and foreign impressions, does disorder and pervert
the sunctions of the digestive Faculty; and by this means does not only
generate a plentiful harvest of Excrements; but also stigmatize, or impresse
this depravity* upon the Implantate spirit of that part, so deeply, that it can
hardly be expunged during the whole after life. All which the Schools, like
mendicants, precarious desume from the brain; and erroneously impute to their
four imaginary Humors, and the defluxion of Rheums. On which Consideration, my
Theory stands point blanck in defiance to the doting tradition of Catarrhs; as
positively denying and wholly subverting their material Cause, receptaries or
places of concretion, efficient Cause, and manner of Generation and Defluxion:
and separating the true Causes, Effects, and method of Sanation, far from the
ridiculous fictions of a Catarrh.

61. By this time, we believe, it is plain and unquestionable, that no salt,
acid, sharp, phlegmatic, or Choleric humor can distill from the brain; but
that, whenever the Influent spirit, polluted with some alien and putrefactive
impression, does arrive at any part of the body; then does nature, without
delay, send thither the Latex, or sourse of serous humidity, to expung this
impression, or at least rinse away the Excrements, there growing from the
depravation of the digestive Faculty. For the Spirit, once vitiated by any
foreign Contagion, wildly rangeth at pleasure through the nerves, arteries,
yea and the very habit of the body; whereupon, the sick seeming to feel as it
were the defluxion, or trickling down of a cold rheum, the brain is
immediately accused as treacherous, and the grand author of this riot and
irregularity in nature. Now since the Latex is sent to the part newly invaded
by this malignant impression, not as the primitive Cause of the evil (though
frequently, by accident, it does foment and aggravate the mischief, and so make
the vitiosity more durable) but as a relief, or stream to wash away the
impression: hereupon have the Schools, to this day, remained doubtful, and
durst never go so far as positively to determine; whether in the Gout the
Catarrb is derived from the head, by the Nerves: or whether transmitted from
the Liver only, by the Veins. And thus evident it is, that the Phlegm and
Choler of the Schools flow not from one fountain, or Cataract; as though the
brain were the Common sewer of all these impurities. Again, as for the last
refuge, whereunto the Schools fly, for protection of their impossible dream of
Catarrhs; namely the Declivity or downwardnesse of the situation of the
members, as in relation to the brain, and the facility of the passages: it may
easily appear to be too rotten and fragile to afford them shelter. Since as in
dead bodies there are none of these respective situations, but only in living;
so also all motion of humors in the body is immediately caused by the Influent
spirit, as the only impetum faciens, and mediately derived from the Principle
of vitality in whose occonomy the Ascent of humors is of no more difficulty
then the descent. For in living bodies, no humor owes its motion downward, to
the declive tendency of its Gravity: but, in impartial truth, to the aim or
direction of that missive power, which levelled it at this or that determinate
part. Hitherto concerning the impression of an External depravity upon the
Influent spirit: it follows that we declare the probability and manner how the
same spirit may conceive, and as it were batch an internal Character, or
domestic tincture of corruption. It comes to pass not seldom, that the Latex
contaminated by the admixture of some foreign Salt, does therewith infect the
Influent Spirit, so that it instantly becomes degenerate from its requisite
simplicity and purity; though not by reason of any external injury of the aer,
offensive odor, sulphurous Fume, etc. but from a breath or blast of Contagion
conceived in the part affected: yea that taking a dislike or abhorrence from
the Latex (as being polluted, and so incapable of its vital irradiation) it
grows enraged and forgeth within itself a character of anger and revenge. After
this the uncivil Latex, like a rude soldier that intrudes himself into
quarters against the will of the Landlord, forces itself into the society of
the offended Influent spirit; and though unfit for its conversation, as well in
regard of its Acidity, as immoderate quantity, yet it still follows and hangs
upon its skirts. In which relation, the most hopeful remedies for most of
these diseases which cause erratick pains, as also for internal Ulcers, must
be Baths, Sudaries, and Stoves or Hot-houses: for by procuring liberal and
profuse sweats, and by that means exhausting the Latex, as the secondary and
fomenting material Cause, they seem more directly perpendicular to health, and
conducible to the pacification of Archeus his worship; then the more
ineffectuall and languid Solutives and Exsiccatives of the Schools..

Vain, therefore, is the story of a Catarrhs arising originally from the
stomach into the head: and its Condensation, Concretion, and Congregation in
the ventricles of the brain. Vain are the descriptions of its Defluxion,
between the coats of the spinal marrow, or between the skull and skin, upon the
Muscles. And, of necessity, vain and deplorable must such Remedies be, as are
administered when the Causes of the Diseases are wholly unknown. Vain also are
Cauteries and Fontanels, for the Revulsion and Exhaustion of Humors, that have
no real existence in nature. And to conclude, vain are the Decoctions of China,
Guajacum, Sassafras, etc. exsiccating Drinks; since the evil arises, at least
is occasionally aggravated by tbe Latex, and must be fomented by any immoderate
quantity of humidity. From whence we have a fair opportunity to collect, that
sober and parsimonious drinking does very much conduce to health; nay to the
cure of Ulcers in the Lungs, as also of the Gout. Since the Latex, which
according to the Primitive institution of nature ought to be insipid, upon the
excessive drinking of eager Wines, such are French, Rhenish, and Sherry, does
acquire a manifest Acidity, or sowernesse, and instantly communicate the same
to the blood; from whence proceed Corrosions, sharp Spasmes and Convulsions,
errattick pains, and chiefly the Gout. But of the history and necessity of
this Latex, we have written a particular Discourse.

62. You may please to remember, that the primitive Material of all concreted
substances, is only Water De rerum naturalium primordiis, per Mechanica
Pyrotechniae experimenta, suo de more, inquirens Author, in tract. de
Elementis; duo duntaxat reperit Primitiva Elementa: Aerem scilicei and Aquam.
(Ignem namque Ens Anomalon, and adnihilationis ordinario capax: Terram vero,
secundarium tantum elementum, sive fructum ex Aqua, virtute seminum, concretum,
eo quod tandem cenvertibilis sit in aquam, per privationem suae essentiae, esse
existimat.) In hanc autem sententiam se incidisse fassus est, exinde quod per
Hermetis ignem didicisset, omne corpus visibile, puta saxum, lapidem, gemmam,
silicem, arenam, marchasitam, argillam, terram, vitrum, calcem, sulphur, etc.
transmutari in Salem actualem: and quod Sal iste, aliquoties cum Sale Circulato
Paracelsi cogobatus, suam omnino fixitatem amittat, tandem transmutetur in
aquam insipidam; and quod aqua ista aequiponderet sali suo, unde manavit. Nec
in contrarium valet, quod imperitus aliquis forsan objiciet; Vitrum esse
ultimum artis subjectum, quodque nec igne nec art deleri, aut in aquam resolvi
unquam possit. Erudietur enim, si Vitri pollinem pluri Alchali colliquaverit,
ac humido loco exp^^uerit; mox totum vitrum reduci in aquam limpidissimam: Cui
si affundatur Chrysulca, add^^o quantum saturando Alchali sufficiat, inveniet
statim in sundo arenam sidere, eodem pondere, quo prius faciundo vitro
aptabatur. Idem etiam sperari possit effectus ex Universally illo Menstruo,
Liquore A^^hahest; qu^ omnia totius universi corpora tangibilia perfect
reducit in aquam diaphanam, absque ulla sui mutatione (i. e. quoad Formam
essentialem, sive nativam seminis dotem) viriumve diminutione. Hujus autem
siupendi sane Magnal^s praeparationem, a Paracelso, vel Basilio Valentino
Monacho olim inventam, and ab Helmontio, veluti Arcanum nemini, nisi dato prius
Sacramenti pig^ore, revelandum, subdole defossam; me aliquando, ubi dabitur
occasio, coram mundo libere promulgaturum, spondeo.
: and all fruits or productions of mixed bodies arise from the same principle.
Let us therefore grant, that the Latex, being naturally insipid, does, upon the
access and fermentation of any seminality, or fructifying tincture, instantly
grow Acide. By example, in the beginning of the Spring, if you make an incision
in the rind of a Vine or Birch tree, near the root, there will distill forth a
very great quantity of thin insipid liquor, which is nothing but the water
freshly attracted out of the earth: but if the incision be made higher in the
stock or branches, then will the liquor be a little Acid. The reason is the
same in the Latex, which being naturally insipid, does, if contaminated by the
contagion of any ferment admixed, acquire a sensible Acidity, and inherit any
foreign quality, or tincture devolved from the vitiosity of our aliment. This
Latex the Schools have wholly neglected, and indeed because they confounded it
with the Urine. It Is a blind and rude method of exploring the secrets of nature,
to make no distinction betwixt the Generatum, or production, and the Materia ex
qua, or material cause thereof; no difference betwixt the Mother and the
Daughter; as if the Muccus ordinarily dropping from the brain by the nostrils,
the salivous humidity of the jaws and tongue, the Water effused betwixt the
omentum, muscles of the belly and the skin, in the dropsy, and the Urine, were
all one and the same matter, namely the liquor we ordinarily drink. The Liver
therefore being misaffected, and invaded by any hostile impression, if it sound
a retreat to the Latex, and call back the streams thereof to its own
assistance; does not convert it into Urine, but makes it the material cause of
oedematous (...), ab Hippocrat. lib. de natura hominis, appellantur tumores
'laxi, molles, indolentes, ad digiti compressionem cedentes, a pituita tenui,
seu frigidtore and humidore part massae sanguineae ortum ducentes.
Tumors, or an Anasarca Anasarca est tertia hydropis species; quam quod
universa corporu moles aqua lenta and concreta suffundatur, Anasarcam and
Leucophlegmatiam (turpiter enim hallucinatur Aretaeus, in 2. de diuturn.
affect. cap. 1. dum discrimen quoddam inter Anasarcam and Leucophlegmatiam
imaeginatur) Graeci nuncuparunt. Illius autem originem and naturam fuse aperiit
Hipocrat. lib. (...).
.

63. I am not a person subject to such extravagancies and wild singularities,
as to affirm, that the Pleurisy, Toothache, and other such maladies, whose
tortures were insufferable, were they not in some sort moderated by their
acuteness, or brevity of duration, are no real Entities. For I too well know,
and lament their tyranny over us. I admit them as Diseases: but oppose the
vulgar tradition of the causes, manner, means, ways, end or destinations of
Catarrhs. Those fictitious and inconsistent causes I deny, and explore other
more real and probable; in whose remove, the direct way to the restoration of
heath does consist. I acknowledge that any man, upon the rupture of an Aposteme
in the Lungs, may die suddenly: yet I positively deny, that a Catarrh is the
cause of this Aposteme, or that death is ushered in by a Defluxion. And with
much more earnestness I deny, that an Aposteme in the Lungs can be generated
from vapors exhaled from the stomach, and recondensed in the brain. For which
reason I account not a Consumption the daughter of a Defluxion of rheum upon
the Lungs; but the genuine issue of their own Archeus seduced into
irregularity, and a depraved execution of the power delegated to his
administration. I conced that the Gout may be praesaged a day or two before the
invasion of its paroxysme from the sensation of the motion of the salt matter
which runs to the joints like a drop of scalding liquor: but cannot allow a
Catarrh to be the cause thereof, since I know assuredly that its material
principles, manner of generation, ways of distillation and places of
concretion and collection, are prodigious figments, irreconcilable to truth.
But the Latex, ordained by nature to wash away the impurities from all parts
official to concoction (like the river Alpheus brought by Hercules to cleanse
the stable of Augeas) is of itself innocent and insipid: but in its course
meeting with the pollutions of saline tinctures, resulting from impure and
inconvenient aliment, it soon degenerates into hurtful and acrimonious, and
breeds Apostemes, Ulcers, and pruriginous maladies, as the Itch, Scabbs, etc. I
cannot fool my own credulity so far, as to apprehend any probability in the
common opinion, that vapors can ascend out of the stomach into the plane of
the brain, be there condensed into water, where is a constant actual heat; and
thence penetrate through the substance and double investment of the brain. Nor
can I shake hands with that impertinent heresy of Paracelsus, that the aer
drawn in by inspiration is carried down directly to the stomach, and other
viscera of the lower belly: but allow that a very small quantity thereof is
insensibly strained through the capillary perforations of the midrife. For in
long compression of the breath, neither any considerable intumescence of the
Abdomen can be observed; nor does the breath, upon its efflation, smell of any
thing contained in the parts below the Midrife. In like manner can no vapors
of Wine or other inebriative liquor, arise up to the head, unless by the
Arteries See Doctor Brown in the second book of vulgar errors. cap. 6. sect.
7. 1 edition.
. For whatever procures vertigoes or giddiness in the head, swoonings and
other intoxicating Accidents, belongs to another Commonwealth, then that
Eutopia of vapors. Nor from the Wembe can vapors be transmitted into the
head; however vulgar Pathologie affirms, that wild and durable perturbations
of the Animal Faculties, and a strong cons^pition of reason, are derivatory
from malignant and narcotiall exhalations arising out of tbe womb. For those
surious motions and actions of the matrix are not to be ascribed to any
sympathy dependent on the necessity of Perspirability; but to the mon^machy or
civil war of that peculiar Monarchy of the womb, wherein women seem to be
strangled by an ascension of some certain globular body, or lump, up to their
throat. This action is a commotion or tumult of the offended spirits residing
in that part, or an error in the government of the Archeus, or uterine
President enraged, to whose arbitary power all parts of the body must do hon
age and conform: as I have amply explained in my Treatise called Ignota actio
Regiminis. For the dominion of which the Womb has over all parts of the body,
is no less absolute or diffusive, then that whereby the Testicles distinguish
a Cock from a Capon, a Bull from an Ox, and a man from an Eunuch; as will in
the Figure of the body, as the blood, flesh, skin, and animosity.

64. But in regard all those disease conceived to proceed from Catarrhs, the
contaminated Latex has obtained a peculiar superintendency or domination over
the other humors of the body, and responds to the nature of Water: therefore
do all Accidents accompanying such infirmities observe their periodicall
exacerbations most toward night; the influence of the Moon, queen regent of
all humane substances, operating those vicissitudes, or causing ebullitions in
us at those hours. And these Accidents display their hostility most upon the
brain, weakened by any native or acquired distemper praeceding: as also upon the
Nerves and Membranes, as parts whose small stock of Vital heat makes them
less able to resist or subdue the impressions of external Cold. And hence is
it, that Consumptive, Hydropick, Gouty and decaying, bodies carry an infallible
Almanac in their bones, presage change of weather, and by the Augurie of their
pains are sorewarned of ensuing tempests: which I have, for that reason,
Christened Tortura Noctis, the torture of night. It is my serious V^inam, and
may be many others, that this way of prognostication had not cost us so dear,
as the sufferance of such intolerable anguish and anxiety. For almost every
week observes unto us, that men once inured to wear the fetters of the Gout,
or tainted with any imperfection of the lungs, yea such as are only troubled
with corns on their feet, are suddenly awakened out of their Profoundest
sleep, by the twinges and cruel mementoes of their infirmities, against change
of weather: and by this smart advertisement can at midnight tell, that Juno
has put on her sable weed of Clouds, and that the unconstant winds are tackt
about to another point of the Compass.

65. Paracelsus was pleased to opinion, that Mercury was Lord Paramont, or
President over the Alimentary liquor, through the whole body: and for that
reason, in another place (de morbis miner alibus) both in name and reality, he
confounds this Planet with the terrestrial Moon.

66 But we, on more substantial and precise grounds, stand assured, that each
nutritive humor of the body does conform to the regiment, and obey the
alterative influence of that seminall part, unto which it is proximly to be
assimilated: nor do the liquid substances in the body hold any correspondence
with the Stars, so long as they are not radically inoculated into the stock of
Vitality, i.e. until, by the irradiation of the internal Sol, or vital Spirit,
they are rarefied and exalted into a finenesse requisite to their participation
of lif^. Which is a convincing argument, that the Marrow in the bones is an
homogeneous part of the body; but no alimentary or liquid substance: since it
is evidently subordinate to the Moon; and the brain, to whose influential power
the bones are subject. And thus all diseases conceived to tyrannize over man,
under the mistaken name of Defluxions, as also the Veneral Contagion, or French
Pox, Contractions of the sinews, torments of the joints, etc. fall under this
one general title or denomination, Tortura Noctis: in this interest, that
their Paroxysmes or periodicall invasions depend upon the motions or
ebullitions of the Latex, are regulated by the influence of our Moon, and
observe their tides or vicissitudes in exact conformity to the various motions,
positions, and configurations or reciprocal Aspects of the Planets.

FINIS.

