A Continuation of the last Occurrences from IRLAND, OR, The Copy of a Letter
sent from Lieutenant Haward, to Mr. Walter Fitz-Williams Esquire, lying near
the Privy Garden in White Hall.

Dated at Duncannon Fort in JRELAND, March. 29. 1642.

Both Good and True.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1642.

Good News from Jreland.
Dear Friends,
YOur courtesies has so tied me that I cannot choose but intimate to you, of
such Occurrences as has has happened to us since our departure from Bristoll,
from whence we departed with 200. men well appointed, and with Colors flying,
arrived at the Fort of Duncannon, in the mouth of the River of Waterford, the
24. of the same, where we found the good Lord Esmond in safe possession of the
Forte, who had endured many a shroud Bickering all the Winter with a Hundred
men; but many of them Sick when we Arrived there, what Joy was in the good old
Lord, you may conceive, having had 1000. Men of the Enemies lying against daily
for many Months before, when we Arrived, The Lord Esmond granted a cessation
of Arms for 5. days, at the reuest of the Rebels, for he always kept them
play, And after that they sent for a Truce for 14. days more, but my Lord
refused, then they desired a Parley with 4. of our best men, with 4. of theirs,
which we accepted of, and as we were marching toward them, came a Messenger
desiring (from Colonel Pierce Butler) that he might meet with my Lord, and
confer with him, but we sent him word, that they had no man of quality, good
enough for him to to confer with, yet if he would come to the Fort, he should
speak with him, but we heard no more of them.

The next day being the 22. of March, our Soldiers being in much want of
bedding or Bed-cloathes, and the Rebels Quarters being little more then Musket
shot from us, we sallied forth, my self and two Lievtenants more, with only
20. Mvsketiers a piece early in the morning, in hope to have driven them from
their quarters, and burnt it, but their numbers were to great for us, yet we
fought with them about an hour, what hurt we did them we know not as yet, we
had only one man of my Squadron shot into the shoulder, they having 9. Colors
flying before us, but very slenderly armed, with some Fowling-peeces, Pikes
made of Dale boards, and some Darts, and of a certain they count their own
cases desperate, not knowing whether to leap into the Fire, or the Water, the
relieving of this Fort has much appaled them, their Gennerall is the Lord
Mon-Garret.

The 26. of this Month, we had another Skirmish, where without doubt we did
them much harm, and received only the hurt of one man, being shot in the
Face, the same day at night the Fellowship of Bristoll arrived, being a Man of
War, with a Pinnace, she having 24. Pieces of Ordnance, and the Pinnace 6.
with 16. Oars, being appointed for this servece.

And on Monday after we appointed to Batter down the Town of Ballihacke, and
passage of both Towns upon the River of Waterfoard, and full of good Pillage
that they have robed the English of, Waterford is revolted, and the River of
Waterford is of that large extent, that it runs through 9. several Counties
in 3. several Arms, and all those 9. Counties are in Rebellion.

Therefore I pray God put into the hearts of the King and Parliament, to
furnish us always with a Ship of good force with a small Pinnace, and to
furnish the Noble old Lord Esmond, with a Regiment, who is the last of those
Valiant old Soldiers that reduced this Kingdom to Obedience, in Queen
Elizabeth's days; And is much awed by all this whole Country, none except the
Lord President of Munster is able to do his Majesty like Service; We hear for
certain by the Country People that the Lord President of Munster has burned
Dungarvin to the ground, a Seaport Town within 12. Leagues of us, And slain
300. of one Captain Wises Regiment, And driven Sir Nicholas Welsh to Waterford
the 28. of March, we removed the Rebels further from us, fired their Quarters,
and burnt some certain housess, and brought away their Corn, we being not
above 250 men have driven from these Quarters 9 Companies with their Colors
flying, blessed be God that fights our Battles, we are very prosperous at
this present.

The 29. of March we sent the great Ship and Pinnace to the passage, and
Balihacke to batter it down the great Ship has bestowed great store of great
shot upon them, what further they have done we cannot know till to morrow, this
is all I can acquaiut you with till my next Letter.

My Captain is come for England to move about a Regiment for my Lord Esmond,
he being in hope to obtain a Livetenant Colonels place, he has promised me to
move for a company for me, he can now report sufficiently of my ability, I
shall entreat you to asist him for me, J doubt not but in due season I shall
be able to give you a testimony of thankfulness, thus having writ unto you by
another Gentleman belonging to the Earl of Ormond, and fearing it might fail,
I have written again with an addition of what has happened since I writ that
Letter, J will not fail you every oppertunity of writing, I request I may be
remembered to your little Gentleman Mr. Morgan, and that I may hear from you
touching the affairs of of our Church and Common wealth, who together with his
Majesty God prosper, which God always bless and prosper you.

Your true and faithful Friend Lazarus Hayward.
Duncannon Fort, March, 29. 1642.
FINIS.

