A Health to all Vintners, Beer-brewers and Ale-tonners, Tapsters, Bezlors,
Carrowsers, and Wine-bibbers, Bench-Whistlers, Lick-wimbles, Downright
Drunkards, Pety Drunkards; Bacc^us Boys, Roaring-boyes, Bachanalians, Tavern
Ancients, Captain swaggerers, Fox-catchers, Pot and halfe-pot men, quart, pint
half pint men, short winded Glasse-men, and in general, to all and every
privy Drunkard, Halfe-pot Companion, Indenturians, etc.
And to all either Good fellows of this our Fraternity, whom these Presents
may concern, GREETING.
Quernnou*

Huc* ku^ pierides.

Castalius or Vinum Hispane^^s*



KNOW ye that we Ralfe Red-nose of Ring-spiggot, in the County of
Fill-pot-lane, together with our dear and wellbeloved Friend, Francis
Fiery-face, of the same Town and County, two of our most dear and loving
Company and Well-willers to any that profess any of the forenamed faculty,
as well Male as Female, by virtue of our Letters of great permission and
charge, given and indented unto us, under the seal and impression of a
Six-penny-Iugge, that all Drunkards that do imprint in our streets, the full
reason of horn continually increasing, whereat reelingly they trip, as in most
places they abound, for which especial care, we do constitute, ordain,
nominate and appoint our well-beloved Fellows, and well-wishers to all
Pot-companies, or to their deputy or deputies, to a^ke, demand, levy, take and
receive one groate as a forfeiture to be paid, of all and every person and
persons, within our liberty aforesaid, that do but presume to ride, saddle,
or bridle our reeling Jade called CVT, upon which demand, if any party, Male
or Female, do confess their fault; then our will and pleasure is, that he or
she, male or female, shall be excused for 2 d. or one Judge of the best Beer
called the OLD DOG, that will hazard or adventure by degrees to creep up into
the Crown Office, there to affront Sir John Barly-corn, being chief Judge of
the said Court, and that upon default of non-payment, if there be but one
Witness to avouch the same, then to pay the total sum of a groat, or two
iugs of the foresaid beer, or else one iug and two pipes of the best
rare-nose. All the which if they, or any of them refuse to pay, in any place of
the said Precincts, according to the premises. Then the aforesaid Well-willers,
their Deputy, or Deputies, shall have authority by virtue of these our Letters
of permission, and charge to distraine, call for, and take two iugs of the
aforesaid beer, or else one iug and two pipes, as aforesaid; drinking them off
in their presence, leaving them to pay, giving and allowing to our aforesaid
thirsty friends for their great care and pains therein taken. To bridle,
saddle, and ride our aforesaid reeling Jade called Cut, wheresoever they shall,
or will come, no man contradicting them. Provided always, that the date of our
Letters of permission and charge, shall continue one whole year to morrow, and
no longer, any thing contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And for the
true performance and execution hereof, we have here caused a Jury of twelve men
to be summoned, whose names are here underwritten.

Given under the great Seal of our Office, In diebus illis Quadragesimo duo,
42.
The Names of the Jurors are as follows.
Tobias Toast. Nicholas Nutmeg. Jeremy Ginger. Simon Sack. Martin Muskadine.
Clement Claret. William VVhitewine. Bejamin Beere-barrell. Abraham
Ale-barrell. Joseph Iug. Peter Pottle-pot. Bartholomew Black-pot
XII. Good men and true, stand to your verdict: The Jurors having given in
their verdict, found that Joseph Judge, and Bartholomew Black-pot, were to
wait and give attendance upon CVT, and his Associates, as well at Midnight,
as at Noonday, wheresoever.

Sealed with Oh I Am sick, delivered by a Bowl and a Broom, In the presence
of Tapster: Fill two Cans more, He that rides Cut next, shall pay the whole
score.
London, printed for Thomas Bates.


