A Ha! CHRISTMAS, This Book of CHRISTMAS is a sound and good persuasion for
Gentlemen, and all wealthy men, to keep a good Christmas.

Here is proved the cause of Free Will Offerings, and to be liberal to the
poor, here is sound and good Arguments for it, taken and proved out of
Scripture, as any has been written a long time.

By, T. H.

LONDON, Printed, for R. L. 1647.

THis Festival and good-time of Christmas, or of our Saviors birth, when God
became man, born of a pure Virgin, when the brightness of the glory became
co^ered with man's nature, when the word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us,
when Christ Jesus came into the world to restore mankind to an everlasting
glorious estate. Again, this very good time of Christ's birth some men do not
greatly desire to have this day sanctified with thanksgiving, nor yet their
poor kindred and poor neighbors feasted with Christian mirth and love, but I
hope th^se men will change their judgment, when it shall please God to
increase faith and knowledge, and it may please God this book may give or show
a little light to their knowledge, for by Gods help we will bring both Scripture
and reason, and that godly and wise Christians of very ancient time have kept
it and maintained it, and therefore I hope that good and reasonable men will
incline to that which is good and right, and first of al you will (...) both
before Christ's coming, and since both for thanksgiving and for feasting on
anoth^r witness* the free will offering and joy, of the Jews for their
deliverance from the plot of Haman by Q. Ester and M^r^^^^^ under God and we
our selves do offer fr^e will offerings of thanksgiving to God Almighty, and
we make merry and feast one another for the deliverance from the Gun powder
Treason and other dangers of late, And see in the 12th. Chap. of Exodus the 14
ver. how God commanded the people of Israel to keep the very type of Christ's
shadowed out in the paschall lamb, these are the words, And this day shall be
unto you for a memorial, and you shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout
your generations by an ordinance for ever, Here is an Ordinance of God Almighty
for his people to keep the type and shadow of Christ, and ver. 16. to have a
holy convocation on the first day, and on the last day, no work must be done
but to dress good cheer, and then shall not we offer free will offerings of
thanksgiving and praise, when the substance of the true pascal lamb Christ
Jesus was borne, and came to deliver all the believing world from hell and
damnation, and by him* we have blessings both spiritual and temporal, Psalm.
110. 3. which is a prophecy of Christ, In the day of thy power shall the
people offer thee free will offerings, and with a holy worshipping, the dew of
thy birth is the womb of the morning, And Levit. 33. we read of a great many
feasts, and the first and last day are to have a holy Assembly, and the people
were commanded to leave some of the fruit of the land and of the corn, for the
poor, and Levit. 35. the people of Israel had a year of lubile wherein they
were to rest and to help the poor the people of God, and had their Feasts and
rests and joy before Christ coming into the world, both by command and by their
free will offering, then let us Christians give God Almighty freewill offerings
of thanksgiving and praise on Christmas day. For the birth of our Savior and
let us remember Christ's poor members upon earth, both poor kindred and
neighbors; and give occasion for them to rejoice with money or feasting. For
in S. Luke 2. 13 there was a multitude of heavenly Angels praising God, and
saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, toward men good will*
then let not us that have this peace of conscience and good will of God our
heavenly Father be backward, but let us give thanks and make good cheer, but
some men will say; how can you tell this is the day, I answer, that it has
been kept many hundred years at this time of the year; and the learned do hold
it was at this time of the year; if that there be ten days difference between
other countries beyond Seas and ours: that is nothing to us. For a thousand
years with God almighty is but as on day, he holds time and times in his
power: therefore let us keep our own countries good times, and show as much
charity on to another as the people of Israel did before Christ, for we have
the promises fulfilled which they waited and looked for by faith: Did not thy
fathers eat, drink and prosper, when they executed judgment and righteousness,
and helped the poor? says the Prophet Jeremiah, to that ungodly and cruel K.
Jehoiakim. so as at a such time as Christmas, those whom God Almighty has
given a good share of the wealth of this world, may wear the best; eat and
drink the best with moderation, so that they remember Christ's poor members
with mercy and charity, and this year requires more charity then ordinary,
because of the dearness of provision of corn and victuals. What if gentlemen of
great wealth should spend a hundred pound in charitable works this year more
then they have coming in, they may help out a dear year, and God Almighty has
promised to be good unto such men, and to bless them with many blessings: and
let every man according to his estate do some good for his Saviors sake. And
then we may sing, that Christ our King was born as this day of a pure Virgin,
of a pure Virgin, and now seeing we are a speaking of Christmas, let us not
be too sad but a little merry and cheerful. Consider what great joy there was
through all the Kingdoms of the great King Ahashueroh, among all the people of
Israel, which were scattered in all the lands of that great heathen King, Ester
9. 20. then Queen Ester the daughter of Abihail and Mordecay the Jew wrote with
all authority to confirm the second letters of Purim, and all this people of
the Jews obeyed Queen Ester and Mordecai, and keep these days of deliverance
from the wicked plot of Haman, and they feasted with joy, and sent portions on
to another, and gifts to the poor: this deliverance from this wicked design of
Haman was a great earthly deliverance, but Haman could not have hurt their
souls, but they might have been saved, but our enemy Satan had and would have
hurt our souls and bodies, and our souls had been accursed and perished, had
not Christ came into the world to redeem them, their deliverance was but to
that Nation, but our deliverance by Christ Jesus coming into the world, and
taking man's nature and condition upon him without sin, the eternal Son of God
by coming into the world, and suffering and making satisfaction for mankind,
has delivered all the believing world, which lay hold on him by a lively
faith: then we Christians have great cause of joy and thanksgiving for the
birth of our Savior, the blessed spirits the Angels were never seen in such
multitudes since that time or before on the earth, praising God in that manner,
and singing as they were that day, the people of Israel which were God
Almighties true Church, were commanded to keep the Feast of the Paschall Lamb
for ever, which was but a type or shadow of Christ; especially until Christ
the Lamb of God came, which took away the sins of the believing world, Exodus
12. 26. and it shall come to pass when your children shall say unto you; what
mean you by this service, ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Lords
Passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when
he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses, and the people bowed the head
and worshipped.

So when our children shall ask us, or think upon Christmas, we may say unto
them, Christ Jesus came into the world to redeem mankind, God so loved the
world that he gave his only son to save mankind, therefore let us be merry in
the Lord, and give thanks to God. Almighty, and be liber all to the poor on
that day, and so leave a good example to our children and successors. For the
Lord is very well pleased with free will offerings of praise and thanksgiving,
and King David says, What shall I pay the Lord for all his benefits to me? the
wholesome cup of saving health I thankfully will take, and on the Lords name
will I call when I my prayers make, And Ps. 118. 21. I will praise thee, for
thou have heard me, and art became my salvation, the stone which the builders
refused is become the head of the corner, this is the Lord doing, and it is
marvelou^ in our eyes, this is the day which the Lord has made, we will
rejoice and be glad in it, and Luke ^. And it came to pass in those days,
that there went a Decree from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be
taxed, and this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria, and
all went to be taxed, every one in his own City, and Joseph also went up from
Galilee out of the City of Nazareth into Judea, into the City of David, which
is called Bethlem, because he was of the house and lineage of David to be taxed
with Mary his espoused wif^ being great with child, and so it was that while
they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered and
she brought forth her first born Son and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and
laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the Inn, and there
was in the same Country Shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over
their flocks by night, And lo, The Angel of the Lord came upon them, and the
glory of the Lord shon round about them, and they were sore afraid, and the
Angel said unto them, fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great
joy, which shall be to all the people: for unto you is born this day in the
City of David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord, and this shall be a sign
unto you, ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, and laid in a
manger, and suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly
Host, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace,
and good will toward men, and it came to pass as the Angels were gone away
from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another let us now go to
Bethlem and see this thing which is come to pass which the Lord has made
known unto us, and they came with haste and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe
lying in the manger, and when they had seen it, they spread abroad the saying
which was told them concerning this child and all that heard it, wondered at
those things that were told them of the shepherds, but Mary kept all these
things, and pondered them in her heart, and the shepherds returned praising and
glorifying God for all the things which they had heard and seen, as it was told
them, here was great joy among the Jews, but in Mat. 2. we read of greater men
among the Gentiles, and of greater joy, and of greater pains and travel to
find out the birth of Christ, and of greater cost of gold and rich
commodities, which may be great joy unto us which were Gentiles and Heathens
before Christ came into the world, as well as they, now when Jesus was borne at
Bethlem of Judea, in the days of Herod the King, Behold there came wise men
from the East to Jerusalem, saying, Where is he that is borne King of the Jews?
for we have seen his s^ar in the East, and are come to worship him, and ver.
10. When they saw the star they rejoiced with an exceeding great joy and when
they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother,
and fell down and worshipped him, and when they had opened their treasury, they
presented unto him gifts, Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh.

Thus we see what love, and joy, and pains, and travel, and great cost, these
wise men thought well bestowed upon their Savior, but now our Savior is gone
into heaven, and is there glorified, and now he is very well pleased when men
relieve the wants of his faithful people for his sake; well then, I say, this
is the greatest deliverance at the first hand by God Almighty that ever mankind
received, and therefore we should return the greatest free will offering of
praise and thanksgiving for it.

Imprimatur,

Gilbert Mabbott.

FINIS.

