Haslerig and Vain Or, A DIALOGUE Between them at their several Conference in
the Tower of London, being a Lamentation of both their vile actions which was
formerly committed by them, with all their damnable plots, against the late
King Charles after their apprehending.

Together with their contrivance against this famous City of London, and now
cursing their miserable condition expecting every day for their Trial.

By T. H,

London, Printed for William Gilbertson.

portrait of a man with a walking cane

A DIALOGUE Between Sir Henry Vain, And Sir Arthur Haslerigge.
Sir Henry Uaine, SIr Arthur you are welcome.


Haslerigge. Not so welcome, for I had rather a gone sick of the Pox to Durham,
then have come well hither,


U. I. so had I to, but we fulfill now the Old Proverb, needs must go as the
Devil drives.


H. Then if needs must, I would the Devil had drove me far enough off before
I had come here to be hanged like a Dog.


U. What hanged Sir Arthur?


H. Why? do you make so strange of it? I knew long ago that would be our end.


U. Good, if you had told me so at Portsmouth, I would have seen you damned
before you should have dril'd me here again but the Proverb still proves sure.
give the Devil his due, and to be hanged is ours.


H. I but sir Henry, who would have thought of this a twelvemonth a go.


U. Thought of it, Faith sir Arthur too many for our sakes as I hear since,
for the Dive^l a one was for us at last, but the Hangman and the Halter.


H. I sir Henry, and those stick close to us now.


U. Too close I am afraid, for I dreamed to night I was going to ride on a Now
Hurdle.


H. Did you but dream it? gad I know it, yet they say oftentimes dreams fall
out to contraries, but they are more liker to prove true now.


U. Why do you think so sir Arthur?


H. Think so. The very boys in the streets give sentence on us already.


U. Why do all people hate us so, worse then T^ade?


H. I Will tell you, The Devil was never again us more.


U. No, because he was always for us, till now at last that he brought us
here, and now he leaves us to shift for our selves.


H. I sir Henry, but that is a sorry shift now. he could bring us in, but he
cannot bring us out, we have stronger Gates to pull down now then we had
about the City, though we ventured our necks for it,


U. A venture do you call it, venture comes of with hazard, but we are not like
to come off at all.


H. So, so, Now you begin to lay all the fault in me.


U. Lay all the fau't in you was it not long of your h^ir-brain with a
horse-pox to you that wrought all the Calamities when you quarreld with
Lambert. that Cutthroat Hanniball which was always for his own ends, as well
as we were. I would have given him one thousand pound more surely to be quiet,
though I had took if from the Widows and the Fatherless, but betw'xt you
both, he after Authority and you after Money, the Devil give ye enough brought
all these sorrows: We that were counted the SuPreem Authority and chief of the
Nations, are now scoffed, scorned and derided by all good and sober-minded
people, bearing our deserved Names worse then Infidels, and tendered as odious
as our actions are infamous and that is base enough of all conscience, and all
our horrid Uillanies dash in our Faces every day, termed Rumpers. Hypocrites,
and Hanniballs, while we are tied here by the necks like wolvs in Chains,
enough to vex any Dog alive.


H. Come come sir Henry be not so wrathful and outrageous, you and I have gone
hand in hand these many years, under (the good Old Cause) in Fraud, Deceit and
Perjury, like two Olive Branches, spreading our Vines and Claws on any good
and honest man's estate, and venters our souls fort as few as any two alive, and
lived together as two friends in a just and Lagall, Reprobate condition
therefore pray fall not out with me now at the last cast, but be patient and
content.


U. P^tient and content sir Arthur. that I cannot be so long as I am alive, and
that will not be long I am sure,


H, Well come sir Henry lets take a turn or two and walk a little,


U. A turn sir Arthur we shall take our turns too soon I am afraid,


H. Afraid sir Henry, I was never afraid in my life, neither of soul nor body,
for if I. had I Would nere done what I did.


U. The Devil was in us when we left Portsmouth, for had we staid there we
had done as good mischief as we did here.


H. I but sir Henry I did always yaune after Authority you know, that by my
consent I Would have nothing done in heaven or in hell, but that I would know of it.


U. I but sir Arthur how did you intend to Govern had you sat upon your Throne
of wickedness?


H. O very well for I would have tolerated all sorts of Religion, had there
been sixteen times as many more.


U. But how would you have paid the Army that held the sword of Uengeance.


H, I Would duble the Excise and Customs.


U. But what if they could not pay it?


H I Would then hang them at their doors.


U. So you might have hanged them all,


H, I had not cared if all had bin hanged so I might have ruled alone.


U. Truly and I had likt your ways very well.


H. Nay sir Henry I knew you could not mislike that.


U, But truly we should have burned the City at that time sir Arthur.


H. Was not I preparing as fast as I could to do it?


O sir Arthur sir Arthur we had accomplished our designs had not that
Parliament Transactor appeard out of Scotland at whose apperition my very knees
did smite against each other worse then Belshazers did at the writing
Menetickel.


I, I sir Henry I knew he was hungry, lingering for a King, like a Lion roaring
for a prey


But why did not you bribe him?


O sir Henry, I would have don ^t but I found that money would no more choke him
then all the Oaths would me,


And indeed sir Arthur you could swear lustily.


I and can still sir Henry for thirty thousand a Year.


That's a brave estate sir Arthur, but now you must part with it.


Truly sir Henry I would as willingly keep it as the right owners are to take
it.


But sir Arthur would you accept of a Colliers place at New Castle?


I as God Iidge my soul would I, any thing in the world to save my life.


Then you are sure to dye sir Arthur?


I would I was so sure to live.


But what if you should P^tition sir Arthur to be hanged at Durham.


I would be glad with all my heart sir Henry for then my estate and I should
never depart.


I but sir Arthur they will not trouble themselves to send you thither.


But what if Lambert would take a bribe and be hanged for you there.


Ah never talk of that sir Henry, for I verily believe he had as live see me
hanged as himself.


But what if you did ransom your self with your estate.


No, no sir Henry I had rather give my life for my estate first, but I shall
loose both it seems.


Then what shall we say sir Arthur, let us sit down in sorrow all the day long:


Nay I believe our Days will not be much longer, Lambert, Lambert the Author
of our misery Cursed be the day that ever he came our society


Nay sir Henry lets not curse one another, For I think we are eursed
altogether.


But as for you and I we have lived too Rebrobate in brotherly Union, like
sons of Perdition these twenty years and odd, and as we have lived
together so let us hang together. and there is an end of the story.


An Epitaph upon sir Arthur Haslerigge, and sir Henry Uaine.
Here lies the body of Haslerigge the late
Grand Traitor to'r King both Church and state
Most impious villain tyrannized over
Three stately Kingdoms 20 years and more.
Murdered his Prince and all his honors blast.
For which due recompense will hang at last.
Here lies the body of Henry Uaine we know
Was traitor both to King and Country too.
Reproach and baseness he will bring to his grave
He lived like a Tyrant and died like a knave.
NOw we are captivitated from all liberty,
For our Treachery,
our high exalting power has a fall.
The records they will tell them what we have do^e o^ late
Against Church and State.
our actions will appear before them all.
Which then will render us as odious
as the tongue of man can tell,
Therefore let we prepare to dye,
and bid the world farewell.
The big'st Record in Urope is not half so large,
As may discharge,
the volum of out actions which will be
Nor can the learned Authors gather to a sum
What we have done,
though twill be seen in roles of infamy
For Generations they will spread
this story over all the world,
That future times may read in lines,
what deeds were done of old.
So farewell all Comits we shall never act.
Nor yet exact
in Uoting up the Customs or Excize,
The selling of the timber in New Forest Wood,
Will cost our blood,
we never shall com again to make a prize
wee've changed our house of Parliament
and in the Tower now does dwell,
But do not think our lodgings in it
is half so good as hell.
Now let all Traitors take a president by we,
Where e're they be,
and know Rebellion is a dangerous thing,
Let Peasants not be Princes but obey the Law,
And stand in awe,
of such a sweet and gracious loving King.
But always study more obedience
in your walking up and down,
Do not contest nor in the least
provoke him to a frown.
Thrice happy worthy Subjects you are in this King
Make much of him,
and render praises to the God on high.
Which has ordained him for you 'twas ye Lords command,
That he should stand
to be a King in glorious Majesty.
And we do council and advise you
ne*r bring your King in thrall,
But faithful be to his Majesty,
so God will bless you all.
FINIS.
portrait of a man with a sword

