A SERMON TENDING TO PEACE.

PREACHED BEFORE His MAJESTY, etc.

At NEWPORT in the Isle of Wight, During the time of this late TREATY.

By WILLIAM HAYWOOD D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON: Printed by Fr: Neile for HENRY SEILE. 1648.

A SERMON OF PEACE.
ROMANS 12. ver. 18. If it be possible as much as lies in you, live peaceably
with all men.


MAny Precepts of Morality the latter part of this Chapter has summoned up
together. Among which there is not any more important, more difficult then this
I have here read you, nor at this time more pertinent. Important it is, for it
comprehends the substance of many Precepts before and after it. Such as, Be of
the same mind one to another: Recompense to no man evil for evil: Provide
things honest in the sight of all men. Not avenging your selves; but give place
unto wrath: I thine Enemy bunger, feed him, etc. And be not overcome of evil,
but overcome evil with good.

Nor this only; but it includes the whole compass of Charity toward men: so
that in this one precept all the Law toward our neighbor appears summoned up.
For as love is the fulfilling of the Law: so peace is the fulfilling of our
love. Love works no evil to his neighbor: And peace multiplieth all good
upon our neighbor. Peace is the complement of all blessings upon the body
politic, as health is of all blessings, on the body natural. As the safety
of our natural bodies consists in a kind of peace among humors, and a union
of all parts and members: So the safety of all Civil bodies, in peace or
harmony among several affections, and the union of all members politic. So
that fulfill this one duty, and fulfill all duties, to the common society of
men belonging. The happiness of private persons is contained in the public:
The happiness of the public (when all is done) will be found to consist in
peace. Live peaceably then, and ye take the readiest way to happiness, both
for your selves, and others, for your private and for the public interest. So
that a more important duty then lies in this Text, can hardly be imagined.

Yet as it is very important, so it is very difficult. That may appear by the two
limitations annexed: If it be possible, and, As much as lies in you. If it be
possible. So that sometimes the work may be neither possible, not yet lying in
us. And yet even then, we are not discharged, till we have done all we possible
may, and all that lies in us, with all the faculties and powers of mind and
body to accomplish it. And the latter of these will cost us difficulty enough;
by which we may take an estimate, how hard a business we are now toward: and
how great need, as of our utmost endeavors, so of our fervent prayers: That
what appears beyond our power, the God of power and peace both, would vouchsafe
to make up, and remove all difficulties from before us.

It is his work we are about. To him that made Heaven and Earth nothing more
acceptable, then to make peace among men; Nor any thing more becoming the
honor of Christianity; for the very end of Christ's coming was to make it. It
was the last blessing our Savior bestowed on his Disciples at his going. Peace
I leave with you: My peace I give unto you. St. Joh. 14. v. 27. The last and
the first, at his coming. For at his birth, it was a main part of the Angels
song, Pax in terris, Peace on the earth. When again he rose from the dead it
was his first salutation, Pax vobis, Peace be unto you: Joh. 20.19. And when he
began first to teach, it was among his first blessings, Beati pacifici, B'essed
be the peacemakers' Himself therefore ye find styled by the Prophet, Princeps
pacis, The Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. By the Apostle, Deus pacis, The God of
peace: Heb. 13. Nay, Ipse, pax nostra, our very peace; who has broken down the
partition wall: Ephesians. 2.14. His Disciples termed in Scripture, Angeli pacis,
Messengers of peace. How beautiful are the feet of them, that bring the glad
tidings of it! Romans 10.5. Sent forth to teach the world with peace in their
mouths, Luk 10.5. known all the world over by this Charter; In this shall all
mers know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another. Joh. 13.35.
And what love without peace? His Gospel therefore we find entitled, The
Gospel of peace; His righteousness, the work of peace; His glorious kingdom,
the Peace that passes all understanding. It Is the general Preface of St. Paul's
Epistles, Grace and Peace be with you. The beginning of the ways of God the
Redeemer, who came to guide our feet into the way of peace; and the end of our
way, the final sum of heavenly bliss, Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace. So that neither to this life, nor the life to come; Neither to
happiness temporal, nor happiness eternal; Neither to God nor Man, to Policy
nor Religion, can ye conceive any thing more agreeable then Peace, or any
Precepts more to be valued, then such as show the way to it.

Not to hold you too long in Prefacing; but to proceed to a division of the
Text. Two parts there appear at first sight in it. First, a duty generally
required, Live peaceably with all men: Secondly, a limitation of that duty,
implying in some cases a dispensation of it, and that two ways expressed, if
it be possible, and, as much as lies in you: In the former General, that is,
the Duty required; ye may take notice of three Particulars; first, the thing
enjoined, namely, Peaceably living; secondly, the parties toward whom it is
enjoined, and they are Men; thirdly, the indifferency or universality of those
Parties, with all men. These three Particulars, together with the two
limitatations annexed make in all five parts of our Text. First, Live
peaceably, secondly, with men, thirdly, with all men, fourthly, If it be
possible, fifthly, As much as lies in you. To proceed orderly, we begin with
the thing enjoined, which is the substance of the Duty, (...), Live peaceably.

Two things would here be inquired of. First, what Peace is, and then what it
is to live peaceably; As touching the first, What Peace is, School-writers
inform us it is, Vnio virtutum appetitivarum, a union of powers appetitive, so
that all creatures capable of appetite, are likewise capable of Peace or
discord, according as their particular appetites agree, or disagree. Now as of
diverse creatures the appetites are diverse, and sometimes repugnant one to the
other; so also in one and the same creature are found different appetites,
betwixt which ma fall out now and then repugnant and contrariety; as betwixt
the sensual appetite and the rational, whereby it comes to pass that one and
the same party other-whiles is out of peace with himself: Hence is it that
Schoolmen make a double degree of Peace, one ad extra, betwixt the appetites of
different parties, which they call concord, or outward peace. Another ad intra,
betwixt the sever all appetites of one and the same party, which they call
mental or inward peace. To the accomplishment of Peace in its perfection, both
these would concur. First, a quiet of our own hearts within, that our
affections be not divided among themselves, by running after contrary
appetitites. And secondly, quieter concord with our neighbors without, that
their affections contrary to ours, divide us not against them. Of these twain,
the latter in our Text seems principally intended, namely, outward peace, or
concord, for it is, Live peaceably with men, and yet the inward may not be
excluded, because unless a bosom peace be well cherished, external peace is
quickly broken: Inward tranquillity (says one) is the ground of outward, unless
our domestic appetites amongst themselves be at unity among our neighbors, we
cannot choose but jarr and breed dissension. Whence it follows, That no evil
man can rightly fulfill this precept of our Text, because such an one is
distitute of inward peace, his conscience ever and anon raises tumults within
him; his reason and his sense distract him several ways, and he obeys two
Masters, with others therefore he can hold no constant friendship, who is so
unstable and at variance with himself, Non est pax impiis, There is no peace
says my God to the wicked, Isay 57.21. How can there be? While their bosoms
within, are like a troubled sea, whose waves cast up mire and dirt? And yet an
appearance of peace there may be for a time, as betwixt Herod and Pilot there
was (you know upon what occasion) but as true friendship that cannot be, which
is not founded in goodness, no more true peace: for peace and friendship go
together: False peace and not to be trusted is the friendship of wicked men,
for while they pursue each one the pleasure of his sensual appetite, to have
their fill of these temperall good things (things which cannot be enjoyed by
many) needs must they fall sometimes upon desire of the same honor, or profit,
or pleasure, which diverse cannot share between them, from whence arises
envy, trouble, and discord, driving all peace out of doors.

To give you therefore the right Peace here discribed: It is such a Peace as
preserves, first, our own hearts and affections undisturbed within. And
secondly, upholds lasting concord and agreement with our neighbors without.
Both these would be had, for to keep outward correspondencie and not inward, to
make show of Peace in our behavior while our hearts are fraught with envy and
malice, what can be worse hypocrisy? And to keep inward peace, without any
outward signs, as great an indecorum, if not impossibility; for how can any
think his conscience should be at peace with God, whose actions are not
peaceable toward men? He that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how
can be love God whom he has not seen? says St. John: and he that keeps not
peace with his neighbors with whom he has not always to do; how can he keep
peace in his own affections with which he has ever to do? Both kinds therefore
must go hand in hand: And so ye see in part what Peace is.

Next we demand what it is to live peaceably? What should it be, but to
dedicate our lives and labors to the maintenance and propagation of this
Peace? not only to preserve Peace where it is, but to introduce it where it is
not. Nor to restore Peace alone, when it is lost, but to continue it after it
is found; nor to cheerish Peace only, abiding with us, but to hold it fast when
it would part from us, and when it is gone, to pursue and seek after it, never
to rest while we have found it. Inquire pacem (says the Psalmist) seek peace,
and Pacem persequimini, follow after peace, Heb. 12. Be instant, and seek
earnestly as ye would for some precious Jewel being lost, or some dear friend
parted away in displeasure; and when ye have found it, make much of it: nourish
it, protect it, strive to prolong and enlarge it; all this is comprehended in
(...), not only to obtain, and purchase, but to maintain and propagate Unity
all we may, and to look that our Peace be right and orderly, without deformity,
schitme, or partiality, without hypocrisy, oppression, or injury, to live
particular, without inconstancy, or giving over: well therefore rendered, Not
have peace (as some Translators read it) but live peaceably, that is, continue
in Peace.

Many and weighty are the labors comprehended in this, word (...), Live
peaceably, it is but a short saying, but very tedious and wearisome offices it
requires; one while we are to study all things that may please and reconcile,
another while to take away all that may distaste and give offense. Sometimes
all manner of molestations are to be endured, and we must not be weary of our
patience; and sometimes our own right yielded up to mitigate other men's
impatience. Above all the manners and dispositions of those we deal with would
be observed, that we offend not unwittingly, many indignities are to be put up,
many affronts fo given, many injuries and unkind speeches buried in oblivion,
and all little enough to make up this duty of living peaceably.

Nor is it a business thus labourious only for the practice, but general also,
for the obligation, As live peaceably with all men: So all men whosoever ye are
think it your duty thus to live. It Is a precept not for mean men only, who are
liable to suffer injuries, but for great and mighty ones specially who have
power to do injuries; nor for inferior people alone, who live under then
shelter of Peace, but chiefly for Governors and Magistrates who have the
custody of Peace; nor for learners only, whose dissentions are often out of
ignorance, but special for Teachers, who can spread dissension by their
knowledge: For all men, and of all sorts, it is a needful duty. That neither
their meaness make them despair of seeking Peace, nor their greatness render
them careless how they break Peace. For (...) here stands plural, that is
indiffinite, and general. All men by all means, to endeavor this peaceable
living.

Y^s ye will say, with whom we are able we are willing, peaceably with God,
peaceably with our own consciences, peaceably with our family within doors, it
may be; but this is not enou^h: the peace here enjoined, is ad extra; not
within doors only, but without. Peace with our selves and our own houses, yea
and peace with other men too. That's the next Point of our division onward, viz.
The parties toward whom this duty is enjoined, it is (...) Peaceably with men.

And with good reason have we the parties thus plainly expressed, least any
should boast (as some do) of their inward peace, while we see no outward fruit.
At peace with God, and their own consciences, O that they are! sure of their
election, no men more; and yet so unquiet with their neighbors, so full of
carping, censuring, wrangling, and fault-finding, so little peaceable
outwardly, as no men less. Are these the sons of peace think ye, or any friends
to it, who for an unkind word, can treasure up many years malice? For crossing
them in their fond opinions, raise slanders, spread libils, practice all
mischief to undermine their brethren, or make them odious: for discovering some
dislike of their faction, fall to hostility, rob, and spoil, and pursue with
the sword, men under the same Laws, and Religion with themselves? And yet many
of these love God with all their hearts, that they do, and are so possessed with
his Spirit, forsooth, the spirit of Peace that they cannot err again; A likely
matter doubtless, that the spirit of Peace should abide in their hearts, whose
works tend to nothing but dissension? Show me thy faith by thy works (says St.
James) so may we say, Show us your inward peace by the outward fruits of it;
witness your love to God by your love to your neighbor, If not, never talk of
regeneration and peace made with heaven, while so little tokens of it appear
upon earth. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and by the
disposition of the heart man works; if no peace in the works, no peace in our
words or speeches, then none in the heart, questionless: Never therefore boast
of Peace, other where seated, unless ye have peace with men.

With men: And that every way; with their affections, and with their judgments
with their purposes, and with their persecutions, with their conceptions; yea,
and with their opinions, if it be possible.

And yet where we speak of opinions; worth noting it is, what Aquinas tells us,
That Peace is properly a union of parts appetitive, not of parts intellective.
If we vary in opinion one from another, this ought not to breed variance in
our wills by and by, were men, as they should be, peaceable. But because most
people are wedded to their affections, making opinions and all, bend after
their sensual appetites; therefore where they find others differing in
opinion, immediately they make a rent in affection too, all because their own
opinions are too much affected. Whereas it becomes Charity, not to follow the
sway of our sensual appetites and affections, but to be governed by reason.
And to interpret the opinions of others with favor, so long as they are not
dangerously destructive to the Christian faith, or the common quiet. Nay, a
peaceable mind will abate somewhat of the stiffenesse of his own judgment for
peace and charities sake, and deny his own wisdom in matters of less
importance, to salve other men's folly. And this makes the precept of our Text
very difficult, for what more various, then the opinions of men? Tot homines,
tot sententiae; Easier it seems to have peace with wild beasts, peace with
diseases and furies, peace with winds, and Seas, then with men in this sense;
And yet as far as divine truth, and the public safety permits, we are to
labor after this peace also, so we can in any fort reconcile men's meanings to
the truth, or bear their untruths, without peril of the Churches disturbance,
we are to endeavor peace; not with men only, but with the affections, the
judgments and opinions of men.

With the judgments and opinions of men; but yet not with the wrongfulnesse of
their judgments, nor the error of their opinions: no, take heed of that. It is
live peaceably with men: not with the vices, and corruptions of men; but with
their persons, and with the persons live peaceably as we ought we cannor,
unless we be at strife with their corruptions. He that rightly loves the
nature, hates the depravation of what he loves; and he that is a true friend to
such and such parties, he can be no friend to that which destroys and marrs the
parties. Think not your selves therefore tied to consent to the errors of men.
Sooth them not in their vices: nor with those false prophets in Ezekiel, sow
pillows to the elbows of sinners; or cry peace, peace, to those whose just
destruction is threatened from heaven. But setting their vices, and dangerousing
agements a side, have all peace with the parties, bear no manner of hatred to
the man, however ye abhor the wickedness of the man, but pity him in his
person as your brother, endeavoring to cure him, and set him right, preferving
all charitable friendship in your hearts toward him; how ever for the
soundness of his future peace, ye be constrained sometimes, to suppress all
outward tokens of present peace. Nor think it enough that you stand thus
charitably affected to some few, whom you can well brook, nay there follows
after the parties, the indifferency or universalitie of the parties, Live
peaceably not with men only, but with all men; which is the third point of our
division.

With all men: That is, not with our friends, or Benefactors alone; why who
does not so? But with our very Enemies and persecutors. For this is right
Christian perfection, to love those that hate us, and return good to these that
hurt us. Cum his qui pacem oderunt, pacificus eram, (says the Psalmist) with
such men have I labored agreement, who when I spoke unto them thereof, made
them ready for battle. Psalm. 120.6. And to do our text right: this comes home
to the meaning of the Apostle. For the believing Christians in Rome to whom St.
Paul wrote, were but a small party, in comparison of those Infidels, Pagans,
and Jewish Proselites, wherewith the world then abounded, from whom because
litile quiet could be expected, if they made open profession of their belief,
he wills them to avoid all visible scandalls, and as much as in them lay, to
have peace with these of a different faith, giving no offense neither to the
Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God, for if you love them that
love you only, what reward have ye, and if ye salute your brethren only, what
do ye more then others; Nay, live peaceably with them that would have no peace,
overcome their evil with your good, and convert the bitterness of their
malice, into sweetness and concord, by the abundance of your kindness and
peaceable carriage; have peace not with your acquaintance only, but with
strangers and aliens; nor with good men alone, but with evil too; nor with
quiet natures and none else, but with froward and perverse; nor with friendly
neighbors that use you well, but with cross and contentious ones, yea with
your enemies, oppressors, and persecutors, never so far estranged, in
affection, purpose, or Religion, do as much as in you lies to have peace with
all men.

And good reason for it, both in general and particular. In general ye are
commanded to love all, and consequently to your power to agree with all: If no
agreement never talk of love; Peace is the fruit of love, and therefore a mong
fruits of the Spirit, set by and by after love, Gal. 5.22. As far as your love
extends, therefore your peace should extend, none to be excluded from the
limits of your concord; because none to be excepted out of your love your
neighbor as your self, that is, every man as your self: And if love may not be
denied to our enemies, then not Peace neither. Servants be obedient to your
Masters, not to the good and gentle only, but even to the froward (says St.
Peter) for this is thankworthy, if for conscience sake ye endure grief, and for
the love of peace be content, not only to do well, but to suffer evil too.
This in general.

In particular. There is not that condition of men to be produced, for which
some reasons and inducements appear not to invite us to peace: Are they our
friends, our acquaintance, family, or alliance, why, what a shame is it to fall
out with such? It Is like the jarring of humors in one and the same body, which
usually foreruns sickness and death; so is it if men of the same lineage, and
blood, the same country and breeding, the same order, profession, or Religion
shall be at emnity; Are not these bonds sufficient to keep us from hatred? With
whom do we think to have peace, if civil relations, if sacred knots and
obligations cannot hold us in. Are they strangers to us? so much the more to be
honored and pleased that they may not speak or think ill of us whom we shall
meet but seldom; Are they our betters? take heed how we provoke them, they
have power on their side, or may have quickly; Are they our inferious? pity to
contend with such weaklings, whom be their cause right or wrong, we in respect
of our mightiness shall still be thought to oppress; Are they our enemies, and
such as have wronged us? so much more glorious the victory, to maintain peace
with them that hate peace, and to overcome their evil with our good; Are they
foes to our Religion, enemies to the truth of Christ, men of reprobate and
wicked manners? have as little conversation with them as you may, but have
peace notwithstanding; to shun them ye are allowed, ye are not allowed to
strive with them: the like may be said of the worst of our Persecutors,
Infidells, Schismatics, Athiests, Incendiaries of Church or State: though you
are to beware contagion from them, yet to your power preserve Peace and Charity
with them; pray for them, revile them not, enter not into open contentions and
comparisons with them; let them not in any case fire you into impatience and
strife; but endeavor with all meekness of wisdom to win them home, and draw
them to the right. No unreasonable doctrine it is therefore, though it be a
difficult one. Live peaceably with all men.

Yea, but how if no peace will be had unless I partake of men's wickedness? No
living in Bethel unless we will worship the golden Calves? No stopping the
mouths of wicked Elders, but by giving up our Chastity, as poor Susanna was
put to it? No appeasing the unruly multitude, unless we will affirm an impious
lie? which was the cause of Calib and Joshua among the ten Spies. No scaping
the rage of the people, unless we assist them in setting up a new fangled
Religion after their fancy, as Acon was constrained to do, shall we make light
of our conscience, and forsake God and his truth for our quiet sake? No, there
is no such necessity laid upon you, ye are not so straight laced, there
follows a difpensation in the Text when such cases falls out, and that not a
single one, but a double, If it be possible, and as much as lies in you. That
brings us upon the fourth General of our Division.

If it be possible. So then it is apparent sometimes it is not possible. And as
much as lies in you. So that there are seasons when you can do no good upon
them. A twofold exception there appears therefore from this general rule. One
rising from the nature of things themselves. If the difference be such as
cannot be reconciled with safety to a good conscience, then look to your
conscience, let peace go. That ye have in, If it be possible. Another from the
measure of the parties ability if it exceed not our strength, if it fall
within our compass; and if it do not, why yet we are bound, as far as our
ability reaches howsoever. And that ye have, in quantum in vobis, as much as
lies inyou. If one of these will not take place, the other may; if the work of
peace in it self be not possible, if we can^^^ reconcile those who are to be
gained with nothing but the (...)ur souls, yet at least, Quantum in vobis, that
is possible; we may do still as much as lies in us, though toward us
outwardly, such adversaries will have no peace, yet inwardly we may have peace
toward, them; though the complete perfection of the work they will not permit,
yet the endeavor of the work so far as are able, in us they cannot hinder; And
that shall suffice to discharge us. Of these two conditions, therefore briefly
in their order. And first of the former, If it be possible.

A form of speech this is which implies often difficulties in the business;
and sometimes impossibility; difficult where the parties to be reconciled are
froward, and self-willed enemies to Peace in David's language. Impossibility
where no agreement will be had, without loss of a good conscience: Where Gods
honor, or the administration of Justice, or the discharge of our calling lies
at stake, so that we cannot have peace with men, unless we will be irreligious,
unjust, or unfaithful. In the former case where peace is only difficult; that
should stir up our diligence the rather; endeavor with so much the more
patience, and unwearied industry, to overcome the frowardness of those we have
to deal with; and where so precious a Jewel as Peace is to be compassed, with
expense of our labor or our substance, there spare for no cost or pains. But
where it is impossible to a servant of God, where nothing will do it but the
sale of a good conscience, there rouse up our courage, and prefer not outward
peace before inward; men's contentment, or our own temporal commodity or
safety, before Gods honor, our souls quiet, and the public good. But it will
here be demanded, how we may know when Peace is possible, when not: Six cases
are mentioned by some Divines, ye may refer them to the three heads aforenamed,
of Religion, Justice, and Faithfulness in our calling. Of Religion first. God
himself (in case his public worship be endangered) enjoins us flatly to break
the peace. If thy brother the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter,
or the wife of thy b^some, or thy friend, which is as thine own foul, entice
thee secretly saying, let us go and serve other gods which thou shall not know,
etc. Thou shall not consent unto him, nor bearken unto him, neither shall thine
eye ^itty him: (...) not spare, nor conceal him, but thou shall surely kill
him, Thy (...) ^all be first upon him, and afterward the hand of all the
people, Deuteronomy. 13.6. Thus ye are to understand it, in case of temptation to
manifest Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heresy, or Apostacy, from the true faith and
worship of God: we can have no peace, nay, we can have no mercy; we are not
allowed to spare and conceal the party so tempting us, but deliver him up to
just punishment, be he never so near, or dear to us. Secondly, where our selves
are persecuted for Religion, or Virtue, or obedience to Gods Law in any kind,
and there is no way of satisfying our persecutors, or delivering our selves
from trouble, but by denying our faith, yielding up our virtue, or violating
our obedience to Gods Commandments. In these two cases, the one offensive, the
other defensive; for preservation of our Religion, and our duty to God no peace
possible.

Two other cases follow, which belong to Justice. One where we are passive, or
those who are one with us: and we are violently assaulted contrary to Law and
equity. We may then break the peace for our own preservation, in defending our
selves, so we do it Cum moderamine inculpate tutelae, go not beyond what is
needful to our honest defense, or theirs who depend on us, as our wives,
children or family. The like holds when we are violently handled, because we
will not join with others in breaking Peace, and trampling down Justice. Cast
in thy lot among us: We will find all precious substance, and fill our houses
with spoil, Prove. 1.13. Thus where in defense of Justice to our selves, and
our own private, being innocent, and against wrongful Authority, our lot is to
be passive. Another case may fall out, wherein it becoms us to be active,
though ourselves, in our particular interest suffer not: and that is, where we
see our innocent neighbors wrongfully abused, and distressed to extremity by
lawless hands; we may there rise up in rescue of oppressed innocence, and do as
much in our neighbors case, as we would wish done in our own. Thus Lot
resisted the Sodomites in behalf of the Angels whom they invaded with violence:
And Moses succored the Israelite striving with the Egyptian, Exodus 2.12. And
thus every good man, armed with wealth and power, may, and ought to stand up in
defense of the poor widow and fatherless, against their tyrannous oppressors.
Nor are they breakers of the peace in so doing: but these cruel grinders of
the poor, whom they resist.

These two belong to Justice. Two cases more remain which concern faithfulness
in our Calling. One where we are Magistrates, with power sufficient in our
hands, and have the custody of the public peace committed to us. There as in
defending the innocent we must be stout; so in chastising the guilty not
timorous, nor suffer dangerous offenders to escape unpunished, for fear of
disquieting our selves or them. The peace is rather broken by tolerating such
monsters, then by our stirring to correct them. The like is to be said for
lawful officers of Justice, Sherifes, Bay liffs, Sergeants, Constables, being
lawfully deputed by right and authority from their Prince, and Country, they
may and must break the peace with those they go to arrest or apprehend
according to their Office; if without breaking the peace it may not be done. To
this head ye may assign all the work of the Souldiary in a lawful war;
Commanders, Captains, or common Men; for what are soldiers, if duly called,
but legal executioners of Justice upon rebellious offenders, whom Supreme
Authority has rightly condemned? This is one case of fidelity in our Callings;
where in protecting the innocent, or punishing the guilty, we are constrained
to open war. Another is in reproving and admonishing transgressors, a war more
private; and this in some degree belongs to every man by his general calling,
as a Christian, and a debtor of Charity to all men: for it is a direct charge of
Almighty God, Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him, Levit. 19.17. And if thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell
him his fault betwixt thee and him. Matthew. 18.15. where we see our neighbor in
deadly peril of his soul, we may and must rebuke him, and not fear breaking
the peace with him, so the manner of our reproof be charitable and discreet,
and the occasion probable, to do good by our reproving. But Ministers of Christ
if we be, and so have a special calling to reprove, Necessity is then laid
upon us, and woe be to us if we be silent: afraid we must not be to speak, where
its likely we shall do not hurt, how little hope soever there be of do^ng good.
Toward those under our charge, if it be, the bond of our partleular calling
lies heavy upon us then. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman over the
house of Israel, Ezekiel. 33.8. When I threaten the wicked, if thou speak not to
warn him: he shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy
band: Then whether it be likely by our reproving to amend, as David mended by
Nathans, or likely rather for our unfaithfulness to be enraged against us, as
Ahab against Michaiah, and Herod at St. John Baptist, yet upon the Lords errand
we poor Ministers must go, come life or come death, come peace or come war,
only where its probable we shall endanger others by reprehending, and fire
offenders into more mischief, there both charity and discretion allows us to
be silent. In all other cases to have peace with known sinners, is to have war
with God, and our own consciences. Nor fear we to be charged for
Peace-breakers, in troubling the dangerous ease of wicked livers; it is they
that break the peace, not we; who fear not to break the Laws of God, says
Ambrose. Who was it troubled Israel, think you, Ahab or Eliah, or who to be
blamed for disquieting the land in Zedekiahs time? Jeremy or the seditious
Princes of Judah, that would not endure Ieremies message from their Maker? Nay,
he that transgresses breaks the peace (says Chrysostom.) He that reproves
transgressors (specially Gods Ministers) does but his duty. And so ye see the
six Cases wherein at all times it may not be possible to have peace with all
men. Howbeit in all these cases, and in all others imaginable, one thing
remember: Though you be forced to break the peace outwardly, preserve it
inwardly; though in rebus ipsis, ye be compelled to strive, and in word or deed
to have contention, yet in heart be at peace: Still be prepared inwardly with
hearty love and readiness to agree, when ever the offense outward shall be
removed. And this is our Qumtum in vobis, the second limitation: As much as
lies in you. Though it be not ever possible, yet as much as lies in you, live
peaceably with all men. That is the first and last part of our Division.

A limitation we have here, not to be spared at any hand, we cannot say, if it
be possible, is proviso enough; nay, even when it is not possible to have peace
on both sides, somewhat lies in us, still to be done, that there may be peace
on one side. That long of us it may not be, the knot of unity is broken. If it
be possible, had that only been said; why then in any of the cases
aforementioned, or in any like; we should have thought our selves, upon a
little trial, clearly at liberty. Being no longer possible to make peace, let
go the reins to strife, never seek farther means to agree, but if peace succeed
not at first offer, wrangle, and brawl, and break Charity with all
bitterness, and never have done. Nay: Even there, where ye cannot agree; do
yet what lies in you to agree: Seek peace, and ensue it still, even when the
Sword of War is in your hand. In this kind it is ever possible to fulfill the
Apostles precept: Have peace with all men. That is, do what lies in you
toward it. To settle perfect peace on both sides is not ever in our power.
Concord, as it is betwixt two parties at the least, so upon the good will of
both parties it depends. Unless both sides yield and meet, no true concord.
Wherefore if one party continue perverse, perfect peace is a thing impossible:
yea but Quantum in volis, that is not impossible. There may be peace, on one
side, one party may be willing to agree, and do all that lies in him toward
it. And then doubtless, it is no more long of him, he has fulfilled this Text,
and lives peaceably with his Neighbor, as far as is possible on his part. But
ye will ask, What means are to be used? Or when may we persuade our selves, we
have done what lies in us to live peaceably? Sundry Rules are here given by
sundry Authors. I shall point you briefly to some of the principal by way of
Application, and so commit you to God.

First then, where our selves only are injured, Gods honor, and the public
not endangered: there by our own private wrongs sit we down. Forgive, forget
and put up without more ado; seek no manner of revenge for such. For as the
former clause, If it be possible, provides for the glory of God, and the common
welfare, that the public take no wrong. So, as much as lies in you, provides
for safety of our own souls, that in prosecution of private injuries we loose
not Charity, and so loose Heaven. If therefore he be a froward Enemy, and
difficult to be won, do not you sit down by and by, and say; Peace is no more
possible, I am dispensed within this quarrel; But assay with all loving
offices to win him, and do to the utmost of what lies in you. Is he weak? Bear
with him. Captious? give him no offense. Is he humoursome? observe times to
please him. Is he over-talkative? say little to him. If hasty to anger,
provoke him not. If stiff upon what he conceives his right, part with some of
yours. If with good usage to be won; cease not heaping all manner of kindness
upon him. If with yielding to be wrought on, submit and give place, yea though
your cause be the better, so the public suffer not. If none of all this will
do, yet still pray for him, love him, hope the best; give not over by the
mediation of others to gain him, though your personal endeavor be fruitless.
Thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, and being strong in love, to
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves.

Singular to this purpose is that memorable Protestation of St. Bernard. I, my
brethren, what ever you do, am determined still to live peaceably, with you,
and to love you, how little soever beloved of you: I will cleave to you, though
I find you unwilling; Nay I will cleave to you, though my self be unwilling.
Long since have I chained my heart to yours, in the firm bond of Charity, that
steadfast knot, that falls not away; with those that be turbulent, I will be
calm; with those that trouble me, meek and patient, like one no way troubled.
At all times will I give place to wrath, that at no time I may give place to
the Devil. Those that are intractable, will I weary out with friendly
offices. Them that are unthankful, will I lade still with more benefits. Those
that despise me, will I not cease to honor. In ill language I will go away
with the worst. In good language I will strive to have the best; And even those
that revile me, shall for my mild behavior be forced to admire me, if not
commend me. This is the voice of a Soul, fully bent on the discharge of this
Text. And he that is as ready to do all this as to say it; we may be confident
comes very near the Apostles meaning in this place.

That these Lessons appear not too hard for us, take notice of the fountain
virtues, from whence they proceed. And those are, Humility, Love, and
Patience; Three virtues, which well settled in us, would take away all strife
in the world, and make up our Quantum in vobis abundantly. Humility first would
teach us to stoop to inferiors, and though our cause be the better, yet to
yield for Peace sake, and the common benefit, to men in a worse: Bear ye one
another burdens (says the Apostle) and so fulfill the Law of Christ. Galat.
6.2. Bear a burden he cannot well, that will not stoop to take it up 3 Agree
with his Adversary, he will not easily, who is high minded, and despises his
Adversary, disdaining to incline and bend to men in virtue, or power, beneath
him.

But Love removes this difficulty; Love as it covers a multitude of offense,
so it can bear with a multitude of infirmities; teaching men to look not every
one on his own things, but on the things of others. Not to be wise in our own
eyes, or stiff in our own judgments; that is, to please our selves, but every
one to please his neighbor for his good to edification. By love we set our
selves in our neighbors stead, accounting our selves one person with him,
esteeming our neighbors benefit, ours, his grievance, ours, and so doing in
all respects, as we would with done to our selves; such love crowns our
humility: when the Apostle therefore had exhorted the Cal^ssians to humbleness
of mind, he adds to make sure work, Above all things put on Christ, which is
the bond of perfectness, Col. s. 3.14.

Charity being well put on, will lead us to patience and long-suffering, the
hardest burden of all three. But to love nothing is hard; How many
unkindnesses, and unthankful carriages does love teach Parents to bear
patiently from their children? It is no love indeed that is not long suffering.
By this we draw near the semblance of Gods love, who is kind to the
unthankful and the evil, making his Sun to shine upon the evil and the good,
and sending rain upon the just and unjust. By Patience we are enabled for the
most needful work of all to the continuance of Peace, namely, not avenging our
selves: for of the two, more guilty is he of strife, that renders evil (says
one) then he that offers evil. He that does wrong seldom thinks it wrong, his
insolence or his ignorance persuades him it is but right; but he that requires
wrong, is persuaded it is evil he has suffered and evil he resolves to
render, so he confesses the wrong: Somewhat worse of the two therefore it is,
to requite injury, then to offer it, worse for Peace, if not for conscience.
The Proverb there holds true, That the second blow breaks the peace, not the
first: for were we patient in taking wrong, and rendered not evil for evil,
all strife would shortly be at an end, the fire would go out of it self.

Now if with all our Patience, and Love, and Humility, we cannot win our
adversaries, yet we are not discharged, This Quantum in vobis reaches further
still. To our Patience, we are to add Perseverance, Not to be weary of well
doing, that is, of suffering evil with patience, but hold out in our meekness
and forbearance, still offering reconcilement, still ready to forgive and
agree, if our adversaries never so late will come in, though we are smiten on
one cheek, turning the other; though we have lost our coat, ready to part with
cloak and all; so Peace may be found in the end; and if no peace come yet never
give over praying and endeavoring, and trying all possible means, that so the
fault may not lie on our sides, but that it may appear to the world, we have
done to the utmost of what lies in us; and having done that, refer the event
to God, Saying, O Lord, we are ready to do and to suffer for the love of Peace
whatsoever thou shall enable us: But if for the punishment of our sins, and the
chastisement of this Nation, it be thy pleasure still to withold so great a
blessing, yet give us hearts always detirous of peace, ever more patient and
acknowledging our strips lighter then we deserve. But if our tears and
supplications after such a length of suffering may find any acceptance with
thee; be pleased, O Lord, to defer the blessing no longer; but say to the
destroying Sword this day, It is enough. Stop the issues of blood, and heal the
wounds of this fainting Kingdom: Soften the most obdurate hearts that block up
the way. Thou that art the God of Peace, command peace, make it thine own work.
So bless this Treaty, that it may answer the hopes and desires of thy poor
servants; And that our lives and conversations may answer those vows and
promises of amendment and thankfulness, which upon granting our desires we have
made to thee; that so peace with our Brethren may further the peace of a good
conscience, and eace of conscience lead us in due time to the peace of thy
Kingdom, even that Peace which passes all understanding. To which we beseech
him to bring us, who has shed his most precious blood to puchase it for us. To
whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, etc.

FINIS.

