AD POPVLVM: OR, A LECTURE TO THE PEOPLE.

By John Tailor.

printer's or publisher's device

^ Oxon may 20th.

Printed in the Year 1644.

Ad Populum: OR, A LECTVRE TO THE PEOPLE.
YE dull Idolaters, have ye yet bent
Your Knees enough to your Dagon-Parliament?
When will ye give us liberty to say
Yee'r reconciled to the Apocrypha
And believe Bell an Idol? Do ye yet
Discern the Footsteps of the Small and Great
In the ashy Pavement, who, while ye stand
Half sterved by, devour the Fat o'th Land?
Gross Ass of Issachar, poor hackney Clown,
Betwixt two Burdens will thou still couch down?
Has not the Son of Beor, that false Seer
Yet rid thee low enough, but thou must bear
Repeated Loades? how truly art thou brought
Into a straight, now, where no humane thought
Of turning either way can cherish't be?
When will thou see the Angel and speak free?
Balaam enraged, thrice smote his tired Ass,
But had no Sword, he wished for one. Alas!
Thy Rider need's not wish, his Hand does hold
A two-edged Blade, with which having switch't thee old,
Lean, Blind, and Lame, that thou do groan beneath
Thy Cares, thy Bowels he will make his Sheath.
And much Good do it ye with your Misery:
Never did a fond young Amorist long to lie
By's Mistress side so much, as you to be
Possessed of your beloved Calamity.
And faith She has paid you, Sculler, plucked you bare,
Not left you Eyes, nor Teeth, nor Nails, nor Hair:
The Kingdoms Bridge-Politique is broken too,
And not your Lecturers only snuffle now;
The Cancro almost is Epidemicall.
Be this my prayer, may they so prosper all,
Who with unworthy private base Intents
So run a Whoreing after Parliaments:
For it is concluded by the graver Bench
That Babylon's Strumpet's now the sounder Wench.
Good heavy Mule, you were too well, when ease
And happy plenty from the Land and Seas
Dropped on your head, which kind heaven rained down
By th'blessed Influence of a Monarch's Crown:
But longed to try which were the better Thing,
Five hundred Tyrants, or one gentle King.
Tell me, experienced Fools, did not your days
Glide smoothlyer on, when in your harmless Plays
Ye Halterd Finch? Christmas games i th Country.
sold Salt fish to the Court?
And Bob'd your Brother gently, but in sport?
When ye had Shorter Sermons, Longer Prayers?
And sought the good Saint Dennis, not your Mares?
When the plumpe Dumpling (like a floating Isle)
Swam in your own dear Allaegre, the while
Your Daughter Al'ce, in love with John, forsooth,
Stareing in's Face, though wide, yet missed her Mouth?
When no grimme Saucy Trooper did ye harm,
Nor fiercer Dragon, when no Strangers Arm
Did retch your yellow Bacon, nor envy
The Richness of your Chimnyes Tapestry?
When good Dame Ellen (your beloved Spouse)
Bare to the elbow in the Dairy-house,
With fragrant Leekes did eat the Cheese she wrought,
Not sent it to the Garrison for naught.
O those were Golden days! all things were quiet
While Pym did whisper Treason for his Diet
At Knightlyes House, and honest Dick and he
In private exercised their Lechery;
Who each Good Friday, ('against the Church a Charm)
Were sure to have a holy Sister warm:
With which Sweet Flesh, e're they had ought to do,
They sanctified it with a Grace or two.
But see what love of Liberty affords,
And the strange Lusting after new-coynd Words!
How much the better are ye now, I pray,
That ye with much expense have learned to say
Quarter for Lodging, and can wisely well
What Carbine signifies, and Granado, tell!
Which would have passed with you the other day
Fro Six-legg'd Monsters out of Africa:
And with a painted Cloth, have made a pretty
Holborne-bridge Jig, or Foole-Trap in the City.
Was not your Ale as brown, as fat your Beef,
Er'e Plunderer was English for a Theife?
Poor Souls! unto your Ruin ye are bent?
Yee've gaynd a Word, lost a Commandment.
A glorious Exchange! and we do fear
KIMBOLTON too was purchased too dear;
For though we yield it has a rumbling sound,
Yet it is scarce worth five hundred thousand pound:
The getting of which word by heart, some guess,
Has stood the Kingdom but in little less:
A word of that rough Shape, men look to know,
E're they come near't if it be whole-hoof'd or no;
Had Daniell known't sure 'twould have made him spare
The expense of's boiled Pitch, his Fat, and Hair,
For, armed with that alone, he might with ease
Have choked the Dragon, without help of these.
But these your Apples were, ye would be wise
Though with the Hazard of your Paradise?
It is the greatest Misery of Mankind
Fortune at once makes Happy and makes Blind.
How richly were ye blessed in House and Field
With all the store that a fat Land could yield,
While heartily ye did in every place,
At the Kings Name, cry out, God save His Grace,
Not bless the godly Parliament? Ye then
Were not enslaved, but freeborn Englishmen;
Your Stacks of Corn were then your own; nay more,
Ye durst lay Claim then to the Clothes ye wore:
Your Wives blew Ruff, and Stammell Petticoate
(In Statute-Lace, which cost her many a Groat
While any Statute was in use) then lay
In quiet Lavander till the next high Day:
Your Sunday-Cloake as then did not miscary,
But sure it was to be in the Inventory,
When weary of this life, you had the hap
With a Warm Pepper-posset and a Cap
To leave the world, for writing which the Vicar
Received his Twelve pence and a Cup of Liquour.
Those Days are gone, your Crests are fallen down,
And now your journyes to the Market Town
Are not to sell your Pease, your Oats, your Wheat,
But of Nine Horses stolen from you t'intreat
But one to be restored: and this ye do
To a buff'd Captain, or perhaps unto
His surly Corporal, with the same degree
Of Cringeing and sordid Idolatry
Ye used in the former days to fall
Prostrate unto your Landlord in his Hall,
When with low Legs, and in an humble guise
Ye offered up a Capon-Sacrifice
Unto his Worship at a New-year Tide:
For which in the Buttery having stuffed your hide
With store of Drink, as heartlesse as 'twas cold,
(Which nothing but an Asses Hoof could hold)
Ye took your leave, making your three long Stretches,
One to Himself, Two to his Velvet Breeches.
No more, no more shall ye take pleasant journyes,
(The Tempters at your Elbowes, Your Atturnyes)
Twice by the year to the Shire Town, and there
Overthrow a Parson, Drink drunk, and Forswear
Your selves, which being done, go home and cry
The Commonwealth's bound to your Industry.
No more, no more shall ye in Triumph say
A Pickering, a Cromwell, and a Wray
At your Knights Choice, not (which appeared most fine)
The bounteous Conduits ran pure Claret Wine:
Which were good Breathings from Affliction,
Like comely Stops in an Oration,
Which intervall'd your Grief: but now ye lie
Under a scourging Perpetuity,
Destroying you by whole Sale, in such sort
For your undoing neither wine nor sport
Shall be allowed ye. When ye joy'd to see
Gods Altars pulled down by a Decree
Of Omri, and his holy Temples made
Worse then your Stables, sordidly betrayed
To Filth (our Kingdoms everlasting Stayne)
The Carved works torn down by the Profane;
When ye beheld the Houses of your King,
His Ships, Towns, Castles, nay his every Thing
Detayn'd from him, could ye so foolish be
To think that your poor Cottages could be free?
When ye did daily hear such foul Disgrace
Such Blasphemies thrown in The Almighty's Face
From out your Pulpits, and did thither run,
Chirping upon your Lecturers while 'twas done;
When 'twas your Joy to see Gods Service fall,
Or worshiped slovenly, or not at all;
When ye so chearefully did entertain
Such Lies and Slanders against your Sovereign,
Who could bewitch ye into so much Trust
To think your Honor should not lie in the Dust?
Or that your Forty Marks, to which ye were borne,
In Soccage, could redeem ye from just Scorn?
When with a Solemn Gladness ye did break
The holy Scept, and did no difference make
'Twixt the unhallowed and the hallowed Land,
Could you believe that your own walls should stand?
Or that a Bore (the Fence being broken through)
Should not lay wast and spoil your Vineyards too?
That Man plants Hedges 'bout himself in vain,
Who lays in common Sacred and Profane.
When your learned Priests, made guilty of all Ills,
Like Partridges were hunted on the Hills,
By Painted Chamber and Committee Men,
Where were your Tears? where was your Sackcloth then?
It was your Game to see it, each Bush was bear,
And not a common Mouth but cried Rett.
And see the Fruit of it, Your Quarry now,
Like Israells Quails, peeps through your Nostrills too;
Your Clergies Scorn is proved your Plague, and will.
Go, Go, make Bone fires now, let every Hill
Shine with your Idoll-Flames, and every Grove
Be filled with Sisters, Zeal, Joy, Pigs, and Love;
Let Wisdoms Turk and Pope, the rest among,
For Aye amidst the Brethren now be sung,
Arch Deacon Cromwells visitation
Has cleansed all (in whose pure voines does run
Th'reforming Blood and virtues of his Grand
Parent, that Man of Iron, whose tough Hand,
Armed with his Fathers Hammer, at one Blow
Made many a stately Abbey lie full low)
Who in one godly March upon his way
(Helped by his Surrogate the good Lord Gray)
Five Crosses killed, Five books of Common Prayers,
Five Surplices, Five Fiddles, and Five Bears.
Blessed Reformation! And the Time will come
When Apes as well as Bears shall have their Doom,
And Badgers Furre grow* Cheap* Deluded Elves,
Where are those days you promised to your selves,
When ye should drink Sack from your own plump well,
And all your Ditches should run Muskadell?
The Bishops Votes are gone, great Strafford lies
To appease the Base a Noble Sacrifice;
And yet in sadness (Sirs) I cannot find
That it raines Fretters yet, or that the Wind
On his soft Wing brings Spices from the East,
Without our Ships, or Ingots from the West:
Nature is still the old slow Thing she was,
And gravely brings her businesses to pass
By Sober temperate steps; she does not yet
Ride Post, make Souce and Puddings at a Heat:
Nor does our Mother Earthes kind Bowels yield
Us Choynes of Beef, yet or the Brawny Shield,
As the Fens do Turffe, for Digging; the same Course
She still observes, only it is something worse.
You thought 'twas brave to rule, and therefore laid
That burden on your own, which God had made
For greater Shoulders; Ye enjoyed no rest
Till your High Constable was above your Priest,
Angry ye were, and did accuse the Fates
For making of ye Subjects, and not States;
Which ye determined to alter, and
Resolved your own, not Heavens Decree should stand;
Enraged, ye had it in your heart to stone them,
Moses and Aaron took too much upon them;
Ye could not sleep, nor yet in quiet sit
Till an Ordinance took place of sacred Writ.
Ye'ave almost your whole wish: and, faith, confess,
What have ye got? Come, be ingenious.
Would ye not give the best horse in your Teame
The three years past were but a fearful Dream,
And hug your Resurrection, that ye might
Retast that Manna, once ye set so light?
We Will not deny't, many great Greivances,
And Scarlet Sins were nourished, such as these?
Landlords exacted Rents, the Priests were grown
So proud, they called th'tenth of our Crop their own:
The Spiritual Courts in every Corner rife,
A Carnal exercise with a Neighbors Wife
Could not be had, but straight they made us stand
Pinned in a Linen Bag with a white wand,
Betraying so our Christian Liberty,
Which gives us Title unto all we see.
Gross Innovations in Religion too
Were frequent grown; O what a Tedious do
Have some Sir John's made, that they might recall
That Superstitious hypocritical,
That Popish Trick of praying on the Knee,
As if GOD joy'd in's Servants Misery?
Troubling the ease and quiet of the Saints,
(A heinous Crime, and causing sad complaints)
Whose Postures should be such as might the best
Mark out and typifie eternal Rest:
Those Idoll-Altar Books, stuffed full of Crosses,
Bound up in Silver Antichristian Bosses,
Made of the Whore of Babilons Thimbles, stood
Preaching-aloft to grace their God of Wood;
And men began to prize them more, then either
The powerful Dod, or his blessed Pew-Mate Cleaver.
Sad times the while! nay (worse in this then Turks)
The Arminian Preachers had so cried up works,
That foolish Men (so evil were the days)
Began to make a Conscience of their ways.
Now bless us all! we were in the very Road
To Rome, and shortly should have worshipped God.
By our Idolatrous Forefathers reard,
Churches (in sooth) began to be repaired,
Nay more to be adorned; Weep, weep mine eyes!
This is a roreing sin, a sin that cries!
And had not this been stopped, there had been found
Who would have sworn they would stood on holier ground,
Then a Justice Parler on whose Cushionly
A Dalton and Practice of Piety.
To sanctify the Room, and purge from sin
The Bribes his Country Visitours bring in:
The Corporation-Custard, which before
(As the fierce Seas curbed by the Sandy Shore)
Did check the fluent Lect'rers heaving vein,
And called the Spirit into his Bounds again,
Awed by the Plumbroath every hour
Lost more and more still of it is wonted Power,
And though the Sisters daily did supply
With Sighs and Eggs to make the Gusto high,
Yet 'twould not do: Pride, pride, the Clergies Pride,
(Which I assure ye, Sirs, was at spring Tide)
Had got that growth, they did not blush to say
They would not preach to please the People, they.
Rank Heresy, if good Mas: Henderson
Can tell what Hresie is --
How saucy were they grown, who dared to preach
The Elect could Sin? (O most abhorred Breach
Of th'Faithfulls Prividedge!) and that Gods Sheep
Were not whom Marshall brands, but they who keep
Th'Impossible Commandments. Beside,
They taught the way to Heaven was not so wide
That a First-Table-Saint who with a Brother
Faithful and called, made bold to break the other,
Could crowd her Belly in: therefore in scorn,
To take it up, they advised each night and morn,
She should in humble manner, soft and fair,
Walk by the Brook of Penance, and then air
Her self 'bout VVeeping-Crosse, early and late,
To fit her Body for the narrow Gate
Maliciously they taught that no man given
To Fleshly Lusts, so dying should see Heaven.
Uncomfortable Doctrines sure they were,
Enough to make the Godly to despair.
Who using th'Creature freely, as their own,
(As it is indeed) are often very prone;
Yet notwithstanding that look to be Heirs
Of Heavens joy too, for verily all is Theirs.
Nor will the Priest e're better Manners have
So long as Tithes are left to feed the Knave,
Those Villainous Tithes, th'Aegyptians Fleshpots, whence
They loath the Manna of Benevolence.
Alas poor Fools! we know not what we loose
When we do part with our Tenth Lamb and Goose,
Surely there is Witchcraft in it; the very Fat
And Marrow of our Substance lies in that,
Being the Top of Numbers; and it is thought
Sinews and strength from'th Brawny Hercules,
From whom that Heathenish custom first did rise,
For mark and ye shall find the plump Divine
Grow fat by th'Tenth, we lean by the other Nine,
Which Nature teaches too, look on the Sea
And she her Tith in the Tenth Wave does pay
Lustier then all the rest, as if she meant
To Seal that Number with a Sacrament.
What'ere the Matter be, it is a Gemme
Unknown to us, but far too rich for Them.
Therefore it is fit Committees should be sent
Unto the godly Dowager of Kent,
That the beloved Matron might prick on
Her learned and Antiquated Champion,
(Like a French Chimney-Sweeper) t'creepe once more
Into Cottons Library through the Back door,
And fetch from thence a Dose of Syriack Rust,
Soot Arahick Ana, and of Eastern Dust
Enough to cast into the Peoples Eyne,
They may not see Tithes to be things Divine.
For while they are bold to vent such dareing words,
That not our Trencher feeds them, but the Lords,
Be confident of this (such is their Pride,)
His Business shall be done, ours laid aside.
All this is true, But pray ye Neighbors say,
While those light Burdens on your Shoulders lay
Had ye not merrier Days? The King and Law
Called for some brick indeed, but gave ye straw;
The Ship-Mony was a weight: well, yield it so;
Since that was damned, does the World better grow?
Have ye no Burdens now? O happy Men!
The twentieth Part ye'ave paid, the Fifth, and when
Your new Taskmasters shall be pleased to call
And say ye are Delinquents, Farewell All:
New victories coined to cheat ye every hour,
Your Purse must bleed so long as they have Power
To lie, your Taxes to the Garrisons,
The Pressing and the Slaughter of your Sons,
Secret Benevolences, and to these
To top up all, but Fifty Subsidies.
Are these no Burdens? Let me pity you,
Sad Souls for onley that is left ye now
Happy ye were and might have so abode,
Had ye not kneeled like Camells for your Load:
They never had risen had you kept your State,
Till ye were wretched, they could not be Great.
Therefore as crafty Glasiers, who retain
Night-walking Drunkards in a Pension,
That when the Danknesse and the Drink command
Windows may fall, that their frail Trade may stand;
Or seemeing Conjurers, who have Theives in Pay:
So dealt the cunning Men with you. For they,
That their great skill in Surgery might be crowned,
And their rare Balsame sought for, made the VVound.
Who (like the meaner Stars which hidden lie
While the World's looked on by the Heavens sole eye)
That they might be adored, and appear Bright,
Resolved to turn the Globe, and make it Night:
And good Night Landlord, when will it be Day?
(It Is hard to give, easier to take away.)
So faint our Hopes be that the sprightly Morn
Should ever more make her defir'd Return,
That they have hardly left a Cock to say
To our sad Hearts, Cheer up, it will be Day:
Or call us to Repentance for the sin
We have so long securely slumber'd in,
The Deny all of our Lord. At first indeed
They Played with you, as with a new-back'd steed,
Nor did they think it fit to fill your Eye
With the whole Scene of your large Misery;
But drew the Curtain by Degrees 'Twas light,
Your burden then, to bear a Beardlesse Knight
Upon your backs, what was it, errant Gulls,
To think that Calves in time would not prove Bulls?
Or that like Milo, you should grow in height
Of strength and Sinew, as your Load in weight!
Of your New States how could ye think so ill,
When all things else increase they should stand still?
No, no, each Man of them is grown so spread
(Upon the common stock of Fat things fed)
That the tall Atlas, who the Heavens does bear,
Has't under Seal, not one of them comes There.
Nine dozen of bread dined the young Elephant:
Whom, when he had more years and volume, Scant
A Tun would satisfy; Change but the Name,
The Fable's Theyrs: And they confess the same,
Who are about to geld the Members now:
(What will the Legislative Ladies do?)
For since that neither the new-raised Excise,
The Sequestrations (though they high do rise)
Their Staple of Plunder nor Jews fetched of late
To buy the Wickeds circumcised Estate
Can fill them all, they are resolved to bate
Something in Number, as they thrive in weight.
(So have I seen good Husbands when they found
Unnecessary Stowage clogg their ground,
Pull down outhouses, that they might not be
Charged with Repaires, where they no profit see)
As if they meant to let ye understand
That five and twenty now can spoil the Land.
All this and more, ye cannot chufe but see,
And will ye still Court your own Misery?
Return, return unto your God and King,
Obedient hearts, and fair Peace Offerings bring,
So shall your weary shoulders soon be eased
For with such Sacrifices Both are pleased.
O be Profane no more, no more defile
Gods Temples, nor tread on the sacred oil
Which does anoint both King and Priest, no more
Cast amorous Glances on that painted whore
Who sits at West-Minster, and 'moungst the rest,
Has also this known Character of the Beast,
She in a Temple makes her abode,
Lifting herself 'bove all that is called God:
But set your Love on them, who for your good.
Are met to hazard both Estates and Blood,
The Oxford-Parliament; for, if there be
At this time any, surely that is she.
Be no more frighted from all Piety
Under a false Notion of Popery,
That Mask is stale: call it no more The Cause,
Or Christian Liberty, to have no Laws:
In points of Faith, take heed how ye appeal
To the New Gospel made by SAY and SEAL.
Let David's Psalms be above Sternholds Meter,
And Wrayes Occasionalls yield to Saint Peter.
Set up Church Discipline anew, be wise:
(For since that fell your Daughters Bellies rise:)
Grow Charitable again, let not your Hate
And private spleen bring forth a public Fate:
So shall ye happy be, and soon return
The Nations Envy, who are now their scorn:
Take up at last, then learn to understand
The Plow and Scepter are not for one Hand.
FINIS.

