THE VNLAWFVLNES AND DANGER OF LIMITED PRELACIE, OR PERPETVALL PRECIDENCIE IN
THE CHVRCH, Briefly discovered.

3 John 9. Diotrephes, who loves to have the preeminence receives us not.

Ambitio non patitur quemquam in ea mensura honorum conquiescere, quae quondam
fuit ejus impudens votum. Seneca de beneficiis. Lib. 2.

Ambition suffers no man to rest in that measure of honors, which sometimes
was his impudent wish.

Printed in the year 1641.

To the READER.
THE causes which to this day have hindered the determination of this unhappy
controversy about Church government in the Reformed Churches, are no other:
But first, The Judgment of God punishing the unthankfulness of this Age, for
the incomparable benefit of the Gospel; and in great wisdom and loving
kindness, trying and exerciseing his Church, that they who are approved may be
made manifest. And secondly, The corruption of the heart of man, loving
preeminence, and preferring himself to his Brethren, which makes him,
although but a Bramble in comparison of the Olive Tree, the Fig Tree and the
Vine, to say and to make others to speak in the ears of men, Whether is
better for you, either that all the Sons of Jerubbaal (which are threescore and
ten persons) reign over you, or that one reign over you? and upon this
follows the blindness and error of the mind, in depending more upon the
prejudice of custom and constitutions of men then upon the judgment of
Scripture to be believed for it self. Yet has the Lord his own appointed
time for ending of Controversies; and if the period of this debate be now
approaching (as it appears to him who looks with observation to the working
of God, the insolency of the Prelates, and the Prayers and desires of the
people) a few of the many considerations pressed in former times will, by the
blessing of God, prove sufficient and effectual for determination. They who
are acquainted with the Reformation here, and in other Nations, will not much
mervell, when the Winter is past, and the spring time comes; That with the
sweet breathings of Zephyrus, at sometimes there be whirlewinds and contrary
blasts; and when the Flowers appear upon the earth, that the weeds also set up
their heads. But the diligent hand of the faithful Laborers, will purge the
Vineyard of these noisome Herbs, which have taken rooting in the time of
Prelacy. That this Prelacy may be removed root and branch, and the Ministry of
Christ be established in purity and power, is the purpose of this paper; and
the Prayer of the writer for the welfare of Sion.

THE VNLAVVFVLNESSE AND DANGER OF A LIMIted PRELACIE: Or perpetual presidencie
in the Church briefly discovered.
IN the Church of Christ, Offices in this Church which are of men, supposed to
be unlawful.
It may and ought to be taken for a Supposition, and as a principle undeniable,
that all the Offices, and Vocations, in the House of God, must be of God, and
not of Men; and that such as are of Men and not of God, are unlawful: for this
was presupposed by Christ himself, in his dispute with the Pharisees; the
Baptism of John whence was it, from heaven or of men? Matthew. 21.25. Mark
11.17. Luke 20.1. By the Pharisees themselves in the same places. By the
Apostle, Gallat. 1.1. Not of men, neither by men: but by Jesus Christ, and God
the Father. Again, Hebr. 5.5. No man takes this honor unto himself, but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron. And by these who are our adversaries in
this cause, both while they disput against the universal Episcopacy of the
Pope, and use the words of Tertullian, which may be thrown back upon
themselves, Quiestis? quomodo et unde venistis? quid in meo agitis nomine? and
while they dispute against us for the Diocesan Bishop, and will prove
Episcopacy, by divine right, knowing that the assertion of the princiall Office
and Calling in the Church, merely upon humane right, were a challenge of the
Scriptures, that they are not perfect; and an exalting of the wisdom of Men
above the wisdom of Christ: although Man can no more make the Office, nor he
can give the Grace; and from Christ both the Institution of the Office, and the
blessing of the Officers, must come. It is therefore supposed to be no less
unlawful to add an Office to divine Institutions, then it is unlawful to
take away an Office warranted by divine Institution; the one making it maimed.
We are forbidden praecepto negativo to presume to govern the Church by humane
wisdom: We are commanded Praecepto affirmativo, to follow the rule of divine
wisdom: And we are warranted praecepto comparativo, rather to follow Christ
them Antichrist; for so must we speak, because it cannot be denied by any, but
such as deny the Pope to be Antichrist.

This then being for a principle presupposed, if we will not shut our eyes
against the light, and involve our selves in subtilties, which the wit of Man
set on work by his own ambition, and the love of preeminence, has invented
against the plain truth of Scripture obvious to every one who desires to
know, The Office of a Bishop, as he is conceived to be a Pastor above other
Pastors: whether in power, or in degree and dignity, with be found in it
self, and not only in respect of the abuse of his power, or of his degree and
dignity, to be unlawful.

The Office of a Prelate is not found in Scripture.
Because the Scripture intending to express the Offices and Officers of the
Church, and speaking so often of them and of their Gifts and Duties; and that
not upon occation, but of set purpose, as Romans 12.2. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4, does
neither express, nor imply any such Bishop: Shall we suffer our selves to
think that the Apostles, so well acquainted with the will of Christ; Acts 1.3.
so fully taught of things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, and so faithful
in the delivering his Commandments, that the Officers may know how to behave
themselves in the House of God, and keep themselves pure: 1 Timothy 3.15.
and in charging them in the sight of God to keep his Commandments without
spot, 1. Tim. 5.21. 1 Timothy 6.13.14.
would not in some one place or other distinctly and positively speak of the
office, gifts, priority or power of such a Bishop? Have they been so careful
in expressing the office, gifts and duty of the meanest Officers Act. 6.
and did they speak nothing of the greatest? would they have neglected the
weightyer matters of the Law of Christ? no surely, these they would have done,
and not have left the other undone.

All the Officers of the New Testament both ordinary, and extraordinary, No
difference in Scripture between a Pastor and a Bishop.
are designed and distinguished by their names, or Compellations, as Apostles,
Evangelists, Presbyters, Deacons. The extraordinary and superior, have upon
good reason, the names of the ordinary, and inferior common unto them, as the
Apostles are called 1. Pet. 5.1.
Elders. But this is not reciprocal, for the ordinary and inferior are never
called, by the names of the extraordinary and superior: the Deacon is not
called an Elder, nor the Pastor by the name of the Apostle, or Evangelist. It
is true that Barnabas is called an Apostle Acts 14.4. and 14.
because he was an Apostle of Christ as Paul was. Titus and others 2 Co. 8 13.
and Epaphroditus Phil. 8.23.
are only called Apostles or Messengers of the Church. Whence it must follow,
that the Office of a Bishop is not an Office superior to the Office of a
Pastor, since the name Bishop is common to the Pastor; and that the Office of a
Bishop, and the Office of a Pastor, are not different, but one and the same
office. Since the names are altogether common in all the places of the New
Testament. Acts 20.28. Phil 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.2. 1 Pet. 5.1.
And the Syriacke Interpreter has translated the one by the other. Tit. 1.7
What reason can there be, while the Officers are distinguished by their names,
and the names of Bishop and Pastor are common, but that the Office of the
Bishop and Elder is one and the same Office; the one name signifying,
sapientiae maturitatem, and the other Industriam curae Pastoralis, says Beda.

No Bishop of Bishops, or of Pastors in Scripture.
We find, that in the Ministry of the New Testament there is a comely,
beautiful, and Divine Order: one kind of Ministers both ordinary and
extraordinary, being placed in degree and dignity before another, as the
Apostles before all other Ministers, the Pastor before the Elder, and Deacon:
But we do not find in Ministers of the same kind, that one has majority of
power, over others, or priority of degree and dignity before others, except
upon the moral respect of age, zeal, gifts, etc. No Apostle is in degree
above other Apostles, no Evangelist above other Evangelists, nor Elder above
other Elders, no Deacon above other Deacons: upon what ground then from
Scripture? can we believe or conceive that one Pastor is in degree superior
to other Pastors, or that, in all other sorts of Ministers, ordinary and
extraordinary, there is all be a parity in their own kind, and only in the
Office of Pastors, an inequality.

The whole power, and all the parts of the Ministry which commonly are
expressed, Every Pastor has power of ordination and Jurisdiction.
by the power of Order and Jurisdiction, are in Scripture made common to the
Pastor and the Bishop; for the Pastor has power to Preach the Word, and
minister the Sacraments: As one of the Presbytery he has power to lay on
hands, and ordain Ministers, 1 Timothy 4.14.
and has not only the Keys of the inward and private Court of Conscience,
but has also committed unto him and his fellow Presbyters, the Keys of the
outward and public Court of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and censure, and
both ways to bind and loose in: when the Apostles first planted the Christian
Churches, and when they were to depart and were near unto death, they
recommended the care of these duties, in all the Chruches unto the particular
Pastors, or Bishops. Act. 15.6. Act. 16.4 Act. 20 28, ^9. 1 Cor. 5. 1 Cor 14.32
40. 1 The. 5.12. Tit. 1.9. 1. Tim. 5.12. Heb. 13.17.
And therefore the Pastor, and Bishop are in Scripture, one and the same in
power and degree, neither has the Bishop any degree, or power, order or
Jurisdiction, but that which he arrogateth to himself, for the honor of his
Priesthood, and for setting up his Monarchical power, against the word of God,
nor ought any such power be given him. A point which is strongly proved by our
Divines, against Papists and Prelates.

Ecclesiastical power was not committed by Christ to any one but to many,
Power ecclesiastical, not given to one, but to many.
It is not said, tell the Bishop or any one of the Church, but tell the Church,
Mat. 18.17.
nor was it exercised and acted by any one of the Apostles alone, for Paul not
a lone, but with a Presbytery, laid hands upon 1 Timothy 4.14.
Timothy, and the Apostles, not alone, but joining with the Elders, Act. 15.
did determine controversies, and discern censures, the same also was the
practice of the Apostolic Churches at Corinth, Thessalonica, and in Asia. In
all which the Discipline of the Church, was exercised by many, and not by any
one. And therefore to exalt a Bishop to any part of his power or any degree of
Eminence, above his Brethren for exercising this power, is against the
Institution of Christ, and contrary to the practice and pattern of the
Apostles and Apostolic Churches.

All majority forbidden the Officers.
All majority and pre-eminence in this kind, is expressly forbidden by Christ,
the Kings of the Nationas, etc. Luke 22, 25.
according to this the Apostle Peter, disclaimeth not pride in majority, but
majority it self 1 Pet. 5.1.
Non est dictum sola humilitate sed veritate says Bernard, Non (...) sed (...)
prohibet Christus, non modum rei, sed rem ipsam, say others. Other ways, that
which Tacitus writes of Otho, might have been applied to them, Omnia
servilit^r pro dominatione; and the temptation of the Disciples was not
tyranny, but superiority, Christ speaks to them sometimes of Thrones of
glory, in the Church Triumphant, never of any throne of Dignity in the Church
Militant: If any such throne whether of Ecclesiastical authority or perpetual
presidence, had been lawful, would he not at sometimes have taught them,
what it was, and with what cautions and Limitations they were to possess it,
as that you shall have precedence of degree, Precepts in the Gospel to be
interpreted according to the rules of the Precepts of the law.
but not of power; of dignity, but not of authority.

These and the like argments Militant, not only against the exorbitancy of
Prelates, but against the Prelacy of the Ministers of Jesus Christ's, and if we
will as indeed must understand the commandments of Christ in the Gospel, Mat.
5.19 (...), 27, 33, 43.
according to the rules agreed upon, in the interpretation of the precepts of
the Law, we must confess that not only the Tyranny, the Pride, the Pomp, the
Priority and power of Lord Bishops, but all the parts, all the degrees, means,
causes, Incentives, occasions, provocations, beginnings and appearances of
these evils are forbidden, and that we are commanded to stop the way with
thorns, Hos. 2.6.
least they return to their former lovers, and to hide all their earerings,
that they be not found again. Genesis 35.4.


Rule of reformation from the prime times.
If the reformation of Episcopacy be intended, we must not take our rule, and
pattern, from ancient and Primitive times, but from the first times, and from
the very beginning, as Christ in the matter of divorcement, did not speak of
David's, or Abraham's, or Lamech's times, but of Adams, saying, but from the
beginning it was not so, so must we in the matter of this divorcement ascend,
not to the times of Augustine or Cyprian, or Ignatius; but to the times of
Christ, and the Apostles, and to the first Institution of the Ministry, at
the beginning, and so much the more, because many of the Fathers, did
unwittingly bring forth that Antichrist, which was conceived in the time of the
Apostles, and therefore are incompetent Judges in the question of Hierarchy,
and upon the other part, the lights of the Christian Church, at and since the
beginning of Reformation have discovered many secrets, concerning the
Antichrist and his Hierarchy, which were not known to former ages, and have
showed us, that at the beginning there was no kind of difference of a Bishop,
from a Presbyter. The way of defection is broad and easy, of which we have
domestic examples. In this Island in fewer years the Church of Scotland
suffered a great Eclipse, in fewer years ours was greater, and darkness had
covered the Land, if the Lord had not prevented us.

Suppose Episcopacie were shaven and stripped naked of all external, Limited
Prelacy unlawful
and heterogeneall pomp, and power, and of the internal power of sole
ordination and jurisdiction, suppose nothing were left unto the Bishops, but a
perpertuall presidence in Church assemblies, and Synodes, Suppose him to be
chosen by the Clergy, and to be subject to their censure, as other Ministers,
and suppose all the cautions, and limitations, that can be devised be put upon
him, to keep him within his bounds from exorbitancie, yet still is he such a
plant, as God never planted, rooted not in Scripture, but in the Earth, and
bringing forth such fruits, as can neither be acceptable to God nor
profitable to men; This degree and primacie of order, by which he is lifted up
above his brethren, cannot be separated from some primacy of power, and when
it meets with ambition, and opportunity of advancement through the favor of
Princes, or the neglect of another time, whether careless or more careful
about other matters, it shall gather strength again, and regaine what it now
loses, by the rasour of Reformation, shall of a Consul make a dictator, and
pull down the house which it made even now to shake. Election does nor hinder
his power to be Episcopal, for not only inferior Bishops are chosen by their
Chapters, but the Pope also by his conclave of Cardinals, neither will this
hinder his power to be Episcopal, because it is under a Synod, for the best of
the Papists hold that the Pope subject to an oecumenicall Council.

Woeful Experience has taught, that from this perpetual presidence, and
Primacy of order, Prelacy and Popery inseparable.
as the first step of the ladder, Antichrist has mounted up, to the Primacy of
power, to Archiepiscopall dignity, to be a Patriarch, and at last to be
universal Bishop and Antichrist, and shall we now after the mystery of
iniquity is made manifest, allow him in this land, the first step of the
Ladder, establish him thereby, and not turn him quite off, and overturne the
ladder it self? this were a dangerous recidive, this were twice to make
shipwreck, and the second because wilful, worse then the first, where before
we were patients, now to be agents in so great an evil, and to make that
which was before, against our will, our evil of pain, now by our wilful
error to be our evil of sinner: were it not better, by the total ruin of
Episcopacie to give example, to other Churches, whose eyes are upon us, by
doing the like, to pull down the Pope? to put him out of hope to rise again
in this Church, and to make all Papists despair to regaine this Kingdom to
the Roman religion? it being their own declaration, that were all England once
brought to approve of Bishops, it were easy to reduce it to the Church of
Rome. Cutzen pol, Li^, 2. c. 18. Limitation of Prelacy will prove weak, by the
example of the Church of Scotland.


All bonds and limitations, although many, although strong, although made never
so wisely, will prove but weak to keep them in order, and bear down their
aspiring Ambition, which our neighbor Church of Scotland, for the greater
part, did not believe at first: and which we could hardly be induced to believe
now, were we not taught by their example: for in the year one thousand six
hundred, the Church of Scotland being met in a General Assembly at Montrose,
these cautions and limits were agreed upon; the Kings Majesty consenting: 1.
That the Minister chosen to this place shall not be called Bishop, but
Commissioner of such a place. 2. That he shall neither propound to the
Parliament any thing in name of the Church, without their express warrant and
direction; nor shall he keep silence, or consent to any thing prejudicial to
the weal and liberty of the Church, under the pain of deposition. 3. Under
the pain of Infamy and Excommunication, he shall at every Assembly give
account of the discharging of his Commission, and shall submit himself to
their Censure, and stand to their determination whatsoever, without
appellation. 4. He shall content himself with that part of the Benefice which
shall be assigned him, not prejudging any of the Ministers in their livings. 5.
He shall not dilapidate his benefice. 6. He is bound as any other Minister to
attend his particular Congregation, and shall be subject to the trial and
censure of his own Presbitery and Provincial assembly. 7. He shall neither
usurp nor claim to himself any power of jurisdiction in any point of Church
government, more then any other Minister. 8. In Presbiteries, Provincial and
general assemblies, he shall behave himself in all things, and be subject to
their censuring, as any of the Brethren of the Presbitery. 9. At his admission
to his Office, he shall swear and subscribe to fulfill all these points, under
the pains foresaid, otherwise not to be admitted. 10. In case he shall be
deposed, he shall no more voice in Parliament, nor enjoy his Benefice. 11. He
shall not have voice in the General Assembly, unless he be authorized with
Commission from his own Presbytery. 12. Crimen ambit^^, shall be a sufficient
cause of deprivation. 13. The General Assembly, which the advice of the Synod,
shall have power of his nomination or recommendation. 14. He shall lay down his
Commission annuatim, at the foot of the General Assembly to be continued or
changed, as the General Assembly with his Majesty's consent, shall think fit.
15. Other cautions to be made, as the Church shall sinde occasion. The godly
and sincere Ministers disliked this course altogether, and some did protest
against it: but others loving pre-eminence above their Brethren, and hunting
after fatter Benefices did consent themselves, and persuaded others to consent
unto it, but did aftewards break all these bonds, and finding themselves
unable to give account, according to the Council given to Perecles, they
procured that there should be no free General Assemblies, lest they should be
called to account, and when they were challenged of their perjury, and
perfidious dealing, their Printed Apology declared their perfidie to be
double, Refut. libel, de regim Eccles. Scotae page 89. cum viderit breviz in
quibus voluntatur incerta, and ancipitia repeter pedem, nec vertet terga sed
sensim recedit, in tutum. Senec. Epist. 22.
which we will express in their own words, because they may be useful at
thit time, and teach us what may be expected from their fellows: Conditiones
aliae protempore mag is quo contentiosis rixandi ansa praeriperetur, quam animo
in perpetuum observandi acceptae. What then may be hoped for in this Land, were
people have been inured to this yoke. Prelates have been in possession, the
Court is near to shire upon them, and where there be no National Assemblies,
but such Provincial Assemblies, where these new Bishops shall be Presidents; or
if National Assemblies shall be appointed, shall they not either be fordidden
to meet, or shall they not be overruled by these Bishops, that in a short time,
they shall not only recover their wonted power and pomp, by the consent of the
Assemblies, and thus, be come deeply rooted, and with greater difficulty
removable then before, but shall also double their tyranny, manet alta mente
repostum, and thus our last state shall be worse then the first.

This perpetual president, Prelacy not the cure, but the cause of Shisme.
or moderate Prelate which was at first, and is now pretended to be a remedy
against Schism, has not only proved a remedy worse then the disease, by
making way to the greatess Bishop, the Antichrist, but likewise does foment and
increase the disease it self of Schism and Division: for beside that it shall
maintain a shameful Schism against all the Reformed Churches, especially
against the neighbor Church of Scotland, which will cause continual
jealousies, and heart-burning betwixt the two Nations, if we shall allow and
establish Episcopacy, which we did before but tolerate, and they have found and
judged upon good reasons to be intolerable, It shall rent the bowels of the
Church and Kingdom within it self; the Parliament shall be divided, some for
it, and others against it; and of these who shall be for it; there shall be
subdivisions, some for one limitation, and some for another: after the
Parliaments Authority shall be for it; the body of the Kingdom, at least the
godly and Religious shall be against it. Whence shall arise almost in every
Parish no small debate and contention, and many sorrows and discontents,
instead of that universal joy which is expected through the whole kingdom.
The Ministers, and whole Clergy shall be rent asunder, is their Sermons,
Lectures, and Polemick writings and Pamphlets; some defending the old
Episcopacie, some the new; and the sounder part oppugning both, and still
pressing a further Reformation; some gaping for Prelacies, and getting them;
others enraged for want of them; a third sort still living in hope of
preferment; and the remnant opposing all this competion, and emulation. And
although this Prelacie were appointed, and received with general consent of
Parliament, Pastors and People (which no man will expect, who is not a stranger
in this Church and Kingdom) yet who can hope that this Tree shall bring forth
the fruits of truth and peace in this Land, at this time, which it never
produced in any time or place since the beginning? There can be no peace to the
Body, till the bad humor now stirred be purged out; and when this Jonah is
cast into the Sea, then shall there be a calm. The work also shall be more
easy, and the labor much less in rooting up the Tree, then in lopping the
branches, which will take a long time, and much debate and deliberation.

In Christian Policy, Prelacy against both Christian and common policy.
that Government of the Church is most useful for Kings, and Kingdoms which
is best warranted by the Word of God, by whom Kings reign and Kingdoms are
established Religion, and Righteousness are the Pillars, which God has made
for upholding his Majesty's throne. Prelacie and Ceremonies are invented and
framed by the wisdom of Man, for setting up, and supporting the Popes
Monarchy; no Ceremony, no Prelat, no Prelat no Pope. 2. Which serves most to
the preservation of pietic, righteousness, and sobriety, against their
contraries, which where they reign as they do always where Prelates have
place, and power, are the certain causes of many calamities and judgments,
and of the changes and periods of States, Kingdoms, and Families. 3. Which
makes the face of the Church and Religion in a Kingdom most beautiful and
glorious, not with Prelaticall pomp and splendour, like the Kings of the
Nations, but with sound faith, a pure worship, and holy life: And 4. Which
conduces most for truth and peace against Heresy and Schism: for which
effect, Church Assemblies of Ministers, equal in order and degree, meeting in
Presbyteries, Provincial and National Assemblies, are powerful means; as
the experience of all the Reformed Churches has taught us, and against which
Prelacie has a natural antipathie, it being the nature thereof to love
greatness, and to grow big by the division of the Church: and therefore the
Prelacie will bear with all Religions, provided they be not Anti-episcopall,
will not only suffer Heresies and divisions to arise and grow, but will foment
them, that the parties may depend upon him as their Judge, Contzen. polit. Lib.
^ c. 19.
and that the thoughts of others may be drawn from his Mitre to other matters.

Again, in common policy, that Government of the Prelates should be shunned,
because he is a superfluous and unprofitable member, the Son of God having
provided for all the necessities of the Church by Officers of his own
appointment. Shall that be esteemed to be good policy in the Church, which no
wise man would judge to be good aeconomic in his own house, no Magistrate
would admit in his own charge? shall Servants or subjects, appoint one to rule
over them at their own pleasures; or shall we think that a Minister has
abilities for all the parts of his function, and shall not be able to preside
in an Assembly, or is there none in the assembly fit to be president but one?
2. because the Prelate is an unprofitable burden, requiring in his greatest
moderation a revenue more then ordinary, and serves for no good use, neither
to Church, King, nor Country. 3. Because the Prelate, by his power, with
Prince and Peer, and by his usurpation and tyranny over the People, divides
betwixt the Rulers and the people, and makes the Civil government, which
without him would be light and easy, to be heavy, and grievous to the
people. 4. Because a Pastor no sooner becomes a Prelate, but he begins to
howl with the Wolves, although he look like a Shepherd; he turns his back
upon his Pastoral charge, or looks down upon it, and his fellow Brethren,
as below him, and sets his face toward the world, hoping by time to be
loosed of his bands, and to become one of the greatest Officers of estate, and
blowing the bellows of division betwixt the King and his Nobles, and betwixt
the King and the Church, that his serviceablenesse may appear the more, and
he may be warmed by the fire which he has kindled himself. They will now
accept of Limitation, and it may be some of them call for it. But did any of
them speak of late against the exorbitancy of their Brethren, or will they
hear of moderation afterward? If we will lay aside prejudices, we may clearly
perceive that the Church, perfect in Officers, may be governed without
Prelates, with more honor to God, with more love and respect to Authority at
home and abroad, with greater riches and glory to the Crown, with more
contentment to the people, greater peace amongst our selves, and greater terror
to all our enemies.

The different use of the names of Pastor and Prelate, dangerous.
Although we do not contend about words, yet the appropriation and Monopoly of
names in matters of this nature, has in it more realty then at first. We do
observe there is no inequality, nor difference of Office, power, or degree,
betwext a Pastor and a Bishop. It is against reason to call on Pastor by the
name of a Presbyter or Minister, and another by the name of a Bishop: the
differences of the names does beget conceptions of different degrees and
Offices, does procure worldly respect; and in process of time, anthority to
one Presbyter above another, and so makes way to Episcopal Monarchy, is
alreadily mistaken through ignorance or inadvertency, as implying a relation,
not to a particular flock, but to other Pastors, and a whole Diocese, and
has been in the Church of Scotland dangerously misapplyed by many, conceiving
the name of Bishop, which only designed the benefice, to be the name of the
Office, and thereby presuming that the Office of a Bishop still remained there,
which was also our error concerning the government of that Church, till we
were better informed of late: against this no better remedy then that the thing
being abolished, the name be no more appropriated.

When the time of persuasion comes, a few arguments are sufficient.
Neither do we intend, nor can any man expect, nor do the weighty affairs of
those, whom this matter most concerns, suffer any large debate about it,
volumnes are stuffed with arguments on both sides, conscience of duty in this
Article of time, observation of providence, courage for the cause of God, and
contempt of the world, will help our resolution against the subtilties,
sophistications and wranglings of humane wit, which will no more receive
satisfaction, in this question of the regal office of Chirst, nor the Papists
will suffer themselves to be silenced, in other controversies, about this or
his other offices. When the appointed time comes of the ending of long lasting
debates, it is not unlike unto the rising of the Sun after a long Winter
night, and the eyes to see, are more useful, then arguments to persuade, the
ways of god are made known, and darkness can no more prevail against the
light, in no Theme have colors and praetexts been more multiplied, then in
this of Prelacie, the ambition and avarice of the heart of man quickening his
spirits, and giving life to his brains, for his own miserable ends, but to an
indifferent eye, and a mind unpartially disposed and not interessed, they
suddenly disappeare and evanish: nothing is more pretended then antiquity,
although they can say with Cyprian, consuetudinem veritate majorem non esse,
although disputing for their dignity, they put the purple robe of authority
upon the Fathers, yet when the Papists dispute against them by this authority,
they quickly put it off again, and although they boast of the Fathers, and
will prove the superiority of Bishops, from several forcible arguments out of
antiquity, yet find they disappointment and emptiness, where they desire most
to abound, for nothing in all this cause is more pressed, by the strongest
amongst them, then that the Angels of the Churches of Asia, were Bishops like
unto themselves, and yet not want of will in them, and diligence in reading of
the Fathers, but the Fathers (whom they would have to pronounce not (...). O
child, but (...), O son of lupiter) writing on the place, are mute, and do
fail them, turning their glosses another way, but this and all other their
pretenses are answered, and the whole matter of true Church government,
treated at large many years ago, without a word of reply from the Bishops or
their Clergy, who yet try all Authors, if they can find so much as one
sentence, even in dedicatorie Epistles (which use to be more encomiastick then
dogmaticall) to speak for them.

It has been the greatest praise of civil powers, that they have exceeded
all who went before them in the reformation of religion: Motives to a full
reformation.
Asa took away Idolatry, but Iehosaphat removed the high places also,
Hezekiah did more, he brake the brazen serpent, but Josiah destroyed the Idol
Temples also, who therefore has this restimony to the end of the world, that
like unto him there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all
his heart, with all his soul, and with all his might: neither is this a
dispraise to Religious Princes going before, who according to their measure of
knowledge, and as the times would suffer, did reform Religion; nor a
disgracing, but rather a promoting and perfecting of the work of Reformation
begun by them. The matters of the Kingdom of Christ, the head and Monarch of
his Church are in hand, in which, as in our own matters we have no power to
dispense, or to decline to the right hand or to the left; and to rest in a
lukewarmnesse or Samaritanisme, which may make our condition afterward to be
restless, and provoke the Lord to make us a reproach. The changes, and
revolutions which we hear of in other Kingdoms, are documents, that the
divine Providence is about some great work, in which we are now called to act
our part, in the sight of men and Angels. Non tantum praesentis sed vigilantis
est, occasioneus observare properantem, Senec, Epist. 22
The opportunity of Reformation is rare and singular, and cannot be paralleled
in any History, and therefore to be used in all reverence, with heavenly
prudence, and abstractnesse of spirit, from earthly considerations. We are
zealous of our own liberties, let us be more zealous of the liberties of the
Kingdom of Christ, that both we our selves, and the Posterity may have a well
grounded and blessed Peace.

FINIS.

