CERTAIN QVAERIES TOUCHING The Rise and Observation OF CHRISTMAS; Propounded to
the consideration of all such as are zealously (but blindly) affected toward
the Observation of it.

To which an answer is desired and expected BY JOSEPH HEMING.

LONDON Printed, Ann: Dom: 1648.

Certain Quaeries touching the rise and observation of Christmas, etc.
Quaere I.

II. December? and what your proofs are?

III.

IV. in totidein verbis?

V.

VI. viz. plain Text, sollid Inference, universal Tradition) it be not a
moere humane invention, and so Will Worship? And how you will one day acquit
your selves before God, for placing, and crying up men's Inventions, instead of
the Institutions of Iefus Christ? And whether it were not faithful dealing
with poor simple people to tell them that you have neither of these to warrant
it?

VII. by God, under the Gospel, are not less lawful.

VIII. Christmas be Christ man? And whether to persuade people it is so, be not
to abuse and delude them? And whether we may not as well interpret Candlemas
Candleman, Michaelmas Michaelman, as Christmas Christman?

IX. Christmas, more then at other times? And whether the Lords day be not
[the] day appointed for them to rejoice on?

X. Christmas day ought in any respect to be esteemed above another of the
Week days? And whether people may not without offense to God follow their
lawful vocations on that day?

XI. condemning and rasing out Holy Days not warranted in the Word? And
whether to observe them be not highly to dislike, and flatly to contradict (in
point of practice at least) their proceedings in order to a Reformation?

XII. England do blindlie and superstitiouslie believe Christ was borne on that
day) preaching on it does not nourish and strengthen them in that belief?

XIII. Feast had not its rise and growth from Christians conformity to the mad
Feasts Saturnalia (kept in December to Saturn the Father of Gods) in which
there was a Sheafe offered to Ceres Goddess of Corn; a hymn in her praise
called (...)or (...)? And whether those Christians by name, to cloak it, did
not afterward call it Yule; and Christmas (as though it were for Christ's
honor?) And whether it be not yet by some (more ancient then truly or
knowinglie religious) called Yule, and the mad plays or sports (wherewith it is
celebrated, like those Saturnalia) Yule-games? And whether from the offering of
that Sheafe to Ceres; from that song in her praise; from those gifts the
Heathens gave their friends in the Calends of January, ominis gratia; did not
arise or spring our blazes; Christmas Kariles, and New-yeares gifts?

XIV.

XV.

XVI.

From my Study in Vttoxeter. 1648.
FINIS

