Valor Crowned.

OR A RELATION OF THE Valiant Proceedings of the PARLIAMENT Forces in the
Closse at LICHFIELD, Against PRINCE RUPERTS.

Discovering the Honorable Conditions upon which it was Surrendered.

As it was Written from Lieutenant Colonel Russell, who was chief Commander
of the Closse.

Wherein is set down word for word, the Articles of Agreement, as they were
Consented unto by the Enemy; given under the Hand and Seal of Colonel
Hastings, by the Authority of Prince RVPERT.

Whereunto is annexed the Copy of Colonel Hastings Letter, to Lieutenant
Colonel RVSSELL, concerning their safe Conveyance to Coventry, given under his
own Hand.

LONDON.

Printed for Benjamin Allen in Popes head-alley: Apr. 27. 1643

(...) B^^te Relation of Lichfields Closse Besiege, Battle, and Surrender.
Dear Brother,
SInce my last to you, being the last week, according to my fears it has
since fallen out; that the Closse at Lichfield is lost: yet the loss to me is
not so great, as the joy of heart I have conceived for the safety and honor
which God has bestowed and conferred upon our Friends, that were there, who
have reaped praise and commendations for their valor and prowess, even out of
the mouths of their enemies, of whom they do affirm, that never did
Soldiers so honor the Parliament as these have done. A brief rehersall of
the particulars I have here enclosed: together with the Articles on which it
was surrendered, as I received them from Lieutenant Collonell Russels own hand,
whereof I think he has sent up a Copy to the House of Parliament; and according
to the conditions they marched forth on Friday last. My self and Brother
Burges rode forth to meet them a mile beyond Merryden, and tarryed with my
Brother Henry Pretty all that night at Merryden, being 4. miles from Coventry,
it being no small joy to us to meet him, who was so dear and tender in our
Affections; whom also we had given up for lost: but God who is rich in mercy,
found out a way beyond our expectation, and even in the Mount of difficulty,
whenas many, or rather more brake in upon them* then was of them in the Closse,
God made it his opportunity to deliver them by weak means, (as you may see by
the enclosed) being not above 30. They beat the Enemy down so fast in the said
Breach, that they made a brest-work about a yard high of dead and wounded
bodies.

Many circumstances might be added, to set forth the excellency of the mercy,
but time will not permit: you have the substantial part of the Tragedy, yet
for my Brother Henry Pretty his particular, take notice (with thankfulness,)
of two remarkable passages of Gods providence to him: he was shot in the middle
of the back, upon his Belt, with a Musket bullet, which struck him down, yet
neither pierced Belt nor Coat; and at the Breach when so many brake in* he and
his Lieutenant, with Captain Graves, lead on those 30. men, where Askin,
Chaplain to Prince Rupert, presented a Pistol to his very face, the Powder
whereof flew in his forehead yet the bullet went through the brim of his hat and
did him no hurt, so graciously did the hand of providence direct it. He with
the rest came yesterday, being Satturday with 10 Waynes laden with Bag and
Baggage. They could not prevail for their Ordnance.

On Thursday night there marched forth of this Town Collonell Barker his
Troop, under command of Captain Lieutenant Flower; the Ministers Commander of
Dragoons under command of Captain Ottoway; a Commander of Dragoons from
Killingworth, under command of Captain Hunt; Captain Potters part of a Troop;
Captain Po^t being Commander in Chief of this Briggade; they marched that night
to Lecester, where they have abode ever since, and are expected to join with
the Lord Gray for some design very speedily, Captain Okey marched along with
them; and they were well last night at 10. a clock: I had commendations from
Captain Okey and Captain Flower, who desire to be remembered to their Friends in
London.

Prince Rupert is Marched from Lichfield, and has left a Garrison there, he
lay last night at Cosill, and is now upon his March on Merryden Heath, within
4. miles of us, what his design is we know not. We expect Father Bough to
Coventry this night, if he be living, for the Convoy is gone for the Prisoners
at Stafford, where if he be alive he is. I fear the Post will be gone, I will
therefore conclude all, and rest,

Coventry, the 23. April, 1643. Your truly loving Brother till death THOMAS
ELLIS.

An Exact RELATION Of the Valiant Proceedings of the Parliament Forces in the
Closse at Lichfield against Prince Ruperts.
PRince Rupert drew near and summoned the Town on Thursday the sixth of
April. On Saturday following surrounded the Closse with about 4000. Horse and
Foot, as we conjectured: The first Week was spent in Battery, some 60. of
them we slew in the beginning as we conceive; upon Saturday last a breach was
made by the Gate, and an assault made with Scaling Ladders, but they were
beaten off, many of them slain, and more wounded, yet but one of ours: on
Sabbath day they undermined three or four parts, one whereof we found out by
Countermining, where in our men and they met together and discharged upon each
other; two other were likewise found out, but not the fourth, by which means
on Thursday last they sprung the Mine, and blew up a Tower, and some six of our
Soldiers (whereof two were slain, the others wounded, yet likely to live)
made a breach about 7. of the Clock in the morning, whereat six might enter in
a Breast, and at the fame time assaulted the Closse in diverse other places: At
the breach 200 of them entered in most of them being their principal
Commanders, and being entered; the greater part of them went into the Houses,
whom we beat out again with Hand Grenades, the remainder were beaten back by
30. of our men, we slew 100. of them, and took some 120. Prisoners: Colonel
Usher was slain* Colonel Gerrard wounded, and Colonel Wagstaffe dangerously
wounded, diverse Captains slain and some 80. Officers, Captain Leg we took
Prisoner; the Lord Digby was shot in the Knee, Captain Corbet son to Sir
John Corbet was also slain; One Askin a Scotchman, Chaplain to Prince Rupert,
was wounded and taken Prisoner; Prince Rupert entering the breach, was shot
through the Boot, and so Retreated. Both Horse and Foot of theirs swear they
never had such an overthrow and loss since the Wars began.

We lost before the Entry but four of our men, and some ten more after: the
breach being somewhat made up, and our Men quiet, we called a Council of
War, and finding our Powder all spent to a Barrel, and our Match gone, and
no help coming, there was an overture of a Parley, which was embraced, and an
agreement made according to the Articles enclosed.

The Summons came first from the Enemy.
The ARTICLES of Agreement Subscribed by Colonel Hastings, by the Authority of
Prince RUPERT.
IT is Consented unto by Colonel Hastings, by the Authority given him by his
Highness Prince Rupert,, that in consideration of the delivery and yielding up
of the Closse in Lichfield, that Lieutenant Colonel Russell, and all the
Captains and Officers with him, shall march out of the said Closse to morrow,
being the one and twentieth of this instant April, by ten a clock in the
Morning, with four score Men and Muskets, with Flying Colors, and four
score Horsemen with Arms belonging to them; and all other Persons within the
said Closse to be at liberty to go whither they please; and for their better
and safe coveyance a fr^e pass or Convoy from his Highness, and eleven Carts
to convey away such goods as belong to any of the Officers or Soldiers, with
themselves to the City of Coventry; and that all Prisoners shall be released on
both sides, which have been taken in the County of Stafford, since the coming
down of the Right Honorable Lord BROOK.

In witness whereof, we have hereunto put our Hand and Seal this twentieth
of April. Anno Domini 1643. Sealed and Delivered in the presents of us. Io.
Fr^chville. Rich. Prideaux.

H. Hastings.

A Copy of Colonel Hastings Letter which he sent to Lieutenant Colonel
Russell in the Closse at Lichfield.
SIR,
I have here sent you his highness command, for your safe passing to Coventry,
and doubt not but you will do the like, for my Party is now with you, for the
return, and so I rest.

Leichfield Friday April 21. Your loving Friend. H: HASTINGS.
The Direction thus.
To my Noble Friend Lieutenant Colonel Russell at Barmigam.


Under which direction was subscribed.
Let this Bearer pass all the Kings Forces to the Parliaments.

H: HASTINGS.



FJNJS.

