Clarastella; Together with Poems occasional, Elegies, Epigrams, Satyrs.

By Robert Heath, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for HUMPH. MOSELEY, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1650.

THE STATIONER To the Reader.
Gentlemen,
I Presume upon your Candor in the Entertainment of these Poems; otherwise I
should despair of the Authors mercy; I confess my presumption great, that have
ventured to the Press without his knowledge; but the ^allantness and Ingenuity
of the Gentleman is so Eminent in every thing, that I could not imagine, but
that the meanest of his recreations, (for such was this) might carry much in
it, worthy of the public view: besides the approbation of some friends has
heightened my desire of publishing it; who (upon their revising of it) do
assure me, that it is a sweet piece of excellent fancy, and worthy to be
called the Authors own issue. Upon this Confidence, I expose it to the world,
and remain

Your faithful servant in this or any other way, H. MOSELEY.

To my honored friend Mr R. H. on his rich Poems and Satyrs.
You Are gone, and yet You Are here, to let us see
The power of verse, how't makes Ubiquitie:
Thus th'husbandman away the Harvest bears,
And leaves the Poor to glean some scattered ears*
Thus we enjoy the Tap-wort of thy Muse,
Whilst others quaff off thy Diviner juice:
That thou will drop these Crumbs, it is Comfort yet
To them that Cannot deserve thy Cates to eat;
Thy Dainties are for foreign pallats, we
Are blessed with scraps, That too, no thank to thee;
For had not Fate, or Providence thrown us These,
Hunger had been our Fare -- and without Ease.
But I have seen thy choycest cheer, and wish
Thy several Arts to th'making up one dish:
Thy rich Composures. I have seen Thee Frame
Variety in that, which was the same:
But much-good-do't-you Friends! for Wee're not right,
Either in Pallat, or in Appetite.
Never fewer Raptures in an Age, less wit,
Less Judgment, Fancy, Poetry, and yet
Th'unthristy science never more credit gained,
Nor Poesy in greater triumph reigned:
The Laurel fades on Mercenary brows,
But on the neck of Honor spreads her boughs.
When Salary and profit ruled the Age,
Some few, would, now and then, ride post, a stage;
But Now it is otherwise -- the Nobler steed
Fames fleetest Coursers, Pegasus own breed
Do stately praunce 'bout Helicons Loved Brink,
And at the Muses-Well would daily drink.
The Alteration of the Times is such,
Great ones turn Poets now -- and so grow rich.
All wit at Livery stood before, but now
The Gentry are at leisure, a Lord too*
Can spare his great attendance, whilst he sits
And Votes -- Happy the man 'Can live by's wits.
And such art Thou --
Had thou breathed, then, thine Airs, so pure and free
Thou Had won the VVench, that now enjoy'st the Tree;
Apollo, then, would ba' been forced to resign,
His Courtship (friend) would have come short of Thine:
The greater favor, thine, I take to be,
While He grasps Her, she twines Her Arms 'bout Thee.
G. H.

POEMS, etc.
The Temple of Virtue.
REach me an Eagles plume! or take
From Mercurie's Ethereal wing
Some highborn quil my pen to make,
Whilst I of Virtue sing!
The Imperial Bay which Poets wore
In Saturn's age, and humbly grew
From base ignoble earth, is poor;
My Temples some more new
Unheard Of garland shall invest;
One of Apollo's burnished hair
Twisted with threads of life, and dressed
With Sol's bright rays, I Will wear.
Hence all prophaner ears! my Lyre
Exalted to Seraphick height,
Echoes streins worthy such a Quire,
And scorns a lower flight.
Mounted me thinks on Pegasus,
From the despised world I fly
Aloft in clouds, where soaring thus
I view this Deity.
There sits she crowned in glorious state,
And whitest robes of Innocence;
Not in that poor despised estate
As she was banished hence.(...)
I'th'midst of a fair* temple, there
Unto her Honor consecrate,
Her handmaids 'bout her Royal chair
Adorned with Trophies wait.
Oh did blind mortals but behold,
How she dispenses gifts each where
To her attendants, I Would be bold
They would with greater care
Serve at her Altars! but alas!
They fondly slight her here below,
And think her nothing worth, because
She does so meanly go.
They do not know what Conquest it is
To have o'rcome one Rebel vice,
What crowns of joy he purchases
Who gets such victories.
Virtue rewards sure, though late;
Who grows soon rich by policy
And thriving Arts, does purchase hate,
And robs his market, he
Thus by forestalling it. Light gains
Make heavy purses: Honesty
That does it self reward, disdains
Boones often in modesty.
For Virtues sake lets her affect
And not for praise or benefit
Accruing thence, such by-respect
Robs both our selves, and it.
Oh what a glorious Court does there
Of all the Graces Virtues too
In female shape and dress appear!
As if they would out-doe
The Heavens in splendor, and confine
All worth unto that sex! behold
Where Modesty in blush divine
With Roses set in gold
Triumphant shines! and close by her,
Silence that Pythagorean grace
He taught his scholars, but by far
More becomes female race.
Next her sits Innocence arrai'd
In snow-white robes, and on her head
A Chaplet wears of Love all made
And Lillies mingled.
Hard by this Peer sits Chastiti^,
Her ears close bound about, for fear
(Though crowned with Lillies too) lest she
Should ought offensive hear.
By her with book in hand, her eyes
Fixed upwards sits true Piety,
As she with Prai'r could pierce the skies,
Crowned with a Galaxie.
There Love, here Affability,
And by her, noble Gentleness;
By whom sits faithful Constancy,
Each decked in several dress:
Lowest of all Humility
Stands gravely by, as who would say
(Though She were crowned too) that she
Served waitingmaid that day.
More do I Laureate view among
These holy Nymphs: but oh! I see
High above all this sacred throng,
A richer Deity,
To whom these homage did, so fair,
That I Will approach and nearer pry;
Chiefly our eyes delighted are
With Curiosity.
Nor is it enough one Grace to know;
The way's all paved with stars, to bliss;
We must from one to the other go,
And climb to perfectness.
I Will through each Glory then, and see
What mighty Goddess dwells there,
Ruling with so much Majesty
In this diviner sphere.
It must be she, and She alone,
(Unless my dazzled eyes mistake)
Whom all these Virtues wait upon,
And their Queen Regent make.
It Is she: loved Clarastella, she
These Virtues court: with whose fair store
All mankind might enriched be,
And yet not leave her poor.
Thy pardon yet dear Quintessence
Of all perfection! if I --
In this thy holy conference
Intruding press too nigh.
'Twas Love did guide me to thy shrine,
Where I Will adoring serve alone
Thee, Virtues self, whose soul divine
does make these all, but one.
On a dust got in Clarastella's eye.
CAn I with patience this my rival see
Courting those flames so long adored by me?
Forcing her shut her eyes from me, and thaw
A tear, which all my sighs never thence could draw?
Can thou small crum of earth eclips my Sun,
And make it set in clouds ever day be done?
Could ought but Atoms to this Orb aspire?
Durst ought but dust approach so great a fire?
Hence thou unluckie beam, but more unkind,
That make at once me and my Stella blind!
What have I said? my pious rage has burned
Too hot, and has on the wrong object turned:
Forgive me little moat; I know you are free;
How has my angry zeal accused thee?
Alas thou wast thither only sent by me,
My guiltless loves unhappy Mercury.
Would know then (Fairest?) whence this dust does rise?
It Is caused by th'flaming sparkles of thine eyes,
Which like the lightning through my veins have shot
Such ardent flames of love, so scorching hot,
My heart's even burnt to ashes; hence it flies,
Dust as you made it, back into your eyes.
On Clarastella singing to the Echo at Aythorn Church in Kent.
'TWas when the Sun had purpled all the West,
And newly stole into his Rosy nest
To bring the Tartars morn; our Nymph was grown
Weary with walking, and did lay her down
Upon the tender trefoiles, glad to yield
Unto so soft a pressure, in a field
Near Aythorns holy Church, to satisfy
Our joint requests with her sweet harmony;
In a serene still Summers evening,
Fair Stella did exalt her voice and sing.
And as the torrent of her melody
Did genly flow in new variety
Of melting streins, in whose swollen rapsodies
She cooled the days heat, and thus fanned the skies,
Her Zephyre breath no sooner whispered to
The sacred walls, but straight was answered too;
As if her Angel voice had echoed bin
By the blessed music of some Cherubin:
Whilst from the Church the listening Spirit there
Through envy of her phansies chirp't to her,
And with distinguished tones in every mood
And skilful accent made her murmurs good.
'Twas in the Church this Rival dwelt; it is there
A better Echo will our sighings hear
And answer too, though never so softly groand:
(Where live thou still in this thy sphere enthroned)
Soon as She did perceive her Art outdone
By the invisible division
Of the Reporters voice, she stretched her throat
And warbling daunced on a treble noat
In loftier measures. These the Echo likewise sent
More perfect back, than from her first they went.
Shame now 'twixt grief and anger placed, did raise
Our Stella, and provoke to second lays:
One whiles she soars like the morns Lark on high,
As with exalted voice she would pierce the sky,
Then with a sullen flat and deeper base,
As she would marry her Immortal lays
With her diviner Odes, she humbly dwells
O the Gamut. The Echo too this lesson spells,
And thus repeating descants* on each strein
Much more distinctly relished and more plain.
How have I loved Church-musick ever since I
First there heard this so heavenly harmony?
Thus by alternate strivings as they had
Even sung the Sun asleep, and made us sad
In their behalf, scarce knowing which t'admire,
And count the Mistress of this holy Quire:
Our Stella did attempt it once again
To get the conquest; but alas! in vain
She striving tired, and tired was fain to yield,
While the Church-Saint was heard the last in the field.
On Loving at first sight.
SO smiles the Sun indeed with cheerful eye
On the bright gold his rays informed; and so
Does that its borrowed beams reflect. But why
Our hearts turned Solar, should each other woo
In silence by aspect, I wonder, I.
The Heliotrope that marks with watchful eye
His Sol's beloved face, and gathers thence
Those amorous features which he there did spy,
Preserving them by secret influence,
Waits on him with religious Loyalty.
By sighs and groans so woo the Turtles, and
Thus do the Mutes by signs articulate
Mysteriously each other understand;
And in this Brachygrapie can relate
Their wills, with only help of eye and hand.
Nature and Art does these instruct, but we
Led with more reason do our loves express
By louder organs tongues: though the eye be
The souls true speaking index I confess,
Yet do we more believe the ear, than eye.
Our forms in mirrours weep with us, or smile;
So at these crystal casements of the eyes,
Our other selves are represented, while
Each visual beam by repercussion is
First met, and so retort by joint recoyle.
Thus from the sparkling beam of eithers eye,
Fanned by their medium air, their hearts prepared,
Like tinder, catch Loves fire by sympathy,
And mingle flames. Let Lovers then award
Cupid his eyes, since theirs so well can see.
On a black mole on Clarastella's fair check.
HOw fair a Character has Nature wrote!
And printed on her cheek in black and white!
While this in the fairer Copy is no blot,
But a full period; that the Reader might
The better understand the sense, and know
That here She stopped, and could no further go.
As when the skilful Artist has expressed
With lively colors a fair countenance,
Yet he at last does shadow forth the rest,
And so with shades the beauty much advance:
So Nature having drawn this lovely piece,
With this last shade perfects her Artifice.
It Is like the mark of the richer text: or hand
Of The margent leading to some Paradise,
VVhere't points at some choice flower in the garden, and
Bids you there fix, and feast your greedy eyes:
This molehil's Cupids throne, on which he sits,
And with his love-arm'd shafts each breast he hits.
Let meaner beauties patch their painted faces,
Studying the black art of complexion,
Nature has here without Arts helping Graces,
Firmly engraved all perfection.
Stella's the pattern which they imitate;
They have no form but what they do create*
Bleeding at the nose at Clarastella's approach.
SO at the Murderers approach we see
The Corpse weep at its wounds again;
And I who first was slain
And robbed of Reasons soul by thee,
Walk but a living Corpse, and drawing nigh,
Thus does my guiltless blood thy murder cry,
From my dead heart it flows, and boldly there
It stares thee in thy guilty face
(Fair cruel Murtheresse!)
Soon as I thee approach more neat:
While thus the spirits all emitted are,
And for thee blushing in my face appear,
Yet back thou small remainder of my life
And bid my drooping heart revive
Which thus again may live,
Could it but some remorseful grief
Raise in thee at this horrid sight, that then
You may be quit, and I no Ghost again.
Seeing Her Dancing.
RObes loosly slowing, and aspect as free,
A careless carriage decked with modesty;
A smiling look, but yet severe:
Such comely Graces 'bout her were.
Her steps with such an evenness she wove,
As she could hardly be perceived to move;
Whilst her silk sails displaied, she
Swam like a ship with Majesty.
As when with steadfast eyes we view the Sun,
We know it goes though see no motion;
So undiscerned she moved, that we
Perceived she stirred, but did not see.
To her having got a great Cold.
WHat blasting dewes are these
That on thy active spirits seize?
And tie that tongue, did make
Music to all that heard it speak?
As by the fire Ice is
Made by Antiperistasis;
So does thy hearts flame within
And th'warm air ambient 'bout thy skin
And colder self, congeal it
To such a coldness you scarce feel it.
It Is so: the heat is more intense
And glowes by th'numness of each sense.
But oh! that vital part
Kill not (thou cruel frost!) her heart!
May th'Elemental fire
That burns there purely through desire,
Scorch, like our fires below
More fiercely, for the frost and snow!
The Invocation to Cupid.
OH do not look me dead, fair eyes!
Do not allure and then despise!
Be kind but as your picture! that
Will look and smile, though you will not.
Ye Gods! or women make less fair!
Or else less cruel then they are!
Or strike me Cupid blind like thee,
So I my torment shall not see.
To one blaming my high-minded Love.
TOo great? wherein? is it in wealth or blood?
Or is she any way too good?
The sacred treasure that I bring, is Love,
Angels enjoy nor wish no more;
It Is Sovereign too, and sans allay will prove
As rich as both her Indies doubled over.
Love makes equality; nor will admit
Finites should bound an Infinite:
Who sets no value on himself, shall never
By others much esteemed be.
Blind Cupid does assist the bold, while fear
Unman's the heart, and shuts the Lovers eye.
But she is high and wel-discended; true;
My birth styles me as freeborn too;
No peasant blood does stein or chil my veins,
And the proud Youth that warms them, he
Was of a Goddess born, and thus disdeins
I should adore less than a Deity.
My loves diviner flames do upwards fly
By nature like their sparks on high;
Base heavy things do only downward tend
To the dull center gave them birth;
But heav^n-deduced spirits there ascend:
Whilst low ignoble minds fix to their earth.
Man's sight erected looks to Heaven, that so
His thoughts he there might level too:
She is the Empyraeum of my love;
Whose Glories though they blast mine eyes,
Yet shall my Eagles singed feathers prove
Bright Trophaees of a gallant enterprise.
On Clarastella's Picture drawn very like her.
FAir shadow of a fairer substance! when*
Thy lively second self I see,
Nature does blush that by Arts powerful pen
Stella again create should be.
See where She all identifi'd appears
Except that soul we cannot see!
Whilst this, her eyes, form, shape, and color wears,
And 'cud it breath, w'ud say 'twere She.
Bright Image of my Saint! to thee I Would bow,
Were it not flat Idolatry,
To think thoult hear what scarce deaf she will do,
In hope thy lips can answer, I.
Yet will I make this holy use of thee:
The looking often on thee may mind
Me of that more respectfull Deity
That to my prai'rs may be inclined.
On Mrs. E. H. having red hair on her head, and on her left side a pure white
lock* growing.
TEll me no more of Helen fair,
Of Daphne, or that famous pair*
Of lovely Dames whom Jove did court
And tempted to his bed of sport.
Such a fair wonder I shall tell
The Golden age cannot parallel:
Her hair the richest Metal yields,
Whilst she like Ceres gilds the fields:
And her smooth flesh with red and white
So fitly mixed, so purely bright,
While the choice flowers there smile so gay,
She Is fair as Flora fresh as May.
Lilly and Rose dwell in her face,
In every look and smile a Grace,
And in whom all is understood
What we count either Fair or Good.
As is the Saints more precious head
With gilded rays environed;
So 'bout this Comet you shall see
The Emblem of her Deity.
Such light surrounds, that all may say
It Is she not Phoebus rules the day;
While those loose flames about her spread,
Irradiate, not shade her head.
Let me adore this Saint-like Shrine,
There Is treasure in this golden mine:
It was not Jason, no; 'twas She
That got the Golden Fliece, not he.
She whose sweet looks and glorious hair
Dart like warm lightning through the air:
That in this golden shower of love
She seems like Danae fit for Jove;
And the gilt threads which twisted lie
Wreathed with Arts Embroaderie,
About her Temples, in her praise
A Garland and a Crown do raise.
Why should fond Fancy then compare*
The sadder with the brighter hair?
Black tresses' come the browner hue
To set it off the better: you
Need no such foil; your Angel face
Wants neither beauty, worth, nor grace.
But here! behold a silver beam
Which from this Blazing-star does stream,
And in such curling waves does flow
About her Ivory breast below;
White as the soul she wears within,
Does speak her pure and free from sin!
Not the blancht snow or Pearly dew
Of Morn, affords a brighter hue.
Here is that Crystal milky way
Which leads (like morning to the day)
To Heaven: oh thither let me come
And climb to loves Elysium!
So fitly on her left side placed,
And with such beauty it is graced,
That Nature sure when this she gave her,
Bid her there wear it as her favor.
As in our Heraldry we deem
These colors of the best esteem,
With Sol and Luna blazing forth
The nobler Arms of higher worth:
So Nature having drawn this piece
(Then which was never artifice
So neatly penned and polisht o'r
With skilful art and beauty more)
Resolved for its great worth and fame,
To put it in a Golden frame.
If in these outward parts we find
Such worth; what bears her richer mind?
May this fair grove then never fade!
Or be by blasting time decaid!
May age never hoar that lovely hair,
Or leave that golden mountain bare!
May not thy envious kemb presume
To pluck from thee one precious plume!
But if you shed a hair let't prove
A chain to lead thy captived love
Or let 't a holy Relic be
Preserved to after ages free.
That the succeeding times may tell,
This from the Queen of Beauty fell.
Amoris Somnium. To Clarastella.
LOve is a waking dream, where both the mind*
And all the senses drowned in sleep we find:
Only the Fancy works, that does range
And to a thousand strange Idaeas change.
For as in dreams we often turn, and sigh,
And groan, as if we were about to die,
Sometimes we startle as we were afraid,
Then breath distracted words, and cry for aid:
So in a trance true Lovers restles are,
Fraught with disordered thoughts, and full of care,
So speechles too, when they with grief oppressed
Speak somewhat, and in sighs do vent the rest.
Stella! when thus you see me, wake me pray;
You know what ails me, though I nothing say.
On Clarastella singing.
YE that in love delight
Approach this sacred Quire, and feast your ears!
Whilst she the sweetest Siren sings,
Whose music equals the harmonious spheres,
And perhaps richer pleasure brings!
The dying Swan or Philomel
Of The wood, not warble's half so well;
Observe the cadence where each dying sound,
Creates new Eccho's to a sift rebound.
Here Is music to the sight:
She looks and sings with such Majestic grace,
That when I Clarastella hear,
She more than woman seems, her voice and face
Taking at once both eye and ear,
That which of these two senses may
Be most refresht, is hard to say.
To glorify her after death, She Will never
Need change; She Is Angel now, and Heaven is here.
A Love Dialogue between Damon and Stella.
Dam. I Prithee Stella why so coy?
Be free as fair, and we will enjoy
New pleasures to Eternity.

Stel. -- O no: I dare not, I.


Dam. Nature's Apostate will thou prove,
That cements all with love?
When all her creatures coupled are,
Will you be singular?

Stel. Though all were Male and Female made,
Yet none shall me in vade.

Dam. View but our mother earth whose fruit
Ads all the glory to it!
Where all things generate with delight,
And feeling appetite.

Stel. I don't abjure society,
It Is fate commands Antipathie.

Dam. The Sun whose powr'full influence
Actuates each soul with sense;
Inflames chaste Turtles with desires;
And can you want such fires?

Stel. Yes: and that bird shall imitate
That lives without a mate.

Dam. The Arabian foul is chaste alone
Because it is but one:
For had wise Nature made them two,
They wu'd like Doves and Sparrows do.

Stel. Yet the chaste Phaenix is admired,
And thought the rarest bird.

Dam. No: she is Natures wonder, 'cause
She only breaks her laws;
For which a Martyr in desire,
She penance does in fire.

Stel. But I shall die with cold. Dam. How then
Can you inflame us men?

Stel. Although mine eye may sparkle, yet
My heart is frozen quite.

Chorus. With warm embraces, hot desires,
And with loves soft yet active fires,
Let Us warm each other til we prove
One flaming sacrifice to Love.

Clarastella playing sweetly on the Lute.
THat empty guts of beasts, and hollow wood,
So rare a sound should make, what mortal wu'd
Believe? did he not see what heavenly hand
Made the strings move and breath, at whose command
They died, or Ecchoed from the sacred Quire
Lays, did our souls as well as them, inspire?
His lost Euridice when Orpheus won,
Alas, his skill compared with thine, was none:
He only taught the rocks to dance, you move
Each stony heart, inflamed by you, to love;
Then with your powr'ful and enchaunting hand
Turn us to stones again, and make us stand
Like unmoved Statues, whilst amazed we
Attend the voice of heavens blessed harmony,
How the Gods listen to her graceful ayrs
Attentive as to Saints devouter prayers?
Wishing she would in those dying sounds expire
In swanlike ecstasy, to fill their quire!
Hark how she whispers from that holy bower,
An Ep'taph for each wounded Auditour!
While from her sweeter hand the warbling lyre
Borrows that sweetness we so much admire.
Touched by her quickening joints the active strings
Leap to express their joys, whilst the sound brings
Such new delight; I could but wish this bliss,
That hearing her, I had no sense but this.
To Clarastella. Loves enterteinment.
WHen Love was exild Heaven, and to and fro
For want of friends did here a begging go,
To seek relief, in this sad pilgrimage
I entertein'd the Youth my maenial page.
And though he was of many held in scorn,
Yet knew I he was of a Goddess born.
For whose fair sake I took him home, and laid
Him in the fairest lodging that I had.
I clothed the hungersterved wretch when he
Was almost dead for cold and misery:
Daily I fed him with my sighs, and in
My tears he quenched his thirst and bathed his skin.
Encouraged thus the lad grew saucy, he
Would from a servant now a Master be.
First he enticed my thoughts and cuningly
Wrought their consent to the Conspiracy;
Then he fast bound my senses by surprise,
That so he might at the Porthole of mine eyes
Bring in's Associate; then set the fort on fire,
Having betrayed the breastworks to desire.
You are that Goddess hatched and sent this spy,
I therefore do forgive his treachery.
(Fair Empress) now you have got it by a wile,
I Will teach you how to keep it: with a smile.
On Clarastella walking in the Snow that dissolved as soon as it came near her
or the ground she trod on.
WHen Heavens Mercurial drops flew gently down,
As they would cloth not pierce the ground;
Yet they no sooner landed and fallen near
Her Glories, but 'twixt grief and fear
Lest by her candor their's should be outvyd,
In Envies tears dissolving di'd.
So have I seen bright falling Stars in show,
Quench in dark gellies here below,
When they false Meteors did (descended) spy
A truer light in Stella's eye:
Thus not hearts only when her warmth is felt
But Snow and fire it self do melt.
To Clarastella. Loves Silence.
AY me! when I
Am blind with passion why
Should my best reason speechless prove?
Does joys excess
(Which words can nere express)
In silent Rhetoric speak my love?
If so; each smothered sigh will vent my smart,
And say, I love not with my tongue, but heart.
But oh! if She
(Blind boy!) should chance to be
As deaf, as my discourse is dumb,
I Will never more
Thy Deity adore,
Or to thee 'ere for refuge come.
O when thou see me stand thus mute and blind,
For pitties sake (my Stella!) then be kind!
Know that such love
Like Heavens comes from above,
And is beyond expression large;
Language is weak,
And should I strive to speak
Words would but lessen not discharge.
My Loves deep Sea's as silent as profound:
Full Caskes stand mute, only the empty sound.
Clarastella distrusting.
YOu say you love me, nay can swear it too,
But stay Sir t'wil not do;
I know you keep your oaths
Just as you wear your clothes;
Whilst new, and fresh in fashion;
But once grown old you lay them by,
Forgot like words you speak in passion,
I Will not believe you, I.
To Clarastella affrighted at the sight of a Cats fiery eyes in the dark, which
caused her to shreik.
THy shril voice pierced each apprehensive ear
Deep, as thy heart could smitten be with fear;
That, if I had not known the tongue, I could
Ha'wisht it out: but since fate pleased I should
Be thus of the sudden thunder-strucken, why
Saw I no lightning from thy troubled eye?
Forewarned thus had I been forearm'd, and though
Prevented not, I had foreseen the blow.
Never weeping Stag, thus frighted, cried so loud
Though by his thirsty foes so close pursued,
As thou (fair) Stella at the sight of that
Some Heathen worship as their God, a Cat,
Whose glaring eyes did unexpected shine
But with like wonder for to gaze on thine.
And as they at full Moon increase: so now
The fullness of your glory swelled them too.
Since lightning flew from each amazed eye,
I mar'l not such a clap did follow, I.
On a Fleabite espied on her fair hand.
BEhold how like a lovely fragrant Rose
Midst a fair Lilly bed,
Or set in Pearl like a bright Rubie shows,
This little spot of red!
Art could not die a Crimson half so good
As this was made by the tincture of her blood.
The cunning Leech knew that the richest blood
In azure veins did lie;
Choosing thy young soft tender flesh for food
Resolved thus to feed high:
Thus being Nectar-fill'd and swelled with pride,
He thinks he is now to you by blood allied.
O how I envy thee small creature, and
Even wish thy shape on me,
That so I might but kiss that sacred hand
That gives life to thee!
That which I hardly now can covered kiss,
Then I might naked touch and taste my bliss.
And though for drawing so much guiltles blood
Thou well deserve to die,
With a gold chain about thy neck, I wu'd
Have thee kept daintilie
As Scaliger's was in a box; and shown
As Stella's gentle Fairie up and down.
On the taking of an Amethist ring from off Clarastella's finger as she was
sleeping.
THou sacred stone whose native heat preservs
Man as he was created, rational,
Infuse thy virtues through my Optic nervs!
Thus while thy temperance I behold, I shall
In stupid draughts my health and reason never enthral.
Rubies that most resemble flames, are so
Devoid of heat no fire can warm them, wine
Thus though this cheerful stone resembles too
Scorns yet to stoop to Bacchus reeling Vine
Or let his Oppium prey upon his sprite divine.
Thou more enchanted than was Gyges ring
Keep then my souls eyes open while others lie
Steept, or transformed in wild Lyoeus sing
Io's to madness, yet do thou let me
Unseen but to my self approach this Deity.
How't blushes for me at the guilt of this
High sacrilege! Yet though from her I got
This virtue sleeping, she not plundered is.
Fair Stella wears a better Antidote
Both for and against the falling sickness: wot you wat?
Loves Expiration.
BY custom who so bold as he
That cannot see?
Yet I by sad experience find,
My love's most modest when mine eles are blind:
Why should my coward tongue else fear to tell
My she Physician I Am not well,
Whose only art
Can cure the passion of the heart?
Why do thou show such cruelty
(Young Boy) on me?
Wast not enough to wound my heart?
Then to add blindness to my former smart,
But make me speechless that I cannot complain?
Thus hopeless to be well again?
What punishment
Is grief that cannot find a vent?
Ah Cupid! if thou will that I
For her must die
Let me but tell her first 'twas she,
She only that did cause my malady.
Assist my tongue with so much courage, I
May tell her it is for her I die!
Perhaps my grief
May thus discharged, find some relief.
On a Crystal Watch presented to Clarastella.
THou careful Steward of my precious time
I now transmit thee to a hand sublime
And heavenly, that will guide thy measures well,
See that to her thou truth do always tell.
When she lies down to rest, then Watch to choose
Let thy soft motion quiet sleep infuse.
But when she waking turns her in her bed
Then be thou nimbly busy 'bout her head.
Put her in mind of me! and to her say
Though she lies still, yet the time poasts away:
Charge her not lose it then! but to her show
When it is time to love! then let her know
That as thou so I restless watch her, and
My watchful thoughts a guard about her stand.
Stand, at that happy hour, I find her kind,
Then let thy speedy wings no motion find.
Go only fast when she retards in love,
Then poast to short the time, then nimble prove!
True Emblem of my love this Watch I send,
Which to your careful keeping I commend:
The balance like my heart, when that beats slow
Then fast, does my disorderd passions show:
The string that holds al, is from Cupids bow,
If that should break alas it would not go:
The Crystal case that keeps it, is mine eye,
Through which you may the several motions spy.
The Wheels are my affections which will stand,
If you not move them with your gentle hand:
Oh when it slowly goes then raise it higher,
That from thy touch it may new life acquire!
It Is in your power to make it by a trick
Go fast or slow, by turning of the nick.
Let it not once go down! Watches you know
With little rest they often forget to go:
Love like the Sun should ever active be,
Which when 't declins, it rises instantly.
Of Love and Liking.
TO like or not to like, does lie
In the election of a curious eio:
But should I only what I see approve,
This were but liking and not love.
Or it would be general, as Boys
At the first sight long for their glorious toys,
Which they embrace til fresh variety
Shows fairer objects to the eye.
Go Muse! and let my Stella know
I like her person well: but tell her too!
I love her soul with mine, and thus I find
When out of sight she is in my mind.
Dialogue between Sylvio and Mirtillo.
Syl. Tell me (if ever you did feel
The power of Cupids fatal steel)
Why the young Tyrant ads disdein
Thus to complete a true loves pain?
Why faithful Lovers seldom prove
Beloved again of those they love?

Myrt. Oh it is because true Lovers are
Too servil fond, and Women care
For things though good if easy, lest:
The dear and hard to get please best.
For should we them but less adore,
They Would punish less and love us more.

Syl. But when the Amorist does find
His love rebukt by some unkind
Repulse, why does he yet admire?
And with sick hopes still feed desire?
Himself afflicting thus in vain
With hopes of what he cannot obtein?

Myrt. Ah Sylvio! Love is a disease
That does of the vital spirits ceaze,
Whose dregs time only must expel:
Hunger in sick folks does foretell
Deaths sad approach; so lovesick men
When that is a dying rave again.

Syl. Why does he not then struggling try
Or to shake off this Lethargy,
Or as some peevish sick men use,
Denied what they would have, refuse
All comfort, and with like disdein
Since She despises hate again?

Myrt. True lov's not like an Ague fit
That does of cold and heat admit;
It Is a quotidian fever that
With constant heat does thirst create.
That with its warmth does make each day
Summer, and knows no Month but May.

Repent not then thy well placed love, though she
With the like coyness slight its modesty!
For who asks doubting lest he should obtein,
Instructs his Mistress to a coy disdein.
To Clarastella. Loves Constancy.
It Is no terrestrial fire
Does with such heat my breast inspire,
For then your beauties Sun
Had looked it to pale ashes long agon.
It Is a Promethean flame
Bright as the Orbs from whence it came,
So heavenly and divine,
Immortal too, that feeds this heart of mine.
Think not (fair Stella) then
That I can be inconstant, when
That love can never die
That borrows flames from your celestial eye.
To Clarastella upon a favor received from her which she tied in my hat.
MAdam! the favor I received from you
I have it in such high esteem
That men might justly deem
Me proud of it, 'cause to the open view,
I wear it always in my hat,
There to be wondered at.
Ruling in chief there in bright Majesty
It does command all caps to vail
And say to it, all hail:
As if they spied in that some Deity,
The colors they are so divine
And with such rays do shine.
As foreign ships yield homage whey they see
Great Britains streamers spread on high
And purpling all the sky:
So when these Rosy royal colors be
Displaid, then each Spectatour knows
That they are yours, and bows.
Juno's gay bird boasts not so brave a plume
Nor in its greatest pride does shine
Like this fair flower of thine.
Me thinks I look like Memnon, could assume
A generals place and overthrow
Englands resisting foe.
A Hector fit for Mars or Venus war
Under these colors I could fight
Me thinks both day and night;
Attempt bold deeds, kill those my rivals are,
And through revenge on each black tongue
That shall thy honor wrong.
Wonder not at this valor! for I know
Under your favor, I would conquer you.
Clarastella's Indictment.
MY heart was slain when none was by
But only you and I:
Durst it self do this act?
No: a strange hand did shoot that dart
Which pierced so deep my heart,
Nor could I do the fact.
Then I Am of the fact acquitted, now
The guilt must lie on you;
I will enquire no further;
The proof is plain, the Boy that lies
Hid in your cruel eyes,
Did do this wicked murder.
Witness your lips all staind with red,
They speak who did the deed,
The Crimson blood sticks there,
And makes them at each blush confess
(For they dare do no less)
And ory we guilty are.
Your pale and self-accusing look
As soon as ere he struck
Proclaimed you accessorie:
And your distorted angry brow
Your full assent did show,
To make my death a Story.
In your hearts trembling does appear
Your more than guilty fear:
You Are by your tongue bewraid,
Which silently accusing, tells
That 'twas by you, none else,
My heart was first betrayed.
By signs thus murther's often revealed
Though it lie long concealed:
This doom I wish you then,
If still a cruel mind you bear,
May each man prove, when ere
You love, unkind again.
On the loss of a Gold-open-ring in which some of Clarastella's hair was
enclosed.
DEar Gold not in thy own self precious now,
But for that more intrinsic value thou
Enclosest, which rich treasure makes thee more
Refined, and hallowed than thou wast before,
(Though had that finger dropped, thou once did grace,
I had susteind that fatal loss with less
Regret) Farwell! Yet thou dear Relic that
Li'st here entombd and buried in this vaut
Of Indian clay, which now thy corpse must hold,
Thou did deserve a richer urn than gold.
May then that happy he shall find thee, kiss,
And then adore this unknown Shrine of bliss!
Whose worth, since he can never know, but fear
Some magic spells within, and so not dare
To wear thee: thus afflicted, may he bring
It back to me, and I Will uncharm the Ring.
But thee in vain on earth, I hope to see,
I Will search the Heavens, for there thou next wilt be:
And whereas Berenices hair was cut,
And at the Lions seavn-stard tail was put,
Thy hair shall shine yet higher in his head,
And's neck shall with this Ring be collared.
To Clarastella saying she would commit her self to a Nunnerie.
STay Clarastella, prithee stay!
Recall those frantic vows again!
Will thou thus cast thy self away
As well as me in fond disdain?
Will thou be cruel to thy self? chastise
Thy harmless body, 'cause your powerful eyes
Have charmed my senses by a strange surprise?
Is it a sin to be beloved?
If but the cause you could remove
Soon the effect would be removed:
Where Beauty is, there will be love.
Nature that wisely nothing made in vain,
Did make you lovely to be loved again:
And when such beauty tempts, can love refrain?
When Heaven was prodigal to you,
And you with beauties glory stored,
He made you like himself for view,
To be beheld, and then adored:
Why should the Gold then fear to see that Sun,
That formed it pure? why should you live a Nun,
And hide those rays Heaven gave to you alone?
Oh do not exile Natures bliss!
Do not Eclipse so great a Sun!
Imprison not a Paradise
In a Religious dungeon!
Let the foul witch laze in her smokie cel;
Only black toads in recluse vaults do dwell:
Fair Angels live in light, the foul in Hell,
I know 'twas you fair thief that stole
My heart away; nor thus content
Your cruel eyes then picked a hole
In that which never before was rent.
And do thou now this heart hence think to carry?
Or being guilty dare no longer tarry,
And so to shreive thee, fly'st to Sanctuary?
Nor is this all; your theft was higher
Than was Prometheus, who did take
From Heaven that quick inspiring fire,
Of clods, us, living men to make:
You to Heavens treasury did find a way
Where all the Beauties and the Virtues lay,
And thence by rapine did them all convey.
Guilty of which high sacrilege,
Do thou now mean to satisfy
The Gods, and give thy body pledge
To expi'ate thy souls theeverie?
Stay Votresse! enter not this Nunnerie!
For thus thou will but draw more guilt on thee,
By tempting others to Idolatry:
For when thy Glory they shall see,
Either they will all forget to pray;
Or what is as bad, they will pray to thee,
And turn devotion to play:
Nor will the Gods unto thy prai'rs incline,
If thou should still continue deaf to mine.
Stay then fair Saint! and make my bed thy shrine!
Thy self a holy Temple art
Where Love shall teach us both to pray,
I Will make an Altar of my heart,
And Incense on thy lips will lay.
Thy mouth shall be my Oracle; and then
For beads we will tell our kisses o'r again,
Til they breathed from our souls, shall cry Amen.
The Quaere. What is Love?
It Is a child of Phansies getting,
Brought up between Hope and Fear,
Fed with smiles, grown by uniting
Strong, and so kept by Desire:
It Is a perpetual Vostal fire
Never dying,
Whose smoke like Incense does aspire,
Upwards flying.
It is a soft Magnetic stone,
Attracting hearts by sympathy,
Binding up close two souls in one,
Both discoursing secretly:
It Is the true Gordian knot that ties
Yet never unbinds,
Fixing thus two Lovers eyes
As Well as minds.
It Is the spheres heavenly harmony
Where two skilful hands do strike;
And every sound expressively
Marries sweetly with the like:
It Is the worlds everlasting chain
That all things ti'd,
And bid them like the fixed wain
Unmoved to bide.
It Is Natures law inviolate,
Confirmed by mutual consent
Where two dislike, like, love, and hate,
Each to the others full content:
It Is the Caress of every thing;
The Turtle-dove;
Both birds and beasts do offerings bring
To mighty Love.
It Is The Angels joy, the Gods delight, Man's bliss,
It Is all in all: without love nothing is.
To Clarastella on St. Valentines day morning.
HArk how the Lyrick Choristers of the wood
Warble their cheerful noats! which understood
Would make us think they wooed and spoke
In pure Tibullus phrase, when he did take
His Lesbia to him! how they sing
And chirp it merrily
To welcome in that verdant spring.
Which makes our blood run high;
Arise then heavy Muse! now winter's done
And the warm pleasant Summer is begun;
Arise! and charge Aurora wake,
And wear her best array for this days sake!
Salute her first whom I Would enjoy,
And then let all the nine
To their sweet music dance and sing
That this days Valentine.
Great Bishop! whose more sacred memory
Crowns this blessed day with due solemnity,
Let me invoke thy holy Shrine
To guide me to another Valentine!
Lend me thy urns fair light awhile
With the Morns brighter eyes,
To find that happy She, and steal
Upon her by surprise.
Assist me Jove! in thy gilt showrs convey
Me to the bed to my bright Danae!
Lest I be blasted or betrayed
By the quick eyes of some cracked chambermaid,
Got up on purpose to be seen;
And though she stand in the way,
Blind me t'all but my Valentine!
Til I approach her day!
Or lend me Gyges old enchanted ring
That I may walk invisible! and bring
Me thus locked up in close disguise
To the blessed place where this fair beauty lies!
Thus undiscerned I Will pass the street,
Nor see, nor yet be seen
Of any until we two meet
(My dearest Valentine.)
Some draw their Valentines by lotterie
Whom they perhaps never saw before, but I
Make a far wiser choice in mine,
Where Love elects discreetly by design:
Some on their hats in wafer scrowl
Their names have charact'red,
I on my heart thy name enroul,
More easy to be read.
See the true windows of the perfumed East!
Breathing such odours that each sense may seast
To luxury! oh 'twould suffice
To live but one hour in this Paradise!
Then haste to kiss her balmie hand,
To kiss her shall I fear?
I Will gently draw the curteins, and
Let the bright day appear.
Behold where Innocence her self does lie
Clad in her white array! Fair Deity!
I Will only print upon her dewy lip
One loving kiss and so away will part.
She wakes, and blushes on each cheek
So red, that I may say
There on each side does truly break
The dawning of the day.
Startle not Fairest! It is I am come
Like th'Persian to adore the rising Sun:
I Am come to view that sight would make
The good old man even for thy only sake
Wish him alive again, to see
Such a fair Saint of's name,
Whose virtues propagate in thee
To his eternal fame.
It Is I am come, who but a Friend before
Am hap'ly now by fate adopted more,
A brother or what else you deem
To be more near, or of more high esteem.
I Am come to join in sacrifice
To our dear Valentine;
Where I must offer to thine eyes,
Knowing no other Shrine.
Large Hecatombs of kisses I will lay
On the altar of thy lips, that men may say
By their continuance we are true,
And will keep so this year, nor change for new.
The birds instruct us to do so,
The season too invites;
When spring comes they a billing go,
As we to our delights.
Each amorous Turtle now his Mare does choose,
Whom Nature for that year by powerful use
Taught to be constant: shall not we
Who love with reason be as firm and free?
Here then our league let us begin,
And from this minute count
Thousands of kisses that within
This year shall thus amount.
How sweet she breaths! the Zephyre wind that blows
Fresh fragrant odours on the modest Rose
Sends forth not half so pure a smell
As that which on thy chaster lips does dwell:
Here in this holy Temple I
Could fix eternally,
And pay these vows until I die
Pitied of none but thee.
Me thinks my arms now grasp a treasure more
Worth than both Indies valued double o'r.
It Is pity we should ever part,
I should be poor, if robbed of thee my heart:
The the other kiss, and though I surfeit on
The sweetness of thy breath,
The blame shall lie me on alone:
Who'd not die such a death?
To Clarastella in a storm at Sea.
BE not afraid (fair Venus of the Sea!)
These waves but haste to view thy Majesty;
Glad to receive thee thus in shoals they crowd
With plaudities expressing joys aloud:
Neptune results and with his watery dip
Gladly saluteth that more happy ship
That bears so rich a treasure; knowing that
He a more precious gem did never create:
Thus Triton and the Seagreen Gods do wear
Their fresh and best array when you appear;
As Virgins welcome spring; whereas before
With sad still blackness they stood clouded o'r:
Thus the proud billows come but to admire,
To raise thy worth and thus advance thee higher;
While they obsequiously about you throng
To guard your person, not to do you wrong:
Thus they approach with pure affection
Offering their backs for you to ride upon;
Where if the waters troubled do appear
It Is 'cause they in your brow suspect a fear.
You great Commandress both by Sea and Land,
Why should you then fear ought? at whose command
Rough Boreas and the Ocean does obey,
And to its Queen thus tribute strives to pay.
I am this Ship tossed in the waves of fear,
You the Pole Star by which I only steer:
Love the unskilful Pilot cannot sail
Homewards if you not blow a gentle gale
From your sweet Zephire breath and send relief,
'Twil suffer shipwreck in a Sea of grief.
In your smooth face let but a calm appear,
Both shall be happy and both free from fear.
To her, the Storm ceasing.
HOw Neptune smiles to view this Deity
Which all the hoarie Gods amazed to see,
Are at a stand and cannot move
When they behold this Queen of Love!
Thy brow not wrinkled now with fear, the sea
Resumes its smoothness by a Sympathy:
And whilst thou smil'st the rougher main
Is levelled to a verdant plain.
A happy Halcyon calmness sits upon
The equal face of all the Ocean:
And not a wave his head dares show
While thus in triumph you do go.
With such fair Wind and Weather, oh let me
Sail always! and I never shall sea-sick be!
On Clarastella walking in her Garden.
SEe how Flora smiles to see
This approaching Deity!
Where each herb looks young and green
In presence of their coming Queen!
Ceres with all her fragrant store,
Could never boast so sweet a flower;
While thus in triumph she does go
The greater Goddess of the two.
Here the Violet bows to greet
Her with homage to her feet;
There the Lilly pales with white
Got by her reflexed light;
Here a Rose in Crimson die
Blushes through her modesty;
There a Pansie hangs his head
'Bout to shrink into his bed,
'Cause so quickly she past by
Not returning suddenly;
Here the Currants red and white
In yon green bush at her sight
Peep through their shady leaves, and cry
Come eat me, as she passes by;
There a bed of Camomil,
When she presses it does smell
More fragrant than the perfumed East,
Or the Phoeaix spicie nest;
Here the Pinks in rows do throng
To guard her as she walks along;
There the flexive Turnsole bends
Guided by the rays she sends
From her bright eyes, as if thence
It sucked life by influence;
Whilst She the prime and chiefest flower
In all the Garden by her power
And only life-inspiring breath
Like the warm Sun redeems from death
Their drooping heads, and bids them live
To tell us She their sweets did give.
On the loss of Clarastella's black fan.
Tell me (fair wonder!) when the gentle air
Courted your wanton hair,
And hovering 'bout your face did beg a kiss,
Proud of so great a bliss,
Why did your envious Fan to it deny
So chaste a liberty?
Nor yet contented only thus to do
Why did you hide it too?
Why did you blind those lamps which both adorn,
And can mislead the Morn?
Believe me 'twas unkindly done to skreen
That light was to be seen.
Though the bright luster of your orient eyes
Like the more powerful skies
Or dazles me or sets my heart on fire
When I so high aspire,
Your Bas'lisk look with its bewitching art
Though it strike dead my heart,
And I stand Planet-struck when ever I view
So fair a star as you;
Yet do I languish like the drooping night
In absence of your light:
(For by your beams such warmth I do receive
By which alone I live)
That if you draw a cloud before this light,
It Is with me darkest night.
When Morpheus once had on my drowsy bed
His sable mantle spread
And drawn the curtains of Heavens Canopie,
Had veild the starry sky,
In this Cimmerian slumber as I lay,
Me thought I wished for day,
Expecting when the rosie-fingred Morn
Should the black earth adorn;
When with his early rays he should affright
The mistie shades of night,
At last he came, and I beheld his steeds
Decked in their Royal weeds,
And fair Aurora purpling all the sky,
Enlightened every eye,
How glad was I? and wished that never night
Might mask so great a light.
You were that Phosphor I thus longed to see
Hid in obscurity;
And now your luster breaks forth like the day
Clad in her best array.
Oh happy loss! by which I gain a sight
As precious as the light!
To Clarastella on a Nosegay of flowers which she wore at her bosom.
IF Bees extract their sweetness from each flower,
As these, theirs, from your breast; I thee devour
Alive then ( Stella!) when I honey eat;
Rare food! than Attick flow'rmel far more sweet!
Yet as robbed flowers preserve their smell, still fair,
So these fresh in thy bosoms garden are,
Though blown on, whose sweet dewes and Sun above,
Make them grow there feed us, still fragrant prove.
There Is scarce a sense, but those thy flowers delight,
They please the touch, the taste, the smell, the sight;
Yet thou the choicest do this all, and more,
Thou sweetly do our hearing ravish too.
Since like those subtle Chemists then, you take
Sweetness from them too, one more exact to make,
Thy self, which Nectar art, oh hiv'd might I
Feed on thy Honey, and there melting lie!
Song.
INvest my head with fragrant Rose
That on fair Flora's bosom grows!
Distend my veins with purple juice
That mirth may through my soul diffuse!
It Is Wine and Love, and love in wine,
Inspires our youth with flames divine.
Thus crowned with Paphian myrtle, I
In Cyprian shades will bathing lie,
Whose snow if too much cooling, then
Bacchus shall warm my blood again.
It Is Wine and Love, etc.
Life's short, and winged pleasures fly;
Who mourning live, do living die:
On down and floods then Swan-like I
Will stretch my limbs, and singing die.
It Is Wine and Love, and love in wine
Inspires our youth with flames divine.
On Clarastella discovered sleeping in her bed.
SLeep gentle soul! and may a quiet rest
Crown the sweet thoughts that harbor in thy breast!
Keep her ye powers divine! let no foul sight
Afflict her mind! no horrors of the night,
No fearful shapes or Apparitions
Disturb her slumbers through sad visions!
I charge thee Morpheus thou pale God of sleep,
See thou from her distempers, startings keep!
Let all her dreams be Golden! let them taste
Of heavenly pleasures! let them all be chaste
Delights, Embraces, Wishes, and such new
And prosperous hopes, as may at length prove true!
Show her rich Crowns and Garlands! then let love
Chaste as her sleep, such as the Gods above
Enjoy, steal in her mind, and represent
The perfect Image of her blessed content!
There let her fix and entertain awhile
A parley with her thoughts! then let her smile
As pleased at the conference, or some other way
By a soft sigh let her her love betray!
Thus please each sense with various delight
And with fresh sights prevent her appetite!
Thus let her sleep secure, that she may find
At once both ease in body and in mind!
I charge you wake her not! no noise draw near
Her bed to whisper in her quiet ear!
See how my charms have workt! behold she lies
Like Innocence her self in white! her eyes
Shut against all worldly vanity, do show
How little she regards this earth below:
Her soul within, though active, yet is still,
Which speaks the calmness of her inward will.
The Zephyre wind does not more gently blow
Nor with so soft or still a motion slow
As her sweet breath from her; here we may find
The even pace of a wel-temper'd mind.
Bless me! what thoughts possess my ravished soul,
And stir my blood, I can them not control!
I Am all enflamed; and yet I dare not do
What the fair harmless object prompts me too.
She stirrs; Oh! I must vanish quickly hence,
Lest I should wake her, with some violence.
To her at departure.
THey err
That think we parted are
Two souls in one we carry,
Half of which though it travel far
Yet both at home do tarry.
The Sun
When farthest off at Noon
Our bodies shade draws nigher:
My soul yours shadow, when I Am gone,
Waits closer through desire.
Dear heart
Then grieve not 'cause we part,
Since distance cannot sever:
For though my body walks apart
Yet I am with you ever.
Elegiack Song.
LEnd me ye floods your tears! oh more!
Lend me al Neptun's watery store
When he drowned all mankind! that I
May in this deluge drown and die!
She Is dead to me: unhappy fate,
That love, which burnt so clear of late,
Is now extinct: oh help! and I
Will weep hers and mine obsequie.
To Cupid. Song.
THou that have shot so many hearts
With thy enchanted darts!
(Young Archer!) if thou have one more
In all thy store,
Send it, oh send it to my Love,
Winged with the feathers of thy Mothers Dove!
Or head it with the same desire,
Thou did my shaft enspire!
Or take thine arrow back from me!
It Is cruelty
Sometimes not to be cruel: Oh!
Or smite both hearts, or else unbend thy bow!
To a Lady wearing a Looking-glass at her girdle.
GAze not on that fair Mirror, where you see
Naught but the shadow of your frailty lie;
Where beauty stays no longer then you look
On the gilt outside of that rotten look
Your self; where all is but dust without, and such
Foul leaves within: why then admired so much?
Since nothing can be loved but what has been
Known to the sense, or to the eye bin seen,
Why should you dote upon that face which you
Never yet saw, nor have the power to do?
Whose very shape when you have often pri'd
And re-examin'd every part, and spied
With strictest eye each line, and symmetrie,
Is clean forgot, when you remove your eye:
Which usual instance may instruct you not
To study that, which is so soon forgot.
Since you nor see your self, nor look upon
That form but thus by mere reflection:
How know you? or why think you are fair?
Is it, 'cause fond admirers say you are,
For want of judgment? or some flattring Ass,
Or this a great deal more dissembling glass
Tells a fair story to your cred'lous eye,
VVil you believe such Romance history?
When the spruce gallant courts your hand, and vows
Saluting it, he nothing whiter knows,
Then gazing upward on that heavenly sphere,
Swears you are Angel-like beyond compare,
Excelling all your sex; can you conceive
That to be true, which he did least believe?
When the amorous youth looks Babies in your eyes
And through Loves flattering optic he espies
At the wrong end a world of beauty there,
Blinded with passion thus 'twixt hope and fear,
When he protests he thinks he sees in you
Some God-like form, can you believe it too?
When knowing men dissemble truth; alas!
VVil you then trust a dumb deceitful glass?
Embrace your self? and like Narcissus pore
Upon that Crystal til you start a flower?
(Which fades as soon as blown,) admiring more
That part your self, then others all the store?
Then quit that coz'ning beam! nor imitate
The Mermaid to be only upwards neat
With comb and glass in hand, when we all know
You'ar either fish or what is worse, below.
The blanched Swan with whitest plumes arrai'd
Til by her own black skin and legs betrayed
Did think her self the fairest bird, do you
But look about you, you will appear so too.
What boots a comely presence, graceful eye,
If all be foul except the Phisnomie?
Wise men admire not beauty, birth or blood,
How rich or fair, they ask not, but how good?
First dress your soul! see that be fair and clear,
And then you will truly beautiful appear.
To Clarastella.
It Is not your beauty I admire,
Nor the bright starlight of each eye,
Nor do I from their beams take fire
My loves torch to enlighten, I:
No: it is a Glory more divine
Kindles my tapour at your shrine.
Your comely presence takes not me,
Nor your much more inviting mien;
Nor your sweet looks; the Graces be
(Fair Creature!) in your picture seen.
No: it is your soul to which I bow,
It Is none of these I love, but you.
How blind is that Philosophy
Does only natural bodies know?
That views each Orb of the glorious sky,
But sees not him that made it so.
I love thy informing part, in the whole
And every part, thy all; thy soul.
The Farewell to Clarastella.
PAssion of me! why melt I thus with grief
For her whose frozen heart denies relief?
Find out some other way to punish me
Ye Gods! and let me not the Author be
Of mine own death! make me forget that ever
I loved! at least that ever I loved her!
Yet I must love her still: O cruel Fate!
That do true love so il requite with hate!
Why ever I saw her did not make me blind?
Then had she as before continued kind
Without power to displease, her Charity
Warm as my Love, and I had still been I:
But now alas! my distant bliss I see,
Which like my courted shadow flies me
As fast as I pursue: ay me! she is gone,
And with her all my winged hopes are flown.
But oh! if you one drop of mercy have,
Let me request you shed it at my grave
When y'hear I died for you! Oh let there be
One tear at least shed from your pious eyes
In memory that I fell your sacrifice!
Where though I cannot, yet my marble will
Against these soft showers for me some tears distill.
Fairest farewell! and by my living love,
May thou to me when dead thus loving prove!
Shed from your eyes perhaps one faithful tear
May make my ashes quick again, how ever
My shipwrackt love in these drops bathed, at last
May drowning grasp what is next, and hold thee fast,
Which whilst I lived it could not; thus I will
Alive and dead (my Stella!) love thee still.
On the Report of Clarastella's death.
She dead? forgive me Heaven! I'ad almost swore
That she 'bout her had nothing mortal wore:
Her soul's immortal, and her body too
Since't knew no actual sin, must needs be so.
Our sins do drag us to our graves, but she
Had no such harbingers; her Piety
Made her a Monarch in Divinity,
And taught her how to live eternally.
It is not likely, guilty death should take
Such Innocence away from us, or make
Immortal Virtue die: old Adam sure
Had lived til now, could he have lived as pure
And free from either act or thought of vice,
He had survived this age in Paradise.
Our sins are our diseases; only they
Invoke pale death, whom we all must obey
When he arrests us for these debts, we know
Life's the cheap ransom for the sums we owe,
Which she never forfeited 'cause no disease
Upon her body or her soul could seize,
She was so sound and perfect: why should I
Believe that Clarastella then could die?
If wantonness durst steal into her mind
'Midst her sweet dreams, leaving a touch behind
Of phansied pleasure, yet she wakt a maid,
And blushing, that she should be thus betrayed,
By her own guiltless thoughts, she feared to tell
Even what her visions were; nor knew she well
What was their pleasant meaning; or if she
Did but by chance two Lovers kissing see;
She thought they did but imitate the Dove
Thus to affect with chaste Platonic love.
Her salutations decked with modesty,
Did like her smiles express humility.
Thus was she perfect Virgin, whilst her love
Knew n'other object but the Gods above.
How then durst death, toward her his dart advance,
Whose only sin was harmless ignorance?
Why should I fondly drooping let mine eyes
Yield at the news, a liquid sacrifice?
Or let her dying rumor wound my years
Whose virtue did deserve a Nestors years?
I Will not believe then she is dead, since I
Know she has merited Eternity:
For were it, as envious Fame reports her gone,
'Twere but a happy transmigration,
To Heaven; where still she lives a Saint, and we
Do still adore her living Deity.
To a Painter limning a Curtezan.
LEave off fond Artist, cannot your wanton eye
Glance on a pleasant face, but presently
You must go court her with your pencil, and
Thus spoil th'invention of a witty hand?
What need you paint her when the wicked Elfe,
Fearing no colors, daily paints her self?
What mean those naked dresses silks and lawn?
When she is much fitter to be hanged then drawn?
Would thou express thy art and judgment? say
Would thou be famed? I Will tell you; thus you may.
Paint me to life, a chaste and virtuous Dame,
Whose spotless honor speaks her still the same,
In whose smooth forehead let there be expressed
What Virgin thoughts she harbors in her breast!
Set forth her several Graces! and her eye
Make to betray a cheerful modesty?
Her sober looks, and her aspect is free,
Let them both innocent and simple be!
Then in her cheeks express that blushing grace
Which Vestal vows have printed in her face!
Then let thy Fancy through her purer skin
Transparent make her chaster soul within!
When you have drawn this piece, then Painter see
You not expose it to each common eye
That cannot judge! to Lovers only those,
And not to lustful eyes this piece expose?
On the young and fair Mrs M. H. her hair being unfortunately burnt by chance
in the candle as she was Combing her head at night.
UNluckie Traitor! could thy greedy flame
Feed on such fuel, and not devour the same?
How durst thy dull pale flames so high aspire,
And mix its lazy heat with Vestal fire?
Oh how I grieve this direful chance? to see
These fresh leaves falling from the blooming tree,
And that the spring which was but now begun,
Should thus of the sudden into Autumn run!
Ah cruel Atropos! why so soon would you
Thus rudely cut those threads of life in two;
Those neat disheveled locks whose every grace
Scorning arts help, set forth a neater face?
With what pale horror do I wondering see
This sight, and fear what the event will be!
Methinks it now portends some overthrow,
Threatens some great man's ruin, and does show
Like lightning before the thunder, bidding all
Be armed against the stroke: or now I call
To mind fair Helen Troy did so admire,
Me thinks it represents that town on fire.
Had this but Lilly seen he would have said
It was some blazing Comet; and that head
Which was thus crisped o'r with purest rays
Was all a heavenly Meteor, that did blaze
Her Virtues forth to the worlds open eye
As Emblem of her rare divinity.
Or had mistook thee in this borrowed light
For brightest Phoebe Mistress, of the night,
By those bright Star-like tapours of thine eyes.
Oh may another lovely Phoenix rise
From these sweet ashes, whose sad funeral pile
With fragrant odours thus perfumes our Isle!
But thou cursed light that wroughtst this Tragedy,
In thy own flames may thou a martyr die.
Writ on Clarastella's Busk.
MIght I of nights in thy room lie
'Twixt Stella's warmer mounts of snow,
So near her heart dissolving, I
No higher Paradise would know:
Such envied bliss would make me stray,
VVhither the Gods themselves would bow,
And leave heavens upper milkie way,
To breath in happier shades below.
Deploring Clarastella's Inconstancy.
FAir and yet cruel? strange me thinks that art
Should act amiss, where Nature plai's her part!
Can you a gentle Saint, a Tyrant prove?
Can your diviner soul forget to love?
Can Winter set in such a love-warm breast
Which was with so much heat but now possessed?
Are the flames dying, and loves active fires
Congealed to frosts, and freez'd to cold desires?
And those fair Violet veins the verdant Spring
Did so enliven now no heat can bring?
Can you that carried Summer in your lips
Red as the Cherrie suffer an Eclipse?
That in the Apples of your cheeks did wear
A fertile Autumn now no fruit can bear?
All heat extinguished? not one spark of fire*
Now left, but to inkindle new desire?
Strange mixture this, when I at once may view*
All the four seasons of the year in you!
Some health for pity to my hopes restore?
Or love me not at all, or love me more!
Under this Equinox my shadows are
Quite round me; whilst I live in black despair;
Frigid nor torrid zones can I endure:
They bred cold Agues, these a Calenture.
Loves Haesitation. To Clarastella.
WHy should I love that thing
Can no affection bring?
Since reason does from liking draw
Reciproque friendship, shall I thaw
When her love freezeth? tell me why
When she disdaineth, should not I?
Yet Loves Religion
Bids me love, though she frown;
By whose more sacred laws Heaven knows*
We are enjoined to love our foes:
Though she reject me then, yet I
Must love my Stella, til I die.
Love! I your powers obey
True love can never decay:
And since that Virtue lives in you
Which made me like, and love you too
At first; I am oblieg'd, and I
Must love thee to Eternity.
To Clarastella admiring her black Eyes and Hair.
LEt others Court the Cyprian Queen,
Gilt tresses, or the Amber skin!
Give me black eyes and hair,
Presumed the face be fair,
And a Seraphick soul within!
The Swan though black below, above
Is the white object of our love,
So is Juno's prouder bird,
For her black eyes admired
And 'cause they are so; I yours approve,
Apelles limning a fair maid,
Let fall by chance his pen, and said
That though he meant it not,
Yet could not mend the blot,
It did express so rare a shade.
If shadows best set forth a face,
Adorning it with beauties grace,
Then are you only fair,
Whose form beyond compare,
Excels the birth of humane race.
In your bright eyes deciphered are
The Evening and same morning star,
Sole Glory of the Night,
Decked with such rays of light,
No day can boast so rich by far.
The Lovers Torch does burn most bright
Like Comets in the darkest night;
And the black Boy still roves,
In sap and shadie groves,
And like you crowns Loves sweet delight.
To Clarastella complaining of my long kisses.
MAdam! I vow I never knew
One creature of your sex till you,
Find fault with what was long in men,
Oh do not geld my Fancy then!
Nor blame my pleasures ecstasy,
That when each sense is feasted, I
Thus taste each pure Ambrosiack kiss,
And by degrees melt down my bliss.
Oh those smooth, soft, and Rubie lips,
That fright the Sun to an Eclipse,
Whose Rosy and Virmilion hue
Betray the blushing thoughts in you:
Whose fragrant Amoratick breath
Would revive dying Saints from death,
Whose Syren-like harmonious air
Speaks music and enchants the ear;
Who would not hang? and fixed there
VVish he might know no other sphere?
Oh for a charm to make the Sun
Drunk, and forget his motion!
Oh that some palsy or lame gout
Would cramp old times diseased foot!
Or that I might, or moult or clip
His speedy wings, whilst on her lip
I quench my thirsty appetite
With the life honey dwells on it!
Oh for a Crane-like neck that may
This Nectar slowly thence convey!
Then on this holy Altar, I
Would sacrifice eternally,
Offering one long continued mine
Of Golden pleasures to thy shrine.
I mean not Pompeys biting kiss
Flora did so commend: nor his*
Venerious sip Catullus used
Where lip-salve was from each infused
No: a more holy chaste impresse,
May the image of each mind express
As perfect as the wax the seal:
Such kisses do not wound, but heal.
Kissing, thou sacred kissing art,
Only the intellective part
Of pleasure; by which union
Our souls discourse and meet in one
Fixed Center, whilst in a full kiss
Each amorous line concentred is:
Nor does it violate Chastity,
Or forfeit like Adultery.
The dowry now, as heretofore,
(When but to speak, or see, was more
Immodest deemed, at least as much,
A Woman; as it is now to touch.)
Thus with chaste lips we blow Loves fire
To a live coal; thus fan it higher:
Thus do we seal affections band,
Which only death can cancel: and
Whilst both our hearts and lips do meet
Thus do our souls each other greet:
Thus we engender speaking Love
Peculiar only to the Dove:
Whereas all other bodies heat
Of Lust does them incorporate
But only in the act; yet we
Thus renew love to eternity
With fresh unsated appetite,
And without shame or sad regret;
Which true experience does prove
The difference betwixt Lust an Love.
Then let us kiss like Turtles, close
Until we both seem one: til those
That see our hearts saluting thus
Shall not disturb, but envy us.
Coyness in women makes men more
Suspect they will do behind the door:
If thus you think I kiss too much;
Know that my love to you is such,
That whensoe'r it pleases you
I Will closer kiss, drink deeper too.
To Clarastella. Why Lovers walk round.
It Is often observed that those who are in love
Do, when they walk, in spherick circle move;
A motion to its nature genuine:
So move the Heavens and Love that is divine
And heav'n-deduced draws like that his gest
A round, because that figure is the best.
Love is a Labyrinth wherein wandering men
Tread the same pensive measur's o'r again:
The Soul her feet the affection guides, and moves
To the same object that she truly Loves.
Thus when I walk so often round, I move
To thee the Center Nature bids me love.
A Pastoral Protest of Love by Damon to Stella.
WHen I thee all o'r do view
I all o'r must love thee too.
By that smooth forehead where is expressed
The candor of thy peaceful breast:
By those fair twin-like-stars that shine,
And by those apples of thine eyn:
By the Lambkins and the Kids
Playing 'bout thy fair eie-lids:
By each peachie blossomed cheek,
And thy Satin skin more sleek
And white then Flora's whitest Lillies
Or the maiden Daffadillies:
By that Ivorie porch thy nose:
By those double blanched rows
Of teeth, as in pure Coral set:
By each azure rivolet,
Running in thy temples, and
Those flowrie meadows 'twixt them stand:
By each Pearl-tipt ear by Nature, as
On each a Jewel pendant was:
By those lips all dew'd with bliss,
Made happy in each others kiss:
By those pure Vermilion cherries
Thy red nipples, and those strawberries
Swimming there as set in cream:
By those two curld locks, that seem
To wreath thy Lover in waved art
That from thee he never should part:
By those silk tresses soft as down
Of tender Eunuchs newly blown,
That vail your body round when ever
In your own shades you would less appear:
By that silver stately neck
Does thy gems more grace and deck
Then they can it: by those two
Soft and wool-warme mounts of snow:
By each Alablaster hand,
And those slender joints that stand
So straight and closely set, each palm
Seems a young tree, distilling balm:
Midst that pregnant Hemisphear
By the fair knot that is planted there:
By those moving columns bear
This Globe and the loved frame uprear:
By those pretty nimble feet
Wont in skilful measures meet:
By the neat fabric of the whole,
Fair as the world from either Pole,
Whose each part is Paradise,
And Heaven both in, and round, it is.
By thy self, when thee I view
I love thy all, and each part too.
Occasional POEMS:

By Robert Heath, Esquire.

Majores majora sonent, mihi parva locute Sufficit, in vestras saeperedire
manus. Mart. li. 9. Ep. 1. LONDON, Printed for HUMPHRY MOSELEY, and are to be
sold at his Shop at the sign of the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1650.

Occasional Poems.
To an old Gentlewoman that would have her Picture drawn.
WHat strange impossibles are those
That one famed Myron you impose?
Drawn to the life you would be you say,
When you are dying every day;
In colors too, when there is but one
All o'r your face, and that is dun.
Heel draw it is like thy shadows true,
For thou art all but shadowed blue.
If fair then thou wu'dst counted be
His pigments let him lay on thee,
And with a trowel dawb and sleek
The wroughcast of each wrinkled cheek,
Else but in vain he shall on you
Spend both his oil and labor too.
Drawn with black lead or with a coal
Over some Alehouse chimney wall,
Thy picture best will semble thee
By some rough Dialler; when he,
Shall underwrite in meeter, this
The widow of Sarepta is.
Or 'twil show best through lattice-work,
Here an old woman, there the Turk.
Yet if thou needs must have it done
Let me say this in caution
Unto thy Painter, that he plie
And speed his work, or thou will die
Before the third days sitting: when
(If thou can live so long) that then,
(Because thoult never be at the expense
To take thy il looked figure thence)
He would but send the piece to me;
I Would rather have it far then thee,
To hang up amongst my Sybels, or
Foul Hags, lest some mistake thee for
One of the Fatal Destinies
Or Helbred Furies worse then these.
But I Am afraid it is his design
To sell thee for some Tavern sign,
(If he not hang thee out a loof
Oth' back oth' Change as weather proof)
And I shall see thee thy ruined face
Hang out in Southwark, old Queen Bess.
Epithalamium Amatorium To Aurora.
WHy peeps the envious Morn so soon upon
The pleasures of our bed?
Pull back thy fiery coursers Phaeton!
And drive not til I bid!
And lest thy headstrong steeds their reins should break,
That Virgin girdle take
I now unti'd! too soon for you it is
And me, our rosy. nests to leave, and rise.
Have I so many tedious Suns beheld
And nights in sighing spent,
Ever to temptation I could make her yield?
And would you now prevent
The long-wisht harvest of my joys delight?
Nor grant as long a night?
Go back to thy loved Thetis bosom! go!
Whilst in our beds we will sport it longer too.
I Would have the world til we our curtains open,
Expect the Morning star,
And from my glorious Darlings blushes, hope
The Day may once appear:
'Tshud be then always night she says, that we
Might never discovered be.
So might it be! for whilst she is in mine arm,
In her Suns shade I Would keep me ever warm.
On the strange unfortunate breaking of a Glass in a Tavern.
HAppy mischance! if happy I may call
What by so strange misfortune did befall!
The Ganymede that had performed its trust,
Discharged so many healths and them so just,
Brok of it self, and falling to the ground,
Foretold our fortunes if we kept the round.
Had it survived the Nectar thence did flow
Our brains had cracked or else we fallen as low.
But tell me little glass my quondam friend!
How did thou come to this untimely end?
Did any fatal or unluckie hand
Throw thee to ruin against thy Joves command?
No: 'twas a stranger full; I rather think,
The wine did make thee fall which thou did drink.
Though the diviner sack Immortal be,
The glass that holds it yet may die I see.
Drinking on a rainy day.
OH: it is a rainy drinking day!
Come let it pow're
Weel drink these clouds all dry away
Suck every shower
The envious Earth shall not drink all, for we
Our plants will water too as well as she.
The clouds that fatness drop from heaven
Descend to us
Even to invite us reach them to enliven
Our spirits thus:
Then sink or swim, weel moisten thirsty care,
And though the weather's foul, weel* drink it fair.
To one that hearing I had some faculty in Poesy, simply requested me to write
somewhat on his dear wife lately dead.
HAd I so well but known thy Ligbie, as
Sire Adam once his Eve did know
Then I might say thy wife a good one was:
But I never saw, nor knew her so.
Wu'dst have me then extol her beauties fire?
Most say she looked, and painted well!
Should I her unknown secret parts admire,
Or hidden qualities sorthtel?
Troth I never heard one good she had, for what,
Thou falsely thoughest one, loving thee;
Now Is out of fashion, and esteemed a fault.
Then in her praise, (...) silent be;
Since Silence best suits me as each of them:
For Women's pride aftecteth such
Gross flattery, that who undertakes the theme;
Speaks both too little, and too much.
On Copernicus his opinion of the earths turning round.
COpernicus was of opinion
That the Earths globe by spherick motion
Turned round, and that the Heavens were fixed: the man
Was drunk sure or on shipboard, when his brain
Hatched this Maeander; for to such the land
Does only seem to move when they do stand.
When Noah's flood had turned the land to Sea
And the earth seemed one floating Isle to be,
The world then rid on waves indeed, and then
In The Ark there was no terra firma seen:
Yet true we find what was but Fancy then,
(For the world if we but understand the men
That live therein) for they alas turn round
And scotomized sail on firmest ground:
Or drunk with madness, with their poreblind eyes
Think States well settled totter though they rise.
A strange Vertigo or Delirium,
Oth' brain it is, that thus possesses'um;
Whilst like to fashions grown Orbicular,
Kingdoms thus turned, and overturned are:
Nothing but fine Eutopian worlds in the moon
Must be new formed by revolution.
Nor does the State alone on fortuns wheels
Run round, alas our rock Religion, reels:
We have saild so far the Antipodian way
That into darkness we have turned our day.
Amidst these turnings it is some comfort yet,
Heaven does not fly from us, though we from it.
To one that was so impatient with the toothache that he would not rest til all
his teeth were drawn forth.
HOw! branch and root? that is too severe,
Let penal laws suffice! howe'r
Do not extirpate the whole breed,
Which one day you may so much need!
That is the last and worst extreme
To 'stroy all, cause some are too blame.
If your right hand offend, I know
You may cut't off, your right eye too
If that offend, pluck out: but 'sooth,
I find not so you may one tooth:
Unless perhaps in drink and heat
With pots or candlesticks you have beat
Teeth out of this or that man's head,
Then eye and tooth, for tooth indeed
Should be repaid. But tell me when
Your teeth are gone, what will you then
For grinders do? youl' learn to chew
The cud, drink, and eat spoon-meat too?
Suck again will you not? I Am sure
That self-preservation Nature
Commands: what should we more preserve
Then teeth, whose want would make us sterve?
Do we not live by them? who w'ud
Deprive himself of's livelihood?
But since you have an aching tooth
To leave no jacks within your mouth,
And are so far run mad with pain
You are resolved to have all drane:
Let not the Barbar-surgion set
Them string'd on scarlet forth, but let
Them in a box be kept, and shown
For those that fell from that jawbone
That Samson fought with; and I Will swear,
That they the very Asses were.
On Whip the Preaching Coachman.
DRive right thou furious Jehu! that have stepped
From the square coach-box and profoundly leapt
To a round Preaching tub! O how he feels,
With learning that he rubbed from horses heels,
Himself inspired oth' sudden! now for the cause
And overthrow of all good humane laws!
So Phaeton drove his car, which overturned
Through headless fury, thus, the world it burnd.
What a strange Metamorphosis is this?
A frock turned to a linen Ephod is;
No Tailour John of Leiden exstant now
To consecrate this groom a Prophet too,
As Becold did Tuscoverer? that then
He in reward may crown him King again?
Like as Caligula when he did feign
Himself a God, his great horse did ordein
His Priest; a God and Prophet much alike,
Both might have learnt of Baalams Ass to speak.
Yet see how Muncers spirit reigns in him!
And like phanatick Phifers makes him dream
More revelations in one night, then the old
Patriarchs and Prophets visions did behold!
Which phansied novels he does often obtrude
To the weak faith oth' giddy multitude.
Rotman or Cniperdolin never knew
Such marks oth' godly as this Saint can show:
Whilst thus like John Matthias, he contemns
All books except the Bible, and condemns
Each human Author to the flames, that all
In The mist of ignorance may prove mistical.
Polygamie of Churches he does call,
A fornication spiritual:
When he expounds oh it is strange to see
After large sighs, in what an ecstasy
He speechless prays! just as the Darvises
Amongst the Turks, so in a trance he is;
These Prophets as they style them, having run
Round til they loose their breath, fall senceless down;
And after some short sleep awaking tell
Their studied dreams as from an Oracle.
So this Enthusiast after many sighs
And turnings of the eggs of his twinkling eyes,
Straight Epileptick in this rapture grows,
Where after many yawns and feined shows
Of a transported mind, at last the Elf*
Delivers nonsense like the mouth of Delph.
Leave, leave thou russet Rabbi! leave for shame!
And do not thus abuse that holy name
And function of a Preacher! drive again!
Currie thy horses and not Christian men!
Else profane huckster with thy whip thou may
Ever long be scourged, and forth the Temple cast.
On the unusual cold and rainie weather in the Summer. 1648.
WHy puts our Grandame Nature on
Her winter coat, ever summers done?
What has she got an ague fit?
And thinks to make us hovering sit
Over her lazy Embers? else why should
Old Hyems freeze our vernal blood?
Or as we each day, grow older,
Does the world wax wan and colder?
It Is so: See how nakt Charity
Sterves in this frozen age! whilst we
Have no other heat but glowworm zeal
Whose warmth we see but cannot feel.
All changed are Ceres golden hairs
To clouded gray, and naught appears
In Flora's dress: our hopes do die
And oth' sudden blasted lie.
Heavens glorious lamps do wast away,
The Elements themselves decay,
And the mixed bodies mutiny
By a rebellious sympathy;
Whilst the distempered world grows pale,
And sickning threatens death to all:
So in an instant waters swept
The old worlds monsters, whilst they wept
It Is funeral: but the new world's sins
Are so deep di'd no flood can rinse.
Nothing but lightning and Heavens fire
Can purge our pestilential air.
Farewell to passionate Love.
Farewell fond Love! I Will never bow
Slave like unto my fetters I,
Fair Sex! I Will not adore you now
Yet love you as my liberty:
Love grown adust with Melancholy,
To madness turns or extreme folly.
About and with your fires I Will play
But with as loose and gentle touch
As boys from hand to hand toss away
Live coals, lest they should burn too much.
Too never his heart who lets love come
Suffers a wilful Martyrdom.
Stout Soldiers in an Enemies land
March not too far sans fear or wit,
Ever they resolve or to withstand,
Or wisely make a safe retreat.
Bodies when joined engaged are,
Piqueering's better sport by far.
The Excuse. To the Lady E. B.
YOur lovely fair did first invite
Me to that strange demand,
Your wanton eye big with delight,
Made me to understand
You pleasant as your looks, where every glance
Did raise and court my warm blood to advance.
Then blame not me for loving you,
Who if alow'd would not do so?
Henceforth I Will sit demure by you,
Nor speak when you w'ud hear,
Just as I w'ud your picture view,
Behold you and admire.
For if I speak, you prompt my tongue with love,
And 'cause I tell 't you, you unkind reprove.
Then blame not me for saying so,
Since 'twas your beauty bid me woe.
Equality To two fair Mistresses.
Shall I freize between two fires?
Or does a numness ceaze on me?
Each star inflames me with desires,
Yet which to choose I cannot see
Since reason admires equally.
Then give me both
For faith and troth
I should be 'oath
Each should not pleased be.
Or you who so perfect are,
That nature has her self outdone
In making you bright lights so fair!
Rule by your turns! that so each one
May cool the heat oth' to'other Sun!
And Love me both!
For faith and troth
I should be loath,
Each should not pleased be.
To a friend. Ode.
AFfect not aierie Popularitie
But what thou would be thought, that strive to be!
Praise is but Virtues shadow; who court her
Does more the handmaid then the Dame admire.
Who only does well, well spoke of to be,
Studies the praise and not the virtue, he.
To blaze thy virtues never bespeak thy friend!
If good, they speak thee and themselves commend.
Now men but judge by hearsay, thus, they will know,
And see thy worth, and judge it greater too.
True worth is best displaid by modesty
The greatest rivers slide most silentlie,
Only the shallow brooks do prattle, they
Make a great noise and go but little way.
Fame that does feed oth' vain applause of men,
Gapes to its Echo to be heard again:
And like this, lives awhile by others breath;
Which being stopped is hushed to silent death.
Good actions crown themselves with lasting baies,
Who deserves well, needs not another praise.
Virtue's her own reward; though, Eug^, none
Will cry, it is Guerdon yet to have well done.
A sudden Fancy at Midnight.
HOw is it we are thus melancholy? what
Are our rich ferkins out? or rather that
Which did inspire them, the Immortal wine,
That did create us, like it self, divine?
Or are we Nectar-sated to the hight?
Or do we droop under the aged night?
If so: weelvote it never to be eleven
Rather then ^^us to part at six and seven:
Moult then thy speedy wings old Time! and be
As slow-pac't as becomes thy age! that we
May chirp awhile, and when we take our ease,
Then fly and poast as nimbly as you please!
Play the good fellow with us, and sit down
A while, that we may drink the to'ther round!
I Will promise here is none shall thee misuse,
Or pluck thee by the foretop in abuse.
Time says he will nor can he stay, 'cause he
Thinks him too grave for your young company.
It makes no matter -- Sirs
How say you yet toth'tother Subsidy?
Yes yes: And let our Ganymede nimbly fly
And fill us of the same Poetic sherrie*
Ben-Iohnson used to quaffe to make him merry.
Such as would make the grey-beard botles talk
Had they but tongues, or, had they legs, to walk:
Such as would make Apollo smile, or wu'd
Draw all the Sisters to our Brotherhood.
And though the bald Fool stays not, let him know
Weel sit and drink as fast as he shall go.
So as the salt Anchovis swam in oil,
We Will make them swim again in sacks sweet spoil.
On a Map of the World accidentally fallen into the water and spoiled.
THe world drowned once again? sure holy text
Says it should be by fire dissolved next.
Deucalion then weeps for this world, as much
As once for the old he did, it is sins are such:
And as before he drowned a world of men,
In figure thus by chance it sinks again.
Who Plato's book of Commonwealth did view
By mice devoured and thought thence would ensue
A fatal Period of the public State;
Would have presaged the like unhappy fate
(Had but he seen this) were attending us,
And construed this dire chance as ominous
I Will not obtrude for truths Prophetic dreams;
Yet Mara's waters like Nil's seavnfold streams
'Tofore that gently did but wet this Land
Now in a purple lake of blood do stand
And quite o'rwhelm't: and which is worse we fear
No Olivebranch will ever again appear.
The Microcosme of individual man
See how that wavers in an Ocean
Of perilous inconstancy! whilst phlegm
And crude raw humors quench the fires in him;
That his split-sailes bear not the gentlest blast
See how the Moral world in strife does wast!
And by like jarring does decay! whilst we
From il to worse still slide, and in a sea
Of Error drown at last! Since then we see
Both these and the material world must be
In The end dissolved: I g^ieve the less for thee,
That art all theirs but thin Epitomie.
Upon the sight of an old but very deformed woman.
I Saw a woman: Bless me! did I say
A woman or a Witch? or what you may
Or can more horrid think, a Fury; she
Was more deformed then Deaths Anatomy
Nor the black ink, nor this more ragged quil
Can dawb her forth, she looked so monstrous il.
A Camel-back with a crookt baker-knee,
Bowed like a token for the earth was she:
Her eyes two inches buried in her head
Like leaden bullets seemed, they looked so dead:
Her nose did like a Promontorie, threat
With its appendant drop the chin to meet.
Her eye brows hairie, and her rougher brow
Furrowed with wrinckles did like trenches show;
Her parched hair did hang like withered hay,
About her ears, it was so dry and gray:
Her lean chops rough and hollow as the earth
When chopped for rain in a dry summers dearth:
The mark was out of her coney-mumping mouth,
Where if a tongue yet was there never a tooth;
Which when she op't, 'twas but to fart a cough,
Where who stood by would wish him farther off:
Her lips like the Monkies hairy hard and thin
And in her bosom hung her forked chin.
Thus monstrous uglie and deformed was she;
From such a wainscoat face, Deliver me!
On the late Sect of the Adamites.
A Sect of Adamites of late's revived,
Who seem more innocent then ever Adam lived.
Such as will naked go, and think it a sin
To wear a garment, they are so hot within
With Lust, that they all clothing do disdain;
Aarons old Vestments they account profane,
Elisha's double mantle when they hear
But named, they sweat again: they naught will wear,
Not holy lawn to keep them from the air,
Nor St. John's raiment, made of Camels heir:
These Vestal garments though they holy be,
Yet they do smell of strong hypocrisy,
Demas must leave his cloak, not any thing
Must here be worn, no not a wedding ring,
Nor fig leaves, such as Adam wore long since,
When he had lost his Robe of Innocence.
The whore of Babels smock they all detest,
All Antichristian Relics with the rest.
All must be barely naked* 'cause they say
Truth it self naked goes, and so should they.
Naked as from their mothers wombs, they wear
Nothing that covers only skin and hair;
Thus marching naked Sister, with a brother,
For want of clothes they cover one another
In some dark Grange thus meet they, where it is fit
That they the deeds of darkness should commit:
The candles are put out, because they say
They are enlightened all, and so they pray;
Here they begin; and thus divide the text,
Handling in order whosoe'r comes next.
They feel a woman's faith, tell by th'spirit
(Which does possess them) which shall heaven inherit.
Each Saint his fellow-feeler chooses there,
As at the spring each bird does choose his Peer.
And when they all grow proud with hot desires,
Thus they correct and quench the rising fires.
To a Lady on the Death of her little Dog.
MAdam, that any dog should die,
I not at all do wonder, I;
Nor can I yours bemoane indeed,
Since like it self a dog it died.
Yet 'twas a pretty dog, I vow,
Descended well, welfavoured too;
Kept clean, and cleanly with the maid
Ayr'd it self every day, it is said:
Then it would smiling fawn, and at
Your trencher with much duty wait;
Bark when it wanted chicken, and
Would take no meat but from your hand;
And like your shadow follow you
Close wheresoever you would go:
Then to your bed 'twould duly come
And lick you where you pleased, whose room
Many good Christians would have taken
With willing hearts, and there have lane.
Lastly (which must not be forgot)
'Twas good conditioned; was it not?
A Dog of wax as soon it was;
It did not Tobits dog surpass,
In mood and form that waged his tail
As 'twould have said to his master, hail!
When bold u^^sses after ten
Whole years to Ithaca again
Returned his dog yet him did know
And welcomed home; your dog had no
Such memory I think; nor would
Have shown such dainty tricks as could
The Tinkers cur of Wapping, that
Did pray and dance on two, and what
More wondrous is, with tail in's mouth
Trip the Canaries round forsooth.
Your dog I grant was better bred,
Brought up at hand; and better fed
Then taught, for this same stately wretch
Scorned ought to carry or to fetch.
What worth was in it then, that you
So much should prize and love it too?
For I Will be bold the last great fall
Of men where Death had conquered all
The field almost, and you did loose
On each side friends, that none of those
Nor, all so much afflicted you
As your dogs fatal end does now.
Oh! it did love you: well it might,
So 'twould whoe'r made much of it.
But let me tell you by the way
(Not to offend you) I heard say,
Your dog so fed with sweetmeats was,
Cakebread, and Almondbutter, as
It Is breath did shrewdly stink: but let
That pass; t'had a worse quality yet,
It Would still be barking with it self,
That I have joy'd to see the Elf
How finely it would turn, when down
It rowld it self upon the ground:
For then it would quiet lie awhile.
But since it is now more quiet; I Will
Not pity it, but you, to grieve
'Cause your dog could not ever live.
Dogs have their days, it is true: and though*
A dog star shins above, below
They die. Yet since you loved its sight
We Will pourtrayt ever you bury it:
And for his Epitaph shall be
This underwrit in memory;
His Mistress chiefest joy and grief,
Loved too almost as her own life;
Here lies the best of Dogs, and lest,
That Album Graecum made the best
To cure sore throats with; for it is said
The Isle of Dogs such never had.
But dead does now so worthless prove
His skin will hardly make one glove
For a child's itchy hand: yet he
Lives famous in Effigy.
In Crumena Vacuum an non?
NAture as says Philosophy
Admits no vacuum; yet I
(O the sad fate of Codrus curse!)
Find there is a Vacuum in my purse.
Or Nature errs sure, or the gold
Which my now empty purse did hold.
When the last mite's exhausted, wou'll
You then persuade me yet it is full?
When Taverns and the Mercers book
Have picked my pocket, shall I look
Then for gold there? I cannot I tro
Both eat my cake and have it too?
Yet to make good this Axiom,
Here Is one in charity throws some
Small crumbs of comfort in: he tells
Me its full of air, but nothing else:
Alas! I Am no Chamoelion,
Nor can I live by air alone.
If all thy gold dissolved be
To liquid and Pota^ile;
Will not your strings stretch for one pint
Of Sack? all gone? is nothing in it?
Oh thou my dear and quondam friend
That in my need did money lend,
How do I grieve thy skeliton
Reduced thus soon to skin and bone!
Sure some will think that see thy thin
And aierie Corpse, that thou have bin
Some Poets purse, thus made refine
By th'Alchimie of wit and wine:
And that thy Angel gold may be:
Still there, though it we cannot see,
It is so sublimated, and
So pure; for since we understand
The Angels to be Spirits, then
You Are become spiritual again.
Well then Philosophy in truth,
I find thou speakst the naked truth;
For though for coin it empty be
Yet there is no vacuitie.
Though no bright Angel do appear
In this despised Hemisphear;
Yet the Div'ls in it without all doubt
There Is never a cross to keep him out.
De sunt nonnulla.
To a Friend wishing peace.
Let Us all be friends! a happy peace
Would make us prize that 'bove our ease:
Then we would home, and marry too,
To keep that corner of the house
Yet left unsackt by civil foe,
And drink a round in dear carouse.
Oh what a happy thing it were,
To live secure, and free from fear
Of plunder! when the dull hind may
With pig in hand his yearly rent
To his old Landlord justly pay
In stead of King or Parliament!
No hurrie then of dread Alar'ms;
From sleep should fright us into Arms:
Gaols should stand empty then, and we
Enlarged as the winds may breath
Each where, and as in Jubilee
Live free from fear of sudden death.
The Trumpet then shall only blaze
In Christmas or at Puppet plays;
Or serve the Clowns to summon over
To wait of the Judge, at grand Assize;
And the drum only beat before
A muzled Bear, or harmless prize.
Then shall we see no arms, but such
As in the great Hall hang of the crutch
All rust with cobwebs, which to clear
The Grooms and Coachmen, (as you know
It was the custom) once a year
Must at the County training show.
In the Kings highway then we will ride,
(Not skulking lest we should be spied
In private lanes or by-waies cut
By hardy Pioneer) a gentle pace,
In stead of marching to a hut
Or hedge, unto some warmer place.
Of The week-daies then we will bowl and chat
Of our dear loves, and you know what,
But not one syllable of State,
Amidst our pleasant mirth; and then
(If that Religion bear date)
We Will pray on Sundaies once again.
If Oliv'd peace should once more smile
And say, be happy! to this Isle,
(Dear friend!) as who knows but she may?)
I dare presume that you and I
Shall kiss her feet, and wish her stay;
And he that does not, may he die!
Song in a siege.
Fill, fill the goblet full with sack!
I mean our tall black-jerkin Jack,
Whose hide is proof against rabble-Rout,
And will keep all ill weathers out.
What though our plate be coined and spent?
Our faces next we will send to the mint:
And before we will basely yield the town,
Sack it our selves and drink it down.
Accursed be he does talk or think
Of treating, or denies to drink,
Such dry hopsucking narrow souls
Taste not the freedom of our bowls.
They only are besieged, whilst we
By drinking purchase liberty.
Wine does enlarge, and ease our minds,
Who freely drinks no thraldom finds.
Let Us drink then as we used to fight,
As long as we can stand, in spite
Of Foe or Fortune! who can tell?
She with our cups again may swell;
He neither dares to die or fight,
Whom harmless fears from healths affright:
Then let us drink our sorrows down,
And our selves up to keep the town.
On the Creeple soldiers marching in Oxford in the Lord Thr. Cottington's
Company.
STay Gentlemen! and you shall see a very rare sight;
Soldiers who though they want arms, yet will sight:
Nay some of them have never a leg but only Will:
Their Governor, and yet they will stand to it still.
The birds called Apodes they resemble, and seem
To be without either wing or leg, like them.
Oh the courage of a drunken and valiant man!
For each will be going when he cannot stand!
Then room for Criples! here comes a company,
Such as before I think you never did see:
Here Is one like a Pidgion goes pinioned in spite
Of old Priapus, the birds to affright:
Another limps as if he had got the Pharse,
With his half leg like a Goose close up to his arse:
Yet mistake me not! this is no Puppet play;
You shall only see the several motions to day.
Ran: tan: tan: with a spanish march and gate
Thus they follow their Leader according to his wonted state.
A Snaile or a Crablouse would march in a day.
If driven as led with the white staff as far as they.
What I should call them I hardly do know,
Foot they are not as appears by the show:
By the wearing of their Muskets to which they are tied,
They should be Dragooners had they horses to ride.
And yet now I think on it, they cannot be suc;
Because each man has his rest for his crutch,
To these their Officer need not to say at alar'ms,
Stand to your Colors, or handle your arms:
Yet that they are Soldiers, you safely may say,
For they will die before they will run away:
Nay, they are stout as ever were Vantrumps,
For like Widdrington they will fight upon their very stumps.
They have keen Estridge stomachs, and well digest
Both Iron and Lead, as a Dog will a breast
Of Mutton. But now to their Pedigree;
That they are sons of Mars, most writers agree;
Some conceive from the Badger old Vulcan they came,
Because like him they are Mettle-men and lame,
The moderns think they came from the Guyes of Warwick; and
Some think they are of the old Herculean band:
For as by his foot he was discovered, so
By their feet you their valor may know.
And though many wear wooden legs and crutches,
Yet, by Hercules, I can assure you, such is
Their steeled resolution, that here
You Will find none that will the wooden dagger wear.
They Are true and trusty Trojans all believe me;
And stride their wooden Palfreis well: it would grieve me
To see them tire before they get
Unto the Holy-bush; but yet
If they should faint, at that end of the town,
They may set up their horses and lie down.
Most of these fighters, I would have you to know,
Were our brave Edgehil Mermidons awhile ago.
Who were their limbs like their looser rags
Ready to leave them at the next hedge, with brags,
That through the merit of their former harms,
They die like Gentlemen though they bear no arms.
Nowsome will suspect that my Muse may be,
'Cause she is so lame, of this Company;
And the rather, because one verse sometimes,
Is much shorter then his fellows to hold up the rithmes;
I confess before Criples to halt is not good:
Yet for excuse she pleads, she understood
That things by their similies are best displaid,
And for that cause her feet are now Iambick made.
Refrigerium.
NOw through each vein my blood does run
Hot as the Summers scorching Sun,
Whilst on what side so ever I turn,
With double frying flames I burn.
To cool both Aelna's first I Will have
An Arbor cool as is the grave,
And with green shadie branches wove
As covert as Dodona's grove.
So that the Sun may not appear
At all in this close Hemisphere.
With Curran-bushes I Will hav't made
Veiled o'r with Sycamores cool shade,
And mixed with Rasps and Cherrytrees,
Whose choice fruit may my pallat please.
In The midst of which next shall be spread
Upon a large and spacious stead,
A frost-upon-green tabbie Quilt
Watered, as if it had there bin spilt,
Strewn o'r with Roses where I may
Naked my lazy limbs display;
And underneath't a Crystal stream.
Of fresh Rose Water stilled from them
Through th'limbeck of my body, that
My smelling Sense may recreate.
A marble Fountain next I Will have
Close by in a large hollow cave
Springing with Nilus seav'nfold streams,
Til they all meet in one fair Thames:
Washing in whose pure waters we
Diana and her Nymphs may see:
With other lively Pictures, that
My Seeing sense may recreate.
Next I will have Arion play
Upon a Dolphins back, whose lay
Shall teach each bird to chirp and try
How to excel his harmony.
Orpheus his harp, Apollo's lyre
Shall with the Sirens fill the Quire.
With other sorts of Music, that
My hearing Sense may recreate.
A Mirmaid next I Will have in stead
Oth' Barber for to kemb my head:
All the four Winds too shall conspire
With gentle breize to cool my fire
Till I being fanned with Ladies love,
Then their cold Sex shall colder prove.
Last, because naught cools better then
A Maid who warms and cooles again.
I Will have a young plump amorous Queen,
Ripe though she be not yet fifteen.
'Twixt whose close arms and snowie breast
I may diffuse my heat, and rest:
Then bath my self in kisses, that
My Feeling Sense may recreate.
Thus when at once I all my Senses please,
Me thinks I feel my self in Paradise.
ELEGIES.

By Robert Heath, Esquire.



LONDON, Printed for HUMPHRY MOSELEY, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1650.

Elegies.
On the Death of the young and pious Lady Mrs C. P.
SO young and ripe in judgment? fit for heaven
A Saint she was on earth, before eleven.
What Virtue was there lodged in this small world,
Whose soul grew faster then the body could?
Sins she had none, but what cursed Nature gave,
Yet ever she knew't, she longed this world to leave,
Where but new entered, she with pious rage
Her Prologue spoke, does bravely quit the stage.
Oh happy growth, that in so short a time,
This early blossom thus to heaven could climb!
Epicedium On the beautiful Lady Mrs A. K. unfortunately drowned by chance in
the Thames in passing the Bridge.
Drowned? and in the Thames? oh how I grieve to see
Such fair streams act so foul a Tragedy!
Not all thy main which twice a day does flow,
Can wash this guilt from off thy conscious brow.
Like the dead sea thou look; whilst every wave
Thou wear'st, now seems to be another grave.
Forgetful Lethe, or the Stygian Lake,
As thou foul Tyber, looks not half so black.
How horrid thou appear'st! and thou do taste
Sour, and not half so pleasant as thou wast;
Rome now will fear to drink thee, since you are did
With such chaste guiltless blood, and none will ride
More on thy ruder waves, thy cruelty
Since 't would not spare so fair a Saint as she.
How I could flow with anger! chide thee too,
But thou art innocent, as pure, I know:
Alas 'twas her Fate, unhappy Destiny!
Thus to thy streams, to add more purity.
You Are become white again; an Element
Fit to receive a soul so innocent;
Whose body buried in thy Crystal tomb
Transparent lies, scorning earths baser womb.
Gilt Tagus banks, nor the Pectalian
Can boast such Golden treasures as you can.
Thou did but lend her to the Earth awhile,
Thou have thy Pearl again, now Thamis smile.
It Is fit such gems should by the makers hands
Shine thus transplanted to their native sands.
On the Death of the excellent fair Lady, the Lady A. R.
HOw blindly erting were those Painters, that
Did without eyes grim Death delineate?
Did he not aiming shoot, and shooting hit
'Midst the Arcadian Nymphs this fairest white,
This whitest Venus Dove? without his light
How had he found this mark, or shot so right?
Thus as he aiming stood, and in his heart
Relenting doubted, whether his fell dart
He should or spare or send, so long he gazed
Upon her Beauties splendor all amazed,
That the bright rays she darted, did so shine
And dazzle the beholding Archers eyne,
That whilst he trembling shot and made her light
Extinct, the beams of that put out his sight.
And so ever since Death has been blind indeed;
On her fair Tomb this Epitaph shall be read:
Beauty here on Death revenged, Triumphant lies,
Whose Glories won all hearts, put out all eyes.
On the loss of Mr N. W. his three finggers cut off at the battle of Edgehil,
he being both a Poet and a Musician.
BY some it has been said,
That the best Music is by discord made;
But here, (I grieve to see)
By discords we have lost our harmony.
How cruel was that hand
Deprived thee of thy cunning fingers? and
At one unhappy* blow
Cut off an Orpheus, and a Poet too?
How sadly the strings rest
Ever since those fingers which before expressed
On them such lively art,
Were thus dissected from their constant part?
Yet though these joints be gone
To quiet ease, two fingers still are on,
Which with dexterity
Can write the Epitaph of the the other three.
And though you cannot play;
Yet still both sing, and versifie you may.
Naenia Upon the death of my dear friend T. S. Esquire, slain at the first
fight at Newbery, 1645.
PAle Ghost! I weep, not 'cause thy precious blood
Honored when spilt, a cause so just, so good;
Nor grieve I 'cause so much that suffered too,
In The loss of such a Champion as you:
This makes my heart afresh with thy wounds bleed,
A Loyal Subject, and my friend, is dead.
One, whose unborrow'd native Wit proclaimed
Him sole Apollo's heir; whose Virtues famed
Him with Pandora's gifts endowed; whose parts
Did style him Master of all noble Arts.
One whose Youths sprightful valor did incline
To acts Heroic without help of wine,
One who preferred the cause he had in hand
Above his life, before his fathers land:
One that was forward, yet not desperate bold,
A coward in ill acts, yet durst behold
Death in his uglyest vizar. This was He
Who loved his friend, and feared no Enemy.
Who nobly thus did seek an early grave,
Because he scorned to live a subjects slave.
Wide was the Orifice sure of thy large wound,
Else had thy great and gallant soul never found
So easy passage thence to sallie out,
And leave her so loved seat to range about
Th'Elesian groves. My souls best part adieu,
I Will bathe thy wound in tears, though wounded too.
Dry eyes forbear this urn! oh come not near
To read this Epitaph without a tear.
Spirit of Wit and Valor here does lie
Doubly entombed in the Readers heart and eye.
Upon the lingering death of the Virtuous Mrs L. H.
DEath! I not blame thy subtlety
In cutting off this Happy She:
Never did thou yet in thy black list enroul
So fair a soul.
Thy Envy snatched her hence, lest we
By her example taught, should be
Immortalized by virtue, and live still
Against thy will.
For had thou spared her yet awhile,
And not prevented by this wile
Our grand design, thou'adst lost thy sting, and we
Not feared thee.
Coward thou did by slow degrees
Upon her Vital spirits ceaze,
Else had she summoned power, enough to stand
Thy armed hand.
Subtle and envious Coward, thus
Thou'ast spoiled Nature, robbed us:
Yet I not blame thee, thou'adst no other way,
To get thy prey.
Upon the Death of the truly valiant Sir Bevil Grenvil slain.
SEE where in Western clouds our Sun is set!
Whilst those thick groves of Pikes of him beset
To guard his Valor, trembled all and shoke
With Aspen fear, soon as this stately Oak
Was cleft with fatal thunder! every head
Droops like pearl'd Violets now Grenvil's dead.
We need no Gods of Egypt to exhale
Salt rivers from our eyes, and force us wail
His sorrowed absence; no sour peele, or Rue
To damp our looks to Pharisaick hue.
From Grenvil's Hearse each cheek is watered,
And scorns to wear a smile now he is dead.
Did I not view Heavens great unarmed bow,
I might suspect Deucalion would o'r-flow
The drenched world again, and in his name
Erect a new eternal Ark of Fame.
What sudden inundation else could thus
As in a second deluge bury us
Alive? and waft us by a quick return
To shades? what fire but that of his bright urne
Could melt each Muse to liquified verse,
And thus dissolve in Elegiack tears?
What Ocean but his Virtues could have drunk
So many floods from weeping eyes, or sunk,
So many drowning hearts? at whose sad fall
A deep groaned Diapason drowneth all,
And blends at once our Harmony --
Oh I could curse that Planet that did reign
At thy first birth, and ever since smiling shine
Til this unluckie hour it frowned on thee,
Prompting our Stars to bode us misery.
For if our hopeful cause should gasping lie,
I Would swear it languisht, since she saw thee die.
Upon the unfortunate death of the truly gallant and noble Gent. Ed. Sackvil,
Esquire.
THy power pale envious death I now defy,
Thy rage is spent in this one Tragedy.
Thou'ast purloin'd our chief wealth, and in one hour
Robbed Honors Garland of its choicest flower.
Now do thy worst! thy life-depriving dart,
Can no more Conquest bring, nor deeper smart.
Often his tried Valor in the open field
Dared thee, where since thou could not make him yield,
Now by a weak and clandestine surprise
Thou smit'st him unawares by cowardice.
Yet went he armed against that fatal blow,
Which sin did print upon his flesh, not you.
Then be not proud of this thy spoil, since he
Did wish to, more then you could make him, die.
For now he lives famed to posterity,
Both for his Virtues and his Loyalty.
The gallant spirit of whose youthful heat
Does with his urnes clear oil perpetuate.
We weep not then, because he died; but thus;
The strange chance, does strange wonder claim in us.
He that but newly changed his mortal life
In sacred wedlock, with a happy Wife,
Is forced by th'ignorant malice of worse men
To change it for a happ'er once again:
He whose rich Virtues gained each man his friend
That knew them both, to his untimely end
Thus brought by foes (if any he could have)
Has with his precious corpse enricht the grave.
He, He, is gone: and naught but sorrow left
To mind us of the good we are bereft.
For it is not only He; we all are dead
As when the Sun sets flowers seem withered:
Nor does his Fam'ly only lose a stem,
The Kingdom suffers in the loss of him.
More I should say; but sullen grief denies,
I Will sigh, and vent the rest with weeping eyes.
Elegy Upon the death of that thrice valiant Lord, the Lord Bernard Stewart,
slain in the fight near VVest-Chester.
BOast not proud death of this thy Victory!
In killing him who thus resolved to die!
Had thou a life to lose, I would on thee
Revenge his too too early Destiny.
But Coward! thou nor spirit have nor heat;
Else thou would near have smit so brave, so great
A Person, that on thy dread Tragic stage
Fought on thy side, and in that bloody rage
To thy black shades so many breathless sent.
Perhaps thou feardst his highborn fury meant
With fierce assault thy conquering self disarm,
Sans fear of death he fought so; at which alar'm,
Lest he thy territories should invade,
And so usurp thy power, thou wast afraid,
So 'caus thy jealous fear would admit none,
A Rival in thy Empire, thou so soon
Did cut him off. Happy unhappy he
Right noble born, and dying; here does lie,
Whose single Death-despising Valor made
His greatest enemy, Death it self afraid.
On the Death of that most famous Musician Mr VV. Laws, slain in this unhappy
Civil War.
SUch is the strange Antipathie between
The Wolf and sheep; that a Drum with Wolves skin
Headed and beat, the partchment bottom breaks,
And soundless to the stick no answer makes:
So the Wolfe's by, the Sic Alciatus putavit in illo eleganti Emblemate.
Coetera mutescent coriumque silebit ovillum Si confecta lupi tympana pelle
sonent, etc. Tanta quippe est antipathia, ut ne morte quidem finiatur; sed vel
tum quoque Lupus Ovi formidolosus existat.
Lambstrings break; so Ideoque Lupinas fides si sungas agninis, illas dissilere
scribit Martinus del Rio. lib. 1. Disqui Magic. c. 4.
dumb
Is the other, when you sound a Wolves-skin'd Drum.
By Wolves our Orpheus thus opposed was slain;
His Lyres offended strings thus cracked in twain,
At their harsh foes approach, and rang his knell.
Such untuned souls, who discord loved too well,
Knew not the Heaven of Musicks harmony
(And who not love't dull or il-natur'd be.)
But more enraged grew. Else like those
Wild beasts Amphion tamed, they would have rose
Inspired with love, and kissed those hands, whose aires
Ravished the birds, and taught the heavenly Spheres
To move in pleasing consort. But ever sin'
Our Laws expired, this Commonwealth has bin
Quite out of tune. Could his surviving lays
Yet 'swage our Genius (as Pythagoras
With his soft accents, and sweet streins subdued
And well appeased a mad-brain'd multitude)
I Would swear they were Divine, whose powerful breath
Could Echo his rare concords after death,
And in Loves Symphonie unite each part.
This had been done by Laws his hand and Art,
(Had he but lived;) ever now. Melpomene,
Mourn then! for earth has lost her harmony.
EPIGRAMS.

The first Book.

By Robert Heath, Esquire.

Quam nihil, hoc aliud, vel male, praestat agam.

LONDON, Printed for HUMPHRY MOSELEY, and are to be sold at his Sho at the
sign of the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1650.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
SUspect your self, and not me, I am no wild Satyr, no Rhinoceros, cui nasus
suspendet aduncus: if you make not your self the greater monster, and by a
guilty application think your self pointed at. Though the title Epigram seems
to carry a sting in the tail: yet the harmless Be will not wound, unless you
first provoke it. Indeed an Epigram should be aculeatum in caud a, where the
whole force of the argument (...) should be syllogistically summed up in the
conclusion. This Lesbian rule, I have endeavored to keep, where perhaps I
conclude sometimes with gall enough, but no spleen. I not personate thee, but
thy follies (if thou have any.) Such general censures are not scandalous, but
useful, and therefore pardonable. If thou see then thy imperfections in any
of these Idaeas as in a mirror represented to thee, blame Nature and thy self,
and not the glass that shows them. All that I shall say to excuse these
illepidas ineptias, in that they are not all alike salted, is what the best of
Epigramatists said of his own long since.

Sunt bona, sunt quaedam mediocria, sed mala plura:
Quae legis hic aliter non fit Avite, liber.
Some good there are, some mean, though most be bad,
N^ book was otherwise (Good Reader?) made.
Epigrams. Lib. 1.
To the Reader of my Epigrams and Satyrs.
REader! that we may still be friends be wise!
And read no more of me, I thee advise!
Somewhere thou wilt find thy self abused, and hate
My naked truths, and so repent too late:
Some saucy line, if they, not give offense,
The duller yet, will vex thy patience.
Why wrote I then, me thinks I hear it sed,
If I not meant the Satyrs should be read?
Read on then at your peril! but see you
Read as I writ, having naught else to do.
To a lacivious Blackamoore Woman.
It Is Night in thine, in my face day: but yet
Should we join; we might mongrel twilight get;
A Tawny-moore that would of both partake:
Haunt me not Shade! I Will no new monster make.
To Cosmus.
Would know who it is that makes his knife his plough?
Reaps with increase, and yet does never sow?
That has no Granarie to inn an ear,
And yet it is harvest with him all the year?
That without fear of Statute, does ingrosse
All th'corn he can, and lives by others loss?
Nor buys nor sels, nor eats it? then know (Sir?)
It Is Gemurcide, your humble Corn-cutter.
On Lieutenant Catch.
CAtch brags much of his learning; and how well
In letters verst, he many does excel:
Thou were indeed a cunning lettered knave,
Thy learning from the gallows thee did save:
No Samian ever so lettered was, as you,
Twice thou wast burnt in the hand, and once in the brow.
To one that after ten years study, brought forth a lamentable work.
TEn years you say it is, since you 'gan to write:
So long in bringing forth so little wit?
So after ten years siege the Graecians won
But a dry ravished Helen, and burnt town:
So Elephants bring forth, having ten years gone,
A foetuqus monster, such as you have done.
On rich Lock.
RIch Lock's maids stay not long with him, yet they
Laden all, though not Maiden, go away:
Some to his tenants eldest sons are wed,
Some to his menial servants married;
With the first he gives some money, and to these
A Rent-free farm or Copyhold he gi'es.
Well their short service thou rewardest Lock:
Young Tenants cannot begin without a stock.
Sure a more gracious Landlord never was known
Lock's now more like a father to his town.
To the Printer.
I Prithee spoil-sheet! through resolved mistake
Don't in my book more new Errata's make!
And force, in the latter sheet thy Reader so
With thy faults and small sense more penance do!
He Will not forgive thee, since he knows full well
You made them now, that it might better sell.
On Galla her going to a Nunnerie.
EVER her Probation year was finished,
She not approved that life; Improve she did:
The first year Galla only said she meant
To prove: She proved indeed, with child, and went.
On Marcus.
HOmers Stentorian that had the voice
Of fifty men, made not so great a noise
As Marcus, when he pleads; no Judge can sleep
Or Officer, he does such bawling keep.
Who but loud Marcus the Court practice has?
His clients cause he carries with a breath.
To Sullen.
SUllen, when it is vext' will angry sit,
'Twil neither eat nor drink, but pout and fret:
Fast! you do well, in Gallen I have read
Such scurvie humors should be sterv'd, not fed.
On Cleombrotus.
SOon as Cleombrotus the Ambraciot read
Grave Plato's Phaedo that discoursed how dead
This life is; after which the soul should be
Clothed with a robe of Immortality.
Mistaking him; himself did fondly drown,
And cried thus changed my crook is for a Crown.
Alas! poor blind deceived Mortal* he
Made too much have to Immortality:
Who'd take by force what may be given him? since
Heaven never was purchased by such violence?
To a Travellour.
YOu talk of Silarus that turns wood to stone;
Of a Fount flows with wax, and then of one
That streams with pitch; and of the Andrian spring
That store of wine and oil does daily bring;
All this I Will first believe, then travail I,
To see how wide you and your fountains lie.
On the Lady Seem-pol.
Dressed like her self, her feat discourse is drawn
Latinify'd in fine spun Cobweb lawn;
Each flatuous word swells with verbositie,
And speaks how skild she is in Sophistry:
How wise your babes would be, if they, so young,
Should learn from you to speak their mother tongue?
Nay she learned Aristotle; dares confute
Or, with Bengeli, of the Stars dispute?
Far above humane, much more, woman's reach
Or laugh at him that did oth' Sunday preach:
Thus at her tongue most rarely good is she:
She Is at her tail as good, or fame does lie.
On Sir Gervas Lofty.
WHat what a Spanish gate this portly tal
And glorious Ship does through the Ocean sail
Of its vast boundless pride? at which the small
And weaker pinnace must or break or vail?
He will know no man; this the cause may be,
He hardly knows himself, for every day
He or his garment's not the same, whilst he
Turns shapes like Proteus, looking big and gay.
Poor ship although your sails so wide you bear,
I know there is twenty have in thee a share.
To the Reader.
Do wonder Reader why my Satyr-Muse
Has got no lines in the front as others use
To set her forth, and so conceive her poor
'Cause friendless as not worth the reading o'r?
Why I bespoke not other men to write
Encomium's there, whose empty praises might
Make the enlarged Preface swel and look
Like Mindus porch, as big as all the book?
She scornd to beg applause, or trouble friends,
Except those she gets: Good wine it self commends.
Why should a stranger at her feast say grace?
She bids you welcome, fall to, if you please!
Epitaph on a Poor Alchymist.
THe ashes of a Golden Ass,
Not worth a monument of brass,
Or Chemist subtle as his gold
Reader this earthen urn does hold;
Who, his gold vanished all to air
And dear-bought cinders, through despair
And Deaths more certain Chimestrie,
The Quintessence of Fool did die,
Thus sublimated and cal^in'd
To nothing, but poor dust refined.
Why men are so unlike.
WHy one man is not like another', this;
No one is like himself, and so it is.
To Madam Moyle on her Picture.
MAdam! their judgments I commend who said,
Your Pictur's like your self, for it is made
Of fading colors which will wear away,
To be gazed on a while, and then decay;
An empty shadow with a rouling sight,
Looks wantonly on all that look on it;
A well dressed statue, yes; and painted too;
It Is very like you, Madam! so are you.
Epitaph on a very fat man.
UNder this pebble stone,
Here fast sleeps one,
And that is not two;
Yet was without doubt
Far bigger about,
Then both I, and you.
His kidneys encreast
So much, that his wast
Was hooped all round:
So his girdle Death cuts,
And down fell his guts,
'Bouts heels to the ground.
To Clois.
I Know you rich; you are an heir,
You Are courteous, liberal, and fair,
You Are wise too, as most women are,
Jolly, and friendly, debonair:
I like this freedom; but they say
You are to free another way.
Clois farewell! your gold's too light;
And so I may too dearly buy't.
On the English Mounsieur.
AN English Mounsieur lately came from France,
Where he had learnt to make a leg, to dance,
To kiss his little finger, ride the Barbe,
And wear his clothes in the authentic garb.
Seeing him thus in the mode, I did demand
In French, how long 'twas since he came to land?
He answered not, but said he had been long
In France, but never cared to learn the tongue.
How many are there whom we thus mistake,
That travel only thus for fashion sake?
On Philautus.
PHilautus thinks each woman that does view
His proper person, straight must love him too*
Alas Town cladder you are mistane I see,
Thou love thy self, and them, they laugh at thee.
On Nab and Plodwel.
NAb gone to Sea two years or more, and dead
Reported since, his wife did Plodwel wed:
Returned Nab found his wife with child, and though
Her he must keep, the child he would not too.
Plodwel ejected of's new home and wife,
Laid the case thus: Tenant for years or life
When that his time expires, what ever he leaves
Unto the Freehold fastened, the Law gives
All to the Landlord; and who ploughs, and sowes
Another ground, at his own peril does
The same, and looses all the crop: since I
Have trespassed, reap the same! he made reply,
The barn and ground's your own; good land should not
Lie fallow. Nab thus gained what Plodwel got.
To Lupa.
THy daughter-Whore, begets a Bawd her mother,
As Ice and water each engender other:
Though thy age freize with her salt mixed like snow
Before her lustful fires, it thaweth too
By the same heat inflamed: when she grows ice
So you can warm her blood with Bawdes advice.
On Priske and Galla.
SOme think Prisk's great with Galla; but say I,
She is grown great with him, or fame does lie.
To a fat Usurer.
FAt folks we say by nature are most free:
You and your purse are fat, and yet I see
Your hand and that still shut, the reasons this;
In costive flesh thy lean soul buried is.
On Wild.
HIs father sick and dying, Wild mourned sore,
But 'twas because he died not before:
At's burial he in mourning weeds was clad,
This was cause the Mother was not also dead:
She dead, sad soul! he clothed himself in Sack
(Cloth I not mean) for the belly, not the back.
Oh Viperous age! when children shall so soon
Through envy wish their parents dead and gone!
On Smart.
A Puritan once; Smart, since conformed did bow,
Wore a Canonick cassock to his shoe:
Turned with the tide he rails against Bishops now;
This for a quiet living Smart can do:
Instead of Cassock now a cloack he wears,
A broad hat with short hair and longer ears.
As the Sun moves he sets his Horoscope:
Smart's both a turn coat now, and Heliotrope.
On Brisk.
BRisk bragged of's ready wit; I tempting him
But for one distick, did propound this theme,
Nothing: It cannot be, he wondering said
That out of Nothing ought should ever be made.
Dull Brisk thou never could tune Apollo's lyre:
A puresteeld wit, will strike Mercurial fire
Out of the flintiest subject: but thy head
Is all composed of softer mettle, lead.
On Mopsa a Chambermaide.
MOpsa advanced from the dairie to her Dame,
With her black bag concealed from whence she came:
Mopsa o'r her body had a tan'd goose-skin,
Yet her clothes hid it, so that was not seen:
Mopsa her face was chinkt and uglie too,
Yet that she salv'd with Arts adulterate hue:
Mopsa's pretended simpring modesty
Hid her foul thoughts: Still good she seemed to be:
Mopsa's wemb swelled, that fault was also hid
By the Chaplains cassock whom she married:
But Mopsa's child did like her Master grow:
Alas! poor Mopsa was discovered now.
To fat Apicius.
A Picius leave! scratch thy bald pate no more
Hark how thy Muse supine does sleeping snore
In thy diseased and bedred soul! She lies
Slumbring resolved neither to wake or rise.
Not all thy sprightly Sack or far fetched cheer
Can help as midwives to deliver her.
The fumes from thy full paunch ascending fill
Thy head with vapors, whose dull mists do kill
And suffocate thy vitals, hurt thy brain,
Where all thy genitive faculties are lane.
The Muses live in hungry air, feed clean,
So must you; else your wit will never be keen.
As it is in Nature so in Poesy,
Seldom or never fat bodies pregnant be.
On a deaf man and his blind wife.
THe husband's deaf, the wife cannot see a wink
She Is ears to him' and now he is eyes to her:
Which has the happier time on it do you think?
He; since her parlous tongue he cannot hear,
Her noise it is thought deaft him; howe'r it be,
Happy is that loss that made them thus agree.
On Lena.
LEna a virgin was so pure,
So holy, sober, chaste, demure,
So all o'r mild, as in good sooth
Butter would hardly melt in mouth.
But Lena married grew a scold
Outrageous, impudent, and bold;
And when her lustful fires went out,
A Bawd, she threw the sparks about.
Her early goodness did presage
She would degenerate with age.
The double blossomed Apple Tree
Never bears any fruit we see:
And a forward promising Spring,
Does but a sterile Autumn bring.
The Proverb thus she verifies,
A young Saint an old Devil is.
Why Justice is painted blind.
WHo painted Justice blind did not declare
What Magistrates should be, but what they are;
Not so much 'cause they rich and poor should weigh
In their just scales alike; but because they
Now blind with bribes are grown so weak of sight,
They Will sooner feel a cause then see it right.
Of Love. Sonnets.
WHy love so often theams each writers pen
Is this: it is spreading Love o'rcomes all men:
Which sickness though most would hide from their friends,
Like Agues, yet 'twil work at the fingers ends.
To Sir Gregory Nonsense.
WHen you to little purpose much do talk
Repeating still the same thing, and I baulk
Your weaker argument to avoid delay;
Angry you would have me hear you out, you say,
I'have heard thee out too long, where you have bin
Wide from the purpose, now lets hear thee in.
To spend-fast a Gamster.
THe famous Lers of Belestat that flows
And for four months does ebb each hour, shows
What tides thy wavering fortune bears, whilst you
By play wax rich, and wain as often too.
But Spend-fast this has a full Sea to feed
It Is thirsty current when it stands in need:
You have not an Ocean of wealth I think,
When all your bags grow dry to make them drink.
To the Ingenious Reader.
REader be wise! and don't abuse the Poet!
Say not his wit is old, stole; or, I know it!
If naught worth praise you here shall find or see,
Be silent then; He Will do as much for thee.
On Sullen.
Sullen will eat no meat but peevishly
Replies I care not nor I will not, I:
Troth I commend his abstinence, it is great,
When having such a stomach he will not eat.
To Pistor.
WHen Pistors bread is found too light, it is sent
To the poor Prisoners for his punishment:
I not approve't, it is Charity mistane,
Pistor youar' still an errant Knave in grain.
On a fruitful Merchants wife.
A Merchant newly married went to Sea;
Returning after three years voyage, he
Found his wife busied midst her children two,
And with a third as big as she could go.
She to prevent a storm said husband! you
By Sea, and I by land have travailed too.
To a painted Whore.
AS rotten worms do breed in gilded books,
So thrives thy carkas under painted looks:
Who reads thy sou I shall find that too within
In every line and letter black with sin.
To Brisk.
BRisk when thour't drunk, then in thy own conceit,
Thour't Valiant, Wise, Great, Honest, Rich, Discreet.
Infused at once so many qualities?
Oh Virtuous sack from whence all these arise!
Troth! Brisk be always drunk! for well I know
When you are sober you are nothing so.
To Jeffry the Kings dwarf.
Small Sir! me thinks in your less self I see
Expressed the lesser worlds Epitomie.
You may write man, in the abstract so you are,
Though printed in a smaller Character.
The pocket volume has as much within't
As the broad Folio in a larger print,
And is more useful too. Though low you seem
Yet you'ar both great and high in men's esteem.
Your soul's as large as others, so's your mind:
To greatness Virtue's not like strength confined.
To Overwise.
BEfore a feast is cracked he laughs and swears
Good before -- oh apprehensive ears!
That do like lightning thus prevent the stroke
And conceive thunder ever the cloud is broke.
On Mounsieur Finedress.
SR. do but mark yon crisped Sir you meet!
How like a Pageant he does stalk the street?
See how his perfumed head is powderd o'r!
Twu'd stink else, for it wanted salt before.
On Philautus.
PHilautus with himself is much in love,
Does his own actions ever best approve;
Nay his own picture he does look upon,
('Cause it is like him,) with admiration:
How well may he be said and truly too
To court a shadow? he himself is so.
To Gripe.
GRipe to me all when he is dead will give,
Will part with nothing whilst he is alive:
What thanks is that to gape for dead men's shoos?
To give them only when you cannot choose?
Give now; it is left then against your will I know:
It is twice given, what living we bestow.
He leaves a good name who givs whilst he livs,
And only carries with him what he givs.
On Lurch the match-contriver.
LUrch the old match-maker with his hunting nose
All the young Heirs both Male and Female knows
In town or Country, widows too, or men
Once married, he can help to wed again:
Saves them the labor too of wooing, whilst
He bids the bans, and sends them to the Priest
For further copulation: thus does Lurch
Prey on each party that he brings to Church.
But oh how often this marriage-Pimp is cursed!
Before I Would grow rich thus, I Would be hanged first.
To the Reader.
REader! my Muse thinks not as beggars do,
Boldly with importunity to woo
A farthing worth of praise, no: her desire
Is only, passing, that you would look on her.
She proudly says on alms she scorns to live:
And as good as you bring she back will give.
On Proud.
PRoud swells like Boreas, with face red as fire,
And keeps a blustering stir in fuming ire,
So Rubies; do resemble flames, and yet
Are neither hot or capable of heat,
Since there is no fire can warm them: So art thou
As cold with inward fear, as hot in show.
It Is but false fire thy seeming Passion givs;
Then thine, there is not a tamer spirit livs.
To his dear friend H. N.
WIth what strange Philtrum's thou did charm the wine,
Whose powr'ful influence made our souls combine
And melt into our loving cups; or how
First thou did win me to thee, I not know;
Wast 'cause you are pleasant think thou? with discreet
And harmless mirth setting an edge to wit?
Or 'cause you are liberal, courteous, and free,
The friend and Genius of the company?
Was It for thy person, wealth, or valor I
So loved thee? or was it only sympathy?
Was It this, or altogether made me doat
Upon thee first? no sure, nor this nor that:
I can no certain cause assign thee why,
But this, I love thee without reason, I.
To Gripe and Holdclose.
GRipe sais Rags clothes are lousie, but Holdclose
Sais they are so poor, they are not worth a louce:
Though your phrase differ; thus agree you may,
Give him fresh clothes, heel shift his lice away.
To Gallus.
What Is in three bellies in one day, wu'dst know?
It Is the new egg thou eatst, each morning to
Thy breakfast: first 'twas in the hens, and then
In thine, at night it is in thy hen's again.
On Bib.
BIbs in a fever always, hot and dry,
Yet I never saw him sick: the reason why?
Life's liquor sack he drinks, whose healthful sp'rit
Expels both sickness, death, and fear of it.
Oh never dying juice of the powerful vine!
Thou makst men like thy Immortal self, divine.
Of Loving Husbands.
WE observe each loving Husband when the wife
Is laboring, by a strange reciproque strife
Does sympathizing sicken, and't may be:
In Law their one, and in Divinity.
On Luscus.
LUscus is never well, but changing still,
And though he loose by the bargain change he will:
No marle he is grown so poor, how should he else?
Too dear he buys repentance when he sels.
On Stut.
THe more Stut strives to speak, he stams the more;
But his cold tongue well oyld, and hot with store
Of wine, he speaks not like an Oracle then,
But much, and loud, and plain as other men:
Such Eloquence has powerful wine: but he
Drinks often til he can neither speak nor see.
The Remedy here is worse then the disaese,
Better then none, a tongue imperfect is.
On the strange Death of Eschylus. a Poet.
ESchylus foretold by a diviner, he
By the downfall of a house should ruind be:
Fondly that day to 'void this Destiny
Did keep the field, not yet resolved to die:
There, as he stood, a Faulcon in his beak
Having a Tortoys which he meant to break,
Supposed his bald pate, as he barehead stood,
To be a stone, on which to get his food
He let it fall: the Tortoys did remain
By this chance safe, and Eschylus was slain.
Oh the unalterd Persian Laws of fate*
Whose fixed decrees none can anticipate!
Bald Poets hence prove mortal, whilst that crown
(Whose radiant temples, laureat with renown*
And decked with tresses like Apollo's brows)
Is safe from Envies crack, or Deaths fell blows.
On Cob.
FRom the College Cob sent to the Ius of Court
Half codled, wu'd seem wise though he pay for it:
A pretty study he has filled with books;
Yet he in that or them but seldom looks.
Not to him but his heir* Cob learning buys:
These are Cobs new Fee simple purchases.
On Cleopatra.
RIch cleopatra striving to outvie
In luxuries excess Mark Anthony,
A Pearl in value worth three hundred crown
Dissolved in vinegar first did swallow down
At one proud draught; and but prevented wu'd
At the next draught have swallowed one as good.
Oh monstrous stomach that could in one hour
Consume an Empire, and a State devour?
On an Inveighing Poetaster.
SEe where a snarling Scribler does inveigh
In toothless jeasts against my Poesy!
The toothach sure torments his head and wit;
Which makes him show his teeth that cannot bite.
Bees when they wound, disarm themselves: this Ca^^
So breaks his teeth when he does biting snarle.
The Dedication to Momus.
I To Maecenas dedicate my book,
He Will read it with no supercilious look;
To each Ingenious Reader I transmit
The same, he best knows how to judge of it;
To the simple that he may admire't, I give,
Whom 'cause he understands not, I forgive;
To all my Poetizing friends I send it,
But to you only ( Momus) I commend it.
On Dull.
Dull reads much, many a leaf turns o'r,
Yet grows no wiser than he was before;
Can tell you many Authors names by roat,
Which upon all occasions he will quoat:
Forgets the text, which he never understood,
Thus he eats much, but cannot digest his food.
Be not too greedy Dull! first learn to spel!
Who rides too fast, at first, he rides not well.
On Accismus.
FOolish Accismus has a quality
To deny offered things in modesty:
By chance one offered him an injury,
He took it: Bless me! what a fool was he?
On Tucca.
Tucca ever while went to a Bawdy house,
Where for his entrance he not paid a sous:
Oh conscience Tucca! alas! it is their trade;
I care not he replies, I Am sure I Am paid.
It Is just; who e'rs caught stealing in the act
If he escape death, should be burnt for the fact.
To Rash.
RAsh swear not! think not 'cause you swear that I
Believe you! no: he that will swear will lie.
To Crispinus.
CRispinus 'cause you lately writ a play,
And then did put't in print the other day,
You think your self to be a professed Poet,
And where you come, believe, that all men know it:
By which small work you now are grown so proud,
That now you dare amidst the Homers crowd;
And 'cause you'have sipt a little, think you'are free
Oth' learned Arts, and of their company:
Intrude not yet Crispinus! you are not fit
For the Muses quire, thine is but suburb wit.
On Howdee.
WHen at the Court a fashions quite wore out,
And come to Longlane walks the town about,
Then does my Ladies Howdee get intoi't,
And thinks him gallant in this new old suite:
No matter Howdee, thour't in fashion yet,
For though a great way off, thou follow'st it.
To Brave.
VVHer'er he comes, Brave like a Valiant Scot
Freely discharges all, and paies the shot;
Else none wu'd care for's idle company;
When the reckoning comes, then Brave, I Will send for thee.
On Venterwit.
HE scrapes up verses, shows them up and down,
And where they are likt, he says they are his own:
If none commend them, then he swears he found
Them by chance, walking in the Temple round.
He by chance met with some of mine, which he
Had spoild with interlining ribauldrie:
Who showing asked we how I like't the strein?
I told him 'twas a poor and empty vein:
He wondering at my censure, boldly said
They were the best lines that he ever made.
Yes: so they were I told him before the text
Was by his comment thus perplexed.
Fool you are discovered; therefore take advise!
Spoil mine no more, or I Will proclaim thy lies!
On Braggadochio Cit.
CIt now he is rich does boast his Pedigree
How he is allied to this great family
And to'ther, whom as customers he knew;
Thus both his kindred and acquaintance grew.
Peace Cit! or I Will proclaim thy stock; I know
That no more arms (poor thou) then legs can show.
On Wild.
Wild drinks to drown his sorrows, and't may be,
The more he drinks, the more foregetful he.
On Childish love.
CHildren their mothers more than fathers love.
The cause is plain: the fathers often prove
Uncertain and unknown, and so it is:
For who can love what he nor knows, nor sees?
On Mr Spendall.
I Asked Spendall why he spent so fast?
Why he his coin did so profusely wast?
He replied moneys were but crosses to him,
And gold a gilded bait that would undo him:
Why he sold all his land, I asked again?
Hanged 'twas but dirt, why should he keep it then?
To purchase Heaven he would sell that and more,
Where til he left his earth, he could not go:
Then, why he sold his bed? troth he did tell
Me, whilst he kept his bed, he never was well:
At last, I asked him why his clothes he sold?
All to his naked shirt? he was, he told
Me now about to bid to every friend
And the world goodnight, and so he made his end.
Troth Spendall, I do like each smart reply,
But not thy witty foolish poverty.
On Lawyer Say-much.
SAymuch by chance in's feet had got the gout,
Yet pleaded still; there he would never be out,
But talked apace, though his feet gouty be,
Yet he may have a running tongue I see.
To Medicus on Tucca.
WHen Tucca's sick, then straight he sends for thee,
Look to his water! he will give nothing, he.
To Vetus an old Antiquary.
VEtus upon a Manuscript does pore,
Tiring himself in reading History o'r;
What Noah eat before the flood, or how
Learning increased, is all his care to know:
Out of Troys ashes here he rakes a Story,
Makes him admire its strength, and Priams glory:
Tells you who Athens built, then talks of Rome,
How many Consuls she has had, and whom;
The oldest books and writings him best please,
As many love to feed on mouldie cheese:
Thus he remembers things forgot, does know
All that is past, but knows not what is now.
'Troth now it is time to know thy self; go die!
Converse with th'dead! here is none can make reply.
On Fine.
FIne carries 'bout him strong perfumes to please
The Ladies sweeter comp'nie, nothing else?
Yet: his breath stunck before of's old disease,
Hoping to hide which, now as strong he smells.
On the Drunkards lavishness.
I'E tell you why the drunk so lavish are,
They have too much, nay more then they can bear.
On Poetizing Momus.
MOmus when any Poem he does read,
Though it deserve just praise, and does exceed
In wit and judgment; yet he sighs it o'r,
Saying he has read as good as it before:
Will never commend it; and if any by
Ask how he likes it? then he makes reply,
It Is good, indifferent; there is something in it,
Or it may pass, but it is scarce worth the print.
Thus though his wisdom can no fault epsy,
Yet he denies it praise, in policy:
'Troth Momus if thou had, no better friend,
None would thy verses read, much less commend.
On Linus.
LInus his Peruque's made of women's hair,
Thus what was lost by women, they repair:
But not long after Linus nose did drop;
Alas! that was such a breach they could not stop.
On Gallus.
TRoubled in conscience Gallus weds his whore,
Hopes she will as honest prove as she was poor;
What skils says he? it is but as 'twas before,
I kept her then, and now I do no more:
For better and for worse our wives we take,
A Whore purchance an honest wife may make.
On Histrio.
THough Histrio on the stage does often die,
Thus put in mind of his mortality,
Yet reclames not, but lives licenciously,
As if he were to act eternally.
Believe me Histrio death at last will come,
Though for a while he keeps the tyring room.
To a Tobaccoseller.
MEn buy thy smoke, but leave it all behind,
Thou sellest naught, grow'st rich, 'cause fools are kind.
To the Reader.
REader! I am no Epigramatist,
No carping Momus, or fell Satyrist:
I touch no man, but in the general,
And modest look, like equal day, on all;
I personate none; if you then guilty be
It Is your own fault t'apply it; I am free.
To Banks.
WHen Spendall asks to borrow, you reply,
You know not when he will pay you* troth nor I.
To the Physicians.
OF all the several Professions
I best approve the wise Physicians,
You can kill men, nor fear a Jury for it,
And get experience by another hurt;
You can take fees, whether you cure or no,
And large ones too; few other trades do so:
Your shop is always open in war or peace,
All times alike conspire to your increase:
Then you have the opportunity you know
To feel a Ladies tender pulse, or so:
Thus you both purge the purse and body too,
Are counted wise, 'cause fools makes use of you.
To Lupa.
YOu are a medler Lupa, rotten too,
That Is 'cause you are an open-arse you know.
Epitaph on Bibulus.
HEre, who but once in's life did thirst, does lie,
Perhaps the dust may make him once more dry.
On Histrio.
HIstrio would needs go write a play of's own,
But could write naught but what is already known,
For he like th'leaden cisterne held no more
Water, then what the Poet dropped before.
To Gut.
GUt eats and drinks, does nothing else but swill,
His teeth do grind, his mouth's the water-mil.
To Simple.
SImple you know I gave you good advice;
Little to say, that men might think you wise;
If you will proclaim your self a fool you may:
I only tell you now what others say.
To Brisk.
BRisk is in love, yet says a single life
Is best and freest from sorrow, care, or strife:
What ever you think, beleeve't it is true you say,
Marry! you will find it so another day.
On Nano being angry.
HOw Nano swells? how big he looks and high?
What a large spleen he bears? so has the fly.
To my Reader.
WOnder not why I humbly do not write,
Flattering Encomium's to this Lord, that Knight*
And each known friend, as hungry Poets use!
Mine is a substantive unpension'd Muse;
Nor ever was hired to write an Epigram
In praise of this fool Lord, or that proud Dame.
To one that asked me why I would write an English Epigram after B. Johnson.
HOw! do thou ask me why my ventrous pen
Durst write an English Ep'gram after Ben?
Oh! after him is manners, though it would
Before him, have writ, if how, it could have told.
On Galla.
GAlla Hobgoblins fears, she says, at night,
And Ghostly Sprights, yet naught can her affright
When any man is with her; she is afraid
More by the next days light to be betrayed.
To Nab.
NAb! thy small wits still shrink in the wetting, why
Then drinkst thou so? I Would have thee sow up, I
Thy lips, but that thy tongue's the fiddle to
The company, drink then! so that but go!
Certain modest deprecations against my malevolent Detractour.
MAy he be proud, yet poor against his will!
May he be forked, and yet jealous still!
May his wife beat him sober, when he is drunk!
May his Xantippe prove, what is worse, a punk!
May not the King reign in his purse a day!
May he have never a cross when he should pay!
May no man mind him what he says! and he
May he have neither friend or enemy!
May no man read his lines! may none at least
Commend, or laugh, when ere he breaks a jest!
May he eat much, and yet still hungry feed!
May no man lend him, when he stands in need!
May he be deep in love, and never obtain!
May all his hopes be frustrate, and in vain!
May his horse in his haste of business tire!
May he be envious still, and yet admire!
Epigrams. Lib. 2.
To the gentle Reader.
'CAuse second thoughts are best, perhaps you will look
For higher Gusto in this second book:
If so; read on! fine stomachs pleased are
Better with second cates, though lighter fare.
Sauce here perhaps you will find unto your meat,
I Will bring the Tart, if you will but make it sweet.
To the Lady Phanton.
MAdam! you wear a feather in your head,
Your face is all Mosaic, colored
With shining unguents; next your linnen's white,
Your garments too are, as your carriage, light;
Your heel's are cork you walk on: I Will avow't,
That Madam! now you are light from head to foot.
On Lying.
POets and Painters by authority
As well as Travelers we say may lie:
Peripateticks lie, few know it is so;
Painters for lying have some color too;
But Bolder Poets when they falsify,
They do it as neatly, they in Print do lie.
Epitaph on John Newter.
REader! John Newter who erst played
The Jack on both sides, here is laid,
Who like th'herb John Indifferent
Was nor for King or Parliament;
Yet fast and loose he could not play
With death, he took him at a Bay;
What side his soul has taken now
God or Div'l? we hardly know:
But this is certain, since he died,
He has been mist of neither side.
A Question about Law.
ONe asked why th'Law was now so much neglected!
Marry (said I) it never was respected,
But still declined ee'r since the Judges ruffs
Were turned to little falling bands and cuffs.
To my Bookseller.
I'Ave common made my book; it is very true;
But I Would not have thee prostitute it, too;
Nor show it barefaced on the open stall
To tempt the buyer: nor poast it on each wall
And corner poast close underneath the Play
That must be acted at Blackfriars that day:
Nor fee some Herring-cryer for a groat
To voice it up and down, with tearing throat.
Nor bid thy 'prentice read it and admire,
That all in the shop may what he reads enquire.
No: profer'd wares do smell: I Would have thee know
Pride scorns to beg: Modesty fears to woo.
On Mr Fanning the Engastrometh.
TO speak within, and to ones self, and yet
Be heard, is much, yet Fanning does it:
So tall and stout a man, it is strange to see it
So like a coward should his words down eat:
The belly has no ears they say; yet his
Has ears to hear, and tongue to talk, I wis.
On the Invention of Printing and Guns.
A Soldier found at first the way to Print,
And 'twas a German Munk did Guns invent:
Thus like armed Pallas, learning does depend
On arms, nor can they without this, defend.
To Megaera.
MEgaera! since thy ugly face would fright
The Div'l himself, and all that look on it;
Prithee why do thou wear a looking-glass?
I cast a figure for that cause, she says,
To fright him from me, and each lustful eye:
Fear't not! I Will warr'nt thee none shall tempt thee, I;
For he that should on thy face dote, I Would swear,
Both blind, and mad, bewitched indeed he were.
On Plot.
PLot now he is married, and keeps house, I hear
Is like his butter, mad but twice a year:
In Hymen's sheets good-fellowship may lie
Thus bedred, and in time expiring die.
To VV. B. a small Poet.
ONe distick well-made's worth two Poems ill;
Prithee contract then thine to disticks Will.
The Stony Age.
'TO fore there was a Golden Age, next that
A Silver one, but now it is Iron all:
To what I tro wilt next degenerate?
To stone I think in stead of Mineral.
To Captain Nym.
BEtimes thou findst me ever I stir, and sai'st
Thy mornings draught o'r night thou promised wast,
But thou nor car'st so much for that or me,
My breeches in the chair thou come to see;
Thy plot prevented thus thou fliest hence,
In have to the next friend with the like pretense,
Whose pockets, you surprising, borrow there
Without his leave a crown perhaps, for fear
More mist, might be discovered, for thy friend
Should thou but ask it, would not six pence lend*
Thus each friends hinder Phob thy want supplies,
Whence thou do raise thy daily subsidies,
And pick some crumbs of comfort; but alas!
Nym the other night by Festus couzned was,
With whom he needs would lie; for Festus did
Not think his money safe though under's bed,
But hid it in Nyms pocket: thought he, never
Will, shifting Nym, look once for money there.
Thus Nym protected, what he else had stole;
Better to venture thus, then lose the whole.
To Mutus.
MUtus where ever he comes in company
Sits still, observes, speaks not a word to any:
Are you a spy or State-informer grown?
Set to pick treason, when we are high flown,
From out our harmless mirth? forgive me pray!
I'ave wronged you Mutus, you can nothing say.
To Jealous.
JEalous if any laughs is angry straight,
Suspects they jeer at him; oh foolish Wight!
Because another smiling wries his nose
Will thou betray thy self, and so expose
Thee to more laughter? though you guilty be,
Yet I dare say there is no man thought of thee.
On Taurus.
I Taurus told that his wife many loved;
He loved her better 'cause she was approved:
I said they used her; then he made reply,
I care not so they use her well, not I.
Oh wilful Cuckold! who will pity thee,
That when you're told, will not believe til you see?
On Swill.
ON fasting-daies Swill eats and drinks fast,
Plays fast, hopes thus the world will always last:
Thus Swil does fast, while the rule Fast and Pray,
He only changes into feast and play!
On Resolute Bat.
AS rough as bear-skins for behavior,
A biscuit face as hard for favor,
As blunt as back of knife, as dull
As whetstone, or crammed capon full,
His talk as women backward flat,
And though laughed at, he is Resolute Bat;
He Will to the Club, and prate his share
Or more, pay less than any there;
Oh what a pretty thing is it
To be but bold though without wit?
To Veta an old Shrew.
YOur husband musters old things quite forgotten,
As men eat Medlers when they are quite rotten:
All th'rags of time he hangs up, he can see;
Keep out of's sight! or else he will hang up thee!
To Big.
BIg why have got so small a wife? it is best
Thou sai'st, of evils we should choose the least:
Thou hop'st to overlay her, that is thy plot,
Kill her and get another, is it not?
To Maechus.
TO be most idle thou may well be sed,
Whilst lazily thou do thy work abed.
On Captain Sharke.
SHarkes Creditor promised often, at length did say,
He now begun to fear he never would pay:
You need not fear it Sir! Sharke made reply,
I never intended to repay it, I.
To Boldface.
BOldface I wonder at thy impudence,
That dare affirm things so against all sense:
For shame be n't impudent and foolish too!
And think all men are fools 'cause you are so!
To Phydias a Painter.
I Phydias asked how he could paint a maid?
Find me but one! I Will paint her then he said.
On Choeril.
CHoeril because his wife is somewhat il,
Uncertain in her health indifferent still
He turns her out of doors without reply:
Wondering at which, I asked the reason why?
In sickness and in health says he, I Am bound
Only to keep her, either weak or sound;
But now she is neither, he replies: you will see,
She Will quickly now or mend or end, says he.
On Stupro.
STupro on horseback says he will ride no more,
It Is 'cause he has been jaded much before:
He may the Trojan Palfrey now bestride,
The living jades are fiery hot, to ride.
On Swillmore.
SWillmore grown dry with talking, drinks til he
Was got so drunk he could nor speak nor see:
His windy words soxt him; some drunk have bin,
As well by letting out as taking in.
On Brave.
BRaves money melt's in's pocket, 'tmay be so
'Twas warm before, but now 'twil colder grow.
On Pure.
HIs text no sooner named, but Pure inveighed
Against Rome, and run quite from't as one afraid:
A sudden rapture 'twas; his text and he
I fear will never again meet, or agree.
On Dull.
SO many men, so many minds there be;
Yet in dispute Dull will not disagree,
But always is on's neighbors mind, 'cause he
Cannot tell how to contradict, I see.
On Sir Sullen Haughty.
WHen I thankt Haughty for his courtesy,
He said he not expected it from me:
Nor I from him that kindness, wherefore I
Thankt him 'cause't came so unexpectedly.
To his worthy friend T. S. Esquire.
IF to be mild be Generositie;
To scorn to give or take an injury;
If to be patient, and yet valiant too
Be truly noble, then (Sir!) you are so:
Virtu's the best Nobility is known,
You're virtuous noble too, in this alone.
To Pantagus.
NOne can say ought, but you will say something to it,
There Is naught another does, but you can do it:
You're cunning Pantagus, and singular,
Good at all things, but no particular.
To Lautus.
LAutus thy palate can be pleased with naught
But the best cates far-fetcht, and dearest bought;
Sicilian Lampreys, and the Thuscan Boar,
With witty dainties never heard of before
Vitellius age, such as Minerva's shield,
A dish made of Scares livers, and then filled
With milt of Sturgeon, and with brains of Railes,
Pheasants and Peacocks, and Egyptian Quails,
With tongues of Nightingales, and those more rare
And seld'-seen Crimson birds, his usual fare:
Mullets and Celsey Coccles, the Severn Trout,
And what more dainty novels can be bought:
Botargo, Anchovois, Puffins too, to taste
Thy Maronaean wines, at meals thou have.
Thus all thy lands thou eat'st and drinkest down,
In thy fair Boggards buried lie, thus grown
With dear-bought soil so rich, to dung the small
Acre that is left unsold, and that is all.
On Profane.
Profane never speaks of God, but in his oaths,
Which he does change more often than his clothes:
Nor thinks he on him when he vainly swears,
Oh Atheist, that nor God, nor Devil fears.
On Bib.
Wisdom does teach us silence, now Bib is
With drink made speechless, is he not then wise?
The effects of Brainsick's letters.
YOur lines were all so sweet, and work't so well,
So purged me too, that I can hardly tell
Whether they wrought on my affections more
Or on my body, I drew thence such store
Of precious Elixer, and so much
Compounded Cates, whose quality was such,
That where my Physic promised me but seven,
By virtue of your lines I had eleven.
But yet I Will tell you; troth 'twas even forgot
It purged and scared and wipt off you know what;
It grieved me your fair hand should undergo
So foul an office as to wipe it too;
But rather then your hand or paper be
Stained with this act, let the guilt lie on me.
I did it 'cause I know that you could write
Such lines again as fast as I could --
Write to me oftener pray! so I may save
Physicians fees, and may bum-fodder have.
On Mr Ap- Taffie Shentilman of Wales.
THe way to make proud Taffie down on's knees
Is tell him that the Moon's made of green cheese;
He then in Heaven would be, and will desire
Naught but to tossed his bobbie by her fire.
To an Irishman.
WHen I do sneeze, God bless you, you do say,
Why not the same when I do fart, I pray?
Are not both sudden ruptures that do make
As with an earthquake the whole body shake?
To break before, at Irish, you do find
To be less dangerous then to break behind;
Besides, this brings a good report you see,
Why is not this as welcome then to thee?
When I break forward, you (Christ help you) say,
But when I backwards break, you backwards pray.
Pardon me Sir! it is my infirmity,
It Is the windcholick that thus troubles me.
To Spruce.
SPruce wears a comb about him, always he
To prune and smooth his polisht hair:
The Cock's never too without his comb you see,
Spruce it is a Coxcomb then you wear.
To Formal.
WHen Formal knows not what to say, then he
Oh Lord, Sir! cries with much tautologie:
Now the Lord help thee Formal, 'twas well meant,
Though you but spoke of him in compliment.
On Swift.
SWift though h'has bin but once amongst Gentlemen,
And has learnt what their Christen names are, then
He speaks to them in such familiar phrase,
As if they had long acquainted been, and says,
If any speak of them, he knows 'um well,
And calls them Jack, Dick, or the like, will tell
You when, and where he saw them last, and how
Their intimate acquaintance first did grow.
Swift thy too much familiarity
May breed contempt. Believed they know not thee.
The Wisdom of this age.
THe Wisemen were but seven: now we scarce know
So many fools, the world so wise does grow.
On Priscus.
PRiscus does poetize now he is in love;
Strange each blind Lover should a Poet prove!
He is inspired sure, how else could he
Be such a Chemist in Loves Poetry?
He courts his Mistress out of Ovids art
Has the Amadis and Spencer all by heart,
Whence he extracts his sonnets, and his rhyme,
And speaks them, dreaming, in and out of time.
Such sudden raptures seldom constant be,
His love is blind, and so's his Poetry.
On Proud.
PRoud quarrels in his cups, and then will fight,
Is beaten sober, 'troth he is served right.
On Doctor Emperick.
WIse Emperick can all diseases cure,
His Physic though it be strong it works sure:
A litte mors in olla which expels
Disease and life together, nothing else.
Happy thy patient, you dispatch him quick;
Your mighty art will not let him long be sick.
On Bib.
TO quench his sorrows Bib drinks very free,
Sorrow is dry, he says, and so is he.
On Nokes.
ONe asked why Nokes discoursing shakt his head?
A Rattle-head 'twas 'cause he was, I sed:
Therefore he shakt his empty sconce, to find
Whether within with any brains it were lined:
To his friend and Companion Mr H. N.
WIt's all the younger sons inheritance,
A small estate, which cannot much advance:
Virgil may talk of Bees, and dunging land,
But it is the Heir that has them in his hand:
To him the indulgent father all does give,
While they alas have naught wherewith to live
But what Dame Nature, like a careful mother,
Laid up, and said 'twas for a younger brother.
A store of Wit, heaven knows it is all she gave,
And yet you're rich enough, while this you have.
A Fico for thy brothers lands! thou'ast more
In Mount Pernassus, than is all his store:
There with Apollo thou may sit and dine
With heavenly Nectar, sup with th'Muses nine;
The lusty Gods and Goddesses will be
With all the Graces there in company:
There we have fields to walk in; oh what fine
Mirth there is in good company and wine!
Lastly to make you fully happy, Be^^ie;
Will meet in the arbor; oh she is wondrous pretty!
Now tell me friend, is not this better sport,
Than to have money, and no pleasure for it?
To Levinus.
I'Have lent Sharke moneys, which Levinus, you
Persuade me, long put off, he will pay me now:
When tro? at the Greek Calends? when the Fleet
Wants guests? when he and I; two Sundaies meet?
If he solve he, deceives me, if not, he
Cozens me worse; still I deceived must be
Whither he pay or not: I'ad rather tho
Be thus deceived then cozend: tell him so!
On Vulpe.
AS Ravens 'bout the breathless Carcass fly,
So swarm Vulpe's friends, now he but seems to die:
Each greedy angler hook and line does lay;
Baited with gifts to catch this Aurata
Which swallows both, escapes, takes all they give,
Thus old get heirs each day, and still does live:
Vulpe preys o'th, living, he most Vulter is;
These Harpies hope for prey, but when Vulpe dies,
Blessed Ignorance.
HE is most happy sure that knows naught,
Because he knows not that he knows not.
To a poor Beggar.
IF thou had said thou had had no money, I
Would then have thee believed, but now you lie,
'Cause you do say you want it, for it is mad
To say one wants that which he never had:
A word well placed may serve one at a need,
Learn to beg right, or you may want indeed.
On Thais her Bastard.
THais the mother, but the father who?
Thais her self nor any else does know:
Can the son oth' people want a father? when
For parents he can claim so many men?
On Gamster.
PLay fair and swear not? burn the tables! I
Will neither the one nor the other by this die:
Gamester I Will now believe thee valiant too,
'Cause you will not swear less then you mean to do.
Epitaph on the Preaching Cobbler How.
TRanslated here lies Cobbler How,
Who, when he lived could rip and sow*
Divide and stitch a text together
Just as he used to spoil his leather.
Or rather here he is underlaid,
Who often o'rlay two chairs and praid,
That his inspired tongue might mend
More souls then ever his Cobblers end
Or hands could cure: he often said
Walk ye uprightly in your trade!
And when your soles do tread awry
Bring them to me I pray! and I
Will set them straight: be mending still
As I am! It Is Gods heavenly will.
Many were wrought on thus, but the time was past,
And so he finished when death brought his last.
Cobbler thou have set up enough
That since can prate like Cobling How.
On Sir John Lackland.
JAck Lackland bringing gracious news to Court,
The King was hap'ly pleased to Knight him for it:
He proud of's honor writes to all his friends,
And with -- Yours Sir John Lackland -- Knight -- he ends.
It Is fit he should, for were not under's hand
None would believe him Knight, that had no land.
On Cosmo.
COsmo in's new and holiday array,
Then to be sure he walks abroad that day;
Goes to a play, will stand in the pit, and talk;
Whiffe smoke, or to be marked, out often walk.
It Is pity Cosmo wears no oftener new,
For then he oftener would appear in view.
On Lowsi-Patch.
WHo says Patch lousy vestments wears, when
They are so threadbare that no vermin can
Upon them stick? Yes: though that they be thin
His loving lice stick closer to his skin.
On Light.
LIght steals a jest, and then to mak't his own
He walks from one to the other, up and down;
By often repeating thus he prostrates it;
Light has a common, though a running wit.
On a fire in a Town.
ONe night through all the streets the men did cry
Fire fire! at which I wak't and wondered by;
Not that dry wood should burn, but because all
Did cry fire, when they should for water call.
Epitaph on Hocas Pocas.
HEre Hocas lies with his tricks and his knocks,
Whom Death has made sure as his Juglers box:
Who many has cozened by his Leiger demein,
Is presto conveyed and here underlain:
Thus Hocas he is here, and here he is not,
While death played the Hocas, and brought him toth' pot.
To one that talked finely.
HOw prettily it talks as you would say
His speech did wear her holiday array?
With fine spun language dressed is his discourse,
It talks in print where not a word of course
Drops from his tongue, but all so finely wove
So smooth so soft as you would swear he strove
To outdo the silkworm, whilst each word he says
Was studied for before, for the better grace.
Speak like a man ^ still to be neatly dressed
Is womanish: your homespun cloth is best,
Because 'twil longer last and finer wear,
Labored invention holds not out the year.
To Cosmo on his fair scolding wife.
Smoke makes one fair, yet says the Proverb, where
It always smoaks, it is a foul sign that there
A dangerous Scold does dwell, whose fiery tongue
Outdo's the fire and draws the smoke along.
The troubled house. Cosmo the have light upon
A fair scold to thy wife, the Question
Whither her tongue, that charmed these clouds to rise,
Or the smoke, cause so many crying eyes.
On Silly.
SIlly observes the company and hears
How each man throws about his jeasts and jeers,
Lest any spy him he about him looks
And forth his pocket steals his table-books.
To glean those crumbs which wise men throw away,
With which he feasts himself another day.
Silly by chance did loose his Diarie
Of wit, which he had got of the company:
No marl he now so mute and pensive sits,
How can he choose, since he has lost his wits?
To Momus.
BEcause I no Maecenas get
To patronize my verse as yet
Nor wooing ever bespok my friend
To swear them witty or well penned;
Momus dares say they'ar poor, not worth
The owning, silly, and so forth:
Ingenious Readers are my Judges here,
But Momus you are none of those I fear.
On Bib.
A Drunken man can catch no harm they say,
How then came drunken Bib so poxt I pray!
He was not drunk enough when that he caught,
He could not so have done or suffered ought.
To Moore.
A Pockhold-lean-swarth-face with ugly hair
And yet be trimmed each morn to make thee fair?
If 'bout that face thoult keep so much ado,
Get thee a Barbar, a Facemender too?
To Madam Cr. wearing a lookinglass at her Girdle.
MAdam! you look so often on your glass,
I fear you doubt whither or no your face
Be still your own, or the same yesterday
It was: for colors change or fade away.
Then view no more thy own fair Physnomie!
Because I Would have thee look the more on me.
On Squire Huffe.
SQuire Huffe had got a vap'ring trick to talk
High ranting words, then 'bout the room to walk
Like bold Andrea acting on the stage
Often in speech would personate his rage:
Sometimes he grew Satyrick and would strein
To jeer each man in King Cambyses vein.
Blunt being touched grew angry, made reply
Though I cannot prate yet you shall find that I
Can fight, and beat him soundly: it is the way
Thus to cure madmen, as I have heard say.
On Philip Soupe and Jone his wife.
LO I the tragic story sing of the life
And death of Philip Soupe and Ione his wife;
A friendly pair of Turtles that did love
Good fellowship and lusty ale above
All earthly good: for why? they often wu'd say
It Is high and mighty Ale does griefs allay,
And when it is nappy and spiritual,
Ale is both meat and drink, and cloth, and all,
For all is included in this sentence Ale:
Lets drink it then they cried, or new or stale.
It hap't these two once wanting company
Which made them sad, and sadness made them dry,
Set foot to foot, and tried the masterie,
Each looked to the to'ther too with narrow eye,
Phil drunk to Iug, and Iug cried Phil again
Til none could stand or speak one sentence plain,
Filled up toth' throat when both could drink no more
And the rest of the drink left running 'bout the floor,
'Cause neither could the spicket wield aright,
Resolving as 'twas time to sleep that night,
They shok their clothes off both at last, and so
Stumbled into their beds with much ado:
But oh the sad disasters that befell them:
At this encounter! You anon shall smell them:
For when Iug roused to buss her Philip, she
Her stomach being o'r-charg'd did rain a sea
Of powerful Ale in poor Phil's face and breast,
Whose gaping mouth, and stomach thus oppressed
With the receipt of his wives spew'd-up liquor
Grew sick, no vomit could have made him sicker,
He turned and groaned as if he were to die,
Then straightwaies faced about, and furiously
Reverst, he charged her body with his rear
On her right flanck all-to-bedighting her,
Then he drew up and spewed, then charged again
Til he had routed all her body, then
After a Parley sounded, Iug did say
You Are pestlence hot, draw off now, Philip, pray;
The place soon grew too hot indeed for them,
For the foul Stygian lake did never steam
With such gross vapors as did thence arise,
Ready to choke them both in woeful wise.
At last Phil reached for the Jordan where he might
Convert his Ale to Lees, but missing it
He fell a ground: the like did Iug bety'd
Who reaching for the drink of the other side
Fell down with the chamberpot upon her head,
Beside themselves, and both beside the bed;
Naked and asleep in the morning both were found
In pickle prostrate on the spawled ground:
Sad chance! this loving couple never were
Known until now to Fall out any where:
Oh curfed Ale could thus part man and wife!
'Twas in their cups, let that excuse the strife.
On Poet Cordus a Rimer.
WHen Poet Cordus writes, he oftentimes
Does wier draw his matter to his rimes,
Provide but reason, rhyme will flow; but he
Harps more upon the words, then sense, I see.
On Fusk.
WHy should Fusk of his wife so jealous be
Unless his own sins taught him jealousy?
(For we are often more suspicious far
Of that wherein our selves most guilty are:)
Some rather think Fusk insufficient,
And 'cause he cannot give his wife content
Therefore he fears she seeks abroad, for why
Women they will be satisfied, or cry:
Some say he thinks she is wiser far then he,
And so turns Envy into jealousy:
Still the fault lies in him not her, you see,
While Fusk grows lean with triple jealousy.
To an old deformed Woman.
THou art a Remedy for love, for he
That thee beholds, in love shall never be.
To Cit.
I Wonder Cit thou art so confident
Sure I never gave thee such encouragement,
I never borrowed of thee, nor was I
Ever once drunk in thy base company,
Nor did you ever pimp for me, or bid me come
To dinner with your friendly wife at home,
You never yet offered to be bound for me
Nor can claim kindred by affinity:
How dare you then be so familiar
With me? what* do you think because you are
Free of the City, and in time may be
The grave Cinquater of your Company
Or 'cause sometimes you walk in scarlet gown,
Reverenced by boys and watermen oth' town,
Or 'cause your satin doublet's girt with gold,
I Am therefore bound to you? are you thus bold
Because you are grown rich by wicked gain?
To your shop Squundrel! and your wares again!
And converse there with thy Apprentices.
If thou wilt oblige me with true courtesies
And lend gentilely, then perhaps I Will own
Thee for a friend, else you are a Cit: be gone.
To Plagiarie.
FEloniously thou stealst another wit,
'Cause sure thou art to have thy book for it:
Thou art no learned thief yet, for although
Thou read well thou can not write well too.
To Lysippus a Barber.
LYsippus! some mistane, have said that you
Are a Barbarian, but I think a Jew,
You circumcise so much, and for your ends
So smoothly stroke the faces of your friends,
Making young novices of all that you
Can circumvent: thus you are a Barbarous Jew.
To a corrupt Judge.
WHy thou so dear do law and Justice sell,
Do hear and take on either side so well,
I wonder not: the Court Seianus made
Thee buy thy place so dear as some have said;
Great reason then that who so dear does buy,
Should the price enhance when he does sell, as high.
Lydia encountered.
FRancis and Lydia in a jeasting way
Each other strove to jeer; he won the day
At last, and silenced her; at which she grew
So vexed, that in her passion she flew
Upon young Francis, and 'twixt rage and fear
Saluted him with a fair box of the ear,
He threw her down of the bed, and kissed her 'til
She cried again, for madness, against her will:
Oh sweet revenge! who would not thus fall out
If he might have but such a kissing bout?
Kiss and be friends was the old way you know
Of reconciling, so it seems 'twas now.
On Gaming.
SOme play for gain, to pass time others play
For nothing, both do play the Fool I say:
Nor time or coin I Will lose or idly spend;
Who gets by play, proves loser in the end.
On Brag.
BRag his right glove draws often off and on,
To show his wounds on each occasion:
Tell not for shame, Brag, where thou gotst those scars;
A tavern broil did mark thee, not the wars.
To Cosmo.
REading my verses Cosmo wonders why
They swel not with Poetique History,
Why I not use their pretty fables, whence
I may suck matter to enlarge my sense?
As now to speak of Danae's golden shower,
Then of Narcissus turned into a flower,
Ixions wheel, or Sysiphu his stone,
Or how the Moon kissed loved Endymion;
Then to display Medusa's snakie locks,
Or talk of wise Pandora and her box,
Or him that wished that all he touched were gold,
And how this granted all his meat resolved
At the first touch to gilded baits, and he
Not able to digest them, forced to die:
Then of slain Pelops Ivory shoulder, how
Io by jove was turned into a cow:
Of the Minotaur's born of Pasiphe
And of Leucothee turned into a tree
Of frankincense: or of Tiresias
Who sometimes man and sometimes woman was:
Then of Minerva born of Jupiters brain
Or by his wife how Hercules was slain
With Nessus poisoned shirt: or of the maid
Turned to a spider, how she first was said
To invent spinning: these he did conclude
With many more you may ofttimes allude
Unto your purpose, where each fiction
By allegorical allusion
Becomes your own, and thereby also you
Are both Historian and Poet too.
Troth I will tell thee why I did omit
Such fabulous phansies, first because I writ
Not only to be read but understood;
And next 'cause lies, down not with all, for food.
The finest web is by the spider spun;
He Is poor that borrows his invention.
On Mounsieur Congee.
A Proper handsome courtly man indeed,
And well set out with clothes, can for a need
Discourse with legs, and quarter congies, and
Talk half an howr with help of foot and hand.
But when I viewd this Mounsieur clean throughout
I found that he was only man without.
On Gripe.
GRipe to himself talks of the sums he lent
And of the debts he ows, but to prevent
Others from borrowing more; away you Jew
Do think I Would ask of such a knave as you?
Besides if I of thee to day should borrow,
I know the whole town should hear of it to morrow.
To Harsh.
Music that once could move each rock and tree
Not a whit moves thee Harsh, or pleases thee;
Thy inharmonious soul how will thou bring
To Heaven, where Angels nothing else but sing?
A Hellish sure and untuned soul has he
That is not rapt with musicks ecstasy:
Know not what evil spirits it expels?
It cured afflicted Saul, and nothing else:
It does inspire the soul and heighten it;
Though had better lose thy ears than once be bit
By a Tarantula whose deadly wound
Is only healed by soft musicks sound.
To Cupid. His Arms blazoned.
LUna he bears, in a cross Saturn plain
A flaming heart transfixed Sol; thus slain
In the wounds orifice it bleeds Mars, from whence
Bloody drops flow, and under the pretense
For Motto this inscribed more is,
Sanat Amor vulnus armoris.
Thy Arms do speak thee Noble, Cruel too,
Else thou would never so many hearts undo:
How much thou do degenerate I find,
For thy fair Goddess Mother was more kind.
On proud Mrs. Minx.
PRide takes no cold, yet Pride often takes a fall:
Both which are true in this our finical
Proud Mrs. Minx fair Madams waiting maid
For though she went like her spruce Dame arraid
In her cast gowns, bare, all the neck and breast
Down to the shoulders, and sometimes the rest;
Yet took no cold, pride and lust kept her warm
Though she went stripped up above half the arm.
Yet did the pride of this She-goat at last
Catch a shrewd fall, for by a stumbling cast
In The Lobby room her heels flew 'bove her head
And so she broke her elboe against the bed.
Yet though she fell her belly riss: what else?
Pride naturally when it is at lowest swells.
On three Knights without spurs.
SIr John in's spurs no rowels had, because
There was no need, his horse twice roweld was:
Sir George but one spur wore, for if one side
Will go, to'ther will follow he replied:
I asked Sir Lancelot why no spurs he wore?
Because says he, a free horse needs no spur.
If spurs show Knights and Horsemen; then I fear
Amongst them was neither Knight or Chivalier.
On Copernicus his opinion who thought the earth went round.
IN vain did Drake with pains the Earth sail round,
Here Is one could do it easier on the ground.
On Doctor Love-Self.
LOve-Self when the Plague in London reigned sore,
Grown rich himself shuts up and wu'd no more
When most his help was wanted: it seems then
He Would not his patients keep as married men
Must keep their wives in Sickness and in Health,
Such is the fearful cowardice of wealth.
Though thou with the Plague would nothing have to do,
A Plaguey cunning Doctor yet were thou.
To my small friend with a great beard.
THy face and self are small, but large thy beard:
Lop't off! thy wood will hide thee I Am afferd.
To Ignorant Zoile.
ZOile I am told you pish and pough, when ever
You any do my lines commending hear:
Pish on! 'cause you still in the wrong place pish,
Aspersing most the best, as I could wish.
To the Reader.
IT is enough: but if you think too much,
Then Reader! say you saw me not! for such
As I for writing what is bad, will you
By others be for reading counted too.
SATYRS.
SATYR 1.
The Argument.
Several fantastic Humors here
Of Sea-sick minds described are,
Wedded to spend their time in vain:
Whence the Author woos them to refrein.
OH men! oh manners! what a medly's this
When each man's mind more than face different is?
For by forms only we distinguished be
One from another: but! alas! to see!
We vary from our selves each day in mind,
Nor know we in our selves our selves to find.
Sure had Erasmus lived til now, he wu'd
Without an Oedipus never have understood
The riddles of this dark fantastic age,
Where each Ape alters with the scaene the stage.
Had I thy razour Actius to dissect
These Gordian knotty humors men affect,
I Would sharp my pen, and after steep it all
In wormwood vinegar and Stygian gal.
Lend me thy whip Alecto! that I may
Scourge the prepost'rous times, as Boys at play
Do whip their eggshels! yet don't I well know
Whether my anger they deserve or no,
But rather pity; whether rather I
Should with scorn laugh at them, or for them cry.
Even Heraclitus spleen would tickled be
To view Welsh bobbie and Garlic eat, or see
A French grenovillio fricas with young mice
And mushroms mixed, or the low dutch device
Of roasted sprats and Herrings, or the Irish
Tough bonyclabber, or that German dish
Of pickled snails and tender Grasshoppers,
Or the Jews Locusts with their Elder ears,
As much as see an Ass eat thistles; who
Would not admire that every Country so
Should vary phansies, and thus strangely affect
A nouvell diet with their Dialect?
But stomachs like our minds are sickly too,
Both are best pleased with quelquechoses vain so new.
So have I seen a travaild Squire discourse
On several sawces, spin out second course
With a picktooth in's mouth, and chafindish
To stew his raw roast fowl and codled fish,
Til we had lost our stomachs, and new got:
Learned in the art of eating was he not?
Yet this at home most galls my patience
To see so humorous a difference
Of more fantastic giddy minds that draw
Like Mules and Oxen each another way.
Here Is one writes more than some good Scholars read,
And quoats more Authors than Pryn ever did,
Or in the whole world necessary be;
Whilst in one Tome a Vatican thus he
Erects; so have I seen a Pampleter
That rails against Bishops, make his margin far
Exceed his senceless Thesis, whilst he swells
His leaf with texts of Scripture little else,
And those false cited or as heterogene
And wide from's purpose as is Po from Seine.
Such swarms of scribled Rapsodies begot
Ragmen to enrich, Typographers, and not
The Understanding; since they more distract
Each weakened judgment, wu'd they were by Act
Condemned to flames! Learning is more profound
When in few* solid* Authors 'tmay be found.
A few good books disgested well do feed
The mind, much cloys or does ill humors breed.
Seempol sets down in his Ephemeris
The trifles of each how'rs vain exercise,
Toys that should be Ephemera indeed
Dying the same day they were born and bred.
Things of so small concern or moment, who
Would stuff his Diarie with, or care to know?
As what he wore, thought, laugh't at, where he walked,
When farted, where he pist, with whom he talked.
Memento's more ridiculous than those
The City Chronicler made at Lord Mayors shows;
As who his Hinchboys were, who waved the sword,
Who brought the Custard to his Honors board,
What year a Lion whelpt in the Tower died,
Pepper or corn was dear, whose child bestride
Each gilt Colossus Pageant in Cheapside,
Or in what year Bartholomie Fair forbid.
(Whereas Historians only things of weight,
Results of Persons or affairs of State,
Briefly with truth, and cleerness should relate)
Laconick shortness memory feeds. I hate
A long spun story of one drawn toth' stake
Would reach from Newgate to Smithfield, and make
The martyred reader sweat as much or more
Than Latimer in the flames, with a bald score
Of phars'd ( Quoth he is) in every page at least,
As without them 'twere not to be expressed.
But Dulman barren of invention, wears
His time and books in reading only. Here Is
Squire Topas spends his days in killing flies,
And like Domitian such a drone he dies.
Rare was the Italians Art, who writ so small
Three pence hid Pater Noster, Creed and all;
And made our Charles but half way drawn to shine
With most Majestic Holiness when each line
Of the admired purtraict breathed such heavenly flames,
That the small piece spoke all the Reading Psalms,
Without a magnifying glass what eye
Could yet discern the lettered Physnomie?
Oh most laborious loss of time! So rare
Callicrates his Ivorie Emmets were,
With His Elegiack verses writ so small
That a Heart cherrystone contained them all;
As Homers Iliads in a nutshel were;
The whole world described in a young Orange sphere.
Archytas wooden dove Agellius named,
Or that same wooden Eagle Bartas les ^our. 1. semain.
Bartas famed,
Or the Iron fly his Salust mentions,
Regiomontanus his Inventions:
Aelians rig'd ship or his (...) made
So little that they each might be conveyed
Under a Bees small wing unseen, what are
They all but witty trifles? sans compare
Industrious follies? who would loose so much
Dear precious time to be accounted such
A precious indefatigable Ass?
Pantagons art sure no less subtle was
Who muzzled fleas and gold chains made to lead
Them captived in* But oh my sides and head
Would ache with laughter* should I muster all
Such vain Sysiphian toils. Yet must I call
To mind Belanch, who as ill spent his time
In The mystery of moustraps and birdlime.
These fond (...) labors were
By Alexander witt'ly scoffed, where
To one who on a needles point each time
Could throw a pea, he gave a peck of them.
Our time was lent us to be employed in high
And nobler Projects, not thus fruitleslie.
Yet better it is thus to mispend it still,
Than naught to do, or what is worser, il.
Well then! --
Since each man's humor is his minds delight,
Let him persu't! mine is to laugh at it.
SATYR 2.
The Argument.
A Female Synod is convened
Of holy Sisters that pretend
To Sanctity in dress and show,
But are discovered nothing so.
Hell and damnation! what Imposture's this?
A She white linen Saint without, yet is
Incarnate Devil: is it not that same Fiend
Was found besieged by her Apostle friend
In An^lin's porch the other morn? before
The Sexton rose they 'ad knocking forced the door,
Had not the grave disturber of dead bones
And bells, there stumbled o'r them both at once.
Out you unhallowed whore! is this the way
To enter heaven at thy straight gate I pray?
Do You sanctify your Cuckold dormant? must
Your mother Church be bawd to goatish lust?
Yet goes she in and sitting prays and hears
With as observing eyes, attentive ears
The Lecture, as the holiest Matron there:
As though her cleanstarcht handkerchieve was never
With close embraces rumpled. Oh what front
Of impudence that sex can put upon it!
As she would suck in nothing that day but grace,
Mark how she eyes the Preacher in the face!
Able to stare suspicion thence! as I
Have seen hoarse ranting Gape with steadfast eye,
Boldly outface a petty Jury, when
The Judge was after dinner sleeping Then
She having gleaned in her spruce table book*
Such crumbs of comfort as the Caiaphas took
First upon trust, with the next Sisterhood
Amongst marrow bones and other lusty food,
She scatters them for breakfast, where must* be
The moyling Priest (for it is not fit that he
Should spend his lungs, oil, labor too in vain:)
Great pleasures justly do attend great pain.
Their bellies filled like windstuft bagpipes, so
Their squeaking Organs must be going too:
Such strange disputes here controverted be
Would puzzle a Scotch-lay-Presbyterie.
Whether that Bigamie been't as lawful now
As 'twas 'tofore? Speak Sister Ruth! we know
You have two husbands now, besides that one
Who next stands fairly in election.
Truly and verily, I profess you may,
How should the Church be built up else, I pray?
Her doctrine Hannah did approve, and doubt
Whether not in the Church as well as out
Women might speak? the Priest resolved they should
Speak out as much and often as they would,
But never in. A Female Synod is
Resolved on to convene: the way was this;
Each truth-inspired She forthwith to meet*
Either in Marklane or near Criplegate,
In Eutichus the Taylours chamber, there
Each Monday 'bout Religion to confer.
The Assembly meets and sits: a pretty sight
Fair smooth chin'd Gospellers in aprons white:
Cathedral lawn not half so learned is.
No Prolocutour here was made, I wis:
They were all speakers. First grave Abigail
The Sempstresse having first pronounced them all
A holy Convent: damned in one word
Arminians with their books to fire and sword.
Such Tyrants women are: when they in stead
Of distaffs scepters take* they will rule their head.
Peace! Peace! said busy Martha, we not know
Nor the She-Burgers in Geneva how
These Schollards tenets to confute: let us talk
Of things we better understand, and balk
Their Heathnish Problems! I had rather know
Whether the world in ninty seav'n or no,
(As Hoord affirms) shall be dissolved? for this
More fit and to be known more easy is*
My husband's now about some land to buy
And I Would not have him throw't away said she;
By no means let him do it, said Sarah, no:
But rather in Reversion let him 'stow
His money at that fatal period, when
The world for certain must dissolve, for then
The earth for a thousand years shall leased be
To us the Saints for little, said She.
To quit this was a learned Quaere made,
By a thin antiquated Chambermaid,
Run mad with reading Dod and Broughton, where
She scruples whether Aarons Ephod were
Of the sky color or seawater green;
The dyers all of Amsterdam have been
Long in dispute about the question.
Next the point of Praedestination
Was startled to perplex the more: in haste
From this to Freewil these Heaven drivers past,
And Squirrel-like as nimbly leapt from this
As o'r one bog to another wild Irish:
Like the dogs that lapt at Nilus seav'nfold stream
They lick the floods now they have troubled them;
Or as young Scepticks in Philosophy
From Air to Water, Fire to Earth will fly,
Peripateticks in Divinity
O'r all its Elements thus they likewise hie,
As nimbly with their tongues, as standing still
O'r the world a man in a map travel will,
With His eye in one short minute, yet not know
Where the Moguls rich country stands, or how
His own is ruled. In every doubt at last
All unresolved each to their homes do haste,
With their boss'd Bibles trussed beneath their arms,
Thumb'd in the Revelation and the Psalms.
Body O death! who should they meet at door
But Grace the waiting maid that saltchin'd whore?
Who before she the Paedagogue had wed
Took all preventives, and when ever she sped
Touched Sowbread, Gladdon used, and Savin, food
To slink her spurious and abortive brood,
Procured for her dear Madams daughters, taught
Them to leap often, soon as their wembs were fraught:
Yet with her cloak as holy face now wears
Where little hair much Sanctity appears.
Lord! how she sighs in direful accents, that
Private affairs had made her come so late!
What matter is it? How do you; her quondam friend
Her Ladies gentle Go-before does find
Her there, renews acquaintance, and thence brings
Her to his Laundresse private house and flings
Her down on the refreshing mat: the bed
Being taken away and nothing but the sted
There lest to hold the sport up, since the poor
Old Bawd her bedcloaths found too fast were wore.
Each met their comforters before they went
To their tup Cuckolds: so the day was spent.
But I am no Sir Pandarus of Troy,
To sent each City stop or close dequoy:
I am no Pimp or Constable* if more
Sinners you would find, search Bridewel! there be store,
Who though they been't all sanctified alike,
Yet are as right for the cause Catholic.
SATYR 3.
The Argument.
The formal breeding of an heir
In The City is described here,
Where the more formal Statesman his
Admired creature pourtraid is.
MAn is a laughing Creature, who in this,
And a soul rational distinguished is
From brutish beasts: yet even they not have
Like use of Reason seem they wise or grave.
Follies in them pity or laughter move
In men of wiser judgment: to reprove
Whose open Errors with as public smiles
Is best: for silent pity but beguiles
And hardens folly by connivance; we
By precept and example taught must be.
Yet both are scarce enough to instruct or wean
Some from the Simples which they first sucked in
With their flit nurses milk: for sure it is
Midwives and Nurses make men fools or wise.
Why should not Cosmus else that City heir,
Whose education was the only care
Of his indulgent parents wiser prove?
For see how like a Puppet he does move,
Or Quarter-striker turns upon his toe,
As in a frame when he saluteth you!
Good manners are not bought at the change or Schools:
Art's Nature servant; Fools will still be fools
Yet wasters could he manage for Pruans well
At Islington on Sundays, and to tell
You truth had learnt to dance, but that his ear
And he both so inapprehensive were.
But he is rich, has fined for Sheriff twice,
And wears good clothes; yet out of them, or his
Mean rabscab company, looks like what he was
First born and bred, that is a precious Ass.
So there is a river in Boetia
Wherein the fishes shine like gold they say;
But taken thence look but as other fry.
The City seldom breeds Gentilitie
Til three or four discents. No Oak can be
Upon a Peartree graft so contrary
And wide their Natures are. But see his friend
Whom he so often walks with to Mile-end,
The Fencer Peregrin that brags he can
Kill at Duello more than any man;
Has rules to print the flesh, as the Stoccata,
Passada, Punto, and the Imbroccata,
With more Italian postures; by a groom,
Yet was disarmed, beat and kicked out of the room,
The other Morn at th'Trumpet: could not skill
Guard him from such a saucy foot as well?
Hanged, this is horse-play, says he; oh the sense
Of discreet manhood valiant patience!
Thus men discovered are by th'companie
They keep, and thoroughly known: else why would he
Delight in Dabcok, that Town-gul, whose nose
And face are as ridiculous as clothes?
Marry to laugh at; that himself might be
Thought wiser, though God knows, but one degree.
As ugly Ladies waiting faces get
More ugly them the better off to set.
Many of the City have such properties
To worship them, and with forced laughter please.
For is it not brave to be the best in the room,
Pay all, have all respect, and after come
To be admired by Squndrels? Formal I
Am most incensed with yet, whose gravity
Outweighs all other parts, his speech is cream
Starcht as his beard, takes his hat off by th'brim
Methodically 'twixt two fingers, while
His face of Essays seldom deigns to smile;
Like one in the Isle of eggs he nicely walks,
Affects strange sawces, like a Sophister talks,
Respects none that wear worser clothes than he,
And thinks himself the rare Academie;
More proud of's little wit, neat hose, than ever
Incaeptor was of's gown the first whole year,
Loves to be eied, yet looks nor drinks below
The salt, seems gravely wise, is nothing so.
How practiced is this policy? for most men
Study more how to seem judicious, than
To be so, herein whilst their best wisdom lies
To hide their follies in Scholastic guise:
This is a fit companion, Cosmus wear
This Bristol Diamond in thy copper ear!
Before him, that young proud Statist I must hate,
Whose face is all Mosaic, intricate,
And full of artificial gravitie,
Talks to himself where ever he goes, with eye
By speculation downward fixed, though he
Looks higher than his foretop, hopes to be
Of The Privy Council: and will whispring tell
News known as doubtful as an Oracle.
This is that other earwig crept into
Cosmus acquaintance, whom he graceth too;
He only bids him welcome for his tongue,
With which he feeds him all the dinner long;
Lends what he asks, though he never thanks him for it,
And hardly owns him when he comes to Court.
Yet often his wife he visits, swears by Jove
He Will place her at next Mask near or above
The Maids of Honor, tells her too he will get
Her Husband Knighted; thus his debts he will quit
While Cos. buys honor. Oh what Emphasis
And weight his words bear while amongst men he is!
Each line he speaks looks like a Pyramid,
On whose three sides one undiscovered is.
His Janus Hieroglyphick double front
Speaks him an Oedipus: oh out upon it!
The Guelphs and Gibellines not so factious were,
As the confused thoughts and projects here
In's Machiavellian noddle; now he dreams
Waking of Crowns and Kingdoms, Stratagems
To subvert Mahomet, or for private gain
Patents for Pins or Soape, or else his brain
Sweats with Monopolies of bones, or tough
Calves-skins well dressed to sell for Irish Bust.
Passant he deigned me once a nod and smile,
To be but known to these Court earwigs, I Will
Be sworn is even as great a grace or mo
Than had I kissed his Holinesses toe.
His Caesar Hawks-nose his ambition shows,
While thus like Niles tal Crocodile he grows
As long as ever he lives: he will surely sup
With one of the Secretaries of the State, and up
With some great Lord, or other at each word,
To gain the audience of all the board,
Whom he names as familiarly, as he
Were his Compeer, and not his property.
His footboy comes and whispers him in haste:
The news? I Am set, so soon as supper's past,
Go tell my Lord I Will wait on him. How now?
A sweating Porter bring a Letter too?
Directed to th'most accomplished Gentleman?
Oh it is from the Lady -- he replies, the hand
I know, and business: well he might, he wrote
The letter all himself, a pretty plot.
Ever he goes thence a prentice with a noat
Sealed from his Creditour finds him, he opes it not,
But loudly tells the youth his Masters suit
To morrow shall be granted, that he will do it,
Bids him be confident. Emploi'd he is
In every s^^ene thus with new business.
SATYR 4.
The Argument.
A Silly Zelot gets a living,
Grows fat upon it: while Gripe by thriving
Too fast and ill, does dearly get
His death; for such a halter's fit.
GO search Niles deeps, and find me if you can,
A thing so ugly as this monster man!
I mean that lean-chopt fellow, whose white face
And nightcap make him look like th'Ace
Of Spades, so formal is his pickdevant,
While he so meagre looks, and as wan
As Adam against the hedge in clay, when he
Was set a drying fore the Sun, to be
Inspired with breath: no Ananias ever
Painted on Country tapistrie could appear
So Ghostly or precise; as he had fed
On roots alone, for those he studied,
As Hebrew with a Chaldee paraphrase,
Or Syriack, while the Greek and Latin was
Profane and modern language counted: but
Behold his clean-starcht ruff of the holy cut
And pure Geneva set! whose every one
With the bright steel of Revelation
Was thoroughly opened: but to say no more,
Most pure he was from head to foot all o'r:
I could have wished this Hypocrite had bin
But half so pure, and so sincere within.
Such hollow falsehood in a Prophet guide,
Confirms the errors of the world beside.
Did he not roundly pay for's Benefice
By symoniack contract ever 'twas his?
Did he not wed his Patrons niece? some say
He sprung her mine too ever the marriage day:
And puts her portion now to usurie.
But oh! what an egregious dunce is he?
And when ordained examining did fear
More than a young thief caught, and made appear
Before a Justice for his first offense:
But his preventive wit and impudence
Wrought well with th'Bishops Chaplain I believe,
Whom he had fed on Ordination Eve
To say as th'Ordinary to the Judge is wont,
Legit ut clericus, my Lord: though he don't
One letter know. It Is usual this: while so
By such cheats knaves and fools get livings too.
But oh! how drunk for joy he got that night
In The Bishops sellar! now the thankful wight
Having his fees discharged goes home, looks worse
Austere and graver than his Lordships horse;
Wrangles and sues his neighbors, keeps no house
Of hospitality, nor gives one sous
Throughout the year to th'poor. Gripe comes to be
Resolved a case of conscience, if Usurie
Of ten in the hundred may be lawful ta'n?
Yes, yes: your talent must not up be lain
But to the most improved. Hear you me!
The tithe of all your coins increase must be
Paid me your Parson! Nay, then Gripe replies,
I Will rather let't at nine per cent. as is
My usual course: my sows shall farrow too
No more than nine at a time: I will go
Sell all my land, and stock, and into gold
Convert it for increase; all shall be sold
Before I Will give one doight away: the King
Shall Not have a subsidy, the poor nothing
For me. Thus Gripe is now a Chemist grown,
What he should eat, drink, wear the miching hound
Turns into metal, whose each new Image
He sacrificing does adore: no Age
Ever such a muckworm bred: he never will
Marry; children are charges, Women il.
He buys bread, pares it, sends it back again
For staler, for which cause the Baker's lain
In The Pillorie: he never at home will eat;
But at another board until he sweat
Again, he swils like any thresher, and
Communion wine he drinks til's neighbors stand
Amazed, and think as if in stead of's own
He drinking were his Savior's health around.
He will not part with a hair, and for that cause
No Shaver near him comes; and hates the Laws
'Cause they forbid engrossing: and is dumb
When Cosk would borrow; nay should Christ once come
On Earth again, the Wretch would not lend him
One tester, were the whole world to redeem
Without security of Angels. The Jew
So circumcised his silver he was brought
Before the Judge to answer for his fault.
Hold up thy lean hand Gripe! Guilty or not?
Not guilty my good Lord: the Jurie that
Shall try. These clippings all I found
In's trunk. 'Twas but to make the money round,
Gripe pleads, which first the coyners did neglect;
Only Rix dollars which I did elect
'Cause they were too square, and broad, for that respect.
Hence take him Jaylour! oh the sad effect
Of covetizing! Cannot I ransomed be?
Take all my goods! save but my life and me.
No: sentence is past: how the hangman swears
And curses 'cause no better clothes he wears.
FINIS.

