A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE RIGHT HONORABLE HOUSE OF LORDS, IN THE
ABBEY-CHURCH AT Westminster, Wednesday the 28. of May 1645. Being the day
appointed for solemn and public humiliation.

BY ALEXANDER HENDERSON, Minister at Edinburgh.

MAT. 6.10. Thy Kingdom Come.

LONDON, Printed by F. N. for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the King's Head. 1645.

To the Christian Reader.
NOt any desire or confidence of mine own, but submission and obedience, made
me first preach, and now print this Sermon. Not any opinion or esteem I have
of it, but example and custom, have moved me to set some words before it;
These have I directed generally to the Christian Reader, that I may not only
include the Noble Lords of Parliament, if any amongst them shall be pleased to
look this way; but may also invite all other Christian Readers (and such I
wish all Readers to be) to bestow some of their most serious thoughts upon so
precious and excellent a subject, as is the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; which is here but generally hinted and briefly touched, but is
represented to the life in Scripture, and to the full treated and debated by
Divines. Jesus Christ by virtue of the three Offices, of his Prophecy,
Priesthood, and Kingdom, is made unto us of God, Wisdom and Righteousness and
Sanctification and Redemption. His sufficiency and sutablenesse to be unto us a
Savior, consists in the dignity of his Person, and in his willing
undertaking and faithful administration of these his Offices: The Sum of the
Grace given us through communion with him, is comprised in these inestimable
benefits; Without the one he could not be a perfect Savior, without the other
our salvation cannot be perfect. It has been of old and is at this day a just
complaint, that of the Offices of Christ, his Kingdom is least considered of,
and most mistaken; Which as it is dishonor to his Name, so is it a mighty
hinderance to the comfort of some, to the sanctification of others, and to the
salvation of many; and is a maine cause of the many disorders and scandals in
the Church of Christ.

The Papists will have their Pope, by reason of the Kingdom of Christ, to be
the head and (which is the same) the King of the Church, and at least in ordine
ad spiritualia, to be the head and King of the Kings of the Earth. A seect of
Politics, which subject Religion to Policy, and Christ to the world, will
have the supreme civil power, at least in ordine ad temporalia, to be the
Head and King of the Church; And both the one and the other do turn the
Kingdom of Christ into a worldly Kingdom. Ignorant and carnal Professors are
content to be served with Christ, as a Prophet to teach them, and a Priest to
satisfy and make intercession for them, but are not willing to serve Christ as
their King, that he may rule over them. And many modest and peaceable
Christians suffer themselves to be robbed or cousened, if not of the one half,
yet of a necessary and large part of the Kingdom of Christ, while they either
satisfy themselves with the internal influence of Christ their Head, upon
their own spirits, or give way to such as for their own ends would have them
believe, that the whole administration of the Kingdom of Christ is internal,
not distinguishing betwixt that which is spiritual, and that which is
internal, nor considering the external administration of the Kingdom of
Christ, although it be in this world, yet to be spiritual and heavenly, and
not of this world. Judicious Martin Bucer in the beginning of the Reformation,
wrote to pious Prince Edward the sixth, two books of Church-policie, to which he
prefixeth the title De Regno Christi, of the Kingdom of Christ. The complaints
powered forth by him at that time against the wisemen of this world, and the
common sort of people, as enemies to Christ's Kingdom, may be now renewed, and
with new aggravations; so rare a thing is it in any age to find a people
disposed to receive the whole Kingdom of the Son of God.

It should not seem strange, that formerly such as desired to decline the one
extreme of Prelaticall tyranny, having nothing to stay them in their way,
nothing in the middle to rest upon, and to associate themselves unto, did run
to the other extreme of popular Anarchy; But now when from the mercy of God,
by advice of the Assembly and Authority of Parliament, the case shall be
changed, and a remedy provided, the people of God will know where to fix their
judgment and choice. Can any wiseman imagine, that such a Chaos of Anarchy,
Libertinisme, and popular confusion, as now covers the face of this Kingdom,
and wherein all errors and sects cover their Heads under the Catholic Buckler
of Independency, that such a Tohu Vavohu, can be the face of the Kingdom of
Christ, or the work of the new Creation; of which it may be said, And God saw
that it was good. Can any of the godly think that the Kingdom of Christ
draws the minds of men from the humble exercise of faith, to the ambition of
new and vain opinions, that it transformeth Religion into fancy, virtue into
speculation, zeal into contention, truth into policy, and charity into
faction? Does not the present posture of Religion, and the constitution of the
Church (which yet is not so Independent, as it is by some desired to be) call
as loud for a Reformation, and for settling of Religion, as the former did,
before a Reformation was begun? And may we not say, that we have spent our
strength in vain, and purchased our misery at a great price, if we shall rest
where we are, that is, in Independency? I should not exceed, if I should say;
Were we all agreed in all things, except in the point of Independency, we
would quickly run again into divisions; And that nothing in a Family, in a
City, in a Kingdom, in a State, or in a Church, has more need of
Reformation, then that Independency, which all men in all Societies naturally
love and seek after. The Government of the Church by subordination of
Assemblies, has endured much opposition and many trials, and is at this day
set upon at all hands, yet is the Proverbiall speech of the Hebrews verified
concerning it, Myrtus stans inter urticas, Myrtus tamen est, and vocatur
Myrtus, The myrtle standing amongst nettles, is for all that, the myrtle, and
is so called; And necessity will drive all that love the preservation of
Religion, and peace of the Church, unto this shelter and sanctuary at last,
although in fair weather some kick against it, and would not only pull at
the branches, but pluck it up by the roots. When after all these tempests and
troubles, the Kingdom of Christ is uniformly settled in the Land, Christ Jesus
will be seen in his beauty and strength, his people will be filled with truth
and peace, and the instruments of so good a work, especially such as remove
impediments out of the way, shall against all envy and aemulation have their
own testimony and honor; according to the Hebrew Sentence; Nisi ipse elevasset
lapidem, non fuisset inventa sub eo haec margarita, if the stone had not been
lifted, the pearl had not been found under it.

Die Mercurii, 28. Maii. 1645.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that Mr. HENDERSON, who
preached this day before the LORDS in Parliament, is hereby thanked for the
great pains he took in his Sermon; And is desired by their Lordships to print
and publish the same, which his not to be printed or reprinted by any, but by
Authority under his own hand.

Jo: Brown Cler Parliament.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 10. read forth. p. 10. l. 9. for endure r. obdure. p. 22. l. 26.
r. natural l. 28. r. him. p. 25. l. 11. r. clownishnes.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable House of LORDS.
JOHN 18. 36 Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this world: if my Kingdom
were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews. But now is my Kingdom not from hence.

37 Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a King then? Jesus answered, thou
say that I am a King. To this end was I borne, and for this cause came I
unto the world, that I should bear witness of the truth: every one that is of
the truth, hears my voice.


IT is acknowledged, and universally confessed, that Justice or Righteousness
is a noble and most excellent virtue. When the di^pute was betwixt Justice and
Fortitude, Righteousness and Courage, whether of the two should have the first
place, both of them being most noble Virtues, Justice was preferred, because
Courage without Justice, is of nouse; but if all men were just, there should be
no need of Courage or Fortitude. This Justice is a constant and perpetual will
of giving unto every one his due, it renders to the inferior what is due to
him; to the equal, what he ought to have; and to the superior, but most of
all to God, and to his Son Jesus Christ, who are supreme, what belongs to
them. There be in these days many complaints of the want of military skill and
courage for the truth and cause of God; but the complaint of the want of
Justice is more just: For if all men were just, the former complaint would be
silenced. And there be many complaints of inferiors, of equals, and of
superiors, that they receive not that which belongs unto them: but the Son
of God, who is supreme and sovereign above all, may more justly complain,
that he gets not his right: which is the greatest injustice in the world,
and the cause of so great injustice amongst men. And therefore the cause of the
great wrath of God, which to deprecate and to turn away, we are humbled before
God, and do afflict our souls this day. Oh that the conclusion might be, a
resolution in all, according to their places and callings, to render unto
Christ his own right.

This parcel of Scripture containing the answer of Jesus Christ unto Pilate,
before whom he witnessed a good confession, holds forth his right: for being
accused by Pilate of the highest degree of ambition, sedition, and rebellion,
and indeed of no less then laese-Majestie: he desendeth himself by
discovering the causes of these Tragedies, and by revealing the mysteries of
his Kingdom, confessing that he was indeed a King; but withal, showing that
his Kingdom needed not to be formidable either to Pilate, to his master
Tiberius, or to any in authority, because his Kingdom was not of this world.
This he makes manifest, from the common condition and manner of earthly
Kingdoms, and Kings, which have their Soldiers and Guards that fight for
them, and defend them from violence, but he makes not use of any: this being
the end of his Kingdom, that the truth of the Gospel may prevail and reign in
the hearts and lives of men, against the tyranny of darkness and lies. Nor
should it seem any thing strange, that he has so many adversaries, and his
Kingdom finds so great opposition in the world, there being so few whether of
the Church or State, that submit themselves to be captived and ruled by the
truth: none are subjects of his Kingdom to obey his voice, but such as by
regeneration are the children of the truth, which is parallel to what he
says, Matthew. 11.19. But wisdom is justified of her children.

There be four principal points aimed at in the Text: First, the dominion and
sovereignty of Christ, My Kingdom.

Secondly, the condition and quality of the Kingdom of Christ, negatively
expressed, as best serving his present intention: My Kingdom is not of this
world.

Thirdly, the end and use of his Kingdom, that the truth may have place among
the children of men for their salvation and eternal happiness, To this end
was Iborn, and for this cause came I unto the world, that I should be are
witness unto the truth.

Fourthly, the subjects of the Kingdom of Christ, such as hear the voice of
Christ, and obey his will: Every one that is of the truth, hears my voice.

The knowledge of the first is necessary, that the Son of God may have his due,
and we may be humbled for not rendering it unto him.

The knowledge of the second is necessary, that Kings, Princes, and great ones
in the world may have what is due unto them, lest from their unjust suspicions,
and evil grounded jealousies, they become enemies to the Kingdom of Christ,
and that they may be humbled for lodging any such thoughts or fears in their
hearts.

The third is necessary to be known, that we may have the benefit intended for
us in the Gospel, and be humbled, that we have not endeavored as we ought, to
find the comfort and power of the truth in our hearts and lives.

And the fourth is necessary, that we may henceforth show ourselves to be the
children of truth, and willing subjects of the Kingdom of the Son of God.

That Jesus Christ is not only our Prophet, revealing unto us the whole will
of God, by the Law discovering unto us our sin and wretchedness, and by the
Gospel righteousness and life: and our Priest, by himself offered in a
sacrifice, purging us from sin, and arraying us with long garments, clean and
white, which is the righteousness of the Saints: but that as our supreme Lord
and King, by his mighty power, and sovereignty, he rules in us, and over us,
and conserveth and maintains our blessed estate thus revealed and purchased,
against all enemies, is a truth as necessary for us to know, but never enough
acknowledged, so very much insisted on in Scripture, as may appear:

First, by the Titles of honor and dignity put upon him; A Commander, a
Captain, a Ruler of Governor, a Prince, Michael the great Prince, a King, the
Prince of the Kings of the earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the
Lord of all. By these Titles is he known in the way of eminency. What is most
eminent in Rulers, Princes, or Kings, all their excellencies, and flowers of
perfection, are most eminently and egregiously found in him; in the way of
negation, all their errors, infirmities and imperfections, which are many, and
too many are far from him, and in the way of causation (as they speak) for
with him is the original and prime cause of all that is excellent in them.

Secondly, by the many great and glorious promises and prophesies of the
Kingdom of Christ, which cannot be reckoned up, (so many are they) in this
shortness of time; and are to every one that reads the Prophesies of the old
Testament, so obvious.

Thirdly, the same is manifest by the administration and execution of his
office, in giving laws unto his people, and executing them, in giving gifts
unto his servants for the good of his people, in ruling his people by his Word
and Spirit, in defending and delivering them from their enemies, and in
subduing and destroying their enemies in the end.

Fourthly, the same is evident also by the homage and honor which the whole
Church militant and triumphant give unto him. And I beheld, and I heard the
voice of many Angels, round about the Throne, and the living Creatures, and the
Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and blessing: And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth,
and under the earth, and such as are of the sea, and all that are in them,
heard I, saying Blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon
the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever, Rev. 5.11, 12, 13. It
requires an heart ready to indite, and a tongue as the pen of a ready Writer,
to set forth the praises of this King, Psalm, 45.1. Only three things I would
say from the descriptions which we have in Scripture: One is, that the Kingdom
of Christ was first made known to the Church when the promise was made to our
first parents: The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent, Genesis
3.15. The second is, that since that time till this day, he has been reigning
in the midst of his enemies, not only after his coming in our flesh, but
before the times of the Patriarcks and Prophets, and ever was known to the
subjects of his Kingdom. The third is, that his Kingdom has been sometimes
more obscure and under a cloud, as in the times of the old Testament, howsoever
even then his hand was stretched out in delivering his people out of Egypt, in
leading them through the wilderness, and possessing them in the land of
promise. And at the time of his suffering, howsoever the beams of his
bringhtnesse did shine through the dark cloud: at other times the luster and
brightness thereof, has been more apparent, as at the time of his exaltation:
Thou art my Son, this day, this day of thy glorious resurrection, have I
begotten thee, fulfilled the decree, and declared thee to be the Son of God.
A Commentary whereof we have, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Wherefore God also has highly
exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name
of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earch, and
things under the earth: And that every tongne should confess that Jesus Christ
is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. And Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended up on
high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. These were his
servants, who were sent forth to preach and proclaim him to be King: And
although men ought to be sparing in determining the manner, the measure, the
time, and indurance of a greater glory of the Kingdom of Christ on earth, to
come; yet have we reason to hope for great things at the bringing in of the
ancient people of God: but ought so to hope for it, that for the present we may
behold Christ reigning in his spiritual Kingdom, and to take heed that the
expectation of that which is future, be not a prejudice to that which is
present, and is come to pass in our days, more then in former times.

Some perhaps may think, that this is no great matter, or deep mystery; since
no man can acknowledge Christ to be the eternal Son of God, but he must also
confess, that he is King and Lord, and that all honor, and Titles of honor
are due unto him. To which I answer, first, that there be many, whatsoever for
their credit they may profess to the contrary, who do not in their hearts
believe, that the Lord God, as a great King, rules the world: for they fight
against the light of Nature, and abuse their power and policy no less, then
if they could rule the world without God: God is not in all their thoughts,
Psalm. 10.4. Secondly, a man may know that God is King and Ruler, and yet be
ignorant that Christ God and Man is King. Nature which teaches that there is a
Godhead, leads also to a providence, but the other is a grand mystery, which
cannot be conceived but supernaturally. Thirdly, we are to understand, that
Christ has a twofold right unto his Kingdom: one by nature, as he is God; the
other by donation, as he is Man. To me is given all power in heaven and in
earth, so that the man Jesus Christ (which is a great mystery, and which the
world believes not) has prerogative and power above all creatures in earth
and in heaven, above all Nobles, Princes, and Kings; and (which is more,) above
all Angels, Principalities and Powers.

Having thus showed, that Christ has a Kingdom, which made him to say, My
Kingdom, I would now make some use of this point; but that I conceive it to be
more convenient, first to speak of the quality of the Kingdom of Christ, and
having joined both together, That he is a King, and that his Kingdom is not of
this world, to give the uses of both at once.

The quality then of the Kingdom of Christ, negatively is this, That his
Kingdom is not of this world: it is not an earthly or worldly Kingdom, and
therefore by consequence must be a spiritual and heavenly Kingdom. As it is a
Kingdom, it has many things common with the Kingdoms of the world: both the
one and the other are of God, both for God and his glory, both for the good of
the people: This being a perpetual difference between a Tyrant and a King, that
a Tyrant conceives the people to be for him, and his ends; but a King knows,
that he is set over the people for their good: both have their Laws, and rule
by them: both have their enemies, which oppose and disturb their peace. But
this is the great difference, that the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world:
For first, Christ being called before Pilate, and being demanded, whether he
was a King, answered, That his Kingdom was not of this world, therefore his
Kingdom is not a temporal and earthly Kingdom, nor would Pilate have
pronounced him innocent and guiltless, if he had made any claim to Caesar's
Kingdom. This is very strongly proved by the following words: If my Kingdom
were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews; which yet makes nothing against the taking of Arms by
such as are in authority, for the defense of Religion, and the just Liberty of
the Professors thereof. Secondly, Christ refused to be a King, when it was
offered unto him, and told his Disciples, That the Kings of the Nations have
dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise authority, but that it
should not be so with them, but that whosoever would be great among them, must
be their Minister, Matthew. 20.25. Thirdly, he refused to be a Judge of secular
quarrels, or a divider of inheritances, Luke 12.14. He came from heaven for
things divine, to work upon the consciences of men, and was appointed to be
Judge of quick and dead, but never meddled with the office of a temporal King.
Fourthly, he acknowledged that Caesar was King, saying, Render to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's. Nor did the Prophets prophecy of any earthly Kingdom
of Christ: For the Kingdom that they prophesied of, was to be established and
confirmed by him, but the Kingdom of Judea was ruined and overthrown for
refusing him to be their sprituall King: There shall not a stone be left upon a
stone in Jerusalem, the chief City of that Kingdom, because thou knew not
the time of thy visitation, says Christ. This yet appears further, if we
consider the qualities of these two kinds of Kingdoms more particularly: The
Kingdoms of the world endure but for a time, and the periods and endings of
them are matter not only of discourse before they come, but of tragedies after
they are come: but the Kingdom of Christ shall not be destroyed for ever, And
of his Kingdom there shall no end, Dan. 2.44. After his departure out of the
earth, his Kingdom was in the greatest strength, and in a most flourishing
condition, he then was gloriously manifested to be a King. The Kingdoms of the
world are governed by the rules and counsels of humane prudence and policy;
but the Kingdom of Christ, by laws of another kind, by the simplicity of the
Gospel, which to the natural man is foolishness. The Kingdoms of the world
are supported by taxes and tributes, ceasments and subsidies; but no such thing
in the Kingdom of Christ. The Kingdoms of the world consist in riches,
honor, power of men, external splendour, and earthly greatness; but in the
Kingdom of Christ, poverty and humility, triumph over the world under the
Standard of the Cross. The Kingdoms of the world have carnal weapons, and
strength of Arms to pursue their ends; but the weapons of the Kingdom of
Christ are spiritual, to procure spiritual obedience unto him.

Many such differences may be observed, by which we may clearly perceive, that
the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world. Yet one thing we must remember for
preventing mistakes, and which being rightly taken and understood, would put an
end to many of the questions which are so much debated at this time, about
Chruch-government. It is this: That we are to distinguish between that which is
of this world, and that which is external and visible in this world: The
Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, yet some part of this Kingdom is
external and visible in this world: for there be two parts of the spiritual
administration of Christ's Kingdom; the one is the internal operation of the
Spirit, accompanying the external means, which are his Ordinances appointed by
himself and his own authority: the other is the external dispensation of
these means and Ordinances by such officers as are called the Ministers of the
Kingdom of Heaven. This does appertain to the Kingdom of Christ, and shall
continue no less then the former, till he render up the Kingdoms into God the
Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. This part of the administration of Christ's Kingdom,
although it be external, yet it is not of this world, but spiritual: for it
comes from the Spirit, and is done by the gifts of the Spirit: The Word and
Sacraments, which are the matter of it, are things spiritual; for the manner
of doing, it is by the evidence of the Spirit; the spirits and souls of men are
the object of it; the end thereof is spiritual edification; and the effect,
the ministry of the Spirit. So that in this respect also, the Kingdom of
Christ is not of this world, but a spiritual Kingdom in both parts of the
administration theoreof.

The Text thus expounded, is a fountain full of springs of Doctrine; As first,
that although Christ was a King, a Governor and Commander, as has been
formerly showed, and was a Prophet also, and it may be now exercising that
office, and testifying of his own Kingdom before Pilate; yet is it no warrant
for Captains or Commanders to preach the Gospel, and to become Prophets:
because first he was a spiritual King and Commander, and not a temporal; and
next, because he had a special calling. The Apostle, Romans 10.14. tells us,
that men cannot preach unless they be sent. And this calling the Apostle
judges to be so necessary, that the Son of God would not undertake that charge
without a singular vocation, Heb. 5. Although a private man who runs unsent,
and an Ambassador who is authorized and sent, speak the same things, yet the
one wants the authority which the other has.

Secondly, although Jesus Christ knew well, that all that he could say, was not
able to deliver him from death, or to do any good to the heart of Pilate for
his conversion, yet he finds himself bound to answer calumnies and unjust
accusations, and to give a testimony of the truth: And so must the servants of
God do, although their words do no more but serve to blindfold and endure blind
and hard hearts, yet must they speak out the truth. It was the practice of the
Prophets, Apostles, and holy Martyrs, and in this as in other things, Ministers
and all others, who have by their place any calling to give testimony to the
truth, must do their duty, committing the event unto God.

Thirdly, although Christ at this time was brought very low in the eyes of the
world; yet he spares not to speak of his Kingdom, and to call himself a King:
Humiliation and exinanition is in it self no derogation to right, but the
right is the same in the estate and case of humiliation, and in the estate and
case of exaltation: the case may change, and the estate be altered, but the
right is without change, and stands unalterable. So was it with Christ, and
so is it in the cause of Christ, with the Church of Christ, and every believing
soul.

Fourthly, as there be many things that are of this world, so there be other
things that be not of this world. A truth which all will acknowledge in respect
of this world and the world to come: but it holds also in this present world,
wherein there be some things that are of it, and somethings that are in it, but
not of it. The Kingdom of Christ, which has many mysteries, many parts, many
privileges, many laws, many subjects, is of this kind. The natural man sees
no more in the world, then what he conceives to be of the world; but the
spiritual man judges all things. And what the eye of the natural man sees
not, what his ear hears not, and what his reason understands not, because
it is spiritual, and cannot be discerned but spiritually; that the spiritual
man perceives, and receives with all his heart, and is no less assured of
the infallibility thereof, then of what he perceives by sense or reason: he
knows what he believes, and that he is not deceived about it.

But passing over all these, and other the like particular doctrines, which
cannot at this time be prosecuted, I come to the necessary uses of that main
and principal doctrine intended in the Text, and laid open by that which has
been spoken: That Christ Jesus the Son of God has a Kingdom in this world,
and that this Kingdom is a spiritual Kingdom, and not of this world.

The first use shall be for Information in the point of agreement and
difference betwixt Civil and Ecclesiastical power; the Kingdoms of this
world, and the Kingdom of Christ; the Magistracy and the Ministry.

First, both the one and the other is from God: In the State there be superiors
and inferiors: the Lord who has appointed in nature the tall Cedar and the low
Shrub growing at the root of it, the Elephant and the Mole, the Eagle and the
Wren, the great Leviathan, and the smaller Fishes, has also in policy
appointed Kings, Princes, and Nobles, to rule and govern, and others of lower
condition to honor and obey. In the Church some to teach and rule, and others
to be taught and ruled by them.

Anabaptists (I speak of such as are not novices, but are acquainted with the
deeps of the profession) and other such masters of confusion, do not
distinguish betwixt the common and particular vocations of Christians: betwixt
a Christian equality, and a Civil or Ecclesiastic inaquality. All Christians
having alike precious faith, in respect of their common dignity and vocation,
as they are Christians and are in Christ, are equal amongst themselves, there
is neither Master nor Servant, Bound nor Free, King nor Subject, Pastor nor
people, but all are one in Jesus Christ: but this hinders not an inequality
in Civil or Ecclesiastical respects. God who has appointed them to be equal
the one way, has also appointed an inequality equality amongst them the other
way. Notwithstanding this agreement betwixt the Magistracy and Ministry in
respect of their Author, yet is there here also some difference betwixt the one
and the other: for Magistracy proceeds from God the Creator and Ruler of the
world, and therefore does belong unto, and is to be found amongst all sorts of
people in all Nations that live in any civil society: But the Ministry is the
Ordinance of Christ the Mediator, and has not place but in the Church of
Christ. Again, Magistracy and Civil government in the general, is from God,
and is ordained of him: But the particular different forms of Civil
government are from men, and yet all of them lawful: Whence it follows, that
Civil power is not absolute, but limited: First, by the will of God, whose
Minister the Magistrate is. And next, by such laws and limitations as are
agreed upon to be the foundation of that power. It is not so with the
Ministry: For not only is the Ministry in the general the ordinance of
Christ, but all the special kinds of Ministers are appointed by him. An humane
creature in the State is not unlawful; but to be, or appoint an humane
creature in the Church, is unlawful. A difference which Politickes and
Churchmen who love preeminence above their brethren, are never enough moved to
acknowledge: Nor have the Ministers of Jesus Christ any limitations from men:
all their limitation is from Jesus Christ, whose Ministers they are.

There is also a second thing wherein the Magistracy and the Ministry do
agree: It is true indeed, that the Magistrate is more about things external,
which concern this present life; and the Minister about things spiritual,
which concern the soul, and life eternal: yet is there nothing so
Ecclesiastical, but it belongs some way to the Magistrate: he being keeper
of both Tables: Nor is there any thing so secular, but it concerns the
Ministry, in so far as secular things fall under obedience or disobedience to
God: For the word of God is extended to all causes, all persons, all conditions
of life: all which are to be ruled by the Word. And this Word is to be
expounded, and must be particularly applied by the Ministry. But while both
are about the same things, causes, and persons, it is in a very different way:
the power of the one is but Ministerial, and the weapons of his warfare are
spiritual, not carnal: but the power of the other, though in respect of God,
whose Minister he is, it be Ministerial, yet in respect of his subjects, and
inferiors, it is Magisteriall, and has authority to compel and coerce. The
Magistrate may not go to the Pulpit to preach or minister the Sacraments; nor
may he, as he is a Magistrate, exercise Ecclesiastical discipline: but ought
by his authority to command all these necessary duties to be done. And the
Minister may not ascend to the Tribunal to judge civil or criminal causes;
yet ought he to teach, and in the Name of God exhort that justice be done to
all, by which every one may have that which is due unto him. We may say with
Bernard, that the Church has two Swords, the Spiritual and the Temporal, but
in a different sort, the use of the spiritual and the benefit of the
temporal. We may also say, that the Civil power has two swords, the
Temporal and the Spiritual, but in a different manner the use of the
temporal, and the benefit of the spiritual. When these two Swords are put in
good hands, and wisely managed, it goes well both with Church and State, with
Truth and Peace, with Religion and Righteousness. The Magistracy and the
Ministry are not unfitly compared to the two principal faculties of the soul
of man, the Will and the Understanding (man being as well a Republic as a
little world) the will of man has two acts: one which is her proper and
essential operation, it is called actus elicitus, as to will, to nill, or to
suspend: the other is called actus imperatus, produced by another power,
whether of the body or of the soul, as by the Understanding at the commandment
of the Wll: For the Will may command the Mind or Understanding, quoad
exercitium, although not quoad specificationem. The Magistrate has actum
elicitum, as his proper operation, about civil matters, as his proper object,
but in spiritual things not so: He may neither preach nor minister the
Sacraments, nor exercise discipline, yet has he actum imperatum, he may and
ought by his place to command Ministers to do all these duties. And if he be
negligent in this, he sins against God. Upon the other part, the Minister
may not judge civil or criminal causes, nor perform the proper offices of
the civil power; yet as the Minister has actum elicitum for performing of
spiritual duties, so has he, although not actum imperatum, yet actum
excitatum, for exciting, and in the name of Christ exhorting and charging the
Civil Powers to the performance of their duty.

This general use of Doctrine may be brought nearer home, by the following
use, which is for reproof of two main errors, which at this time make a great
deal of trouble in the Christian world, and which being once removed, there
might be greater peace and quietness in Churches and Commonwealths: The one
is of the most unjust and tyrannous claim made by the Pope, of temporal
dominion over the whole world; or at least to intermeddle with the affairs of
Princes and Kingdoms in reference to the Church, or as the Papists express
themselves, in ordine ad spiritualia: For the Pope not contenting himself with
the transcendency of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the whole Church, though
he has no warrant for it, in his boundless and endless ambition, did climb
yet higher; and partly by the favor, or foolishness rather, of Christian
Princes; and partly by his own fraudulent and violent dealing, as the son of
him who has been a murderer and a lier from the beginning, has set himself
up first amongst, and next over the greatest Princes and mightiest Emperors,
to dispose of their Crowns and Dignities at his pleasure, which is the mark
and character of him who is spoken of by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Who sits
in the Temple of God as God, showing himself that he is God, and opposing and
exalting himself above all that is called God. As the Text shows, that
Christ was no earthly King, that he left no Regal power to Peter, and therefore
the Pope can have no temporal power as the Vicegerent of Christ, so the
supreme power to dispose of Kingdoms, and temporal things in reference to
things spiritual, and the lawfulness of civil dominion, which the Pope
claims by the donation of Princes, are overturned by the grounds laid in the
Text: The Kingdom of Christ is not of this world. About this point there be
three things which may astonish our hearts, and indeed are matters of
admiration: one is, the wonderful patience of God, suffering that man of sin
so long to rage, and to be drunk with the blood of the Saints, which should
make us to say with the Spirit and Bride, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; the
sins of that Sea are long since at the height, Lord, why tarriest thou? Never
since the beginning of the world was there such an example of divine patience.
Learned men have applied themselves to search into the causes of the so long
continuance of the Sect of Mahomet, and conceive that the detestation of
Idolatry, and of persecution of the Gospel, are two principal causes thereof;
the contrary whereof is found in the Church of Rome, which makes the patience
of God so much the more admirable. A second is, that he who calls himself the
servant of servants, does make himself the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
and yet the Kings and Lords of the earth do still give their strength and power
unto the Beast, and lie under his yoke drunk with the wine of his fornications;
nor will they yet awake after so full a discovery of that mystery of iniquity,
which is from the spirit of slumber in the justice of God possessing their
spirits. And the third is, that such Kings and Kingdoms as are begun to hate
the Whore, and make her desolate and naked, do suffer themselves by whatsoever
tentations or worldly respects, to be divided or retarded in accomplishing the
work. And here we have just reason to lament, that the work of God makes so
slow progress in this Land. And it may be unto us this day, just cause of deep
humiliation, that our sins in former times, and since the beginning of this
work of Reformation, are such as make obstruction unto it. The Lord, I
confess, has done much already, especially in removing the Prelates, and other
members of that Popish Hierarchy, who had transformed the Kingdom of Christ in
this Island, into a wordly Kingdom, very conform unto the Pope the head of the
Hierarchy. In this, England has as great cause to rejoice, as any Nation under
heaven, because never any nation has felt more of Popish and Prelaticall
tyranny, then England, and that both of old, and of late, witness your own
Histories.

There is also another error to be reproved, which is upon the other hand, and
may be called a new Papacy: the former error is (...), this (...), which
Court-parasites, politicians, and such other enemies to the Kingdom of Christ,
would introduce into the reformed Churches: ascribing to the highest civil
authority, or to the supreme Magistrate, the same place in the reformed Church
within his dominion, that the Pope has in the Roman Church, and making him
head of the Church, by which the Pope is changed, but not the Papacy; the
Dominator, but not the Domination: Nor is there any difference, but 1. that
this opinion makes as many Popes as supreme Magistrates, which would cease, if
Caesar's or Emperors as of old, did rule the world. 2. That it will be
acknowledged that such civil Popes are subject to error, which is no great
difference: for the chiefest Doctors in the Roman Church do admit that the Pope
may err; and for this cause will have him subject to general Councels. For
clearing of this great difficulty, and that we may give to Caesar what is
Caesar's, unto Christ and his Ministers what belongs to them, we are to
observe these three distinctions: 1. We are to distinguish times; in the times
before the Law, the Civil and Ecclesiastical power might be in one person, as
in Melchisedeck, Job, etc. not so after the Law, when the Republic and Church
of Israel were once constitute and settled. The Lord that makes Summer to
succeed after Winter, the day after the night, and youth after infancy, would
have it to be so. The saying of the wise Physician, Vindiceanus, quia ego non
jussi, belongs to God in matters of this kind, August. Epist. 5. 2. We are to
distinguish between cases; in extraordinary cases, and when the estate of the
Church was corrupt, many things were allowed or permitted, as in the times of
Eli and Samuel, which in other cases were not lawful. 3. We are to distinguish
betwixt the supreme Civil power of the Magistrate about matters of Religion or
things Ecclesiastical, and the ultimate and highest jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical in matters of this kind, the one is not only lawful, but
necessary, as a principal point of the Magistrates duty; the other does not
belong to the Magistrate, or any civil authority, but to the Church, and
authority Ecclesiastical. To assume ordinarily after religion is settled, the
last resolution and highest jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in matters of
Religion, unto which formal and legal appeals shall be made in Church
matters from the Assemblies of the Church, is more I hope, then needs to be
feared from the wisdom, piety, and justice of the honorable Houses of
Parliament. They have in their great wisdom, piety, and justice, removed
Churchmen from their Senate, and will neither have Prelates nor Pastors to sit
with them in that supreme civil Court: They have abolished high Commissions
and Star-chambers, and therefore will not intermeddle, unless it be at
extraordinary times, and in extraordinary cases with Church matters. It cannot
be denied, but persons distressed by Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, may by way
of complaint, although not by way of accusation, express their unjust
sufferings to whatsoever kind of persons, private or public, in Church or
State, and each one is to bear the burden of another, much more therefore may
they fly to the supreme civil authority, not to this end that the cause be
recognosced by them; but if need be, and they find it necessary, they may
desire, or command the same to be resumed and examined again of new; but this
Christian way of complaining, makes nothing for any formal or legal appeal
from one kind of authority to another. Appellations must be from the inferior
to the superior in the same kind.

Before I proceed, there is one objection to be removed: If the power of the
Church be not above the State in civil matters, nor the power of the State
above the Church in matters of religion, if the Kingdoms of the world be not
subordinate to the Kingdom of Christ, and if the Kingdom of Christ be not
subordinate to the Kingdoms of the world, then it will follow, that they are
equal, that they are parallel and collateral; and therefore will be emulous
and jealous one of another, and will strive one against another. For answer.
This objection savoureth of much malice against the Ministry of the Gospel,
and (which is suppressed) against the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. It is not
unlike the speech of the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin against the building
of the Temple at Jerusalem unto the Lord God of Israel: This City is a
rebellious City, and hurtful unto Kings and Provinces: It has made
insurrection against Kings, and rebellion and sedition has been made therein,
Ezra 4.15. The practices of such are not unlike the practices of the enemies,
Nehem. 4. who by craft, by rumors, and by hired prophesies, would have
terrified Nehemiah, and others that were with him, from building the walls of
Jerusalem. Their calumnies are not unlike that of Haman, Esther 3. There is a
certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the
Provinces of the Kingdom, and their laws are diverse from all people, neither
keep they the Kings laws, therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer
them. In a time of reformation when the Temple or walls of Jerusalem are to be
builded, there be ever some Rehums, and Shimsaies, some Sanballats, Tobiahs,
Gash^es, or Hamans, that endeavor to hinder the work. It is a matter of
humiliation, that there are any such in this land, and will prove greater matter
of humiliation if they shall have their desire. But the wisdom and vigilance
of the honorable Houses of Parliament, will take heed unto, and note such
unhappy instruments, that their wicked desires be not satisfied. It cannot be
denied, but there is some kind of mutual and reciprocal subjection or
subordination of the one authority and government unto the other: such as uses
to be, and must needs be in all such societies as have diverse ends before their
eyes: those who command in respect of the one end, must obey in respect of the
other; and such as obey in respect of the one end, must command in respect of
the other. When a company of Soldiers enters into a ship to fight against the
enemy at sea, in so far as they are in the ship, and within board, they are to
be governed by the master of the ship, who is to command all in matters of
navigation; but as they are Soldiers fighting against the enemy, they must
obey their own Captain, and be directed by him. He that commanded in the one
respect, although a General, or a King, must obey in the other respect; nor is
it any derogation, but wisdom to do so. When the son is a Consul, and the
father a private man, the son obeys the father as his father, and the father
obeys the son as his Consul, or Magistrate. And thus in diverse respects
there is a mutual subordination, yet is there no such equality, as to make the
two Governments jealous one of another: for there is a threefold difference
betwixt them, which being well observed, will cure all this unnecessary and
groundless jealousy: one is, in respect of God, to whom both are subject;
another in that respect which the one of them has to the other; and the third
is, in respect of the people concredit unto them. In respect of their
subjection to God, the one is subject as a deputed and inferior Lordship or
Dominion; the other is subject as a ministry or service, Christ only being
Lord of his Church: The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and
they that exercise authority upon them, are called Benefactors. But ye shall
not be so, Luke 22.25, 26. Domination is forbidden Churchmen, Ministration is
commanded. It is one thing to be a Viceroy, and another thing to be a Legate, or
a Stewart: Christ has Legates to declare his will, but has no Deputies or
Vicegerents. In that respect which the one has to the other, we may observe
this difference, that the subordination of the Minister to the Magistrate, is
to the Magistrate himself, as to the Vicegerent of God, of whose power he does
participate; but the subordination of the Magistrate to the Minister, is not to
the Minister himself, but to Jesus Christ, whose servant he is. Now then we
are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. In respect of the people
under their charge, every soul is subject to the higher powers, but the Church
only is subject to the Ministry: they have nothing to do with those who are
without; and which is a main difference, the flock under their charge, is dealt
with by them, not by way of command, or compulsion, but by moving, entreating,
and persuading them to receive the commandments of Christ. They are therefore
no other then firebrarnds, and instruments of division, that would raise
jealousies of this kind, betwixt these two kinds of government, both which are
appointed of God to serve for the good of the people of God, each in its own
way. Whatsoever has been, or can be spoken against Church Government, may as
well be spoken against the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, and the contest is not
properly betwixt the Magistracy and the Ministry, or betwixt Civil and
Ecclesiastical authority, but betwixt the Kingdoms of this world, and the
Kingdom of Christ, which is a great unhappiness, and the cause of a world of
miseries unto the Kingdoms of this world, wherein the ambition of Churchmen
transforming the Kingdom of Christ into an earthly Kingdom, and clothing the
Church with the pomp of the world, bears a great part of the guiltiness: if
both were kept within the just limits, and moved within their own spheres,
their motions and influences might be comfortable to the souls and lives of the
children of men.

I come now to the third use, which is Correction, against such as say with
those Citizens, Luke 19.14. We will not have this man to reign over us. There
be many diverse sorts of enemies in the kingdom of Christ, that say so: some
open and professed enemies, such as are Pagans, Jews and Turks; some more
secret and dissembled enemies, who under the pretense of the doctrine of
Christ, oppose him and his Kingdom, such as have been false Christ's, and are
this day Antichrist, with all his members and followers, Heretics,
Schismatics, Politics, and all worldly and mere natural men: And there be
many sundry causes that draw them into by-parhs, and make them run into errors
greater or lesser: but it may be coafidently a vouched, that the main cause by
which Satan prevails upon the corrupt heart of man, to make him an enemy to
Christ and his Kingdom, is the dislike he has of this principle, and
fundamental of Christian Religion: That the Kingdom of Christ is not of this
world. All men naturally love the world, and the things of the world, which are
the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life; and finding
that the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, nor does promise unto them
the things of this world, but that it is a spiritual Kingdom, binding up
their spirits, and interdicting their hearts, the love of the world it must of
necessity follow, unless the light and power of the Spirit of Christ, shine in
their minds, and work upon their hearts, that either in profession, or in hear,
or both, either more or less, they prove enemies unto Christ, especially in
that which would break the bond that tieth them fast to the world. If men might
be pleased to examine themselves narrowly, and descend into their own hearts,
they would find that their hearts deceive them; and while they seem to others,
and to themselves, to be despisers of the world, they are either by
covetousness or vaing-lory, or love of carnal liberty, or some other such
tie, entangled and kept fast by the world, and are either directly or
indirectly, drawn to oppose the Kingdom of Christ. He that will consider the
grounds of Paganism, Judaisme, and Turcisme, and for what reason they do not
receive Christ when he is offered unto them, shall find this to be a principal
cause. He that will search into the histories of particular heresies and
schisms, will often meet with this, and find the world in the bottom of the
hearts of men. I do not speak of the simple seduced people, but of the wisest
and learnedest of their seducers, and of the great wits of the world, which
make the world their Idol, and bow down before it.

But leaving this, I come to the fourth use for instruction in such duties as
are required of us all at this time, and after a special manner of those that
are in high places. First of all, seeing the Kingdom of Christ is not of this
world, but is a spiritual Kingdom, it is a necessary duty to study the
nature, and search into the mysteries and secrets of this Kingdom. The kingdom
of Satan and Sin have many deeps and secrets, the Kingdoms of the world have
their secrets of policy and government, and the Kingdom of Christ has greater
secrets, and more hid mysteries. Great ones in the world know many things of
the mystery of Iniquity, and of the secrets of Kingdoms and States of the
world; but the truth is, many of them are ignorant of the mysteries of the
Kingdom of Christ. The Princes of this world, whether Princes for knowledge,
as the Philosophers were, or for power and greatness, as the Nobles and great
ones be, do not know those mysteries: for had they known them, they would not
have crucified the King of glory; But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things that God has
prepared for them that love him; which the Apostle speaks of the Kingdom of
grace in this world, 1 Cor. 2.8, 9. Natural reason calls for fit instruments
for every work, and the matter well prepared to work upon: but the Apostles
were neither noble nor learned, but poor and simples, and the world altogether
indisposed to receive them, being at that time, as much as at any time before
or since, full of learning, of power, and of policy; yet they went on,
subduing, conquering, and bringing all unto the obedience of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. The laws of this kingdom were, in stead of revenge, Love your
enemies; in stead of lust, Look not on a woman to lust after her; in stead of
covetousness, Forsake all; instead of ambition, Deny your selves. And yet the
supernatural laws, by the Spirit and power of the great Lawgiver, were
settled and written in the tables of men's hearts. The promises of reward were,
not worldly pleasures, or ease, but let every man take up his cross and follow
me. All things in this kingdom were above the reach of natural reason; yet
the spiritual man by a new faculty created of God, knows the deep things of
God, and judges all things. Some Divines have observed seven things in the
passion of Christ, altogether contrary to the judgment of the naurall man: the
greatest impotency and weakness in him who was omnipotent: the greatest
suffering in that was impassible: the greatest foolishnes (according to the
judgment of men) in the deepest wisdom: greatest poverty in the God of all
riches: greatest shame in the greatest glory and majesty: greatest dereliction
and forsaking in the most perfect union; and great severity of the Father
against his Son, in the greatest love of the Father to the Son, in the very
time of his suffering. Many more might be added in the administration of the
Kingdom of Christ after his ascension into heaven, both at the first planting
of the Gospel in the primitive times, and in the time of reformation of
Religion in diverse Kingdoms and Nations. And therefore as natural sense
corrects the errors of our imagination, and makes us see the folly of our
fancies: and as natural reason corrects the errors of our sense, and makes
us judge otherwise then our sense teaches; so must the divine power, and
superior faculty of faith, correct the errors of our natural reason. If we
will acquaint our selves with the secrets of the Gospel, and with the
proceedings of the Kingdom of Christ, we begin no sooner seriously to think
upon them, but we seem to our selves to be transported and carried to another
world, and are constrained to acknowledge and confess to the glory of God,
that flesh and blood does not reveal these things unto us.

The second duty required of us, is this: When the Lord has opened the eyes of
our understanding to behold somewhat of the secrets of this spiritual Kingdom,
we are to draw near, to join our selves unto it, and become the subjects of
Jesus Christ. To which purpose it is necessary to express the matter briefly,
that we first know our estate by nature, all of us by nature being subjects,
yea slaves to the Kingdom of Sin and Satan; no man is excepted, Kings,
Princes, Nobles, as base slaves, this way as any other, although walking in
gold chains. Next, that we acknowledge Christ to be King and Lord of his
people, putting our confidence in him, as having all sufficiency for life,
liberty, salvation, and every good thing, yea, endeavoring to feel the
Kingdom of God within us, and his Scepter set up in our souls formerly
tyranized over by strange Lords. And thirdly, that we make a resignation of our
selves in all humility and obedience to do his will: for it is the quality of
his subjects to be a willing people, or a people of willingness, Psalm, 110.3.
If every one of us had many wills, we ought of sacrifice them all, and turn
each one of them in a willingness to serve him. According to this is it, that
his people are called Amminadib, or my willing people, Cant. 6.12. The word
used to express, willingness, signifeth Generosity, or Nobleness, opposed to
Churlishness, Isa. 32.5. The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor
the churlish said to be bountiful, Nabal shall not be called Nadib. The true
subjects of Christ, were they never so meanly born, although like the wretched
infant described Ezekiel. 16. yet being born again, they deal nobly with him; but
others whatsoever be their extraction, and were they never so nobly descended,
they deal but churlishly with Christ. A noble man, that gives not himself
willingly and cordially to the Son of God, and accounts it not his chiefest
honor to be a subject of his Kingdom, in Scripture language is not a Nobleman,
but a Nabal, a Churl; and surely to deal churlishly with Christ, who has been
so benign and bountiful unto us, and is so worthy to be served, is the most
base churlishness, and the greatest churlishness in the world. If we would
consider what we are without him, what we may be through him, and that there is
a necessity either to be the slaves of sin, or to become the subjects of
Christ; yea, either to be his free subjects, or his bound-slaves and captives,
we would willingly offer our selves in this day of his power.

The third duty is, when we are acquainted with the nature and secrets of the
Kingdom of Christ, and are now become his willing subjects, then to be zealous
in using all good means, each one according to his place, for advancing and
establishing the kingdom of Christ. A point very necessary to be considered,
because as Herod and all Jerusalem with him, were troubled when they heard that
the King of the Jews was born: So are great ones that are in authority, and
the multitude of the people much troubled when they hear of the Kingdom of
Christ; Kings and great ones, because they conceive the advancing of Christ's
Kingdom to be a diminution of their greatness and power, wherein they bewray
both their ignorance and ingratitude: ignorance of the nature of his kingdom,
which is spiritual, not only in the internal, but external part of it. He
that would establish a spiritual Kingdom, does not take away, but on the
contrary does both confirm and sanctify the temporal Kingdom wherein it is
established. The Son of God never imposed such a hard condition to Kings and
Nobles that were to become Christians, as to forsake their crowns and
dignities, except in their affection, and in comparison of the excellency of
the Kingdom of Christ. Ingratitude, not only because by him Kings reign, but
Jesus Christ having proclaimed a Jubilee, a great liberty to Kings and
Kingdoms from the tyranny, the servitude, the usurpations and impositions of
the Pope. This is all the thanks that they return, that they either put away
the Gospel from themselves and their Kingdoms, or will receive but so much of
it as they think meet; which is rather to reign over Christ, then that Christ
by his Scepter reign over them. As for the multitude of the people, they have
no desire to hear of the setting up of the Kingdom of Christ, because they
are afraid of poverty, and other such miseries as may be brought upon them by
innovations, measuring all by their worldly gain and ease, and considering no
other ways of changes, but as they import some earthy benefit to their own
private. So was Jerusalem troubled when Christ was born, and so were the
Gadarens when he came into their country. It cannot be denied but the Lord
has done a great work in this land, yet there be many of all ranks, that wish
it had never been begun, by reason of the trouble and losses they have
sustained: not considering nor knowing that a little of God and of Christ, and
of his Spirit, and of the Word, and of the Ordinances, is much more then the
greatest things of the world; and that it is better to suffer with the people
of God, and for God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. When
things are equally balanced, the worst things of Christ, that is, his cross
and sufferings, is better then the best things of the world. Upon the contrary
therefore I shall desire these seven things about the Kingdom of Christ, and
the matter of religion may be diligently taken heed unto.

1. Take heed of self respects: these are of two, sorts, one is private, when
men look so much to themselves, that they forget the public; or if they look
to the public, and seem to be zealous about it, it is always with reflection
upon their own private; were the circumference never so wide, themselves are the
center, and all the lines of their actions have their concentration there.
Private spirits are evil spirits, whether they be in Church or Parliament; and
I may add, that they are foolish spirits, seem they never so wise: for being
once embarked, how shall they hope to escape if the public shall perish?
Another sort of self respect is public, which may seem a paradox, and yet is
it a certain truth, when men would draw all to the Parliament, not only negotia
Regis and Regni, the matters of the King and Kingdom, but negotia Jehovae and
Ecclesiae, the matters of God and the Church. Many things indeed may, yea must
be done pro tempore, and in this corrupt state of the Church; but it is the
worst kind of sacrilege to take the power which Christ has given to the
Church, and put it in the hands of the State.

2. Beware of luke-warmnesse and indifferency in matters of Religion, that we
be not like Gallio, that cared for none of these things, or like Pilate in this
place, who spoke so coldly of the truth: What is truth? He declared by his
question, that it was a thing he cared not for; or like Saul, I Sam. who when
he had commanded to advise with the Oracle of God, what he should do; yet
before he received an answer, led forth the Army into battle. It is a rare
thing in great men to take Religion to heart, and to be solicit about it. There
may be here a twofold indifferency: one is, when matters of Religion come in
debate, we care not what way they go, nor to what side they be determined. The
other is, that having past an Ordinance, we care not what become of it, whether
it be put in execution or not, or whether it be spoken or written against, or
not, which is nothing else but a vilifying of the Ordinance of God, and the
prostituting of that authority which God has put upon men, unto contempt and
reproach.

3. Take heed of division, the most destructive thing both to your selves and
the cause, that can be. There be many causes of division from Satan, who is a
factious and schismatic spirit; from the world, which delights to run in
diverse channels; and from our selves, every man having a seed of division in
his own heart. It is true, that all men by nature love unity as well as being:
for unity preserves, but all men through the corruption of nature, incline to
division and destruction: yet there be some spirits, whose predominant it is,
to be heretical, schismatic, and factious: and it is as natural to such to
delight in divisions, as it is for others to wallow in uncleanness or excess.
If we will have the Kingdom of Christ settled, these are to be noted, and
either avoided or kept in order: otherwise there will be no end of division in
the State, and of schism in the Church. And take heed of division from the
Kingdom of Scotland, with whom ye are so nearly united, both by nature and
covenant; were I there, I would say no less unto them in relation to this
Kingdom. There be some pernicious instruments, who bufie themselves in fishing
of faults, and use the damnable art of Tyberius: he was earnest to have a
Virgin strangled, some mention particularly the daughter of Sejanus: others, as
Suetonius, more indefinitly speak it of Virgins: but because it was not
lawful amongst the Romans to strangle a Virgin, he will have them first
defiled by the Executioner, and thereafter strangled, Immaturae puellae, quia
more tradito nefas esset virgins strangulari, vitiatae prius a carnifice, dein
strangulatae. I leave it to your own application. It is known amongst the
people, that he that would kill his Dog, can easily find a staff, and it is
not unknown to the State, that they who would be rid of a good subject, or
servant, can easily lay treason to their charge. But so long as that Nation
abides constant to the cause of God, and honest in their endeavors toward
you, ought they to be so talked of as they are by many? If in saving
themselves, and serving you, they should be disabled from saving themselves and
serving you, ought ye to add affliction to the afflicted? When the truth,
which is the daughter of time, shall appear, I hope men will be ashamed of
their speeches, and eat up their own words; and therefore I will speak no more
of this sad subject.

4. Beware of delays and procrastinations in settling of Christ's Kingdom. The
setting up of the Discipline and government of the Church, had been a more
easy work long ago, then it is now; and is more easy now then it will be
afterward: For the longer we go down by the river side, we will find it grow
the deeper and broader, and parting if self in more divided channels. Had the
Discipline and Government of the Church been set up at first, it would have
proved very serviceable to the Parliament, and saved them much labor in the
doing of their work. The ordinances of Christ have much power and strength in
them, and they are accompanied with many blessings. The spiritual and secular
Arm, like the two Arms of the body, when both are stretched out and exercised,
are very effectual for the public good.

5. Beware of discouragements from the power of the world, the Kingdoms of the
world, or any other kinds of oppositions whatsoever, while ye are about the
building of the House of God, and establishing of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.
If the enemies had been able to hinder it, it had never found any settling on
earth. Principalities and powers in high places, the Kingdoms of this world,
and the spirits of men, have been always bent against it, no power, no plot,
or policy, has been, or will be unassaied. Beside many particular hindrances
of the settling of Religion in particular places and Nations, do but lift up
your eyes and look back to the course of the world in the general. In the
first Monarchy we find a fiery Furnace; in the second, a den of Lions; in the
third, the madness and fury of Antiochus, justly surnamed Epimanes, which
exceeded the former two; and in the fourth Monarchy, the ten Persecutions, ten
times more bloody and grievous then all that went before. The Kingdoms of this
world are resembled by most bloody and monstrous wild beasts, Dan. 7. and by
mountains that are full of wild beasts, because of their craft and cruelty
against the Kingdom of Christ, Psalm 76.4. Cant. 4.8. But we may be comforted
by that, Zach. 4.7. What art thou, O great Mountain? And I may add, All ye
wild Beasts? Be not troubled with the fears of the Kingdoms of the world, in
building the Kingdom of Christ. For my part, I think it nothing strange, that
the world, and the God of this world, stand in a continual opposition. It is a
greater wonder that any especially of great Ones: are found to have any courage
for the Kingdom of Christ. It is a miracle which we hear of, Isai. 11. The
Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the Kid, and the young
Lion with the Calfe, etc.

6. Take heed of imprudency in choosing and employing of instruments for the
establishing the Kingdom of Christ: the greatest show and profession of zeal,
is not always the programe of the greatest zeal. As a man of a calm
constitution may seem to have more patience then another, which yet is not
patience, but mildness of temper. So a choleric disposition may appear to be
zeal, but it is only a natural and earthly, not a spiritual and heavenly
fire. Again, he that has most true zeal and holiness to make him a spiritual
Soldier, has not always the best abilities for a temporal war. It is a
great mistake, and the mother of much confusion to take grace for gifts, or
gifts for grace. A man may have great gifts and abilities, which the Lord will
bless for the benefit of his people, and yet have a small measure of grace for
his own comfort and salvation: And a man may be a very gracious man, and yet no
more skill to be a good Soldier, then to be a good Shoemaker. It was said
of old, that then it is well with Kingdoms and Commonwealths, when either
Philosophers reign, or they that reign are Philosophers. We may say that it
is a happy thing when such men are employed as have best gifts and grace,
whether it be in the time of peace or war.

7. Take heed of fainting and wearying in setting up of the Kingdom of Christ:
the Lord has made you isntrumental in laying the foundation, ye must
persevere till the head stone be brought forth with shoutings: otherwise it
will be said, that these Kingdoms did begin to build, but were not able to
finish the work. Sometimes weakness may appear in one Army, and sometimes in
another; out the cause is the same, and with God Almighty there is no shadow of
change: his power is not greater one day then another: for the infiniteness of
Omnipotency admits of no degrees. Pilate protested three times, that he
found no fault in Christ, and endeavored for satisfying his own natural
conscience, to set him free: but in end, lest he should be reputed an enemy to
Caesar, he delivered him to be crucified. Darius labored all the day long,
till the setting of the Sun, to deliver Daniel, but overcome with opportunity,
he condemned him at last to the den of Lions. We may change, the Kingdoms of
the world may change, but the Cause and Truth of Christ abide the same without
change throughout all generations.

My exhortation therefore is, that you beware of self Respects, of
Indifferency, of Division, of Delays, of Discouragements, of Imprudency, and
of Inconstancy; and that you give your selves to Sincerity, Zeal, Unity,
Diligence, Magnanimity, Prudence, and Perseverance, that ye may be the choice
and blessed Instruments of God, for the establishing of the Kingdom of his
Son, our Savior, in the Land.

The last use is for Consolation, which is not repugnant to true humiliation. I
will not trouble you with the general Doctrine of such benefits and comforts
as we are made partakers of by the Princely office of Christ: for it were long
to show how by the virtue of this his office, he applies unto us all that he
has done and suffered, that the Kingdoms of the world may be our Lords, and
his Christ's, and he reign over them for evermore; and communicates with all
true believers this grace, to be Kings with him, to reign over their own
lusts, which is greater then any earthly conquest: He that rules his own
spirit, is better then he that wins a City; to reign over the world, which
still lies in wickedness, and to reign over Satan the Prince of this world,
and worker of all mischief: if we find nothing of this, we believe nothing of
the Kingdom of Christ: if we endeavor not the sense and experience of this
communion, our faith is but imagination. But leaving these generals, I would
upon this ground, give you some comfort for the Cause, and work in hand, and it
is this: First; If it be the cause of Christ which we maintain. Next, if we be
the servants and people of God, seeking his honor, and endeavoring that his
Kingdom may come, why may we not be comforted in this, That Christ is our
King, and will one way or other vanquish and subdue all our enemies. I will use
but two reasons for it: one is, from the great and glorious victories that he
has in former times obtained over so mighty-enemies for the comfort of his
people, if we do but remember what great things he has done since the
beginning of this war, we should deny our own experience, if we doubt for
afterward: The other is, when we consider what is said in the end of the prayer
which he taught his Disciples, Thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory:
If we pray and endeavor that his Kingdom may come, if we desire the Crown to
be put on his head, and the Scepter in his hand, we may be confident of
success: Because his is the Kingdom, he is bound by right to fight for, to
defend, and to deliver his own subjects that are fighting for his Kingdom: His
is the power in heaven and in earth, over Angels, over Devils, over Armies of
men, and over all Creatures: And his is the Glory, the honor of his own
actions will return upon himself. The first, that he is our King, teaches us,
that by office he ought to save us: The second, that he is able to do it,
because power is his: And the third, that he will do it, because it will be
dishonor to this Name, to suffer his Cause and People to perish; and it will
be his glory to save them. And that not only in this world, but when we go
hence. The penitent Malefactor on the Cross, cried out, Lord remember me when
thou come into the Kingdom; we may rather with greater confidence say, Lord
remember us, when now after victory over Satan, the World, and Death, thou do
possess thy Kingdom. The time permits not to proceed to the other two
branches of the Text, and therefore here I cease. *

FINIS.

