Tertull. ad Scapul. Colimus Imperatorem sic, quomodo and nobis licet and ipsi
expedit ut hominem a Deo secundum, and quicquid est a Deo consequtum, solo Deo
minorem, hoc and ipse volet: Sic enim omnibus major est, dum solo Deo minor
est. Idem Apologet. Circa Majestatem Imperatoris Infamamur, Nunquam tamen
Albiniani, vel Nigriani, vel Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani. Lactant.
Lib. 5. Instit. ca. 8. Ideo mala omnia rebus humanis quotidie ingravescunt quia
Deus hujus mundi Effector and Gubernator derelictus est, quia susceptae sunt
multae Impiae Religiones, and quia nec coli quidem, vela paucis Deo sinitur.
Malach. 3. Return unto me and I will return unto you says the Lord of Hosts;
but you said wherein shall we return? will a man rob his Gods? yet have ye
robbed me; but ye say wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and offerings;
ye are cursed with a curse because ye robbed me, even this whole Nation. THE
DECLARATION OF Mr. ALEXANDER HENDERSON, Principal Minister of the word of God
at Edenbrough, and chief Commissioner from the Kirk of Scotland to the
Parliament and Synod of England: Made upon his Deathbed.

HOSEA 10.For now they say we have no King, because we feared not the Lord;
What should a King do to us? PSALM. 63.The King shall rejoice in God, and all
that swear by him, shall rejoice in him; And the mouth of them that speak
Lies shall be stopped. PRINTED, An. Dom. 1648.

The Declaration of Master ALEXANDER HENDERSON.
WHEREAS the greatest part of the distempered People of these miserable
distracted Kingdoms, have been and are, woefully abused and misled with
malicious misinformations against his sacred Majesty, especially in point of
Religion and morall-Wisdome; whereof, I confess with great grief of heart, my
self to have been (amongst many more of my coat) none of the least; who out of
Imaginary fears and Jealousies, were made real Instruments to advance this
un-naturall War, wherein so much Innocent Protestant blood has been shed,
and so much downright Robbery committed, without f^ate, or shame of sin; to
the scandal of the true Reformed Religion, as cannot but draw down heavy
Judgments from Heaven npon these infatuated Nations, and more particularly
upon us who should have instructed them in the way of Truth, Peace, and
Obedience.

I conceived it the duty of a good Christian, especially one of my profession,
and in the condition that I lie, expecting God Almighty 's-call, not only to
acknowledge to the All-mercifull God, with a humble sincere remorse of
Conscience, the greatness of this offense; which being done in simplicity of
Spirit, I hope with the Apostle Paul to obtain Mercy, because I did it through
Ignorance: But also, for the better satisfaction of all others, to publish this
Declaration to the view of the World; to the intent, that all those (especially
of the Ministry) who have been deluded with me, may by God's Grace, and my
example (though a weak and mean Instrument) not only be undeceived
themselves, but also stirred up to undeceive others, with more alacrity and
facility; that the scandal may be removed from our Religion and Profession,
and the good King restored to his just Rights, and truly honored and obeyed as
God's-Annoynted and Vicegerent upon earth; and the poor distressed Subjects
freed from those intolerable Burdens and Oppressions which they lie groaning
under, piercing Heaven with their tears and cries; and a solid Peace settled
both in Kirk and Commonwealth, throughout all his Majesty's Dominions, to the
glory of God, and of our blessed Mediator and Savior the Lord Christ.

I do therefore Declare before God and the World, that since I had the honor
and happiness to converse and confer with his Majesty, with all sort of
freedom; especially in matters of Religion, whither in relation to the Kirk
or State (which like Hypocrates Twins are lynked together) that I found him the
most intelligent man that ever I spoke with; as fair beyond my expression, as
expectation, grounded upon the Information that was given me (before I knew
him) by such as I thought should have known him. I profess that I was
oft-times astonished with the solidity and quickness of his Reasons and
Replies; wondered how he, spending his time so much in sports and recreations,
could have attained to so great knowledge, and must confess ingenuously, that
I was convinced in Conscience, and knew not how to give him any reasonable
satisfaction; yet the sweetness of his disposition is such, that whatsoever I
said was well taken; I must say that I never met with any Disputant (let be a
King, and in matters of so high concernment) of that mild and calm temper,
which convinced me the more, and made me think that such Wisdom and
Moderation could not be without an extraordinary measure of divine grace. I
had heard much of his carriage toward the Priests in Spain, and that King
James told the Duke of Buckingham upon his going thither, that he durst venture
his Son Charles with all the Jesuits in the World, he knew him to be so
well grounded in the Protestant Religion, but could never believe it before.

I observed all his actions, more particularly those of devotion, which I must
truly say, are more then ordinary; I informed my self of others who had served
him from his Infancy, and they all assured me that there was nothing new or
much enlarged in regard of his troubles, either in his private, or public way
of exercise; twice a day constantly, morning and evening for an hours space in
private; twice a day before dinner and supper in public, besides preachings
upon Sundays, Tuesdayes, and other extraordinary times; and no business
though never so weighty and urgent can make him forget, or neglect this his
tribute and duty to Almighty God. O that those who sit now at the helm of these
weather beaten Kingdoms had but one half of his true piety and wisdom! I
dare say that the poor oppressed Subject should not be plunged into so deep
Gulfes of impiety, and misery without compassion or pity; I dare say, if his
advice h^d been followed, all the blood that is shed, and all the repain that
is committed, should have been prevented.

If I should speak of his Justice, magnanimity, charity, sobriety, chastity,
patience, humility, and of all his both Christian and Moral virtues, I should
run my self into a panegyricke, and seem to flatter him to such as do not
know him, if the present condition that I lie in did not exeem me from any such
suspicion of worldly ends, when I expect every hour to be called from all
transitory vanities to eternal felicity; and the discharging of my conscience
before God and men, did not oblige me to declare the truth simply and nakedly,
in satisfaction of that which I have done ignorantly, though not altogether
innocently.

If I should relate what I have received from good hands, and partly can
witness of my own knowledge since these unhappy troubles began, I should
enlarge my self into a History: Let these brief Characters suffice. No man
can say that there is conspicuously any predominant vice in him, a rare thing
in a man, but far rarer in a King; Never man saw him passionately angry, or
extraordinarily moved, either with prosperity, or adversity, having had as
great trials as ever any King had; Never man heard him curse, or given to
swearing; Never man heard him complain, or bemoane his condiction, in the
greatest durance of War and confynement; When he was separated from his
dearest consort, and deprived of the comfort of his Innocent Children, the
hopefullest Princes that ever were in these ingrate Kingdoms: when he was
denuded of his Counselors and domestique Servants; No man can complain of the
violation of his Wife or Daughters, though he has had too many temptations in
the prime of his age, by the enforced absence of his Wife which would be
hardly taken by the meanest of his Subjects: and (which is beyond all
admiration) being stripped of all council and help of man, and used so harshly
as would have stupefied any other man, then did his undaunted courage, and
transcendent wisdom show it self more clearly, and vindicate him from the
obloquy of former times, to the astonishment of his greatest enemies: I
confess this did so take me that I could not but see the hand of God in it,
and which will render His name glorious, and (I greatly fear) ours ignominious
to all posterity, he stands fast to his grounds, and does not rise and fall
with success, the brittle square of humane actions, and is ever ready to
forgive all by past injuries to settle a present solid Peace, and future
tranquillity, for the good of his Subjects; nay, for their cause he is content
to forgo so many of his own known, undoubted just rights; as may stand with
their safety, as Salus populi est Spurema Lex, so, and si parendum est patri in
eo tamen non parendum quo efficitur ut non sit Pater. [Seneca.]

I confess that I could have wished an establishment of our Presbyteriall
Government, in the Kirk of England, for the better Union between them and us,
but I find the constitution of that Kingdom, and disposition of that Nation
so generally opposite, that it is not to be expected: They are a People
naturally inclined to freedom, and so bred in Riches and Plenty, that they can
hardly be induced to embrace any Discipline that may any ways abridge their
Liberty and Pleasures. That which we esteem a Godly Kirk policy, instituted
by the Lord Christ, and his Apostles, is no better to them then a kind of
slavery, and some do not stick to call it worse then the Spanish Inquisition:
Nay, even the greatest part of those who invited us to assist them in it, and
sent hither their Commissioners to induce us to enter into a solemn national
covenant for that effect, having served their turn of us, to throw down the
King and the Prelaticall party, and to possess themselves with the supreme
Government both of Kirk and State; are now Inventing evasions to be rid of
us, and to delude it, some of them publishing openly, in Pulpits and Print:
That the sacred Covenant was never intended for the godly, but only as a trap
to ensnare the Malignants, which cannot but bring heavy Judgments from Heaven,
and, I am afraid, make a greater disunion between these Nations, then ever
was before: Like unto that bellum Gallicum, quod sexcentis foederibus
compositum, semper renovabatur [Canon. lib. 3. Chron in here. 5. an. dom.
1118.] with a deluge of Christian blood, and almost ruin of both Parties; or
like unto that bellum Rusticanum in Germania, in quo supra centena millia
Rusticorum occubuerunt. [idem an. dom. 1524.] Or most of all, both in manner
and Subject, resembling that of John of Leydon, Munser and Knoperduling, [idem
an, 1534.] which took it is rise from the former; so many different Sects
spring up daily more and more amongst them, which all like Ephraim and
Manasses, Herod and Pylate, conspire against the Lord's-Anoynted, and the true
Protestant Religion.

The City of London, that was so forward in the beginning of this glorious
Reformation, surpasses now Amsterdam in number of Sects, and may be compared
to old Rome, quae cum omnibus pene gentibus dommaretur omnium gentium erroribus
serviebat, and magnam sibi videbatur assumpsisse Religionem quia nullam
respuebat falsitatem. [Leo in Sermon. de Petro and Paulo. app.] their
trausgressions are like to bring them to that confusion of the Israelites when
they had no King, [Judg. 21.] every one did what seemed good in his own eyes,
because they feared not the Lord; [Ihos. 10.] they said, What should a King do
to us? The young men presumed to be wiser then the elder, [Isai 3.] the viler
sort despised the honorable, [Lament. ult.] and the very serving-men ruled
over them.

I profess, when I saw these things so clearly, I could not blame the King to
be so backward in giving his assent to the settling of our Presbyteriall
discipline in that Kirk, for the great inconveniences that might follow
thereupon, to Him and his Posterity, there being so many strong Corporations
in that Kingdom to lead on a popular government, such a number of people that
have either no, or broken estates, who are ready to drive on any alteration,
and so weak and powerless a Nobility to hinder it. Multos dulcedo praedarum,
plures Res angustae vel ambiguae domi alios scelerum Conscientia stimulabat.
[C. Tacit.]

Let me therefore exhort and conjure you, in the words of a dying man, and
bowels of our Lord Christ, to stand fast to your Covenant, and not to suffer
your selves to be abused with feigned pretenses, and made wicked instruments to
wrong the Kirk and the King, of their just Rights and Patrimony.

Remember the last Prophetical words of our first blessed Reformer, that after
the subduing of the Papists, foretold us the great battle remained against
manifold Temptations of the devil, the World and the Flesh, and especially
against the sacrilegious devourers of the Kirk rents, which will not be
wanting now with baits cunningly laid upon golden hooks to ensnare the
greatest amongst you both in Kirk and State, but I beseech you in the words of
our blessed Savior to be wise as Serpents and mild as Doves, let no worldly
consideration induce you to slide back from the true meaning of our holy
covenant with the all-seeing God; who punished Saul in his Sons for the
breach even of an unlawful Covenant with the Gibeonites. [2. Sam. 21.]

Remember the supplication of the General Assembly at Edinburgh, given in to
the Earl of Trawhaire [sess. 23 Act. 2] his Majesty's high Commissioner 12
Aug. 1639 recorded both in the public Regester of our Kirk and Parliament,
whereby to obviate malignant aspersions [2 Caroli Act. 5. sess. 7 Junij 1640]
that branded us maliciously with an intention to shake off civil and dutiful
obedience due to Sovereignty, [verbatim ex Registro] and to diminish the Kings
greatness and authority, and for clearing of our loyalty; We in our names and
in the name of all the rest of the Subjects and congregations whom we
represent, did in all humility represent to his grace and the Lords, of his
Majesty's most honorable privy Council, and declared before God and the
World that we never had, nor have any thought of withdrawing our selves from
that humble and dutiful obedience to his Majesty and his government which by
the descent, and under the Reign of 107 Kings is most cheerfully acknowledged
by us and our predecessors, and we never had, nor have any intention or desire
to attempt any thing that may tend to the dishonor of God, or diminution of
the Kings greatness and authority, but on the contrary acknowledging with all
humble thankfulness the many recent favors bestowed upon us by his Majesty,
and that our quietness, stability and happiness, depends upon the safety of
the Kings Majesty's Person, and maintenance of his greatness and Royal
authority who is Gods Vicegerent set over us for the maintenance of Religion
and administration of Justice, we did solemnly swear, not only our mutual
concurrence and assistance for the cause of Religion, and to the uttermost of
our power with our means and lives to stand to the defense of our dread
Sovereign, his person and authority, in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Kirk and Kingdom; but also in
every cause, which may concern his Majesty's honor, to concur with our
friends and followers in quiet manner or in arms, as we should be required
of his Majesty, his Council, or any having his authority, according to the
Laws of this Kingdom, and the duty of good Subjects.

And though some malignant Spirits wrest maliciously Some words of our
Covenant, Act. 3. contrary to the true meaning thereof, as if we intended
thereby to restrain our allegiance contrary to the Apostles precept and nature
of our duty, and make Religion a back-dore for Rebellion to enter in at; if
there be any of the simpler zealous sort that conceive the Sense to be such,
or if there be any others that would make use of it for their politic ends,
we disclaim them: and I declare before God and the world that it was far
from the intention of those that contrived it, to wrong the King and his
posterity, as the plain words of that Article in the close do clearly bear;
and the foresaid supplication does manifestly declare, their intent being only
to have settled a conformity in Kirk government throughout all his Majesty's
dominions, which they conceived would have strengthened his Majesty's authority
and made him and his posterity more glorious: but since we sinde many
invincible difficulties and intolerable inconveniences arise, chiefly from
those who invited us to enter therein for their assistance in the
accomplishment thereof in that Kirk, and so clearly that they intend to delude
us with vain glosses and distinctions to the destruction of true Protestant
Religion, and Monarchical government, and perceive, to our great grief, that
we have been abused with most false aspersions against his Majesty; the most
Religious, Prudent, and best of Kings: I do further declare before God and the
World that they are guilty of the breach of the Sacred Covenant, and that we
have discharged our duty thereof (which is only promissory and conditional as
all oaths de futuro are) by endeavoring to effectuate it quantum in nobis
erat, and that we are absolved in foro Poli and Soli of any oath or vow
contained therein, in so far as concerns the settling of Religion in the
Kirk of England and Ireland, and that we are only bound thereby to preserve
the Reformation of Religion in our own Kirk and Kingdom confirmed by his
sacred Majesty in Parliament, and to restore our native King to his Just
Rights, Royal Throne and Dignity, in as full and ample a manner as ever any of
his Royal predecessors enjoyed them, and that the mouths of all Malignants
may be stopped, that it may not be said Presbytery fetters Monarchy as
Independency destroys it, who cast up to us the holy league and covenant of
France as a pattern on the mont of ours.

Therefore I exhort and conjure you, again and again, in the bowels of our
Lord Christ, and words of a dying man, especially my brethren of the Ministry;
as you expect a blessing from God upon this distressed, distracted Kirk and
Kingdom, upon you and your posterity; as you desire to remove Gods heavy
Judgments from this miserable Land, the Sword and Pestilence, and what else
may follow, which I tremble to think of; to stand fast and firm to this point
of your Covenant, which you were bound to before by the Law of God and of this
Land, and never suffer your selves by all the gilded allurement of this world,
which will prove bitter and deceitful at last, to relinquish it: Stand fast to
your Native King most gracious to this Land far beyond all his predecessors;
none owes greater obligation to him then the Ministry and Gentry, let not an
indelible charracter of Ingratitude lie upon us that may turn to our ruin.
The Protestants of France when they were happy in the free profession of their
Religion suffered themselves to be abused and misled by some great ones unto a
Rebellion against Lewis 13, their Natural King, which cost many of them their
Lives and Estates and the loss of all their hostage Towns, and might have
endangred their liberty of conscience, if the King had not been very gracious
to them, the Templers pride and ambition rendered them formidable to all
Christian Kings and made them to be cut off in the twinkling of an eye. The
Jesuits are running hedlong to that same height; and our Bishops, not
contenting themselves with moderation, were made instruments of their own
destruction; as some of our brethren before by their Indiscretion enforced King
James to set them up; wherefore I beseech you my brethren of the Ministry to
carry your selves mildly toward all men, [Tit. 3.] and obediently toward the
King and his subordinate Officers, [Rom. 13.] Preach salvation to your stocks,
[1. Pet. 2.] and meddle not with them that are seditious; keep your selves
within the bounds of our blessed Saviors [Prov. 24.] Commission and do not,
as the Bishops did, entrench upon the civil Magistrates authority, that ye
may live in Peace and Godliness together as becomes the messengers of the
Lord Christ, non eripit terrestria qui Regna dat coelistia.

God of his mercy grant you all, the Spirit of Love and Union that you may
Join as one man to Redeem the honor of this ancient Nation, which lies a
bleeding in Foreign parts where it was once so famous for its valor and
fidelity even to foreign Kings; to redeem it I say even with your Lives and
Fortunes according to your Solemn Covenant and the duty of your allegiance to
your Native King; consider I beseech you your own interests, besides honor and
conscience, and never rest until you have restored him fully to his Royal
Throne and Dignity; let us his Native Subjects, be his best shield and buckler
under God, to defend him from all enemies, and to transmit his Scepter to his
posterity so long as the Sun and Moon endures, and let our forces be
employed for the Restitution of the most Religious and Virtuous Queen of
Bohemiae and her distressed Children, to their just Inheritance and for the
pulling down of the Antichrist and enlarging of our Lord Christ's Kingdom
throughout all the World.

C. Tacitus. In tanta Republicae necessitudine, suspecto Senatus, populique
Imperio ob certamina potentium and avaritiam Magistratuum invalido legum
auxilio, quae vi, ambitu, postremo pecunia turbabantur; omnem potestatem ad
unum reddire Pac is interfuit, non aliud discordanis Patriae remedium quam ut
ab uno regeretur.
FINIS.

