THE HEADS Of several PETITIONS delivered by many of the Troopers against the
LORD GENERAL And some other Officers of the Army.

With the Answer which Mr. Committee on Tuesday, October 5. 1641.



LONDON, Printed for John Thomas, 1641*

October the 5. 1641.
THE HEADS Of the Petitions delivered by the Troopers against the Lord General
and some Officers of the Army; With Mr. Pyms answer thereunto.
Upon Tuesday last the Committee received diverse other Petitions from several
Troopers, viz. from the Troopers of Sir Thomas Lucas Colonel: And of his
Brother Sir Charles Lucas Sergeant Major, most of which agreed in their
particulars mentioned in their several Petitions, viz. That the Kings Majesty
did freely of his Royal goodness give unto the Petitioners their horses, and
that they desired to be resolved from Mr. Committee.

I. Whether it lay in my Lord Generals power to give away 5. l. unto the
Colonel* and Captains out of their pay. II. Secondly, they Petitioned for
moneys deducted for Arms. III. Thirdly, they Petitioned for moneys for powder
and shot, which they paid for; either upon exercise or service, which was
allowed their Officers from the King. IIII. They Petitioned for moneys which
was deducted by their Officers for dead horses; And lastly they desired to have
redress from the Committees, and that they might be suffered to travail into
foreign parts, there were some other particulars then alleged by the
Troopers against their several Captains for money which they took from the
Troopers for Arms lost in the skirmish.


Upon the receipt of the said Petitions for answer thereunto; kept the
Committees in han^ all that day, and about 12 of the clock, M^. Pym chief
Committee, and 6. others of t^^ Committees went to the Lords and desir^^ their
Censure, and about one hour after they returned, and Mr. Pym then desired that
the Troopers might be called in where the Committee for the House of Commons
sat, (...) then told them he had an Order from the Lords to answer the
particulars mentioned in their Petitions.

The answer of Mr. Pym to the above mentioned particulars.
I. I Am commanded from the Lords to tell you what the Law of this Realm is in
these particulars, and that is this.

Whereas you tax my Lord General for the giving away 5. l. out of your pay
for the horses. It lies not in the power of the House of Commons to give you
any redress for my Lord General being a Peer of the Realm, and a Member of
the higher House, it lies not in our reach to call him to account therefore;
But you must prefer your Petitions to the Higher House, and then if my Lord
have committed crimes not beco^ming his place or person, without all question
you shall have a Remedy.

2. Secondly, for moneys deducted for Arms. The Officers have informed his
Majesty, it was the usual custom in Holland, Germany, and other foreign
wars, where such an army was assembled, that twopence a day should be
deducted out of every horsemans pay, in case that any arms should be
negligently lost, the said moneys were to buy new ones, or to repair the old
ones, this lies (...) Coffers, whereunto we cannot give any answer but upon the
desired return of his Majesty, no question but that so Noble and good a
Prince, will give freely that which is your due. Thirdly and Fourthly, for the
moneys deducted for powder and shot, and for the dead horses, it was by order
from the Lord General, wherefore as I told you before you must repair to the
higher House for satisfaction therein. 5. Lastly, whereas you Petition that
none is suffered to go into foreign parts, we have consulted with the Lords
thereupon, and has thought fit that if any one or more of you have a desire to
go beyond Sea, you may repair hither and have a warrant granted for your
passage; But for those that have friends we shall earnestly entreat them to go
into the Country to their Parents or Kinsfolks, and if you shall be pleased to
follow this business you may leave two of each several Troop to take care
for you in your absence, I would not willingly have you abide about this Town
for fear of scandal, there are many and great misdemeanors lately committed
here in this Country, and all is laid upon your backs, but for mine own part.
I do otherwise conceit of you, believing that as you are Gentlemen and
Soldiers, you scorn to wrong any of the Kings Subjects, and being informed
that there are others who are already in hold, which went in your habits, but
proved no such men. I am not ignorant but that a Soldiers life is warranted
both by the Scripture and the Laws of this Realm. And that you are to be
nourished by us being Members of the same Body Politic, and assuredly
believe, that though it lies not in our power to meddle with my Lord General,
yet we shall prefer your Petitions, and be either ready to hear or right
your Grievances with all expedition that may be, and so you may repair hither
upon this day seaven-night, where you shall hear further.
Upon which Speech the Troopers desired several warrants for their several
Officers, which Mr. Committee granted, and they are to answer thereunto upon
Tuesday next following.

Captain Yarner was this day committed to the King's Bench for false Musters.

FINIS.

