The Arch Cheat, or the Cheat of Cheats: OR A notable discovery of some parts
of the mystery of iniquity, plainly showing that this is the Prelates War,
managed under the Kings Name, only to advance the Hierarchy above the
temporality, yet leave them some externalls to deceive all sides, and all
sorts, a choice piece of gullery trimely set out.

Cause we are more for the Senses then Sense.
Thus our conceptions we do commence.
depiction of puppet show P. The Puppets. F. A fellow pointing. C. All sorts of
common people. H. The country Husbandman or Farmer. B. The Prelate ordering
of all. K. The King. N. Nobles. S. The Shark or Cavaleer enforcing the Damsel.


The voting Puppets each eye descries,
But its The Wise see further, then with eyes.
Sophia has the seeing ey^s.
Common understandings reach not things, things out reach them.
Plebeians move in lowest Sphere,
But its wisdom mouts the highest career.
The To the Sects and the rude people all is attributed.
Puppets seemingly do braule,
But its Mercuriall But its the crafty Prelates, and their Athisticall Faction
under several species, pretenses sets all together by the ears.
Hocus governs all.
Though Wisdom not craft should govern.
Pallas should, whose dues All excellencies belonging to wisdom, and the wise.
the golden ball.
But the goddess In a threatening way, and in time of remedy, Instice shall be
told of all her prankes.
Astrea shall know all.


London printed for M. W. at Grays-Inne Gate, October 4. 1644.

Courteous Reader, here is but a little Poetry, and yet its lame of its fee^^,
Not to fail when all fail were to be singular, which is the greatest failing.
let thy ingenuitie relieve it, for its thy only strength to bear with its
weakness, and its therefore weak to try thy strength, and it has therefore
failed that it might not fail.

S. H.

The Arch Cheat, OR The Cheat of Cheates: OR A notable Discovery of some
parts of the Mystery of Iniquity, plainly showing, that this is the Prelates
War, managed under the Kings name, only to advance the Hierarchy, above the
Temporality, Yet leave them, some externalls, to deceive all sides and all
sorts, a choice piece of Gullery trimely set out.
Writ at the beginning of these troubles, but occasionally confind till now.

THere is a Crew which In their ay^es and in^entions and are Athists also.
crows and crowns themselves with Rose-Buddes of beauty, sweetness and
delight (of with the Prelates and popishly affected, irreligious religious men
are chief) who aiming at greatness and all kind of licentiousness, etc. and
withal to advance thereto nimbly also without toil yea to Soveranize and King
themselves and govern kingdoms, do break through all laws, Devine, Humane,
Moral, Rational, etc. to attain thereto.

2. This to bring about, they find lies in the interressing themselves into
the favors and good opinions of Princes, under the pretense of amplifying
their greatness and Prerogatives, etc. next by gaining all the powers into
their hand as for the empty titular titles, and some externalls, they leave
them to the temporal * Laike Kings and Peers to color the business, that
the Cheat may not 1. Thus they render them in contempt.
be seen, etc.

3. Their own names will not carry it, they wanting Law, Right, Title and
opinion* etc.

4. Besides they must not appear in the action, but lie close snugge, and
close hid as does in shows the lurking spirit that guides the oculer motions,
which 2. As in Puppet plays or other motions under neath guides all. The Kings
Name, Hand, Person, etc. dec^ave^ and conquers the Kingdom. IGNOTO.
are only seen to act all, and all to them is attributed, but cunning Hocus
plays his prankes under board.

5. With Princes then they tamper, who have law, right and title on their side,
and opinion too, that foolish goddess, and goddess of fools, their names
they advance, magnify, yea deifie, etc. but prostrate prerogative, etc.

6. It takes Herod-like with some too much with all to their falls.

7. More Princes fall in Court by Flatterrers charms.

Then in the field by the Aversaries arms, etc.

8. On they go and pinnacle Princes with Prerogatives about God, but sure they
will be to mount with them, as did the Devil with our Savior: and then 3.
Their profane Hierarchy.
on, with condition of his dismounting, prostration and 3 worshipping beastly
monsters, with seven Heads and ten Horns, they will do wonders, if not 4.
The riches powers and honors of Kingdoms:
done before they come, -- why, they will give him all the 4 Kingdoms of the
Earth, and subdue the 5 Nations to him, with an Iron Rod, or rather than fail
-- 6 with a flaile.

9. Great is the Temple of the goddess Diana, but were it not for her silver
5. England. Scotland. Ireland.
Puppetts the godless gods and her Temple might go fiddle -- so might
Prerogatives, etc. 6. Any way.


10. These graceless youngsters, 7 gracious yet with Princes, and are
seemingly 7. Ignorant of their Rogery.
very officious to accommodate them with Honor, Greatness, Majesty, etc.

11. A Golden bait, but the forked hook appears not.

12. By this they attain to be their Counselors and next the betrust of
places of command and power which was the white they aimed at, as the only way
to King themselves, and depose Princes, oppose others.

13. These they bestow into hands of their own faction, such as can flatter
and abuse Princes out of their prerogatives, as well as themselves -- Birds of
a Feather,

14. Now who but these are the only men with 8 Kings I and Queens to, 8.
Ignorant, ^^ before of their Rogery.
Oh they are wily Mercuries and have curious blandishments to insinuate in^o
and infatuate all sorts, and fatten themselves, etc.

15. Well Princes conceive the power in their own hands, but P. O. for that,
its the 9 Prelates prize, of which he must not know any thing till their ends
be 9. Or the Priests bit. 1 Samuel 2. 13, 14.
compassed

16. As for him he may go 10 sleep, sport, hunt, or tennis it, they will order
matters well enough for his greatness, and renown if ill enough be well
enough, 10. Out geerers of Prince^ so all sorts.
etc.

17. The Popish government under the cheating name of Religion they mainly aim
at, but mum not a word of either not intentions but pranct up pretentions like
gaudy Dianah must gadde abroad to bewitch the foolish Sechemites but Simeon and
Levi brothers of iniquity drive on their designs like furious Jehu, to
circumvent the credulous Sechemites, with universal Ruin. The wicked Layty
and Clergy of all sorts.


18. The Kings name still carries out all things, but he is kept ignorant of
whatsoever is oftensive to his nature or disposition, or else they do palliate
it with pretexes qualifications, etc.

19. They * rail of all their adversaries, from access or prepare antidores
against by threatenings so by keeping them at distance, as with a^ile^.
their poison as against belief, infidelity and villefie with names to
contemptablenesse.

20. But with the people, they magnify an implicit faith believe as the Church
believes the trumpe of Cheats, etc.

21. Mountain promises are made, of Justice liberty laws, and Religion, but
not a dust or grain made good, except jering as Children and Fools for their
easy credulity.

Its glory to betray any way disglory to be betrayed.

22. If Robbing, murchering, ravashing, yea all kind of injustice be justice
than none more just more faithful in performance, twice twelve to the dussen.

23 Quarrels are pict, pretenses found, on purpose to rout out all oposers
either Religious or Morralists.

24. It is easy to find a staff to beat a Dog, with the quarrelsome.

Its as easy to find a Dog for a staff.

25. Other pretenses are found to raise Arms, any thing is just with the
powerful any thing seems so with the simple.

26. Some on hopes, promises, preferments rewards, offices, and others, a
licentious Nobles. Gentry, Commons all sorts comply.
libertine course of life others errors of judgment, Scruples of conscience,
opinion pretenses of one kind or other.

Most, a fools paradise -- here.

or a ports Elysium -- hereafter.

28. What should I say it asks an eternity to rectify all these giddie
brains.

29. If they be not Traitors, Rebels, Murderers, Thieves, and punshable as
such here, and damnable hereafter who are on the offensive side, and sight
against Religion the liberty of the people, and priveledges of Parliament all
established by law. The name of a King is so dazeling that it prostrates all
behoulders -- except -- Bell whom Danill must prostrate.

30. Beauty in Heaven and Earth this grace does win. ^gnoto.


It supplies rigor, and it lessens sin etc.

31. Soldiers are raised, why, John for the King, so all, and who nor, they
see none other, they spy not Hocus under the Board, nor that Ioabs hand is in
all this they are light Angels but not Angels of light.

32. If monyes be wanting, then Nimrod like that mighty hunter plundring,
robbing whole Countries, Counties to mount their Babell battlements, parallel
with those of Heaven, is lawful and under the name of warring to perpetrat any
villainy is excellent villainy -- if any villainy be ^xcellent.

33. That which even now was a hanging matter to do, is now a hanging matter
not to do.

Thus a moment, can Invert, pervert circularly. For themselves in the Kings
name.


34. Out goes Summons, Proclamations, Threats etc. to amate awe, etc. Trained,
Bands comes in as if to the Goulden Septer -- poor folks, Hocus is to hard
for you, its to the Crosiers staff which like Muses rod has champt up the
Septer, and now begines with its cammocke nose to catch hold of them as did the
bush of Ablahams Ram, they are plundered, they fleed of their fleeces as of
Horse, Arms Judas is no Judas to this Judas.
money, and sent away like a pilde sheep, or as a Dog with his tailo clapped
betwixt his legs.

35. Horse, Arms, money, throng in as if to homage it to the burnished throne
which so dazeleth and a stoninisheth all behoulders that they spy not lurking
Hocus the Judas who for thirty pence will fell his Master and all his Desciples
-- grinning like a Satier or as Moss his Mare simpered when she eat thistles
to see of the wise.
these s^ infatuated fools purchase themselves halters, manacles, fetters at
so dear a He cannot help it He is their Prisoner Jeering Hocus
^ate, and like Salom us fools, go to the Stocks for correction.

36. If the Throne conquer, yet Hocus is victor, who sliely conveyes away the
throne and sets his tressells in the place nimbly over layning them wiith a
watchet covering imbrodered with goulden Flower deuces, and as nimbly claps a
Miter the^eon instaed of a Crown all so dexterously handled as unespied of any
but Glorious Titles etc.
the wise Bribes are promised in the Kings name to betray thus that Fort
Castle, etc. and its all by these Traitors for themselves, they rob to pay the
bribe or paies it, and 10. times more out of the places delivered up to them
Virtue that is power is gone from me. For you shall he kept under like beasts by
the sword and with implicit factions, Law, but will and that of batbarous
villanes
Sophia, whose intentions discovers the cloven head of the Miter just like that
of the Devils foot out she cries of the cheat, Oh you fools how long will you
continue in your folly but all in vain as I do hear, for fools though
brayed in Morters will not forsake their folly, nor will deaf Adders hear
charm you never so wisely.

37. Now they soveragnize it yet, the Kings name colors all still, I and now
he begins to color it also with anger and shame to se the gullery but * noe
force patience, perforce, he is as fast as Mars and Venus in Vulcans weary net,
the more he spraules and kickes, the more he is entangled * at this, sly *
Mercury laughs a maine but unespsed of any, but only the wise * Sophia who
still carries out, but is not heard, Oh you fools etc.

38. Yet ex^ernalls are allowed as gay as the Chamblet ribbonds, Hocus pulls
out of his mouth, to delude the fillie Spectators.

39. So have I seen at Childrens festivalls the gaudie King and Queen
followed by an awful black Coat neither crowned nor Robed, yet well maced who
cold at pleasure; though a pawn give Check mate to both Rex et Regina inbeati.

41. Great matters are promised, hoped for as a^ * but who shall now force to
performance, they are Atheists, yea worse, not Moralists, not any Bonds,
Oaths, lies will hold any more then Samsons, Hairlaces fillets, or head-bands,
etc. you challenge them of this and that, etc except ^ave exclaim what care
they, they know you not, how now, away, avaunt your workers of Iniquity.

42. Help o King a railes not how can I says he seeing that the Lord Prelat
pleases not to look upon either of us.

43. Is not this fine that you have unkinged your King and enslaved yourselves
and your posterities to the forked Miter, instead of the arched Crown, and
must now ask and wait for what was once your own, but it may be never shall
be.

44. All are their Prisoners and Captives from the throne to the cottage, not
Kings The Government of Spain and France is in the Hierarchy their (...) is,
not the Kings.
not Nobles, not Gentry; not any are free, but lie at their mercy for favors
or frowns.

45. And now are the commons of England putting on Canvis Breeches and wooden
shoes, and the Peers are but so, ad placitum the Gentry, and are but Gentiles
an^ aliants to the Commonweal o^ Israel there.

46. Former freedom and liberty -- for like to foolish and profane Esau, all
sort and all degrees have sold their birth rightes for a Mess of Pottage (as
red as the sloud of Martyrs.

47. Certain 21 things called religious men, murder, steal, rape, oppress,
what not, by their temporal agents, who act all, like the apparent Pupitts,
but while As the Popish Prelates.
Mercury still plays his prankes under-board, or slinkes behind the
Curtain, like a snarling Curre.

48. Then lastly they jeere to see how finely with the Kings names have S^ale,
shows, promises, personal presence, pro^ests, threats, and flowrishes,
messengers, ^an ^. Nations put up this. I am of opinion whilst the K. is in
such ^^cksters handling, nothing should (...) as (...), but refeld with scorn,
as from these, etc Let not our Nobles and Gen^ry, nor the Scot also. Flatter
they do, using the Kings name O this our worthy Subject, etc. To raise,
prefer, confer honor as they l^st, then jeere ^t the Gulles that the King
does all, and its themselves by him to purchase the Kingdom. O let respit be
til convincement, which does in^^^cement is just.
etc. they have befooled all sorts, out of their Religion, Laws Liberties, and
estates each one holding what they have of them simply: nothing in fee-simple,
and so simpletons all are.

49. Now Esau his rough hands gripe like a Griffen etc,

50. In the name of foreign Princes aid comes in, as if to Princes, their
mutual names, colors, all but it is often from faction to faction from Cheater
to Cheater, and the poor Princes are prund of all, O you Princes how long will
you suffer your selves to be gulled of your Prerogatives, under pretense of
maintaining Prerogative, is it not time to give over these wilely beguiles?

51. Trust not I say, your lives, nor your Posterities in the hands of
Traitors, Rebels, to whom if you comply not, they will send you packing -- and
not comply, but desie, etc.

52. Suffer their King, so themselves to be overtopt by the Prelacie once more,
and the government translated to the Hierarchy, shall their wiles, suggestions,
and pretenses so far delude as not to see, it its not pretenses, but
by-intentions which they steer to, rowse up your spirit and quicken your
understandings and vindicate your King and your selves, and your Country from
their inslavements, and redeem your selves from their jeers, serious
insulations, down with them, and for other matters settle with Wisdom in its
opportunity.

53. Call to mind the miseryes, the Irish, so this Nation have endured by
their means.

54. Be as faithful to your country, as the Scotts to theirs.

55. As the ten Tribes to one poor wronged Levit.

56. Are we not your Brethren, flesh of your flesh, bone of your bones.

57. And for Religious severity which owes all sorts. If you dare trust a
mortal such dispensations shall be found as shall content all sides without
gain saying, though nothing remove mean then your mean.

58. This cruel crew make riddance of, least it rid us all which God and you
for bid.

59. I Protest the King and you are abused by their suggestions, their tenants
so their practices are destructive to the prerogatives, yea safety of Princes,
States, Law, then are they thus suffered? who should suffer.

60. What hurt do the Protestants, or sects in Holland, France, etc. are they
not faithful every where some follies, humors opinions they Mass and hold
that are troublesome but treacherous they are not, they stab not, nor poison,
betray, forswear, burn fire not down houses, Cities, whole Kingdoms, they
delight not in blood and massacers, as the Papists do, Oh murder them not by
neglect, for neglect is murder, Robery, Rape etc.

61. I end as did the Levite to the ten Tribes, see, consider, Judge and give
sentence.

62. And do as in the twentieth of Judges, the Tribes did all at their own
charge for our levite assembled, etc.

Read and fail not.

63. They delaid not, but met as one man, and accommodated to right, and
revenge the injury done to the said one poor Levit, but oh our Levity, etc.

64. Forget not then, Oh all you whom it may concern, as it does all. who in
any kind can do good, least not only a mother in Israel, but the mother of
Israel, yea Israel herself be destroyed. which God and you forbid, and you
will forbid if men you be, that is have the bowels of men, of mercy, and
resolution of manhood in you.

Oh why does not the Kingdom like an inundation, or deluge overwhelme these
rascal crew of Egyptian Gipses.

Least they Cheat the King and State of the Kingdom, and we be a jeare to all
Nations. Vale.

A short Summary of the premises for plain Capacities,
ALL the Atheists, inhumanes, Traitors, Rebels, Rogues Thieves, Cheates,
Cutpurses, Murderers, so all idle and lawless persons of the Kingdom are met
together, and have got the King amongst them to color, and credit their
rogery, his person and name they seem to magnify to the people, the King, the
King, the Lords anointed, but Jeere, and scorn both him, and all Lords, just
as did the Demetrians Diana, who magnified her only to make themselves, and as
did the Princes abuse, and overthrow Darius and made pretense of godding him,
unmade him, and made color of Prerogating him, precipitated him, etc. These
now with the Kings, Person, Name, Scale, Warrants, Proclamations, Letters,
Threats, Messengers, etc. ^^asse all sides, especially the simple, whose
opinions, Idolatrize the name and persons of Kings, and at this advantage the
villainous adversary presumes, glories, insults and jeeres. For what ever they
have a mind to do, they do it, and the King must, or they will enforce his
person, or name, or both to bear it out; Thus Towns, Cities, Forts, etc. are
summond, so Horse, Arms, money are taken up, as if for the Kings use, when it
may be he knows not of it, or knowing, cannot help it, enjoy all they do,
not he, any thing, but in name, so with commands, Proclamations are abroad and
its not the King, but this faction is accommodated, scornfully, (...) they
urge, what keep Forts, Towns, and what from your King, Sovereign. Lo^^
Anointed? cause they should be delivered to him, what not obey your King caus^
they would be obeyed, what fight against your King! the Lords Anointed, caus^
they would command, rule, do all things as they list, and have no resistance
thus all are fools, or knaves, or both, and take part with Traitors (as they
say to aid the King) but its to keep him their prisoner. Foreign Sta^es are
thus gu^^, or would gull, for in thinking to aid the King, they aid Traitors
against him, ^^ politickly intend the King, and so support their own faction
against him, and the State, thus which simple to us, or Knaves, the loyal that
fight for to rescue him, seen against, etc. so traitorous, and rebellious, and
those true Traitors (cause locally on his side) seem to fight for him, and they
do so indeed, for its to hold him their prisoner, to color, and credit their
Rogery as before, so they are seemingly loyal, who are most absolute desolute
loyalists.

Now seeing its discovered, let fools Knaves, and Malignants see to it, their
pretend not, no longer ^o abuse King and State, and fight, and speak against
him, in seeming to speak. and fight for him, as did DEMETRIUS Humanis, and the
Princes of Darius all birds of the same Fether, for neither their bauleing, nor
sophistical pretended prate can quit them of being Traitors and Rebels to
King and State at large, or content, so also there are Hypocrites murderers,
thieves and Cheaters, etc. and who are so, are base, base then as they are,
they must pass for, and fools let them pass for who are so cheated.

FINIS.

