Hear, hear, hear, hear, A WORD OR MESSAGE FROM HEAVEN; To all Covenant
breakers (whom God hates) with all that has committed that great Sin, that
is, as the Sin of WITCHCRAFT.

The great God that is most high and infinite, that has the Command of Heaven
and Earth, and of all therein; who has taken to himself that liberty as not
to give an account of any of his matters to any of his Creatures; and this is
the Power of his excellency which he holds forth for all our learning in his
Word, and this liberty God has given to Kings on Earth: And none may say to
the King, What do thou?

And now that Gods Commandments has not been observed, but the Power
resisted, it is high time that they were.

London Printed in the year, 1648.

A Word or Message From Heaven, to all Covenant breakers (whom God hates) with
all that has committed that Sin, that is, as the sin of Witch craft.
THe great God that is most high and Infinite, yet is pleased to give unto his
poor creatures the children of men a directory in his Word, which reaches to
all the particular actings of the Sons and daughters of men, 2 Timothy 3. 17.
Therefore Kingdoms and Armies are to be regulated and ordered by it; and no
other specious pretense must be intermingled with it; and this is Gods order
upon pain of damnation, Deutro. 4. v. 2, and 12. v. 32. Joshua 1. 7. Prove. 30
6. Revel. 22. 18. This God is the great Lawgiver which is not to give an
account of any of his matters to any of his creatures Job 33. 13. Yet although
the great God has taken to himself this Prerogative of not giving an account
of any of his matters; either of his secret will, or of his revealed will: yet
in all Gods actings and doings in the World, he himself does nothing that is
contrary to his own laws: for God himself has sworn to keep his own laws,
Nehem. 9. 15. and now although we are not to liken God to any thing, or to
equal the holy One, Isa. 40. 25. Yet God himself is pleased to hold forth
himself with the head Magistrate on Earth, and that in these words: My Son
fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with those that are given to
change. Prove. 24. 21. and in the 2 Pet. 17. This particular place of Scripture
is an exemplary to the King, and holds forth unto us Gods unchangeablenesse
in his laws: Now seeing the Lord is pleased to hold forth the Kings Prerogative
by his own example, as in these words: Where the word of a King is there is
power? And who shall say unto him, What do thou? Here God is pleased by the
scripture, to hold forth unto all this heavenly pattern, which is exemplary to
the earthly: which is this, That the King, which is supreme is not to give an
account to any man on earth of any of his matters; but to God that is in
heaven: for he only is higher then the highest Eccles. 5. 8. and this
Prerogative God has taken to himself, and left it in his word for our learning.

Now all you that require to have it showed by divine designation, and not by
Court Maxims, nor by haire-looms only of the Conquest; of the absolute
Impunity of Kings that they are not accountable to any on earth; and now that
these are not haire-loomes and therefore not so much in Law-bookes, as in the
word of God originally Old Testament and New: and therefore his assumed
privileges are not begotten by the blasphemous arrogance upon servill
parasites, and so steered only by slavish or ignorant people in your
remonstrance page 4^. But yet for all this you have not prooved that God has
given the Parliament or you this power over the King, that you assume; yet you
say, God has given it page 48. but the truth is your proposalls long a gone,
and this remonstrance without any foundation upon the word or light from it.

This truth before spoken is held forth by several places of Scripture Eccles.
8. 3. the words are these, Be not hasty to go out of the Kings sight: stand
not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him? he that resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God, and he that resists shall receive
to himsefe damnation. Romans 13. 2. Now therefore the Jesuiticall and Carnal
reason and prudentiall provision must cease; for this is not that wisdom that
dwells with prudence, and finds out knowledge of witty inventions Prove. 12.
And further the Holy Ghost by the Preacher sets forth the power of a King by
the way of an Allogory, and says, there be three things goes well; yea four
are comely in going, a Lion which is strongest among Beasts, and turns not
away for any; a Greyhound, a Hee-Goat, and a King, against whom there is no
rising up; Prove. 30. 29. 30, 31.

If thou have done and spoken foolishly, hear the word of the Preacher or God
by him, Lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and beware least thou Incur the wrath of
the Lion, of the Tribe of Judah this therefore do, open the two Levigates.
Isai. 45. verse. 1. and with Bennedad put ropes about your N^cks and remember
the Counsel that was long ago directed by God to be given you and prepare to
fetch home your Father and Prince King Charles. For God himself has promised
to be with him upon the Throne: and to establish that supremacy for ever and it
shall be exalted Job. 36 7. For says the Lord, by me Kings Reign and Princes
decree Justice, by me Princes rule and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth.

Now no question but Kings which are supreme have their failings, and are men;
yet although it be so God has not any where in his word put them over to any
of their Inferiors to be tried by them, and as be foresaid, who may say to the
King. what do thou? Prove. 8. 15, 16.

Further Elisha convincing Job has this expression; Is it fit to say to a
King, thou art wicked? and to a Prince thou art ungodly? Speak not against the
King, no not in thy Bedchamber, for the Birds of the Air shall carry the
voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter: Ecl. 10. 26 Here we see
what care God has taken for the preservation of supremacy of Kings; for indeed
the supremacy of the 5 Commandment is the foundation, and therefore God has a
tender care of his own honor, and of the honor of his own Word, and of the
supremacy of Kings: and here is the double fountain from whence all true and
dew duty does proceed by divine designation; Fear God and honor the King, and
this is the whole duty of man; and this is the fountain from whence all
supremacy does redound to arents and Masters.

Now where are those pot-sheards and seminary Priests, that does still go on to
contend with him that is mighter then they, Eccles. 6. 10 and these three
scriptures before specified 2. Pet. 17. Prove. 24. 21. Job. 34. 19. I say, that
God in these scriptures hold forth the King only with himself and no man else:
And further, there is a confirmation of it, Eccles. 5. 19. moreover, the
Prophet of the Earth is for all; the King himself is served by the field: here
is none held forth with the King, therefore he has no equal.

Now, who or where is this Goliath, or these Goliahs that stand upon their
swords Ezech. 33. 16. and hold out defense against the Lord of Host the God of
Israel, in casting off, and trampling under their feet commandments of God;
and this they say in their Remonstrance, That they must mind the Parliament of
their Votes once past of making no more addresses to the King; and of their own
engagement to adhere to the Parliament therein, and what they in their
engagement did summarily lay down, that which the Parliament took satisfaction
therein; which was, that none of the extraordinary, or arbitrary power, before
mentioned, may be exercised toward the people by any of Right; but by that
suprem Council or Representative body of the People, nor without their advice
and consent; Neither may any be imposed upon, or taken from the people; or if
it be otherwise attempted by any, that the people be not bound thereby but
free, and the attempters punished. Now contrary to this Order, there was
Proclaimation published with Drums and Trumpets without any word from the
supreme Parliament so called.

Now here is a Lime-twig, and yet this snare is not broke, and this is the
independency that may properly be called, a corrupt and outside Religion; and
of necessity it must be so, when Reason is said to be the teacher, page 29.

And now that it is said, That the King was the Author of this unjust war, and
therefore guilty of the highest treason against the highest law amongst men;
and therein guilty of all the innocent blood spilt thereby; and of all the
evil consequent or concommitant thereunto? Now seeing this question is thus
stated, it is desired that every one would reflect, and cast an eye upon their
own actings; and not judge partially, for God would judge righteous Judgment,
and render to every one according to the fruits of their doings. Jerem. 17. 10

And therefore to consider a little the first beginning of our troubles, after
the second Parliament was set and settled by our King: If you please to call to
mind what extraordinary Petitions there was from the City and Country, and
bringing their grievances unto the Parliament, as making complaint against the
King of their heavy oppressures that they had laid under, which were but as the
weight of a little finger in comparison what has been along time together
since.

And that men's backs or rather estates have been broken in pieces, and their
hearts too almost at the sad events: and indeed the hand of God has been sore
upon us in that we were not content to have Christ's Kingly Office held forth to
us in these three Kingdoms by one Head, according to God distinct order, 1
Cor. 12. 21. And now instead of having one Head to make up the Body with the
Members complete, we have had a preposterous Body without a Head; and what we
have now we know not, which are said to hold forth the supremacy of the
Kingdom or People: which Title I find not in Holy-writ, belonging to the
Members subordinate to the Head: but indeed these Members have well resembled
the Feet and Toes of Nebuchadnezzars image, which was composed of Iron and
Clay; and in regard of Coveteousnes and Self-seeking, are now in great danger
to be broken in pieces, because they are not sensible of regaining their
strength nor the danger that they hazard in being without it.

And now at first beginning of our troubles, when there were such resort to the
Parliament, and the King so slighted, for he was not at all then looked upon
as a supreme Prince; and by reason of the great concourse of people which were
at Westminster Petitioning, and Murmuring up and down; the Parliament at last,
commanded the Trained Bands to attend them, and multitudes of the Citizens came
with them, and Courts of Guards were kept by Commission of Parliament. And
strange untruths were raised, as if the King would Sack the City, and speeches
went up and down, that the King had thousands of men in yards ready armed to
come in the night to surprise the City; and false alarums there was given in
the night according to the false hoods that were raised: and the brooding of
these Eggs has brought forth Serpents and Cocatrises. And the King being in a
deplored condition, there were gathered Gentlemen unto him, some of them having
lost their Fortunes, as they did to David in his deplored condition, and at
length indeed, I think, the King had his Court of Guard as well as the
Parliament; then the Parliament came into the City and sat in Guild Hall.

Now a little before this the King had required five Members out of the house,
and again he did it at Guild Hall: and some days after this, the Parliament
was to return to Westminster, at their return its Well known to the City
and Kingdom, what provision there was made for them, and what rumors there
were up and down the City and multitudes of the Citizens, and multitudes of
the sea men that were to lie with their murdering pieces all over the Theames,
and it was so; and in these times of these rumors and destractions, the King
could not but be put into fear and at last fled away: and after the King had
acted his part, now it may be called to mind that the Independent company in
the Parliament and elsewhere, and the Presbyterians, all Sects comprehended, I
say these two parties has played their parts several years together, and in
all this time, the Kingdom in a very sad condition; and God and his Laws was
not at all looked after in a due and true manner, for disobedience to Parents
and Masters increased in abundant manner; and now at this day it is come to a
full height and ripeness, the reason is because God ceased to govern, and
carnal reason prevailed and want of love (to do as we would be done unto)
ceased yet still a saying, let the Lord be magnified Isa. 66. 5. 8. and making
Covenants, calling God to witness, now in all this time many petitions were sent
to the King to desire his return to the Parliament with many expressions in
them, that it would be a means to put an end to all the troubles in the
Kingdom, and that was a truth spoken, but not really intended as it does
appear since; and at length he did return, and that the Scots can witness,
to his Parliament; what the condition were that passed between the two
Kingdoms about the King; it is known to them that made them, and God also
best knows.

Now further concerning some of the particular proceedings of Parliament and
Army, as the King required five Members so did the Parliament imprison some of
the City when they came to petition for there Laws and Liberties, and the Army
they played their parts, and demanded a 11 Memberes, and had them: and now the 2
part of the tune sounds abundantly higher. And what was the common speech when
the King demanded 5 Members; that if he had them he would by degrees take away
all that should withstand him and his party in their lusts? and must the Ceader
be pulled down, and the Thistle set up? Now, seeing the Parliament and
Kingdom did not help themselves in that way that is warranted by the word of
God, Prove. 21 15. Which is to obey all that have the oversight of them; Heb.
13. 17. Romans 13. 17. We all understand there is a double sense in this speech
of the Ho^y Ghost, This scripture should have been toward the beginning but it
could not be found; and now God has brought it The fear of a King is as the
roaring of a Lion, who so provokes him to anger sins against his own soul.
Prove. 20. 2, 3, etc. It is an honor for a man to cease from strife but every
fool will be meddling Prove. 26. and consider who has spoken: blasphemy, and
remember that ignorance is a damnable sin.
which is to obey either Active or Passive, as our Savior and his Apostles
did: now God is pleased to discover the depths of that wickedness which was in
the hearts of men, which they themselves were not aware of.

It was said, the reason why the Parliament denied the King in his demands,
was, because of the wicked counsel he had about him, which put him on to
satisfy their lusts; and indeed there was wicked ones about him, which the
Parliament by the Army, was said to seek to suppress them: and it was their
saying, for many years together; and if their hearts had been down right
sincere in that particular, God would have owned their actions, so far forth as
they were warrantable by his Word and honored them: for God has commanded to
remove the wicked from the King, and has promised that his Thron shall be
established; but not a word of touching the Kings Person: but seeing it is
desired in your Remonstrance page 23. that the guilt and blame may be laid
where its due; Now God has showed unto you, that you are not to meddle with
the King, no not although he has acted and done contrary to the command of God
and his own laws: yet God will have you to know he has not put him into any of
your hands, to pass your sentence upon him, yet you say, with hazard of your
lives and fortunes, you shall close unite and join with the Parliament for the
speedy executing of Justice upon the grand Incendiaries of our late and former
troubles, that the heads of the Authors go not down with peace to their graves;
and God has given him clearly into the Parliaments hand to do Justice, you
say; Whether it can be just before God and good men not to do it? You desire an
answer from God concerning the justnes of your Demands: and in the 2 Rom at the
beginning, God gives you an answer with reproof to your selves, who would take
his work out of his hand and in Luke 19. 22. Christ tells the evil servant,
that out of his own mouth he shall be judged: But to proceed (to say something)
out of the Romans 2. Therefore thou art unexcusable O man, who ever thou art that
judge, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self? for thou
that judge do the same things: and in the 2 verse. But we are sure the
judgment of God is according to truth, against them that commit such things:
and think thou this o man that judge them that do such things, and do
the same; that thou shall escape the judgment of God, or despisest thou the
riches of his grace and long suffering? and will not yet look back and know
that you are fully out of the way and walk of God, as the King of Asseriahs
army was. Now I desire the Lord to open your eyes, that you may see your
palpable blindness, and that you may find out the steps and degrees of your
sins, ever since you point blank broke the Command of God, and would not
disband at the Parliaments command: and you bolster up your selves in that
particular, that God has made you instrumental, to take away the wicked from
the King; (and there rested) Now if God be pleased to afford that mercy unto
you (which I earnestly desire) as to give you repentance, if not, look to your
selves: for the earth growns (as I shall hereafter show you) and the heavens
has a long while mourned. I pray you remember, what the wiseman says; there
is a time wherein one man rules over another for their own hurt, Eccles. 8. 9.
But wickedness shall not deliver those that are given over to it.

Now consider your monstrous Remonstrance, which is like to Rabshekahs arrand,
that he brought from his Master, but not from God: and your Declarations,
Proclamations, as Jehu with trumpets; but no commission from God, or Parliament
in all this: yet Zimery like, you attempt the killing of your Master, and by
violence have taken him into your own custody; but Zimry lived but seven days
after he had killed his Master, for the earth could not bear him: but Hazael
reigned certain years after his Master, and went on violently to do the work of
the Devil, and fill up the number of his sins, and shed much blood. Now
consider, if at any time since Saul was made King, to the coming of our
Savior Christ, and ever since; whether ever any Subject but (these three that
have been specified) Zimry, Jehu, and Hazael, did attempt the like: but Jehu
had a special command immediate from God: but the scripture is full of
counterdemands to your actings. But to the matter first of Saul, after he was
made King, we know he did exceedingly break the special commands which were
given him by the Prophet Samuel from Gods own mouth: I have not time to
express all the particulars, how he slew eighty and odd of the Priests of the
Lord, and did observe his own will in the exercise of his government among his
people; as the Prophet before had told the people he would do: yet for all
this, when David who was anointed to be King in his room after him, did but cut
off the tip of the skirt of Saul's garment, God smote his heart for it, so says
the Text; and Pharaoh that did use the children of Israel so hardly, yet they
were not to do any thing to contrary his will; no not Moses and Aaron: not did
Moses carry the children of Israel out of Egypt without his leave: Nay, Moses
himself did so honor the supremacy of Pharaoh, that he held it an honor to be
commanded by him; as in these words of his: Glory over me, when shall I entreat
for thee, and Pharaoh said, to morrow. And we know Saul, and David, and Solomon
was not without their failings: yet they were not reproved by any of their own
Subjects, not so much as by the Prophets, but by special command from God to
the Prophets; and then their arrand was expressly given them from God, every
word what they should say, and God has left the same word.

And when our Savior Christ was born and Horod made King over the Jews by
Caesar Augustus, we read in holy writ that many male children Herod slew
thinking thereby to destroy Christ; yet for all that blood he shed, God did not
take him away till the full time of his days were expired: Nay, God caused
Joseph to carry his own son Christ into Egypt till Herod was dead; for God
has ordained his word from the beginning, and it shall continue firm and
sure; not a title of it shall fall to the ground. And thus says the Lord,
Children must obey their Parents in all things, and Servants their Masters
according to the flesh; yea, though they are wicked, and do beat them for well
doing, they are not to turn again, but to bear it patiently; and in so doing
its thankworthy to God. But Gods commandments are not regarded to be observed
in the public ordinances, nor generally in men's lives; like the Scribes and
Pharisees taught children to disobey their Parents, and they thought to have
taught Christ too. For they came and asked him, why his disciples did eat with
unwashed hands? but Christ answered them by way of a question, why do you
transgress the commandments of God by your traditions? for God commanded
saying, Honor thy father and thy mother: He that curses father or mother let
him dye the death (I would know of our Divines whether the penalty of this
command be abrogated) the Scribes and Pharisees would have had it so, and it
is amongst us fully abrogated in the obedience of it; but Christ called the
Scribes and Pharisees hipocrites, and told them, in vain they did worship him,
teaching for doctrine the traditions of men, which were their own wills, as it
is at this day amongst us.

Now where are those or Jeremiahs, to mourn and cry out in regard of the
pitiful complaints that are amongst us, as Jeremiah did; concerning the
reproach that is come upon them and upon their inheritances; for their
inheritances were turned unto strangers, and their houses to aliens; and now
there is a beginning of like condition amongst us: for says Jeremiah, Servants
have ruled over us, and there was none to deliver out of their hands: and these
servants hang up their Princes by their hands, and the faces of their Elders
were not honored; Lament. 5. 1, 8, 12. If it be well observed in this place of
the Lamentations, that the breach of the fifth Commandment was the chief
sin that brought all that extremity upon them: and the 22 of Ezekiel makes
it manifest.

And the Holy Ghost by the Preacher further sets forth the practice of such
Servants as break their rancks, and cast the commandment of God behind them;
and says, there is a generation who teeth are as swords, and their jaw teeth
as knives to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men
Prove. 30. 21, 22, and the Preacher persists in his speech, and goes on, and
says; there be three things for which the earth is disquieted, and four which
it cannot bear; two of them are, a Seavant when he reigns, and a fool when he
is filled with meat.

And now for the sons of Corath, that are not contented with their particular
places and callings, and are not contented to study their duties to God and
man, and to do violence to none, and weight till God shall honor them, if he
sees it good.

But with Corah, Numb. 16. they think themselves fit to hold forth (as public
Persons) the Priestly office of Christ; and they think themselves fit for the
Kingly office too: and indeed, one sin goes not alone; for sin is of that
spreading nature, according to its tutor Satan, it will aim at the top.

But when things comes to this pass, that Servants gets the government into
their hands, the earth groans, as before said, in the Proverbs) and the heavens
has manifested it ever since the King was taken from Holmby, and the soldiers
drawing near to the City (as we have already in brief expressed.) And now all
that has eyes and will not see, and ears and will not hear, take heed and
remember that God caused the earth that groans; and because it could not longer
bear, it swallowed Corah and his Company; for he preserves not the life of the
wicked, but gives right to the poor. Job 36. 6.

And the delaying to keep a good conscience before God and toward all men
brought danger, and the Army breaking their ranks took the King from Holmby,
and because there was great and much resort to him, and some secret intentions
withal, at length, he was put in fear of his life, whereby he might make his
escape, and so be further remote; and after he was fled to the Isle of Wight,
there was no right way thought upon to bring him back again, but rather such
ways taken which were not lined out by Gods word, neither has been blessed
by him. Yet a seeming to stand up for the great God, by fasting and prayer, as
people that would be taught of him. But yet still in all proceedings, the
actings, doings, looked squint-eyed, and quite contrary to the rule; and this
we know, a man in a journey if he mistakes and rides out of his way, the longer
he goes out, the more ado he has to come back again, without he does come
into the way he cannot get to his Journeyes end: this earthly resemblance holds
forth a heavenly to us: But to go on,

Then there was an act of Indemnity desired by the Army to be procured by the
Parliament, and a seeming falling out between them there grew; whereupon the
Parliament commanded the Army to keep thirty miles from the City, and at
length to draw into several Regiments and to disband; but the Army disobeyed
the Parliaments command as well as the Prince and Duke; and marched nearer and
nearer to the City, and upon the sudden the Malitia must be altered, which was
appointed by the common counsel of the City and confirmed by order of
Parliament. And after this leading Card the City began to be touch to the
quick, in regard of the loss of their Charter, they indirectly made a
combustion, the Army being upon their march there must be no denial, but the
Tower must be surrendered to them; and it was concluded thar they should come
through the City. And at the very time, yea the instant of time although it
was a very fair sun-shiny day the Heavens all about the City gather
blackness, and presently there was such a mighty storm of Hail, Thunder and
Rain; and all of it in and about the City, and four miles of there was none,
but very clear weather: But this Thunder of Hail did hold forth that height
of Gods displeasure against the Armies disobedience to the Parliament; in Gods
account disobedience is a greater neglect then sacrifice, because it is
absolutely the breach of Gods commandment: and Samuel told Saul that Rebellion
is as the sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbornness is as the Iniquity.

But to proceed they did come, march through the City which was of a
Satterday, and the second part being again played upon the same tune but
higher: they came in and about the City this Saturday December the 3 also in
the afternoon, and in stead of preparing for the Lords day; put the City
Susan in a distraction and perplexity, and they in the Subburbs running out of
their houses and a great deal a do to provide for the Soldiers almost all
that night.

Whether they took the King away without any authority from the Parliament on
Satterday night or Sabbath day I know not, but this I know the Lords day was a
wonderful dark day as ever I saw; and if it be but called to mind the
unreasonablenesse of the weather that has bin ever since the King was taken
from Holmby: and God has held out by this Summer unto us the strange and
preposterous government that is amongst us.

And now in regard there has been abundant of unjust doings in the Kingdom;
coveting, and not only coveting their neighbors goods, but actually the
taking away of them; multitudes have suffered, both they and their posterities
are like to suffer hereby; and the greatest part of the treasure of the Kingdom
gathered into such laps: but for this particular, here what God says, Also I
shook my lap, and said, so God shake out every man from his house and from his
labor, that performs not his promise, even thus be he shaken out Nehemiah.
5. 13. and the general speech to cover unjust proceeding, that title of
Malignant was the cloak, and all that held of the Kings side were to have their
goods confiscated for so doing.

And now I pray consider, who has kept or broken the commandment of the great
God of heaven and has suffered for it: but when the Lord has taken the King
out of your hands (as he will certainly do) and set him upon his Thron too.

And when it shall appear that God does translate the estates of those that
withstand the King to the King, then it will plainly be seen, or appear, that
the Lord was highly displeased at the standing out against the King. Christ's
command and example was, To give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and
unto God the things that are Gods: and had it been so, the blessing of God had
been upon us at our going out and at our coming in; and we had had our peace
in our borders: but we have been an empty Vine, and we have brought forth fruit
to our selves, according to the complaint of God to the children of Israel.

Now concerning the Covenant that was made to stand for the Truth, the true and
pure Religion, and to preserve the Kings Person; and herein God has performed
his Covenam in preserving the supremacy, Prove. 8, yea and has preserved the
Person of the King too.

But in their Remonstrance, there is a dispensation given for it of that
sufficiency, to free those that do make a Covenant to maintain true and pure
Religion, which is to keep themselves unspotted in this world, and to preserve
such or such a Person: and because after they have made the Covenant, the other
Person will not at their command enter into it at all: though they themselves
are not in such a capacity to demand such a thing at his hand; and because he
refused it and will not take it: it is said, that this tie which they
voluntarily bound themselves in, and called God to witness to it, may be
broken by man.

But now seeing there has been absolution given, but not from God to Covenant
breakers: hear therefore what the Lord says, Zecha. 8. 16, 17. These are the
things that ye shall do, speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor, and
execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates, and let none of you
imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and love no false oath; for
all these are things that I hate, says the Lord: and further, hear what the
Holy Ghost says by the Prophet Mal. 3. 5. and I will come near to you in to
judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the sorceters and against the
adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the
hyreling in his wages, the widow and the fatherless; and that turn a side the
stranger from his right, and fear not me says the Lord of Host, Psalm. 119.
104. Mal. 3. 15.

Object. But some object and say, that our Kings are not so constituted, nor
our laws so as they were in the times of the Kings of Israel? and this
objection has caused many through ignorance to stumble: and whether the Moral
law be not of the same use to us now under the gospel, as it was unto the Jews
under the Ceremonial law? and whether there be not the same penalty by Gods
ordination to be executed upon the transgressors, as was heretofore? and
whether every one shall not give an account of all his actions to God; Romans 14.
11, 12 Isai. 45. 23. Saint James will tell you they are, James 2 12. So to be
judged every one according to the fruit of his doings, Ierem. 17. 10. John 12.
48.

Now here is a further word of the Lord, that does put bounds to all that has
or shall be spoke, Isa. 57. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant, says the Lord
my spirit, that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of mouth
of thy seed seeds, says the Lord of host, from hence forth even for ever.

I have not taken example by your Remonstrance to lay blood at any of your
doors, no not the blood that has been shed since you took the King from
Holmby; and that at Westminster you remember, and that in Essex. For I desire
to be acquainted with the Laws and Word of God, for the laws of the land I do
not so well know them, but I know the pursuer of blood will pursue the guilty
person in time, Dutro. 19. 6. and now a little further concerning the laws of
God, which ought to be the highest law to be observed amongst men; and it is
this, Ezera 7, 27. And whosoever will not do the law of God, and the law of
the King, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death
or banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or imprisonment.

And now that you all are out of Gods ways, and therefore go on further, but
come quite back again, and put your selves into the right way speedily: and if
you do not beware of the immediate wrath of the great God, that bids you lay
down your temporal sword, least God cause you to turn it one upon another; for
you have no cause to hold it forth in this manner. And for those that you call
malignants, there is no question, but they may prove as honest men as your
selves, (through the power of God) and go you every one to his own field and
vinyard, (if you have any) and take pains to earn your own bread, for the
commandment of God is, that they that will not work should not eat.

And now that you have made your Will, and set forth your Magna Carta, which is
to kill your Lord and King, that his inheritance may be yours (and you have
disposed of it already) and this you say, that it will give the most
authentic Testimony and Seal that ever was: to do it you have molded the
Parliament to your modle.

And now that you dare break the commandment of Christ and teach men so to do
Matthew. 5. 25. remember what Christ says, they shall be least in the Kingdom
of heaven.

And now a word to all superiors and inferiors, And first to all governors
that they should be informed themselves from the Word, what is amiss in their
own particulars, and seek unto God to teach them, and reform themselves; and
then they are fit to inform and reform others: and this must speedily be done;
from the highest to the lowest in the kingdom; that so all Families, Cities,
Towns, Parishes may be brought into an orderly frame, and every one to be
informed of his duty in his particular place; and this must be the study of
all: and remember that Christ has said, he will come in an hour when people
are not aware of him. And we see that God is exceedingly displeased with these
Kingdoms.

And now behold ( Esai. 59. 1.) the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot
save, neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear; and further, hearken what God
says in the same chapter in verse 14, and judgment is turned away backward,
and justice stands afar off; for truth is fallen in the streets, and equity
cannot enter: for behold, what Sabboaths we have kept with those that would
indent with God to have a new heart for others, and go on themselves in that
old old capital sin of disobedience: and in the 15. Yea truth fails, and he
that departs from evil makes himself a prey, and the Lord saw it, and it
displeased him that there was no judgment. 16. verse And he saw that there was
no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor, therefore his arm brought
salvation to him, and his right hand it sustained him. And now if you desire to
be at peace with God and all men; I beseech you all, Parliament and Army, bring
your selves and actions, to the rule, and agree with God which is your
adversary, now while you may.

And now for Indemnity, so far forth as Gods word would give it you, no
question but you shall have it, if you prove your selves worthy persons; if
not, your foot shall slide in due time. Deutro. 32. 35.

And now for those that are set in authority, according to the laws of God and
of the land; let them speedily take King Artaxarexes counsel and learn the laws
of God, Ezera 7. 25. and take the Prophet Isaiahs counsel to the law and to the
Testimony, whosoever does not according to it, its because there is no light in
them: 2 Chronicles. 19 10. deal courageously an the Lord shall be with you: but you
must not turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left. Deutro, 17. 11. and
much in this chapter: and remember that the eyes of the Lord are upon the ways
of man; and he perceives all his goings, and the iniquity of the wicked, if he
turn not away from it, shall slay them. Prove. 5. 21. Isai. 55. 7.

And now that there are, and has been long this many years, and a company in
shipskins, that does seek to deceive the hearts of the simple and honest party;
and these and some colorable to set up Christ's Kingdom: But indeed their aim
is to set up Antichrists Kingdom; and a party they are who heretofore in the
Queens time, and a party of those has been all along in the Parliament and the
Army, and up and down in the Kingdom brooding, and he that they call Dell in
the Army is one of them he baptized Major Cowels child without the Element of
water; and that holds forth, that he is one of Antichrists Seminaries: and yet
it is well that there is a severation now in the Parliament, and I would it
were so in the Army to: least the justice of God break out upon the good with
the bad; and this party their designs all along has been squint-eyed: and it
may be called to mind, that it was said there was a great plot found out, just
before the Army came into the City the first time.

And indeed that plot was to make that party strong in the Parliament by the
Army, that so they may bring their lustful desires about. And now when
Remonstrance came forth it was noised about, that the Parliament and the King
were agreed; and whilst, they took the King and possessed themselves of
White Hall, and of the City; and now the pretense is, that the Army is come
into the City because of the backwardnes of their paying: and the Army want
their Arrears. But the abundant of money that has been gathered in all these
times, both in the Countries and City for the Army, and no account given that
ever any of it was paid; for the Soldiers reports they have had but a little
in comparison of what has been gathered. And indeed the Army abundant of them
are kept like Vassels: and their pay kept from them because there should be
some colorable pretense for the indirect courses, that has been long a foot:
and upon this colorable pretense, treasure is ceazed upon, and much more their
Demands holds forth, of taking by force out of men's houses, if they may not
have their wills.

And this they hold forth now, (and it is their own words) and if it seem
strange unto you, it is no less then that our forces have been ordered to do
by the Parliament in several Counties of the Kingdom: and because there was
order from the Parliament, in the several Counties heretofore, they make that
of sufficiency to carry forth all their preposterous doings now: but no order
now (for all these actings) but from White Hall since their Remonstrance came
forth, for all this is acted and done: and who but a King, Calls and Sets the
Parliament, and who but a King can set a period unto it. And indeed this is not
to do now as does appear: but take heed fellow soldiers, covet not that that
is none of your own, but for your pay, which is fit you should have. There are
some will shake their laps, and pay you suddenly, yea repay to other, if they
do not leave your cause to him that is higher then the highest; and the Lord
will be with the good.

And remember the civil war that was between Israel and Benjamin, and how that
Israel fell twice before Benjamin, and how that 40000. men were slain, and yet
not with standing the third time Israel prevailed and subdued Benjamin and so
it will be now: and the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem will rebuke you, Zach.
3. 2.

And now if you will yet be Vassels, I speak to the good party (disband
immediately) for God himself will end the war: And there is a party will be
brought down wonderfully; and I fear, that some will hardly die the common
death of all men: and now let us wait to see the salvation of God, farewell
fellow Soldier, God has warned the twice by me, and too much writing is a
wearisomnes to the brain: Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the
whole duty of man: For God will bring the work to judgment with every secret
thought whether it be good or evil.

You were told long agone that you were turned into an indirect way; also, you
were told, who was the Person in chief that God has set to govern: you will
see it suddenly, you that are so hasty to try your brethren that break your
commands, and forget God, take heed, he is coming to tear you in pieces, and
who shall deliver you, Christ will not own your cause: and the latter end of
the 50. Psalm. But you say, that you observe providence, and that and your
consciences are the teachers; but seeing it is so that you have left the two
Testiments, your great fabric will fall, read the scriptures, for all things
comes alike to all. I refer you to three chapters in special Proverb. 26. and
Isai. 57. Romans 2. and I will sing the 46. Psalm,

FINIS.

