Heads of HIS MAJESTY'S LETTER and PROPOSITIONS SENT From the Isle of Wight,
for settling of the Church and Kingdom, and paying of the Army.

AND His Majesty's desire to come to London to the PARLIAMENT.

ALSO The Copy of a second Letter from Col. Hammond Governor of the Isle of
Wight, and his desires to the Parliament concerning the Kings Majesty.

November. 19. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbott.



HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms

London, Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, 1647.

portrait of Charles I

Heads of HIS MAJESTY'S Letter, and Propositions to both houses of PARLIAMENT.
Dated at the Isle of Wight.
HIs Majesty conceives himself bound not to abolish Episcopacy, both as he is
a Christian, and as he is a King; As he is a Christian, it being instituted
by Christ and his Apostles: And as he is a King, being bound to maintain them
by the Oath which he swore at his Coronation; And by them the Doctrine of
Religion, the Government and Discipline of the Church, which has (under his
Predecessors) been maintained.

And for sale of the Bishops Lands, His Majesty holds it high sacrilege, they
having been given to them by diverse benefactors.

His Majesty offers to call in all his Proclamations and Declarations against
the Parliament, and those who have adhered to them, and will give order for
withdrawing all Inditements against those who have adhered to the Parliament;
And his Majesty offers to pass an Act of indemnity. and general pardon.

For the Army, his Majesty undertakes with the moneys received, and due, and to
be received out of Sequestrations, to pay 400000 pound for payment of the Army
their Arrears, and if it will not do it, his Majesty will make it up out of
Forest Lands.

His Majesty is content to part with the Militia of the Kingdom, during his
own life, but that after his Reign it may return again to its proper place.

For the public debts of the kingdom, his Majesty will confer with his two
Houses of Parliament, for the payment of them.

And his Majesty is content to confirm such Officers of State as the two
Houses of Parliament shall nominate, etc.

His Majesty propounds the Proposalls of the Army to be taken into
consideration by the Houses of Parliament.

And for other things, his Majesty propounds to come to London, to consult with
his Parliament, for the settling of a firm and lasting peace.

These be the heads of his Majesty's Letter from the Isle of Wight. Subscribed
CHARLES REX.

A LETTER FROM Colonel Hammon, Governor of the Isle of Wight, (and Colonel
of a Regiament of Foot, of the Army under the immediate command of his
Excellency). Read in both Houses of Parliament.
My Lord,
Since my last which gave your Lordship an account of his Majesty being in this
Island I have had a meeting with the Gentery thereof, who express a great
deal of cherefullnesse in their desires, and endeavors of preserving His
Majesty's person, and obedience unto the authority of Parliament.

I have also given orders, (which are diligently observed) that no persons go
out of the Island without passes: And that no botes bring over any person
whatsoever, (not belonging to this Island) but whom they cause to be brought to
me, to be examined, that I may thereby be the better able to preserve the
Kings Person in security, as also to prevent the confluence of people that
otherwise, upon the occasion of His Majesty's presence would flock hither to
the disturbance of the peace of this Island, which at present (through the
blessing of God) is in a quiet and peaceable posture, having earnest
expectations upon the continuance of their peace, by a general settlement of
the peace of the Kingdom, for conveyance of which unto them, they look at
your Lordships as the blessed Instruments.

My Lord,
Give me leave to acquaint you that the accommodations of the King at this time
are no ways suitable to His quallity, which makes me bold to offer to your
Lordships (if it be thought fit) that His usual allowance may be continued
to Him, for His better provision whilst he shall abide in this place.

I shall not further trouble your Lordship then to assure you, that in all
things, in my power, which may express my duty to you and the Kingdom, I
shall study to declare my self.

My Lord, Your Lordships and the kingdoms most humble and faithful servant.
TO. HAMMOND.
From the Castle of Carisbrooke Novem. 16. 1647.
To the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the house of Peers
pro tempore.
FINIS.

