OF THE ARTICLE OF OUR CREED: Christ descended to Hades, or ad Inferos.

Posit. 1. Christ's soul went to Hades, or ad Inferos.

2. It concerns a Christian to know the right meaning of this Article.

Quest. 1. What is meant in the Creed by this Article?

2. Did Christ's Soul go to Heaven or Gehenna?

With Answers to both of them severally.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1642.

To the Christian Reader.
GOD has in these later days opened a plentiful fountain of sacred truth to
inform our judgments and direct our practice: yet such is humane frailty,
that ignorance and curiosity have broached many Controversies, and prejudice
and partiality maintained most of them with much vehemence of contention, and
disaffection of hearts. Whereby the propagation of the Gospel, and the
advancement of Gods glory is much retarded. These things it becomes us not
only tolament, but to endeavor by all possible means to remedy. Now what
better and speedier course can be taken for cure herein, then for the Sons of
the God of Peace, Subjects of the Prince of Peace, men renewed by the Spirit of
Peace, to take to themselves a calm and peaceable temper, to treat of sacred
matters without malice and bitterness; in points of much controversy and
difficulty to use a punctual plain and brief discourse;. That Truth be
neither lost, nor undiscerned nimium altercando by vastness of debate, nor
clouded by extravagant, far fetched, and nice expressions. I have in this
present Treatise endeavonred to bring arguments and grounds most perspicuous,
brief, and pertinent; that the point here handled might not be (...) and a
rock of offense amongst us. Some passages herein require not an ordinary skill
in tongues. So that men not versed that way are to be entreated not to
precipitate their judgments; but many passages are so cleared by Scripture and
good deductions thence, that my appeal may be to any indifferent judge. Such
as this discourse is, I present it unto your gentle perushall and serious
consideration, and humbly desire Gods gracious blessing on both our pains, and
the Divine assistance of his Holy Spirit leading us into all Truth.

Two Positions about the ARTICLE Descendit ad Inferos, to Sheol, or to HADES.
POSITION I. Christ did Descendere ad Inferos, to Sheol, or Hades.
THe Old and New Testament, the two excellent witnesses of sacred Truth,
affirm with one accord, That Christ's soul was in Sheol, or Hades, and (as in
latin these terms be generally by all translate) apud inferos. For Psalm
16.10. It Is said, Thou will not leave my soul in Sheol, or Hades, nor suffer
thy holy one to see corruption. And Act. 2. These very words are expressly cited
from the Psalm; And there S^nt Peter expounds the latter part of the words
thus: Nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption, that is, Christ's Body or
Flesh to to turn to dust in the grave. The meaning therefore is, that Christ's
So ^e going to Sheol or Hades, or ad Inferos should not there be left to abide
or continue longer then the third day. For Christ promised to rise again, and
set the time of his Resurrection to be not before the third day. This it
pleased him to do, that he might fulfill what was typed in Jonas: As also that
we might assuredly know, that he was truly dead, From Christ's interring until
the third day, Christ's flesh or body did rest in hope: which could not in any
wife be frustrate. And therefore on the third day Christ was quickened by the
Spirit, 1 Peter 3.8. So that his Sou^e, which h^d been in Sheol, or Hades, or
apnd Inferos, and his body which was in the grave united; and that himself
role dead. For these passages concerning Christ, David as a Prophet saw before,
and spoke concerning Christ's rising from death. Which death to Christ, as to
all men, was the parting of the soul and body to be sent each to their due
place. Thus it is manifest by facred Scripture that Christ's soul did
descendere ad Inferos, or go to Sheol or Hades. For what was not left there,
must goeth^ther, be there, and come thence. Seeing Scripture is so express in
this point, I shall not need to use any further proof thereof.

POSIT. 2. It does much concern us Christians to understand aright, what is
meant by Christ's Soul going ad Inferos, to Sheol, or Hades.
IT behooves us truly to understand, what is meant by the descent of Christ:
because,

1. It is a ru^h affirmed by the Holy Ghost in both Testaments, and an
expression of a chief action of CHRIST about his death and Resurrection.

2. Because Saint Peter does cite from the Old Testament, words witnessing the
same, and expounds them as u^eful to be known for the confirmation of a
Christians faith in the point of Chri^ ^efurrection, which is a matter of great
consequence for our salvation.

3. Because this clause, 1. Is taken into the common Creed of the Churches in
this part of the world. 2. Expounded as part of the Creed by many of the
ancient Fathers, and mentioned in diverse parts of their works, and generally
acknowledged and received by late Writers upon the Creed.

4. Because the different expositions thereof have in these latter times
occasioned much controversy and jarres among Christians, and bean a great
stumbling block to Jews: who are of themselves too averse from Christianity,
and made by misprision and quarrels about this Article much more to disaffect
our Doctrine.

^ What inconvenience and mischief these have brought to the Church of Christ
in these our days is most apparent. In regard of these and other reasons, which
might be produced, it very much concerns us Christians to understand aright,
and to profess, what according to sacred truth is meant by Christ, Soul going
ad Jnferos. That I may clearly set down what I conceive both from Scripture,
and the learned and worthy pains of the most judicious Divines and exquisite
searchers into the fa^red Text, is meant thereby, I propound the two following
questions and answer thereun^o.

QUEST. 1. What is the full meaning and true sense of the word in our CREED.
He des ended ad Inferos, to Sheol, or Hades^
FOr the making a distinct and punctual answer to this question, I will first
produce the various significa ^o^s of the words, Sheol, Hades, Inferi. For
unless ambiguous words be well and rightly distinguished, neither can I fully
and perspicuously express my meaning, nor others without misprision conceive,
what they endeavor to understand. If words give not a certain sound, we
shall but beat the air, and leave the matter doubtful, and give occasion to
further dispute.

First, Then Sheol, Hades, Inferi signify Death, when they are spoken of a
person in danger of his life, As Psalm 18.6. The sorrows of Sheol compassed
me, that is, the sorrows of Death or sorrows bringing to the Grave: and
Ps^me 116.3. The pains of Sheol found me: that is, grief and pain hastening
death. They do also signify 'Death, when Soul is put for life. As Psalm
30.3. Lord thou last brought up my soul from Sheol: that is, my life from
Death. And Psalm 49.25. God will redeem my soul from the hand of Sheol: that
is my life from death. That life is signified by soul is evident by our
Translation very often. As Matth^w 2.20. Herod was dead, who tought the young
Child's life: where the Original has Soul. And that Sheol is put for death
appears, Psalm 88 3. My soul is full of troubles, and my life draws nigh
unto Sheol, that is, Death.

Secondly, When Sheol, Hades, Inferi are spoken of the body, they signify
Grave, as Genesis 42.38. Ye will bring my gray head with sorrow to Sheol: that
is, my body to the grave. So I Kings 2.9. David bids Solomon bring Shemei his
hoary head with blood to Sheol, to the Grave.

Thirdly, When they are spoken of the Soul separate from the body, they
signify the common state of all souls departed this life: So that their own
proper force extends no further, but to express the world unseene, without any
distinction of the blessed place, for the faithful, or place of torment for
unbeleevers. In this sense these words are found, Psalm 89.48. What man lives
that shall not see death? This speech expresses, what becomes of every man's
body. It follows, Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of Sheol, or the
world unseene? Here it is expressled, that the soul of every man dying goes to
an other world: which is called Sheol, because (...) it requires all men to
come thither; and called Hades, because it is a place (...), unseene unto us a
live. Seeing every man has an immortal soul, the necessity of human
condition requires that when the soul cease to give life to the body, it go
to the other world. And this is the common condition of all souls, both of the
godly and ungodly; all of them are said indifferently to go to Sheol, or Hades,
to the world unseene.

Now the nature of these words admits the like acception and sense, which other
general words have, when they comprehend places of better and worse condition.
As namely, when it is said, The Ambassadors were brought from Dover to London,
and the Pirates were brought from DOVER to LONDON, London is the place common
to both: the condition of the persons distinguishes of their lodging of the
honorable entertainment of the former, of the imprisonment of the later. So
though Sheol, Hades, Inferi denote the common lodge of all souls separate from
their bodies, yet the quality of the persons may and does intimate and
distinguish the estate of their joy or torment. When therefore it is said of a
good and faichfull soul, it is gone to Sheol, or Hades, the meaning is
according to the bare force of the word, that it is gone to the world unseene,
but by consequence it is employed, that it is gone to Heaven: because Heaven is
that part of the world unseene, which of Gods mercy in Christ is prepared for
believers. And when it is said of an unbeleevers soul, that it is gone to
Hades, or Sheol, the bare force of the words ^nferres no more, but that it is
gone to the world unseene: but by consequent it is employed, that it is gone to
Geheuna. That both the ancient Fathers and best approved foreign writers use
these words, as here I have explained them, the most learned Archbishop Usher
has out of the plentiful treasures of his observations excellently and
clearly demonstrated in his answer to the Jesuit.

Fourthly, When the person is put for the soul separated by death, so that the
person is said to go to Sheol, Hades, Inferos: those terms in their own
force signify no more, but the general place of all souls good and badde,
without distinction of their several and different Lot.

1. That the person is sometimes put for the soul, I prove by these
Scriptures, 2 Cor. 5.1. When our earthly house of this Tabernacle shall be
destr^yed, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands eternal in
the heavens. Here by [Wee] is to be understood [Our Soules] So Saint Augustine
using the like kind of expression says. The blessed poor are received into
Abraham's bosom, (as was Lazaru) after this life. That is their souls are
received into the same. Quaest. in Evang. lib. 2. And of the person of the
wicked it is said, 2 Peter 2.4. and 9. The Lord reserves the unjust, that is,
the souls of the unjust, unto the day of judgment, (as he does the Angels,
which fell) in chains of darkness. And Apoc. 14.11. It is said. The wicked
are tormented evermore before the Lamb: Namely their souls first, and after
the Resurrection, their souls and bodies both together endure that torment.
Thus it is evident, that the person is sometimes put for the soul separate
from the body.

Secondly, That the word Hades, and so Sheol, and Inferi, of like nature with
Hades signify in this kind of use, the place of souls both good and bad,
just and unjust, I thus show, Revel. 20.13. In speech of preparation for the
great and general judgment of the world, it is said, that death and Hades
gave up the dead, which were in them. Here the persons the dead are said to be
given up out of death and Hades, namely the dead that is, the bodies of the
dead are restored from death: and cl^ dead, that is the soul of the dead do
come from Hades, the world unseene. Theophylact on 1 Cor. 15. Thus understood
death and Hades, where he says. Jufernus or the world unseene, has possession
of the souls separated, death of the bodies.

The speech of our Lords body and soul in the Creed may hence in great part
be cleared, and made manifest. For when we say Christ was buried, that is
affirmed of the person which is properly spoken of one part of him, namely his
body. And when it is said, Christ went to Hade^, that is affirmed of the
person, which is properly spoken of the Soul.

And thus commonly the condition of body and soul parted is expressed, and to
be understood, when the speech mentions the state of both. So that Hades and
Inferi express the general place, which receives all souls separated. And in
this regard Hilary on Psalm 138. says; That Christ's so^e was in Hades or apud
Inferos, quia consummationem very hominis non recusavit, to show that he was
^uly man: and the^e he adds this reason: It is the Law of humane necessity,
that when the body of any man is dead, the soul should go to Hades, or ad
Inferos, to the world unseene. And hence it is that Hades is frequently
mentioned, as the common lodge of all men. (...).

All mortal men go to Hades. And again (...). Epig. Graec. B. 3.6. Hades is
the common Haven receiving all men, that is, all men's souls. Hence it is, that
there it is said of many persons burnt in one house: That their ashes could not
be distinguish to be put in several urnes by men: yet Hades could easily
distinguish them in their ashes: The meaning is, that notwithstanding their
ashes were confounded, yet their souls went to and were distinct in Hades, or
the other world. Thus then the persons are sometimes put for the souls: and
Hades, Sheol, Inferi, express the general place receiving all souls separate
from their bodies.

My Answer then to the Question is.
SEeing 1. Some things are spoken properly of the person of Jesus Christ in the
Creed, viz. That he suffered under Pontius Pilate and was crucified. 2. Some
things spoken of his person, but to be understood of his body, viz. That he
was dead and buried. 3. This spoken of his person, which is to be understood of
his soul, viz. That he went to Hades, or ad Inferos. 4. Seeing Hades, Sheol,
Inferi in their own proper force are put for the place receiving all souls in
general; and 5. seeing general words by particular circumstances of the
persons, whom they concern, may serve to express something in special more
then their own force will extend to in propriety: I Answer: That the Article He
descended ad Inferos in the proper force and meaning thereof expresses,

1. That Christ had an humane immortal soul.

2. That this soul, when the body was left dead, went to the world unseen, as
the souls of all men do. And thus much I hold to be sufficient for Answer to
the Question propounded.

3. I add, that some circumstances concerning Christ's person may extend the
force of the words in this Article to express in particular the distinct and
special place, whither Christ's soul went.

Now that all circumstances concerning Christ's person, which conduce to the
clearing of the point of Christ's soul going at his death either to Heaven or
Hell in special^, may be well weighed and considered, I propound a second
Question.

QVEST. 2.
What is the particular place to which Christ's soul went at his death on the
Cross, and from whence it came to his body at his Resurrection?

The 1. Ground for Answer to the Question.
THat this Question may be fully and clearly resolved I will consider some
text of Scripture, upon which a resolution of the doubts incident thereunto may
be grounded. And here first let us take notice of that speech of Christ to the
believing malefactor on the Cross. Luke 23.43. This day shale thou be with
me in Paradise. Here what manner of place Paradise is, Paul plainly expressed,
2. Cor. 12, 2.4. where he calls it the third Heaven. So that from these two
texts it appears, that both Christ's, and the repentant theifes souls were that
day in the third Heaven. If it be here objected, That the meaning may be.
Thou shall this day be with my Godhead in Paradise.

I Answer, that the very context requires, that the words be understood of
Christ's humane soul. For the believing malefactor considering himself in the
same condemnation with Christ, and his body to undergo the same death, which
Christ should suffer; confessed further, that he himself was justly punished
for his offenses: but that Christ was a man, who had done nothing amiss: and
thereupon besee^heth Christ to remember him, when he came into his kingdom.
By this it appears that the malefactor spoke of Christ, as man, and going to
his kingdom in the other world; though in this world he was ignominiously
entreated and cruclly put to death. And Christ in his Answer says to this
effect. I whom thou acknowledgest to be the Lord, and to die an innocent man,
go^ hence to my kingdom: and as thy body is here condemned to the same
disgraceful death with mine, and shall be crucified: so shall we both this
day be in blis^e together, in Paradise or Heaven together. I go to my father
and of my mercy will receive thee into my kingdom. The what is spoken of both
their persons is to be understood of their souls. We shall be in Paradise
together, is in ffect, our souls shall be in Paradise together. So in spee^
of ^ke kind, when Christ says: Could you not watch with me an bour? the sense
is, Could ye not watch (...) I do? And so, ye who continued with me in my
tentation, is ye who endured tentation^, as I endured them: or who were
as^cted with me in my tentations.

And not only the speech of Christ's coming into his kingdom, but these texts
also conclude, that Christ's words of his being in Paradise were spoken of his
humane soul. I go to him, who sent me. Ye shall seek me and shall no find
me. Ioh. 7 34. I go to prepare a place for you: I will come again and receive
you to my self. John. 14.3. And, I go away; and will come to you again If, you
loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go to my father. Ioh. 15.28. These
speeches (of going and coming) so often used can not be understood of Christ's
Deity, which is present every where: But necessarily must be understood of
Christ's humane soul, which went to his father and came to his body again, and
raised it to li^e: S^ that after his resurrection he came to them again. Thus
it appears, that Christ's speech with me in Paradise implies with my humane
soul in Heaven.

A second Ground from Scripture.
SEcondly let us observe, that Christ having 12. Disciples, who were witnesses
of ^ll things, which he did, or spoke or suffered until his death; after his
death upon Ju^ as his fall and perishing, Saint Peter Act. 1.22. says, that
another necessarily must be chosen and put in Judas his place, for to be a
witness which the other 13. Apostles concerning Christ's resurrection. From
this speech of Saint Peter I this argue. If the choice of a new Apostle was
necessary that he might be a witness with the other 11. then is was likewise
necessary, that there should be some witnesses of the condition and place in
which Christ's humane soul was after it was separated from his body and until
he rose again. Of this no living man could testify. Therefore it pleased God,
that at Christ's resurrection many of the dead bodies of the Saints should rise
again. Mat. 27.52. Whose souls coming to their bodies again by virtue of
conformity to Christ's soul coming to his body and raising it up to life, were
witnesses to Christ concerning the place and state, in which his soul was from
the time of his death, until their rising again with him. For other witnesses
we find none.

Their raising from death was an extra ordinary work of Gods power: now God
never works in a course extraordinary, but upon an extraordinary occasion and
I know no other extraordinary occasion, which can be alleged for their
raising from death with Christ: but their witnessing, whether his humane soul
went at his death, and whence it came at his resurrection to his body again.
Their very company does most fitly give testimony thereunto. For they were
Holy persons, therefore their souls came from the place, in which before
Christ's death the souls of the Saints departed rested from their labors. That
place is Abraham's bosom to Lazarus, Luc. 16.22. A better and heavenly country,
which the Patriarchs, who died in the true faith, sought; even a City
prepared by God. Heb. 11.6. That place is called Paradise to the beleiving
theif: and Paradise by Saint Paul 2. Cor. 12.2.4. is the third heaven. It is
also the house of God, in which are many mansions, and whither Christ went to
prepare or make assured a place for the Disciples, and to come again to them,
John. 14.2. and thence he came at his resurrection with the attendance of those
Saints rising with him.

Obj. If it be here objected, That we read not any words recorded, which these
Saints spoke concerning Christ, or any testimony given concerning the place,
whence he came, or otherwise.

Ans. I Answer, It Is most true; yet seeing they appeared to many in the Holy
City, as Christ also did, we may conceive that they conversed with and spoke
to the Saints then living: as Christ himself did after his rising again. In
this as in many other things the servants might be as their master, and
conformable to him. So that we may further conceive, that whatsoever they
spoke was doubtless holy and heavenly: yet it pleased not the spirit of God to
have it recorded: because we have a sufficiency of sacred doctrine in Moses,
the Prophets, the Evangelists, and Apostles writings, and ought to hear them.
For so the course here shall be consonant to that in the speech made to the
richman, Luc. 16.29. concerning his brethrens instruction. They have Moses and
the Prophets etc. If they will not believe them, neither will they believe
though one rise from the dead. Further suppose they spoke nothing, but in
general, as Paul did who was rapt up into the third keaven: VIZ. That they
came from Paradise or the third Heaven, and that the words there heard, the
glory there appearing, the bliss there enjoyed was exceeding great and
unutterable. This was not necessary to be recorded. Because 1. other Scriptures
mention and declare for our comfort Gods abundant mercy and goodness toward
us, in giving us in this life grace (...), which can not be unfolded, and joy
(...) unspeakable; and reserveth for us in heaven a treasure (...) that shall
nevenfaile: which Saint Paul expounding calls Such an eternal weight and
exceeding riches of Glory, that it is (...) not to be reached to by an
Hyperbole, and by other the like speeche^. From all which we may by the
ordinary ministry of men be taught out of the word written, to conceive so
much of Heavens bliss and the like, as God thinks fit here to acquaint (...)
with all, and what we are here capable of: If the world make us not backward
to listen thereunto and dull rightly to conceive thereof, as the Rich man's
speech to Abraham intimats that his brethren were.

Again the very appearance of the Saints, who rose again was a sufficient
witness, that Christ came to that Paradise or Heaven, where their souls had
bin, and brought them thence, that they might rise from death together with
him. This very work of Christ did witness of him: as else where in an other
case he said, John. 10.25. and 29. Nor is it unusual to draw conclusions from
Christ's works, as well as from his words. Omnis ejus actio est
nostrainstructio. And in this present occasion we may do well to believe,
both for his work, and for his companies sake.

Obj. If it be further objected, what need is there of witness in this kind?
was not the witness of the 12. Disciples sufficient for all things, which we
need to know?

Ans. I Answer. 1. Of all other passages from Christ's Baptism God provided them
to be witnesses: and seeing it was his will, that these Saints should rise
again, and in likely hood be witnesses, as I have showed, in that point, to
which no living man could give testimony, great reason it is, that we should
rest content, and accept of their witness, and not dispute against it. 2. It
appears that witness in this point was necessary. For seeing it is necessary
to understand a right what is meant by Christ's soul going to Hades or ad
Inferos (as is showed in the second Prosition,) and seeing the sacred Scripture
assures us that Christ's soul was in Hades or apud Inferos: and much dispute
there is and has bin in the world about the condition of the place, whether it
be Heaven or Hell: Surely if the Testimony of these Saints was not necessary,
yet it cannot be denied to be very expedient and useful. 3. Where as in the
Epistle to the Trallians among Ignat. Epist. it is asserted that Christ did
(...), really and indeed, and not in appearance: and things in Heaven, on
earth, and under the earth are brought in as witnesses thereof: the things in
Heaven are said to be the incorporeall natures (which must be the Angels, and
the souls of these Saints now spoken of:) things on earth were the Jews and
Romans, and all present at Christ's death: things under the earth are the bodies
of the dead Saints, who rose with him at his resurrection. Thus was their
testimony necessary for the truth of Christ's death and rising again. So that
the souls and bodies of these dead Saints coming to life again did show and
testify. 1. that as their death was un leniable and never questioned. So was
his death true, and ought not to be questioned. 2. As their resurrection from
death was most certain, so was his. And I will further 3. add (which I
conceive I well may) as their souls continuance in Paradise or Heaven from he
time of their death until their resurrection was undeniable, so was Christ's.
They were alike in the former, therefore in this point also.

The third Ground.
IN the third place from the consideration of Christ, as the Head of the
Church, and all true believers his members, let us see what is that Conformity
between him and them, which in many passages of Scripture is mentioned.
Concerning the point in hand, these conformities following are most
considerable.

In the very same manner as it was with Christ.
The Saints suffered many calamities in their life time. They denied
themselves, and took up their crosses. They died, their bodies were buried.
Their souls were commended into the hands of God. They enjoyed the Heavenly
country, which they sought, and the City prepared by God.


As Christ their Lord did.
The souls of some of them came from that Heavenly country, and were united to
their bodies again. They appeared in soul and body alive in Jerusalem.


Seeing the Conformity holds in other points we may well conceive and affirm,
that it holds also in this, that Christ's soul went to, and continued in
Ab^ahams bosom, or the Heavenly country until his resurrection. Besides in Act.
2. where is mention made of one prophesied of, whose soul was not left in
Hides or the world unseen, nor his body left to suffer corruption: it is
prooved that these words in the Ps^lm belong to Christ and not to 'David by
this only nonconformitie: viz. That Christ's body saw not corruption, as David's
did. There is not any dissimilitude mentioned concerning the state of their
souls. Whereas if the soul of David had gone to Heaven and Christ to
Gehennah, there had bin a nonconformity of a vast distance to distinguish
them, and an argument of good force to show, that the words in the Psalm
nothing at all concerned David.

Moreover unto Christ all true believers, since his death and Resurrection,
must be conformable. They endure many afflictions her in this life, they take
up their crosses patiently, they deny themselves, they die, their bodies are
buried, their souls go to Paradise: thence at the general resurrection their
souls return, and shall be reunited to their bodies: and being thus raised
from death, they both in body and soul shall ascend to Heaven. Thus it was
which Christ, and his members, in all these respects they are and must be
conformable unto him their head.

The 4. Ground.
FOurthly let us thoroughly weigh the admirable and manifest correspondence of
these things following:

1. Christ's soul went through the vail of his flesh, Heb. 10.20. for his flesh
was as a vail, and kept the eyes of men from seeing his glory, because he was
clad which the similitude of sinful flesh.

As the high Priest went through the vail of the Tabernacle, which separated
the Holy place from the Holiest, and kept the eyes of men from looking
thereunto.

2. Christ our high Priest having offered in this world his own blood, entered
into the Holy place, and thereby obtained eternal redemption for his people.
Heb. 9.12. and 24.

As the high Priest having offered the blood of Sacrifices in the worldly
Sanctuary entered alone into the Holiest place once a year for pardon of his
sins and the peoples.

3. Christ's soul going from his body has made a new and living way for all
believers souls to enter into the^ Holiest place, that is, Heaven, and not by
that old way of beasts slain. Heb. 10.20.

The renting of the vail showed that the old way unto the Holiest place was
taken away: and the way opened for entering into a greater and more perfect
Tabernacle not made with hands. He. 9.11 and 24.

4. Christ's soul came to his body, which slept in the grave: so that he rose
again to life, and became the first fruits of them, who slept and afterward in
soul and body ascended into Heaven.

So the souls of them, whose bodies yet sleep in the dust, shall at Christ's
coming again be joined to their bodies: so that then they shall rise from
death, and ascend as Christ the first fruits did.

Now if the Holy place and wordly Sanctuary, and the Priests sacriscing and the
performances therein typed, what Christ did for (...) in this world: and if the
Holy of Holies into which the Priest entered once a year was a type of Heaven,
as indeed it is Heb. 9.24. then the fullfilling of this type must be, that
Christ's soul (when his blood was shed, and his soul or life made an offering
for sin, Es. 53.10.) entered into the Heavens as is expressly said in Heb. 9.24
and as the correspondence of the particular matters above mentioned do imply.

The 5. Ground.
IN the fifth place I think it well worthy of our consideration, that seeing
Christ was crucified on the day of preparation to the Sabbath, and that his
body was put into the grave in the Evening afterward: and seeing that he rose
not again until the first day of the week in the morning; it is manifest that
his body rested in the grave, and perfectly kept the whole Jewish Sabbath; So
that neither the wicked Jews and Romans his enemies, nor the pious women, who
out of their love minded with sweet odours to embalme him, did interrupt the
rest of his body all that time.

This being the condition of Christ's body, and the Sabbath thus observed and
kept by it: what shall we think became of his soul, where kept it the
Sabbath, that it might observe a correspondence therein with the body? Shall
we not grant that it went to Paradise, to Heaven the lodge of the Saints?
where we expect to enjoy an everlasting Sabbath, Shall we not think, that as
the body of Christ in the grave, and as the souls of Gods servants departed,
in Heaven rest from their labors, Revel. 14. So Christ's soul in this place of
bliss rested from its labors. He was freed from conceiving grief at the hard
hearted ness^ of wicked men on earth: and now after his death should his soul
come to a place, where wretched and ungracious souls were tormented
irremediably for dying impenitent? Where Christ found people on earth
obstinatly unfaithful and ungodly, he abode not among them, but departed out
of their coasts: and shall we conceive that his soul after his death did go
to, and abide in the darksome lodgings of souls given up to disobedience and
rebellion, where he could do them no good. The Scripture has not revealed
any such thing, not a word of any promise tending that way.

Obj. Christ in his life time shunned no place, no people. He went to the
Publicans house, dined with him: he went to Samaria a wicked people, and often
conversed with sinners.

Ans. He did so indeed: and well might he so do: because he was an
extraordinary Physician, who could not be infected with the contagiousnesse of
any sinner. 2. Because he brought to them such precious balmes, so soveraig^e
medicines, that there with he often cured some of them. And be it so, that the
sins of them in Gehenna, damnable to themselves could in no wise touch or
affect him: Sure it is, that his most excellent medicines were not prepared for
any in their condition. For we read not that any actually in Gehenna were
redeemed thence by Christ.

Obj. B^t might not Christ notwithstanding go th^ther to triumph over the
damned spirits in Gehenna?

Ans. Had it bin Christ's pleasure to have triumphed over them: Surely as the
Lord from Heaven could laugh them to Scorn. Ps. 2. so might he show himself
from Heaven after a triumphing manner over them. And I conceive that his
laughing at the destruction of them who obstinately despised his counsel, and
would not be bettered by correction. Prove. 1.25.26. is a kind of triumphing
over them, if we may use the word [triumph] speaking of God after the manner
of men, as it pleases the Holy Ghost to use the phrase of [ laughing to Scorn
from Heaven.] Seeing the Richman in Gehennas torment may be conceived by us to
see Abraham and Lazarus in bliss: for the text relates it, Luc. 16. much more
may we conceive, how the damned spirits in their miserable condition may to
their horror see the glorious state of Christ triumphing in Heaven. So that
'cis no more necessary for Christ to go to Gehenna to triumph over the damned
souls there: then for a King who has vanquished rebels and imprisoned them
to come and abide some days triumphantly in the prison: which commonly is a
place too loathsome for him to come near.

Obj. But some will farther say. Where ever Christ's soul was, though in
Gehenna, it might and would observe an Holy Sabbath: no external matter could
molest or disquiet it: no hellish representation of torture or hideous noise of
the damned, no anguish of theirs could break off or interrupt its Sabbath and
rest.

Ans. Be it so. Yet we must know that the Jews for the observation of their
Sabbath did not only every man in himself enjoy a sacred retirement from
outward and wordly affairs, and contemplated in his private thoughts on
Heavenly matters: but did join also with many others, a public congregation in
their Synagogues called houses of God: where with one accord they praised God.
Now whether something answerable to this, was to be done by Christ's soul in
Gehenna, or amidst the Quire of Saints and Angels in Heaven, let any man judge.

The Judgment of some worthy and learned writers about these points.
PReg^an^ evid^nces of Scriptures, and next to them sound deductions the ce are
of greatest validity to settle divine Truth: the judgments o^ pious, learned
and long exp^rienced divin^s, though they be of much infertour author^ty to
the forme^, yet have their use, and are nor to be neglected: ^spec^a^ly where
their (...) and abili^es served to clear texts obscure, or liable to^on
rov^rsie. Give me leave the fore for the fuller opening o^ this present poin^
to produce the judgments of some later divines, who since the ^eviving of
sacred knowle^ge have attained much skill in the (...), and become diligent and
se^ious Searche^s into the ^xt indicted by the holy Ghost, and by their (...)
afforded much light to the discussion of the business now (...) hand.

1. Henry Bullinger in his Decads, where he wries on this Article, says to
this estect. By Infers in the Creed we understand not the place of ^erment
d^stinated to the wicked, but the godly departed out of this life: as by Superi
we understand them, who are ye^ alive. And therefore the soul of Christ
descended a^ Inferos, that is, was carried into Abraha^s besom, in which were
gathered together all believers deceased. Therefore when Christ said to the
malefactor, the believing thief crucified with him: This day shall thou be
with ^ee in Paradise, he promised him society with himself, and the blessed
spirits in life eternal. And where as Christ is said to descend, that is only
from the custom of that tongue or speech. We further confess in this Article,
that souls are immortal, and presently pass to life, when the body dies.
This I have read cited for the judgment of the Zurich divines. If they concur
herein: then it is of so much the more weight, as a whole Churches consent out
weighs the determination of one particular Treacher. That Juferi are taken
for the dead, Superi for the living the speech of Maxim. Taurinus De sep^lt.
Domini, Hons.3. shows, Quid quar^ apud Inferes, quem re^iisse jam constat ad
Superes? why seek thou him among the dead (this with reference to the body,
which the soul left and went unto the world unseen) who is well known to be
now among the living. And Macrobius (a judge for Latin words not incompeten^)
speaks to the same purpose. Nos defunctis Superi habemur: we here living are
called Superi in regard of them, who are gone to another world. In So^n. Scip.
1.3. And they by the opposition of the words are called Jnferi. This is the
custom of speech which H. Bullinger mentions.

2. Bishop Bilson a very learned man and much versed in this point was overcome
by the force of truth, and in some sort yielded the cause against himself. For
though he held that Christ's soul did descend ad locum damnatorum, yet he
expressy says, We have no warrant in the word of God so to fasten Christ's
soul to Hell (that is to Gehenna) that it might not be in Paradise, before it
descended to Hell: and he first show himself to the Saints to their
unspeakable comfort, before he went to subject the powers of darkness under
his yoke. Sermon. page.219. Upon this his grant, I infer. Seeing he yields that
according to the Scripture, Christ's soul went at his death to Heaven. 1. the
Scripture never mentions, nay has not one title to prove, that his soul went
from Heaven to Gehenna. 2. If it were first in Paradise, and came with the
souls of the Saints thence at his resurrection (as there is little reason to
hold the contrary) why should we not think, that it continued in Paradise from
its access thither, until its coming thence with the souls of the Saints,
who rose with Christ. 3. If Christ's soul went first to Paradise; and there
showed it self to the Saints great comfort: it might in Heaven also show it
self to the spirits in torment to their utter confusion. So Abraham (as I said
before) appeared in the place of happiness to Lazarus his comfort: and yet was
seen by the Rich man to his utter despair of remedy. And indeed Christ's
appearance in Heaven in the sight of the damned spirits in Hell might, though
himself uttered no words at all, intimate to them, somewhat like to that in
the parable expressed, as spoken by Abraham. Remember that ye in your life
time received pleasures, and on the contrary the Godly, as did Lazarus, evil
things: but now they are comforted and ye are tormented.

3. Master H. Broughton a man very skillful of the sacred Original, and an
earnest and studious searcher into passages of Scripture and other writers
making for the clearing of this point, says. Hades is the general word
expressing the place of all kind of souls, and by different circumstances is
sometimes Heaven, sometimes Hell. Reply page.37. Andagain, Sheol comes 64 times
in the Holy tongue; Hell as often in our old Translation, and never directly for
Gehenna, but as by the Argument may be concluded: and so it may be Heaven in
speech of the Godly. Neither should Hell in the Creed [expressing Haden and
Inferos] mean any thing else but the world to come, the world of souls.
Likewise, Hell comes 9. times for Hades in the New Testament, but never in all
these places, does it signify Gehenna. Thus 73. times in a gener all meaning
of separation from the world, and such lot, as the matter (where you find it)
follows, it comes in both Testaments. Explic. of the Article, page 3. That
he might show his Judgment to be sound and orthodox in this point, he, in
the book last quoted, has diligently expounded most of the Scriptures, where
these terms are found: and brought many speeches of foreign writers, that the
true acceptance of the word Hades might the better be understood.

4. Master J. Casaubon on Greg. Nyssen. Epist. ad Eustat. etc. Not. 116. says,
They who think Hades is properly the seat of the damned, be no less deceived,
then they who when they read Inferos in Latin writers, do interpret it of the
same place, namely Gehenna. Here is plainly intimated by this worthy My^tes of
sac^ed and humane learning that he judged Haden and Inferos to denote proper^y
the common state of all dead, and improperly only and oy consequence the place
of the damned. In which regard a so they may sig^e the lodge of the blessed. And
hence I conceive it is, that Luke 16 22. the Rich man is said to be in Hade or
apud Inferos in Hell in torment. If Had^s properly and of its own force had
signified G^h^nna, Hell, be words in torment might have bin omitted.

5. Archbishop Usher in his above cited T^eatise full fraught with diligent
reading and judicious observations out of all kind of good litterature, so that
it contains, what soever in the Treasury of learned Antiquity may conduce to
the right understanding of the terms here questioned, concludes. 1. That
Christ's dead body, though free from corruption, yet did descend into (the
grave) the place of corruption. 2. That Christ's soul being separated from his
body departed hence to the other world or world unseen, as all other men's
souls in that case use to do. So that hereby is asserted, that Hades
signifies the other would or world unseen, whither other men's souls go,
without any distinction in the word it self of their joy or misery. 3. That
Christ went to the dead and remained for a time in the state of death, as other
dead men aoe.

These assertions in the fornamed book page.37.go as far as is necessary for
the point in controversy between my Lord and the lesuit. Elsewhere (page.353) it
is further averred: That it had bin sufficiently declared out of good Authors,
that Hades signifies the place of souls departed in gener all: and so is of
extent large enough to comprehend under it, as well (...), that part of Hades
(or the world unseen) which is in Heaven, as that, which is by Josephus called
(...) the darker Hades, and in the Gospel (...) outer darkness. And page 376.
it is on very good ground concluded, that seeing the Rule of faith, common to
great and small ones in the Church (as is fit) should contain such verities
only as are generally agreed upon by common consent of all true Christians,
Christ descending to Hades may have this meaning in gener all; that he went to
the dead, and continued in the state of death, until the time of his
resurrection: and further that the particular determination of the place of
bliss or of torment, or of both may be left, as a number of other
Theological points are, unto further disputation. Thus this most learned
Bi^hop in a right Christian moderation, and pious study of the Churches peace
gives his judgment concerning the article, and permits further disquisition
concerning the particular part of Hades, whither Christ's soul went. (...) any
passages out of learned Authors are in that Treatise cited mon judiciously:
and may serve very pertinently to show their opinion to be, that Christ's soul
went at his death to Paradise, to Heaven, to the place, where the souls of the
Saints were. So that not my self only, but even all who are studious to find
the truth in this controve^sy shall stand highly engaged to this most reverend
and learned Bishop (as for many other) to for that his most learned and exact
producement.

Now then I might call in hither the authorities of some, of those learned
writers, and much in large this Treatise but having taken in hand (as may well
be permitted) to make further disquisition into the point, my course has bin,
though I have thought good to cite the learned pains of the Judicious late
writers above, a few of many; yet especially to stand upon, and maintain the
point from sacred Scriptures, and deductions grounded thereupon. These I shall
still hold unto and rest upon, because they have fully satisfied my self: and
having clearly and briefly propounded them, they may, I hope, prevail with
others, who read without prejudice, and judge without partiality. So I proceed
from these grounds of my answer to a punctual and distinct answer to the
second Question.

The second Question answered, and some Objections against the Answer resolved.
IT has bin showed above that Hades, Sheol, Inferi of their own force express
no more, but in general that Christ's soul went to the other world, or world
unseen: and further that if general terms serve to express something more
particular (as general terms very often do) circumstances considerable about
Christ's person, and places of Scripture touching thereupon must enforce the
same. Now I having declared the circumstances of chief weight and moment in
this point, and in the several chapters above having considered the Scriptures
on which the knowledge of those circumstances depend, I thus answer the 2d.
Question.

1. That Christ's soul at his death commended into the hands of his father,
went to Paradise or Heaven, typed by the Sanctum Sanctorum: into which Paradise
or Heaven the believing malefactors soul, and the souls of all the then dead
Saints were carried, and into which all believers souls now and hereafter go
at their deaths.

2. That Christ's soul going from the cross to Heaven, did in Heaven amidst
the blessed and holy assembly of the Saints keep an holy Sabbath is his body
did rest in his grave until his resurrection, and that his soul came from
Heaven to his body on the third day, as the souls of the dead Saints, which
rose with him at his resurrection, did to their bodies, and as all believers
souls shall at the general resurrection.

Obj. Against this Answer some man will perhaps object. Be it granted that
Christ's soul went to Paradise: yet some passages of the ancient Fathers make
Paradise a different place from Heaven and shut up the soule^ of the Saints,
whilst their bodies lie in the dust, in refriger^o, in a place of refreshing,
and not of perfect blisle. Whence some conceive it to be said, that they are
under the Altar, and cry. How long Lord holy and true! do thou not avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth?

Ans. I Answer, 1. The souls of the Godly enjoy the blessedness, which they
are capable of during the time of their separation from their bodies. The want
which any one has conceived so to diminish their bliss, that is is not full
and perfect, can be no other, then that which proceeds from their bodies still
lying in the dust. Whence their blood spilt (in which once was the life and
soul. L^v 17.14.)cries, as did Abels, for Gods justice on their persecutours.
2. In the old Testament the happ^nesle of the godly is expressed by Gods
countenance shining on them; the misery of the wicked by Gods setting his face
against them, ps. 67.1 ps. 34.15.16. Numb. 6.25. Lev. 20.3. The one of these is
cause of all happines^e, the other of all misery both in this life and that to
come. They under the Law rejoiced in the one with great content, and strove
with all earnestnesl^ to avoid the other. In the new Testament for
distinguishing the contrary lots of godly or wicked souls after death, God
uses the terms O^ranos heaven, and Tartar^ hell, well known to heathens: and
Paradise and Gehenna the usual terms of the Jews, and best fitting their
vein. By these terms are the 2. opposite estates of all souls let forth
whether godly or wicked: nor is there any third distinct lot mentioned: and in
this plain evidence of Scripture we rest. 3. The time (...) refrigerij of
cooling or refreshing is before the face of the Lord, Act. 3.19. So that the
soul enjoyes the light of Gods countenance, and Gods face shines upon it, as
this matter was phrased in the old Testament. And where atta^neth the soul
separated this bliss but in heaven often mentioned in the New Testament? And
as the soul in heaven, so the body laid down in the dust is freed both from
the fiery darts of the dive^ and from the hot persecutions of the wicked. 4.
Seeing the godly in regard of their regenerate part are said to have their
conversation in heaven, whilst here they live: much more are their souls
fitted for heaven, and there have their conversation with Christ, which Paul
held to be best of all for himself, Phil. 1.23. when their bodies lie in the
earth expecting their purging and rehning, and raising up to glory.

Ob. It is said that Christ did (...) to Hades, that is, go down ad Inferos:
for so the word signifies. Therefore by his going down is rather expressed,
that his soul went to Hell, then to Heaven, which is upward.

Ans. The Divines of Zurick tell us (as above) that this is but the thras^ and
usual speech of the tongue, in which the word (...), signi^es a going from one
place to another, without any respect to upward or downward. This is clearly to
be seen by the often use of the word in the Acts of the Apostles: So that the
exposition of the word may be, that Christ (went) and not (descended) to
Hades. Besides though (...) and descendo and so Iarad the Hebrew word in speech
of going from an hill, do signify to go down, as Exodus 19.14. and 25. yet
often they signify a passage from one country to another as from Canaan to
Egypt. Genesis 42.2.3. and 44.23.26. Deuteronomy. 10.22. Or a going to war, whether
upward or downward. Iud. 1.9.1. Sam. 26.10. Hence it is that Jarad is sometimes
translated by (...) to ascend. As namely Jonas is said by the 70 Ion. 13. (...)
to go up into the ship, or to take ship: which action Ps. 107.23. is termed a
going down to the Sea in ships. Again whereas Ruth is said by the 70 to go up
to the floor of Boaz Ruth 3.3. she is said in verse. 6. (...) to go down to
the same floor. Again it is said that Sampson and his father Iaredu went down to
Timnah, Judge. 14. yet it is said that the Philistines came up to Timnah to
Sampsons father in Laws house Judge. 15.6. Thus it is manifest, that the word
signifies any passage from one place to another. This is further cleared by
Judge. 15. where it is said, that Sampson dwelt on the top of the rock Etam: and
that 3000. men of Indah Iar^du (...) went up (it must be so by consequence) to
him on the top of the Rock, verse. 11. and in the next verse laradnu (...) we
are come up (for he was on the hill) to bind thee. Thus Iarad and (...) in the
70. by consequence signify to ascend. Wherefore (...) in the Creed may truly
and without violence to the words be expounded, he went, and may be consequence
import, that the soul of Christ ascended: because the Gospel says, that his
soul went from the Cross to Paradise or Heaven.

Obj If the A^ticle, He descended into Hell express no more but Christ's going
to the world unseen, and if that part of the world unseen be Heaven according
to the New Testament. How could the Creed possibly be Englished, He went to
Hell and an opinion be so long held by many, that he went to Gehenna?

Ans. 1. The English term (Hell) comes from the words to Hill, or to Hell, and
these words anciently, and at this day in some countries in England signify to
Cover. For to Hell or Hell the head is to cover it. Thus Hell according to its old
and original signification rightly expresles Hades, and imports the world
unseen, hid, and covered to us. 2. Our ancientest translations of the Bible did
usually put Hell for Sheol and Hades. Now seeing translations are to be examined
and judged of by the tongue original, the word Hell must have the same
signification, that Sheol and Hades have, and so express the world unseen: and
may be consequence (as do the original words) signify (...) Hades which is in
Heaven, as Damascius called it. 3. If the word Hell come from Sheol by losing S.
which as easily it may do, as Cachinnus of Shekok laughter, and a Bat and
Battoun from Shebet a staff, and a Boat lose C. and its vowel, and yet come
from (...): then much the rather may Hell have the signification of Sheol and
Hades. See further my Lord Primats judicious answer to this point: page 287. of
his B. And 4. because Hades in the Creed was in Latin translated by the word
Inferi, and Inferi conceived properly to express Hell or Gehenna by some, who
were not masters of that tongue, or were misled by the darkness of their times:
though indeed it does not so, as the learned I Casaubon above: Hence in some
part grew the misprision.

Obj. But is it possible that words should be so misconceived and the largnesse
of their signification restrained by misprision?

Ans. It Is not unusual, nor has it only happened to Hades and Inferi, but to
many other words; that from a general signification, 1. custom of speech has
made them (like the conclusion following the worse part) to be commonly taken
in the worse sense: and then 2. ignorance of the rarer signification of words
in their primitive and remote sense, has sealed up and confirmed the error.
So Hostis of old signified any stranger, afterward when some strangers proved
enemies, it came to signify an enemy. And had not Tully and some ancient
writers reserved notice for us, that once it signified a stranger: from the
custom of its use in later writers, it would be concluded to signify only an
enemy. The word (knave) of old signified any man servant or attendant good or
bad: I. Stowe, and R. Versteg. Now the custom of our speech has attributed it
only to an ill conditioned Rascal. So that the old general signification of
the word is wholly unknownto our common people. The like has befallen Hades,
Sheol, Inferi: their general signification of the world unseen, has by
ignorance overspreading former times, and by neglect of knowledge of tongs, bin
much forgot, and suffered them to be usually understood in the worse part, as
if they always denoted the place of the damned. But now these mists and fogges
of error are by Gods goodness dispelled, and the right meaning and sense of
these words cleared and justified by the attestation of Scripture, and the
ancient Fathers both the Greek and Latin.

Thus have I answered the Objections against the going of Christ's soul from
his body on the cross to Heaven.

Now further it will be more easily granted that his soul went to the
mansions of bliss; if it be well considered that Hades in the Macedonian
Dialect does signify usually Heaven. For seeing the Macedonian victories made
the Greek tongue well known through a larg circuit of the world, their
acceptance of this word, which God pleased to make use of in the New
Testament, must doubtless be of good esteem, and weight with the judicious.
Now in what sense they used the term Hades appears in the King of Spaines great
Bible published by Arias Montanus a learned and judicious linguist. In the
Greek and Latin Dictionary belonging to this Bible it is said. Hade Macedones
vocant calum. The Macedonians call Heaven Hade. And Ieronymus Meg^serus (a man
famous for his skill in many tongs) in his Thesauro Polygl^sto puts Hade for
Heaven in the Macedonian tongue. And in his book of the Lords prayer in 50.
languages in the Macedonian tongue it runs thus. Our Father, which are in Hade.
Thus as the use of Hades in the common Greek Dialect maks not against nor
disproves, so in the Macedonian Dialect it makes for and confirms my Answer to
the second Question.

And now having endeavored as briefly and perspicuously,as I could, to discover
the truth of the chief points, which concern the subject undertaken, I humbly
submit, all that I have said to the judgment of the learned and judicious: who
for their skill are able, and for their study of the Truth will be ready to try
and scan each particular here delivered, and approve and hold all that is sound
and warrantable. In which disquisition and trial, I beseech the God of Truth to
direct them for his own glory, the honor of Christ our Savior, the prevention
of offense to the Jews, and the settling of peace in the Christian Church
about these points.

FINIS.
ERRATA, Page ^. lin. 6. grave were united -- rose again from the dead. page
4.1.38. consequence. p. 6.1 13. distinguished p. 7. l ^ texts p. 8. 1. 25.
witness with. p. 10.1.^. one Hyperb. and 1.33. Christ died. p. 12.1.16. clad
with.


