A SERMON PREACHED AT HIEWORTH At the Funeral of EDMUND WARNEFORD Esquire.

By THOMAS HAUSKINS Minister of Gods Word.

On the 24. of August. 1649.

OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL. An. Dom. 165^.

A PRAYER.
O LORD be gracious unto thine Handmaid and her little ones, whom by thy
sudden stroke thou have made fatherless and widow, In the sense and
Conscience of that Christian duty which as members of the same Body we do owe
one to another, we do desire to grieve with and for them, and in testimony
thereof in their behalf to pray, saying: O Blessed Lord God, as thou have
sadly humbled thy Handmaid in her outward Condition, so do thou truly and
savingly humble her in her Soul for Sin, which is the moritorious cause of all
the evils and sufferings which the Sons and Daughters of Adam do feel or
fear: and let her so weep for the one, as not weeping for the other Blessed is
the man, and thrice blessed is the woman whom thou chastnest, and whom together
with the outward chastisement thou do thus humble and teach them out of thy
Law. And forasmuch as thou have promised that all things shall work together
for good to those that love God: O Lord do thou shed abroad thy Love, and the
love of Thee into her heart, whereby she may be made capable of the good
therein promised unto thy servants. and then do thou make a gracious
performance and accomplishment of the same: O let this sore and sharp loss and
cross be so overruled and sanctified by theee, as that it may some way or
other, yea every way turn to her spiritual good and gain. It is good for me,
says David, to draw near to thee; it is good may she say, and we say for her
and us all, to draw farther off, as from the Cares, so from the comforts of
this world, and to draw near, even near and nearer both in our affection and
in our conversation to thee. O let this heart-piercing affiction drive and draw
thy servant near unto thee, nearer and nearer in the fear of thee, faith in
thee, love toward thee, communion with thee, obedience to thee, and dependence
upon thee. In these ways, and by these means, do thou first of all fit her,
and then do thou bestow upon her both inward and outward consolations. Let her
so weep as. if she wept not, so weep for the loss of one comfort, as one that
has not lost cither all, or the maine of comfort. Let her so weep as not to
murmr and repine at the dealing of thee the only wise God, and Sovereign
Lord of all, but still let her in faith and patience possess thee and her
self, let her so weep for the loss of a Creature-comfort in a loving
husbandas, rejoicing that she has him the way of believing, and obeying shall
ever have a faithful Creator and a most loving Savior. Thou who art the
Comforter of those who are cast down, do thou both counsel and comfort her in
this tribulation. Let her be able to do all things, and to suffer all things,
through a Christ strengthening her. Let thy directing, assisting, comforting,
supporting grace, be sufficient for her in and against her own weakness, and
against the strength of all adverse temptations.

Lord be thou a Father of all mercies and blessings to the Children, who by
this sad hand of Divine providence are become fatherless. O thou just and
righteous God, what shall we who are Parents in our Confessions say unto thee,
but this, to wit, that there is sin enough in the best of Parents, for which
thou might if thou would in thy just displeasure curse them, as well in
the fruit of their Loins, as of their Labors; in which regard it is the
humble and earnest desire of every knowing and devout. Parent, that for Christ
his sake (who did bear the Cross and the Curse) thou would take away the
curse, which is not only due to them in their own persons, but which is
moreover due to theirs for their sake: and this as we hope, was the desire of
the Parent here, when he was alive. In prosecution of which his desire, he
being now departed, and immediately to be laid in dust, we humbly pray thee,
that the good which was in him, may live and dwell, may thrive and grow in his
children. But as for the evil which was in him. Oh let it be through the power
of thy preventing grace declined by them and through pardoning grace let it not
be imputed to them, or visited upon them. Provide for their education in the
knowledge, and faith, and fear of thee, the only true God, and of Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. Yea as the shall grown in years so let them grown
in all grace, and in special in the Love of thee, and under thee in mutual
love and helpfulnesse each to the other. Now they are forsaken by the father of
their flesh, let is appear that they are taken up and owned of thee the
everlasting Father, and Father of their spirits. Let what is wanting to them be
by a good and just hand of Providence in due time supplied, and let what they
have be in the mean time, and always by a blessing sanctified: whatsoever
they have, or whatsoever they want, let them not want a portion of grace from
the here, and a portion of glory with thee hereafter.

AMEN.
1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. But this I say brethren, them time is short. I remains,
that both they that have wives, be a if they had none: And they that weep, as
though they wept not and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not; and
they that buy as though they possessed not: And they that use this world, as
not abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away.
I Shall begin my Sermon with the very words of my text, saying, Brethren, the
time is short, the time I mean for my present discourse is sort. for custom,
you know, consines me to an hour) It remains therefore, that (as persons who
are strainted for want of time) I make so much the more have, not spending one
minute of this short time in any impertinent, needless, or complementall
circumstances. And for that cause as well as others, I shall altogether
forbear whether in the beginning, or ending of my Sermon, to speak in the way
of such praises and commendations, which any of you do know, or may think to
be due unto the dead, and instead thereof I shall wholly and solely apply my
self unto the end, for which I was requested hither, and that is, To minister
a word in season for the edification of the living, such instructions in
special as are either expressed in, or may be deduced from the words, which I
have read unto you.

I shall with a very quick dispatch as in one, or two minutes pass through the
context to the text and then forward. As for the context then, this only I
shall say, to wit, That the Apostle in the beginning of this chapter does
resolve certain Queries, or cases propounded to him by the believing Corinths
concerning marriage and divorce, and from thence he proceeds in the progressee
of the chapter to give counsel and advice to Masters and Servants: what his
resolves, caveats, and decisions were in the several cases propounded, I shall
refer you (as Christ did the young man in another case Luke. 10.26.) to what
you find written and recorded in the chapter it self, which you may read at
your leisure. Now in the close of these decisions the Apostle says down and
asserts a known truth, the knowledge and use whereof being of universal
concernment, he does therefore direct and exhort all persons of all sorts, both
married and unmarryed, rich and poor, bond and free, accordingly to improve
it, and this he does in the words which I have read unto you; in which words
we have two things considerable, 1. The preface or introduction (But this I
say brethren) 2. The substance or maine matter, and that consists in the whole,
which follows.

The preface or preamble is in these words ( this I say, or, this I affirm, or
openly avouch) To insist largely upon this preface were to make a business of
a by-matter, and to rest, or sit down in the porch, which was built, for a more
sigtly and convenient entrance into the House; and therefore I shall lightly
pass it over, only by telling you, that the scope and end of such preambles,
or introductions, is to beget the more diligent, and exquisite attention; as if
the Apostle, had here said, what was usual with Christ to speak in his
Sermons, and what is frequently said by the Spirit, to the Churches of Asia,
He, that has an ear to hear, let him hear. And let this be the use, which I
shall entreat you to make of this preface, let it awaken and quicken your
attention; upon the hearing of these words from the mouth of Saint Paul (This I
say, brethreen) I shall desire you to be as erect, as attent, as intent, as was
Samuel upon the calling, and recalling of his name, saying, speak brother,
speak Paul, speak Lord, and speak to both ears; for with both ears thy
servant hears.

And let so much suffice to be spoken, as in passage to the substance, or
matter of the words, in which are three things considerable, first a doctrine,
or an assertion (The time is short) secondly the use and application of that
doctrine, (It remains, that both they that have Wives, be as if they had
none; And etc.

Thirdly a motive, or argument to enforce, or set on the said several uses of
the doctrine ( For the fashion of this world passes away) The word translated
[fashion] is emphaticall, and signifies the visage, outside, accidental
external figure of a thing without real substance, as if all the things in the
world were but a mere surface, a vain and empty outside, and the word
translated [passeth away] signifies likewise to cozen, or subtily to deceive,
so that if the words had bin thus rendered, The visage of the world deceives,
the translation had been sufficiently suitable to the original and very
agreeable to the truth, and very profitable to edification, it being as well
true, that the world does deceive us, as that the world does vanish and pass
away; and which of these two translations is more agreeable to the context, and
to the mind of the Apostle in this place, seems to me very hard to determine,
especially if we consider all circumstances, which I cannot now stand to
mention, and much less to debate. Let it be sufficient to tell, you, that the
world does soon vanish and pass away, and by its sudden vanishing and passing
away, it does usual cozen and deceive us, and therefore we should So weep and
so rejoice, as if we did not weep and rejoice.

There are in deed according to diversities of copies, some different readings
of the words; but because the differences are very small, to wit, about the
placeing and pointing of the words, which will not vary the sense, I will not
therefore, spend any scruple of this short time in the mentioning, or relating
of differences so inconsiderable, but will comeforthwith to the doctrine of the
text, set down in these words, [The time is short]

The word translated [short] does properly signify Contracted, it being a
Metaphor (as say the learned in that language) taken from Sailors, who when
they draw nigh the shore, use to contract, or role up their sails: or, from a
piece of cloth rolled up into a little compass, only a scantling l^f^ at the
end, so that the word according to its significancy might thus be rendered, The
time is curt or curtaild: and to signify how curt the time is, the Apostle does
curtaile, or cut short his speech: for the verb is not expressed in the
original (wherein we only read, the Substantive and Adjective without the
Copulative, (Time short) but is left to be understood; and it is as if Saint
Paul had more fully told us, That our time is reduced or brought into a a very
narrow conmpasse, we having but a short remnant, or scantling of time. The
doctrine is (as you plainly perceive) like the time, very short. If you desire
to have it enlarged, I shall thus deliver it with reference to the context in
the following words, to wit, Whatsoever our state, relation, or condition be in
this world, whether we be married, or unmarried, rich, or poor, bond, or free,
the time with all of us is but short.

This doctrine is a truth so unquestionable, that any one without breach of
modesty, may boldly avouch it in the very phrase of the Apostie, saying, This I
say, the time is short: and for bare conviction, it is enough to say it,
without offer of any farther proof: But because it is both usual and useful,
especially for the making of a due impression upon the affections, not to pass
over plain, and confessed truths without some proofs and illustrations from
Scripture, I will therefore (not so much to convince, as to affect you)
demonstrate, and illustrate the truth here asserted, by declaring in what
respects Saint Paul does here avouch the time to be short; for which purpose
know you, that Saint Paul affirms the time to be short in two respects, first
in respect of the near approach of Christ's coming to judgment. Secondly in
respect of the near approach of death; I The time is short betwixt, and the
coming of Christ to judgment. There is reason to conceive, that this is a prime
part of the Apostles meaning in the text: for besides that it is the judgment
of some learned Interpreters, that Saint Paul does immediately aim at this,
let is be farther considered, that it is ordinary with the Apostles to press
Christians to duty with arguments taken from the propinquity of Christ's second
coming; for which, see Phil. 4.5.1. Pet. 4.7. Now if this be the meaning of the
Apostle in saying, that the time is short, to wit, That Christ will ere long
come to judgment, the following Scriptures, for the confirmation thereof may be
alleged phil. 4.5.1. Pet. 4. 7. lam. 5.8. Rev. 22, 20. There we read, that The
Lords coming draws nigh, is at hand, that the end of all things is at hand,
that Christ will come quickly etc.

If it be objected, that the Saints are ready to think and complain, that it
is long ere Christ will in this sort come Rev. 6.10. and that they do
frequently say in respect of Christ's coming to them in glory, as David sates in
respect of Gods coming to him in grace, Psalm. 101.2. Lord when will thou come
unto me. I answer, that the time betwixt, and Christ's coming to judgment
(however in some respects long) yet may it be said to be short in the following
respects.

First in respect of Gods account, to whom a thousand years are but as one day
2 Pet. 3.8. As God sees not, as man sees, so he reckons not as man reckons.
Esa. 55.8.

Secondly in respect of the time already past, and in special, in respect of
the time since that his coming was prophesied of: for his second coming was
prophesied of by Enoch the seventh from Adam, many thousand yeras ago Jud.
5.14. and in regard hereof our time now is said to be the the last time, and we
are said to be the people, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Job.
2.18. 1 Cor. 10.11.

Thirdly, in respect of time to come, if I may so speak, and call that time,
after which time shall be no more: but I mean, that in respect of eternity
succeeding Christ's second coming the time betwixt and that is but short for
suppose it were an 100 or a 1000 years before Christ shall come to judgment,
yet what is that to eternity; it is no more to eternity then a drop of a bucket
to the whole Ocean, or then the dust of a balance to the vast mountains; it
is no more then a finite thing to what is infinite.

Other considerations might be named, with regard whereunto Christ's coming to
judgment may be said to be near at hand; but I shall pass them over and come
to prove the second particular, to wit,

Secondly, That the time is short in respect of the near approach of every
ones death. This is another thing, which the Apostle aims at, in saying, that,
the time is short; he would give us thereby to understand, that we have but a
short while to live; and for proof thereof, view the following Scriptures, Job
14. 1. and 16.22. Psalm, 89.47. and 39.12. Heb. 13.14. wherein it is said, That
we are of few days, that we have here no continuing city, that we are
Pilgrims and Strangers etc.

Before I make application, I shall make answer to the following question, to
wit, how short is our time. Should we hear such a question undertaken to be
answered out of the pulpit, we might perhaps at the first hearing of it
imagine, that the party so undertaking did intend to cast a figure, and to tell
fortune (as we call it) but if you will carefully attend to the three following
answers, which I shall make thereunto, I doubt not, but that you will judge it
to be a Question not unfit, for the most serious and sober Divine to resolve.
To the question then I answer,

First, that to speak within some latitude, and compass of time, or in
general wise, it may well be known how short our time is in this sort, I say
the shortneste of our time may be known by those various Metaphors,
similitudes or comparisons, wherewith in the following Scriptures, man, his
life and days are set forth in the word of God. Job. 7.6, 7. and 9.25, 26.
Psalm. 38.39. and 103.15, 16. 144, 4. lam 4.14. Psalm. 102.3. There we read, that
man, his life and days are resembled to a wind, smoke, vapor, grass,
aflower etc. Especially I shall mention Psalm. 39.5. because that scripture
comes very near to the Metaphor, which Paul uses in the text; there we see,
That God has rolled up our time so close and near together, that there is but
the scantling of an handbredth lest unto us.

Secondly, to speak punctually, to a point or moment of time, there is no man
able to say; how short the time is, whether in respect of Christ's, second
coming, or in respect of his own death.

First, None knows the punctual time, day, or hour, when Christ shall come
to judgment, and for proof thereof see, Mat. 24.36. etc 25.13. Mar. 13.35.

2ly, That none knows punctually the time of his own death, see the following
Scriptures Pro. 27.1. lam. 4.14. Eccl. 9.12. There we read that mand knows not
his time not so much as what shall be on the next morrow etc.

Thirdly I answer, that the time is much shorter, then the most people for the
most part are aware of, and this I affirm both in respect of death and
judgment.

First, That the time betwixt this and Christ's second coming, is shorter then
the most people for the most part are aware of, may be proved by Luke 21.35.
where it is said, that the day of judgment; shall come as a snare upon the
Inhabitants of the earth, as also by Lub. 17.26, 27, etc. where we read, that
most people shall be as sensual, as secure, and as little looking for Christ's
coming to judgment, when he comes as Sodom, or as the old world did expect the
desrtruction of fire, or the deluge of water.

Secondly, that the time betwixt this and our dying day is shorter then the
most do imagine, may be proved by Eccle. 9.12. where it is affirmed, that
death comes and seizes upon the most of men, even as unexpectedly as the net,
or snare does the Fish, or Foul. The truth of this is seen in sad and frequent
experience: for let it be observed, and we shall find very commonly, that God
does then cut short the thread of men's lives, at what instant they think to
live long; as for example, when people have undertaken more worldly employment,
then ever they did before, when they have most yrons in the fire, and are most
eager in the pursuit of their worldly designs, or when people have compassed
all their worldly projsects and have go the things, which in their hearts and
souls they did most thirst after, and do then think to live long and with
hearts ease upon the sweet of that which they have labored sorely for, and
beath their brains about, I say, at such a time God does shorten and put and
end to their time. And for further proose hereof, let the following Scriptures
be considered, Luke 12.19, 20. Mat. 24.48.

Use
I now come to the quod reliquum, to what remains of the doctrine, I mean to
the use and application of it; and surely this that remains is like the good
wine in the Gospel, though it comes last, yet indeed it is best of all, the
life and soul of a Sermon being in the use and application of it. Now for the
use, which we are to make of the foresaid doctrine, the Apostle does in the
following words both expressly and amply, and singularly direct us, saying, Let
them that have wives be as if they had none, and they that weep etc. Yet before
I urge or prosecute any of these particulars, give me leave to premise and
infer one general use, and the rather, because that general exhortation
will have a special influence into, and will prove as a special preparative
disposing us the better for the following particuiar instructions. Be you then
from the consideration of the foresaid doctrine in general wise exhorted To
lay to heart the shortness of your time. This is a very special and a very
profitable duty. Ecc. 7.2. There we see, that it is the duty of the living to
lay to heart their end: this laying to heart our end is elsewhere called the
consideration of our latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.29. and in that regard I shall both
exhort you and pray for you, saying in the Apostles words 2 Timothy 2.8. consider
what the Apostle has said in the text concerning the shortness of our time,
and the Lord give you understanding, both in this, and in all things. We have
need of prayer as well as of exhortation: for the Lord knows, that we do see,
and hear, and read frequently of many things, which we do very little, if at
all consider, and lay to heart, and least of all the particular in hand;
insomuch as I may truly say, that of any thing in the world, that is so well
known, so frequently and apparently scene, there is nothing, that is so little
considered and laid to heart. Paul says in the text, This! say brethren, the
time is short; I may well add, we our selves do see, and see, and see, and see
often in such fad instances and spectacles of mortality, as is now before us,
That our time is short: but who lays to heart and considers it who can say in
this case as the Church did in another Lam. 3.51. Mine eye affecth my heart?
Let us a little take view of all sorts and conditions of people. I will pass
over childhood (because at that age we are less capable of consideration) and
come to youth; Do young men and women consider and lay to heart the shortness
of their time? Alas, they are so far from laying to heart any alteration by
death, that they lay not to heart any the least alteration by age or sickness:
for young people make not any account, that their fine face, their youthful
strength, beauty, activity, shall ever decay, or be impaired. Having passed
through youth, I come to middle age, and do ask the Question, Whether do
people in the midst of their days, in the height of their strenght, lay to
heart the shortness of their time? As Sampson said, Give me a champion, that I
may fight with him, so I say, show me an instance, and example in any one man,
or woman, who considers this thing, that I may commend them. Yea to come to old
age, do people when they are wll stricken in years, or when they begin to be
sickly and do find infirmities to be growing upon them, do they lay to hears
the shortness of their time. Alas the very Heathen did observe this
corruption; and deceit in the heart of man, to wit that there is scarce any one
so old, but he thinks to live one year longer, and still one year longer, and
yet one years longger. for people when they begin to be sick, and as we our
selves may observe, how it is given to people to think, and say of their
sicknesses, as Christ did concerning that of Lazarus, This sickness is not
unto death; yea it were to be wished, that carnal friends in their foolish
pity, [coming to visit their sick friends] would not, like the false Prophets
of old crying peace, peace, sow the pillowes of security under their friends
arme-holes, and rock them in the cradle of forgetfullnesse both of God and of
themselves, assuring their friends, that their present sickness shall not
shorten, and much less end their time; of such friends we may well say as Job
did of his, Miserable Counselors and miserable Comfortors are ye all. And
because it is not sufficient to accuse, unless the charge be made evident, I
will now make it appear by sundry evidences, that very few do lay to heart
the shortness of their time; First I shall bring in the common wickedness and
profanesse of the world to testify it, and I shall say with allusion to those
words of Samuel to Saul 1 Samuel 15.14. If the most of people do indeed consider
and lay to heart the shortness of their time, what means that common cry of
all forts of sins (of drunkenness, swearing, cursing, uncleanesse,) which we
do daily see with our eyes and hear with our ears, especially if we go
abroad to a market, fair, or the like.

But for more particular evidence I say, first, as the Prophet speaks in
another case Hos. 7.10. so I say here, The pride of people does testify to
their faces, that they do not lay to heart how short their time is: for did
people consider seriously and sadly the shortness of their time, would they be
so haughty, so hofty, so scornful and disdainful of their inferiors: (as if
we all were not one flesh, and of the same blood) as they be. Would the women
kind be of such a proud demeanor as is described and reproved, in the haughty
Daughters of Sion, walking with stretched out necks, wanton eyes, mincing as
they go and making a tinckling with their feet. Esa. 3.16 Surely beloved, the
minding of the shortness of our time, would bring down the stout hearts and
lofty looks of people, and would cause us all to walk more humbly both with
our Creator and with our fellow creatures

Secondly, Men's covetousness does testify to their faces, that they lay not to
heart the shortness of their time: we see, that with very many there is no end
of wordly care, toil and travel, they being never satisfied in their minds
with what they have, but are still restless in adding house to house, field to
field, farm to farm, bargain to bargain. Did people seriously consider,
that they have not long to live, there would be more contentment and less
convetuosnesse, then is every where among all sorts to be seen.

Thirdly, That few do consider the shortness of their time does appear by
this, to wit, That though people do sometimes think upon death, yet they think
only of one way of dying, or upon one kind of death, to wit, they think only
of dying a natural death, they think of dying by age, or in their beds; where
as we may as well die an untimely, or a violent death as a natural death, we
may be cut off in the midst of our days and strengthy by a thousand disasters,
we may die in a prison, we may have our throats cut, or our brains dashed out,
we may die in a ditch as well as in our beds.

Fourthy, It appears, that the, most people are mindlesse of the shortness of
their time, in that they consider not in whose hands their time is: For whereas
Scripture tells us, that our time is in Gods hands, and that our life does wholly
depend upon his pleasure and appointment, they are as forgetful of any such
thing (as appears by their common language) as those wordlings, whom Saint
James reproves for projecting this and that, and yet never asking leave of God
Iam. 4.13, 14.

Fifthly It appears, in that people do so busy themselves about trifles with
neglect of the maine things necessary. How do the most people first provide
for the body, for the things of the world, and put off the providing for the
soul and things belonging to another world, I will instance only in two
things of moment, which people do put off.

First the making of their wills. We see in experience, how that people do
commonly put off the doing of this to the time of their sickness (albeit it is
most uncertain, whether they shall have any warning of death by sickness) yea
many will not do it, when they are sick, unless they are persuaded, that
they shall die of their ficknesse and how few will persuade themselves, or will
suffer themselves to be persuaded by others, that when they are sick, they are
sick to death.

Secondly, But this is a light matter in comparison: in allusion to those words
of the Prophet to the king Esa. 7.13. I say here, that it is a light matter for
men to neglect the making of their wills, and thereby to prejudice their
posterity; there are matters of far greater moment, which are commonly
neglected, and those are, The repenting of our sins, the amendment of our
ways, the setting of accounts betwixt God and our souls, the making of our
peace with God our Judge, the making of our calling and election sure, and
alas, alas, how are these neglected? Let two things be here observed, I How
lasie and slow and sluggish the most of people are as to these things; they are
as loath to come to any business of this nature, as ever any sluggard was to
rise out of his bed, insomuch as when they are awaked by the loud cries of Gods
Ministers, calling to and upon them in those words of Solemon Prove. 6.19. How
long will thou sleep O sluggard, when will thou arise out of thy sleep.

They do yawn and stretch them selves upon the bed of security and sensuallity,
saying with that Sluggard Prove. 5.10. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber,
alittle folding of the hands to sleep; a little more of the pleasures of sin,
a little more of the profits of sin etc.

Secondly, let it be observed, how faithless and false hearted people are in
things of this nature: for albeit they will purpose and set a time for the
doing of these things, yet when the time comes, yet ( faithless and perverse
generation as they are) they will put it of till another time. We see in
experience, that Laban did not more often change lacobs wages, then many men
and women have contrary to their purposes, promises, vows and covenants
changed the time of their repentance and conversion; they have set a time ten
times over, and that time being past and gone, they are still to repent and
convert, yea they are as far (if not farther) from repenting and converting,
as ever they were before.

Briefly and undeniably, The whole course of peoples lives does testify to
their faces, that the shortness of their time is not laid to heart by them:
for consider, whether the most people do not live, even as the drunkard
drinks, or as the prodigal spends; as those do drink and spend as if they
could never see the bottom of the barrel, or of their patrimony, so people
do so live, as if they were to live for ever in this world, as if they should
never come to the end of their lives

Having now ended my general exhortation, I might in the next place infer
sundry particular ones: For example, First, If our time be short, then let us
all look back and consider, how we have spent and misspent our time, what
time we have lost. Secondly, Learn the misery and mischief of delays of
delaying things of moment. Thirdly, Beware of a surprizall, of being caught
napping (as we use to say) of being taken at unawares. Fourthly, Labor less
for the meat that perishes, and labor more for that which endures to
everlasting life. Fifthly, Learn this point of wisdom, to wit, to dispatch
the most necessary things in the first place.


These and the like instructions might fitly be deduced from the doctrine in
hand, and are very profitabe to be urged, but because I desire to speak
somewhat to some of the uses, which the Apostle does expressly infer from the
point, I must therefore of necessity forbear the prosecution of any of the
said particulars.

The first use, which the Apostle does make of this doctrine is to married
persons; I say to married persons: for what he says to Hushands, saying [let
them, that have wives be as if they had none] must be understood as spoken
likewise to wives (for as they who have wives must live as if they had none, so
for a like reason those who have husbands must live as if they had none) The
Apostles true and full meaning is, That the shortness of the time considered,
those who are married should so live as if they were loosed, or unmarried. But
some will here perhaps demand this question, what must married persons do, or
how must they so live married, as if they were unmarried.

I answer, that diverse particular duties are therein comprised; among which I
shall instance only in three, or four.

First it implies, that man and wife ought so to live together, as making a
certain account, that within a very short time they must part, or be parted
asunder, saying that [de futuro] for future concerning each other, as Christ
said [De praesenti] to the Samaritan woman concerning her reputed husband, He,
whom I now have, shall not always be my Husband, She whom I now have, shall
not always be my wife. The contrary presumption, or forgetfulness is (I am
afraid) the common fault of married persons: for consider whether it be not
with the most couples, as you shall immediately hear from me; every one does
eagerly desire a good wife or husband, being half impatient for such a
blessing; as was Rachel for the blessing of Children, saying, A good husband, a
good wife, or else I am undone; and when God has granted unto men and women
these their desires, what do they think, or say, and how are they affected.
They are affected as Jonah was, when he had got a gourd, they are glad out of
measure, saying as Laodicea in another case, I am rich and increased in
comfort, and I have need of nothing, yea saying moreover as Babylon in her
prosperity Esa 47.8. I am made and I am made for ever, I shall never be a
widow etc. and thence it is, that God making a sudden and unexpected
alteration, they are as much overwhelmed with sorrow and amazement, as before
they were full and did overflow with joy; just as it was with Jonah, so it is
with them; for as Jonah was over-joyed when he had a Gourd and when he was
suddenly deprived of it, he did so take it to heart, as that he wished his own
death, so they being over-joyed in the enjoyment one of another, when God has
made a separation, they are so out of measure passionate and impatient, as to
wish, that they had died the same day, and been buried in the same grave with
them. But would you know your duty; remember then this first particular from
the text, to wit, That you are so to live together in the married estate, as
making account, that it cannot always, yea, that it cannot long be so, but
that within a short time you must part. Man and wife must so live in the
Hourse as the Patriarchs did in the world, to wit, as strangers and sojourners
together Heb. 11.13, 14.

2 Would man and wife so live married, as unmarried, they must be careful to
use all the comforts and contents of marriage soberly and moderately. It is one
maine part of the Apostles end and scope in these words, to exhort all married
persons unto Christian sobriety and moderation in the use of all marriage
contentments, so that they may be wings but not weights unto them, we may
surfer as well of the comforts as of the cares of this life.

Thirdly, That man and wife may so live married as if they were unmarried, they
must have a special care not to cool or abate in affection to the Lord Jesus
Christ. We must still love the Lord Jesus Christ in such sort, as if we had no
other Love but him. The law of marriage is for the married persons to forsake
father and mother, and to cleave to each other, but it is not to forsake the
Lord Christ. This admonition is the rather needful, because of the common
fault of very many married couples in the world. We do live in a world of
extremes both within doors and without: for as some couples do love too
little, and searse at all, so others do love one another too much, in so much
as that they do quite dote one upon another, and make idols one of another,
they love one another as Eli did his sons, to wis, more then they love God
their Maker, and Christ their Redeemer. God may have the same controversy
against many married persons as he had against Ephesus, to wit, That they have
lost much of their first love to him. But oh that married persons would
remember, that God is a Jealous God; And oh that they would remember those
words of Christ Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father, or Mother, Son, or
Daughter, Hhusband, or Wife, more then Christ, is unworthy of Christ.

I might here have added certained other particulars, but that I hasten to
speak a few words concerning the next particular, And they that weep as if they
wept not. Let the question be demanded, what is it for a Christian so to weep,
for a loss, or cross, as if he wept not. I answer, 1. A Christian must so
weep for his sins, which are the meritorious cause of every loss and cross,
as not weeping for the loss, and cross it selse. Our sorrows in respect of
any suffering should be nothing in comparison of our sins that have deserved
it. I cannot say indeed, tha it is the scope of the Apostle in the text to
press the belceving Corinths to sorrow for sin above all things,
nevertheless I have thought good to answer the Question in this sort, in the
first place partly because it is a true saying, That a Christian ought so to
weep for his sins as not weeping for his sufferings (for our sufferings we
must so weep, as not weeping; but for our sins we must so weep, as it we wept
indeed) and partly because those persons, who do truly, and plentifully weep
for their sins, cannot choose but weep moderately for any outward suffering,
which faid, moderation is the scope of the Apostle in the text.

2 Would we so weep as not weeping, we must so weep, as not to refuse such
Christian counsel, or comfort as is fit to be given to us in our mournful
condition. When people are under the heavy hand of God, they are more sit to be
spoken unto, then when they thrive and prosper in the world; and one cause why
Solomon tells us, that sorrow is better then laughter, is because (says he) by
the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better, more soft, and more
humble Eccl. 7.3. We should therefore so weep, as that we do not refuse such
Christian advise, counsel, or comfort, as it fit to be given unto persons in
our sad condition. The contrary excess is a fault too common; for many weep
for their losses, as Rachel did for the loss of her children [they will not be
comforted] or as Israel did for their bondage [They harkned not unto Moses for
anguish of heart, Exodus 6.9.]

3. That we may so weep as not weeping, we must so weep as not to murmr,
repine, or once to open our mouths against the Lord and his dealing; we must
so weep as quietly, silently, patiently submitting our selves to the disposing
of the only wise God and Sovereign Lord of all. I shall for this refer you
to such Scriptures as wherein patience under all losses and crosses is as a
very special and Christian virtue, commanded, and wherein the contrary evils
of fretting, murmuring, and repining, are forbidden, as very great and grievous
evils.

Fourthly, That we may so weep as not weeping, we must so weep as not to
dishonor our Religion and specially that faith and hope, which we profess to
have in God. It is a great sin and shame for a Christian to mourn
excessively for any outward suffering for thereby he does dishonor religion,
and give the world occasion to think, that there is no such comfort in the word
and in the ways of God as the Scriptures do testify, and therefore we should
beware of so mourning, as to do the least dishonor unto religion, by bringing
an evil report upon it.

And more especially we should beware of so mourning as to dishonor our faith
and hope in God, either that hope, which we profess to have either touching
our selves, or touching any of our departed friends.

First, we should so weep for the dead, for any of our departed friends as not
to dishonor, or disparage that hope, which we profess to have concerning them
and their better condition in another world; we should so mourn, that they are
lost to us and to the comfort which we might have had by them here, as not
mourning, that they are lost to God and to themselves; we should so mourn for
them being dead, as rejoicing, that they are alive to Christ, and that one day
they shall rise again to life everlasting. This is the Apostlles counsel
concerning the manner, or measure of mourning for the dead, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.

Secondly and lastly, we should so mourn as not to dishonor that faith and
hope, which we do profess to have in God, his love and favor. Every true
Saint and servant of God is most deeply, most highly in the love and favor of
God (as the Scriptures do testisie) and they cannot be under such sadness for
any outward loss and cross, but that still they have abundant cause to rejoice
in the interests, which they have in the favor and friendship of the Lord
Jesus Christ, in so much as that Jesus Christ may well say to his over sad and
pensive servants, as Elkanah did to his beloved Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8. Why weepest
thou and why is thy heart so much, so over much grieved, am not I better to
thee then ten sons. Is not my love better then the love of ten husbands, or ten
wives. Briefly then, upon occasions of weeping, a Christian must of weep for
the loss of one comfort, as not weeping, but rejoicing rather that he has not
lost all, nor the maine of comsorts, A wife must so weep for the loss of a
loving Husband, as not weeping, but rejoicing rather, that she has not lost
an ever living God and an ever loving Savior.

Caution. As Christ said in another case, so I say here, All men and women
cannot receive this comfort, but only those, to whom it is given, I mean, the
true Saints and servants and children of God, such as can say with the spouse
in the Canticles (I am my welbeloveds and my welbeloved is mine) and therefore
Qui potest capere, capiat,) They that can receive this comfort as belonging to
them, let them and them alone receive it, but as for worldlings and the wicked
(continuing in the estate wherein they are) I must needs say, as Christ did to
the rich Luke 6.24. Woe unto you for you have received your consolation.

FINIS.

