AN Help to Prayer: FOR THE Catechized YOUTH OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

Very useful for Parents and Masters to teach their Children and Servants how
to Pray.

Imprimatur, Martii, 22. 1677/8

Guil. Sill.

LONDON, Printed by M. C. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West end of St.
Paul's. 1678.

^ PREFACE TO THE Christian Readers.
PRayer is the most comprehensive Instance of Religious Worship, which we all
ought to give unto God from our Youth up, and (to say nothing of its other
Benefit,) of greatest influence into a good and virtuous life. It is great pity
therefore that any should neglect thus to Honor God and Profit themselves, for
want of some plain and useful Help for the due performance of it.

Those that stand most in need of Assistance this way, are the younger and more
ignorant sort of People, Children and Servants: whose Capacities are well to be
considered of: That neither their understandings be confounded with things
above their reach, nor their memories over-burthened with too great a length or
variety.

And, for such as these, methinks nothing can be more apposite than the pious
an^ wholesome Direction of a Reverend Divine in his late Treatise of Prayer,
That the^ would learn the Lord Prayer, with the Explication Dr. Brigh Treat of
Prayer, Cap. 5. Sect. 19. p. 387.
of it, and the sum o^ the Ten Commandment in the Church-Catechism turned into
Prayer, and other short comprehensive Forms: and that Parents would be careful
to teach their Children such, and see they say them.

In pursuance of which Excellent Advice I do heartily recommend the ensuing
Plat*form to all whose hearts God shall incline to make use of it: where I have
prefixed the, open and personal Profession of Christianity it self, according
to our Baptismal Vow; Point which I conceive of great usefulness in it self,
and the greater still, because Confirmation is so much neglected.

This Religious course will make the Plai^ and Godly Principles of the Church
Catechism which is too commonly despised) to take the ^eeper Root, and stick
the faster in the minds and affections of those that have learnt it, and help
exceedingly to reduce those fruitful Principles into practice: being a
continual Monitor both of the threefold Engagement ^ve are under as Christians,
and the chief Rules we are taught to observe in Order to ^ur discharge thereof.

I will say no more of it farther, but this, that it seems to me a good
expedient against ^nany extravagancies, which attend Arbitra^y and Extempore
Devotions: and may possi^ly train up a Generation of Honest and Orderly
Christians to succeed us.

Only I must admonish those who make use of ^is Platform, these two things in
the General.

I. That they bethink themselves what they are going about; namely to Address
unto, and ^orship the Great God of Heaven and Earth, ^ho is present with them,
though they see him ^ot, to behold and observe all their carriage: and,

II. That they say and repeat every clause Leisurely, Gravely, Distinctly; and
labor to keep their Eyes from wandering, and their Thoughts as intent as may
be, to the words they utter; and, as they grow in years, improve in the
considering more deliberately of them, and being affected with them.

And so I leave this Charitable Help, intended for Beginners, to their kind
acceptance, and God Almighty's Blessing upon the conscionable use of it.

AN Help to Prayer.
Fall down upon thy Knees with Reverence, and say;
GOD be merciful to me a Sinner! Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O
Lord: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.

A Form of daily acknowledging and confirming our Baptismal Vow.
I Do, before God and his Holy Angels, Acknowledge and Renew the Solemn Promise
and Vow, made in my name at Baptism; and do verily think, that I am bound in
Conscience,

I. To renounce the Devil, and all his works, the Pomps, and Vanities of this
wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh:

II. Heartily to Believe, and openly to profess, All the Articles of the
Christian Faith: and

III. To Keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the
days of my Life.

And Thus, by God's help, I will do.

And I heartily thank our Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this state
of Salvation through Jesus Christ our Savior: that is, that he has made me a
Member of Christ, a child of God, and an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven,
upon these Gracious Terms and Conditions which are all for my greatest Good.

But, knowing that I am not able to do these things of my self, I pray unto God
for his Grace, which he has promised unto them that ask it, that I may both
perform and continue in the same to my live's end. Amen.

Then say the Lord's Prayer.
OUr Father which art in Heaven,
Hallowed be thy name;
Thy Kingdom come;
Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven;
Give us this day our daily bread;
And Forgive us our Trespasses, as we Forgive them that trespass against us;
And Lead us not into Temptation,
But Deliver us from Evil;
For Thine is the Kindgdom, and the Power, and the Glory for ever and ever.
Amen.
And add this Paraphrase upon it.
O Lord God, our Heavenly Father, the Giver of All Goodness!

Send thy Grace, I beseech thee, unto me and All people, That we may Worship
Thee, Serve Thee, and Obey Thee, as we ought to do: even as Saints and Angels
do in Heaven.

And I pray unto Thee, O God, That Thou would send us All things, that be
needful, both for our Souls and Bodies; for this Life and a Better.

And that Thou would be Merciful unto us, and forgive us our Sins upon our
True Repentance; As Thou have Commanded us, and by Thy Grace we are Disposed to
Forgive those that Trespass against us.

And that it will please Thee to save and defend us in all dangers, Ghostly and
Bodily, That we be not hurt by the Assaults of the one or other.

And that Thou would keep us from all Sin and Wickedness; [which is the
greatest evil] and from that evil one, our Ghostly Enemy, [the Devil] and from
Everlasting Death; the most dreadful of penal evils, which is the due wages of
Sin.

And all this, O Heavenly King and Father; as Thou art able to do by Thy Power,
so, I trust, Thou will do for us of Thy Mercy and Goodness, which is Thy
chiefest Glory, through our Lord Jesus Christ: and therefore, to testify both
my earnest Desire and Hope, I say, Amen. So be it. So by the Grace of God it
shall be.

In stead of the Creed this Doxology.
Then rise up, and, instead of the Creed, which thou may sometimes also
Rehearse, say this Doxology devoutly, which takes in the Three things that we
chiefly learn from thence. Glory be to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Creator, Preserver and Governor of all things, visible and
invisible, who has made, does Preserve and Govern me, and all the World!

And to the Only-Begotten Son of that Eternal Father, who in the fullness of
Time was made Man, and has Redeemed me, and all Mankind, with his most
precious Blood!

And to the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, the Sacred
Spirit of Light, and Grace, and Comfort, who sanctifies me, and all the Elect
people of God, that is, all true Christians!

As it was in the Beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without End.
Amen. Lord, I believe, help Thou my Unbelief.

Then fall again on thy Knees, as before, and say
Have Mercy upon me, O Lord, The X. Commandments turned into Prayer.
have Mercy upon me, a miserable Offender; for ever miserable, without Thy
Mercy; and incline my heart to keep all Thy Commandments, I beseech Theee:

That I may both know and practice my bounden Duty.

The sum of the first Table.
That I may Believe whatsoever Thou say, who art Truth it self; and fear to
Offend Thy Majesty; and love Thee above all, with all my Heart and Mind, and
Soul, and Strength; That I may Worship Thee as Thou requirest, in SPIRIT and
TRUTH: that I may in every thing give Thanks unto Thee for thy Benefits; and at
all times put my whole Trust and Confidence in Thee; and in all my wants call
upon Thee by Prayer and Supplication: That I may Honor Thy Holy Name, and Thy
Word; and serve Thee truly, as on the Days set apart for thy Worship, so all
the Days of my Life.

The Sum of the second Table.
And that, for Thy sake, I may love my Neighbors as my self; and do unto all
and every Man as I would they should do unto me, in the like Relation and
Condition of Life:

More particularly,

That, as a dutiful Child, I may Love, Honor and Succor upon occasion, as I
am able, my Natural Parents, Father and Mother:

That, as a Good and Loyal Subject, I may Honor and Obey the King, [the Father
of my Country] and all that are put in Authority under him:

That I may submit my self to all my Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors,
and Masters:

That I may order my self lowly and reverently to all my B^tters:

That I may hurt no Body by Word or Deed; but be true and just to all my
dealings:

That I may bear no Malice, nor Hatred or Revenge in my heart: [which is
Spiritual Murder.]

That I may keep my hands from Picking and Stealing; which is often a step to
greater wickedness.

That I may keep my Tongue [that unruly Member] from evil Speaking, Lying, and
Slandering; [so common in the World.]

That I may keep my Body in Temperance, Soberness and Chastity, undefiled with
Fleshly lusts, such as the Sins of Gluttony, and Drunkenness, Fornication and
Adultery.

That I may not so much as Covet or desire Other men's Goods; but learn and
labor truly, [with Contentment and Diligence] to get my own living, and do my
duty in that state of Life, whatsoever it be, unto which it shall please Thee
to call me. Amen.

Concluding with this Collect.
O Almighty Lord, and Everlasting The Collect to be added hereto.
God; Vouchsafe, I beseech Thee, to Direct, Sanctify, and Govern both my Heart
and Body, in the Ways of these thy Holy Laws, and the Works of Thy
Commandments; that through thy most Mighty Protection, both here and ever, I
may be preserved in Body and Soul, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Then say the Collect for Morning, or Evening.
For the Morning.
O Lord, and Heavenly Father, Almighty and Everlasting God, who have safely
brought me to the beginning of this Day; [for which I bless thee] defend me in
the same with thy Mighty power; and grant, that this Day I fall into no Sin,
nor run into any kind of danger; but that all my doings being ordered by Thy
Governance, I may do always that which is righteous in Thy sight, Through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Evening.
Lighten my Darkness, I beseech Thee, O Lord [and Father of Lights] and by thy
great Mercy defend me from all Perils and dangers of this night, for the Love
of thy only Son, my Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.

Then Recommend thy self, Relations and Friends to God's Blessing, Thus,
God the Father, God the Son, The concluding Benedictions.
God the Holy Ghost, whose I am, and whom I serve; in whose Name I was
Baptized, and to whose Faith and Fear I am devoted, Bless me both in Soul and
Body, Prosper the work of my hands, and the way of my goings; and together with
me, Bless my Sovereign Lord the King, with all the Royal Family, and all that
Minister under him, both in Church and State; my Honored Parents, and those in
their place and stead; my Father and Mother, Grandfather and Grandmother,
Godfathers and Godmothers, Uncles and Aunts, my Brothers and Sisters, with
the rest of my natural Kindred and Relations; my Master and Mistress, all my
Benefactors and good Friends; the Family wherein I am and all the Neighborhood
about me; with all Blessings Temporal and Spiritual, Now and Ever. Amen.

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, Thy Love O Heavenly Father; Thy in-lightning,
Sanctifying and Comforting Fellowship, O Sacred Spirit, be with me, and all I
should pray for, This day [or this night] and Evermore. Amen, Amen.

THE END.
Postscript.
IF this course of Prayer seem too long for any, they may sometimes omit one
part, and sometimes another; but so, as to reassume them at times of greater
vacancy and leisure, such as Sundays and Holy Days; wherein I advise to use
them all.

And, if any, on the other side, think them too short; They have a farther
supply at hand in the Public Liturgy; out of which I recommend to them these
particular Prayers and Collects to be gotten without Book.

The Prayer for all Conditions of men, and

The General Thanksgiving.

Then before they read in their ^ibles, or go to Church to Hear, This Collect.
Blessed Lord, who has caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our
Learning: Grant that we may in such wise Hear them, Read, Mark, Learn, and
inwardly Digest them, that by Patience and Comfort of Thy Holy word we may
embrace, and ever hold fast the Blessed Hope of Everlasting Life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

After Reading or Hearing, This.
Grant, we beseech Thee Almighty God, that the Words which we have this day
Read [or Heard with our outward ears] may through thy Grace be so grafted
inwardly in our Hearts, that they may bring forth in us the Fruit of good
living, to the Honor and Praise of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Grace before Meals.
O God, in whom I Live, and Move, and have my Being, bless thy good Creatures,
I beseech Thee, to my Use, and me to thy Service, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

After Meats.
The God of all Power and Glory, who has Created, Redeemed, and at this time
plentifully fed me, His Holy Name be Blessed and Praised for ever. Amen.

Upon all occasions, These Pious Collects.
Lord of all Power and Might, who art the Author and Giver of all good things,
graft in our Hearts the Love of thy name; increase in us true Religion; nourish
us with all Goodness, and of thy great Mercy keep us in the same; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty and Everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and do
forgive the sins of all them that are Penitent; Create and make in us New and
Contrite Hearts, that we, worthily lamenting our Sins, and acknowledging our
Wretchedness, may obtain of Thee, the God of all Mercy, perfect Remission and
Forgiveness; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, who have given Thine only Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice for
Sin, and also an Example of Godly Life; give us Grace, that we may always most
thankfully receive that his inestimable Benefit; and also daily endeavor our
selves to follow the Blessed steps of his most Holy Life, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. [With many others.]

FINIS.
Books Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's. 1678.
Mr. Comber's Companion to the Temple: Or, a help to Devotion in the daily use
of the Common Prayer.

Bishop Wilkins Natural Religion.

Bonas's Precepts; or Practical Rules for a Christian Life.

His Guide to Eternity.

The Reformed Monastery; Or, the Love of Jesus. A sure and short, pleasant and
easy way to Heaven. In Meditations, Directions, and Resolutions to Love and
Obey Jesus unto Death.

Mr. Glanvill of Preaching.

Dr. Sparks's Devotions on the Feasts and Fasts of the Christians.

Dr. Du Moulin's Prayers.

Mr. Campfields Discourse of Angels.

The Fathers Legacy; or Counsels to his Children and Friends.

Dr. Woodford on the Psalms.

His Divine Poems.

Senecas Morals, of Benefits, a Happy Life, Clemency and Anger.

Several Sermons at Court, etc.


