CHRIST'S KINGDOM ON EARTH, Opened according to the Scriptures. Herein is
examined, What Mr. Th. Brightman, Dr. J. Alstede, Mr. I. Mede, Mr. H. Archer,
The Glympse of Sions Glory, and such as concur in opinion with them, hold
concerning the thousand years of the Saints Reign with Christ, And of Satan's
binding: Herein also their Arguments are answered.

Imprimatur; Ia. Cranford.

Feb. 12. 1644.

LONDON, Printed by Ric. Cotes for Stephen Bowtell, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Bible in Pope's Head Alley. 1645.

Christian Reader,
Diverse are the Causes of Error in Religion. Many there are who will not rest
content with necessary and saving truths others are misled by Enthy siasms and
their own private spirit: some err by reason of the weakness of their
judgments, and not attending to them that can better inform them: but above
all, what Christ said to the Jews was and ever will be true, men err not
knowing the Scriptures. Admit, will some say, what you affirm to be most true
in the general temper of the now d sordered world, you may not lay these
imputations on such whom you undertake to answer; they were men learned,
moderate, cautelous, well-studied in Scriptures. It is granted: but the best
may err, and therefore let us search the Scriptures, as did the Bereans, and
try whether side in these points maintain the truth. Dr. Alstede was a man of
vast comprehension, but had many Irons in the fire; Mr. Brightman I leave to
Dr. Coopers judgment, who says that pretending to give us a Revelation of the
Revelation he has set forth an Obscuration thereof. Mr. Mede was my worthy
and learned friend, but not to be preferred before truth. Mr. Archer was held
to be a pious and good Christian: if he be not the Author of the Book in his
name, let him bear the blame that fathered it upon him. who should be the
penman of the Glympse I know not. With none of these deal I farther then they
are engaged in this dispute. What I cite out of Dr. Alstede is from the English
Edition, more parable now then the Latin. What I crave of you good Reader is
this; that you would read without prejudice, examine each matter thoroughly, and
judge impartially.

Yours in all Christian Offices of love to be commanded, T. HAYNE.

The Contents of this Treatise.
Chap. I. WHether Christ's Kingdom on Earth be yet begun or not? The Question
sttated. The Affirmative proved. Page 1. Chap. II. The chief and common
Argument produced against my Tenent answered and confuted. p. 4. Chap. III. The
answer to many Objections of the Divines, who endeavor to prove, that Christ's
famous Kingdom is not yet begun. p. 9. Chap. IV. Mr. Th. Brightmans judgment of
the Times in Daniel and the Apocalypse particularly examined and refuted. p 34.
Chap. V. Dr. J. Alsteds and Mr. H. Archers and others account, and Arguments
about the same Times propounded and refuted. p. 38. Chap. VI. The Arguments and
authorities from the Rabbis urged by Mr. Mede on Rev. 20. answered. p. 54.
Chap. VII. Objections out of Rev. 21. and 22. cleared by other Scriptures and
answered. p. 66. Chap. VIII. Whether the binding of Satan for a thousand years
Rev. 20. be already past. The question stated. p. 71. Chap. IX. The famous and
notable binding of Satan, Rev. 20. is already past. p. 72. Chap. X. Objections
answered, whereby it will further appear, that the eminent binding of Satan is
already past. p. 74.
Some faults escaped are thus to be amended.
PAge 9. Line 10. read as is, p. 121. 16. r. of Gods. p. 15 1. 13. r. crucif^e
him. p. 16. (...) thousand years, p. 23. 1. 5. r. any whosoever, p. 25. 1. 15.
r. a peace which, p. 31. (...) ass^ctions, p. 43. 1. 29. r. a time. p. 44. 1.
25. r. ^xtie days. p. 47. 1. 1. r. Dan. 7.8. is not Antichrist. p. 48. 1. 29.
r. days and nine^e. p. 49. 1. 36. that is, uphold. p. 54. (...) p. 55. 1. 28.
r. ^ude 14. p. 53.1.12 r. did and will. p. 64. 1. last r. Coch notes on p.
66.1.^ r. is (...) p. 70. 1. 27. r. (...). p. 75 ^.^. r. up in the p. 77. 1.
16. r. twe^ft-twentieth, and 1. 28. r. hst, p. 85.1.3. blot out so.

CHRIST'S KINGDOM on Earth, opened according to the SCRIPTURES.
Chap. I. Whether Christ's Kingdom be yet begun or not? The Question stated.
The affirmative proved.
THat we may rightly set down the state of the Question, and clearly deliver
the truth concerning Christ's Kingdom, frequently mentioned in Scripture, we
must know, That God is omnipotent, the fountain and original of all power and
dominion: That his kingdom is ever lasting and throughout all ages.
Psalm.145.13. That his Throne is in heaven. Psalm.105.19. And that he rules not
in Jacob only, but even to the ends of the world: Selab. Psalm.59.13. We must
also observe concerning Jesus Christ, That by him the world was made. Joh. 1.3.
That whatsoever the Father does, the same does the Son also. Joh. 5.19. And
that the Throne of the Son of God, our Savior, is for ever and ever. Heb. 1.8.

So that in regard of the Sovereign power and dominion of Christ, it is
undoubtedly true; that at all times he rules, has an absolute Kingdom in the
World, and does whatsoever pleases him, Psalm. 135.6. The rules and Laws of
this Kingdom are delivered to Gods people in the Scripture: and Christ
according thereunto continues the administration thereof on Earth, until at
the end of the World he comes again to the last judgment: and then he
delivers up this his Kingdom (as a faithful Governor of the same) to his
Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. And ever afterward sits in the Throne of his Father, Rev.
3.21. that is, in Heaven, which is Gods Throne, Mat. 5.34. Acts 7.49.

Of this extent is Christ's Kingdom; yet in regard that God has sometimes
permitted Satan, and wicked men in extraordinary manner to domineere and
exercise their worldly and ungodly power: And that at other times he has made
his own Sovereignty by remarkable mercies and judgments, in more especial
manner to appear, God and Christ, upon this more glorious expression of their
overruling might, are then especially said to have a Kingdom, and to Reign;
because in such times their glory and Majesty does more manifestly show it
self, Exodus 15.18.1 Sam. 12.12. Obad. 21. Apoc. 12.10. and elsewhere.

Indeed the World, were its eyesight clear, might well discern Gods power to
be above all in many less matters; but especially, When he removes some
Kings, and sets up others, Dan. 2.21. and 4.14. When Babels eminent Monarchy
was pulled down by the Medes and Persians, Esa. 13.17. The Medes and Persians
Might queld by the Grecians, Dan. 7.7. and 21. The Grecian Domi^ion broken and
divided between the four chiese Captains of Alexander, Dan. 11.4. And then
again subdivided by two of Alexanders Captains, the one in the South, the
other in the North of Judea, Dan. 11. Who battered one another, until they bad
no more strength, then the two lea^ of the image, part of iron, part of clay,
Dan. 2.41, 42. But so dull is man of understanding, that in these Kingdoms
earthly sple^dor and glory obvious to the eye is admired, and Cyrus and
Alexanders great prowess highly extold; but Gods indulging and advancing their
Empires, though very discernible by an attentive and heedfull mind, is passed
over and unregarded.

But in this very case God has not left himself without witness, but tells us,
both how Josuab was famous through the World, for his victories, Josh. 6.27.
The Heathen people could mark that. And tells how also it was God, who sought
for Israel, Josh. 10.42. This many could not so well observe. Scripture also
declares, how Babel the glory of Kingdoms does fall by the Medes, Es. 13, 17.
and how also it was the hand of God, that overthrew the might of that Kingdom,
Esa. 14.22. Suppose the world negligent to observe Gods power and goodness in
these and the like passages: can it possibly be so blind, so regardlesse, when
the Son of God was incarnate, come to undo the works of the Devil, showed
his power by many miracles, and wrought man's salvation, and divulged the same
to all people? We must needs see (what is so often iterated) that then the
Kingdom of God was at band, yea, was come to the people then living, and that
whosoever submitted thereunto, was a subject of that Kingdom. It Is true that
Satan in those times bragged, that all the Kingdomer in the World were his own;
and it is evident, that he had long domineered among the Heathen, and usurped
power over the Jews, and vassalled them in great part to his pleasure. Yet by
Christ's casting out Devils out of many persons possessed, by his conquest over
Satan at his death, by his giving his Disciples power to tread on Serpents and
Scorpions and power over the enemy, it clearly appears, that the kingdom,
power and glory (as the Church confesses, Rev. 4. and 5.) is truly his: and
that he is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Rev: 19.16. The wise men were by
God directed to esteem Christ a King, though found in a manger. Pilate
adjudging to death the Lord of life, yet resolutely gave him his due style: and
Christ himself denied not, but witnessed the truth; that he was a King, and
born so to be, Job. 18.37.

This Kingdom Christ began to express and make known, while he lived here on
earth. We can not but confess it, when we consider, that he commanded
winds, waves, diseases, devils; that he conquered death, and aseended to his
Throne in heaven: and yet has his Throne of power in his Church, Apoc. 5.6.
and has been, is, and will be, with the Apostles, and their Successors
always, even to the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. He is said, Apoc. 6. To be
crowned as a King, and on a white horse to ride forth conquering, and to
conquer: And therefore the great and famous Kingdom of Christ, that mentioned
in Dan. 2.44. and Dan. 7.13. and Psalm. 2. has already long since begun, now
is, and ever will continue, and is not (as most Jews, and some Christians too
sarre herein consenting to that deceived Nation, affirm) hereafter to take its
beginning: much less is it to be a Kingdom of a thousand years continuance,
and no more.

That Christ's Kingdom is long since begun, thus I punctually prove by these
Arguments.

Argument 1. The destruction of Jerusalem and its Sanctuary was acted a
thousand and some hundred years agon, about the year of Christ 73.

But Jesus Christ was to be the Messiah or anointed Prince before the
desir^ction of Jerusalem and its Sanctuary, Dan. 9.25, 26.

Therefore Jesus Christ was the Messiah, or anointed Prince a thousand and
some hundredth years agon. And is not now to begin that Kingdom.

Argum. 2. Princes upon, or presently after their being declared to be
anointed Princes begin their Kingdom. Scripture and common experience confirm
this.

But it was declared, that Jesus Christ was the Messiah, the anointed Prince,
before the end of the seventy weeks, Dan. 9.24, 25, 26. which no Expositor
extends further then the destruction of Jerusalem, and that was one thousand
five hundred years agon.

Therefore Jesus Christ began his Kingdom before the end of the seventy weeks,
one thousand five hundred years agon:and is not now to begin it.

Argum. 3. No good and lawful King sends out his commands, and requires them
to be obeyed, before he has begun his Kingdom.

But Christ sent out his commands, and required obedience to them at his being
here upon Earth, one thousand five hundred years agon, Mat. 28.20.

Therefore his Kingdom then began, and is not hereafter to begin.

Chap. II.
The chief and common Argument produced against my Tenent, answered and
confuted.

AGainst the Tenent above confirmed, this Objection is commonly made;

Christ comes not to that his Kingdom in Daniel, until the fourth Kingdom in
that propbesie be destroyed, Dan. 7.11, 13.14, 27.

But the fourth Kingdom in Daniel, is that of the Romans, which is yet in
being. Therefore that Kingdom of Christ is not yet begun.

Answ. In speech of four great Kingdoms, without reference to Daniels
prophe^ie; the Babylonian Kingdom is the first, the Medes and Persians make
the second, the Grecians is the third, and the Romans is rightly counted the
fourth. But if question be about the four great Kingdoms in Daniel,
Alexander the Great, and his four chief Captains, who after his death were
made Kings of several Nations, and were more famous then the rest, are the
third Kingdom in Daniel. Afterward, Sele^cus Nicator King of Syri^, and
Ptolomie Lagides King of Egypt, and their posterity became potent for a long
time above all other Kings. They being two, and endeavoring by marriage to
agree in one, and by their frequent dissentions much molesting the Jews, whose
Country did lie between Syria and Egypt, make the fourth Kingdom in Daniel,
expressed by the two legs of iron, with feet, part of iron, part of clay, and
by the fourth beast, Dan. 7. which was more savage and cruel to the Jews, then
the three former Kingdoms.

That the Kings of Syria and Egypt are the fourth Kingdom in Daniel, is
averred and su^hciently proved by these learned, skillful, and most diligent
searchers into the sacred Text: Namely, Fr. Junius, Im. Tremelius, H.
Broughton, Robert Rollocke, Am. Polanus, And. Willet, Is. Genius, Joh.
Borelius, Joh. Scharpius, Joh. Woolebius, Mr. Diodate and some others.

That their judgment is sound and good, and that the Romans be not the fourth
Kingdom in Daniel, I thus prove:

Argument 1. The fourth Kingdom in Daniel was to be destroyed before God gave
Christ the great and most eminent, and everlasting Kingdom and Dominion, Dan.
7.11, 13, 14, and 27.

But the Roman Kingdom was not destroyed before God gave Christ the great,
most eminent and everlasting Kingdom and Dominion, mentioned, Dan. 7. For
Christ had all power in Heaven and Earth given him, Mat. ^8.18. A Kingdom
which lasts for ever, Luke 1.33. And this Kingdom he had at, or near his
ascension, at which time, and a thousand, and some hundredth years after the
Roman Kingdom stood, and (as some affirm) yet stands.

Therefore the Roman Kingdom is not the fourth Kingdom in Daniel.

Argum. 2. The fourth Kingdom in Daniel is to be destroyed before Christ's
Kingdom, to which all Nations, (and not the Jews only) are to submit, Dan.
7.14. not before a Kingdom of a thousand years (as some conceit yet to come)
begins.

But the Roman Kingdom was not destroyed before Christ's Kingdom began, to
which all Nations were to submit; for it began about the time when Christ sent
to all Nations to obey what he commanded, Man. 28.20. At which time, and
thence to this present the Roman Kingdom continues.

Therefore the Roman Kingdom is not Daniels fourth Kingdom.

Argum. 3. If the fourth Beast, Dan. 7. expresses the Roman Kingdom, then the
Beast, Rev. 13.1. to the 11. sets forth the very same Kingdom, and not one
like thereunto. For most Exposisitors hold (and that aright) that that Beast,
Rev. 13.1. sets forth the Roman Kingdom.

But the Beast, Rev. 13.8. to the 11 verse, expresses not the very same, bnt a
like Kingdom to the four Kingdoms, Dan. 7.

Therefore the fourth Beast, Dan. 7. expresses not the Roman Kingdom.

That the Beast, Rev. 13.1. to 11. expresses not the very same, but a like
Kingdom to the four Kingdoms, Dan. 7. I thus prove.

The chief mystical and figurative terms in the Revelation, having reference
to something in the Old Testament, expresso some new matter like the Old, and
not the same with the Old.

But the Beast, Rev. 13.1. has in the figurative and mystical terms thereof
reference to the Old Testament; namely, to the four Beasts, Dan. 7.

Therefore that Beast, Rev. 13.1. expresses not the very same, but a like
Kingdom to those four in Dan. 7.

What ^asfirmed of the chief mystical and figurative terms in the
Revelation, is evident: For Egypt, Babylon, the New Jerusalem, the Wilderness,
Paradise, Manna, and other the like terms express new matters like the old,
and not the same.

And that there is a manifest reference of that Beast, Rev. 13.1. to the four
beasts, Dan. 7. is most manifest. For

In Dan. 7. The 1. Beast is a Lion. 2. A Bear. 3. A Leopard. 4. A Beast with
ten horns.


The Beast, Rev. 13.1. Has 1. A mouth like a Lion. 2. Feet like a Bear. 3. A
body like a Leopard. 4. It has ten horns.


And as the four Beasts, Dan. 7. have seven Heads: The Lion one, the Bear one,
the Leopard four, and the fourth Beast one. So the Beast, Rev. 13.1. Has
seven Heads. Thus the reference is most evident.

Answ. To this Argument is answered. Be it granted that Christ's providentiall
Kingdom over all things, and his spiritual Kingdom over his Church were
administered by him, when he lived upon earth, yea, even from the beginning of
the world, and shall continue unto the worlds end. Yet his Monarchical
Kingdom, in which he shall govern and reign, as earthly Monarchs have done,
universally over the world is not yet begun. Mr. Archer.

Replicat. Christ in his Kingdom above mentioned, is the most absolute King
and Monarch that ever was, is, or shall be: and you much debase and vilify him
and his Kingdom in comparing it, and counting it inferior to earthly
Monarchies and Kingdoms. For they rose out of the Sea or Earth, Dan. 7.3, and
17. Rev. 13.1. and 11. But Christ's Kingdom is set up by the God of Heaven, and
is often called the Kingdom of Heaven in the Gospel. Christ is the Lord from
Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.43. and therefore is above all, Joh. 3.31. The kingdoms of
other States were destroyed. Dan. 2.44. But Christ's kingdom is everlasting,
and can never be destroyed, Dan. 7.27. Other great kingdoms of the world
ruled over one hundred twenty seven Provinces, or the like. But Christ is to
have all Nations to serve him, Psalm. 72.11. Even the uttermost parts of the
Earth for his possession, Psalm 2.8. In all things Christ has the
pre-eminence: And therefore Christ at the time mentioned was a more absolute
Monarch, then any King ever was, is, or shall be; and had a lawful authority
to give out his commission for all Nations to be taught to observe his
commands, Mat. 28.20.

But to come close up to the Point, Thus I argue.

Argum. 1. When Herod, Pila^e, and the Jewish Rulers rose up against Jesus
Christ, God set him up to be his King on Mount Sion his holy Mountain, and
gave him so eminent a Kingdom, that to it, all Kings, Judges, and people must
submit, or else be crushed with an iron Scepter, Psalm. 2. Act. 4.26, 27.

Pnt Herod, Pilate, and the Jews rulers rose up against Jesus Christ one
thousand five hundred and more years agon. This is undeniable.

Therefore God set up Christ his King on Sion his holy mountain, and gave him
a Knigdome so eminent, as above, one thousand five hundred and more years agon.

What ever men conceive, W^e must to the Law and testimony, to the sacred
authority of Scripture: and seeing we have good ground thence, so to do, we
may and do aver, that (notwithstanding worldly potentates not subtle
reasonings only, but mighty oppositions also aganst Christ) God set him up
King on mount Sion, and laughed to scorn the vain and frustrate designs of his
Adversaries, agents for, and friends of Rome, the then most potent Kingdom on
Earth. So that it must be granted, that Christ's Kingdom then set up, was more
powerful then Romes: which to this very day never could (though assisted by
the Gates of Hell) either by might or policy prevail against Christ's Kingdom.

Argum. 2. Christ in St. John's time, was the Prince of the Kings of the Earth,
Rev. 1.5. had all things given him by his Father, Luke 10.22. All power in
Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28.18. before his ascension: so that he was the head of
the Church his body; and in place far above all principality, power, and
Domination, and every title and name, that is named, not in this world only,
but in the world to come, Ephesians. 1.21, 22.

Therefore at Christ's being here on earth, or near unto that time, he had an
absolute and boundless Sovereignty far above all Monarchs and Kings that
heretofore lived, or ever shall hereafter.

For though many of them had very large Dominions, and great prosperity both in
Peace and War, and subdued and vassalled many other Kings to their Scepters:
yet none of them had all power in heaven and earth committed into their hands
by God. They were not capable of such honor, nor fit to be entrusted with so
great a charge.

Chap. III.
The Answer to many Objections of sever all Divines who would provetha Christ's
famous Kingdom is not yet begun.

It Is sufficiently above proved, that Christ's emin^nt Kingdom was long since
begun: yet against this truth (as against diver^ others) are many things
objected. But the Sun retains its light, how many clouds soever be
interposed. We will punctually examine any thing that is worthy of Answen.

Object. If Christ had about the time of his Ascension^ so absolute a
Sovereignty, at is affirmed, how is it, ^that many Nations in those times, many
afterward, many at this very day have not, or do not yet yield obedience to
him? Many Tyrans, many Heretics have risen up against his Dominion and Laws.

Answ. Those were no impeachment to Christ's absolute Soverdig^ty. The
wickedness of Sons takes not away the fatherhood and authority of Parents that
is over them: nor does a debauched Servants ill carriage, argue his exemption
from the Mastership he is subject unto. David was, and continued King, though.
(...) and Saul's house, though Absalon his own Son^e, though Shebah a Benjamite,
and many of Israel rose up against, and submi^ted (...) his Scepter. So Christ
sits an absolute King on his Throne, be the people of the world never so
unquiet, erroneous, rebellious. He rides on a crowned King conquering his
enemies (more then ever David did) and still to conquer. Rev. 6.2. And If any
escape their due deserved punishment in this life, they must appear at the
great day of accounts hereafter, and shall then smart for all their
miscarriages.

Object. Judge we of Christ's Kingdom by what we find in sacred writ, and
otherwise concerning him. When he^came into the world, He was a man of sorrow,
he was in the form of a Servant, rather a worm then a man, had no beauty in
him that be should be desired. In all this what Royalty? What sign of
Majesty? Glimps. 11.

Answ. We are not to judge of matters according to their outward appearance,
or men's est^em, but according to their true worth and excellency. Christ it his
incarnation humility, but whatsoever he then appeared, he was indeed the
fairest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. Fairer then the Children of men, Psalm.
45.2. and was God and man: and exalted by his Father above every name that is
named.

Object. He had a Reed put into his hand, in stead of a Scepter, was bowed to
in scorue: his Lordship and Dominion was much darkened, and appeared not to the
world: his Crown and dignity were hid in a monnet: b^e was little known by the
Name of God Omnipotent, ^or showed himself to be Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings, Glimps. p. 9.

Answ. 1. If Christ was abused and scorned, the greater was the peoples sin,
and his patience the more eminent. The more indignity he su^ed, the greater
did his love appear to wards us, and his merit more prevail for us.

Such an Objection as this, might of old have been expected out of the mouth of
a Pharisee, or now from an unhappy Son of the Sy^agogue? A child of wisdom
cannot but know, that Christ by his by his (...), curing ^ll disedses; by
bpening the eyes of the blind, so born; by giving hearing to the deas; by
raising the dead, by rising himself from death, notwithstanding Satan's and
wicked wretches malice against him, showed himself to be the Son of God, to
be God equil^ and one with the Father: and to have a power above all ^ings and
Potentates that ever ruled. My works, says he, testif^e of mea.

Object. No^ only himself, but his Disciples and Followers also were injured
and mu^thered by the bloody minded Jewish Rulers, and Rem^n Dop^ties; yea^ his
Subjects were but a company of poor distressed forlorn people, wandering up
and down, destitute of all comforts. Glimps. p. 9.

Answ. If Christ himself suffered a shameful death, surely he had done all
things well, and deserved it not: but he came into the world to die for us,
and for our redemption he died, and overcame death and all adverse power. If
his Apostler, their successors, and mu^titudes of Christians were injured and
persecuted by the authority of Heathen Emperors, and many of them put to
death, and savagely butchered: yet dying for, and in the Lord, and in a good
cause, they were so sary^ from being for^orne or miserable, that they are
pro^onced blessed and happy, Mat. 5. Rev. 14. Christ by dying for them, (...)
of death: So that their deaths were comfortable to themselves, and advantageous
to the Gospel, and Christ's Kingdom thereby was more and more propagated. They
were of that number which overcame the Devil and his instruments by the blood
of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and that loved (...) their
lives unto the death, Rev. 12.11.

Object. Christ has not yet ruled, as earthly Monarchs did, universally over
the known and esteemed World: nor has be had Sovereignty over all the Earth in
a visible and worldly manner for splendour, riches, peace, etc. whatsoever is
not sinful. He has not subdued all the neighboring Nations, as David had
done. The fa^ on earth, Psalm. 22.29. that is, great men for outward estate
bowed not unto him. Archer (if the book be his) p. 3.6.

Answ. If Christ did not rule, as the Earthly Monarchs for visible splendor,
glory, etc. the reason is easily given: Solomon who excelled in abundance of
all outward and royal accoutrements, found all to be but vanity of vanity,
and vexation of spirit. If the wise^t of all Kings esteemed them so upon his
own just trial and experience, much more did Christ know their worthlesnesse
and emptiness. His Kingdom served to furnish his Subjects with matters an
hundred fold better in this life, and in the world to come with endless
happiness. Whereas all that those earthly Monarchs possessed was but as the
beauty of a lilly, which soon fades, and on the morrow is cast into the Oven.
Nor did Christ intend to conquer the world by force of Arms, but in a more
heavenly, peaceable, and glorious a manner. He (as a Learned man well says)
sent forth his Apostles, who though they were but a few mean men, yet were they
more victorious, then the greatest Alexander, and potent Caesar's; and conquered
by the word of their testimony many opposite Kingdoms; subdued many thousand
spirits and consciences, and that in a short time without shedding one drop of
blood.

Secondly, Though not many noble, rich, wise, yet some of al these sorts were
converted in the Primitive times: as, namely, Joseph of Ar^mat^ea an honorable
Counselor; some Saints in the tyrans Nero's house the Ethiopian Queens
Chamberlain, such as came out of all Nations at Penteoost, Acts 2. (for mean
men use not to be far Travelers) the generous Bereans: and seeing these
became followers of Christ, so doubtless did many others. For Isaiah speaks
often of Kings, (whose example draws a train of the best sort after them)
overcome by the brightness of the Gospel. Besides the fat on earth, men like
the plants of God flourishing with the fatness of Gods grace, Psalm. 92.14. fed
with the marrow and fatness of the Gospel, Esa. 25.6. became members of
Christ's Kingdom.

Object. At Christ's possessing his Kingdom (suppose it to be about his
Ascension) he did not bring under all the earth, and haughtiness of people;
that is, Kingly power, that he alone might be exalted, Esa. 2.11. and 17.
Archer p. 22, etc.

Answ. Christ was the Stone, Dan. 2.25. which did strike, break, and destroy
the four kingdoms there mentioned: and was avenged of them for their pride
and Idolatry, which are the sins for which God threatens in Esaias. As God in
his due time punished those four Kingdoms; so when Romes sins were come to
ripeness, he spared i^ not. For he took peace from the earth, and left the
Roman forces to kill one another, Rev. 6.4. And for being drunk with the blood
of God people, when her sins come in remembrance before God, (be is fully to
be rewarded: and at length to be left desolate, and burnt with fire, Rev. 17.
and 18. How Christ at the coming to his Kingdom was and is exalted above all,
I have formerly declared: how Christian Kings are his substitutes and nursing
fathers of the Church: See Esa. 49.23. and 60.3.11, etc.

Object. Antichrist has set up himself as Lord and God, and prescribed Laws to
the consciences of men: so that Christ has been cast out of his Throne, and to
this day has reigned little outwardly. The Devil himself in regard of
multiplicity of Subjects is a greater King then he. For the greatest part of
the world is beathen, Antichristian, or ^isked, Glimps. p. 9, 10.

Answ. Anitichrist has indeed magnified himself, as much as possibly he
could, and attempted to throw Christ out of his Kingdom. But Christ's Throne
abides firm for ever and ever, Heb. 1.8. Antichrists Babel falls, but of Christ's
Kingdom there shall be no end, B^ke 1.33. And though the Devil has many more
Subjects then Christ, if you account the faithful alone to be Christ's
Subjects, and the rest the Devils; yet if you judge aright, you shall find that
Christ has more subjects then the Devil, and that Christ's power over all is
greater then the Devils. For even the Devil himself, and all his Subjects,
(as you call them) are at Christ's command, and if they do any good, it is by
their true ^orde exciting them; and evil neither can they, nor the Devil
their Lord by usurpation do, except Christ permit them. Besides, every
faithful Servant of God, and subject of Christ is as dear to God, as the
apple of his eye, is as David, Zach. 12.8. worth tenthousand of the Devils
Vassals. If the least in the kingdom of Heaven be greater then John Baptist,
how much more precious to God is any true Christian then millions of Reprobates?

Object, Kings have their royal Thrones, their Palaces, their Attendants; they
appear many ways, both in these and other matters, what, and how great they
are. Now, what I pray you, was there in Christ formerly answerable to the
glory, power, and Majesty of some mean Kings in the world in these times?

Answ. If you will further urge to a comparison between Christ and Earthly
Kings, I doubt not but that you will easily discern your misprision. For what
Kings palace and Throne on Earth is comparable to Christ's which is in Heaven? 1
King. 9.27. Psalm. 11.40. What Kings Attendants and messengers like in
fidelity, agility, strength and observance to the Spirits, holy Angels, who are
at Christ's command? Kings have their potent and puissant Hosts; but infinitely
inferior to Christ's Hosts, that is, all Creatures in Heaven and Earth; far
unlike to the thousand thousands that minister unto Christ, and ten thousand
thousands that stand before him, Dan. 7.10. God gives to Kings great Majesty
and glory, Dan. 5.18. But Christ's glory is above all Principalities and powers,
and all names of created excellency: and into his hands God has given all
things, Ephesians. 1.21. Job. 13.3. and 16.15. Kings send their Edicts to the
utmost parts of their Dominions: but Christ to all parts of Heaven and Earth.
Kings command their Officers, and have them responsable for their services: but
Kings themselves are Christ's Vicegerents, and must be countable to him for
all. Christ's laws are most heavenly, most perfect, far surpassing all humane
inventions. The honors that any one receives from his King, are but mean and
momentary in regard of the honors, which God ^ gives. Kings can punish the
bodies of their Subjects with prison and death; but God can cast both their
souls and bodies into the lake of fire and brimston. Kings stand in need, and
make use of their Subjects help and advise: but Christ nor needs, nor will use
his subjects counsel; and will use, though he needs not, their services. What
should I say more? Christ in all things does (...), not only surpass all that
is in Kings, but even all that can be spoken, or conceived of them. So great
then is the glory and Majesty of Christ, that the Moon may be abashed, and the
Sun ashamed (take the speech literally, or else figuratively for Princes, and
such as they lend their light unto) when Christ raigns on mount Sion, and shows
his power to be above all created might whatsoever. The Sun never saw any King
do such wonderful works as Christ here on Earth did effect. If some subject
be ignorant of a Kings Majesty and eminency, it is because his meannesse has
not access to the Court, nor converse with such as can inform him: but a good
christian cannot but know Christ's kingly glory and highness. For though he
cannot approach that light and Majesty, in which Christ now is: yet may he
search the Scriptures, which in excellent manner discover the same, so far as
it pleased the holy Spirit to describe them, or is needful for us to know.

Object. But Christ himself says, My Kingdom is not of this World. Therefore
there was some power and royalty, which was either denied Christ, or which he
would not take upon him.

Answ. A Kingdom may be said to be of this world in two respects: First,
because the administration of it is by humane and worldly means, and tends to
worldly ends; as, namely, to get a large extent of wordly Dominion, a glorious
name among men, abundance of earthly matters, and there is terminated. In this
sense, not Christ's, but Alexanders and the Caesar's kingdoms were of this world.
Secondly, because it is so administered, that Men conversing in this world may
thereby take notice of Christ, use the things of this world in an heavenly
manner, have on earth a conversation as it were in Heaven, each man in his
several calling and place of worldly employment serve God, and advance his
kingdom of grace in this world, and so submit themselves to Christ's government
here, that they may be heirs of glory in a better world. Such a kingdom
Christ both had, and has, in, and over this world; such a kingdom he affirmed
himself to be born unto. And as Christ governs this world and all things
therein in ordine ad c^lestia, with reference to the world to come: so Moses,
who was in Gods place, and his Deputy, to direct Aaron and the Israelites; and
David, who was Gods shepherd to govern and feed the Jews, did (...), perform
the best service they could, for the bringing the people in those times of the
world under them, to a more blessed estate in another world.

Replicat. But when the people would have made Christ a King, he did not
assent thereunto, but went from among them, Joh. 9.

Answ. The people there, out of a sudden apprehension of Christ's power, who
miraculously fed many thousands with five barley loaves and two fishes, were not
fit instruments; nor had a calling to fit them, for conferring on Christ so
great a dignity. Scinditur incertum studia in contrariavulgus, is a true and
clear verdict upon them, as the schism, Joh. 10.19. plainly shows; they which
today would make Christ a King, will to morrow depose him: if not they, some
others in a like, but contrary heat, upon some slight distaste will do it.
Their Hosanna one day, their Crucifige soon after show the mutability of their
fancy.

Secondly, had Christ accepted of the kingdom at these few Jews instance, this
might have been an occasion of a grievous combustion in that seditious and
discontented people; because the chief Rulers of the Jews consented not
thereunto, and had much people blindly led by them. If the chief builders
refused the head corner stone, and said, We will not have this man rule over
us: and further conspired, saying, Come this is the heir, let us kill him:
Christ, who well knew Gods law for the government of that people, would not be
made King, unless he was orderly called thereunto by the chief Elders and
Rulers of their Tribes.

Thirdly, Christ did not deny, or publicly gainsay his being made a King, but
perceiving their intention to take him, and make him a king, he withdrew
himself, and thereby both avoided civil dissension, to which that people were
too too prone, and continued also his humble course of life, that as a Lamb he
might come to the slaughter and die for us. He well knew the time appointed
for his humiliation; and waited his Fathers good pleasure for his exaltation.

Fourthly, when he was set as a king upon the holy hill of Sion, his purpose
was to propagate his kingdom by other courses, then suited with these peoples
plots and devises: Their thoughts and ways, were not Christ's thoughts and
ways: For his mind was to demonstrate his glorious might and Sovereignty, and
his Infinite and all-seeing wisdom by means in the worlds eye and humane
esteem most unlikely. This in his good time he accordingly peformed.

Object. The Saints are said, Apoc. 20 to reign with Christ a thouand years;
this is not yet fulfilled. Therefore there shall be hereafter a thousand years
of Christ's reign, in which the Saints shall reign with him on earth. For their
reign with him in Heaven is everlasting.

Answ. Obsrve well, that it is no where said, that Christ's reign on kingdom is
of a thousand years continuance. His kingdom foretold, Dan. 7.14. begun long
since, and continues for ever: he neyer reversed his command of teaching all
Nations. Ever since that edict, people of all Nations and languages have been
called to Christianity, showed their faith by their practice, and sealed their
Testimony (such as have been called thereunto) by their deaths.

Secondly, for the space of a thousand years after Christ's time, many were
called in several Nrtions, and in every part of that thousand years, many
lived and reigned with Christ, and the true doctrine of the Gospel was held in
some good measure until near the end of the thousand years: at which time
there was a declining, Mr. Fox Mart. Pres. page 5. Then matters grew worse and
worse, Fox. p. 215, vol. 1. Sylvester a Sorcerer about that time held the Popes
Chair. And Hildebrand soon after appeared to rule not by Gods, but by Satan's
spirit, Id. page 237. So that soon after these wicked beginnings, error and
superstition spread very much in the Churches proceedings.

Quest. When then did the thousand years of the Saints reigning with Christ
end? Tell us the time punctually.

Answ. As we cannot design the very year and day of the beginning of Christ's
famous kingdom, and Gods setting him up King upon the hill of Sion (nor do we
hold it necessary) but only in general aver with Scripture that it was begun
in Christ's life time on Earth. So for the end of the thousand years of the
Saints reigning with Christ, we will not point out the very year and day ^
but we say that about a thousand years after Christ's time, Satan being loosed,
did with the full height of his malice infuse into the Pope and his
instruments, Pride, error, and other impieties: insomuch that by the Popes
power and craft conjoined, the Nations in all the kingdoms of this western part
of the world in great measure yielded to the Popes supreme authority over all
Kings, to his pretended infallible determinations, to many superstitious
observances, and were led blind fold into a multitude of false and currunt
doctrines. In this grand Apostasy, Christ had faith full servants who saw
Romes declining from truth, and growth to an height of wickedness. These as
the rest of the Saints formerly continued to inhabit the holy City, the new
Jerusalem, though they were assaulted with bloody and most violent persecution,
and were extremely oppressed and tyrannized over until Luthers time.

Object. The Saints are said to reign with Christ the thousand years, in which
Satan is bound, Rev. 20. Their reigning with Christ imports more then when it
is said, that Christ reigns in or with them. This their reigning with Christ
has never yet been performed. For Christ has never yet visibly and personally
come again to the Earth, that they might reign with him, as the words import.
And therefore hereafter he must so come, and they reign with him. Archer.

Answ. 1. There is nothing spoken, Apoc. 20. which may assure us, or indeed
give us any the least warrant of Christ's personal and visible coming again to
reign here on earth. If such a matter had been, it might much better have been
concluded from this: Lo, I am with you always to the worlds end, Mat^ult. Or
from Christ's walking amidst the golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. that is, the
Churches of God. That he then did perform, and in the same manner (which is
there meant) he will ever do it to the last day. These speeches and the like
put together would soonerafford (which indeed they do not) a personal presence
of Christ still on earth, then any speech, Apoc. 20.

And, 2. where it is said, The Saints reign with Christ on earth, how can that be
more emphaticall, and imply more then this, We shall suffer with Christ? Rom
8.19. No man ever hence inferred that Christ must again come down from Heaven,
that we may suffer with him. In both speeches of reigning with, and suffering
with Christ, Christ is the chief, men are his members, and partake with him
their head in both. Sometimes the frame of the like expressions is different.
As thus, Cornelius believed with his whole house, Act. 10.2. even here
Cornelius is the chief; so had he been, had it been said, The whole household
believed with him. And what can there be more in this speech, We work
together with Christ, 1 Cor. 3.4. then in this, Christ works together with us?
Mar. 16.2. Christ is the chief in both. Let us not gull our selves with
niceties, and wrest that from Texts, which was never intended. We suffer, we
co-worke with Christ. and both these we do on earth: but may not hence
conclude, that Christ comes down to us personally and visibly for that purpose
So neither can we conclude Christ's visible and personal presense on earth,
because it is said, that we on Earth shall reign with him.

Dr. Alstede, who has labored most earnestly in his proofs about this point
of the thousand years, never makes any conclusion for Christ's visible and
personal coming down again to earth. He was a better Logician then to
conceit that such an inference could be wrought from these words, Apoc. 20.
The Glimps. is unresolved, page 13. Mr. Cotton denies it. p. 4. Mr. Mede most
modestly and ingenuously (as in his other writings, so in his Comment on the
Apocalypse) lashes not out so far: but keeps to general terms. Only Mr.
Archer is bold, as to wrest some other Scriptures, so here: and to make Christ
visibly come from, and return to Heaven according to his fancy, rather then any
text well understood.

Repl. Be it so, that Dr. Alstede says not, that Christ shall visibly and
personally reign on earth as Mr. Archer does: yet be asserts the resurrection
of the Martyrs, who are to reign with Christ, to be demonstrated (...), as
clear ( Apoc. 20.4.) as if our eyes saw it. p. 8. But the Martyrs are not yet
risen from their graves: therefore the Saints and Christ's eminent Kingdom is
not yet past. The speech cannot be of the Martyrs rising from sin, but from
their graves. For it is mentioned after speech of their beheading. Therefore it
cannot be meant of a rising from sin in this life.

Answ. 1. Let it be observed, that the Thrones were set, Apoc. 20. and 1. That
we mostly agree in this, that the Apostles and other godly persons are those
that sit on the Thrones. 2. It is also confessed, that these were beheaded, or
otherwise killed for their testimony to the Gospel: both these were fulfilled
in the Apostles, and other the Saints life time: So say I, was also their
Judging the world by Gods word preached, as the word preached by Christ judged
it, Joh: 12.28.

Moreover, secondly, it follows not, that because their deaths and martyrdoms
were spoken of first, Rev. 20.4. that the speech afterward of their rising
again, must be meant of their rising from death and from the grave, and not
from sin. For after speech of their martyrdom, it is said of them, that they
worshipped not the Beast, nor his image, nor received his mark, as advancers of
the Beasts kingdom with reference to their life time: but ((...) is here so to
be rendered) lived and reigned with Christ, that is, as advancers of his
kingdom, and partakers thereof, and that in their life times also. Mark the
context well, and of this there will be no doubt. Mr. Cotton ( page 20 l.
pen.) grants, that even now there is a resurrection of many precious souls, and
that they reign with Christ in their hearts and families, as much as in them
lies. So the Apostles and all good Christians rose from the death of sin, as
Christ from the grave, Col. 3.1. and on earth sought things above and in
Heaven, where Christ is: they lived with Christ, as Henoch walked with God,
Genesis 5.22. they reigned in this life through and with lesus Christ, from whom
they received abundance of grace, Romans 5.17.

And, thirdly, I answer, that this reigning with Christ is an expression like
others denoting the excellent privileges of Christians, and the great honors,
which Christ confers on them. As namely, Christ treads Satan under his feet:
true Christians also tread on him, Romans 16.20. Christ rules the Nations with a
rod of iron, Christians also do the same, Rev. 2.27. Out of Christ's mouth went
at we edged sword, Rev. 1.16. The word of God in the Ministers mouth is a two
edged sword, Heb. 4.12. Christ treads on the aspe, the lion, and dragon, Psalm.
91.13. Christ's Apostles tread on serpents and scorpions, and nothing shall hurt
them, Luke 10.14. Christ inherits the earth, Psalm 2.8. So do good Christians,
Mat. 5.5. Psalm 37.9.11. Esa. 60.21. As Christ has a kingdom here on earth,
Psalm 2.6. Rev: 19.16. So the Saints are made Kings unto God, (not Kings over
men, as David) and shall reign on the Earth, Rev. 5.10. Thus as is the heavenly
man, such are they that are heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.48, 49. True Christians are the
body of Christ, he is their head, 1 Cor. 12.27. Col: 1.18: As they partake of
sufferings like his: so they have their share of honors, which Christ enjoyes:
of his fullness they receive in their measure, as by the particulars here
mentioned, and some other the like does clearly appear. The speech of reigning
with Christ may not be stretched further.

Repl. Sitting on Thrones, and having judgment given to the Saints, imports a
far other matter, then you conceive: Believers shall rule the world as Kings,
and discipline men's souls as Priests. Christ will depute the Saints Governors
upon Earth, Arch. p. 23. The wicked shall be ruled with a rod of iron, and be
Tributaries to the Saints, as the Gibeonites to the Israelites, Arch: p: 22.
The first part of Christ's kingdom shall be ruled by them. For they shall sit
on Thrones, etc. Mat. 19.28. At last Christ will be visibly on the Throne, and
constantly there sit and judge, Id. 23. p.

Answ. Nothing here spoken does prove the Saints to be Kings in any other
manner, then I have above declared. They who continued with Christ in his
tentations, that is, were tried by as^lictions as he was: they that followed
him in the regeneration, that is, rose from sin, as he from death, sit upon
twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, as the Presbyters, Rev.
4.4. sit upon Thrones, and preach the Gospel to the twelve Tribes, as Peter a
Presbyter, 1 Pet. 5.1. did. And to them Christ appoints a Kingdom, as his
Father appointed to him: that as, they partake of the benefits of his kingdom:
so do all the Saints converted by their and their successors sermons, Mat.
19.28. Luke 22.28, 29. Rev. 5.9, 10.

And, secondly, concerning the Saints judging others, we know that it belongs
to the office of a judge to bind or to loose, to acquit or condemn: which power
that the Apostles might exercise Christ gave them the keys and authority
thereby to bind or to loose, to acquit or condemn in his name, Mat. 16.19. By
this means they had a greater power then Earthly Judges, who pass judgment
only upon men's bodies, liberty and goods: But Christ gave the Apostles power
to remit and retain sins, Joh. 20.23. and tells them, that what they hind or
loose on earth, is bound and loosed in Heaven, Mat. 18.18. The Apostles and
their successors were good and faithful Judges, and endued with wisdom,
directing them to kiss the Son, Psalm. 2. and were not like Pilate and Herod
and other Judges who opposed him.

Thirdly, the Apostles (for I will not deny them any their just titles) were
(...) rulers under Christ, Acts 15.22. For Christ is, (...) the Ruler, Mat.
2.6. and has his rule and authority, as he is the great Governor above all,
feeding his people Israel, expressed by this title. Hence I suppose the
Apostles to be called Princes in all lands, or all the Earth, Psalm. 45.16. for
Christ sent them to all Nations. They had their attendants, who ministered unto,
and were directed by them. These seeing and imitating the courses taken by the:
Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.17. did work the work, of God as the Apostles had, done, 1
Cor. 16.10. What is said of Paul and Barnabas, and others, Acts. 15.12. was
true also of Peter, James, Matthias, Silas, Apollos and the rest: they all had
rule and authority given them by Christ, according to their places. And what
authority Timothy and Titus had, we read in the Epistles wri^ unto them. The
witnesses of Jesus Christ and of his Word, who did not worship the Beast, nor
his image, neither took his mark in their foreheads, nor in their hands, they
lived and reigned with Christ, and sat on the Thrones spoken of, Rev. 20.4. and
ordered matters in the Christian Church, acccording to the direction of Christ
the great ruler of the Church.

Object. Before the famous thousand years, and the great and terrible day of
Christ's conquering his enemies, and setting up his kingdom, Elias must come,
Mal. 4.5. and restore all things, Mat. 17.11. Now Elias is not yet come; nor
are all things restored: nor could the time of Christ's incarnation and
preaching be termed a terrible day; for it was a most joyful day, Alsted. 54.
Therefore Christ's kingdom is not yet begun.

Answ. First, Christ, who had no guile found in his mouth, tells the Disciples
plainly, That Elias was come before him, Mat. 17.12. that is, John Baptist in
the spirit of Elias. The Disciples conceived aright, that Christ affirmed the
Baptist to be Elias. Why then should any doubt of this truth? Dr. Alsted might
well have seen a figurative speech here, as elsewhere he does: when a new State
of the old Babels and Edoms spirit, is termed Babel and Edom, page 44. and 53.

Secondly, the word Nora in Mal. 4. signifies not a day terrible, to affright,
but a day with all diligent and reverend care to be looked unto. Such a day
was it, when Christ appeared in the flesh, and published the Gospel: Acts 2.20.
a day of much comfort and joy: and therefore, Joel 2.31. it is called (...), a
glorious day; and Nora elsewhere is rendered by (...) glorious. Deuteronomy. 20,21. The
Lord did for Israel great and glorious things: for such they were to Israel at
their coming out of Egypt. And hence it is, that Joreh Elohim is rendered, one
that fears God, Job 1.1. and that Joseph using the same word, says, I fear
God, Genesis 42.18. not that God was terrible to him, but that he had a filial
and religious fear of the divine Majesty.

And, thirdly, if you would know how John Baptist restored all things; First,
tell us, how all men believed that John Baptist was a Prophet in very deed,
Mark 11. and how all men hon^^red Christ, Luke 4.15. And if you answer not your
selves, we will assay to find you an answer. It must needs be, that (all) in
these and the like places admits some restriction: and concerning John's
performance, we find, that all things, which he spoke of Christ were true,
Joh. 10.41. That he told the Publicans and Soldiers and other people their
duties, Luke 3.12. That the Pharisees and Sadduces, and all Jerusalem and the
Region round about Jordan wese baptized by him, Mat. 3.5. His doctrine was,
repentance for remission of sins, and he prepared the way for Christ, by whom
all flesh should see the salvation of God, Luke 3.3, 4, 5. and many other
matters he preached. Now I am assured that no man will conceive that all things
absolutely were to be restored by him^ for then what need would there be of
one greater then he, to come after him? It is enough that he taught such
doctrine, as set all matters in order, according to Gods will, for the approach
of Christ the Savior of mankind. But it is replied, Saint Augustine, and others
say, That Elias indeed shall come and restore all things, that is, confirm the
Saints vexed with antichrists persecutions. So that Malachies prophecy being
once fulfilled in John Baptist: yet may a second time hereafter be fulfilled
in some worthy instrument of God, Alsted p. 54. Answ. I acknowledge Saint
Augustine to be in his time an excellent and bright shining light in Gods
Church, so other Fathers. But I believe Christ's exposition of Malachi to be
undoubtedly true, namely, that John Baptist was that Elias spoken of by the
last Prophet in the Old Testament: and to have appeared in the very porch of
the New Testament; and that Malachies prophecy was by him perfectly fulfilled.
Yet because Gods dealings are often alike, I say, that God, who sent Enoch to
the Church of old declining, Noah to the old World, Elias to Israel, John
Baptist to the Jews become wicked; may also send some eminent person or persons
to the world near the end there of, who shall give warning of Gods coming to
his own people and servants in mercy; to his enemies in judgment before the
last day.

Object. It is promised, That all the ends of the Earth shall be saved, and
every knee bow to Christ, Esa. 45.22, 23. and every tongue confess unto him,
Rom: 14.11. Phil: 2.10. That all Israel shall be saved, Rom: 11.26. Mic: 2.12.
But this has not yet been performed: there was never yet an universal
conversion of all Nations, nor of all Israel; therefore Christ's kingdom in
which this is to be fulfilled, is not yet come or begun: Alsted. 89. Arch: 11.
and 28. Glimps: 28.

Answ: The word ( all) in many places of Scripture cannot (as was above said)
be extended to every particular, but must be warily limited. It is said, that
Christ healed every disease, Mat: 4.23. that he is a light to every man that
is born, Job: 1.9. That Saint Lukes Gospel was written of all things which
Christ had done, Acts 1.1. whereas, so short a book could not possibly contain
each particular, Joh: 21.25. And Christ healed not all diseased people, but any
whatsoever that came unto him, or sought by others for cure: nor did the light
of the Gospel by Christ brought in, benefit each particular person. For it is
presently there added: That the world knew him not, that his own knew him not.
So then the meaning of these speeches here urged must be limited according to
other Scriptures. That is, all shall be saved by Christ, and all have eternal
life, whosoever believe in him, Joh. 3.15, 16. Whosoever hear Christ's commands
and obey them, Mat: 7.24. this limitation is warranted, Joh: 6.45. where first
it is said, They shall be all taught of God: there is the general fully
expressed: but presently the restriction follows, (...), every one that hears
and learns of the Father, comes to me. Those are only such as the Father
gives unto Christ, verse 37. So then the sense of the texts produced, is, that
an elect company out of all parts of the world, both of Israel and every Nation
and tongue, shall be saved: all that adore Christ as their Savior, shall be
blessed in him. This is in good part accomplished already, and shall still more
and more by Gods mercy, and good Christians industry be effected. Let no man
conceive that hereby an evasion and shift is made, to elude truth. The course
of Scripture is clear; that there will be tares among the wheat, fishes good
and bad in the net of the Church; that l^^ a remnant of the Jews shall be
saved. Hence it is, that Rev: 21. and 22. When into the New Jerusalem through
the twelve gates they that are written in the Lambs book, enter; without this
City (yet in this world, Archer p: 22.) are dogs, inchanters, murderers,
idolaters, and such as love and make lies. Mr: Archer therefore very much
mistakes, who holds that in Christ's kingdom all things in the world shall be
as perfectly subject to him, as to Adam in his innocence; page: 5. And elsewhere
seems to say, that then all people shall be holy, page: 25. Thus he
over-lashes: Therefore I marvel not that elsewhere he contradicts himself,
and says, That the armies of the wicked only shall be destroyed by Christ in
the beginning of his Kingdom: as Egypts armies at the red Sea: and that in the
thousand years there shall be left some wicked (fearing else that there would
be no ungodly persons in after times) for a seed, whence the warriers of Gog
should spring: The Glimps: runs the like course, and says, that in Christ's
kingdom all dissension shall be taken away, and all men shall come and serve
God, and he called by one name; so that no one Church shall dissent from
another, p: 28. where speeches in Scripture tending to this sense occur we
must warily understand them. The learned Mr: Mede said very well, that ( shall)
often denotes, actum solitum aut debitum, not whatishall doubtless be done,
but what is wont on ought to be done. So Exodus: 30.29., All that come to the
Altar shall be, that is, ought to be holy: And Ier: 18.18. The Priests lips
shall, that is, ought to preserve knowledge: And Rom: 14.11. Every knee shall
bow to Christ, that is, ought to do it: for so it is expressed, Phil: 2.10.
God has highly exalted Christ, that every knew should bow to him. But this
counsel of God many have rejected against themselves: and many now and
hereafter will neglect. Or else, every knee shall bow to Christ, may thus be
expounded: Every one shall either willingly obey Christ and serve him: or when
Christ has subdued all the Churches enemies, and brings them all to judgment
at the last day they shall yield to him, and acknowledge him to be Lord of
Lords and King of Kings.

Obj. It is promised that Jerusalem shall be a quiet habitation, Esa: 33.20.
That the people shall break their Swords into plow shares, and their spears
into pruning books, Esal 2. That Jerusalem shall be again inhabited in
Jerusalem, and that then God will defend Jerusalem, and destroy all Nations
that come against it, Zach. 12.6. that there shall be no more destruction, but
Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited, Zach. 14.11. Many the like Texts are
produced by Dr. Alsted and some others. And these promises say they, have not
yet been fulfilled, but shall in their due time be fulfilled: and therefore in
the thousand years yet to come.

Answ. Dr. Alsted in page 52. says very well, that Zachary speaks not of the
old. Jerusalem, which was after his time demolished, but of the New Jerusalem;
the Christian Church consisting of Gods people, first in the old Jerusalem, and
thence all the world over. So that the old Jerusalem needs not to be rebuilt,
that we may go to worship God therein. For Jews and Gentiles, converted in all
Nations whatsoever, have a fre^ access to God in their own Countries where
they dwell. All families shall mourn for their sins, as of old the Jews are
said to due, Zach. 12.11. Mat. 24.30. Even Egypt once so wicked, Zach. 14.18.
and Ashur once so tyrannical, Es. 19.23. shall worship God by such Rites as
God appoints, as Israel of old did in Jerusalem at the feast of Tabernacles,
Zach. 14.16. Midian and Shebab shall comes to Christ, and Kedar and Nebaioth
and Tharshish shall call on Gods name, as the Jews used at their offerings and
sacrifices, Es. 60. Zach. 14.17.21. Other speeches in the Prophets like these,
are in the same manner to be expounded. It is here said, these things shall
be done, that is, as above, they should and ought to be done: These and all
other Nations were by the Apostles, to be taught to do what Christ commanded:
the gates of the new Jerusalem were opened to all people and Nations on each
side of the City. And many persons in all Nations were of old, and shall still
be called and redeemed, Acts 2. Rev. 5.9. Satan could not hinder the Gospel
from being propagated: as I shall hereafter show.

Secondly, concerning the quiet and peace of the Christian Church: though it
have a place which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. yet even in the
Kingdom of Christ, there must be a patience and suffering, Rev. 1.9. The
Saints have a blessed and quiet estate, but yet they first were in, and then
came out of great tribulation, Rev. 7.14. The witnesses were killed; but revived,
and were taken up to Heaven, Rev. 11. Gods servants cry; but tears are wiped
from their eyes. They have sores, but cured with the leaves of the Tree of
life: they thirst, but are satisfied with the waters of life; they undergo
sorrow, pain, and death: but these are the first things; things that first they
must suffer; but such things as must pass away. Rev. 21. and 22. The Church is
tried, purged, whited by affliction (as Dr. Alstede page 7.) Christ himself
came from the cross to the Crown: and what befell the green tree, the dry can
not escape. They that will live godly, must suffer persecution, 1 Timothy 3.12.
This is their portion in this life, as usually Gods Word describes it. The
godly are trees planted by rivers, Psalm. 1.3. Esa. 14.8. and as trees endure
many a sharp frost, and bitter storm to make them take root the better: They
are Vines, Psalm. 80.9. but must be pruned, else they will be luxuriant in
boughs, deficient in fruit. What Son is there whom the Father chastises not?
Heb. 12.7. Christ himself has told us how these things may be competible and
consistent. In the world, says he, ye shall have trouble, in me ye shall
have peace. Joh. 16.33. So there may be terrors within, and fightings
without, but God is the comfort of his people, 2 Cor. 7.5, 6. The joy, the
quiet repose, the happiness of the faithful, is, to have God for their God,
Rev. 21.3. And having him they can want nothing needful, things present and
things to come, all are theirs, 1 Cor. 3.22. They shall not want any thing that
will work for their good, nor have any thing, which may procure their harm.

Thirdly, it is not always conclusive; God has promised this or that:
therefore undoubtedly it shall be fulfilled interminis, according to the
express words. For, first, many of Gods promises be conditional, free in the
promiser, and not deserved by us, though by Gods work upon us we obey him, and
he fulfill his promise; but many promises by man's neglect of the condition
deserved to be cut off from being fulfilled. God promised that a man should
not stand before Israel in battle, Josh. 1.5. yet sometimes their sins so
provoked God, that the Canaanites foiled them. God said that Elies house should
walk before him for ever: but now, says he, (upon their offending him) it
shall not lee so. They that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30. And
secondly, we must balance the promises of God made to his people, with the
threats against them. God does so, Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Romans 2, 6. etc. And makes
both take effect, as to him seems good. These good things, says Zachary, shall
come to pass, if ye obey the voice of the Lord, Zach. 6.15. and by the rule
of contraries, the evils shall come to pass, if they disobey.

Fourthly, many promises are made good to Gods people in heaven with greater
advantage, then they could be on earth: God promises length of days and
prosperity to such as keep his Laws, Prove. 3.1, 2. yet Henoch lived not half so
long as his forefathers, and Josias had his years cut off in battle; though
both Religious. God made them a recompense in Heaven.

Fifthly, Temporal promises are often fulfilled in this life, with much
advantage in spiritual favors. God promises, that the wives of such as fear
God, shall be as Vines on the house side, their children as Olive plants about
their Tables, Psalm. 128.3. That the meek shall inherit the Land. Yet often good
and faithful men lose wives, children, brothers, lands, and the like: but God
then gives them spiritual graces in this life, Which are a hundred fold better
for them; and in the life to come everlasting blessedness, Mark. 10.30.

Object. Christ visibly and personally came, first, to be incarnate: secondly,
he so comes to receive his Kingdom: and thirdly, to judge all men at the worlds
end. Some confound the second and third coming of Christ, and think, there
shall be no coming of Christ to judgment; but to the last and final
judgment. His coming to receive his Kingdom has been overlookt since the
first hundredth years of Christ, Arch. 15. p.

Answ. Dr. Alstede, who is most zealous in your way, and ready to maintain your
conclusion for the thousand years, yet accords with many Expositers before him,
and approves but of the first and last visible, and personal appearing of
Christ. If a middle coming of Christ could have been justified, he wanted
neither will nor skill to have asserted it. Here Mr. Archer, who censures
other^ for dim-sighted and over-looking, what he conceived he saw; will be
found not single cied, but to have mistaken and made three commings of two, as
he, whose sight failing him, said, Geminis consurgit mensa lucernis, that
there were two candles, where in truth was but one. If the Texts he brings for
a second visible and personal coming of Christ at the beginning of the
thousand years yet to come, were in any least measure conclusive, I would
particularly examine them. But that labor may well be spared. If he demand;

Quest. Is there no coming of Christ to judgment, until the last judgment?

I Answer, There is no visible and personal coming of Christ to any other
judgment. Yet Christ judges and punishes the wicked of the world, by bloodshed,
famine, pestilence, Rev. 6. and 18.8. and 19.2. Many remarkable ways he has
judged and plagued the Churches enemies on earth by his instruments, as a King
punishes his disobedient Subjects by his Judges and Justices, yet Christ leaves
not, nor comes down from Heaven his Throne, no more the^ an earthly King from
his palace.

Repl. But there is a partial judgment at the beginning of Christ's Kingdom.
For after this judgment the Temple is opened, the Ark of the Covenant is seen,
there are lightnings, thunders, etc. Rev. 11.18. This Text is manifest, and
proves a judgment performed by Christ, when his Kingdom to come begins, and
before the Temples opening, etc. Arch. p. 13.

Answ. First, The judgment spoken of Rev. 11.18. is the last judgment, at the
worlds end; for there the dead are judged, small and great, and therefore all
of them. There Gods servants according to Christ's promise are rewarded, and his
enemies, destroyers of the earth, destroyed.

Secondly, I Answer, that that which follows of the Temples opening, the Ark
seen, of lightnings and thunders, and the like, is but a preparation and
passage to the vision next in place: And may much better begin the twelfth
Chapter, then end the eleventh Chapter. This I prove, because we find the
like address to other visions in this book: Namely Chap. 4.1. and 5. and Chap.
8.5. such a preparation was made at the giving of the Law, Exodus 19.16.

Object. Christ's Kingdom is said to be at the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.15. and
then all kingdoms in the world are subject unto him. Arch. p. 11. Likewise
after the condemnation of the great Whore, and the avenging of the Saints
bloodshed by her, Christ is said to be Lord of Lords and King of Kings.
Therefore then toward the worlds end the eminent Kingdom of Christ begins.

Answ. Christ's eminent Kingdom began, as was showed above: and from his being
upon earth, he has had the kingdom, power, and glory for ever. But as the
Lord is evidently known, by executing judgment, Psalm. 9.16. so he is
especially known and taken notice of by men, to be King, when he in evident
manner shows his power in defending his servants, and in plaguing his enemies.
Hence it is, that when he ruined Pharaoh and his Host, Moses said, The Lord
reigns for ever and ever, Exodus 15.18. When he smote the Philistines with
Emeroids, and kept them under in Samuels time, no King leading forth the
Israelites Armies, it is also said, that God is their King, 1 Samuel 8.7. and
12.12. When the fury of bulls, dogs, lions, Unicorns prevailed not over Christ,
so that he conquered all power opposite unto him, David sung, The Kingdom is
the Lords, Psalm. 22.28. When David himself overcame the enemies of his kingdom,
which was a type of Christ's, it is said, The Lord reigns, 1 Chronicles. 16.31. When
Satan is conquered by Michael, then it is proclaimed: That the Kingdom is the
Lords, Rev. 12.10. When Christ judges and plagues Rome, he is styled King of
Kings, Rev. 19.16. When at the day of judgment all his enemies are wholly cast
down under his feet, and lie at his mercy and disposure to be judged: then
it is said, That the kingdoms of this world are our Lords, even Christ's, Rev.
11.15. He that was first styled Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5.
then plainly at last appears so to be: what the wicked out of their pride
would not before assent unto, then they shall to their shame and confusion
confess, and find most true. This I touched before, and now have cleared
fully and past denial.

Object. God has promised to put on his armor, Esa. 59.17. to make his sword
drunk with the blood of the slain, to make a great slaughter in Edom and Bozra,
Esa. 54.14. To power out his indignation on the armies of the wicked, to fat
his sword with blood, Esa. 34.2. To feed his enemies with their own flesh, and
to make them drink their own blood; to contend with them, that contend with his
people, Esa. 25.25, 26. That wars moved against his Church shall not prosper,
Esa: 54.17. That he will wound Kings in his wrath, and fill all with dead
bodies, and destroy the heads over diverse Countries, Psalm. 110. and slay the
wicked, Esa: 11.4. that is, some eminent opposer of Christ. That he will make
a City to be an heap, and a strong City a ruin, Esa: 25.1. And bring down them
that dwell on high, Esa: 26.5. That when the Nations are ripe for the Harvest,
he will fill the Winepresse of his wrath, Joel 3.9. That he will destroy all
the Nations that come against Jerusalem^ Zach. 14.11. These things are to be
fulfilled, when God reigns in Sion: and express the Churches happiness, and
the wickeds misery, not yet fulfilled.

Answ. From these Texts may be inferred, First, that as the old Jerusalem was
cruelly assaulted, so shall the New ^ for in it Christians suffer great
tribulation, Rev. 7.14. The Dragon wars with the Woman's seed, Rev: 12.17. The
ten-horned beast blasphemes Gods Tabernacle and the Saints in it, wars with
them, overcomes them, Rev: 13.6.7. kills many of them, Rev: 6.11. And

Secondly, Though God suffer his Church by the enemies thereof, sometimes to be
thus used, yet he being armed, and riding on his white horse, goes on
conquering and to conquer at his good pleasure: and sends the riders on the
red, pale, and black horses to punish the great men of the earth, and their
retinue; so that they hide themselves in caves and dens, Rev: 6. These things,
says Mr. Mede, were don within four hundred years after Christ's birth. After
this Christ powers Vials of wrath on the Churches adversaries, Rev: 16. He
makes Babel fall, casts the beast and false Prophet into the lake of fire, and
slayes their remnant, Rev: 19. He slayes Gog and his Armies, Rev. 20. Thus he
destroyss them that destroyed the earth, Rev: 11.18. The wicked may domineer
for a time, yet shall be, not only in the four hundred years after Christ,
but oftentimes afterward foiled: and in the end the victory shall be on the
Saints party; who are the inhabitants of the New Jerusalem. They, it they live
are the Lords, and if they die, they change a pilgrims and militant state here,
into a glorious and perpetually settled estate hereafter. Besides, they leave on
earth a faithful ^uccession of Inhabitants of the new and spiritual
Jerusalem, against whom the Gates of hell cannot prevail; whence it is that
this Jerusalem cannot be destroyed: and that all which maliciously oppose it
shall b^e vanquished and subdued, as all Nations were, who fought against the
old Jerusalem.

Thirdly, that God, not delighting in men's destruction, lets the wicked eat the
wickeds flesh, and drink each others blood. He pulled down Aram; and the
neigbouring Nations by Babel, Babel by Persia, the Persians by Alexander King
of Greece and his chief Captains, the Greeks the posterity of Seleucus and
Ptolomy by the Romans; the chief Roman rulers, (...), by mutual conflicts
among themselves, and by the Goths and Vandals, and others: and at the last day
will utterly destroy and abolish that wicked State with the brightness of his
coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. What befell Babylon, Tire, Damascus of Aram, Kir and Ar
of Moab, Dumah of Edom, Zoan of Egypt, will at length befall Rome. For among
the wicked there is an eminent and superlative wicked State, called the wicked
one, whom God will destroy, Esa: 11.4. and this is, as Jonathan Ben Vzziel
says, Armylus, the Roman power (says Mr. Broughton) by original from
Romulus, the word denotes him with no greater change then Armathia is put for
Ramath. Nor can the Roman Beast fall alone, the heads of diverse Countries, the
ten Kings fall with him, Rev: 16.14. and their posterity turn to Christ's side,
verse 16. Thus Christ brings them low, that carry their heads full high, he
quels their power, and demolishes their cities.

Fourthly, Christ who has, and still does plague his enemies, observes the
time of their sins being ripe for the harvest, Rev. 14.15. and come to the full
height: and then makes them drink full cups out of the winepresse of his wrath.
Thus, to conclude, it is manifest that the New Jerusalem shall subsist and
prevail: and that the City, which in Saint John's time ruled over the Kings of
the Earth, and which would then have no King but Caesar, and now would have the
Pope above all Kings (persisting in one and the same fin of making lawful
Princes her vassals) shall still boe decaying, and at last be utterly
destroyed. But hence can not be concluded that the Christian Church shall enjoy
on Earth such, and so long felicity, as Mr. Archer and some others plead for;
and it is probable that such prosperity would bring more damage to the Church,
then could affection. The Churches experience has usually found it so to do:
and on good ground has contented it self with some small measure of outward
comforts, sweetened with plenty and abundance of spiritual refreshments.

Repl. You take the term Jerusalem in a mystical sense, and decline the
corporal and outward felicity of the Church, with diverting us to spiritual
blessings. If thus you fly to Allegorizing texts, and turning plain evidences
for corporal matters to spiritual, you may easily put off any Scripture
produced against your opinion. There is no sufficient reason why thus you
should do.

Answ. There are in Scripture (...), speeches Allegorical, Gal. 4. Christ
often spoke by parables, and parabolically and spiritually expounded diverse
passages of the Old Testament in the New: as Rahels weeping for her Children,
the Sheep scattered, when the Shepherd was smitten, and the like. And more
punctually to the matter in hand, in expressing of this very allegory, it is
said, Gal. 4. That the old Jerusalem is in bondage with her children, the
unbeleeving Jews; and that the new Jerusalem, and all the faithful her
children are free from bondage, and thereupon are called the children of God.
Let such as have gone too far in allegories answer for it. This Allegory has
sufficient warrant.

Secondly, Dr. Alstede himself confesses, and that aright, that by Moab
sometimes the Churches enemies are meant, page 44. by Edom, false brethren,
page 44. by Bozra and Babel, Rome, page 44. by Sion, the Church of Christ, page
42. And in the Apocalypse neither is Manna, nor Paradise, nor the tree of life,
nor the leafs thereof literally, but figuratively to be understood. So are
diverse other terms in that book, as the most and best Expositors grant.

Object. Christ being risen from death, spoke many things to the Diseiples
concerning the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. and thereupon the Apostles jointly ask
Christ: Lord will thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel? verse 6. Now
the Apostles having both lately and formerly heard Christ often preach; were
men of understanding, and could not possibly (in asking Christ concerning the
restoring the Kingdom to Israel, such a Kingdom, as once Israel had, and as
other Monarchs had on earth) be deceived, and err in a matter of so great
concernment to the whole Nation. See Archer page 10.

An. First, all that hold, that the Jews shall again have an earthly kingdom,
such as other Monarchs have had and that the Disciples inquired of that
Kingdom; and that the Kingdom, which God promised Christ, is not begun one
thousand six hundred years since that question, must necessarily hold, that the
Disciples both could and did err about the time of that Kingdom: and thereby
make them not so understanding as they desire to do.

Secondly, I conceive that the Apostles did not err about the time. John
Baptist and Christ had taught them often, that the kingdom of Heaven, that Dan.
7.14.18. was at hand: and religious people among the Jews, even in that corrupt
time, waited for, and expected that the consolation of Israel, and the kingdom
of God should appear, Luke 1.25. Mark 15.43. And even about the time of that
question, in regard of Christ the head of that Kingdom, the kingdom was come:
for to him are ascribed Kingdom, Power and Glory for ever and ever, Mat. 6.13.
Rev. 5. But in regard of the Jews and others, who should be members and
subjects of that Kingdom, seeing it was to be a Kingdom within them, Luke
17.21. it could not come (...), so observably, that any one could say, this is
the very time of men's becoming subjects of this kingdom; for some did partake
of this kingdom sooner, some later; some with a weaker, others with a stronger
faith; all, even the best, might increase in faith: and in this regard all must
pray, Thy kingdom come, let it more and more daily rule in our hearts.

Thirdly, if the kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. and the kingdom of Israel be all
one, as indeed they are, the Apostles erred not much about the benefit of this
kingdom, which should redound to the Saints, Dan. 7.22. and to the Israel of
God, Gal. 6.16. that is, to a remnant of the Jews, Rom: 9.27. and elsewhere
often: and to the Gentiles, as Peter was taught, Acts 10.35. to a multitude of
them: Rev 7.9. For neither does the speech, In thee shall all the Gentiles be
blessed, Gal: 3.8. Nor the speech, All Israel shall be saved, Rom: 11.26.
comprehend any more of each party obtaining peace and mercy, then such as walk
according to Christ's rule, Gal: 6.16. which is, whosoever believes in Christ
shall have life eternal, Job: 3.16. In this the Apostles, remembering what
Christ had so often inculcated, erred not, as I conceive: yet might they err
in some circumstances of this Kingdom, especially in such as concerned their
ministry about the same: Christ therefore, who had given them commission to
teach all Nations to do what be as a King (else what authority had he to send
out his Edicts?) commanded; tells them in effect, that he indeed should have a
kingdom over Israel, and that themselves should in due time (which the Father
reserved in his own power) receive power from the holy Ghost to bear witness
of, and to propagate this kingdom of hi^ their Master in all parts of the
world. Christ at the time of his ans^er to the Apostles had many things to say
to them, and they then, (for so his speech intima^^s) could not (as in Joh.
16.13. he likewise says) bear them: And therefore he refers them to the
holy Ghost, who (being sent down to them at Pentecost) should lead them into
all truth: among which truths we find this to be one; That Christ was by God
set up a King on mount Sion, above all Principalities and Powers; albeit the
Jews and Heathen ^o^entates raged against him. His power was such, that he
bound some of them in the blessed chains of the Gospel, Psalm 149.8. These
bands of Christ were such as they could not break; such cords as they could not
cast from them, Psalm 2. Wise Christian Kings, serving the Lord in fear, were
blessed: the Jews and Heathenish Princes rebelling against him were broken in
pieces like a Potters vessel.

Thus have I answered Texts produced against my Tenet. So that the considerate
Reader will discern hereby how to blunt Arguments grounded on some other the
like Scriptures. And if any one surmise that he can put a better edge on any
Argument here discussed, or bring stronger proofs against me; may he please
moderately and punctually to propound the same, and I shall by Gods assistance
so answer him, that it shall appear, how I will not willingly boulster out any
error, nor shamefully desert any truth.

Chap. IV. Mr. Tho. Brightmans judgment of the times in Daniel, and the
Apocalypse examined, and disproved.
DIverse learned men have employed their time and pains about the times spoken
of in Daniel and the Apocalypse, and in regard both of the excellency of their
parts, and of their diligent perusal of what has formerly been written
thereof, may be thought in all probability to have found out the truth, yet
may perhaps have missed thereof. I will therefore briefly set down their
opinions, and examine, whether they on good ground dissent from my Tenet, and
have happily attained the truth.

Mr. Tho. Brightman on Apo^. 20. holds, First, that Satan, that is, the wicked
Emper^^^ did persecute the Christian Church, until Constantine ruled: which
was about the year of Christ, three hundred.

Secondly, That Constantine imprisoned Satan, that is, the wicked Emperors,
and bound them a thousand years, by so settling the government, that they could
not domineer over the Church, as formerly: In this time, says he, Antichrist
reigned, and the Saints lived and reigned with Christ, that is, embraced the
Truth. This period of time, Rev. 20.2. lasted one thousand years.

Thirdly, That Satan was loosed. And then the Turk plagued the Roman Empire
three hundred ninty five years: that he likewise vexed the false Church that
of Rome, and the true Church, which began to appear out of the wilderness in
the year one thousand three hundred, and forsook Romish superstition, and
opening her eyes to the truth, rose from death by the first resurrection. Three
hundred years are now past, says he, since this began. Further the Turk shall
begin to fall in the year one thousand six hundred and fifty, and be quite
overthrown in the year one thousand six hundred ninty five; Antichrists or the
Popes fall is in the year one thousand six hundred eighty six. After this, the
Jews shall be called, and the Gentiles also come into the true Church. So that
seven hundred years more being added to the three hundred above, the Church
shall enjoy happy times, and the Gentiles continue in the truth. This period of
time, Rev: 20.4. is of years, says he, one thousand.

These three periods of time extend to two thousand three hundred years. How
long after the Jews shall continue to embrace the Truth, God, says he, has
not revealed, nor can any man tell. But at length the world shall grow secure
and wicked, and then Christ will come and put an end to the Saints sufferings
and patience, and to the malice and misehievous practices of the ungodly
against them.

Some truth is in these passages, to it I assent. First, It Is true, that the
wicked Emperors did persecute the Church, until Constantines time. I add,
that some of them after his time did also vex the Church. It Is a truth also,
that Constantine settled Christian government. But not so, say I, that is
continued one thousand years from his time. For Rome infected the world with
error, about one thousand years after Christ. I approve also his exposition of
Antichrists reigning, and of the Saints living and reigning at the same time
with Christ: But I hold these things not settled by him within their due limits
of time. It Is true that rising from Romish superstition and error is a first
resurrection in some; but I add further, that all rising from sin in this
life, is likewise a first resurrection. I grant also that the Turks have much
plagued Rome, and that both Turks and Popes have don great mischief to the true
Church, and that their tyranny shall fall in due time. But the just year of
their fall, who can tell? Lastly, the Jews calling and the Gentiles fuller
conversion may justly be expected and indevoured. But, Go teach all Nations,
expresses a command to us, and a duty for them, ever from Christ's time to the
worlds end. What more I do approve will appear in other parts of this
Discourse, with my reasons thereof.

That many other passages herein are unsound and groundless, I will
particularly show. First, Satan himself (and not the wicked Emperors his
instruments) is bound, Rev: 20.2. And lest any should mistake herein, be that
is bound, is expressly set forth by four titles; the Dragon, the old Serpent,
the Devil, and Satan; So also Rev: 12.9. And secondly, be that is bound, is
tied fast from deceiving the Nations. Now the old and grand deceiver is Satan
himself; and Rev: 12.9. is called (as indeed he was before Christ's time) the
deceiver of the whole world. The Emperors course was by the sword and violent
means of war, not by wiles. Whence, Rev^ 13.4. the brag is made: who can war
with the Beast? Therefore Satan himself, and not the Emperors, was bound.

Secondly, if Constantine bound Satan, first, it may as well be said, that
Maxentius a cruel Tyrant, Julian the Apostate, Maximus and other Arrians, P^as
the murderer of his predecessor, and other the like wicked Emperors let him
loose again. Secondly, how could Constantine, who ruled but thirty years, bind
Satan a thousand years? it must be Christ, who by his Almighty and endless
power could bind Satan so long a time. Thirdly, when Satan was cast down from
heaven into the earth and Sea, Rev: 12, which are termed the Abyss, in which
he was bound, Rev: 20. he gives his power and great authority to the beast,
Rev: 13.2. that is, as most Expositors hold, the secular power of Rome; 1. in
the wicked Emperors; 2. in the Popes arrogating the same. Satan therefore was
bound, the wicked Emperors were loose.

Thirdly, Satan is not loosed, Until he Rev: 20. in eminent manner deceive
the Nations again. whom Christ commanded the Apostles to teach, what he
commanded. This was don about a thousand years after Christ. For then darkness
overspread the face of the Church, Popes pride exalted it self above all called
God, and tyrannized over Princes: then were super^itious ^ites and humane
inventions mixed with, and preferred before Gods ordinances: then nice and
Scholastic disputes to little or no edification were agitated, and the milk
and strong meat of sacred Scriptures neglected.

Fourthly, If the first resurrection be the bringing of men from Popish
errors to truth, and a raising them from a sinful course to an holy life, ^
qua pridem^erant alieni, which was not in use with them before: as Mr.
Brightman says on Apoc. 20.5. then may it also be termed the first
resurrection, when many thousand Jews and Gentiles were converted from
heathenish superstition and Jewish errors, and embraced the Gospel in, and
presently after Christ's time. This is rather the first resurrection, then that
in which men abandoned Bomish superstition three hundred years agon in the time
of Mar^^^^^ (...) John de Ganduno, John Wiclif, and others, as Mr. Brightman
would have it.

Fifthly, Suppose it granted that three hundred years are past, since popish
errors were gainsaid (as indeed when ever did any error manifestly spring,
but God had his witnesses of truth to oppose it?) what glound have we to
affirm that some Gentiles shall held the truth seven hundred years more, and the
Jews no man knows how long after that? By this account the world should endure
two thousand three hundred years after Christ's time: which some learned men
deny, others will not define: nor has Mr. Brightman any found Argument to
prove it. If he urg from Apocalypse 20. the thousand years mentioned for the
reigning of the Saints with Christ, and then the thousand years before them,
for Satan's binding, he may as well add a thousand years more, in which the
Saints shall be priests of God, and reign also with him. For the thousand
years are a third time named; and by this means he will make the world
continue three thousand three hundred years, from Christ's time. He may
likewise make the woman Rev: 12.6. and 13. fly twice into the wilderness:
because there her flight is twice mentioned. In this way I think Mr. Brightman
will walk without company.

Sixthly, Concerning the Turks Mr. Medes opinion is more probable, first, that
their dominion began when Tangolipex was made King in the year one thousand
fifty seven, not in the year one thousand three hundred, as sales Mr.
Brightman. Secondly, that from the year one thousand fifty seven, count three
hundred ninety six years more, which come to the year one thousand four hundred
fifty three, and then in this very year the Turks took Constantinople, and rose
to greater might: and not began to fall, as Mr. Brightman affirms they should
after three hundred ninty six years. Thirdly, the Text is express, that upon
the times mentioned Apoc. 9.13. they should kill the third part of man; whereas
the Text has not one word of their fall; nor is the ruin of the Turkish Empire
foretold in what year it should fall, says Mr. Mede. And again Mr. Mede still
holding his accustomed ingenuity, gives another sense of Apoc. 9.15. thus: The
Turks will be prepared for a fit time, to wit, for a day, a month, and a
year, to kill the third part of men. And surely this sense is more probable
then the other, depending upon the exposition of each day for a year, which is
not to take place, except something in the Prophecy lead us thereunto.

Seventhly, If the ten horned beast, Rev: 13.1 be not the Popes, as they are
Clergy men, but the secular Rulers of Rome; then Mr. Brightman erres in making
this beast to express Antichrist, or the Popes only. Secondly, he erres in
saying that this beast began in the year three hundred and six; whereas the
Caesar's began before, and were in Saint John's time. For it is said of the seven
heads, that five are past, that one is, Rev: 11.10. that is, the Cesars. And
then thirdly, if this beast be to rule two and forty months in Mr. Brightmans
sense, they must begin in or before Saint John's time, and so must be ended
many years agon: though his account for the wounded beasts cure, be taken in
to make the sum swel. Other exceptions against Mr. Brightman will in part
appear elsewhere in this Discourse.

Chap. V. Dr. J. Alsteds, and M. H. Archers accounts about the times in the
Apocalypse and Daniel, propounded and refuted.
DOctor Alstede lays his plot for the account of times thus: Daniels seventy
weeks end at Jerusalems ruin in the year of Christ 69 Add thereunto the days
after this desolation, Dan. 12.11. that is, so many years 1290 These two sums
make up the years of the Churches affliction, 1359 Then follow the days, that
is, years, which make them happy who live unto them 1335 These two sums reach
unto the year of Christ 2694 The last thousand of the years in the sum last
above mentioned are the thousand years in Apoc. 20. in which Satan is bound,
and the Church flourishes: So that this thousand years begin in the year 1694.

Mr. Archer thus frames his accounts of these times, page 47. Julian set up the
abomination of desolation in the year of Christ, 366 To this add the account
of days, that is, years, Dan. 12.11. at the end whereof the Jews shall be
called to Christ 1290 Then add also 45 years more, part of the 1335. Dan.
12.12. 45 These three sums amount to about years 1700 Then in the year 1700.
Satan is bound, and the Churches happiness begins. After this follow the wars
of Gog and Magog: So that the world ends not before, but some time after the
year 2700.

Mr. Archer brings us another account, page 51. that if one miss, the other
may hit. Thus it stands: The Papacy begun, and the ten Kingdoms arose in the
year of Christ 406 The Papacy continues years 1260 So that the Papacy is ruined
in the year 1666 Then begin the years of Satan's binding, in which the Saints
reign with Christ in much prosperity. These are years 1000

Then follow the wars of Gog and Magog, after which the last and sinall
judgment comes, so that these wars are not before the year of Christ 2666.

These accounts of time I hold to be many ways faulty. First, Daniels weeks
end not at Jerusalems fall by Titus.

Arg. 1. Jerusalems wall is built, and the Messiah slain after seven weeks, and
62 weeks. Dan. 9.26. and in the half of the one week remaining, the Messiah
puts an end to sacrifice and oblation. There is the end of the seventy weeks.
But the destruction of Jerusalem was thirty and odd years, if not forty, after
Christ's death; which did put an end to sacrifice and oblation. Therefore the
seventy weeks cannot end at Jerusalems fall by Titus.

Arg. 2. The Covenant with many, at which the seventy weeks end, was confirmed
in the half of the one week, which remained after the seven and sixty two
weeks, Dan. 9.27. But this Covenant was confirmed by Christ at his death and
resurrection. Therefore the seventy weeks end at Christ's death, and not at
Jerusalems fall, above thirty years after.

Object. It Is said, Dan. 9.27. That in the one week remaining after the seven
and sixty two weeks, the abomination of desolation shall be powered on the City
Jerusalem. Therefore the seventy weeks end at the destruction of Jerusalem.

Answer. The one week, the last of the seventy ends (as in the Text is plain)
when by Christ the Covenant is confirmed, and sacrifice caused to cease by his
death. That which is added concerning the abomination of desolation powered on
the City, shows (as Mr. Brightman on Dan. 12.11. well says) the Jews
punishment for killing the Messiah: and that Christ by confirming a new
Covenant, and by his death putting an end to legal ceremonies declared, that
there should be no need of the old Jerusalem. There is not, nor needed there
to be an expression of any time foretelling the ruin of the City. By story it
fell forty, or near forty years after Christ's death; and in this time the
Apostles called some Jews to repentannce and faith in Christ: that Christ's
blood might not be upon them all to their eternal ruin.

Secondlly, Dr. Alsiedes opinion fails in making the days one thousand two
hundred and ninty, Dan. 12.11. to take place at Jerusalems destruction by Titus.

Arg. 1. Those days one thousand two hundred and ninty take place upon the
taking away of the daily s^crisice, and setting up the abomination of
desolation: But these both were do^ by Antiochus Epiphanes many years before
Jerusalems ruin by Titus. Therefore they may not be referred to the
destruction of Jerusalem, after Christ's time by Titus. But here perhaps it will
be objected. The setting up of the abomination of desolation, spoken of in
Daniel, is in Mat. 24.15. Mark. 13.14. and Luke 21.20. expressly referred to the
Romans and their Soldiers besieging and destroying Jerusalem. Therefore the
desolation spoken of, is that acted by Titus and the Romans, and not by
Antiochus.

Answ. There is a twofold desolation spoken of by Daniel. The first don by a
King, that speaks against Gods Saints, Daniels people, consumes them, and
attempts to change Times and Laws, and this he does for a time, times, and
half a time, Dan. 7.25. This is again mentioned, Dan. 12.7. and further
explained verse 11. to be one thousand two hundred and ninty days after the
taking away the daily sacrifice, and setting up the abomination of desolation.
This was fulfilled by Antiochus, and was one part of the Jews misery, which
Dan. 12. is expressed.

Secondly, Daniel speaks of the over spreading of abomination and desolating
Jerusalem after, and for Christ's death. This is in Chap. 9.26, 27. Of this the
Gospels are to be understood; they express its performance by Titus and the
Romans. This desolation might make the Jews not miserable, but happy by taking
them off from doting on Jerusalem, and their legal rites, and making them
look toward Christ. That in Daniel 12. made them miserable: for it hindered the
Jewish worship, which in Antiochus his time was lawful.

Object. Suppose Antiochus afflicted the Jews three years and an half, their
afflictions were not accomplished and ended thereupon: for the Jews suffered
much by other of the Grecian Princes after Antiochus, as we read in the Ma^es
History, and most miserably in the times following by several Roman Captains
and Governors: but at the end of a time, times, and half a time, or days, one
thousand two hundred and ninty, or at least forty five days after the Jews
afflictions were to be at an end, and they become happy. And therefore the
afflictions of the Jews, Dan. 12. cannot be those inflicted on them by
Antiochus. Brightman, Dan. 12.

Answ. Mr. Brightman being himself out of the right way, by a false light,
strives to hold on others in their straying by-pathes, for companies sake. We
sinde that at the end of three years and an half, the Temple was cleansed, and
sacrifices renewed, Joseph. Bell. Jud. 1.1. Nor did Antio bus, or his son, or
any Prince of the Greeks ever prevail against the Jews, their Temple and
sacrifices in like manner, as Antiochus had don. So that this kind of misery
of the Jews was then accomplished and ended: and of no other misery, but that
brought on them by Antiochus, is the speech in Dan. 12. There is not a word of
the miseries that should befall them by the Romans. Secondly, the very words
spoken of Antiochus time (as Mr. Brightman himself holds, Chap. 11.35.) are
iterated in Chap. 12.10. Many shall be purifyed, made white, and tried; but
the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall have understanding,
but the wise shall understand. Iteration of the same speech in substance, shows
the same thing to be insisted upon. So mention of judgment on the Saints
behalf, and their possessing a kingdom is twice spoken of, Dan. 7.22. and 27.
in the exposition of the vision. So the woman, Apoc. 12.6. and 14. is twice
said to fly into the Wilderness. So Apoc. 17.12. and 17. The ten Kings are
twice said to give their power and authority to the Beast. Thus in these places
there is a commoration upon the same thing. To the very same purpose are the
words above doubled in Dan. 11. and 12. As Mr. Broughton has well observed,
and thence inferres that the same matter is insisted upon: and that the matters
spoken of Dan. 12.11, 12. belong to Antiochus time, and not to the time of
Titus making Jerusalem desolate.

Repl. The times limits will not agree with Antiochus dealings. For Antiochus
his taking away the daily sacrifice, and setting up the ahomination of
desolation was but from Kislen 25. Anno 145. of Seleucus his kingdom to Kisleu
25. Anno 148.1 Macc. 1.57. and 4.52. Only before these three years, which are
the precise time, there were ten days more; in which the beginning of his
wicked attempt was made known. Nor is it material that Josephus, De bell.
Judaic. 1.1. says, that the daily sacrifice was taken away by Antiochus, three
years and an half. For it is said, 1 Macc. 4.54. that the same day that the
Gentiles defiled the Altar, it was again renewed and c^eansed. And Josephus a
more religious witness elsewhere says, That the same day three years that the
Altar was prosaned, the Jews sacrificed again on the Altar erected anew, Antiq.
12.11. Mr. Brightman on Dan. 12.7.

Answ. Mr. Brightmans misprisions beguile some others, else should I not spend
so much time in answering him. To clear the whole matter, observe that in Anno
145. of the Greeks, Antiochus first sent an Host to Jerusalem, 1 Mac. 1.30.
which spoiled and fired the City, captived and killed many, made others fly, and
give place to strangers, and laid waste the Sanctuary. Secondly, He sent
letters and Messengers, to enjoin the Jews to follow the Laws of the Heathen,
to neglect their Sabbaths, Feasts, and Sacrifices (mark here the daily
Sacrifice amongst the rest hindered) to erect new Altars, and to sacrifice
Swines flesh thereon, to omit Circumcision on pain of death. Thirdly, In this
very year the fifteenth of Kisleu, the abomination was set upon the Altar. And
fourthly, on the five and twentyeth of Kisleu, sacrifice was after the beathen
manner offered on the Altar. Suppose now that both the books of Maccabees and
Josephus say truly, that on what day of the year the Altar was heathenishly
sacrificed on, even on the same day, just three years after, the Jews in holy
manner sacrificed on their purged and rebuilt Altar, yet the other tyrannous
dealings of Antiochus over the Jews, and his inhibiting their sacrifices, his
firing, killing, and other mischievous deeds may very well take up half a year
more. And thus shall Josephus be as religious a witness for the three years
and an half, as for any other true passage of Story. Because this his witness
accords with time, times, and half a time. And hence it may appear that
Josephus, better in his time understood Daniels prophecy in this point, then
Mr. Brightman, and is wrong fully here charged to have corrupted the Story:
Whereas he living nearer those times might either know the truth certainly
from the common assent of his Nation, or might, as a reasonable man, judge,
that the mischiefs done by Antoochus before the sacrificing on the Altar on the
five and twentyeth day of Kislen, might very well take up a full half years
time.

Object. Here I shall produce one objection more then Mr. Brightman thought
upon: for he is ap^enough to speak for himself, what came into his mind, if
not sometimes more then is sound and conclusive. This it is. Seeing that in the
Apocalypse, time, times and half a time, have correspondent to them days one
thousand two hundred and sixty, and two and forty months, how is it, that here
Antiochus his dealings are bounded twice by time, times, and half a time, Dan.
7.25. and 12.7. and Chap. 12.11. by one thousand two hundred and ninety days,
and not as in the Apocalypse, by one thousand two hundred and sixty days?

Answ. 1. I might here answer that Chetsz in Chap. 12.7. translated half a
time, is in Chap: 7.25. expressed by Peleg a dividing or part of time: and that
Chetsi signifies not always ajust half. Thus, and that truly, says the
learned and painful Dr. Willet. I prove this to be so. Because the verb
Chatsa (whence Chetsi comes) expresses a dividing into three parts, Judge. 9.43.
and the dividing of Jacobs wives and children into four parts. Nor were the
children equally parted, but with Leah were mo then with any of the rest, Genesis
31. and Judge. 7.16. three hundredth men are divided (here also Chatsa is used)
into three parts. Nor is it easy to prove, that the Idolater, Esa. 44.16, 19.
made an image of one just half of the block, and roasted his meat with the
other just half thereof, or that David did rise just in the middle of the night
to praise God, Psalm. 119.62.

But secondly admit that the word Chetsi, signifies half of the year, and not a
less part, ten days or the like: I will endeavor by Scripture to show (for I
may not here lash out largely to make use of the learned disquisitions of Joh.
Lalamantius, Jos. Scaliger, and our Countryman Mr. Th. Lydiat, or of the lately
produced, and learned Treatise of Mr. Seldom, much to be honored for his
excellent skill in several kinds) what we are to judge of the extent of a
year in Gods account. Here first, I say, that time, times, and half a tims, and
two and forty months, and one thousand two hundred and sixty days, terms used
in the Apocalypse, express the very same extent of time; and usually Expositers
make them so to do. Now one thousand two hundred and sixty days divided to
two and forty months afford to each month just thirty days. And that each
month had so many (and no month of five months together, had but nine and
twenty days) we see Genesis 7.24. Where one hundred and fifty days are the just
extent of time from the seventeenth day of the second month, to the
seventeenth day of the seventh month, Genesis 7.11. and 8.4. Therefore the usual
year in Scriptures account consisted of twelve months, each of them having
thirty days. So that there are given to every year three hundred and sixty
days by this account. And that by one time, a year is meant, we find by
seven times, that is, seven years passing over Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.29. Here
again it may be objected. If these things be thus, how then, in Dan. 12.11.
dee one thousand two hundred and ninty days answer to time, times, and half a
time? and seeing God in difficulties, gives (where they are for our capacities
and clearer instruction) different expressions, why are not two and forty
months at any time in Daniel mentioned, where the Prophet diligently inquired
after a punctual expression of time?

Answ. In every year according to the course of the Sun, are days three
hundred sixty five. This generally all hold. The five odd days are omitted in
the account, Apoc. 11. where one thousand two hundred and sixty days, answer
to two and forty months. But those five days overplus in six years make
thirty days, or a full month. And therefore to time, times, and half a time,
or three years and an half in Dan. 12.7. we find correspondent one thousand
two hundred and ninty days, Chap. 12.11. for so sometimes it must needs fall
out, when the month or thirty days made of the five odd days in six years,
are taken into the year. See Coch in Sanedr. page 9. Mr. Broughton in M. S.
Sionens. Colleg. And by this also we see that this month supernumerary, added
in the three years and an half in Dan. 12. could not admit the number of two
and forty months: as the three years and an half did in the Apocalypse; where
two and forty months, and one thousand two hundred and sixty, are equivalent.

Object. The little horn, Dan. 8.9. is Antiochus Epiphanes. But the little
horn, Dan. 7.8. and 20. is not Antiochus, but it is doubtless the Turk, and
the number of time, times, and half a time, Dan. 7.25. and 12.7. are one and
the same, and belong to the Turk. That they have respect to diverse persons it
is proved. Because the vision in Chap. 7. is sten to come out of the Sea: the
vision Chap. 8. is by the Riven Vlai. The former vision is written in Chaldee,
because it is a Prophecy concerning all men: the later in Hebrew, because it
properly concerns the Jews. Brightman on Dan. 12.

Answ. The Sea and Ulai can no more make the little horns of Chap. 7. and 8. to
denote diverse persons, then one appearing amidst the seven golden
Candlessticks, and having seven stars in his hand, Rev. 1.13. and one riding on
a white horse with many crowns on his head, etc. Rev. 19.11. set forth diverse
persons. Here descriptions much different, express one Christ: and there
expressions a little differing, one and the same Antiochus.

Secondly, The difference of the tongues can much less do it. For then the
Bear, Chap. 7. and the Ram, Chap. 8. should not alike express the Dominion of
the Medes and Persians, because the visions are told in different languages.
Add thereunto that the one of these rose out of the Sea, the other was seen by
the River Ulai. We see hereby how Mr. Brightman doting on a false conclusion,
uses any slight argumentation to boulster on the matter. The reason why the
eighth Chapter is in Hebrew, is this. There the Medes and Persians, and Greeks
are expressly named: whereby the Exposition of that vision is a key to open all
the rest of the visions: and therefore is in a tongue strange to the Chaldees,
familiar to the Jews: as Mr. Broughton most judiciously observed.

Object. The little horn Dan. 7. is belonging to the fourth kingdom; therefore
to the Romans. The little horn, Dan. 8. comes out of one of the Goats four
horns. But the little horn, Chap. 7. is one horn with the other nine, on the
fourth Beast. And therefore denotes not one and the same Antiochus. Mr.
Brightman.

Answ. I have above proved, that the Greek kingdom parted between the Syrian
and Egyptian Princes is the fourth kingdom in Daniel. The little horn therefore
on the fourth Beast, Dan. 7. is of their race, and was Antiochus. And in Chap.
8. The Goat bucks first horn is Alexander the great. The four horns on the same
beast are Alexanders four chief Captains. Of these, two were of no long
continuance: the other two Seleucus Nicator, and Prolemeus Lagides subsisted a
long time mighty in themselves and their posterity: and at length became weak,
not long before Christ's time. These two and their successors make the fourth
kingdom, and are expressed by the two legs and feet of the Image, Dan. 2. and
by the fourth Beast that had ten horns, Chap. 7. Antiochus Epiphanes, a King
that rather desired to be, then could attain to be great, was one horn with
the other nine horns, Chap. 7. And thus he is the little horn in both, Chap.
7. and 8.

Repl. But Antiochus cannot be the little horn, Dan. 7. because when the reign
of the little horn ends, the Son of man takes his kingdom over all Nations,
which Christ did not presently upon Antiochus death. Mr. Brightman on Dan.

Answ. Mark the Text and you shall find, that Christ's Kingdom begins when, not
only the little horns Dominion is taken away, Dan. 7.26. But the body of the
Beast (hornlesse and harmless in great part after Antiochus) is destroyed,
verse. 11. and the Dominion of such of his successors, as ruled after him,
consumed unto the end. Verse 26. Thus when the fourth Kingdom (not all the
kingdoms of the world, (as says Mr. Brightman) was quite ^ut down: the famous
kingdom of Heaven is set up by Christ, the great King on mount Sion, Psalm. 2.
Of this I spoke above.

Object. There be four Beasts, Dan. 7.3. and 17. which denote sour Kingdom.
If you make the little horn to belong to the Greek Kingdom, though it be on
the fourth Beast, you make contrary to the Text, but three kingdoms, by making
the third and fourth beasts to express the Greek kingdom. Alexander was the
first founder of that kingdom. The Kingdom of Antiochus, and the Kings of his
line, and of the Ptolemies, and their race, is ever in the Maccabees, called
the Kingdoms of the Greeks. Therefore if you make the third and fourth Beasts
to express the Greeks, you make but three kingdoms, where Daniel makes four
in plain terms. Mr. Brightman.

Answ. There is first, the Kingdom of the Greeks entire and whole in Alexander,
and his four chief Captains, who for a while expected some of King Alexanders
kindred or children to succeed him. This kingdom being of short continuance is
expressed by the brlly of the statue, Dan. 2. and by the third beast, Dan. 7.
And secondly, there is the Greek kingdom parted, which was of longer durance,
and was fitly set forth by the legs and feet of the statue, Dan. 2. and by the
fourth beast having ten horns, Dan. 7. Of which horns Antiochus Epiphanes is
one. That this Kingdom is counted distinct from Alexanders, is evident.
Josephus antiq. 12.7. and 14. Where Josephus says, as does the Book of
Maccabees, That the Temple was cleansed in the hundred forty eight year of the
Greeks kingdom, which, says he, began of Seleucus. Therefore the parted Greek
Kingdom is by Josephus (who seems to speak the Judgment of his Nation, and
those times) counted a different Kingdom from Alexanders. The Goat in Dan 8.
shows how in some sort the third and fourth kingdoms are Greeks: and the
Leopard and beast with ten horns Dan. 7. show how in Gods, as well as in
Josephus and other men's esteem, they were two distinct kingdoms.

Object. That little horn, Dan. 8.8. is Antiochus, but the Turk, whose
dominion begins in the year of Christ one thousand three hundred; To him Daniel
gives a time, that is, a hundred years, two times, two hundred years, and halse
a time, that is, fifty years. Add these three hundred and fifty years to one
thousand three hundred, and by this it appears, that the Turk declines in his
power in the year one thousand six hundred and fifty. And Apocalypse 9.15.
gives the Turk a year, which according to the days it contains is three
hundred sixty five years; and a month, which in the same sense is thirty
years. These three hundred ninety five years added to the one thousand three
hundred years above amount to one thousand six hundred ninety five; Then shall
the Turks dominion be quite extinct; Mr. Brightman on Dan. 12.

Answ. If the fourth Beast, Dan. 7. express the Roman State (as Mr. Brightman
holds) how comes the Turk to be an horn of the same beast? The Turks have had
no joint agreement and fellowship in their designs and attempts with the
Romans against the true Church, but rather most deadly hate the Roman Church,
as for other reasons, so also because it allows of Images in Gods worship,
which the Turks from the express words of Exodus 20. abominate. If one beast
should express the Roman and Turkish dominions, they should agree in singular
amity, assistance, mutual defense, and Law, as did the Medes and Persians,
who are typed by one beast. Or else they should by mutual intermariages
endeavor to make the like friendship, though without success, as did the
Seleucidans, and Lagidans, and as the description of the fourth kingdom, Dan.
2.43. expresses it. Secondly, Time, times and half a time have a far different
extent of time (as I above showed) then Mr. Brightman would allow them.
Thirdly, what I have said of these passages, applying them to Antiochus, will
not by any one be easily disproved. Fourthly, The miseries expressed, Dan. 12.
do befall Daniels people, Verse. 1. that is, the Jews before Christ's time: not
the Christians vexed by the Turks after Christ's time, when there is neither Jew
nor Gentile, but all are one in Christ. Wherefore Mr. Brightman here without
any good ground talks of the Turks declining and fall.

Having cleared our way by removing the rubs and blocks which seemed to stop
our passage, let me now return to make further exceptions against the accounts
of Time in Dr. Alstede and others.

Thirdly, Dr. Alstede, Mr. Mede, Mr. Archer, and such as concur in opinion with
them, mistake in placing the thousand years of the Saints reigning with
Christ, the Churches purity and happiness, in the fag end of the world, and
dregs of time, which in all likelihood will be worse and worse, as was the old
world in Noah's time, and will now need sire, as then water to purge it. See a
true glass of the last times, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. where their most wicked
affections, words, deeds are set forth.

Fourth^ Mr. Archer misses the mark and shoots extremely wide, where he makes
Julian the Apostate the setter up of the abomination of desolation spoken of by
Daniel. This wretched Emperor doubtless aspired to the height of wickedness,
but was prevented of this inglorious achievement both by Antiochus and Titus,
as I have already showed. He not only came too late for the work, but could
effect nothing he desired: and was so far from taking away the Jewish
sacrifices (which is one main thing, Dan. 12.11. mentioned) that he attempted
to set them up in contempt of Christians and Christ their master.

Fifthly, Both Dr. Alstede and Mr. Archer and others of their opinion err in
multiplying one thousand two hundred days to the number of ^so many years. It Is
true that days be put for years, Ezck. 4. but it is not consequent that in all
other prophecies it should be so: Nor indeed in any can it be so: but where
some circumstances require it, or God plainly says as to Ezekiel: 1 appoint
thee a day for a year, a day for a year. To him the words are doubled, that
we should not mistake. In Daniel we find them not single. And must not of our
own heads devise, what was never intended. 2. The days two thousand three
hundred in Dan. 8.14. be properly understood of days according to Mr.
Brightman and others: Why then may not one thousand two hundred days, Dan.
12.11. be so likewise expounded?

Reply. Days one thousand two hundred and sixty, and months forty two, in
the Revelation express a longer time then the bare words import. So may the
sum here. If you say that in the Apocalypse is meant properly so many days or
months, you accord with the Papists, who hold that Antichrist shall reign but
just three years and a half.

Answ. I know well that Christ's servants, Rev. 11. witness to his truth, that
the beast, Rev. 13.1. rages, that the woman clad with the Sun, Rev. 12. is
preserved in the Wilderness longer then three years and a half, though the
limits of their times expressed, properly signify no longer a spade: but I say
further, that phrases and forms of speech in the Revelation have often
reference to former matters to which they have some resemblance: So Babel and
Egypt in the Apocalypse signify not properly, but metaphorically places and
States like them for mischiefs done to Gods people, and their ruin thereupon:
So the three years and an half of the Saints preaching and persecution is not
properly just so long, but has a reference unto Christ's preaching and
persecution, which was in propriety of speech just so long. This is to show
that the Saints case is like Christ's, and the time not properly, but by
allusion understood of them: So in Scripture the Saints afflictions are called
the afflictions of Christ, Col. 1.24. and the Saints are said to have (...) a
share and part of Christ's sufferings, Phil. 3.10. and to be (...) partakers of
Christ's sufferings, Heb. 12.8. and to be (...) comformable and like to Christ,
Romans 8.29. and Saint John and other Christians are said to be companions in
tribulation, and in the Kingdom of Christ, Rev. 1.9.

Thus Christ is the great and eminent both Teacher of and sufferer for the
truth; his servants imitate his actions, and are like to him in suffering. Such
was the course of Christ's public ministry, whilst he lived, such must be
theirs until their deaths. As he, so they must hold out and continue
faithful in their callings. His time was but three years and an half: theirs
may be less, perhaps something more; but however, it will be a momentary and
short space in regard of the eternal weight of glory, which follows it,
Again, as the seven Churches of Asia, some purer, some more corrupt, some in
diverse respects prais-worthy, others in as many respects justly to be blamed,
show the state and condition of seventie and more Churches, and what Christ
has to say to them in regard of their like obedience or disobedience unto him:
So the teaching and sufferings of Christ in three years and an half show,
what shall be the case of his servants in three times three or more years of
their ministry? So that time is put for the condition of the time and things
done therein. As, Act. 3.24. The Prophets foretold these times. And Esther
1.13. wise men knowing the times: that is, things done in the times. And Christ
says, Father keep me from that hour, Joh. 12.17. that uphold me in the
sorrows of that hour.

Thus then yon see apparently that I run not into the Papists error, who
absurdly bound Antichrists persecution, and the Saints sufferings to three
years and an half; Rome first in its wicked and Idolatrous Emperors; secondly,
in its proud and superstitious Popes has been an Egypt and a Babel to Gods
servants, oppressing them these one thousand six hundred years, and not barely
three years and a half: and in all this time God has had witnesses to his
truth. The allusion both to the places and the time is most elegant and
comfortable. They that suffer with Christ, shall also reign with him.

Sixthly, If the settling of the days one thousand two hundred and ninety,
counting them so many years, as above, be faulty, then Mr. Archers addition
of forty five years unto them, (which are the overplus of one thousand three
hundred thirty five days, by him counted years, Dan. 12.12.) must also be
erroneous. Besides Mr. Archer mistakes by making those forty five years to be
a time of great affliction to the Jews. For their welfare begins at the end of
one thousand two hundred and ninety days, when Jerusalems desolation is
repaired, and the daily sacrifice renewed: and a further access of happiness
is made unto them forty five days after. So that Dan. 12.11, 12. speaks of
the Jews welfare, not of their misery; and fits their condition in Antiochus
time exactly; for about forty five days after Judas Maccabeus had cleansed
the Altar, and sacrificed thereon, Antiochus became extremely sick, and
confessed how unjustly he had tyrannized over the Jews, 1 Macc. 6.8.9, etc. and
soon after in the next year died.

Seventhly, Mr. Archer affirms that Julian was the setter up of the
abomination of desolation spoken of Dan. 12.11. Mr. Brightman is of the same
opinion on Dan. 12. Admit this to be true: then he must also be the taker
away of the daily sacrifice: for both these go together, and have the same time
asoribed unto them. Now Julian was so far from taking away the Jewish
sacrifices, that he endeavored to set them up, and did much countenance the
Je^es against the Christians. Socrate^ Eccl. Hist.B. 3.

Eighthly, there is no reason why Mr. Archer should hold that after days or
years one thousand two hundred and ninety, Dan. 12.11. the Jews should be
called to Christianitle. The Text faith no such thing: but tells how the Jews
should be freed from two miseries; first, from the desolation of Jerusalem,
secondly, from the taking away their daily sacrifi^e. Seeing these two are the
miseries befalling the Jews until the end of the time there designed, they
must necessarily fall in the time that sacrifice was lawful. And therefore
they must not be in the days of Titus, or of the Turk.

Ninthly, These learned men swerve from the truth, by not making Christ at his
being on earth, the strong man, who bound Satan, and gave his Apostles power to
tread on the Serpent, whose head himself brok, and whom he made as lightning
to fall from Heaven: so that from the time of Christ's Ascension the devil
could not prevail to deceive all Nations, as before he had don: but was loosed
about a thousand years afterward, as has been declared above.

Tenthly, There is not any passage in the Revelation or elsewhere, that I know,
from which it can be proved, that the Papacy began in the year four hundred
and six. It Is true, that about this time Constantine left Rome, and made
Constantinople his royal Seat: but the Bishop and Church of Rome, did not then
so apostate, and degenerate from what they had been, that gross popery and
Antichristianism may be laid to their charg. Constantine, who erected
Churches, placed new Bishops in them, countenanced other good Bishops already
placed; so held his Imperial authority, and Vicegerency under Christ, that the
Bishop of Rome never in his time exalted himself above the royal Scepter, or
challenged an universal authority over all Churches. There were fault^ in
Churches, and errors in Bishops and teachers before Constantines time, and in
it. But we see by Christ's judgment upon the seven Churches in Asia, Rev. 2.
and 3. that some faults and errors do not presently unchurch a people, as rank
Popery and Antichristianism do.

Eleventhly, If the ten Kings received their kingdom, Apoc. 17.12. and employed
their power in oppressing the Church, together with the beast, namely, the
persecuting Emperors, then they received that their power from the C^sars long
before the year four hundred and six. And if it be meant of receiving their
power from the Popes, it is manifest that they submitted not their necks, nor
took their Scepters from the Popes, until many years after four hundred and
six, namely until about the year of Christ one thousand and odd. Herein
therefore Mr. Archers groundwork fails him.

Twelfthly, How can the year one thousand two hundred and sixty be attributed
to the Pope alone? Suppose so many years given to the warring Beast, Rev. 13.4,
5. that is, the Emperors, which make the sixth head, and the^ ruled in Saint
John's time: I find nor the like time ascribed to the beast with two horns, or
to any particular type, whereby the Popes alone are expressed. Mr. Brightman
holds the beast, Rev. 13.1. not to be the Emperors or civil State of Rome,
but the Popes: because the Imperial State was risen before St. John's time; and
Christ showed to Saint John, matters only, which were to be don after the
giving of those visions, Rev. 4.1.

To this I Answer, Christ did show St. John matters, which for the most part
were to be don after the Vision, Rev. 4. But he showed him also, first, some
things absolutely don and past: as namely, five of the heads of the Beast seen
by John, were fallen and gone, Rev. 17.11. Christ appeared to him as a Lamb that
had been stain, Rev. 5.6. This was don long before that vision And secondly,
some things showed to John were formerly in part fulfilled, and were yet more
and more to be fufillled in and after his time. As these, God doubtless
before sat gloriously upon his Throne, as he is said to sit. Rev. 4.2. The
Elders, namely John himself and the other Apostles, and the whole Church of
God, before John's Visions, ascribed praise, honor, glory, etc. to the Lamb, as
they do, Rev. 4. and 5. The New Jerusalem spoken of, Rev. 21.10. was before
Mother of the believing Galatians, and other Christians, Gal. 4.26. Heb. 12.22.
I might instance in diverse other the like passages. Observe this well, or else
Mr. Brightman will by a false fire mislead you in diverse other matters.

Thirteenthly, Mr. Archer and some others, though they decline the gross
millenary opinion of one thonsand years victory, pleasure, Joviality, yet in
ascribing to their refined thousand years plenty of all things without sin, and
making the Martyrs raised from death, partakers thereof, etc. palpably (as I
conceive) mistake. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink. nor (which is
consequent) other matters, less necessary. And to what end should the bodies
of the Martyrs and Saints raised up immortal and glorified (such they are
described to be 1 Cor. 15.) live again on earth to make use of such poor
accommodations, and not rather enjoy glory and immortality in heaven: for which
the resurrection fits them; as it did Christ risen from the dead, and ascending
into heaven?

Fourteenthly, See how they jar and differ in their judgment. Mr. Brightman to
the sum three hundred and sixty in Julians time adds the one thousand two
hundred and ninty in Dan. 12.11. and the forty five years more there in verse
12. and says, that the Turks power will be extinct in the year one thousand
six hundred ninty five, to which sums those numbers do amount. Mr. A^cher
from three hundred sixty six, and the other sums says, that in the year one
thousand seven hundred, the thousand years begin. Dr. Alstede to the year ninty
six, in which, says he, Jerusalem fell, adds the same one thousand two
hundred and ninty, and one thousand three hundred thirty five, and affirms that
the thousand years, Apoc. 20 end in the year two thousand six hundred ninty
four, which Mr. Brightman ends about the year one thousand three hundred. Mr.
Archer to the year four hundred and six, when says he, the Papacy began,
adds the one thousand two hundred and sixty, Apoc. 11.3. and 12.6. And tells
us, that the Papacy falls in the year one thousand six hundred sixty six. Mr.
Brightman from the same sums and an addition of years, for the heads cure,
which Apoo. 13 was wounded (which cure some others, that think themselves
Surgeons, not inferior to him, little thought of) makes the Pope-doms fall to
be in the year, one thousand six hundred eighty six. See his Comment. on Apoc.
13.5. Hereby it appears, what liberty is taken to dispose of these Prophetical
accounts of time, rather according to humane fancy, then clear evidence of
Scripture: whence their opinions become different, and leave us more uncertain,
and unresolved, then when we consulted them: except we will confide, and
rely more on men's persons, then on their proofs and arguments. In opinions
thus disagreeing it necessarily follows, that some of them be faulty: and it is
not improbable (their grounds being so sandy and weak) that all of them may
be false. What Reasons I have here alleged to disprove them, I humbly submit
to the censure of such as are judicious in these matters.

Chap. VI. The Arguments and autorities from the Rabbis, brought by Mr. Mede
on Rev. 20. answered.
MR. John Mede, on Rev. 20. produces diverse reasons for his opinion about the
thousand years. And thus first he argues: Gorists kingdom is joined with his
appearance to judge the quick and the dead, 2 Timothy 4.1. But at Christ's last
appearing to judge the quick and the dead, he is so sarre from beginn^ing a new
kingdom, that be delivers up the kingdom to his Father. That kingdom
therefore, which neither shall be before the appearance of the Lord, nor after
the last resurrection, is necessarily between them. And this kingdom is said to
be for one thousand years, Rev. 20.

Answ. Saint Paul says not, that Christ's Kingdom was not before his appearing
to judge the quick and the dead: and Mr. Mede himself grants, That Christ long
before had a crown given him, and rode firth, conquering and to conquer, Rev.
6.2. This he judges to be in the beginning of the Apocalypticall times. And
that it was so, I have above proved. In the latter end of his Kingdom, Christ
makes an absolute conquest over the beast and ^alse Prophet: and casts them
into the fiery Lake; and brings all men to judgment: and then delivers up his
Kingdom of governing and defending his Church in this world, to his Father: And
they reign together eternally with the Saints in a setl^d and blessed estate.

Secondly, I conceive the terms at his appearing, and in or at his kingdom, to
be in sense, at his manifest appearing to be the great King. And that the
form of speech is duobus pro uno positis, by putting two expressions for one.
So Thunders and voices, Rev. 8.5. are put for thundering or loud voices, as both
Mr. Mede, and Mr. Brightman, expound that place. The reason why I thus
understand it, is, because Christ ever truly the great King then appears
manifestly to be the great King indeed by an absolute conquest over the
Churches enemies, and by over-comming death, and by bringing, as the great and
on^y King, the whole world to judgment.

Object. In Dan. 7.9. and Rev. 20.4. Thrones are said to be set up, and
judgment given to the Saints, (who are said to judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2.) and
the Saints to obtain the Kingdom, that is, to live and reign with Christ.
Besides, in Dan. 7.13, 14. and Luke 21.24, it is said, That Christ shall appear
in the clouds of heaven, and have power, glory, and kingdom given him: so that
all people, Nations, and languages shall serve him; and that these things shall
come to pass, when the times of the Gentiles shall come to an end. That is,
when the little born, Dan. 7.11. namely Antichrist, is overthrown. Therefore
Christ's glorious Kingdom, and the Saints reign with him takes not place until
the Popedom be ruined.

Answ. In Dan. 7.9. the Thrones, that is, those of the four beasts, are said to
be (so our new translation has it) cast down: and the Ancient of days to sit
on his Throne. He gives judgment to the Saints, that is, on their party, or
inables them to maintain their party against the little horn that domineered
over them before for a time, times, and half a time. The Saints therefore in
those days after Antiochus his armies were defeated, set up Gods worship
again, 1 Macc. 4. and maintained their cause against the body of the fourth
Be^st, which was then hornlesse, Dan. 7.11. and 26: So that it began to decay,
and was consuming daily unto the end. This the Jews Gods people did until the
Son of man came in the clouds of heaven, and received the ^ternall kingdom,
Dan. 7.14. which began (as was above proved) one thousand five hundred years
agon.

Secondly, How Christ's Kingdom so long agon begun, the Saints judged and
reigned, I have likewise declared.

Thirdly, Christ's glorious coming to judgment is sometimes to be understood
of vengeance and punishment ins^icted on the world for their sins. So the Lord
is said, Judge. 14. To come with thousands of his hely ones to give judgment
against all men, and to rebuke the ungodly, etc. when he drowned the old
world: So Christ coming with power and great glory, in these Texts of Daniel
and Luke, may express his coming with vengeance against the Romans and Jews
that killed him, and opposed the Gospel. For it is said, Luke 21, 22, and 32.
That that age and generation should not pass, until all those things were
fulfilled: Besides, it is not said, that Christ shall not so come, until the
times of the Gentiles were fulfilled, but until Jerusalem be trodden under
foot by the Gentiles, and the power of heaven, Sun, Moon, and Stars (that is,
the government of that people) be shaken, This was don when Jerusalem was
overthrown.

Repl: The sense of Luke 21.32. may be; (...), this people, Nation, kindred of
the Jews shall not pass, or cease to be a Nation, or people, until these
things be fulfilled. The word (...)so signifies.

Ans. The word (...) expresses Dor generation in the old Testament a hundred
times: It is sometimes also put for Gnam, Mispa^ha^h, M^ledeth, people, nation,
progeny: But then commonly it intends and denotes the Nation or family then
living, which is all one in meaning with Generation: In this sense, The People
and Nation, and race of men now living shall not pass, or be extinct, until
all these things be accomplished.

Repl: If you deny the Texts, Dan. 7.9. and 22. and Rev: 20.4. to express the
great day of judgment, Christ's coming in the clouds with power and great
glory, and the Saints with him to judge the Earth, and abolith Antichrist with
the brightness of his coming in the thousand years yet to come, you undermine
the pillar of Evangelicall faith, concerning the glorious coming of Christ.

Answ: God is known by executing judgment, Psalm 9.16. Not by the great and
sinall judgment only, but by other particular judgments also on mankind. Some
Jews might mis-conceive of Gods dealing toward them; and be per swaded, that
they should in, or at Christ's time get their necks from under the yoke of their
oppressors. But when they saw Jerusalem in that age ruined, many Jews cruelly
slain, the rest grievously dispersed: how could they but think, and you now
conceit, that God then sat gloriously in judgment against them, who were grown
as secure as they in the old world, Mat. 24.37. Luke 17.26. As this judgment
was conspicuous; and showed the great power and glory of Christ, and verified
Christ's speech of some then standing by him, who should not taste death, until
they saw Christ's kingdom come with power, Mark 9.1. So I verily believe, that
Christ will come in the clouds, or (...), with clouds of witnesses, Mark 14.62.
and great power to judge and destroy Antichrist, and all his Churches enemies,
Apoc. 20.9. Thus do I endeavor to hold up the pillar of Evangelicall truth,
and in no wi^e undermine it. Christ, I say, has already by the brightness of
his coming in the word preached given Antichrist such a blow, that he shall
never lick himself whole; and will in his good time bring him to utter
confusion: What was done in the thousand years, I have above sufficiently
unfolded.

Object. Justin Martyr tells Trypho the Jew, that himself, and all Orthodox
Christians knew the resurrection of the body, and the thousand years, in which
Jerusalem should be re-edified, adorned, and enlarged, according as Ezekiel and
Esaias had prophesied of a thousand years, in which shall be a new heaven, and
new earth: So that Jerusalem is made to triumph, and the days of Gods people
to be as the days of the tree of life; In these words, says Justin, we hold
that the thousand years are implicitly pointed at: He further says, that John
in the Revelation prophesied, that Christians should accomplish that thousand
year in Jerusalem.

Answ. Justin believes the resurrection of the body; we deny it not. But
Justin asserts not two resurrections, as some now do, one a thousand years
before the other: Justin says, that Jerusalem shall be re-edified, enlarged,
adorned in such sense as Ezekiel and Esaias foretold: it is most true; A
Jerusalem, that in Rev. 21.10, and Gal: 4.26: all the world over shall be made
a place of Gods worship (as was the old Jerusalem) to the great joy of all
people: the distinction of Jew and Gentile shall be taken away, and all true
Christians shall be the Israel of God, and true Jews: and shall have no need
of the old Jerusalem. How implicitly in Esaies words, by Justin cited, the
thousand years should be pointed at, he is quicksighted, that can discern. No
man (I think) endeavors now to prove the thousand years from that text in
Esaias. It there were any such thing in Esays words, Logic now, if ever, would
work it out. Further, St: John says not totidem verbis in express terms, what
Justin alleges: but that there shall be a new Jerusalem coming down from
heaven, not built by man; and that the Saints shall reign a thousand years with
Christ: and I will also grant, that this reign should be in the new Jerusalem.
But that reign was in the beginning of the Gospels times for a thousand years,
and shall not be toward the end of the world: This Jerusalem is mother of us
all, of all the Israel of God, of all believing Jews and Gentiles, in all times
to the world end; and is not limited to old Jerusalems seat, and some certain
time. That kingdom began long since, and was such, as has been above showed,
not such as the pleaders for the thousand years to come, describe it.

Object. Diverse of the Ancient Fathers, besides Justin Martyr, as Ireneus,
Tertullian, Lactantius, Nepos, and others, held the opinion of the thousand
years reign. Austine himself sometime inclined to the same: and it seems to be
Ieroms prime Argument against it, that it savoured of Judaism: to reject this
opinion, is a neglect of an ancient Tradition of the Church. Papias recommended
it to the Fathers above, they to us.

Answ. The antiquity of this opinion, will be little warrant to the verity of
it: if we consider that Ireneus says, That Papias an Auditor of St. John
asserted it: whereas Papias himself denies that ever he saw or heard the
Apostles. And Eusebius B: 3. Histor: Eccles. says, that Papias was too
credulous, and of shallow judgment, and by mis-interpreting Apostolical
expositions led others into error; as Ireneus in this very point; and as some
conceive, in the opinion of Antichrists reign but for three years and an half
near the worlds end. You see then, what a tottering and weak foundation this
tradition has. It is granted, that Austin had an inclination to like of it,
but his (...)second thoughts made him wisely to abandon those Fathers faulty
opinion, and to correct his own: as for Ierom, he censures the millenary
conceit to be a Jewish (...) fable; and so inconsistent with the vision, in
Apoc. 20. jarring in it self, contrary to other Scriptures, and unworthy of the
Christian faith; See Ierom on the life of Papias. He had therefore Arguments
sufficient to confute it. Dionysins a learned and judicious Bishop of
Alexandria called together the chief abettors of this opinion, and argued with
them about it three days, from morning till night, and examined Nepos Book in
defense thereof: whereupon in conclusion his chief opposer yielded, and
promised never to teach, or so much as to mention the opinion again: and all
the rest there present submitted to the truth, Eusebius. Histor. B. 7.

Repl. Be this opinion true or false, or whether the Fathers held an error
herein or no; to be of the same mind with the Jews is not always culpable.
The Rabbis tell us, that the seventh millenary is the great day of Judgment.
That the world shall continue six thousand years, and in the seventh thousand
be destroyed with fire, and purified: and the Lord alone shall be exalted in
that day, Esa. 2. that is, shall be King over all the Earth. They say, that
God in this millenary shall break the wicked; and that it shall be a great
Sabbath, or day of rest. Other Rabbis hold, that the sixth millenary shall be
the day of Judgment. Rabbi Elias says, that the world should continue two
thousand years before the Law, two thousand years under the Law, two thousand
under Christ. See these and other their opinions cited by Mr. Mede on Revel. 20.

Answ. No man holds the Jews in all things culpable. They are most careful and
vigilant preservers of the original Hebrew Text entire and incorrupt: so that
had not the Jews and Greeks been kept distinct people until these times, the
knowledge both of the Hebrew and Greek originals had perished by the prevalency
of Papistical darkness. See my preface to Cognatio Linguarum. The Jews also,
when they list to speak out, show good skill in the sacred stories. Besides
many passages in their Talmuds about their rites and customs serve better to
open some difficulties in the New Testament, then our Latin Commentaries. What
I attribute to the knowledge locked up in the Hebrew tongue, see in my Book
Cognatio Linguarum. Posit. 9. The Rabbis have many truths: but like good corn
in much chafe; themselves often times so speak, that they will tell you,
Stultus credit omni verbo, it is silliness to take all they speak for sad
truth. Maimonid. part 1. chap. 62. Schick. Bechin. Happer. page 114. Some
truths they hide under Enigmaes and Parables, and of them they say, I finding a
Pomegranat did eat the Kernels and laid by the Rind. P. Galatin. 1.7. Yet many
such riddles they have not worth the cracking their shell, and more like a
deaf nut, then an wholesome Pomegranat. These fall under Paul's prohibition of
not giving heed to fables, 1 Timothy 1.4. He that will prositably peruse them,
must try all things in them, and keep that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. And
whoever will hope to deal soundly with them (which would be a glorious and
heavenly work) for their conversion, must be able to match and surpass them,
as in sound knowledge of the Scripture, so in their own tongue and learning, as
the Apostles and ancient Fathers did the Greeks. Herein Mr. Broughton did much,
and had he lived longer by good encouragement was both able and willing to
have done far more.

Secondly, for the present question observe the Jews jarring opinions. Some of
them hold the day of judgment, the wickeds breaking, and the Messiah his
exalting to be at the end of the fifth millenary; which is fully past: for I
hold the world to be five thousand five hundred seventie one years old in this
year one thousand six hundred forty four; yet is not the one thousand years
by some conceived to be begun. Some begin the great Sabbath at the end of the
sixth millenary: Such as live to it shall see how near they come to the mark.
Elias seems to hold, that the fifth and sixth millenary shall be under Christ:
and therefore, say I, by their own grounds, times of much happiness. I would
they were so humble as to make use of them. There can be but one truth, some of
these (to pass by others) must needs miss it, perhaps all of them: See how
our writers vary from them. Mr. Brightman begins the famous 1000. years in the
three hundred year of Christ, Dr. Alstede in one thousand six hundred ninety
four, Mr. Archer in one thousand six hundred sixty six, or in one thousand
seven hundred. Others differ from these. This it is to grope after truth by a
dark light, or no light at all; Maimonides says well, It is better that a
matter of which no certain demonstration can be made, should remain in doubt,
then in vain to dispute thereof. Mor. Neb. Part. a. Cap. 16.

Repl. We Christians use Jewish terms; Gehenna for hell, Paradise for heaven,
the day of judgment for Gods final judicature; yea Saint Peter may seem to
have confirmed the Rabbis tradition by his speech of the day of judgment, 2
Pet. 3.7. and of one day being with the Lord as a thousand years; Let us not
rashly neglect their terms.

Answ. Pau's rule is, not to use words, which man's wisdom teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13.
to avoid profane and vain jangling and opposition of science, 1 Timothy 6.20. for
there may be wisdom and science falsely so called. He injoyns us to speak (...)
the words of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, doctrine
according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. and tending to godly edification. These
rules we may observe, and yet seeing Gods word speaks linguis ^ominum as men
use to do, (so said Maimonid. Mor. Neb. p. 1. c. 26.) and has frequent
Metaphors, Metonymies, Ellipses, Metaplasms, and other forms and frames of
speech usual in other tongues and forain writers; we nor are nor need to be
nice in using the Rabbis phrases, especially these, which the New Testament
does expressly and particularly warrant by its own example, or in general by
examples of like nature; so that we ever take heed that they lead us not into
error. The holy Spirit is so far from scrupulositie in this kind, that not
only it makes use of those Rabbinick and Jewish terms above; but of Syriack
also, as Abba Father, Maranaths the Lord comes; of Roman, as Legio a Legion,
custodia a watch; of the Septuagints, as (...) poison, (...) Heb. 11.21. from
Genesis 47.^1. in which word the Seventie mistook, and translated Matteh (...) a
staff, for Mittah a bed: And (...) it is a wonderful thing, Matthew. 21.42.
(mistook also by the Seventie in Psalm. 118.22.) for (...). In these and some
other the mastakes of the Seventie Interpreters, the New Testament follows
them, where the error might be helped by recourse to the Hebrew of the Old
Testament. Yea the holy Ghost has made use of some Poets speeches, Tit. 1.12.
Act. 17.28. and declined not the names Castor and Pollun, or Dioscuri, Act.
28.11. a term superstitiously used by the Heathen: So that I conceive, that
where God says, ye shall not name the Heathen gods, Jos. 23.7. he intends
the naming them with honor and reverence, as the Heathen did. Wherefore we
may use Jewish terms and forms of speeches borrowed from other nations, so that
we trespass not against the rules above. We must ever have a diligent care,
as not to obey the commandments of man, so not to use their terms, that turn
from the truth, Tit. 1.14. we must be careful that we do not (...) teach
other doctrine then that received from Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 1.3. into which
straying bypath, quaint and novell expressions do sometimes make men unawares
to slip.

Saint Peter has the term, day of judgment, 2 Pet. 2.9. and 3.7. calling it
the day, to which the wicked are reserved. But he rather has it from Job
21.30. then from the Rabbis; See the place. As for Saint Peter's speech, which
follows, One day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day: it shows that perhaps men will count God slack of his promise, as of
that, Luke 18.7, 8. God will avenge his elect, which cry day and night unto
him, yea though be long forbear, he will, I say, avenge them quickly. A
little time may seem long to a man: but in regard of God himself, there is no
slacknesse; only in mercy he gives men time to repent. So that Saint Peter
expresses the day or time of Gods longsuffering: and not the day of judgments
continuance to be for a thousand years. as Mr. Mede and others conceive.
Besides, Christ ^seth, as this, so many other passages of Scripture
misconstrued by the Jews, yet needs not to refute the Jews misprision. It is
sufficient that Christ applies them aright. Rectum est index sui and obliqui.
The very propounding of truth will justify it self, and disclose what is
erroneous.

But not to dwell longer on this matter, I hold that all phrases or speeches
are to be approved or disallowed, according to the ground on which they be
built. See what the Rabbis say for themselves in this regard; Rabbi Elias
says, that the world shall continue six thousand years; Why so? Because there
be six Alephs in the fi^t Verse of Genesis, where each Aleph stands for a
thousand. This reason is senseless: but if you dislike it, you shall be told
from Rabbi Symeon Ben. Iaba. Woe be to him that thinks the Law contains no
more in it then the ^are words import. To this I say no more, then that as we
must not take any thing from the Law, which on good ground may be concluded
thence, so we must not add thereunto, Deuteronomy. 12.32. that is, we must not
infer from the Law, what the holy Spirit never intended. The learned Mr. W.
Schickard has well shaken such like Jewish tricks as this. Bechin. Happerush.
page 146. etc.

Repl. A tradition agreeing with Rabbi Ketina's opinion of the worlds
destruction in the seventh millenary, gives us a better ground for its truth;
thus. After six years the Jews land and people had a cessation and rest: so
after that six thousand years be past, in the seventh thousand years the world
shall have a cessation and rest.

Answ. The use which God makes of the seventh years rest in Levit. 25. is much
different from that of the Rabbis; Namely, that the Jews might know that the
Land was Gods, and they but sojourners with him, Verse. 23. That they might
observe how God blessed them, when they in the seventh year labored not; and
that it was he that gave the increase, when they did labor; and so depend on
his goodness to them: It served also to bring them to the seventh seven, and
so come to the Jubilee, the famous year of rest. So they might rather conclude,
that the world should stand (but this also would be but a sandy foundation)
forty nine thousand years, and then have a great Jubilee and rest, in which
the last Trumpet should sound, as in the Jubilee year the Jews Trumpets were
wont to do.

Obj. The ancient Jews understood, Esa. 2.11. and 17. of the great day of
judgment: where it is said, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.
The later Jews speak something to the same purpose; and thence they say that
the Lord shall be King over all the earth.

Answ. In Esaias 2. is an excellent prophecy of the preaching of the Gospel, and
of the calling of the Gentiles by the Word going out from Sion and Jerusalem.
This was fulfilled when God set up Christ his King on mount Sion, as I proved
above. Peruse the Chapter, balance each passage, and particle thereof, and try
whether there be any the least warrant for a day of judgment of a thousand
years continuance. It is true, that when the Gospel began to be taught, Christ
was by all true believers exalted alone, and preferred above all the high looks
and lostinesse of men: many idolatrous and superstitious persons then turned to
Christ, and cast away their silver and golden Idols, as there it is foretold.
And if any unbeleevers saw not then Christ's glory, they were justly to be
blamed. His glory was then such, and has so continued, that the gates of hell
could never prevail against it. It is true, that many worldly Potentates then
strove to exalt themselves above Christ, and were highly exalted by others;
saying, Who is like this our Lord? who can war with him? But Christ in due time
did manifest that these brags were vain and foolish: Because Christ by
overthrowing them, will show his might to be far above them, and that all
their forces are inconsiderable. And at the day of judgment, when all quick and
dead shall stand before him, all both small and great shall see and consesse
him alone to be exalted. But neither in Esaias 2. nor in the whole prophecy is
there any ground for two resurrections, and a day of judgment between them of a
thousand years continuance.

Obj. The Rabbis think the title of Psalm. 92. L^jom ^ass^abat for the day of
the Sabbath to be the argument of the Psalm, and to be understood of the
Sabbath of a thousand years.

Answ. We find the Rabbis often extravagant in their opinions, therefore
their bare affertion cannot be a sufficient warrant unto us, they say, that
Psalm. 92, is for the day, that shall be all rest. On Talm. Sanedr. Chapter 11. and
add that a thousand years in Gods sight are but as yesterday: from Psalm. 90.4.
We must attend more, why they thus speak, then that they thus speak, and try
what they say: against their assertion thus I argue. First, if the title of the
Psalm import that it was only for the Sabbath of the thousand years, that is,
then to be used: as the title Libnei Korch implies a Psalm to be used and
sung by the sons of Kore^: how is it that some Rabbis say; that it was sung by
Adam in the evening before the Sabbath, after the promise made to him; and
others say, it was sung in the Sanctuary by the Levits? Secondly, If the title
be so expounded that Lejom Hassh. mean concerning the Sabbath, as the
objection intimates, by making this title the Argument of the Psalm; this
cannot be: For the Psalm entreats not of the thousand years of Christ's reign,
making it such as some now do: Yea it speaks of Gods being the most high, and
the King exalted above all (not for a thousand years, but) for evermore; and
touches matters usual in the gracious course of Gods governing the world, and
his goodness to man in the same. Thirdly, What day is all rest? none, I think
on this earth. Here the Church is militant. The dead that die in the Lord rest
from their labors, Revel. 14.13. The time of all rest is in heaven only. 4.
The speech of a thousand years being but as yesterday, in Psalm 90. has no
more reference to the title of this Psalm, then Harp and Harrow have each to
other. Fifthly, The 90 Psalm speaks of man's birth, his flourishing, his decay.
If he live threescore and ten or eighty years, (as men did in Moses, in
David's, in our times) his days seem as soon past, as a thought. To it they
are compared. If man could live a thousand years (as Adam almost did) these in
Gods sight are but as yesterday, as a watch in the night, that are past. What
are they to God that is eternal? Sixthly, what reason has any one to refer the
words of a thousand years being as yesterday more to the seventh thousand
years, then to the fourth, sift or sixth thousand years of the world?

Obj. We desire the conversion of the Jews, and is it not the easiest way to
deal with them for the same end, not to wrest plain Prophecies, which pertain
to the last and glorious coming of Christ, to his first coming: So that we
hold the main truth, and prove to them, that Jesus of Nazaret was the true
Messiah, and that they ought not to expect any other?

Answ. Here Mr. Mede answers himself, saying; That a Christian must consent no
further to the Jews then his profession (rightly I suppose, grounded on Gods
truth) will give him leave. The rule is good. Now let us try what things he
holds to belong to the second coming of Christ, not to his first, as others
affirm.

First Instance in Mr. M^de, in Revel. 1.7. it is said, That Jesus Christ who
bath washed us from our sins by his blood, comes in the clouds of heaven, and
every eye shall see him, even they that have crucified him, and all Tribes of
the earth (hall mourn before him. These passages are verified only at Christ's
last and glorious coming.

Answ. The mourning of all kinreds of the earth in regard of their sins, for
whose expiation Christ was crucified, is foretold, Matthew. 24.30. and Luke
21.27. where it is also said, that he comes with power and great glory, (...)
or (...), with or upon the elouds of heaven, that is, say the Rabbis, the
Angels. Coch-Nathon Sanedr. page 370. answerable to Jude 14. Where God comes
with thousands of his holy ones; This was fulfilled before that generation
passed, Mat. 24.34. Luke 21.32. Some that heard Christ preach, are told, that
they should not taste death, until they saw the kingdom of God come with
power, Matthew. 16.28. Mark 9.1. and many of them might live, until, what was
showed to St. John Rev. 6 by the horses and riders upon them, was in some sort
fulfilled. The high Priest and his assistants might live to see the Son of man
sit on the right hand of the power of God, and come in or with the clouds of
heaven, Matthew. 26.24. to punish the Jews, and ruin Jerusalem, as Henoch bid
the old word behold God coming with thousands of his holy ones or Angels to
destroy the old world, Jud. 14. In the same manner the Son of man is set forth
with a Crown on his head, and a Sickle in his hand, when be comes to fill up
the Wine Press of his wrath, Revel. 14.18. The mourning here spoken of was in
part fulfilled, Act. 2.37. in the Jews, who seeing, that is, pondering in their
minds, how they had killed the Lord of glory, as Peter there told them, Were with
grief pricked at their hearts, repented and believed in Christ. Now what was
done by them, was and is in like manner done by all converts of all Nations
whatsoever from Christ's time to the worlds end. Thus it appears that the
passages above instanced in, may be said to be done at the Gospels first
progress, and yet must continually be done by all who become Christians in
after times.

Instance of Mr. Mede. The royal Kingdom of Christ, who feeds the innumerable
multitude that have palms in their hands, Revel. 7.17. and Christ's victory over
the ten Kings, vassals of the Beast, Rev. 17.4. are better referred to Christ's
last and glorious coming, then to his first coming.

Answ. The multitude with palms in their hands are converts of all nations,
kinreds, tongues, and people, who praise God for their salvation, Rev. 7.10.11.
The like is done, Revel. 5. where the redeemed out of all Nations acknowledge
all power, riches, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and praise to belong to
Christ, who sits crowned upon his throne. This vision in Chap. 5. Mr. Mede
himself holds to be fulfilled in the beginning of the Apocalypticall times.
The Palm bearing multitude (be they in what time they shall) continue the same
course of ascribing all praise, honor, power, etc. to Christ sitting on his
throne. And Christ, Revel. 17.14. conquering the ten Kings, shows himself to
be Lord of Lords and King of Kings. Now before the visions here mentioned
Christ was exalted far above all principalities, powers, and dominations, and
every title and name that is named, not in this world only, but in the world
to come, Ephesians. 1.21.22. and in the very entrance of the Revelation in styled,
the Prince of the Kings of the earth, Revel. 1.5. Therefore the royal Kingdom,
and all power, and honor, etc. begins to be due to Christ at his first
coming, and must in all times afterward, even to his second coming at the
worlds end be ascribed unto him.

Instance. The marriage of the Lamb, Revel. 19.7. The New Jerusalem, Revel.
21.9. The Lamb, the light of the new Jerusalem, Verse. 23. are better applied to
the last and glorious coming of Christ, then wrested to his first coming.

Answ. To these Instances I purpose to answer in their due place where now I
come to speak of diverse passages in the two last Chapters of the Revelation.

Chap. VII. Objections out of Revel. 21. and 22. answered.
AMong learned expositers many controversies and doubts are moved about the two
last Chapters of the Revelation: I will briefly handle that which especially
concerns the matter here to be discussed.

Obj. Many most excellent and admirable promises are made unto Christians,
Apoc. 21. and 22. which must be made good at one time or other. Many of them
have not yet been fulfilled: therefore they are to be fulfilled hereafter: and
that must be either in the thousand years of the Churches prosperity, in
which the Church and Saints of God shall reign with Christ before the end of
the world, or else in the world to come in heaven. The promises are these, of
new heavens and new earth, of a new Jerusalem, of its being prepared and
trimmed for Christ, the bus band thereof; of freedom from tears, death, sorrow,
pain; of all things made new, and many other the like. Read the Chapters.

Answ. I grant that the promises in these two Chapters are for this life. And
thus by several arguments I prove it. First, the new Jerusalem comes down from
God out of heaven, and is on earth: if it were to be in heaven, then it should
ascend from earth to heaven, which it is not said to do. And this ascending to
God befalls not Gods servants both in body and soul^ until the last judgment
be past: whereas in this life the Ephesians and other converts become fellow
Citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19. And secondly, there can be no tears in
heaven, which need to be wiped away from the Saints eyes. Thirdly, It Is on
earth that the Saints thirst, Revel. 21.6. and there Christ refreshes them with
the water of life, Joh. 4.14. In heaven they thirst not, but are fully
satisfied with all joy and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. Then fourthly, the
Nations that are saved, Revel. 1.24. walk. (a phrase usual for conversing in
this life) in the light of Christ, who is the light of the world, and glory of
his people Israel, Luke 2.32. And it is on earth, that Kings do their service to
God, and bring their people to the New Jerusalem, or the true Church. On earth
are civil distinctions of Kings and people, of master and servant: but in
heaven a Lazarus is (...) in an Angelical condition no less then a great
Monarch, all there rest from their labors. Fifthly, Christ who is the wisdom of
the Father, is the Tree of life, Prove. 31.18. and 22. Rev. 22.2. and is the
life of men in this world, 1 Ioh. 5.20. As he is the spiritual Manna, so he
is the fruit of this tree every mon^th fed upon by believers. Sixthly, The
leaves of this tree serve to heal the Nations, Rev. 22.2. Now in heaven there
is no account kept by months, nor are there any sores of the Saints to be
healed, or that need cure. The souls of all faithful are purified by faith in
this life, Act. 15.9. And their bodies lie down, and leave, what was sinful
and corrupt in them, in the dust of the grave, and rising glorious and
immortal ascend to heaven. Thus by these Arguments it appears, that the
condition of Gods people in this life, is in these two Chapters declared.

Secondly, I will show, that many passages in these Chapters, which seem to
belong to the Saints state in heaven, express their happy condition not only
in the thousand years from Christ's time, but in all the days of the Gospel to
the worlds end: and thus I prove it. First, Every one that is in Christ is a
new creature: and not only so: but all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17.
This is answerable to Apoc. 21.5. And appears further thus. Christ is the
second or new Adam: he maks new matters; floods in deserts; them that were not
his people to be his people; be makes a new Covenant; speaks to people by new
tongues, gives them new hearts and new spirits; puts new wine into new bottles;
gives believers a new name written in a white stone; clothes them with new
garments; puts a new song into their mouths; makes a new heaven and a new
earth, and a new Jerusalem, that is, a Church of all believers both Jews and
Gentiles. These things began to be performed in Christ's life time, and have
been, are and will be continually in fulfilling unto the worlds end. For all
Christians from the first to the last have their portion herein. Secondly, the
marriage of Christ with the Christian Church began with the preaching of the
Gospel: for then God made a marriage Feast, and invited guests unto it, Mat.
22.2. Joh. 3.29. He has ever since, now does, and will continue still
inviting them thereunto so long as the world lasts. Paul long since prepared
the Corinthians a pure virgin for Christ their husband, 2 Cor. 11.2. The other
Apostles and Religious Teachers ever since have endeavored the same for other
people and Nations. Thirdly, the (...) Tabernacle of God was among men at the
Gospels beginning. Then Christ (...) bad his Tabernacle among men, Job. 1.14.
and became Immanuel God with us by assuming humane nature. This Tabernacle
Christ took up with him to heaven at his ascension. Besides, as God had his
dwelling or Tabernacle among the Israelites, in the wilderness and in Canaan:
so Christ walks amidst the golden Candlesticks, the Churches here on earth,
Rev. 1. and on his throne he sits in the midst of the Rulers of his Church,
Rev: 5.6. and all Christians did, do, and shall acknowledge his glory, honor,
dominion, to the worlds end; as they in that Chapter do. Fourthly, the
Covenant by which men of all Nations are Gods people, and he their God, Rev:
21. was made at the beginning of the Gospel, and continues to be made with all
converts to the end of time: For God dwelt among the Corinthians, and by Paul
said unto them, I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, 2 Cor: 6.16.
and he is the same to every person of any Nation, that fears him, Acts 10.35.
This Covenant is made with all that be taught of God, and hear him, Jer:
31.33, 34. John 6.45. And fifthly, from the Christian Churches beginning to the
worlds end; All tears are wiped from the eyes of all believers, no death,
sorrow, crying, pain does rest on them, but passes away, Apoc: 21.4. So that if
they weep (as men in affliction cannot but sometimes do) they (upon better
consideration) will be as though they wept not, 1 Cor: 7,31. They suffer
tribulation, but they come out of it, and by the Lamb of God are filled full of
all joy and comfort, Rev: 17.14. There will be wicked men, who with their
tongues will calumniate, and with their weapons wound them: but their malice
shall not prosper in the end: They themselves shall fall; because Gods Covenant
of mercy and peace shall never fail his people; Esa: 54.10. etc: Hence the
Saints are bidden, when perils are at hand, not to fear, Acts 27.24. not to
fear the fear of the wicked, 1 Pet: 3.14. God being their helper, they need not
fear what man can do unto them, Heb: 13.6. Yea tears shall be so wiped away,
and pain so allayed, that they shall count it exceeding joy, that they fell
into temptations and afflictions, Jam: 1.1. Their sorrow is in the issue turned
into joy, which no man can take from them, Joh: 16.20. This is of force
sufficient to wipe off all tears. For they shall have assurance by their faith
in the Lamb, and in his blood, and by their testimony given unto Gods truth, to
overcome, Mat: 28.8. Rev: 12.11.

I might go on, and further instance in other particulars, which subserve, and
are fitted unto these already spoken of. In brief, I will collect them, and say
no more, but what may point at them in general.

First, seeing the old Jerusalem is ruined, God builds a new one the mother of
all faithful Christians, both Jews and Gentiles; and this must needs be a
great and capacious City, having glorious foundations and walls, to be strong
for defense, and have gates on each side of it, for access thereunto from the
four coasts of heaven.

Secondly, if the twelve Patriarchs of old had their names graven in pearls and
jewels, and born by Aaron a type of Christ, the upholder of all the faithful,
for the comfort of each godly person in the twelve Tribes: much more may the
names of the twelve Apostles be set upon the twelve foundations of this
glorious City, for the comfort of all such, as are begotten children to Christ
by them and their doctrine.

Thirdly, if Gods Law was esteemed by David walking therein, above gold, above
the finest gold, and thousands of it: then doubtless, the streets of the New
Jerusalem, in which all good Christians walk, may very well be compared to
gold, as pure and clear, as glass.

Fourthly, the Tabernacle and Temple of old glittered with golden surniture,
and the choicest gems: the Christian Church comes not short of either of them:
but is, as every man must needs grant, far more glorious in all respects, has
more excellent and spiritual privileges, and clear and comfortable doctrine
far beyond all former times. As the Tents for Gods people are enlarged, and
their curtains further spread then of old, Esa. 54.2. So are Gods favors more
extended to the Christian Church, then formerly to the Jewish.

Fifthly, If David was the light of Israel, and by his high esteem of Gods word
the light to men's paths, made his people to walk safely in that light: much
more now is Christ the David, or beloved of God, and the light of the world,
and directs Christians to come out of darkness unto the saving Truth. These
and other matters most glorious, spoken of the Churches estate in Rev. 21. and
22. are belonging to the Church of God in this life.

Nor need any man to admire that the high and heavenly expressions, in these
two Chapters used, concern the estate of the Christian Church in this life.

For, first, the faithful in their life time have (...) an exhibition or
subsistence of things hoped for, of the happiness promised them for life to
come. They have (...) a summary inventory of things not yet seen, Heb. 11.1.
that is, of the inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
but is reserved for them in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4. The eye of faith is
quicksighted, and beholds things afar off, as present. Hereby Abraham in his
days saw and enjoyed Christ, and redemption by him: and Moses ( which is much
more) saw him that is invisible. Thus a Christian may in this life by faith
see, take comfort in, and rejoice most heartily in the glorious estate of the
life to come, and (as we use to say) have an heaven upon earth; whence it is,
that the Church on earth is called Heaven. Of which hereafter I shall speak.

Secondly, the comforts, joys, blessings of Gods people in this life are
exceeding abundant, his gifts (...) unutterable, 2 Cor. 9.15. their rejoicing
for the same is (...) unexpressible, 1 Pet. 1.8. They have peace (...) that
passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. If they lose wife, children, brothers,
lands, or the like, they receive in this life (...) things an hundred fold
better, Mat. 19.29. And if Paul count all things dung in comparison of Jesus
Christ, and the enjoying of him: the old Jerusalems richly beautified Temple,
the resplendent Jewels in the new Jerusalems walls and gates composure, the
gold transparent as glass, with which the streets are paved; the Cry stall
rivers, the fruitful trees, with which the City is furnished and adorned,
cannot fully and to the life set forth the wonderful glory of Gods Church in
this life. Let what can be said of the Kings daughter, Christ's Spouse, of the
Churches excellency from outward matters, Psalm. 45. in the Song of songs, and
elsewhere, this addition, S^ is all glorious within, surpasses all; So there is
an ward beauty, a spiritual glory superadded to the outward excellency of the
Church that goes beyond the highest strains that can by words be uttered. Let
but the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, the enjoyment of his favor, the
comforts of the holy Ghost, which in this life must be gotten by them that
hope to enjoy his presence in the other world, be put into the balance
against all worldly matters, to whose luster allusion is so often made in these
two Chapters: they are of more weight, and greater worth, then all such outward
things. Wherefore the lofty and stately expressions in these Chapters, cannot
be denied to belong to the Christian Church, of which Christ is the light, from
his being here on earth, until he give up his government of the same at the
last day, and take up with him his servants to those heavenly mansions, which
he has prepared for them.

Chap. VIII. whether the binding of Satan for a thousand years be already
past. The Question stated.
THE Angels, which in the beginning of the world fell from their happy
condition, were east down into Tartarus, and were there reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness, to the judgment of the great day, Jude 6. Therefore
they are at all times so bound that they cannot work any mischief to man
without especial commission from God; who gives them liberty, and looses their
chain, so far only as to him seems good. This sometimes God does, and that
either for trial of the godly, as in Jobs case; or for to humble them, as when
Paul was buffeted by Satan's Messenger, 2 Cor. 12.7. Or for punishment of the
wicked, as when Ahab bent to believe false Prophets, was deceived by a lying
Spirit, 1 Kings 22. or upon some other the like cases. Of this restraint and
loosing of Satan the question is not.

Scripture informs us further; First, of an eminent and notable binding up of
Satan for a thousand years after Christ's time, in the Abyss or bottomless
pit; wherein he is so fast sealed up, that he cannot deceive the Nations.
Secondly, of an eminent and manifest loosing him, after the thousand years are
ended. After which time he works much mischief against Gods people, and draws
the Nations in all coasts of the world into combustions of war.

The controversy here is, whether this notable binding up of Satan be already
past, or yet to come? This I am now to discuss.

Chap. IX. The famous and notable binding up of Satan is already past, and is
not yet to come.
THis position I thus prove: Arg. 1. The famous kingdom of Christ and
Christians, and this notable binding up of Satan for a thousand years begin
both together. Dr. J. Alstede, Mr. J. Mede, Mr. Archer, The Glimpse jointly
hold this undeniable.

But the famous Kingdom of Christ and Christians began more years then one
thousand five hundred agon, as I have above proved.

Therefore the notable binding up of Satan began one thousand five hundred
years agon, and therefore is past long before our time.

Arg. 2. He that did in eminent manner by the Spirit and finger of God cast
out devils, and did (...) annul and undo the works of the devil, and spoiled
him of his power, did first eminently bind Satan, Matthew. 12.29. Luk 11.20, etc.

But Christ at his being on earth above one thousand five hundred years agon
did in eminent manner by the Spirit and finger of God cast out devils, and
annull and undo the works of Satan, and spoil him of his power.

Therefore Christ then bound Satan, as above, in an eminent manner.

Of Christ's casting out of devils is often mention made in the Gospels: as Luk
11.10. and elsewhere; and this he did in such manner, that all man were
astonished thereat, Matthew. 9.33. Mark 1.27. and never saw it in the like manner.

That Christ did annull and undo the works of the devil, and take from him
his power, is manifest. The devil was the Prince of darkness, Christ was the
light of the world, Joh. 1.9. The devil blinded the minds of unbeleevers:
Christ commanded light to shine out of darkness, and gave the Nations knowledge
of himself, and the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.4. The devil caught men in his snares:
Christ by bringing men to repentance and faith freed them from those snares, 2 Timothy 2.26. Zacheus of a Publican and sinner, and lost man, was by Christ made a
son of Abraham, Luk 19. So were other the like converts. The Ephesians were
children of wrath, as other Gentiles, and walked according to the Prince that
rules in the air or darkness: but Christ enlightened the eyes of their
understanding, quickened them by grace, saved them through faith, Ephesians. 1.2.
The devil drew men at first into sin, and thereby brought (as other
calamities, so) death on mankind: but Christ by his death destroyed him that
had the power of death, that is, the devil, Heb. 2.14. and took away the
sting of death, 1 Cor. 15.55. So that Satan did but bruise Christ's heel;
Christ crushed Satan's head. Thus Christ did overpower and conquer Satan in
those primitive times, as the Texts cited show.

Arg. 3. Christ has already become the head of all principality and power,
and spoiled them and made a show openly, and triumphed over them, Coloss. 2.10.
and 15. and being raised from death, sat on Gods right hand, and was above all
principalities, and powers and dominions, and had all things subject to him,
and under his feet, Ephesians. 1.20, 21.

Therefore Satan was then also conquered and triumphed over by Christ: for he
was the grand Boutifeu and chiese enemy of Christ, and was by Christ
imprisoned and laid fast up in chains, as conquerors deal with the
ringleaders of such as with hostility oppose them.

Arg. 4. The 70. Disciples sent forth by Christ subdued devils by Christ's name:
and Christ thereupon tells them, that he saw Satan fall from heaver as
lightning: and then did Christ give to his disciples power to tread on Serpents
and Scorpions, and all power of the enemy, so that nothing could hurt them, Luk
10.18. etc. To which purpose also we read, 1 John 5.18 that the evil one
cannot touch them, that are born of God.

Therefore in the primitive times one thousand five hundred years agon the
devil was bound, and in eminent manner restrained by Christ.

Chap. X. Objections answered: whereby it further will appear that Satan's
eminent binding for a thousand years is already past.
HOwever the arguments in the former Chapter sufficiently confirm the truth;
some there are who will not be satisfied therewith: I will therefore answer,
what they produce to assert the contrary.

Object. How was Satan bound (say they) when all the Apostles were persecuted,
Christ's subjects distressed and destitute of all comforts, and most of them
cruelly put to death? Gl. page 9. had not Satan a manifest hand and plot
herein, and indevored hereby to hinder, if not to extirpate the Gospel?

Answ. Satan was long agon cast down by Michael or Christ, and subdued, as is
above proved: and seeing then he could not do the mischief he desired to
Gods Saints, and hinder the advancing of the Gospel: he Rev. 13. gave his
power and throne and great authority to the ten horned beast, the Roman
Tyrants, who by their agents and friends then murdered the Apostles and Saints
of God. Secondly, though the servants of God were persecuted and put to violent
deaths; yet Christ having conquered death, its sting was taken away; so that it
was but a passage for them to a better life, and to endless bliss. Thirdly,
Christ when it so pleased him, did often deliver his servants from dangerous
persecutions, and from death it self, As namely, Peter strictly watched in
prison, Act. 12.7. and Paul, when fattie persons had sworn not to eat or drink
until they had killed him, Act 23.12. and then only did God permit them to be
slain, when they had finished their course, and might best glorify God by
their deaths, which they underwent willingly, courageously comfortably. So that
as formerly their lives, so now their deaths made the Gospel greatly to be
taken notice of, and to be glorified.

Object. Satan is cold the Prince of the air, who works in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. He is (...), a ruler of the world in darkness here
beneath, Ephesians. 6.12. The coming of the man of sin is by the works of Satan
with signs and lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Therefore Satan was not in the
primitive times bound, chained, and sealed up the bottomless pit.

Answ. That which in Rev. 20. is termed the bottomless pit, is in other
notions called Earth and Sea, Rev. 12.12. and air or darkness; Ephesians. 2.2. The
air, says Philo Jud. is black and dark of its own nature, and is called (...)
darkness. Hence the devil is styled the Prince of the air and of darkness.
The Sea and Earth also have no light of themselves, but from above. When
therefore it is said, the devil has power in the air, earth, or sea, by
these are meant men of dark, earthly, and unquiet minds. In which sense it is
said, Rev. 12.12. Woe be to the inhabitants of the earth and Sea, for Satan
being by Christ cast out of the heaven of the Church, he came amongst the
inhabitants of the Air, Sea, and Earth, that is, men who were not heavenly
minded. The affinity of these terms appears, first, because the Beast which
Apoc. 13.1. is said to rise out of the Sea, is spoken of Apoc. 9.7. as
ascending out of the bottomless pit: And secondly, there is a Tehom, an Abyss
or bottomless pit, Psalm. 71.20. ascribed to the Earth, as elsewhere to the Sea.
Now when Satan was cast down from domineering in the Church, and had his
special abode among wicked men, he set up, first, the ten horned Beast,
Revel. 13.1. to blaspheme the name of God, to war with, to overcome and kill
Gods people. And secondly, he set up the Beast with two horns, Verse. 11. who
did the works of the first Beast, and did also deceive the world with signs
and lying wonders, Verse. 13,14. for this second Beast expresses fully the man
of sin, who 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. is described by his false and commerfeit wonders:
What mischief Satan bound by Christ could not then work by himself, he
endeavored to act by these two his wicked instruments.

Quest. Suppose it be denied, that heaven in Scripture at any time signifies
the Church, and that Earth, Sea, and Air denote wicked, blind, and unquiet
worldlings, how can the contrary be proved?

Answ. It is thus proved; First, The disciples are called the lights of the
world, Matthew. 5.14. The godly Philippians must shine in the world as lights,
Phil. 2.15. When the teachers of sacred doctrine in the Church were pulled down,
the Stars are said to fall from heaven, Dan. 8.10. Rev. 9.1. The Angels or
chief teachers of the Church are called Stars, Revel. 1.20. Therefore the Church
is the heaven in which they move, and shine, and from which their light and
influence proceeds, to take men off from their worldly estate. Secondly, Saint
Augustine says expressly; Sancti and justi coelum vocantur, holy and just men
are called Heaven, De civ: Deilib. 2. c. 21. and expounds that in Mal. 4. lest
I come and destroy the earth, of the wicked upon the Earth, qui terrena
sapiunt, who mind earthly things, Ib. c. 29. His judgment herein is sound,
because we find the members of Christ's Church called heaven, Rev: 12.11.
where the heavens and they that dwell therein, that is, such as overcome by the
blood of the Lamb, are bid to rejoice. And on the contrary the inhabitants of
the earth are expounded to be such as have not their names written in the book
of life, Rev. 12.9. Thus what was denied, I conceive, is sufficiently proved.
Many learned Expositers give their assent hereunto.

Repl. The casting down of Satan to the earth, and excluding him from heaven,
Apoc. 12. and Satan's binding, shutting, and sealing up in the bottomless pit,
Rev. 20. are so far from expressing one and the same thing in different notions
(which some Expositers think they do) that there is no one word the same in
both, 1 The Angel binding Satan, Apoc. 20, came from heaven: but Michael in
Chap. 12: fights with the Dragon in Heaven. 2 Concerning Satan, be is 1 taken,
2 bound, 3 shut up, 4 sealed up, Chap: 20. In Chap: 12. there is no mention of
these matters at all, M: Mede Clavis Apoc. part 2. Synch. 4.

Answ. First, in general I answer, the same thing is often in the Revelation
expressed in a different manner. As namely, first, Christ Rev: 1. appears to
St. John in Patmos after a glorious manner, amidst the seven golden
Candlesticks. In Chap: 5. he appears on a Throne in the midst of twenty four
Elders, as a Lamb that had been slain. And Chap: 6.2. he is seen on a white
Horse armed and crowned, and riding with conquest. Secondly, usually when
diverse visions run upon one matter in the Revelation, what is omitted, or not
so clearly expressed in one, is more fully and plainly opened in another: that
so the whole matter intended may result from the several visions compared
together. Hence Rev: 1.7. the godly, coming to the knowledge of Christ
crucified for their sins, lament and wail. But Chap: 12.12. upon Christ's
conquest over Satan they rejoice. And Chapter 15.2, 3. they harp and sing as
Moses and Israel, having passed safe through the red Sea in which the Egyptians
were drowned. M. Mede himself grants that diverse visions in the Apoc. do
relegere, run over again, and express one and the same thing in a different
manner, Clavis Apoc: part 2. Proem: So Mr. Brightman on Apoc: 11.1. Many
Expositors unanimously agree herein.

Secondly, in particular I answer, Christ is the Angel of the Covenant, Mal.
3.1. That came down from heaven, Joh. 6.38. Apoc. 20.1. He being on Earth, and
the chief Ruler of the Heaven on earth, that is, his Church; (This exposition I
have above confirmed) he, I say, I fought with Satan, 2 conquered him, 3
excluded him from heaven, 4 cast him into the earth and Sea. This Christ does
under the name of Michael, Chap. 12. His fighting with and conquest over Satan
intimates that the Dragon was taken, and as a captive of most malice bound,
fast shut up, and chained. The casting of the Dragon into the Earth and Sea,
and his exclusion from heaven fully express his binding and confining to the
bottomless pit. How Earth and Sea are answerable to the Abyss or bottomless
pit, I have formerly showed. Evident it is, that these be forms of speech
which humanitus loquendo, after the manner of men, set forth one and the same
thing, namely, Gods restraining Satan. And hence it appears how the twelve and
twenty Chapters in diverse manner, and somewhat different notions express the
same restraint of Satan, and how each Chapter helps to the more clear
understanding of the other. Many good Expositors judge them so to do.

Object. Satan was not bound in the time of the six former Seals, and six
former Trumpets. For in the time of the six former Seals, he was in B^^tail
with Michael: and when Michael had overcome him, then only arose the ten horned
Beast out of the Sea, and bad Satan's power and Throne given him, which he
exercised against the Church. Then also Satan cast a flood of water out of his
mouth to overwhelm the woman, and prepared to war with the rest of the woman's
children. Therefore Satan was not bound in the time of the six former Seals;
and in the beginning of the Trumpets time. And in Trumpet five is not Satan
loose? It the Angel of the bottomless pit called Abaddon and Apollyon any
other but Satan, who was cast down from heaven by Christ? For none other in all
the Apocalypse fell down from heaven to the Earth: nor can the title there used
well sit any other. However, Satan was not then bound, not the pit shut, and
sealed, but open: for out of it a smoke issued, etc. Chap. 9.2. And out of the
mouth of the Dragon; the Beast and false Prophet came unclean Spirits of
Devils, Apo. 16.13. How then is Satan bound in all this time? Mr. Mede Clav.
Apoc. part 2. Synch. 4.

Answ. Under seal one, (which Mr. Mede makes rightly to be at or near the
beginning of the Apocalypticall times) Christ appears a Conqueror, and goes on
more and more to conquer: And whom here did he conquer, but his grand
adversary the Devil? For Christ risen from death sat on Gods right hand, was
about all principalities and powers, and had all things under his feet, Ephesians.
1.20. and therefore the Dovils also among the rest. Nor is it possible that any
created power can so long, as Mi^ Med^ holds, maintain a combat with Christ,
When he pleases do ^ake all Dominion into his hand, and make all powers subject
to himself. It has been proved above that Satan at, or near Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension was bound by Christ. Then Satan being shut up, gave
his power to the Beast with ten horns, Rev. 13.1, 2. that is, to the Roman
secular power, which began its tyranny in the primitive times, and continued it
against the Christians many years: And therefore this Beast began not his
devilish persecution many hundredth years after St. John's time, upon the end of
the sixth Seal, as Mr. Mede holds. And whereas it is said that Sat^m^ast a
flood of water after the woman; the speech is metaphorical, as is that of the
Abyss or Sea, into which Satan was cast: and intimates that Satan going to
prison himself, raised what waves of trouble he could against the woman. And
whereas He formerly stood before the woman to devour her child, Apoc. 12.4. his
mischief was prevented, and himself was cast into the Earth and Sea, or Abyss;
and thither (...) he went, Verse 17. yet by the ten horned Beast, Rev: 13.
(Vicarius ejus, his Deputy; Mr. Mede Clav. Ap^part 2. Synch. 4.) invested with
his great power, He made war with them that dwell in Heaven, or the Church,
Rev: 13.6, 7. which had the Festimony of Jesus Christ, Rev. 12.17. What was
done by the authority of the Devil may be said to be done by himself. So
what was done in Baptism by Christ's authority, is said to be done by Christ:
whereas not Christ, but the Apostles did Baptize, Joh: 4.1. So Solomon is
rightly said to build the Temple, which his Subjects built by his authority,
direction and charge.

To the second part of the objection I answer: It Is not material whether Satan
be at the fifth Trumpet loosed or no. His Deputy has seope enough to do
mischief, though he be imprisoned. Stars are the Angels of the Churches, Rev.
1. and a star fallen from Heaven here denotes the Bishops of Rome, who before
were bright and shining stars in the Church: but at length by the height of
their pride, and their declining to herefie, fell to the earth. This has the
assent of many learned Expositors. To the Bishops of Rome thus fallen was
permitted by God, and given by Satan ((...) imports both, as if need be shall
be proved) the key of the bottomless pit. They having Satan's power and depths
of crast for lying signs and wonders (as the ten horned Beast had for war and
slaughter) brought upon the world by Gods just permission strong delusion. Thus
the Pope became Abaddon and Apollyon, the son of perdition, the son of the
great father of perdition (called usually in the Revelation the Dragon, the
Serpent, the devil and Satan) and he, the Pope, I say, (...) with damnable
heresies destroys both himself and others. So that many of the best writers
judge the Pope not unworthy of these unglorious titles. And therefore the
learned and ever ingenuous Mr. Mede rather questions (Is not the Angel of the
ba^omlesse pit called Abaddon and Apollyon any other but Satan?) chen asserts the
contrary: as some precipitate expositer would perhaps have don. The devil
(...) was in combat thrown down fram heaven, Apov. 12. There are other falls
thence, as first of a star into the rivers and fountains, Chapter 8.10 which may
perhaps denote the heretics wresting and imbittering the sweet streams of
Scripture. There is secondly also a fall of Rome, which being once an holy
spouse of Christ, fell to be the mother of fornication, and the notorious
whore, Apoc. 17.2. and 18.2. This in the Apocalypse language is a fall from the
heaven of the Church to earthly profaneness: Such is the fall of the Star
here, and most fitly suits to the Pope. Wherefore Mr. Medes arguments are not
of strength enough to prove, that Satan's binding is yet to come. Come we to
other objections.

Object. Satan is said in the Apostles times to go about like a roaring ^ion,
seeking whom he may devour: and the godly are bid to he sober and watch, and
to resist him, 1 Pet. 5.8. and Revel. 2.10. Satan is said to cast some into
prison for ten days, and to have his throne in Pergamus. Therefore Satan was
then unbound, and not only did mischief to earthly, unquiet, and dark minded
men, but to faithful men also, and such as were members of the Church.

Answ. There are some in the Church, who are not of the Church, 1 John 2. some
pretending to be members of the true Church, which for the present might he
of the Synagogue of Satan, Revel. 3.9. In the tr^ Church then there were false
Apostles, Revel. 2.2. and 2 Cor. 11.13. and false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1. Hence
it is that Satan in the Church serks whom he may devour. True Christians
resist him and persist stedsast in the faith, and he sties from them, 1 Pet.
5. But such at receive not the love of the Truth, are caught by Sataus wiles,
believe lies and perish, 2 These. 2.11. Thence it is said, wae to the
Inhabitants of the Earths and Sea, that is, to profane and wicked men. But the
Heavens and all therein, all true Christians rejoice, Revel. 12.12. And whereas
it is said, that Satan casts some into prison, that is spoken of his
instruments of Satanicall bent, who acted it; In which sense also Satan is said
to have his throne, where ungracious and bloody persecutors bear sway and
tyrannize. This was the reason, why Judas was by Christ called a devil, Joh.
6.70. and others called sons of the devil: because his works they did, Joh.
8.41. in calumniating and persecuting Christ and his servants. We must
distinguish (as well as we may) between mischiefs done by Satan immediately,
and those done by his instruments.

Obj. Satan is not by Christ to be bound for a thousand years, until the
Beast and false prophet be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone: for Saint
John saw the Beast and false prophet, Chap. 19. cast into that lake, and then
afterward Chap. 20. Satan bound.

But the Beast and false prophet are not yet cast into that Lake: the Secular
and Ecclesiastical power of Rome still exists and continues in the Pope and
his substitutes. Therefore Satan is not yet taken, bound, shut and sealed up by
Christ. This objection is Dr. Alsteds and the others jointly.

Answ. The Revelation declares, what John in order saw, not what should in
order continuedly and successively be acted. This truth in general Mr. Mede
approves, though he starts from it in this particular: Clav. part. 2. Synch.
4. The reasons which drew him to this mistake are above answered: I say then,
that Saint John saw the vision of Christ's conquest over the Beast and false
prophet, and how they were cast into hell, before he saw the vision of Satan's
binding and sealing up, and of his loosing and casting into the fiery lake. Yet
might Satan be bound in the Abyss, and therein incite the Sea Beast, the
wicked Emperors; and Earth Beast, the false prophet, (for both Sea-beasts and
Earth-Beasts have their Abyss, as above) to do mischief, and both they and
he be at once cast into the lake of sire. Mr. Mede judiciously says in the
end of the Clavis, Corol. the 2. that as in histories, so in visions diverse
matters don at one and the same time, are not told at one and the same time,
but one after another: and that they will mispend their pains, who tie the
events of matters mentioned in the Apocalypse to the series and order of the
visions. The observation is of very great use; and proves true often in the
Revelation. Saint John after that he saw the vision of the sealed book, Rev.
5. and 6. saw the book open, Rev. 10. yet the prophecy of the open book
(according to Mr. Mede and others) begins its accomplishment at the very
entrance of the Apocalypse times, where the sealed books time also begins. So
the vision of the two witnesses who prophecy one thousand two hundred and
sixty days, is related, Chap. 11. before the vision, in which the Beast, Rev.
13.1. exercises the dragons power forty two months: yet Mr. Mede rightly
(though I approve not his settling their beginnings) makes them contemporary. In
like manner the Beast, false prophet and the dragon may be all at one and the
same time cast into the lake of fire, and not Satan's two chief instruments a
thousand and more years before himself: though one in vision be related before
the other. Nor indeed does the original, Apoc. 20.10. say, as some urge it,
that the Dragon was cast into the lake, where the Beast and false Prophet are
or were; or are or were cast: but were seen to be cast by John as in Chap.
19.19, 20. The words and context will bear this sense very well.

Dr. Alstede page 20.1.7. says that after the thousand years are ended, the
great Antichrist reflorescet shall flourish again, and have great power in the
wars of Gog and Magog. But how can that be? If the Beast and false Prophet (by
them the whole succession of them are understood) were cast into hell a
thousand years before the wars of Gog and Magog; and not they only thus
punished, but the remnant of their people killed by him that rides on the white
Horse? Rev. 19.21. Besides the Abetters of this opinion jointly hold, that the
Papacy or false prophets, Romes power is extinct, before the famous kingdom of
Christ begins. And if the false prophet and all his retinue be cast into hell
before the thousand years, I suppose them in a prison, whence there can be no
escape, much less a return to a flourishing estate on earth.

Obj. In the famous thousand years the Nations shall not be seduced by Satan.
But the Nations, yea both Jews and Gentiles were seduced very much in the
thousand years after Christ's ascension; for then rose Simon Magus, Nicolaitans,
Menandrians, Valintinians, Novatians, Anrians, Donatists, and sundry other
heretics. These wonderfully seduced the world before that thousand years were
ended.

Ans. We must know, that when it is said, that Satan was cast down from heaven,
the meaning is, that he was cast out from deceiving heavenly minded men in the
Church. They resisted him, and abode steadfast in the faith. And that when it is
said, he was ^st down to the earth, and fast bound in the bottomless pit: then
because it is said also, wo^ it to the inhabitants of the Earth and Sea, Revel.
12.12. hereby was denoted, the devils prevailing over men of earthly and
unquiet minds. Among whom was Simon Magus, who to be accounted a great man
deceived the people. Such also were the Nicolaitans, men of lustful demeanor;
such were Novatus and his followers, who out of their pride thought themselves
holier then all other men; such was Donatus, who missing of the Bishopric of
Carthage fell into heretical doctrines; many other heretics in several
nations were caught in the devils snares, and led captive by him. But Satan
could not then deceive the nations universally as formerly. The Gospel was
spread into countries far and near.

Repl. There does not appear any considerable conversion of the Nations in the
thousand years after Christ's time, he neither then nor since has subdued all
the sons of Seth, Numb. 24.17. nor showed himself to be the Prince to whom the
people of the world should be gathered and yield their obedience, Gone. 49.10.
Alstede page 40.

Answ. Christ showed that he should and ought to have a people gathered out of
all Nations, when he bad the Apostles and their successors, Go and teach all
Nations, what he commanded them. And surely he would not give such a
commission in vain, or upon weak grounds, or out of its due time. The Apostles
then also caused the sound of the Gospel to go out into all the world, Romans
10.18. Paul wrote to the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, etc. In
Christ's name teachers came to Samaria, Antioch, Caesarea, Crete, Pamphilia,
Pisidia, Lycaonia, Babylon, Macedonia, Achaia, Dalmatia, Spain. Scripture
mentions all these and more Cities and countries, to whom the Gospel came. And
if so many parts of the world, as Scripture mentions, were instructed by Paul
and his fellow laborers, we may justly conceive (were stories of these times
silent) that many more Cities and Kingdoms were taught by all the twelve
Apostles, and those that they sent forth to spread the Gospel. This manifestly
appears by the song, Apoc. 5.9. where the redeemed acknowledge themselves to
be of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. We see hence
therefore that Christ did exparietare (as Dr. Alstede according to Mr.
Broughton, whom he calls his learned master for the Hebrew tongue, translates,
Numb. 24.17) unwall all the sons of Seth, that is, all the Nations of the
world, or rule over them, as the Rabbis say, Coch. page 377. for he broke
down the partition wall that kept out the Gentiles, Ephesians.2.14. So that
whosoever feared God in any Nation was accepted, Act. 10.33. Of the far
spreading of the Gospel many fathers speak: Prayer to God (says Justin Martyr)
was made in Christ's name in all parts of the world, Dial. with Tryph. The
doctrine of Christ (says Tertullian) ubique porrigitur, ubique ereditur, was
every where propagated, every where believed. It was carried home by the
converts of all nations, Act. 2. Tertul. lib. contr. Iudaeos. The Gospel was
taught (...) on the Theater of the whole world, Clem. Alex. Protrept. 2. It did
(...) overcome all, Eusebius. Hist. 2.14. The Gospel preached at the first did
presently (...) possess the whole world, Diod. Episc. Tarsens. And Aretas
Chap. 60. on the Apocalypse says, that (...) the knowledge of Gods will in all
the world showed, that Satan was then bound. And I add from Revel. 20. that if
this be so, it shows also that then the Saints reigned with Christ in all the
world. Wherefore the spreading of the Gospel among the Jews and Gentiles was a
thousand five hundred and more years agon accomplished: and is still to be more
and more accomplished. Because Christ's command of teaching of Nations is still
in force: and because Christ then riding on his white horse conquered, and goes
on still to conquer, Revel. 6.2. Nor did the converts in all parts of the world
leave their own habitations to go to Canaan, (as some conceit the Jews at
least should do) but did (...) dwell as formerly in their own countries. Idem
Diod. in Photii Bibl. page 691.

Object. The Jews have been more seduced in the years since Christ's ascension,
then before. They are extremely bent against Christianity, and wander still in
gross darkness of mind. The ten Tribes captived by Assure have heard nothing
concerning Christ, Alst.page.38. They are all lost, Arch. 27. It Is a hard censure
utterly and wholly to exclude them from communion with Christ, Alst.page.39.

Answ. It is most true that many Jews were and are very much overwhelmed with
error and blindness; yet did a great part of them believe the Gospel at or
near Christ's time. The distinction of Jew and Gentile, much more of Judah and
Israel, was taken away after Christ's death. So that the title (Jew) in those
times and afterward comprehended all of that Nation of what Tribe soever. Now
it is said, Act. 2. that there were Jews of all nations under heaven at
Jerusalem: These then learned the Gospel of Christ by the miraculous gift of
the Holy Ghost, and carried the sound thereof into their own countries, into
Parthia, Media, Persia, Mesopotamia, Pontus, Cyrene, and the other places there
mentioned, as T^rtullian above truly said. Atone Sermon, Acts 2. were
converted three thousand souls, and Acts 4.6. others in number five thousand.
The frequent Sermons of the Apostles doubtless converted many more. We read
Act. 21.20. that many myriads or many times ten thousand Jews believed. If the
Apostles and others taught the Gospel in all parts of the world, and it pleased
God to work wonderfully with them, as we read in express Scripture he did
with some of them, doubtless in all parts, where they came, many of several
Tribes were converted. Secondly, more particularly for the ten Tribes. First,
Many of Ephraim and Manasseh and Simeon fell to Judah from Israel, 2 Chronicles.
15.9. Many were brought from Beershebah and mount Ephraim to worship God with
Judah, 1 Chronicles. 19.4. The chie^ fathers of Israel covenant with Jebojadah, as
they of Judah did, 2 Chronicles. 32.2. Israel helped Judah to repair Gods house, 2 Chronicles. 24.5. Hezekiah gathered the remnant of Israel, who escaped Assurs rage,
2 Chronicles. 30.5, 6.11. The Israelites that lived in Judah helped to put down
Idolatry, paid their tithes and otherwise showed their religious practice, 2 Chronicles. 31.1.5,6. Thus many of the ten Tribes, whose kindred were carried away
captive by Assure, heard much of Christ to come, and were of the same Religion
with Judahs Tribe. Secondly, such of the 10. Tribes as were captived by Assure,
were carried to Hala^ and Habor, and the Cities of the Medes, 2 King. 17.6. and
19.11. So that when the Med^s and Persians ruled, they had liberty by Cyrus
Edict to return to Canaan out of any country subject to his Scepter, Ezr. 1.
And not Judah and Benjamin only, but all of Israel were in their Cities after
the return, Ezr. 2.70. and 3.1. and 6.16. Hence the returned offered twelve
Goats for the sin of all Israel, Ezr. 6.17. And when Hester and Mordecai by
Gods special mercy had brought the Jews nation into so great es^eeme, that
many of the people of the Lands turned Jews, Hest. 8.17. much more some of the
ten Tribes captived before, would now also turn lews: when a King then ruling
over Assure, in whose countries they then resided, or in some near coasts
thereunto, did abundantly favor them. Thirdly, The Jews and proselytes from
all nations under heaven, from Media, Persia, etc. Act. 2. (as above) divulged
the Gospel in the countries, where the ten Tribes captived are said to be,
when Ra^ell wept for her children, and a woman compassed a man, and God made a
New Covenant; all which was done in Christ's lifetime; thereupon says Jeremy,
the Israelites turn to God. ler. 31. The Israelites were the sons of Seth, as
were all other Nations, and were then unwalled with the rest. The Aposi^s
weapons were of force to pull down the strong holds ^pposit to Christ among
other people, and would not pass by their brethren of the ten Tribes. For
Saint James writes to the twelve Tribes seattered in diverse countries, Iam.
1.1. All which twelve Tribes serving God day and night looked for the promise
of God, Act. 26.7. Hence it is, that (as I conceive) many myriads of them
believed (as above) though they had their weaknesses. And when Christ had
wrought our salvation, then be was not a Jew, who was one outwardly according
to the flesh: but be was a Jew, that was inwardly a Jew, and circumcised in
heart, Romans 2.29. Likewise when it is said, that Christ was sent to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 15.24. Israel includes all the twelve
Tribes, and in this sense is the name of ( Israel) often used in the New
Testament: as Blindness is come in part upon Israel, Romans 11.25. that is, on
Indah and Levi, as on the other ten Tribes. Christ gives repentance to Israel,
Act. 5.3. that is, to all of any Tribe whatsoever. A remnant ^ely of Israel is
saved, Romans 9.25. that is, such of any Tribe, as did believe in Christ; yea to
show a larger extent yet of the term ( Israel) it is plainly said, that all the
seed of Jacob, or Israel, are not Israel, Romans 9.5. But all believers (both of
Jacobs seed and of the Gentiles) are the sons of Israel, the Israel of God,
Gal. 6.16. and the seed and sons of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. And fourthly, I hope
through Gods great mercy in Christ, that many more of that Nation, yet obstinate
in their errors, will in Gods good time be converted to Christianity. And I
do heartily beseech all good Christians both Rulers and Teachers and people to
be very cautelous of holding any error, which may give the Jews just offense.
For the Jews manner is to suck p^son out of Christians misprisions, as s^ies
from Ulcers. Justin Martyr Dial. with Tryph. observed this in his time: nor are
they much bettered in ours. Let us Christians also so strive to be of one heart
and mind, which is full often enjoined us: for not any one will willingly learn
of them, who disagree among themselves. As Justin also truly affirms Inorat ad
Gra^.

Object. If the one thousand years of Satan's binding began about Christ's
ascension, then they ended about six hundred years agon: at which time also
Satan was Ioosed; that is, near unto the one thousand and thirty. And then soon
after Gogs wars began. But Satan was not loosed six hundred years agon, nor did
Gogs wars then begin. In these things Dr. Alstede and the rest agree.
Therefore, say they, the thousand years began not, as is affirmed, Alstede, p.
53.

Answ. Satan was so bound and restrained by Christ, that the Church from
Christ's time to Pope Hildebrands stood in some indifferent estate of truth, and
then began Religion to be turned upside down, Mr. Fox Martyrol. Pref. p. 5. So
that about six hundred years agon, Superstition and error spread it self, the
sacred Scriptures were laid aside, the original Texts unregarded, niceties
broached, controversies handled mostly by school disputes without Scripture;
the Popes Supremacy was advanced, the people were generally kept in darkness,
and made to serve dumb Idols, and worship Images. These things could proceed
from no other, but from the Prince of darkness, who then being loose, incited
the Angel of the bottomless pit, the Bishop of Rome, with gross and thick
smoke of Heresies, to darken the sun and air, which Christ had enlightened with
clear truth. By this means the Leaders of the people being blind, led their
blind followers into the ditch.

Secondly, about a thousand years after Christ, Sylvester obtained the Popedom
by Sorcery, and the finger of the Devil. About that time the Clergy of Rome
began to wring from the Emperor the election of the Pope: then was Henry the
fourth their Emperor accused of Heresy, and of diminishing the authority of
the Sea of Rome. Robert Guiseard was set up General (the spiritual Sword was
not keen enough to maintain their cause) to conquer the people, and make them
obedient to the Pope of Rome; In these times Hildebrand, or Helbrand (as some
call him) showed the height of his proud heart, and overruled as Pope indeed,
before he was Pope in place or name: for he did beat the Pope, and compelled
him to do, whatever he pleased and ever stood out against the Emperors
authority. And when this Hildebrand had settled himself in the Popes chair, he
deposed the Emperor Henry the fourth, and discharged the people of their
Allegiance. He made Otho Duke of Saxony, as also Rodulp King of Sweden to
raise war against the Emperor, and to attempt the depriving him of his Empire.
So that Mr. Fox says, That hereby this Hildebrand disquieted the peace of all
^umane life: that ^ee caused such stirs in the Church, as had never been. By
his example his Successors were insected with ambition, pride, tyranny,
stoutness, disobedience to their Emperors lawful Authority. So that Mr. Fox
says, That the Popes after this Hildebrand, imitated him, on the Kings of
Israel did idolatrous Jeroboam. Whereupon the Clergy of France said, that
Hildebrand ruled not by the Spirit of God, but of Satan. It seems that they saw
Satan loose in him and his practices. Pope Alexander that proudly set his foot
on the Emperor Fredericks neck, confirmed the wicked acts of this Hildebrand.
Pope Adrian said, that this Frederick claimed homage of the Popes, required it
of them that were Gods, and Sons of the high God. In brief the Popes in these
times did so domineer that Kings could do little in their own Realms: because
the Popes exalted themselves, and to get'a boundless authority, took away all
unity and concord. Not England alone, but Germany and France, and most parts of
the western world felt this to their smart, had their Estates impoverished by
large contributions, and heavy exactions at the Popes pleasure, and their blood
lamentably and profusely exhausted in the wars for the holy Land (as the Pope
styled them) and in other combustions. So that Mr. Fox averres, that these
courses were taken to weaken and bring low Princes, and to advance and enrich
the Popes. And that the restless spirits of Romanists, and especially of the
later sprung brood of the Jesuits, more violent then ever, have raised
grievous combustions in the Church, there is scarce any eye so dim, that does
not clearly discern. Thus it appears that Satan was loosed about six hundred
years agon, and then deceived the world, as of old: and that by the means of
Romanists grievous Wars and bloodshed have broken forth, which may well be
termed the wars of Gog. And so the learned H. Bullinger esteems them, and more
sully relates the miseries of those wars. Of the same mind is the judicious D.
Paraeus, and others. In those Wars many of Gods Saints were vexed with the
Popes pride, exalting himself above Christian Princes, were much afflicted,
injured and slain: the like may be said of other Wars, which have succeeded
them for the holy Land.

Repl. The express words, Rev. 20.3. are that Satan shall be loosed but for a
short time, in which he deceives the Nations, and promotes the wars of Gog,
which compass the holy City. Therefore it is an error to make the wars of Gog
of five or six hundred years continuance already past. Whereas Gogs assault
will be but a sudden ^urry, and last but a little time, nor in those wars
shall an hair of the Saints perish, Arch. 34. and 41. So many years cannot be
counted a shors time, D. Alstede p. 36.

Answ. Five or six hundred years may in Scripture phrase be termed a short
time. For first, Where the Saints Souls under the Altar, are bid to rest a
little season, until their fellow servants be killed, even as they, Rev.
6.11. It is manifest that the Saints of God have been ^illed much more then six
or seven hundredth years, as were the Christians at or near the Primitive times,
of whose fouls, in that place is mention.

Secondly, Five, or six, or seven hundred years may be termed a a short time
of the Churches sufferings, if they be compared with the eternal bliss, that
Gods people shall enjoy after their miseries in this life are ended. In the
like sense the afflictions of Gods Servants in this life, how great soever, are
termed light and momentary in regard of the most excellent and eternal weight
of glory in the life to come, 2 Cor. 4.17.

And, thirdly, so many years in regard of the thousand years of Satan's
restraint are a shorter time, and may be termed a short time with respect to
the thousand years: In this sense Dr. Alstede himself and some others take them.

Fourthly, Christ himself says, Behold I come shortly, or quickly, Rev. 22.20.
and yet is not he come to make an end of the world, as there of revealing
matters from the Primitive times to the worlds end in which space one thousand
six hundred years are already past. Thus six hundred years and more may be
termed a short time: Mr. Archer here erres against plain Scripture, Gogs wars
shall not be a sudden and short hurry, not much harmfull to Gods Saints; For
God tells us, that Satan's rage shall be fierce, because ^ee bath but a short
time, Rev. 12.12. Gogs wars are in the four Coasts of the Earth, and are so
great and furious, that God comes down himself to put an end to them, and to
vanquish and punish the Author and Instruments of the War. Wherefore D. Alstede
more soundly holds, that in these wars will be a grievous and lamentable
affliction of Gods people.

Repl. If the wars of Gog and Magog have already lasted so long, as you
conceive, then surely they cannot be far from their end, and the last and
final judgment must be near at hand: But it is expected that there shall be a
time of great prosperity of the Church in all matters not sinful, Arch. page
3. and that the same time should begin within some few years, and continue many
hundredth years before the last day of judgment. And that the Jews also shall be
called, and enjoy those happy times.

Answ. It is very probable, that the day of judgment is near. For first, there
has been (as was foretold, 2 Thessalonians. 2.) a departure front the true Religion,
and that most conspicuous and manifest about a thousand years after Christ: and
the man of sin, the son of perdition, the adversary of Christ, the exalter of
himself above all that is called God, is disclosed, and by good proof
demonstrated. Luther, and many other Learned Writers, some in, many since his
time have laid open to the world Antichrists wicked enterprises, by the working
of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders: and showed how in the
ages before Luther, the world was gulled by strong de^sio^s, and believed lies.

Secondly, the new Babel, that is, Rome is fallen in her honor and repute. Her
grand claim of universal vicarship, her power over Kings, her unerring
judgment in matters of controv^rsie, her vast challenge of all power spiritual
and t^porall, and her like capital errors are plainly by the writings of the
Orthodox party confuted, and by religious Princes within their own Territories
taken away in good part: and will daily more and more fall to the ground. At
Cyrus conquest of the old Babel, the Kings and their Nations subject to her
Scepter, left her. So now England, Scotland, Denmark, a great part of Germany,
the Protestant Churches in France, and others elsewhere, once under Romes yoke,
have already abandoned the Popes power, and censure the Roman Church justly, as
condemned by God himself in the Apocalypse. And in truth the Pope is more
honored at a distance, which often beguiles the eye, then in some parts of
Italy, and even in the territories near Rome.

Thirdly, are not men become self-lovers, proud, covetous, boasters,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, etc. 1 Timothy 3.1. such as Paul there
says men would be in the last days. Whereas Gods servants should be endowed
with righteousness, faith, charity, peace; and should be gentle, apt to
teach, patient, etc. 1 Timothy 2.22. which are virtues and graces in these days
somewhat rare. Let us therefore not be secure, and cry peace, peace, and happy
days, but remember the worlds stupiditie in the days of Noah and Lot, Luke
17.27. how the world then feared nothing, till judgment seized on them. Let us
rather watch and wait for Christ's coming and appearance, being confident that
as Christ by the Sword out of his mouth, his heavenly word, and the bright
shining light of the Gospel has made a great and manisest ^msumption of
Antichrist, so by his glorious and last coming he will abolish him, 2 These.
2.8. Matthew. 25.31. And destroy them that destroy the earth, Rev. 11.18. among
whom Antichrist the Pope of Rome has been and is a chiese actor. Then shall
all the world see most clearly Christ to be (which in truth he has ever been)
the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Revel. 19.16. Then even his enemies shall
see that his Kingdom was such as could not be shaken, nor prevailed against by
all their malice, power and designs: and he thenceforth shalll reign in
heaven with his faithful servants in happiness for evermore, Rev. 11.15.
Concerning the Jews calling to the Go^el I have above spoken. Here only I
add, that we should take heed of any proud or contemptuous carriage toward
them. They were broken off from the true Olive, and we graffed in. God is able
to graffe them into it again. It concerns us to use all good means to win them
to Christ. If we can trade to the Indies for worldly commodities, why should
we not take courses for reducing some at least of that once beloved nation
into Christ's fold?

FINIS.

