THE Hearty Concurrence of diverse Citizens and Inhabitants of the City of
London; with the Ministers of the Province thereof, to their Testimony to the
Truth of Jesus Christ, and to our Solemn LEAGUE and COVENANT. As also against
the Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times, and the Tolleration of
them.
THE Inestimable value of Truth which undeniably claims God the Father to be
the Author, Jesus Christ the Purchaser, and the Holy Spirit of God the
revealer of it, the zealous practices of the faithful witnesses of Jesus
Christ in former ages opposing errors by their valiant sealing to the truth
with their blood, the painful preaching pious practices, and learned writings
of our late faithful Ministers now with God: As Mr. Egerton, Mr. Stock, Mr.
Randal, Doctor Sibs, Dr. Preston, Dr. Tailor, Dr. Stoughton, Mr. Elton, with
many others, together with our present vigilant Spiritual watchmen in the
Province of London, honored in being the first which brake the Ice in their
zealous contention for truth against error when it was highest, themselves (we
hope) at lowest; Together with the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ in the
Counties of Warwick, Gloucester, and that heart-warming harmonious consent of
the Ministers of the County of Lancaster; And, the serious consideration of the
most observeable acts of Gods grace to this City, as well of old, as of later
days; our late afflictions, dishonours, and reproaches cast upon us for our
neutrality, lukewarmnesse, formality, the cloud of blood still hanging over our
heads, the sparkles of Gods wrath scattered amongst us, the fearful frowns
of our justly angry God against us, manifested in several symptoms: Lastly,
that we in our places might contribute something wherein we might the more
firmly engage our selves to the truth, encourage the truly godly, recover some
which are misled, strengthen them who are ready to fall, fill the faces of
Heretics, profane persons, lukewarm Pollititians with shame (that so they
might seek the face of God in Jesus Christ) advance Covenanted Reformation;
And, which is not the least, our consciousnesse of Christian duty lying upon
us, being as fire in our bowels, so that we can no longer forbear, lest God
spew us out of his mouth, and we be a reproach to the Gospel; The deep and
due consideration of these and many other such like weighty incitations do
most seriously put us upon this work to imitate our faithful Pastors in
contending for Truth against Error; for piety against profaneness, and for
our Solemn League and Covenant against all opposers in these few ensuing
particulars.

I. We testify to all the World, That it is the earnest desires of our souls
that the humble advice of the Assembly of Divines by Authority of Parliament
sitting at Westminster, concerning the Confession of Faith, abundantly
satisfactory to us, for its purity, sollidity, and conformity to the holy
Scriptures, the two Catechismes both the larger and lesser may be established
among us by Civil sanction, with the Church Government.

II. We do hereby also declare against all those unsound Opinions, Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies, already enumerated by our godly Pastors in their
Testimony: As also some others since published, A Testimony to an approaching
glory, per Joshua Sprig, Page 65.
viz. That while we are weak we know not the love of the Father to us; But
think that Jesus Christ does procure the love of the Father; when as Jesus
Christ does but manifest and declare the love of the Father. The life of Christ
Printed 1648. p. 2.
Another, That Christ is not borne of the blood of Adam, but from Heaven. All
which Tenets we look upon as contrary to the Analogy of Faith, and pattern
of sound words; and therefore with the Ministers that are gone before us, We
do testify and declare our utter dislike of Anabaptisme, Brownisme,
Errastianisme, Independencie, and Prelacie; so also our souls abhorrencie and
vehement detestation of Antiscripturisme, Socinianisme, Arminianisme,
Arrianisme, Antinomianisme, Popery, and Antitrinitarianisme, with many others.

III. We desire to express our hearty sorrow for, and detestation of all
those graceless causes, and ungodly practices of these Apostatizing times, as
profane swearing, drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, oppression, which are
God-provoking, and Kingdome-destroying abominations, not to be named amongst
Christians: All that opposition to Reformation, hypocritical pursuing of false
interests under specious pretenses of public good, all which are against
piety toward God, Justice, Righteousness and Sobriety toward men, laying us
naked to Divine vengeance, and rendering us a people fitted for destruction,
therefore we desire to be sensible of these provocations, and to stir up our
selves, and all the godly in this Kingdom to disclaim against them, and
endeavor in their and our places to reform them according to our Covenant.

IV. Our dislike shall we say? That Is too little, nay rather our detestation of
that wicked design of the Sectarian profane party, who endeavor to extirpate
and expel from amongst us, our learned, godly, and conscientious Ministers,
declaiming against their persons by uncivil scoffs, and against their Calling
as Antichristian, and by detaining not only a plentiful, but even a competent
maintenance, under pretense of unlawfulness of tithes, which makes us invocate
the Lord, that they may never have power to accomplish this execrable design,
nor we have cause sadly to sigh, and say, our Teachers are removed into corners.

V. We declare our hearty desires, That the Government of Jesus Christ
(according to our Covenant, and the advice of the Assembly of Divines) may be
established amongst us, a taste whereof in that little part of it which is set
up amongst us, we look not upon as Arbitrary and Tyrannical, yea to have it
completed would be our Glory and Crown of rejoicing; utterly disliking the
opposition it meets withal: And, oh that we knew what to do for the
suppressing that opposition by loose and profane persons on the one hand, and
on the other by such as separate, and highly contend for that Great; Diana the
Compendium of all mischiefs concentred in that one word, Toleration.

VI. Lastly, but not least of all, as for the Covenant, our Solemn League and
Covenant, as we heartily rejoice that we took it, that it was commended to
the Kingdom by the Parliament, and taken by so many in both Kingdoms with
their hands lifted up to Heaven, so also we desire to be afflicted in our
souls with shame and sorrow for the violation of it, either by our selves or
others, but most of all for that stupendous wickedness and matchless impiety
in villifying and contemning that Sacred Oath, even by too too many that
entered into it and covenanted with us; doubtless that faithful God who
keeps Covenant with us, will avenge the quarrel of this Covenant broken by
us, unless prevented by Repentance and Reformation: And as we look upon it as
a duty belonging to all to take it, and therefore blame the non-taking of it by
any; so we declare our utter dislike of the slighters and contemners of it, and
earnestly desire the taking of it by all, be not only commended, but commanded
by Authority.

As for our selves, it is our desire, and shall be our constant endeavors in
the strength of Jesus Christ, maugre all malice and opposition whatsoever, to
keep it, and to pursue all the ends contained in it, in the plain, literal,
grammatical sense of it, in the which we then took it, abominating all other
glosses upon it, and do with the Ministers of London, and elsewhere, declare
that we believe in our consciences, no power on earth whatsoever can absolve us
from the bond of that Covenant.

In Testimony whereof, as in the presence of the Lord, in the integrity of our
hearts we hereunto subscribe our names.


