The Heads of the Petition.
THat according to our solemn League and Covenant his Majesty's Royal Person
may be defended, and that his just Power and greatness (in the preservation
and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms) may be
established.

2. That the Rights and Privileges of Parliament may be vindicated, and the
lawful Liberties and Property of the Subjects preserved and maintained.

3. That the Government of the Church may be speedily settled, Conventicles
(the Seminaries of Separation) suppressed, and a toleration of licentious
liberty effectually declared against.

4. That all Incendiaries, Malignants, and evil Instruments, which hinder the
Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or one of his
Kingdoms from another, or make any faction or Parties among the People
(contrary to the solemn League and Covenant) may be brought to public trial
and receive condign punishment.

5. That all obstructions in the ordinary Courts of Justice may be removed, and
the insufferable abuse of Committees and their Officers considered.

6. That the arrears of the soldiery of this Kingdom may be satisfied, and
security for their future indemnity for all acts done (by them) tempore et loco
belli.

7 That the Army now on foot may be disbanded, or otherwise disposed of, That
so this almost exhausted Kingdom may be freed from those many grievous
oppressions it now groans under.

8. And whereas there have been and still are great abuses and insufferable
injuries, done to your Petitioners by the sale of freedoms, and Forreiners
intruding into the Suburbs and places near adjacent, to this City, whereby
your Petitioners are much discouraged in their services, the Freemen of this
City prejudiced, and the Franchises, and Liberties thereof infringed. We
therefore humbly beseech this honorable Assembly to resolve on some course, (as
you in your wisdoms shall think fit) as well for the expulsion of such as
have so unduly crept in amongst us, as for the future prevention of the like
insufferable Injuries, that may redound to your Petitioners hereafter.


