THE RIGHT of DOMINION, AND PROPERTY of LIBERTY, Whether Natural, Civil, or
Religious.

Wherein are comprised The beginning and continuance of Dominion by Arms; The
Excellency of Monarchy, and the necessity of Taxes, with their moderation.

As also the necessity of his Highness acceptance of the Empire, averred and
approved by Presidents of P^aeterit Ages, with the firm Settlement of the same
against all Forces whatsoever.

God changes the times and seasons. He removes Kings, and sets up Kings.
Dan. 2.21.

Imperium semper ad optimum quemque a minus optimo transfertur. Salust. Catil.

(...). Arist. 5. Eth. c. 1.

Imperatoris foelicitas in Subjectorum foelicitate consistit. Grotius.

By M. H. Master in Arts, and of the Middle Temple.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. and are to be sold by John Perry in Green Arbor, and
by Tho. Brusler at the three Bibles at the West End of Paul's. 1655.

Magno, Magnae Britanniae etc. PRINCIPI etc PROTECTORI, Patri Patriae, and
semper AUGUSTO.
Celsissime Princeps, and semper Auguste,
CVjus nomen et omen tibi apt quadrare videantur, sive quod ab augurio and
divini Numinis afflatu ad summu^ Imperiu^ evectus erat; sive ob auctum
Imperium, cujus amplitudo illius auspiciis magnopere augebatur. Quis enim sani
cerebri inficiari queat? Te coelesti open and vi divina erectum supremam
potestatem aspirasse, and magno illo figulo ultra humanae naturae captum, in te
collatam, and firmatam, (...). Hom.
Efficiebatur vero Dei voluntas: cui quis resistat? vestra etiam virtute
Rempub. civilibus aerumnis laceratamet distractam in unum corpus coalu-isse
nemo non e populo novit: Cumque etiam copiae tuae insuperabiles aegritudine et
infesta intemperie Borealis aurae attritae and evervatae fuere, indomita tua
mente jacentes militum animos and corda in pedes prona Magnanimo tuo impulsu
erexisti: Ita ut feroces, and spe victoriae elatos Calydonios, clades and
coedes spirantes, et minitantes uno pene ictu prostaverunt, aut in fugam
conjecerunt, aut funesta strage foedarunt, Te equidem summo duce, and
Imperatore. Calydoniamque ipsam antea invictam nostri Juris and ditionis
fecisti, and herbam porrigere coegisti. Egregium certe Reipub. nostrae
augmentum, and tuo Mart patratum. Assiduoq, adhuc omnibus nervis intendis, and
summa diligentia satagis per Mare, per Terras, per Saxa, per Ignes, patriae
tuae uti indulgens pater aeternam gloriam and opiparum incrementum parere, unde
quod Caesar de seipso, de te vere referatur; Nihil te amplius Assecutum esse
propter Caesaris dignitatem, quam ut occupatus viveres. Sed desino ulterius
veris encomiis Celsitudinem tuam adornare, quia defessi erunt homines laudando
quam tuipse gloria digna faciendo, ut Salustius etiam de Caesare: Addamque
solummodo Symmachi consularis ordini^ dictum, Specto tuae virtutis augmenta qui
defero laudare principiae. Aeternum valeat Celsitudo vestra, diuque populo
Britanno intersis, praesis, and prosis, quod faxit tutelaris ille Jehovah.

Tuae Celsitudini, ut nemo aeque, deditus MICH. HAWK.

COurteous Reader, it is the Author's post-request, that you be pleased to take
notice of the erroneous mistakes have passed the Press, whereby he may be
fully conceived, and you satisfied.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, Page 3. lin. 9. read placebuut. p. 10. l. 25. r.
Virg. Egl. p. 15. l. 18. r. (...). p. 16. marg. r. Bak. p. 42. l. 29. dele
that. p. 47. marg. r. robur. p. 49. l. 20. r. on the. p. 51. l. 1. r. that it.
l. 9, r. defendimus. p. 72. l. 15. r. for as the. p. 86. l. 8. r. intestinas.
l. 16. r. ordinavit. p 90. l. 23. r. robore. p. 95. l. 29. r. free Com- p. 104.
l. 10. dele (...). p. 105. l. 12. r. libertas. p. 108. l. 12. r. Imunitas. p.
120. l. 27. r. existimantes. p. 124. l. 12. impulsion of Christ, r. impulsore
Christo. p. 126. l. 4. r. an Objection. p. 131. l. 28. r. forcer. 165. l. 2. r.
with heretics. p. 168. l. 29. r. fiebant. p. 169. r. (...). 181. l. 8. r.
Helvetians.

To the Indifferent and Diligent Reader.
OF making many Books there is no end, says Solomon, which is understood of
those (as Judicious and ingenious Cook) that propose to themselves no end, In
his Preface to the 11th. Report.
and which are vain and fruitless: For in all Actions the end gives the
Perfection. (...), it crowns and perfects the work; Acti^^es disting^^n^^^
^^nibus-^^inis specific^t a^^^^nes.
besides the excellency of all actions are distinguished and specified by their
ends.

Of such digested Books no number is superfluous, though treating of the same
subject; For as Augstine, De Trin. l. 1. c. 3.
Vtile est plures libros a pluribus fieri diverso stilo, etiam de quaestionibus
iisdem, ut ad plurimos res perveniat, ad alios sic, ad alios autem sic. It is
profitable to have books composed of many in a diverse style even of the same
question; that the knowledge of the thing may be conveyed to very many; to some
after this manner, to others after another.

Now as touching this present discourse (Non umbraticam causam agimus) it is
not nugatory or needless, but presents to our view Honorable and Commodious
ends, whose Scope is to blason the Virtue of a Prince, the safety of a
Commonweal, and the liberty and tranquillity of the Subject, the three
Columns of public felicity; and therefore the more to be desired and
affected for the excellency of the ends. Finis enim dat amabilitatem mediis.
For the end gives a luster and loveliness to the means. Wherein though I may
seem actum agere, and to prescribe those things have been discussed by others,
yet are not some of them without their defects, which may happily here be
repaired; For as Cicero, Recentissima quaeque sunt emendata magis. Besides,
Acad.
many material Gleanings are added, and novel Collections, which out of
superfluity or security were omitted. Howsoever (...); Quae decies repetita
glacebunt. Good says repeated often do often please.

And it has been a custom among all Writers, to season their Dictates with
other Sentences, that they may seem not to presume on their own Authority, and
write with more certainty, and be read with more delight. Assranius was blamed
for borrowing many passages of Menander, who confessed he had not only taken
from him, but from many others, what was convenient for his purpose, and which
he could not better compose; and it is Plutarchs judgment, Symp^^s.
(...). To invent, and enquire, is reasonable; but to collect out of others, is
admirable.

Yet whosoever does insert the inventions of other Authors in his own Editions,
and not gratefully acknowledge from whom he has received them, Reus est legis
plagiariae, is guilty of literary filching or robbing the treasury of the
Muses. For as Pliny, Ingenui pudoris est fateri per quos profecerimus, and haec
quasi merces Authori pensitanda est, ne fures esse videamur. It is the part of
ingenuous modesty to profess by whom we profit; and this is a guerdon by all
right to be rendered to the Author, lest we may seem to be pilferers.

Ingenuous and industrious Reader, for to such I communicate my Genius who are
embellished with the ornaments of Indifference and Diligence; For he that is
void of the first, will be obnoxious to prejudice, which will cast an
impostorious mist before his eyes, and delude the minds of the otherwise
judicious, that they cannot apprehend and discern things as they are in their
very nature, but according to their forestalled conceits; For the will
anticipated with prejudice will hurry away the understanding, whereas the
understanding should direct and guide the will. A preposterous course in these
rash and heady times, which have need of a sound and solid observer; Men for
the most part being carried away with the violent stream of their affections,
preferring uncertain hopes, and blazing shows, before settled certainties and
substantial truths.

The second Virtue required in a a Reader, is Diligence; It was Scipio 's
saying, Nou amo nimium diligentes.
and in this case nimia diligentia will not be displeasing to Scipio himself,
who was nunquam minus otiosus, quam cum otiosus; never less idle, but when he
was at leisure. Lucian derides an illiterate and negligent Reader, calling him
(...) (...): a buyer of many Books, and yet meanly learned, stuffing his study
with literary housholdstuff, but not with the laborious Student, or stirring
Housewife, being diligent to peruse them, or industrious to apprehend them, but
percursoriously to run them over without observance or rumination, which
causes him often to stumble at the craggy and crabbed passages of truth, and
fall into mischievous mistakes.

Howsoever, let the Reader be never so supine or partial, and his affections
never so far esloined from the apprehension of the truth; yet as at a various
Feast may he light on some Cates which may satisfy and please his palate; and
with Pliny, a studious Surveyor of all sorts of Books, profess that he never
^ead any Book quod non ex aliqua part prodesset, that did not in some part
profit him; and with Virgil, Man. Nullias disciplinae expers.
one void of no Science, acknowledge that he has selected some gold out of
Ennius's ordure.

The Preface.
OMnes trahimur and ducimur ad cognitionis and scientiae cupiditatem* Tull.
parad. Ar. 1. Met. c. 1. (...).
All men are led by the light of Nature to the desire of knowledge; which not
only proceeds from an appetite every one has to his perfection, Science
being the Excellency and perfection of a man; but from a longing he has, as
Aquinas, conjungi cum suo principio, to be conjoined with his Principle. This
incited our first Parents to affect the inhibited fruit, that they might be as
Gods in knowledge, which is the sole happiness, as the Poet divinely, Hor. l.
1. Ep. 6. Nil admirari properes est una, Numice,
Solaque quae possit facere, and servare beatos.
To admire nothing is the only thing,
The which alone to mortals bliss does bring.
And so deeply is this impression implanted in man, as no peril will deter him
from it. Though Eve had divine warning of the danger, yet persisted she in it
to her fatal fall. Some say, Aristotle drowned himself in Euripus, because he
could not comprehend the reason of the various ebbing and flowing of that Sea;
and Alexanders desire to see the Sea, Curt. l. 9.
had almost lost himself in the Sea. Val. Max. l. 4. c. 12.
Homer also consumed himself with grief, because he could not dissolve the
knot of a Fishermans Riddle; which has also pricked on my pen in these knotty
and ambiguous times (wherein men's mouths are full of debates and divisions,
concerning the Right of Dominion, and Property of Liberty) to commit to writing
my Animadversions concerning the same, and that only for the desire of
knowledge, (no man understanding any thing so fully as by writing, through the
frequent reflection of the Intellect) thereby to instruct my self, if not
others, in the certain knowledge of the Origin, Conservation, and End of
Dominion, and in the true nature of Liberty; not only as it is natural in the
abstract, and proper to every one, but as it reflects on the public
Government, be it either Religious, or Civil in the Concrete; Ingenuously
professing Meipsum scire propter se petere; Arist. 1. Me^..
That I covet knowledge for it self: Ju. Brut.
solo veritatis ob oculos ponendae desiderio; with a singular desire to set
forth the truth before your eyes. Not to accommodate Arguments and Assertions
to the popular applause, Populo ut placerent, Populo ut placerent quas fecifset
fabulas Ter. Andr.
who commonly weigh not the matter by the truth, but by fancy and delight. Non
rem veritate ponderant sed ornatu, and esteem nothing right, Lact. l. 5. Just.
but what is pleasing and delightful. Nil rectum reputant, nisi quod placuit
sibi ducunt; Whereas the force of reason, not elegancy of words, is to be
considered; as Ambrose against elegant Symmachus; Non verborum elegantiam, sed
vim rationis spectandam putes. Wherein if by any conclusion I may seem to
discede from the received opinion, so long as it is warranted by reason and
venerable Authority, I hope I shall not want a Protector, or a sufficient
Apology. For what is more servile then to captivate reason to others conceits,
it being equally distributed to all, and which all are to use as the Lydian
stone to try the truth?

Ingenium servile nimis quod dicta Magistri
(Semper habet certa pro ratione) sui.
Too servile is the mind which fondly weighs
His Masters dictates, 'bove right reasons rays.
Howsoever, to discourse of Liberty freely, may seem blameles, especially in a
free Commonweal, according to the sentence of Tiberius, In Civitate libera
oportet linguam esse liberam, Sueton.
Under whom an harmless liberty of disputing was no snare to any one.

LIB. I. Of Natural Liberty.
CHAP. I. Of the several significations of Liberty.
IT is a Canon in Logic, Monseca. Just. Leg.
Distinctio vocis ambiguae sit primum in consideratione. The distinction of an
ambiguous word is first to be considered, without which to proceed, is wilfully
to lose time. The name then of Liberty being ambiguous, ought first to be
distinguished, Vetle tempus perdere
and to be divided into its several significations. For as it respects the
power of Nature, it is natural, and by nature appropriated to every living
creature: And as it reflects on the sociable Condition of man in the state of a
City or Commonweal, that is either Civil, or Religious. Civil, which consists
in the managing and protecting of the people, and their Estates, and is named
the Liberty of the Subject: And Religious, as it is conversant about sacred
Rites and Doctrines, and is called the Liberty of Conscience.

CAP. II.
1. Of the Excellency of Natural Liberty.

2. Of the Cause of Natural Liberty.

FRee Agents are by Nature most excellent: Praecipuum in omni re est actio.
Aust. 9. Eth. c. 9.
For the chiefest thing in every thing is Action; and the excellency of Action
is Freedom, as when it is more able to act freely, then of necessity: For those
things which act by the necessity of nature, want a Superior to order them to
their ends: Whereas free Agents prescribe an end to themselves after an
imperious manner.

Sic volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas.

Jun. Aquinas.
Vt sine causa nihil fit, ita sine ea nihil distinct, cognoscitur. As nothing
is without a cause; so nothing is distinctly understood without it; and
therefore the cause of liberty is diligently to be enquired, which is natura
naturans, or as the Poet says, melior natura, that is God, who is liberrimum
Agens, the freest Agent, acting what he will, Ephesians: 1.11.
and working all things according to the council of his own will: Neither is
his power astringed to the course of second causes, as the Stoics dream.

Non Deus est numen Parcarumc arcere clausum, Mel. de Any.

Quale putabatur Stoicus esse Deus.
The Divine power is not sure enclosed
In Fates close prison, as the Stoics supposed.
For he can produce effects above the operation of nature, as to draw water out
of a Rock, and by his absolute power make creatures more noble then these: And
in this also does he transcend all other free Agents; Scal. Ex. 249.
that whereas they may be obstructed by opposite Agents from accomplishing
their intended ends, Gods aims are no way obnoxious to any prohibition, or
coaction; for who can resist his will? And in this sense is the saying of the
Poet true: Aeschines. (...).
There is none free but God.


That is eminenter and originaliter: For as he is the freest Agent; so all
freedom flows from him: For every Agent produces to himself the like; and
every creature in some sort resembles the Creator secundum aequalem analogiam,
Omne agens agit sibi sibi simile. Aqu.
according to the equality of similitude: For as God was first moved by his
inward will, and not for any external respect, to constitute the Universe; so
has he without any relation communicated his similitude to some creatures more
then others, and more respectively to man: And that reasonable creatures excel
others in the free and arbitray motion of the will or appetite, no other cause
can be given quam quod illud principium, illa vis, illa potestas insita sit a
natura aut naturae fabricatore: Bies. de not.
Then that the said principle, power and faculty is implanted by nature, or the
Fabricator of nature, which is God, which Fortescue comprehends in one
Thesis, De laudibus Leg. Angliae. L. 4. c. 2.
Libertas est a Deo homini insita a natura. Liberty is given from God to man by
Nature.

CAP. III.
That Sensitive Creatures participate of Natural Liberty.

SEnsitive Creatures are in dignity second to man, and before the Fall were
gracious with him, which is manifested by the Serpents familiarity with him,
and his imposition of names on them: The Scripture ascribes to them wisdom,
and the Philosophers Election and Cognition: Ricob. in Arist. Eth. L. 3. c. 1.
Lud. de anima. Mel. de anima.
Vt monstrent vitae praesidia and contraria: That might show them what was
commodious for the preservation of life, and contrary. Copious are the examples
of their wondrous wiles, wherein they may seem sometimes to equal man's
providence, by way of preventing perils, and preserving their lives and
liberties. They are by Nature a free company, and by force only haled to
subjection, unless in their tender years made tame, which Experience the
Mistress of things learnes us: Experientia rerum Magistra. Cook Just. l. 60.
For beasts in Forests will fly and fight for their liberties and lives: And
whereas some have cicur ingenium, it proceeds from the discipline and industry
of man. So Horn: Mirror of Justice.
That according to the law of nature all sensitive creatures ought to be free,
though by the constitutions of men they are enslaved, as Beasts in Parks,
Fishes in Ponds, and Birds in Cages: And Justice Cook, That a man has a
qualified property in those beasts which are free natura, Hep. l. 7. f. 17.
and are by industry tamed; but if they cease to be tame, and attain their
natural liberty, and have not animum revertendi, their property is lost: with
whom the Civilians concur: Feras cap^as, and evadentes, naturalem libertatem
recuperare: Tholos.
That wild Beasts taken, and escaping, recover their natural liberty: And
besides, it is the opinion of the said Justice, That those beasts which are
ferae natura, are nullius bona: Neither can any man restrain them of their
natural liberty, and enclose them in a Park without license of the King. Just.
60. b.


CAP. IV.
1. That Natural Liberty is more eminently planted in man.

2. The definition of Natural Liberty.

SAnctius his Animal, Homo Augustum Dei templum and simulachrum, Ovidius.
Man is a more sacred creature, of sanctified temple and Image of God.

Exemplumque Dei quisque est in imagine parva.
Man is Gods pattern in a little shape. Man.

And as by propinquity of similitude man is above all terrestrial creatures,
nearest allied unto the Deity; so does he surmount them in excellency of
freedom, as a Vive resemblance of the Divine Agent: For which reason God did
invest him with a power over all living creatures, quod dominari in caetera
possit, Ovid.
that he might rule over them: But in relation of one man to another, he has
equally endowed man with the faculty of Liberty.

Mortales egit aequali genere.
Boet.
He made all mortals of an equal mould.
Wis. 9. v. 6.
And as the Wise man says, has the same entrance into life, and the same going
out: And Macrobius elegantly, Ex iisdem constant, Satur.
and aluntur ^lementis, eundem spiritum ab eodem principio capiunt, eodemque
fruuntur coelo, aeque vivunt aeque moriuntur. They are all composed of and
nourished by the same Elements, receive the same spirit from the same
principle, enjoy the same heavens, live equally, and die equally.

What natural liberty then is, may be inferred by the premises; To wit, That it
is a natural faculty of living or doing as one will: Pol. 6. l. 6.
(...), says the Philosopher; which Tully translates, potestas vivendi ut
velis, and with whom the Poet concents.

An quisquam est alius liber, nisi ducere vitam
Cui licet ut voluit?
Persius. Not any one else is free but only he
That as he list does live at liberty.
To which the Civilians add natural, which is the causal difference, and gives
the definition its perfection: For freedom flows from God by nature, by which
we are made all equally free.

CAP. V.
1. That there are no servants by nature.

2. That all men are more apt to rule then obey.

3. That men of a mean and servile condition have by nature been raised to the
highest dignities.

4. That such for the most part Ruled best.

5. That the Origin of great Empires proceeded from rude and mean beginnings.

NAtura neminem fecit servum aut liberum, says the Divine Philosopher: Seneca.
Paul, Ga. 3.28.
and the Philosophical Divine, Nec liberum, nec servum esse apud Deum, There is
neither bond or free, with God or nature, or any such distinctions or
differences with them, the one having no such degrees in his heavenly Mansion,
nor the other in his earthly Manor. And as the Civilians rightly, Servitude is
aliunde, from some outward act, or public offense, De sur. b. and p l. 3. c.
7. 1 Pol. c. 3. Fortuna haec nomina imposuit. Senec.
whom Grotius follows: Servi natura citra factum humanum nulli: And the
Philosopher, (...). There are no servants by nature, but either by some humane
fact or law; or as Seneca, by fortune.

And though many by nature seem to be of a servile disposition: (...), 1 Pol.
c. 3.
as the Philosopher, whose conditions are best to be commanded. Such a mind,
says Cicero, is not been informatus a natura; or as Arist. in another sense,
(...), 1 Pol. c. 3.
is not well informed by nature, because it is ill affected, contrary to
nature; and as Tholosanus, Synt. Ju. unit
imminutum habet animum, they have a decayed, or imperfect soul: So as it is
not nature, but ignorance makes servants, Bucid. l. 1. Pol. c. 3.
non natura, sed insipientia.

Besides, since the introduction of dominion, nature has been much dulled by
servile education.

Adeo a teneris assuescere multum est.
Virg. En. Custom from tender years avails much.
Yet there is not any so stupid, or stolid, who would not rather be free then
serve; and to be governed by himself, then commanded by another, if he had
ability and power; which infinite Commotions in diverse Countries have by sad
and bloody experience verified: For the first state of mankind was honored
with command, and generally pronounced to all, to which men are still by nature
inclining, ad imperandum magis quam ad serviendum apti, Juv. Brit.
more proclive to rule then serve; which the Philosopher expresses more
emphatically, 7 Pol. c. 7.
(...). The mind of man is inexpugnably propense to rule: And Quintilian,
Habet enim men's nostra sublime quid and erectum, and impatiens superioris; For
our mind has a certain sublime and stout conceit, and is impatient of a
Superior. Whence arises, as Xenophon truly, the great difficulty to exercise
command over men; for there is no living creature so seditious against his
Pastor, that he will not spare him if he deny him necessaries, man only
excepted, who is always displeased with those that seek to have dominion over
him, and oppress him, Patrc. i would mo. and Arist. Eth. 1.
and upon any occasion will meditate mischief against him; which caused
Dioclesian, well practiced in the anxieties of Government, to resign up his
Empire with this protestation, that Nihil est difficilius quam been imperar^,
there is nothing more difficult then to rule well.

Hence is it obvious and clear, that all men are more propense to rule then to
serve, Tholos.
which is ultimus vilitatis humanae gradus, the very depth of humane baseness,
the vigor of nature breathing in them.

Servire cuiquam vile, dominemur magis.
To serve is base, let us rather rule.
And though it be alleged that some men are born to rule, and others to obey;
and that Jason did thirst after a Throne, and Themistocles said that he knew
not how to obey: Polit. 3. c. 6.
The Philosopher gives the answer, that they had not learned to live a private
life, being constantly employed in public commands; which proceeded from
education, not nature: Yet have there many of an obscure birth, and servile
education, by the vigorous power of nature ascended to that supreme Celsitude.
Romulus, a sacrilegious Bastard, and educated by Shepherds; and Mahomet, a
Merchants bondman, were the Raisers and Founders of two matchless Monarchies:
Gordius from his Cart, and Camillus from his plow, were advanced to the highest
command. Dioclesian was a Senators Libertine, Aur. Victor
and Zeno Isauricus was as basely bred as foully deformed, yet both Emperors.

And which is more memorable, Such as were raised from inferior places, were
more illustrious and famous for their virtues, and surmounted those in more
honorable acts were nobly bred. Gordius, though of a low fortune, yet was he
of an high wisdom, and perspicacious wit, Justin.
vir prudentissimus, sed humilimae sortis. Passi. de Mon. Et Arist. l. 1 c. 1.
Cecrops an Egyptian and Alien, yet for his civil and commodious Government
both by Sea and Land, was in higher esteem among the Athenians then Pisistratus
a native. Arbactes, a subordinate Officer to Sardanapalus, for his virtue and
valor was preferred before him, Justin.
and exalted to his Throne. Vespasian, Suet. gente obscura.
of an obscure Stock, was of all the preceding Emperors most applauded; and as
Tacitus, solus in melius mutatus, alone changed into the better. Aurelianus, of
a mean parentage, Mediocri parente genitus. Aur.
for his celerity in conquering was paralleled to Alexander the great, and
Caesar the Dictator. Servius Tullius, born of a Slave, by a wile gained a
Kingdom, Dolo. Flo.
but ruled it so well, ut jure adeptus esse videatur, that it seemed gotten by
right- Probus, descended of a Rustic Race, Amn. Vid. patre agresti.
was exceeding famous in the Arts both of peace and war; Belli pacisque artibus
long clarissimus. Martianus, of a low degree, and of a common soldier created
an Emperor, Vict. humili genere.
yet excelled in Military Arts, and noble Acts. Virt. utroque parente
ignobilis, suumcustos, deinde boum, postea Lignarii cujusdam minister.
Justine sprung from sordid parents, in his tender years run through all the
tenures of baseness, first a Swineard, then a Herdsman, afterward a
Woodmonger, and at the last a common soldier; who for his promptness in
handling his Arms, and dexterity in charging the Enemy, ascended to all the
degrees of Martial Dignities, and in fine was honored with the Imprial
Ensigns: He was a studious propagator of Christian Religion, and a strenuous
oppugnator of the barbarous Invaders; chasing the Vandals out of Africa, and
forcing the Goths out of Italy.

If I should muster up all the Auxiliary examples tending to the fortifying of
this Assertion, Dies me deficeret and nox, The day would fail me, and the night
forsake me, I will only add this serious observation of the Satirical Poet.

Ante potestatem Tulli, and ignobile regnum
Multos saepe viros nullis majoribus ortos,
Et vixisse pro bos, amplis and honoribus auctos.
Horat. l. 1. Sermon. 8. Before the power of Tully, and his ignoble reign,
There many often were of an inferior strain,
Who virtuously did live, and ample honors gain.
Neither is it absonant to reason, that men of the meaner sort exalted by
degrees to Offices of Authority should discharge their duty more exactly and
judiciously, then such as from the cradle have been lifted up unto a Crown, and
challenge it as their birthright; which the Philosopher proves by a well
grounded reason, (...), 3 Pol. c. 3.
That a man cannot rule well that has not obeyed: For how can one prescribe
rules of obedience, that is ignorant of the praxis? no more then a Geneval can
rightly compose, order, and command an Army, that is ignorant of the office,
having not before led a band of men, or marched under the discipline of a
skilful General; unless with presumptuous Phaeton he will undertake to rein
the fiery horses of the Sun, or with the silly sow, instruct and order Minerva.

It was an ancient custom among Princes to nominate their Successors, as Moses
did Joshua, and David Solomon, though he had an elder son. Alexander bequeathed
the Kingdom of Egypt to Ptolomy, and Attalus made the Republic of Rome his
heir; and Prafatagus then King of England, made Nero his heir, which before the
Conquest was very frequent; William himself claiming the Kingdom by the
nomination of Edward the Confessor, as well as by Conquest: And afterward,
Ban. l. 207.
Edward the sixth excluded his two Sisters Mary and Elizabeth, and by his
Letters Pattents, made the Lady Gray Heir of the Crown; and Henry the 8th. had
power granted him by his last Will and Testament in writing, and signed with
his hand, 28. Hen. 8.
to make conditions and limitations what he would concerning the inheritance of
the Crown; which also was a constant practice among the Roman Emperors, either
by adoption, or arrogation, to nominate those whom they approved worthy to
succeed them in the Empire; sometimes whilst they were living to settle it on
them, but ordinarily to bequeath it after their decease: To apply this to our
purpose, most of them, especially the Roman Emperors, did nurse and educate
those they intended to nominate, and arrogate to be their Successors, in the
Temple of Virtue, and School and Field of Mars, whom, after that they were
sufficiently instituted, they usually adventured in Martial Employments against
hostile Forces; as Augustus did Germanicus and Tiberius, by which they obtained
the Praxis as well as the Theory of the Art Military: Such, for the most part
were advanced to the Imperial Dignity, as worthy and able to discharge that
Martial Honor; who by their Military Virtue, Populo Romano nomen, urbi
aeternam gloriam, Cic. pro Murcima.
orbem terrarum parere huic imperio coegit, Procured to the people renown,
eternal glory to the City, and forced the world to their subjection. But to
supersede this pertinent digression, and to pursue our proposition.

Nature is equal to all, and conferreth equal endowments, si quis cognoverit
uti, if any one knew how to use them: and commonly, men instigated by
necessity, employ them to the best advantages.

Pers. Magister Artis Venture.
Plaut. Nam ille omnes arts perdocet ubi quem attigit.
Need is the Mistress of all Arts and Skill,
Which conjoined with industry and sedulity, commonly produce rare effects.

Virg. Labor omniai vincit Improbus.
Hor. Perrupit Acheronta Herculeus Labos,
Nil mortalibus arduum.
Herculean Labor will all things overcome,
And force its way through Styx and Acheron.
Nothing is hard unto a mortal Wight.
Neither does virtue descend, but is habitus acquisitus, an habit acquired by
deliberation and practice: For good men do not by nature produce good men,
(...), Ar. 1. Pol. c. 4.
but frequently the opposite, whence proceeded the Proverb, Heroicos filios
esse pestes, Noblemens sons are pestilential sores, Camec. in hist. 1. Ar^
polit.
as Caligula, Domititian, Commodus; the Flagitions sons of virtuous Parents,
which has been Historically observed in many, and more particularly in the
unnatural attempt of Darius son of Artaxerxes, on whom his Father having settled
his Crown, he in retaliation conspired his fathers fate, which he had acted, if
not by discovery prevented; which degenerous exorbitancy, says Justine,
proceeded from the parents excessive indulgency: Just. l. hist. 10.
Nimia parentum undulgentia corrumpit liberos: who should instruct them as the
father does his son in the Comedy, Ego te meum dici tantisper volo
Dum quod te dignum est facis.
Ter. Eu. My son, so long thou shall be mine,
Whilst thou in worthiness do shine.
For it is not the glorious stem of virtuous progenitors does make men noble,
unless they do patrissare in their virtues.

Nobilitas sola atque unica virtus.
Jun. Sat. 7. Virtue's the the sole and true nobility.
But to decline to the set of this Section. Nature distributeth her dole
impartially, without any exception of King or beggar; and Seneca says the
proverb is true, Aut Regem aut fatuum nasci oportere, Every one must needs be
born an Idiot or an Emperor: Especially if we consider man as a Citizen of the
world, De morte Claudii Caesaris.
and born to rule: For Homo animal est audax, acutum and multiplex, atque
imprimis imperandi, quam parendi cupidus. Baccl.
Man is a bold, subtle, and wily creature, more covetous of command then
obedience, and will dare to adventure on any thing to accomplish his ambitious
designs; and say with Caesar, Sever. Theb.
Si violandum est jus, regnandi causa violandum est. Heaven and Earth cannot
limit his mind; but with Alexander he will wish for more worlds to conquer;
and with the Giants Caelum ipsum petere stultitia, and purchase Royalty at any
rate. Imperia pretio quolibet constant been. And as mighty men have sprung from
mean fortunes; so great Commonweals have had their Exordiums from foul
foundations. Justine extols the Athenians for their native birth, Hist. l. 2.
that they were in eodem solo nati quod incolunt; but says that other Nations
a sordidis initiis ad summa crevere, from sordid beginnings grew to their
greatness. Rome, the great Ornament of the world, had its foundation and
augmentation from inglorious persons, Livy.
the scum of a licentiousous Sanctuary; and the growth of the great Turk had
its nutriment from a confused collection of discontented persons: Rawleigh
Hist. of Mahomet.
So equally and without partiality is the power of nature distributed to all
men.

LIB. II. Of Civil Liberty.
CHAP. I. Of Property.
The Law of property flows from the Spring of Nature.

Claud. Natura beatis
Omnibus esse dedit si quis cognoverit uti.
Nature assignet happiness to all,
If any one knew how to use it.

GOD, says St. German, Doct. and Student. l. 1. c. 2.
has in Nature given all men their portion, which they may appropriate, and
freely use and dispose at their pleasure: Who likewise, to convince the conceit
of Community, adds an inexpugnable argument. If all things were in common,
says he, it was never of the law of reason, but in great extremity; for the
law of reason may not be changed; but it is evident, that the Law of Reason, by
which all things should be in common, is changed, and therefore never was of
the law of Reason, which is the law of Nature, especially considered; and
properly according to the judgment of Grotius, Juris proprie capax est non
nisi ratione utens: De Jur. b. and p. l. 1.^ c. 2.
with whom Gessendus accords, Jus humanum homini proprium est and natural,
Nothing is capable of law, D Philo. E. f. 1549.
but what by nature has the use of reason; and the law of reason, or humane
law, is proper and natural to man.

Before there was dominion introduced, the first possessor had a propetty in
what he possessed; which by Pliny is called proprium habentis, and by Grotius
Ius occupantis, De Jur. b. and p. l. 1. c. 2.
the property of the haver, and right of the occupier; who adds quod jus qui
eriperet, faceret injuriam, which right, who should take away, should do
injury: For as Gessendus, there is justum and injustum natura, tametsi nulla
societas, nulla pactio civium esset, De Phil. Epit. f. 17. 56.
There is right and wrong by nature, although there had been no society, or
paction of people.

Cain and Abel were the first Planters and Occupiers; one had a property in the
firstlings of his Flock, and the other in the first fruits the ground.

Abraham and Lot traveling to a new Plantation, had their several goods and
occupations. Adam was also in the state of property; for there was one tree
whereof he might not eat, in which he had no property: The eating of which, Mr.
Askam of gover. f. 22.
as Mr. Askam, was a sin against property, and therefore theft, theft being a
breach of property; for no man can steal, but from the right owner. And the
prime duties of the second Table, which is convertible with the law of nature,
are conversant about the right of property; for if women, and all things were
in common, there would be no law against Adultery and Theft.

And for the present, according to the consent of the Civilians, Thol. syn. P.
un. l. 20. c. 2.
Quae in nullius bonis sunt, occupantium fiunt, What things soever appertain to
none, be the occupants. As an Island borne in the the Sea, or a Continent
discovered, cedant occupanti, give place to the occupant: A Relic of which
remains in our Law: As if cestny pour l'autre vie die before cestny que vie,
whosoever enters first after his decease shall enjoy the land by the title of
an occupant: The substance of all which, accurate Gessendus comprehends in
one sentence, Tol^atur omnis lex, De Phi^^s. Ep. c. 1750.
superest tamen lex naturae, ipsumque rationis dictamen; quo cavetur, ne quis
in alium, quod in se nolit, peccet, ac ne re prius communi, sed occupatione
facta, propria vi, aut dolo spolietur, Take away all laws, yet the law of
nature, and dictate of reason remains, by which it is provided, that not any
one should commit that offense against another, he would not have committed
against himself; and that he be not by force or deceit spoiled of the thing
which was first in common, but made by occupation his own.

CAP. II.
That men have power by Nature not to commit any outward act repugnant to the
law of Nature.

THere are insite in our souls common notions and principles ((...)) which
though we have not from our birth, A^istot.
yet will they irresistibly draw the hearer or conceiver into their consent; by
which we are instructed to abhor and shun those vices which are offensive to
the Supreme Justice: which though, as the Philosopher, (...), 1 Pol. c. 3.
by reason of an evil affection, contrary to nature, or indeed, per culpam
parentum, by our Parents fault they may be depraved and defaced, yet, are they
not utterly extinct or abolished: But as Augustine confesses, Tua lex, Confess.
tua lex scripta est in cordibus nostris, quam non ulla unquam delet iniquitas,
Thy law, thy law is written in our hearts, which not any iniquity ever does
blot out; which though it may be impaired, and we thereby become incapable of
the exact and inward performance of the Law, yet in respect of our external
Functions, every one has sufficient power to reign, Melan. de any.
and moderate his outward demeanor, that he commit no outward or civil act
repugnant to the law of nature. And in this sense is Mr. Hobs saying true, that
the law of nature is easily kept; and the position of the Philosopher also,
(...), 3 Eth. c, 5.
Virtue is in our power as well as Vice. According to which sense he urges
this Argument, That whatsoever Masters of Families, or Lawmakers command, or
forbid, must be in our power; but they command virtuous actions, and forbid
those are vicious; therefore such actions must be in our power* The which
reasons the Divines press more vigorously: For God, say they, has given unto
men Magistrates and Laws, by which their actions should be ruled, whom the
Apostle advises to obey, and to do that is good, and not that is evil, for
fear of the sword. Romans 13.
Vain therefore and injurious were this institution of God, the power of
Magistrates, Laws, and the advice of the Apostle, if we were unable externally
at the least to fulfill and observe their laws: For that were to enjoin
impossibilities, which is tyrannical and absurd, and adverse to the rules and
maxims of Laws; for it is a maxim in our Law, Lex non cogit ad impossibilia:
and a rule among the Civilians, Cook. Inst. f. 921. a. Tholos syntag. Jur. Vniv
l. 44. c 10.
Quae possibilia non sunt, non obligant, The Law compels none unto
impossibilities; and if it should, impossible preceps do not bind.

CAP. III. Of Peace.
NAtura est quietis appetens, says Bodin, Nature is desirous of quietness; for
Peace and Concord are the Union of the Universe; Macro^. S m. Sci^. l. ^. c. 14.
witness the harmony of the Heavens, and the mutual coherence of the Elements,
and the golden chain which reaches from the Heavens to the Earth, by which all
things are reciprocally tied and knit together. The several Flocks of Birds,
and Herds of Beasts, feed and live quietly together, according to their
distinct species.

Horat. Ep. 7. Neque alius lupis mos, nec suit Leonibus
Vnquam nisi in dispar feris.
Juv. Saevis inter se convenit ursis.
Among themselves the Lions, Wolves, and Bears agree.
Much more should men of the same nature and similary shape, and above all
others more sociable and communicable by speech, live quietly and peaceably.
Doctor. Stud. l 1. c. 4. Mr. Hobc. Philos. Rudiments
And therefore, says St. German, It is the law of nature that men live
peaceably, that they may tend the preservation of their lives, which whilst
they are in war they cannot, and which is the first and fundament law of
nature, at which all human laws level, even the law of war and arms, whose
ultimate aim is peace: As the Philosopher, (...): 7 Pol. c. 1.
And as Tully, Vt in pace vivatur, That we may live in peace. So Salust,
Sapientes pacis causa bellum gerunt, Orat. ad Caesarem.
laborem spe otii sustentant, Wise men make war, to purchase peace, and cheer
up their labor with the hope of ease. And for this cause do all
Commonweals, and especially the law of this Land, carefully provide for the
preservation of common peace, and abhor all force, as the capital enemy of
peace, and subject the bodies of such to imprisonment, whence all laws are
more severe against the violaters of the public peace, Hub. Cas. f. 3. Cook.
then the corrupters of private virtues; against Riotors, Robbers, and
Homicides, then against Libidinous, Luxurious, and Deboist persons, censuring
the one with infamy or pecuniary mulcts, and the other with corporal or capital
punishments.

CAP. IV.
1 Man by nature is a sociable ereature.

2. The causes of humane society.

3. Men primitively ruled by the Light of Nature, lived peaceably.

4. The original and provoking causes of disorder among men.

5. The origin of Dominion.

MEn are by nature sociable, Arist. l. 1. Pol.. c. 2.
and more sociable then Animals, which are (...), congregable creatures, by
reason of their language, which is (...), the communicative organ of society.
(...), says Anaxagoras: and Cicero, Pares cum paribus facillime congregantur,
Like will to like, In Catil.
which proceeds from their natural affections, founded on the similitude of
nature, which has constituted a certain alliance among all men. To which
purpose Grotius, Tholos. s. 7. Ju. Vniv. quandum cognationem inter homines
constituit.
Naturalis juris matter humana natura etiamsi re nulla indigeremus ad societatem
natura appetendum ferret, Humane nature it self, the Mother of the natural
law, though we wanted nothing, would lead us by nature to the desire of society.

Conservation also is the cause of socity. Natura enim est rapax similium, quia
omne conservatur similitudine. Nature longs for the like, Kekerman.
because it is conserved by the like: And as Gessendus notably, Mutual
indigency and imbecility, Mutua indigentia quam natura fabricata est, est
causa societatis, ut suis rebus uti tutius possit. Guess. de Philos. Epicurea.
Tossed. in 10. caput Geneseos.
which nature has framed, is the cause of natural society, that men may use
their substance more safely: And as Tostatus, Necessity was the original of
civil communication for the mutual conservation of mankind. Neither were men in
the first age dissociable, fusi per agros and dispersi montibus altis, as the
Poets feign, scattered in the fields, and dispersed on the mountains; but
according to their natural inclinations, had their several Associations and
Families: Neither were there any (...), vagrants or vagabonds; Genes. 4.
for it was inflicted as a punishment on Cain for the slaughter of his brother
Abel.

And in those golden times, and to which the quality of charity and simplicity
were proper, Askam of the con. and rev. of gov. c 3. f. 4. Mr Hobs Phil. Rud.
as learned Mr. Askam affirms, as men were sociable, so were they peaceable,
peace being the first and fundamental law of nature, by which they were led,
satisfied and contented with what they gathered and collected to their proper
use. That though turfy bowy booths and caves were their habitation, Annotat. on
the bible. Chronologers (...) 130. years from the creation to the slaughter of
Abel.
yet lived they free from mutual molestations; as Cain and Abel seemed to have
done for a long space; for we read not of any discontent between them, until
the slaughter of Abel, which was above 100. years from the Creation: And so
odious were all injuries in that Age to mankind, that every one was naturally
a Magistrate to punish the breakers of peace, and the law of nature, which
caused Cain to cry, Whosoever shall find me will slay me: Of which times the
Poets also truly; Petronius. Conservabat opes humilis casa.
A simple Cottage conserved their goods.
And Boethius. Odiis nec fusus acerbis
Cruor arma tinxerat.
Neither had bloody wounds flowing from bitter hate
Bedi'de their swords.


Charity and Simplicity had sudh power over them, that they naturally abhorred
rapines and homicides: But when the Earth was replenished, and Families grew
numerous, envy and avarice possessed the minds of the naturally ill-affected,
and incited them to reject the peaceable and golden precepts of the law of
nature, and to invade others properties. Then might became right, and id
aequius quod validius, he was most just was most powerful, witness the first
Tragedy of Abel. And as the Poet, Horat. Jura negat sibi nata, nihil non
arrogat armis.
The laws he does deny as borne to him,
But with his arms is always conquering.


The mighty would not permit the feeble to possess those things they had
collected and occupied, but ranged with Brennus Motto in their mouths, Omnia
sunt validiorum.
All things belong unto the stoutest.


And roving up and down, used it as a calling, by force and rapine to oppress
the impotent, and enrich themselves, holding it no disgrace, so as it was
valiantly performed. To which Cicero, speaking of that Age, assenteth: Vt
tantum haberent quantum manu ac viribus per eoedem and vulnera eripere, Orat.
pro Sexto.
aut retinere potuissent, That so much they had, as by force and strength
through wounds and slaughters they could obtain or retain. For though man, as
the Philosopher, considered in his perfection, is the best of all living
creatures; Arist. l. 1. Pol. c. 2.
yet having fallen from law and right, is the worst of them all: (...), a most
impious, fierce and cruel creature, far surpassing the wild beasts in malice
and immanity.

Hence arised wars worse then Civil, and horrid Homicides; covetousness on the
one side, and desire of revenge on the other, Avaritiae and ultionis apperitus
aliis in alios arma suppeditavit. Bod. l. 2. c. 6.
furnished them with Arms and weapons.

Lucian. Et pars vilissima rerum
Certamen movistis opes.
And wealth the vilest of all mortal things
Provoked strife.
The injured party laboring with all their might to fortify themselves,
Prosopopaeia.
and recover their losses, had recourse to the redoubtest and wisest of their
Families, (...), Hom. Ila.
of many others the worthiest, imploring his Heroical Assistance, and that he
would accept to be their General, which he confidently and courageously
undertook, as well for their good and utility, as his own honor and safety.

Nam tu^^ res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet. Virg.
Near is the danger when the next fence is fired.
Justin. l. 6. de Lacedaemo^iis. Aut vincendum aut moriendum censuerunt. Quasi
tempestas quaedam omnia diruit. Just. de conque.
Who armed with force and virtue, having ordered and encouraged his cohorts and
associates (who cohorting one another to the combat, resolved either to die,
or gain the Victory) gave the plundering enemy a furious assault, and like a
thundering tempest did shatter and shiver their Ranks, and beat down all before
them, forcing them to exclaim for ignoble quarter, which upon their disarmed
submission was granted. Whereupon the General, with the applause and consent of
his Associates and the better party took upon him the Empire of them both, His
quidem ut amicis, illis autem ut servis imperans, Bodin. l. 2. c. 8. de Rep
Commanding the one as servants, and ruling the others as friends: The one
reverencing him as their Lord, and the other honoring him as their Protector:
And so settled in his Throne, with the right hand of respect favored his
Allies, and with the left hand of severity curbed his Enemies, wisely disposing
them both to his subjection: A Stratagem as ancient as the Origin of Dominion,
and first put in practice by Nimrod; for until his days Noah and his
Generations, as Paraeus, per familias suas placide gubernarunt, In caput 10.
Genesees. In 10. cap. Genes. viribus robustus, and consilio discretus.
did rule gently by their Families.

But he being a mighty Hunter, as the Scripture styles him, that is, as
Tostatus expounds, strong in body, and discreet in mind, by the Engine of
Wit, and Art of Gratification, in heaping good turns on injured persons, did
allure and draw multitudes of people to his party, The Sept. call him (...).
Vnde dominandi cccasionem nactus Monarchiam usurpavit, and regnum obtinuit.
Musc. Ibid.
through whose assistance and Gygantaean force he pursued men, as the hunter
pursues beasts, subdued many Nations, and was the first that obtained a
Monarchy and Kingdom; and was so famous for his victorious valor, as it
passed for a proverb, As another Nimrod, as we use to style a valiant man alter
Caesar, vel alter Alexander. Or as the Poet, Alius Latio jam partus Achilles.

Which Martial policy has been subsequently practiced by many Martial Heroes:
As Justin relates of Philip of Macedon, that by ministering aid unto the wea^er
side, Victos pariter victoresque subire regiam servitutem coegit, Just. l. 8.
compelled the Conquerors as well as the conquered, to undergo a royal
servitude. And it is recorded of the Romans by Cicero, the studious observator
of that State, That by releiving their confederates, they augmented their
Commonweal; Noster populus sociis defendeadis, terrarum jam omnium potitus est.
Vid. Alb. Gentil. de armis Romans
and by imparting Assistance to other Nations, brought the whole world into
subjection. And in our Histories it is by approved Authors affirmed, that the
Saxons were called into England by the Brittans to defend and aid them against
the incursions of the Picts and Scots; who, though at the first they seemed
mercenary and assistant to them, yet in the conclusion became Masters and
Conquerors of them.

CAP. VI.
Dominion by right belongs to the valiant man.

IT was the judgment of Polybius, Scipio's Master, That it was a necessary that
he who excels in strength of body and courage of mind, Polyb. l. 6.
ipsissimum naturae opus.
do obtain the Principality and Empre; and this is, says he, the very work of
nature, which is apparent in the Regiment of Beasts, among whom the strongest
always precede. And it is Aristotle's position, Ar. 1. Pol. c. 4.
Alexanders Paedagogue, (...), whatsoever is superior in power, excels in
goodness; for without Virtue, Force cannot safely consist: And therefore do
the Grecians conjoyn them, and call valourous men (...), good men: And the
Latins derive virtus a viro, virtue from a man, as if Manhood comprehended all
Virtue, as it has been anciently taken, and so is expressed by one of the
Ancients.

Plaut. Amph. Virtus praemium est optimum;
Libertas, salus, vita, res, parents,
Patria, and prognati tutantur, servantur.
Virtus omnia in se habet; omnia assunt bona
quem penos est virtus.
Valor is worthy of the best recompense;
Freedom, Life, Safety, our Friends and parents,
Our Country, Kindred, are by it preserved.
Valor has all things in it, and all things flow*
To him who gives the valourous victorious blow. 3 Pol. c. 12*

Such a valourous man, excelling others in virtue, is worthy of an Empire,
which by right, says the Philosopher, appertains to such an one: (...): Then
it is right that such an one be Lord of all, and King alone. At which the Poet
also points, Juv. Ipsius certe ducis hoc refer videtur,
Vt qui fortis erit, sit felicissimus idem.
This certes reflecteth on a Generals aim,
That he who valourous is, thrice happy reign.


Such a one meriteth a Throne, even by the judgment of the great Macedon, who
being demanded by Perdiccas on his fatal Couch to whom he would bequeath his
Kingdom, answered, Ei qui optimus esset, To him who should be best.

Honor. Emitur sola virtute potestas. Claud. 3.
And Tully, a bitter Antagonist of Caesar's, and Monarchy, for the same reason
subscribed to it and him, saying, Demus igitur Caesari Imperium, sine quo res
Militaris geri non potest, Let us therefore yield the Empire to Caesar, without
whom Military Affairs cannot be managed. So as he who ruled all by his gown
and tongue, was coacted to veil to valor and the sword, and to grant a
Principality, who before esteemed it a Tyranny: And which Paradox after Caesar's
slaughter he reassumed, and maintained in his Philippick Orations against M.
Antony, to his miserable massacre: The Allegory of Antisthen^s lively
representing his destiny, which was, That the Hares at a solemn Assembly of
Beasts, moved that there might be an equality among them all: To which the Lion
replied, he would condescend, if his claws could be taken off: By which Tully,
for his invective Orations against Antony, was desperately torn in pieces; and
by whose command his head, wherein he forged, and his hand, whereby he pressed
his declamations, were fixed to the Pulpit wherein he made them.

CAP. VI.
1. To reduce the Conquerours with the conquered into one Government, is a
prudent part of the Conqueror.

2. How it may without danger be effected.

IT is a principal part of the Imperial art, to reduce the Conquerors with the
conquered into an uniform model of Government: For which, Romulus, the Founder
of the Roman Royalty, is extolled, quod eodem die plerosque populos, and
hosts, and cives habuerat, That within the same day he had diverse Nations for
his enemies and Citizens: Senec. l. 2. de Ira. c. 24.
And Caesar, the Founder of the Roman Empire, after the conquest of France,
mingled the Gauls among his Legions, whose Auxiliary Forces much availed him in
all his Victories; for which, at his return to Rome, in requital he placed some
of them in the Senate; which policy Seneca calls salubrem providentiam, an
wholesome and healing providence, to t^mper and mix the Vanquishers with the
vanquished, and so dispose them into one Civil Body. Concerning which, acute
Clapmere propounds this caution, De arcanis l. 3. c. 2.
That in a new State, which is full of seditious and factious spirits, a more
rigid and strict Government is to be exercised by the Prince, lest, as he
says, Serpentem in sinu alet, He shall foster a serpent in his bosom; as
Caesar did, who embraced his greatest enemies in the arms of his clemency, to
his lamentable destruction; for those whose lives he saved, and honorably
preferred, plotted and acted his barbarous slaughter, which made him exclaim in
the agony of the act, Men' servasse qui me perderent, Have I saved those should
slay me? wherein also Alexander the great failed, who, contrary to the
admonishment and precept of his Master Aristotle, (...), to be friendly to his
familiars, and severe to strangers; Plut. vit. Alexand. Arist. 7. poli c. 7.
and to contein the Grecians by love and respect, and retein the Persians by
command and authority; entreated the one not as conquered persons, but as
companions of his Victory, Non quasi victos, sed victoriae socios habuit: and
handled the other not as his commilitons, and fellow-conquerors, Justine. l: 12.
but as slaves and subjects of his cruelty, rashly murdering Clytus, the
preserver of his life, and cruelly putting to death Philotas, Parmenio, and
diverse other noble Graecians, who by their valor had seconded him in all his
conquests; for which, and other such ungrateful insolences, he was miserably
extinguished by poison; so difficult a task it is to reduce the differing
humors of a divided State into a safe and equal temper: Alexander, and
Caesar, the greatest Monarchs on earth, could not attain to this medium of
policy, the one being faulty in fostering his foes, and the other in despising
his friends; for as concerning foes, Clapmere concludes, De arcu. imperiis l.
4. c. 15.
that in such cases extreme Counsels are best; Aut enim, says he,
interficiendi sunt, aut praemiis multis molliendi; tertia via nulla est; for
either they are to be destroyed, or else by many gifts, gained and quieted:
There is no third way; yet Gessendus prescribes a safer rule, De Philos.
Epi^ur. f: 1468.
Cum ex indulgentia nihil timendum est, rationi, bonitati, and clementiae locus
relinquatur; Where nothing is to be feared in being indulgent, let place be
given to moderation, goodness, and clemency, which he says is honorable, and
worthy of praise, and as the Poet, the greatest victory.

Nulla est victoria major,
Quam quae confessos animo quoque subjugat hosts.
No greater victory there is,
Than to subdue the minds of men,
and make them his.
CAP. VII.
1. Dominion was first procured by arms.

2. That it is not disseisin, robbery, tyranny, or usurpation.

3. That the Law of Arms, is above all Laws.

SVbjection is neither natural nor voluntary, neither will any one submit
himself freely to the collar of dominion, ut canis ad vincula, but is gained by
the prowess of the Conqueror; for every one in the state of nature, has a
right to dominion, and conquest only puts him in possession: and it is averse
from reason, that men should expose their natural liberty to imperious
subjection, unless incited by fear, or constrained by force; as Judicious
Patricius, De Mon. and Aristo. f. 6.
nullagens sine metu sese supremo magistratui subjecit; the horse in Aesops
fables, accustomed freely before to wander up and down, would not have
submitted himself to the bridle of the Rider, but for fear of the Bull, his
enemy, by which means the Rider obtained the dominion of them both, and had
vitae and necis potestatem over them both; and it is contrary to the Law of
nature, for any one to expose his life to another censure; for if no man has
power to take away his own life without the guilt of being a murderer, how can
any one confer such a power as he has not himself, upon any one, without
being accessory to his own death, which is the most unnatural murder?

Dominion then was first achieved by valor, and Empires purchased by arms;
their creation was by force; though afterward, some by succession, and others
by election, Syntag. juris univ. l. 18 c. 2.
were made Kings; as Tholosanus, primus vi constituit imperium, alii partim
successione, alii electione facti reges, which afterward was not perpetual,
but sometimes changed, by interposition of arms, which as in many Nations, so
in this is most apparent; that Dominion having been by the arms of the Romans,
Saxons, Danes, Normans, and other particular forces, often altered: and whereas
many supposing the golden age, in which men at the first should live peaceably,
and by election advance those to the supreme dignity, who by their prudence
drew barbarous and wandering people into societies and Cities, and instructed
them in commodious arts, or conferred other benefits on them, as Saturn,
Jupiter, De repub. l. 2. c. 1.
Bacchus, and Ceros; which as Bodin truly, in Jubilis poetarum, quam reipsa est
illustrius, which is more illustrious by poetical figments, than real truths.

Neither were those times according to their fictions, free from discords and
digladiations; for Jupiter by force, Bod. meth. hist. c. 7.
deprived his father of his Scepter, and was made famous for his parricides,
libidinous escapes, and notorious incests: his brethren also by force attempted
to break the frames of heaven, and hale him from his thundering throne; and
Bacchus, Patric. l.
Joves spurious impe, is affirmed to have first by force invaded and conquered
the East Indies. This was the impious and furious product of that golden and
Halcyon age^e and whereas diverse otherwise exquisitively learned, following the
tract of Herodotus (as Justine, Cicero, and others) (who though for antiquity
is styled by Cicero, Alber. Gent. de armis Romans f. 54. Bodin. Metho. histor. f.
65
the father of History, yet by some is called mendacissimus, the father of
fables; and by Thucydides, Plutarch, and Diodorus censured in his History, to
have respected elegancies and delights, more than truth and substance) conceive
that in the Heroic times, Kings were first created by the suffrages of the
people: whereas, it is impossible, in any small society, for all the people to
agree, or hardly the major part, though they lived so peaceably as to refer
all their variances and controversies to one, whom servandae Justitiae causa,
Cic. offic. l. 2.
as Cicero, to do justice, they constituted a King, as they pretend, which
abhors from all probability and practice; Verissimus historia parens. Bodin.
Thucid. lib. 1.
for as Thucydides, the truest father of History relates, that a little before
his time, there was so much barbarousness, and savageness in Greece, that by
Sea and Land they openly exercised theft and robbery: and Tully himself
averreth, Ita rerum naturam tulisse, ut quodam tempore, homines per agros ac
dispersi vagarentur, tantumque haber^nt, quantum manu ac viribus per caedem and
vulnera accipere, Orat. pro. Sext.
and retinere potuissent. That such was the nature of things, that for a
certain time, men being dispersed, did wander up and down the fields, and had
only so much as they could snatch, and keep; which also in Caesar's time,
Caesar's, com.
was the condition of the Germans, who held Larceny no infamy, but used it as
an exercise for their youth, to keep them from idleness; from which I conceive
Mr. Hobs might collect, that the right of nature, is a condition of war, of
every one, against every one, and right of every man to every thing, even to
another body; but if there ever were any such plain and quiet times, as is
conceived, yet were they proper only to the first families, and of no long
continuance; which is evident by the History of Cain and Abel, and the
murdering mind of Lamech: The voice of God also then testifying, that the
imagination of the thoughts of man's heart, Genes. 6.5.
was only evil continually.

So as it is above belief, to conceive, that by the unanimous consent of such
discrepant and disordered persons, a Prince or a Supreme Sovereign should be
quietly elected; or otherwise, that such rude and barbarous people, should be
reduced to a civil Government, unless by force and power of a victor, which was
first attempted and achieved by Nimrod; Mus^ulus, chrys^stom. Cornelius a
lapide,
who as has been premised, in vigor of body, and virtue of mind, Tostatus,
Mercer. Rivet. upon the 10. of Genes.
surpassing others, by his humanity and benignity to distressed persons, gained
to himself a potent party, by which he subdued his opposites, and erected a
Monarchy, and which is perspicuous, and received of all, that Nimrod was the
first King and Monarch, because as Tostatus, In 10. Genesis quia neminem in sacri^
litteris legimus ante eum vegnasse. Cas. Sph. in Arist. l. 3. c. 10.
we read of none in the sacred Scriptures, to have reigned before him; Quid
igitur (says one, not superficially versed in Politic principles) profanas
historias quaero? Legimus in sacris litteris, Nimrod alia via sibi procurasse
imperiu^; venator enim robustus fuit populosque vi, and sceptro subaegit: why
therefore do I seek profane Histories? we read in the holy Writ, that Nimrod
procured unto himself the Empire another way, for he was a mighty hunter, and
subdued Nations by force and arms unto his Scepter; which also were the orgine
and foundation of the vicissitude of succeeding Empires, as of the Medes,
Persian, Greek, and Roman Empires, and lately of the Mohammedan Turkish
Dominion, all which had their source and rise from their victorious arms. They
therefore who trace the steps of the founders of Monarchy by suffrages,
unadvisedly conjecture, that the atchievments and purchases of such as win
dominion by arms, are disseisins, rapins, tyrannies or usurpations; whereas
they are the work and ordinance of God, who is the Lord of hosts, and
naturally reigns over all by his might; for which reason, Nimrod is said to
be a mighty hunter before the Lord, Coram Domino, quia rob accepit a Domino.
Chrysostom. Cornelius de lapide, in 10. Genes. Abenezra* Paraeus, ib. Melchior Ca^^s
Dei nutu and been placito. Corn. de lap, ib.
and was not only called so, because he excelled in might, but that he nutu
and ductu Dei, by the divine impulse and conduct, should force the barbarous
and rude people into a civil life, and stoutly rule them by the power of the
sword, which is the ordinance of God, who only has power to give, and take
away Kingdoms; with which, the peoples obedience must go along and wait on
Gods providence; and whom to resist, though a Nebuchadnezar, were to fight
against Gods substitutes and servants, and by the word of God is rebellion; and
it is an high presumption to brand those with the title of tyrants, 2 Chronicles.
3.13.
whom God honors with the name of his servants, and which title is not to be
found in the Scriptures, by application to any Governor; and as Musculus well
observes on the aforesaid text, the word Tyrant vulgarly signifies nothing
but a Mornarch, a Prince, or a King, which he says is the most excellent kind
of Government, if it fall to a good man; and therefore is that place perversely
by some Expositors abused, In 10. Genesis Si cadit in virum bonum.
who with the Anabaptists thence infer dominion to be tyranny, and that it is
not the ordinance of God; non coram Domino, sed contra Dominum, contrary to the
will of God, and mind of the people; whereas all power in it self is of God,
as Samuel said to the Israelites, In se. Rivet. ib. Insubjecto.
see ye here, whom the Lord has chosen: though in the subject it is not
always just and lawful for the abuse of it, which turns it into tyranny,
Arist. 8. eth. c. 10.
and is a vice proceeding aliunde from the malice of men, and as Arist. (...),
a wicked King is a tyrant. Seneca speaks excellently to the same purpose, that
a Tyrant differs from a King, Senec. de clem. l. 1. c. 11, 12.
factis, non nomine, not in name, but fact; species enim fortunae and licentiae
par est, nisi quod tyranni ex voluptate saeviant, reges autem non nisi ex
necessitate; for the form of their power and privilege is all one, but that
tyrants use rigor for their will and pleasure, but Kings out of necessity or
extremity.

And whereas, a tyrant is described by some, to be one who rules contrary to
the will of the people; by that reason there should be no Kings at all: for it
is a popular, not a royal power, when the Commonweal is governed by the
arbitrament of the people, and not a King; and by which rule, Moses the most
just and wise Prince, may be reputed to be the greatest tyrant, because he
enjoined, and prohibited, almost all things contrary to the will and mind of
the people.

Vain also is the distinction; though God ordain the power, yet he allows not
the usurpation; for he is the author of the one, as well as the other; nam
Regnorum initia, incrementa, and casus a Deo dependent; for the beginnings,
increase, Philo.
and chances of Kingdoms depend upon God, which is particularly apparent in the
conferring of the ten Tribes of Israel on Jeroboam, which in it self was an
usurpation, in the right of Rehoboam; 1 Reg. 11.13
yet notwithstanding, is it by holy Writ, declared to be Gods gift: and when
Rehoboam had raised a mighty Army, to regain the ten Tribes of Israel from
Jeroboam, he was deterred from that expedition, by the Prophet Shemaiah,
because the Lord by him had demonstrated himself to be the author of that act;
A me inquit factum est verbum hoc, for this thing says he, is from me.

And in all the records and acts of our Laws, there is no mention of any
usurpation, but only of the Popes usurped authority, 28. Hen. 8.
who went beyond his last, and pastoral authority, to meddle with any royal
jurisdiction; to which, the Church was always subject: else it might have been
declared, that William the Conqueror was an usurper; for Edgar was the right
heir, and Stephen an usurper, who as primus occupans, Baker. 66. Qua ex
hostibus capiuntur, jure statim capientium sunt. Grot. De jure b. and p. l. 3.
c. 5. Phil. Rud. sect. c. 4.
and by force procured himself to be King; and by the Law of war, whatsoever
the Victor obtains, is his right: jus est in armis; and as Mr. Hobs, a sure
and irresistible power conferreth the right of dominion and ruling over those
cannot resist; and the Conqueror may by right compel the conquered, unless he
will choose to dye, or give caution of his future obedience, which is a just
right and title, surmounting, and swallowing all other rights; as Suidas (...):
Camer. iustit. pol. l. 1. c. 4.
There is no Law so potent, as the Law of arms; for whosoever exceeds in
power, his commands and acts are esteemed most just: and that is a good plea in
the Court Martial of all Nations, against all disseisius, tyrannies,
usurpations, and all demands whatsoever, that it was obtained by battle and
conquest; as when Solomon demanded Rome of the Pope, Clap. de arc. imp. l. 2.
c. 13.
declaring that was unjustly alienated by Constantine the Great; the Pope did
not urge the donation of Constantine to Pope Silvester, but pleaded, Quod jam a
tot annis contra omnem vim possidemus, ac ferro defendemus; That at this
present, from many years, we possess it against all force, and by the sword
defend it.

Which answer the Venetians transversim returned to the Pope, who requiring of
them by what title they held the dominion of the Seas, boldly protested, that
they held it bello and victoria, by war and victory.

And this law says the Philosopher, (...), 1 Posit.
is a kind of consent and compact among all Nations, at which the Comaedian
points, discoursing of a pitch field.

Plaut. Convenit, utri victi sint eo praelio,
Vrbem, agros, focos seque dederent.
It was agreed, that they who conquered flies,
Should yield their Cities, fields, and families.
For the Victor has an universal, not a particular right, De jur. b and p. l.
3. c. 6.
and that without any relation to the cause, but only to the bare fact, ex quo
jus oritur, says Grotius, from whom the right arises; and which is an
eternal Law, and a custom which has been confirmed by the practice of all
Nations, from Nimrod the great Hunter, to Ottaman the great ranger, and so will
continue Vsque dum Regnum obtinebit Jupiter Feretrius.
So long as the Lord of Hosts shall reign.


CAP. VIII.
1 In the beginning, the decrees of Princes were Laws.

2. Whether it be better to be ruled by a good Law, or a good man.

3. That secrecies of State properly appertain to the Prince.

IN the beginning of Government, the wills and decrees of Princes were Laws,
Just. l. 1.
So says Justine of the Assyrian, Arbitria regum pro legibus erant: Just. l. 1.
and of the Athenian, Libido regum pro legibus erat, who for their approved
moderation and equity, Just. l. 2.
were honored and reverenced as speaking Laws, guiding themselves and others
by the law of nature, which they as Gods subjects are bound to observe, as well
as their subjects them; and which, as Bodin, is Regina utrisque imperans,
Bodin. l. 3. c. 3. de repub.
a Queen commanding them both; and a Lesbian rule, flexible every way according
to the various contigences and vicissitudes in every particular case, which
makes it dubitable and disputable, as it is propounded by the Peripatetical
disputant, (...)* Arist pol. l. 3. c. 12.
whether it is better to be ruled by a good law, or a good man? who for the
latter alleges this reason, That laws cannot be given for those things fall
into debate, as contingent and future things, which defect upon emergent
occasions, may be supplied by the presentary prudence of one good man. To which
may be added that the Law is a mute rule, and a dead letter, whereas a good
Prince is the life of a State, and a living law, whom all for his Majesty are
more apt and ready to obey: For which reason Anacharsis derided Solon, when he
enterprised to make laws, saying that it was ridiculous to conceive that the
injuries and ambitions of men would be reclaimed and restrained by mute and
dead letters, which would not differ from spiders cobwebs, that detein the
lesser not the greater flies, out of which the potent and richer persons would
easily escape, as the Poet, Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censurac olumbas.
Censure does crows enlarge, and vexes silly Doves. Juven.



Whereupon Plutarch in the life of Solon relates, That he by the constitution
of his laws, obtained not that happy end he expected, which arrogance and
insolency is regulated and curbed by the majesty and authority of a good
Prince, whose will and edicts, the superior as well as the inferior will more
readily observe and obey, especially if they be correspondent to the law of
nature: According to which if we all live (as Sir John Davis, In his preface to
hi^ ^epor^s
a President of the law, acknowledges) we should need few laws, and fewer
Lawyers: Do as you would be done to, would rule us all, and every man's
conscience would supply the place of both Advocate and Judge, which also, as
Salust, In Catil.
was anciently practiced among the Romans, Apud quos jus, bonumque non magis
legibus quam natura valebat, with whom nature more prevailed to do that which
was right and good then law. And howsoever positive and municipal laws being
granted, whereby the Commonweal may be governed by subordinate Officers, the
Princes shoulders being of too narrow a compass for so large a burden; yet to
a Prince more peculiarly appertains the deliberation concerning secrecies of
State, which reflect on the present glory and safety of the Empire. Tiberius
callidissimus omnium Imperatorum, Bodin de rep.
of all Emperors the craftiest, referred public affairs to the cognizance of
the Senate; yet reserved he jus and vim Imperii, Suet.
the power and right of the Empire to his secret deliberation. Augustus also
when he intended to consult and deliberate about the secret affairs of State,
repai^ed to a private and close place, which he called Syracusas, or (...).
Suet*
And the Emperors generally had their (...), the Councel-chamber, or
Cabinet-councel, wherein they did ponder and diligently consider (...),
Herodian.
the secret and occult occurrences concerning their safety: who also had their
special Edicts, which they called peculiaria, and nova Edicta, peculiar and new
Edicts, which were promulged upon extraordinary and unexpected occasions,
containing in them the vigor of Laws. Not much unlike to our Princes Edicts
and Proclamations, which Mr. Pimm, the prudent and severe observer of passages
of State, Pims Speech.
styles the great and most eminent power of a Prince, and the glorious beams
of Majesty, most rigorous in commanding obedience and subjection; which are
said to be leges temporis, with which our Princes have used to encounter with
sudden and unexpected dangers as would not endure so much delays as
assembling the great Council of the Kingdom.

CAP. IX.
1. Empires are conserved by Arms.

2. The Majesty of a Prince is the safety of a State.

3. Guards are necessary for the safety of a Prince.

4. And are not tyrannical, but Basilical.

5. Laws are protected by Arms.

THe conservation of an Empire is the maintenance of the Militia: For, Eodem
modo quo quid constituitur conservatur: And as Scaliger, Scal. de subt. Ex. 3.
Conservari refertur eidem authori, and principio; Every thing is conserved by
the same means, author, and principle it was first constituted; but Empires at
the first were constituted by Arms, as has been fully shown, and therefore by
Arms are to be conserved, which Pansa and Hirtius in Paterculus resolve, Quod
principatus armis quaesitus armis tenendus est, That a Principality acquired by
Arms, is to be retained by Arms. For as Salust, Imperium iis facile artibus
retinetur quibus partum est, C^til.
An Empire is easily retained by those means it was obtained. And therefore
the Stratocratique and Military Empire is universally more lasting and
permanent, because by the power of Arms it is sustained, and maintained against
foreign Invasions and intestine Seditions. For as Aristotle, (...), Arist. 7.
Pol. c. 9.
It is in their powers who are Masters of the Militia, and have the management
of Arms, to be a means to continue or not continue the state of the
Commonweal; which is confirmed by the practice of all Nations, and the
augmentation and duration of all Empires, Hor. 1. Ser. 8. Tempora si fastosque
velis evolvere mundi.
If you will revolve the times and annals of the world.



And which at this present is more perspicuously eminent in the great growth
and constant conservation of the Turkish Empire, C^m. in Arist. Pol. l. 3. c.
10.
which as Camerarius, Confusum ex diversis nationibus, and militari manu
conservatum, ad maximam potentiam evectum est, composed of diverse Nations, and
conserved by Military force, is advanced to the greatest power, and also to the
highest Title, the Turk stiling himself Imperatorum ter maximus, Bedi. de
Repub. s. 192. Herb: H. 8. f. 337.
and denying the name of Emperor to Charles the fifth, saying there was no
Emperor in the world but himself. To which height of dignity and immensity, by
the conservation and augmentation of his Ianisaries and other Military Forces
he has attained, which he has always in a readiness to defend himself from
Insurrections at home, and to invade the Territories of the nearest Princes
abroad, to the continual augmentation and duration of the Empire, which
consists in the power of Arms, Plato scripsit intra septing. an. nos magnis
rebus pub. definitam esse conversionem. Annot. in Florum. Aristo.
and may by it be made Impeperium sine fine, if it continue invincible, which
is not impossible through Gods assistance, and man's providence: For the
corruptions and conversions of Empires have not their vicissitude from the
result of time, and resolve of Fate, as the Platonists and Stoics did divine,
but from external or internal force, which by the potent and vigilant power of
Arms, the Divine power conniving, may be prevented.

It is the experimental observation of Augustus, Omnia quae praeclara sunt, tum
imprimis summum Imperium cum invidia conjunctum est, Cl^p. de art rep. l. 1. f.
1.
All excellent things, especially the Supreme Power, is conjoined with envy,
which accompanied with ambition and satiety of the present Governor or
Government, do frequently move many factious people to spurn at the Majesty of
Authority, and to study new designs; who easily may (if no bar, or preventing
obstacle be interposed) lay violent hands on the Prince, and so disturb and
surprise the Commonweal: Curt. l. 8.
For, Majestas Imperii salutis est tutela, The Majesty of the Empire is the
protection of safety: For if the Majesty of a Prince be not maintained, the
safety of a State cannot continue, but will fall into divisions and turbulent
factions: For as Sir Edward Cook, A Prince is caput and salus Reipublicae, and
a capite bona valetudo transit in omnes, The head and safety of a Commonweal;
Cook repo. l. 9. f. 124.
and from the head health is conveyed to all. And for this cause is his person
sacred, that whosoever offers it violence, reus est laesae Majestatis; and
pereat unus ne pereant omnes; is guilty of high Treason, and let one suffer,
rather then all perish. And therefore do all Laws provide for the safety of a
Prince, because the safety of all depends on it: And though all power is of
God, yet ought not a Prince to presume only on Gods providence for his
protection, and rely on the reason of Antoninus, Si Divinitus ipsi debetur
Imperium, non poterimus ipsum interficere, etiamsi velimus, If the Empire was
due to him by gift of God, we cannot destroy him if we would; nor on the
resolution of Vespasian, who admoneshed the Conspirators of his life, that they
should desist from treacheries; Si fato ipsis deberetur Imperium, si iis
adjumento futurum, If the Empire should be due to them by destiny, and that it
would be an assistance to such. Barcl. contra monarch. l. 3. c. 2.
For the eternal opifex of all things from the origin of the world, would that
all things should arise and proceed from second causes in a firm and constant
order, whereas he is able of himself, without any ordinary means, to produce
all the effects of natural things; So would he that Kings and Emperors be
provident and circumspect to use all ordinary means by Arms, or otherwise to
secure and guard their persons: For as Cato, Vigilando, agendo, been
consulendo, prospere dii omnia concedunt: Salust. Catil.
ubi socordiae and ignaviae te tradideris, nequaquam Deos implores, irati
infensique sunt; The Gods grant all things prosperously to those who watch,
act, and consult well; when that you shall give your self to negligence and
idleness, do not implore the Gods, they are angry and displeased. For as
Solomon, The slothful man kills himself, Prove. 21.25. and 14.23.
but in labor there is profit: Dii omnia laboribus vendunt, To which Gods
power is always and many times miraculously assisting, as it was to Sampson,
and David. And therefore have all Princes ductu Dei, by Gods direction, used
all diligence and the ordinary power of God for their preservation, and fenced
their Royal persons with Military Forces, to prevent competition and
conspiracy: For as Livy, Parum tuta est sine viribus Majestas, Majesty without
might is seldom safe. Navius calls them regalis corporis custodias. ^^vy.
For which reason, Romulus in the beginning of his Royalty, selected 300. Light
Horsemen for the custody of his Royal body, whom he retained tam pace quam
bell^, as well in peace as war; which solemn guard his Successors constantly
maintained. And Augustus in the beginning of the Empire, premonished by the
slaughter of Caesar, armed with a coat of mail, guirded with a sword, and
guarded with military forces, repaired to the Senate, besides the Praetorian
cohorts which were continually in a readiness to prevent seditions; which
provident postures the succeeding Emperors observed; the which also at this
present is practiced by most Princes; And in England was first instituted by
Henry the seventh, Bacon Hist. Henry. 7.
whom Sir Francis Bacon graceth with the Elogy of a wise Prince, who made it to
hold in succession for ever. And more rare and singular was the providence of
Massinissa, who, though he was fortified with fifty four valourous sons, and
strengthened by the friendship of the Romans; yet as Valerius Maximus, Parum
fidei in pectoribus hominum reponens, Val. M. l. 7. c. 3.
reposing little faith in the breasts of men, environed his person with a pack
of dogs, placing most confidence in his Vlyssean Guard.

And therefore was it justly accounted a State solecisme in Caesar, though
otherwise in Military Discipline an exquisite Grammarian; who, notwithstanding
he continued his perpetual Dictatorship, dismissed the Praetorian cohorts, and
careless and fearlesse of any peril, presented himself naked and open to the
sword of his Enemies. In which State-Criticisme, Alexander, though an expert
and skilful General, was fondly overseen; who notwithstanding he had divested
Antipater of the Praefecture of Macedonia, Thessalia, and Thracia, yet did he
appoint Philippus and Jolas his sons to be his cup-bearers, Curt. l. 10.
Praegustatores.
and foretasters, a place of eminent trust, and imminent peril, whom Antipater
suborned to take away his life by poison.

Neitheir is this State Policy a tyrannical device, as some detractors from
majesty affirm; for by the Judgment of Aristotle a perstringer of tyrants, a
guard is as well basilicall as tyrannical; (...), such a guard is royal, and
not tyrannical; and he puts this difference between them, Ar. l. 3 po. c. 10.
that the one is guarded by forreiners and strangers, and the other by natives
and Citizens; wherein Alexander also forgeting his Masters precepts, drew upon
himself the suspicion of tyranny, in committing the custody of his person to
the Persians, which the Macedonians could not endure: Jactantes, as Justine,
hosts suos in officium suum a rege subactos, that he had substituted their
enemies in their places; with which exorbitancy the late King of England was
charged, Declar. of Parl. May 22, 1644.
for having a design to bring in Germane horse, as a presumption of tyranny.
Other differences also the Philosopher adds, that a tyrant respects his
potent power, and private commodities, and a King his Princely honor, and
public utility; that the one fortifieth himself to the destruction of the
people, and the other to defend his person against conspiracies, and to protect
the people from injuries.

Arms are also necessary for the protection of the Law, which as the
Philosopher, Arist. 1. Rhet. Poli.
is (...) the safety of a City; and in another place, is more necessary than
bread, by which the people are sustained and preserved from the injuries of the
unjust, as the Poet, Hor. Jura inventa metu injusti fateare necesse est.
Who cannot but confess that
Laws first given were for
fear of the unjust?


Yet as a Lawyer says, Lex otiosa est, Danaeus Aphor. f. 559
and inutilis potestas, and quasi Campana sine pistillo, The Law is a vain and
useless power, and as it were a bell without a clapper, which yields no
sound, and produces no effect, unless it be empowered by the Prince and sword,
from which it receives its life and authority; so says the Apostolical
Lawyer, Romans 13*
If thou do that is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the sword for
naught. Arms and the sword are the Protectors of the Laws, as their great
Protector Justinian declares, who discoursing of their mutual assistance,
puts it down in his Institutes: Illorum alterum alterius auxilio semper
eguit, and tam res militares legibus, quam ipsae leges armorum praesidio
servatae sunt; The one has always needed the others help; and as well
military affairs are preserved by the Laws, as the Laws by the protection of
Arms; Mr. Pim. Arist.
and herein does the majesty of a glorious Prince appear, that as he is the
clear fountain of Justice, and guardian of the Law, so he should protect them;
for therefore are Kings called Custodes legum, Cas. 3. pol. c. 11.
Wardens of the Laws; quia illas elingues elumbesque gladio defendant, because
they being speechless and heartless, should be defended with their edicts and
sword, and they with that famous Emperor, protest and practice, Ferdin.
Nec me regnante* licebit
Gunt. Has cuiquam nostras impune lacessere leges:
At ^si quis tumidus praesumpserit obvius i re
Supplicium praesens manifestaque poena docebit
Non magis invictum bello quam legibus ess^.
It lawful shall not be whilst we do reign,
That any one should slight our Laws in vain;
And whosoere shall proudly them oppose,
Present and public punishment shall disclose
Us both by Laws and Arms to be invincible.


Which also has been the Sovereign care of our Albion Princes, who by oath
protested themselves Protectors of the Laws; some of them using all diligence
to abbreviate their volumes, and purge them from irregularities; for which
Edward the Confessor is magnified, who out of an indigested rapsody and cento
of numerous Laws (which the Romans, Cook 3. rep. ep. ad. Lect.
English and Danes had ordained) selected the best, and compiled them into a
compendious systeme, some of which William the Conqueror approved, disallowed
others, and added some new; and so did Henry the third abolish some, decree
others, Baker.
and was the first constituted Parliaments; for which also the indulgent care
of our present Prince is to be extolled, who has proved himself a real
Protector of the Law, which when it was totally to be abrogated by the violent
part of the last Assembly, he through the assignment of the rest, Delphico suo
gladio, dissolved it, and routed them; the peoples inheritance as well as the
Lawyers advancement being by it preserved; Ployd. Com. Wisbish. ca. f. 55.
and like another Justinian has his Highness called together persons of great
ability and integrity, as are in these Nations, to consider how the Laws may be
made plain, short, and less chargeable to the people; by whom the Courts of the
Upper Bench and Common Pleas are judiciously reformed, and the Chancery more
accurately regulated, and which might have been exactly completed by the last
Parliament, if they had left the Government as they found it, there being Bills
prepared to that purpose: to some of which, though the Government seemed a
(...), yet according to the direction of the Philosopher, Laws are to be
conformed according to the condition of the present State, Clap. de arc. imp.
f. 66.
which is warranted by approved Praesidents: Augustus the most r^nowned of all
the Emperors, as Tacitus in the name of the Romans relates, potentiae securas,
quae in triumviratu gesserat abolevit, deditque jura quae pace and principe
uteremur, being secured by power, abolished whatsoever he had enjoined in his
Triumvirate, and gave Laws which we should use for the peace of the
Commonweal, and safety of the Prince. And so did William the Conqueror, who
after the establishment of his royalty, Cook. 3. Rep. ad Lectorem.
as Sir Edward Cook, introduced some new Laws, quae ad regni pacem tuendam
efficacissimae viderentur, which were efficacious for the settlement of peace
in the Kingdom; which Laws are called (...), Clap. de art. Imp. l. 1. c. 10.
and fundamenta imperii, the elements, and fundamentals of the Empire and
Government, and are conversant about assemblies, and Parliaments, Magistrates,
and Jurisdiction, and concerning Arms, and the Exercise of them, which as the
Philosopher, Arist. l. 4* Pol.
appertain to him is the head and chief of the Commonweal.

CAP. X.
1. Monarchy was the first Government.

2. It is ordained by God, and settled by nature.

3. It is the best Government.

THe Government of one was the first Government on earth by man, Barc. cont.
Monarch. ib. Chrysostom.
as it is the Government in heaven and earth by God; for God created Adam
alone, out of whom all Nations should arise, and made not woman of the earth,
but of man, that there should be one head and father of mankind: so as Adam,
the father of all men, had a Monarchical power over them by a general
ordinance, settled by God in him; and therefore as Chrysostom, Monarchy is more
excellent than other forms, because first ordained by God: Adam then was the
first Monarch and King of his family, (...), as Homer said of Telemachus, Homer
Odyss. a.
which Government continued in families, until the reign of Nimrod, who first
changed the paternall Monarchy into National; Though by Herodotus the Egyptians
are reported to be the Ancients of all mortals, Herod. l. 2:
and that they never lived without a King, of whom Menes was the first.

And that Monarchy was the first Government, appears also by the Testimony of
other approved authors: Principio rerum, gentium, nationumque imperium penes
reges erat, says Iustine, and Salust, Justin l. 1. Catal.
lu teuris nomen imperii primum fuit: and Aristotle, (...): The Government of
all Countries, Cities, and Nations, first resided in Kings, and therefore is it
feigned says he, that all the Gods were ruled by one King, Pol. l. 1. c. 1.
which continued as a custom among all Nations, and therefore does Aristotle
add, (...), as the Nation^ also now do. In Abraham's time, not three ages
distant from the flood, there were five Kings at one time, Genesis 14.
in a small part of Asia; and Joshua in the same Country which God gave unto
the Israelites, subdued 31. Kings: and in those days Abimelech forced seventy
Kings to his subjection; and not many ages after, there were thirty two Kings
auxiliaries to Benadab, King of Syria; and it is related, Josh. 8.12.
that in Greece, no less than seventy Kings joined their forces to invade the
Trojans; and that before Caesar's expedition into France, Caesar c^m. de bell.
Gall. 10.
there were more Kings than Provinces; and that in Kent, which is but one of
the thirty seven Counties in England, at one time there reigned four Kings: and
though the Government of Gods own people varied under the several titles of
Patriarchs, Captains, Judges, and Kings; yet in all these, the supreme power
rested still in one person only, which is the same with Monarchy, (...).
it being the Government of one alone, as the notation of the word declares.

Which Government of one, proceeds from a natural inclination man has
thereunto, or as if the soul of man is a parcel of the divine essence, and
^vel^ti Deus in humano corpore habitans, so is there an innate propensity in
man, Seneca.
to applicate himself to that divine form of Government, to which all Nations,
though rude, and barbarous, are and have been by it incited; which moved the
Israelites to desire such a King as the Nations then had: and if we survey the
present State of Europe, we shall find the Emperors from Julius Caesar, the
Hungarians from Aitila, Danes from Danus, the Suevians from Mugosa, the Scots
from Fregusius, and the Brittans from Brutus, to have derived and continued
their Monarchies; which instinct by some is called jus natural: Jus naturae
est, quod commune est animalibus.
For what is common to all sensitive creatures, is said to be the law of
nature; and whatsoever beasts act by natural instigation, if the same be done
by reasonable creatures, is said to be jure naturali: And so says Seneca,
Natura commenta est Regem, quod ex aliis animantibus, and apibus licet
dignoscere; Nature invented a King, which may be collected from Bees, and other
animals, who in their herds, flocks and swarms, have a principal and leader.
The Cranes, litterato ordine, Arist. de anim^ c. 1.
in a composed order have a Conductor, who, as Aristotle says, agit and
moderatur gregem, leads and orders the flock; which is most remarkable in
the wondrous economy of the Bees, and their singular observance to the Majesty
of their Prince; Pliny l. 11. not. hist. c. 17.
of which Pliny fully, and the Mantuan Poet sweetly, Virg. Geor. Regem non sic
Aegyptus, and ingens
Lydia, n^^ populus Parthorum,
aut Medus Hydaspes observant.
Egypt and Lydia do not so
observe their Kings,
Nor Medes, nor Persian people,
as these humming things.


Who instructed them in this principle of Policy, but the Genius of Nature?
which if it may not be properly called a law, as Grotius believes, because
reasonable creatures are only capable of it; yet as they have a shadow and
resemblance of reason, may a law improperly be ascribed to them; which by
Gessendus is called jus animale, the law of sensible creatures.

And it is Aristotle's observation, that in all things which are cemented, and
composed of many parts, and made (...), Arist. l. 1. Pol. c. 3.
a certain common thing, whether living or not living, there is a certain
principality: As in man, the mind, which is (...), governing the affections:
And in beasts, as Tully says, quiddam simile menti, something like unto the
mind, Camerius ibidem.
which rules and orders their appetites: As also in Vegetatives, and those
things which are produced out of the Earth, the Roots have the Principality. So
is it in things without life; As the Sun has the principality of the Stars,
and rules and governes their influences by his light; from whence the Civilians
collect, that according to the course of nature, there is a principality in
those things which are not concrete, but (...), only conjoined and obliged: as
in a Flock a Shepherd, in an Army an Emperor, and in a Society a Governor. To
which, Alexanders answer to Darius, offering him part of his Empire, is not
impertinent, Mundum d^^bus solibus non posse regi, Justin l. 11.
neque orbem summa regna terrarum habere; That the world could not be ruled by
two Suns, nor the Earth safely have two great Kingdoms. And that of the
Senators to Tiberius, pretending to have the Empire divided, Vnum esse reipub.
corpus, Tacit. An.
and unius animo regendum, The body of the Commonweal is one, and ought by one
soul to be ruled. Rome could not brook two Twins, though Brothers: Esau and
Jacob were at variance in one womb: There is one Pilot in a ship, one Master in
a family, one General in an army. And therefore as the Prince of Poets, Hom. ^,
b. (...).
The rule of many is not good,
Let there be then
One Ruler, or one King, to reign
the wills of men.


And the Prince of Philosophers discoursing of the forms and species of
government, Arist. Ethic. l. 8. c. 10.
resolves, (...) But of these Royalty is the best.

CAP. XI.
1. Monarchy is the cause of Concord, and Polyarchy of Discords.

2. The Events of both.

UNitas est Matter and Fundamentum Concordiae; Pride. Metaph.
Unity is the Mother and Foundation of Concord; and the dominion of one more
peaceable and quiet then that of many: For in many an unity is required to all
Consultations, Acts, Elections, which cannot so easily be obtained as by the
result of one person, quia rarius secum unus quam multi inter se dissident,
Cas. Sph.
One does more rarely differ with himself, then many among themselves: For
among many, frequent dissentions and debates arise; the wills of men being
various and dissonant.

Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vivitur uno. And many Governors, as Bodin
judiciously, though they know the truth, Bod. de repub. l. 8. c. 4
tamen invicem sibi sunt impedimento, yet are they obstructive one to the
other, and severally biassed by their affections. And if we take an exact
Survey of the intestine seditions which did tear and rent the bowels of the
Roman State, few or none will appear in the Reigns of their Kings whilst it was
subject to the dominion of one. But after the extirpation of Royalty, dangerous
discords did infest their State. The common people first in a furious sit
deperted from the City to the sacred Mount, and could not be recalled until
their debts were remitted, and Tribunes constituted with power to impede any
proceedings in the Senate, which might be prejudicial to them; and grew to that
hight of ambition, by virtue of their Tribunitial power, that nothing would
content them but a parity and equality with the Patricians, and the Nobles; not
much unlike to our late ambitious Levellers. Then the Tribunes elevated and
animated with their negative power, pretending the benefit of the people,
chiefly aimed at their own dominion, and were the cause of many turbulent
commotions, which like Hydras heads, one being lopped, others instantly
sprouted up; of which the Gracchi, Apuleius, and Drusus were the principal
actors, by whose daily seditions and rapins, Horus L. 3. c. 13.
the Commonweal was much impoveris^ed and endangered, Justice violated, and
the Treasury exhausted. Infinite were the distractions which molested their
many-headed Government, whose particular repetition would stuff a vast volume;
as their social and servile wars; the desperate conspiracies of Spartacus,
Sertorious, and Cataline; the bloody and envious discords between Marius,
Sylla, Cinna and Corbo; and the fatal wars between Pompey and Coesar, Brutus,
Cassius; and Augustus; and afterward between Antony, Lepidus, and Augustus.

Hora. -- adeo sunt multa, loquacem
Del^ssare valent Fabiu^^.
There are so many be enough to tire
The long-winded Fabius.
It is the judgment of Seneca, Ibi semper est Victoria, ubi est Concordia;
Concord and Victory are twins, and always march together, and with Castor and
Pollux have divine success. The Unanimity of seventy Grecian Princes at the
last vanquished the almost inexpugnable City of Troy, though the event was much
retarded by the difference of Achilles: And whereas ten equal Commanders
appointed severally in their courses to command in chief, were elected to
encounter the confident and formidable Army of the Persians, Aristides
presaging and perceiving the discords which from the diversity of their
Commanders might arise, through his sage advice prevailed to have the whole
charge conferred on Miltiades; by which union, and the powerful command of
Miltiades, the famous Victory of Marathon was obtained: And the contentions
between Themistocles and Euribiades had almost delivered the Istmique victory
into the hands of the Persians. The three Military Tribunes appointed by the
Senate to besiege Veios, through their differences were disgracefully defeated.
The Sicilian Expedition was frustrated by the discords of Nicias and
Alcibiades. The variances between Sempronius and Scipio precipitated the
Thebaean Victory on Hannibal. The debate between Terentius and Paulus
occasioned the miserable overthrow at Cannas, whence to escape by flight was a
glory, so fiercely were they pursued.

Virg. Ecl. En quo discordia cives Perduxit miseros. And as small and mean
States have by their Union flourished; so have mighty and glorious Commonweals
through their strifes fallen to ruin. Thucydides writes of Pyrocles, that so
long as Athens was ruled by him, it flourished; but through the difference of
the Praetorian Officers it did run to ruin. Horat. ed.
Ruit and ipsa Roma viribus suis, And Rome certainly had by their civil broiles
been consumed, had not their divided State been happily reduced to the dominion
of one. Tacitus An. 1.
When the Turk had besieged Cyprus, and the Pope, the King of Spain, and the
Venetian had sent a mighty Navy to its relief, the Captains by the way
disagreeing, staid at Crete whilst the Turk took the Town: whereupon Turselinus
truly collects, Turseli. hist l.
Quod Turca semper discordiis nostris crescit, That the Turk always increases
by our discords, Luc. l. 1.
Quae populos semper mersere potentes. And may be the ruin of Christendom, as
they were of Carthage, which stood in competition with the Romans for the
dominion of the world; yet were they through their divisions subdued, Patric.
de princip. f. 513.
and compelled to serve that people they otherwise might have subjected; which
also were the cause of the subjecting the Britans to the Romans, Vita Agric.
as Tacitus impartially relates, describing their condition, Quod Principes
factionibus, and studiis trahuntur, in commune non consultant; ita dum singuli
pugnant, universi vincuntur; That their Princes were drawn, and divided by
their factions and affections, and never consulted in common, insomuch as
whilst they fight severally, they are universally overcome.

CAP. XII.
1. That Civil Wars can hardly be composed, but by the revolution of the
Government to one person.

2. The necessity of Caesar's and Augustus acceptance of the Empire, to whom
his Highness condition, and necessary occasions of taking upon him the
Government, is fitly compared, with other pertinent passages.

Barc. contra Mo. l. 44.
IT is the Animadversion of Dio, a man of exquisite Learning and long
experience, That if any Commonweal has sometimes flourished under a popular
government, it continued so long until it had attained to the height of its
greatness: Then from its prosperity did arise ambition, envy, and from them
contentions and civil dissentions, which can hardly be composed but by the
devolution of the Empire to one Governor, as Clapmere acutely observes;
Seditiones, and bella civilia componi vix possunt nisi Imperio ad unum
devoluto: Clap. de arc. Imp. ff. 77.
Which is confirmed by the Oracle of Apollo, whom the Phrygians, almost
consumed by intestine seditions, consulted how and by what means they might
put a period to them, who were by it advised, and answered, Regi discordiis
opus esse, Just. l. 11.
That they had need of a King to appease their discords: which afterward was
prosperously effected by Gordius their allotted and deputed King, by whose
prudence and prowess, peace and concord were established. And the Polonians
from Lechus were ruled by Kings for the space of one hundred and fifty years;
but the Royal Issue failing, Joannes Herbert l.
the Supreme Power was conveyed unto twelve persons, who in the beginning made
some fair proof of their just Government; but in process of time, they being
carried away with ambition, and a sordid desire of amplifying their private
fortunes, so disturbed the Commonweal with their discords, that a lamentable
Ataxy of all things had ensued, and the dissolution or the State, unless it
had been maturely prevented by the reduction of the Government to the power of
one person. But more illustrious is this experiment in the various vicissitude
of the Roman State, which by degrees had run through all forms of government;
yet at the last, through their continual seditions, and as Tacitus, ob certamen
potentium, by the conflicts and contests of the potent, it was so torn and
racked with convulsive distractions, that it had utterly been ruined, if it had
not been miraculously reduced by the invincible power of Caesar and Augustus to
the Supremacy of one Prince. So the great Statesman Tacitus, Neque aliud
discordantis patriae remedium fuit, Ann. l. 1.
quam si ab uno solo regeretur; Neither was there any other remedy for that
discordant Nation, than that it should be ruled by one. The which also Cicero,
though a professed Patron of Polyarchy, was at the last forced to acknowledge;
L. 1. de not. Deo.
Quod is esset reipub. status, ut eam unius consilio and cura gubernari necesse
est; That such was the state of the Commonweal, that of necessity it must be
governed by the council and care of one. And therefore was Caesar, as Plutarch
affirms, Vit. Caesar.
created perpetuus dictator, hoping thereby ab intestinis discordiis respirare,
to breath from their intestine discords; for which reason his barbarous
slaughter was condemned as a detestable parricide, and of a dangerous
consequence to the State, Clap. de arc. Imp. l. 5. c. 19. Patri. de Princip. l.
1. tit. 13.
new Civil Wars thereupon ensuing, which Caesar prophesied of himself, Non tam
sua quam reipublicae interesse ut salvus fieret; That it reflected not so much
upon his own good as the welfare of the Commonweal, that he should be safe;
which Dio, Tacitus, and Pomponius also aver, Quod ita evenit, ut necesse
esset reipub. per unum tantum consuli; That it so fell out, as that it was
necessary for the Commonweal to be swayed by the advice of one alone: And
therefore did the divine vengeance pursue that inhumane slaughter, not any of
the Assassinates long surviving, but every one of them within the space of
three years perishing most miserably by the pursuit and prowess of Augustus,
who, Plut. vita Caesaris.
as Tranquillus, Omnium bellorum initium and causam hinc sumpsit, nihil
convenientius ducens, Vit. Aug.
quam necem avunculi vindicare, tuerique acta, From thence did ground the cause
and beginning of all the wars, deeming nothing more convenient then to
vindicate the slaughter of his Uncle, and to defend his Acts. Which after he
had happily effected, perceiving, as Tacitus, Vt pacis interesset omnium
potestatem ad unum conferri; Ann. 1.
That it appertained to peace to have the power of all conferred on one, under
the name of a Prince, took upon him the Empire; Distractions in a State being
dolores and (...), pains and pangs of one laboring for delivery, and in the
end bringing forth (...), one and a great one. Such an one was Caesar, Qui
continuo seditiones intistinas compressit, Patric. de Princ. l. 1. t. 13.
and pacem non modo urbi, sed etiam Italiae, and universo terrarum orbi
praebuit; Who presently suppressed intestine seditions, and did make and give
peace not only to the City and Italy, but to all the world. Such a one was
Augustus, Qui (as Florus) sapientia sua, and solertia perculsum undique and
perturbatum ornavit Imperii corpus, Flo. l. 4 c. 4
quod haud dubio ita coire and consentire non potuisset, nisi unius praesidis
nutu quaesi anima, menteque regeretur: who by his wisdom and care reduced
into order the confused and disjoynted body of the Empire, which without doubt
could never have consented and come together, unless it had been by the will
and prudence of one president, as by one soul and mind.

And such an one is our Prince, a Caesar for valor, Augustus for fortune, and
for prowess and prudence second to neither: whose noble acts are engraven in
the late perilous and epidemical wars, spread over the Territories of three
Nations; wherein he was constantly a principal Actor, and a perpetual Victor:
Hostis ubique, and semper Victor. By whose valourous virtue England was
quieted, Ireland settled, De Iure Reg. apud Scotes.
and Scotland subdued and brought under subjection; which from two thousand
years before, as Buchanan brags, was liberum regnum ab externarum Gentium
Imperio, A Kingdom free from the dominion of Foreign Nations. And as Edward
the first was called Malleus Scotorum, the Mauler of the Scots, so may Oliver
the first be styled Scotorum Domitor, The Conqueror of the Scots.

But after the fury of the war was allayed by his invincible virtue, all
discords ceased, as after a tempestuous storm the winds become calm and
pleasant: Though not long after many insolences and corruptions began to reign
in the Senate, aiming at an arbitrary perpetuity to act what it pleased, and
proposing to themselves private respects before the peoples profit, which was
the just cause of its dissolution. And afterward that an hopeful Assembly was
convocated and constituted; wherein, contrary to the expectation of the best,
more pernicious absurdities and dangerous errors did sprout up, to the
depravation of the true Religion, and subversion of the Civil Government, which
worthily wrought its dissipation and assignment: All which are more exactly and
amply deciphered in that judicious Tractate entitled, The Case of the
Cowmonweale stated as now it stands by a Protector. Then the generous and
ingenuous spirit of our General, instigated by the importunity of necessity,
and at the entreaty of diverse persons of honor and quality, and chief Officers
of the Army, with the approbation of the chief Magistrates of this Commonweal,
and diverse other Gentlemen, Citizens, and persons of worth, under the name of a
Protector did take upon him the Government, as well for the prosperity and
tranquillity of the turbulent and distempered State, as also for the safety and
dignity of his own person, being enviously undermined by some ambitious
persons, as Caesar was by Pompey, and Augustus by Antony. Cook Rep. D was C se.
Foelix necessitas quae ad meliora conducit; Happy is the necessity which
produces better things: And happy those who studious of the public good are
sheltered under his protection, by whose providence are received more
commodious and blessed things: Insomuch as what was was said of Augustus upon
the like occasion, may aptly be applied to his present condition, Nunquam pacis
facultas, tantaque omnium copia affluxit, Patric. de princ. l. 1. c. 13.
quantum suppeditavit ille postquam Imperii habenas accepit; Never so much
freedom of peace and plenty of all things did abound, as he has given and
ministered since he took upon him the reins of the Empire. Our swords fat with
slaughters, and our lands lean with plunderings, are turned into profitable
siths, and fertile plowshares; peace is within our gates, and plenteousnesse
within our palaces, every one sitting under his own Vine and Figtree, without
fear or dread of any Enemy: Vt non solum, as Tully in the same sense, ii quibus
natura sensum dedit, sed etiam tecta and agri mihi laetari videantur; As not
only creatures to whom nature has given sense, but the houses and fields also
seem to rejoice.

And, which exceeded the expectation of the Sagest, has his Highness through
the divine assistance, and humane providence, quelled the high and mighty
Masters of the Seas, and by his magnanimous Blake, Monk, and Pen. Vantrump.
quasi d^as Maris.
Argonautes calmed the fury of the maritine and raging * Belgian Tritons; who,
maugre the mountainous waves and tempestuous winds, Augustus invito Neptuno
dixit se victoriam adepturum. Tranq.
invito Neptuno, engaged themselves to gain the Victory; the which at the last,
after many horrid and dismal conflicts, was obtained, and the confident
Assailants compelled to lore their resolutions, and stoop to their ancient
homage and fealty, submitting themselves to glorious and laudable conditions of
peace; for which noble and famous act he meriteth to be styled Imperator
Oceani, as Queen Elizabeth was Regina Oceani: Canba. vit. Eliz.
By whose example, and fame of his virtue, diverse Foreign Potentates, auditu
modo cogniti, known unto him only by report, have been invited to seek his
amity. Whose prudence in his courteous comport, and equal transactions of
peace, may seem to parallel, if not transcend his skilful stratagems in war;
Tam belli, pacisque artibus long clarissimus; Turselinus.
as it was said of the Emperor Probus: for which his fame will live,
Tiber.Vivit dum robora tellus,
Dum coelum stellas, dum vehit amnis aquas;
As long as the Sun, Moon and Earth endures; and which are able to wrest
Elogies out of reluctant and refractory spirits.

Yet such is the condition of Principality, that it is commonly accompanied
with hatred and envy.

Senec. in Thyest. Ista mundi conditor posuit simul
Odium atque regnum.
And our pious Aeneas wants no malignant and envious conspirators; but this is
no wonder or terror to his undaunted and invincible mind, well knowing rancour
to be the prosecutor of honor. Hercules after his unparalleld labors, Horat.
s. 2. Ep. 1.Comperit invidiam supremo fine domari.
Did find the Monster envy in the end untamed.


Who out of malice vent their venom against those, whose memory, if deceased,
they would honor.

Hor. l. 2. Ep. 1. Exhaustus amabitur idem. It was the stout reply of Queen
Katherine to Wolsey, Godw hist. He 1.8.
Quid est tam firmum quod invidia non ausit oppugnare? What is so firm that
envy dare not assault? Alexander was not free from Conspiracies, neither could
Caesar escape them, and hardly Augustus; who as Suetonius, Ne ultimae quidem
sortis hominum conspiratione and periculo caruit; wanted not the dangerous
conspiracies of the meaner sort of men; Yet he was so circumspect, that he
discovered and suppressed all their plots, priusquam invalescerent, before they
were of any growth, or mature: Even so fares it with our Augustus, a
circumspect and vigilant observer of malignants and malcontents; who also is
so well respected of the Sager and melior party, as Augustus was, that he wants
not Inquisitors to search into their secret treacheries, which are always in
their birth detected, and suffocated in their infancy, Et in herba oppressae.
Oculeus totus.
Besides, the All-ey'd Speculator of the Universe surveyeth all their
imaginations, and will not permit them to prosper in their impious
machinations, but to weave and work their own destructions, and to fall
headlong into that fatal pit they prepared for others.

Ovid. 1. de art. am. Nec lex est justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
Neither is there any law so right,
That whosoever plotteth death be deprived of light.
And it was the sentence of Cicero; Quem discordiae, Cic. Phylip.
quem civil bellum delectant, ex numero hominum ejiciendum, ex finibus humanae
naturae exterminandum; Whom discord and civil war delight, let him be cast out
of the number of men, and banished the bounds of humanity. But what need he
fear whom the Lord of Hosts favors? Me thinks I hear the Lord encourage him as
he did his servant Joshua, Josh. 1.9.
Be strong and of good courage; be not afraid, nor be dismayed; For the Lord thy
God is with thee whithersoever thou go.

Virgil. Nunc animis opus Aenea, nunc pectore firmo. CAP. XIII.
All Governments turn to Monarchy, from whence they came.

MOnarchy was from the beginning; Et primum in unoquoque genere, est causa
reliquorume ejudem generis, and that which is the first in the same kind, is
the cause of all the rest of the same kind; and as Monarchy was the first
Government, so all other Governments are derived of it, and return to it, as
the principles of things to one cause, and the rivers to one Sea: For whereas,
through the Tyranny of Princes, commotions of the ambitious, or mobility of the
people, Monarchy is sometimes changed into Polyarchy, and never cease until
it falls to the lowest, as the Poet, Si paulo summo decessit, vergit ad imum;
Which is apparent in the various vicissitudes of States, and especially in the
Roman; which after the expulsion of royalty, never rested until it had run
through all the forms of regiments, from Consuls to Decemviri, from Decemviri
to Consuls and Tribunes, and sometimes to Dictators, or Triumviri; yet in
conclusion, after the various trial of them all; they have been enforced to
have recourse to the principality of Monarchy: for though the splendour of
Monarchy for a season, through the interposition of seditious objects be
eclipsed, and its prerogative obscured, yet will it by degrees break forth into
it is majesty, and in it is Meridian and Throne seem more glorious. The Athenian
Democracy had it is fate, and the Roman Commonweal it is period; all in the end
subscribing to Monarchy, the worlds prime dignity: all Nations acknowledge this
verity; Jun. Noverunt Mauri, atque Indi.

And though there be some revolted States, which veil not to this
principality, yet are there but few, Jun. Vix tot itidem quot
Thebarum portae, vel divitis ostia Nili.
Scarce so many,
As there be gates of Thebes, or fertile mouths of Nile;


Here one, or there one, in comparison not considerable, and in probability not
perpetual; the great Turk gaping for Venice, and the Catholic King for the
Netherlands, two of the strongest; though Buchanan styles the Duke of Venice
nihil aliud quam legitimus Rex, De J. reg. S^o.
nothing else but a lawful King; and another doubts whether Venice sine duce
floreat: Cas. Joh. 201.
and Daniel Eremita denies Helvetia to be a Commonweal, because it is
mercenary, which is auctoramentum servitutis, Descr. Helvet. f. 512.
a sign of servitude; for he is not free says he, qui arma, vitamque non
propriae virtuti, sed aliorum commodis emancipavit, who subjecteth his arms
and life to the commodity of others, and not to his own virtue.

CAP. XIV.
1. The Counsel of one is more secret; and secrecy is the safety of a State.

2. The providence of one is more speedy, and active, and less subject to
dangerous delays.

3. One is less subject to corruption, and is sooner satisfied than many.

MAny arguments offer themselves in defense of Monarchy; some of which in so
clear a case I omit, lest I might seem candelam accendere in meridie; and will
only touch those are most material.

1. The Counsel of one is more secret and effectual; for though in a multitude
of Counselors there be safety, yet in the conduct of State affairs, especially
in Martial, wherein secrecy and speed are essentially requisite, a number of
Counselors is an incubrance. Scipio, contrary to the decree of the Senate,
transported his Legions from Sicily into Africa: Et nisi plus in ea re suo,
Val. Max. l. 8. c. 17.
quam Patrum scriptorum consilio credidisset, secundi belli Punici finis
inventus non fuisset: And if in that Expedition he had not believed his own
Counsel rather then the Senates, an end of the second Punicque war had not been
found. And it is a safe rule, Quod fieri debet, cum multis; quod facturus es,
cum paucissimis; What ought to be done, consult with many; but what you are to
do, communicate to few, for fear of discovery: For secrecy of council is the
safety of a State, which constantly produces happy events: As Tacitus, Primum
and praecipuum eorum quae ad faelicem exitum requiruntur est silere: Ann. 3.
The first and chiefest thing of those that are required to an happy end, is
silence. No man knew where Scipio marched but C. Laelius: Admovis annulum
Labiis Curt.
And Alexander imparting letters of secrecy to Ephestion, sealed up his lips
with his ring: And it is Seneca's counsel, Alium silere si vis, prius sile; If
you will have another silent, say nothing to him:

2. The providence of one is more speedy and active, which in all affairs is
most available; for commonly the opportunity of the design cannot brook
delays.

Ovid. Nam mora damnosa est; nec res dubitare remittit.
For dangerous is delay, wherein the matter cannot permit debate.
If Themistocles and Aristides, Scipio and Fabius Maximus had spent their
opportunity in Ratiocinations, when the peril was eminent, the enemy had
surprised them ere they had concluded what to act. Celeritas in conficiendo was
one of the Elogies of Pompey the Great, which Curtius principally ascribes to
Alexander, and Suetonius to Caesar, who were so sudden in their exploites,
that Justin relates of Alexander, Vt quem venire non senserunnt, videre vix
crederent; That whom they perceived not to come, they scarcely believed to see
him when he was come: And Florus of Caesar, Ante victum esse hostem quam visum:
That the enemy was overcome before he was seen.

3. It is more facile to find one good man then many, and less subject to
corruption or avarice! Rari quippe boni; Whereas many are more impious and
ravenous, ever sucking and never satisfied. Though among the Romans there were
severe Laws against corruption, and bribery; yet prevailed they little with
the Senate and people: for which Jugurth opbraided them with this Sarcarsme. O
urbem venalem, and mature perituramsi emptorem invenerit; O mercenary and
corrupt City, which soon would perish if it should find a Chapman: And Marius
well experienced in their conditions, brought into the Common Court bushels of
Silver to purchase the peoples Suffrages; for which reason Plato calls the
popular Government of the Athenians Nundinas venales, merchandising Marts,
Synt. Vae. Jur. l. 47. c. 15.
wherein poverty and ignorance so prevailed, that what they did vote one day,
they altered the other; as within one day they condemned and absolved the
Mytelenians. Wherefore as Tholosanus, it is more tolerable to live under the
Dominion of one, then of many, and to bear what Taxes, and Subsidies shall by
him be imposed; because the necessity of one is soon satisfied, whereas the
necessity of many is insatible; who if they should be satisfied one after
another, the substance of the State might be exhausted. The witty fable of
Aesop is not impertinent to this purpose: Arist. Rhet. ad Alex. c. 20
who faineth a Fox swimming over a River to fall into a pitfal, out of which
for a long space being unable to extricate herself, many Dog-flyes seized on
her and sucked out her blood: whose misery the Hedge-hogge pitying, offered to
pull off those Flies; but the Fox refused it, saying, that those Flies being
full did draw little blood; whom being pulled off, many hungerstarved ones
would succeed, and suck out all the blood remaining: The which they know to be
true by practice, who are experienced in the mutations of many Governors. It is
therefore more eligible and profitable to have one blood-sucker rather then
many, one Tyrant rather then more; for as Gessendus, De Philo. Epi. c. f. 1648.
In polyarchia sunt tyranni plures, in Oligarohia pauci, in Monarchia unus;
ergo ex pessimis melior. In the government of many there are many Tyrants, in
the government of a few are few, in the government of one but one: And therefore
of the worse the better, and consequently of the better the best: for
Contrariorum eadem est ratio: which Patricius though he lived under the Senate
and people of Siena, De Mon. and Arist l. 1. Tell. 1.
ingenously acknowledges; with whose sweet sentence I will shut up this
Section, Quid enim suavius aut magis optandum mortalibus, quam sub optimo rege,
and principe privatam agere vitam sine injuria, and populi ambitione: What is
more sweet, or more to be desired of mortals then to to lead a private life
under a very good King and Prince, without injury, or ambition of the people?

CHAP. XV.
1. The end of Government.

2. What Civil Liberty is.

3. Good Princes are the peoples Servants: and to live under such is the only
Liberty.

THe foundation, and conservation of Empires and Government being premised, the
end is to be inferred, which as the Philosopher, is causa causarum, 3. Met. c.
2.
because all things are for it.

The end then of Government is the peoples felicity: Arist. 7. Pol. c. 2.
and that government is best, according to whose ordinances (...), every one
may live happily: which happiness as Cicero, consists in these two things, in
their Protection, and in their Procuration of convenient necessaries: Tull.
off. 1.
Vt enimtutela, sic procuratio reipub. ad utilitatem eorum qui commissi sunt,
non ad eorum quibus commissa est, gerendae est. For as the Protection, so the
Procuration of the Commonweal is to be managed to the utility of those who are
committed to its charge, and not to the utility of those to whom it is
committed. And herein says the Philosopher, the excellency of a Prince
shines, that he has a care of his Subjects. (...), Arist. 8. Eth. c. 11.
that they may do well; as a Pastor has of his Flock: hence says he, Homer
called Agamemnon (...) the the Pastor of the people: for which reason also
Kings were anciently called Abimelech, that is pater meus; and lately by the
Romans patres patriae, Fathers of their Countries for their paternal
Procuration, L. 1. de repub. c. 1.
and provident tuition, as by Seneca tutores status publici: The Greecians
styled them (...) quasi (...), Barcl. l. 1. contra Monarc f. 206.
quod sint basis and firmamentum populi: because they be the foundation, and
stability of the people; and columen populi, and their supporters. Jun. Brut.
Sir Edward Cook calls the King of England Sponsus regni, the Spouse of the
Kingdom, who by the Ceremony of a Ring was wont to be married to the Kingdom;
intimating thereby the love and care Princes ought to have and bear to their
Spouse and State: and further adds that Kings are ex officio to govern and
preserve their people: which is the essential difference the Philosopher
puts between a King, and a Tyrant; Arist. 8. Eth. c. 10.
for a Tyrant says he, proposes (...) what is profitable to him self, but a
King (...), what is commodious to his subjects, whom Buchunan seconds, De Jur.
reg. apud Scotoi.
saying: Qui sibi gerunt imperium, non reipub. utilitati, qui regnum non dei
donum, sed praedam oblatam credunt, tyranni sunt, and Dei and omnium hosts:
who govern for their own good, and not for the good of the Commonweal, who
believe a Kingdom not to be the gift of God, but an adventitial booty are
Tyrants and enemies of God and all men.

And as the end of Government is the peoples felicity; so the felicity of a
Prince consists in the felicity of the people, as Grotius: Grot. d. I. b. and
p. 4. 92.
Imperatoris felicitas in subditorum felicitate consistit: And therefore are
Tyrants certainly much distempered in their judgments, who by impoverishing
and oppressing their Subjects produce their own ruin: for it is the Princes
profit to preserve his people; and the want of people is the destruction of a
Prince. Prove. 14.28.
Sint quibus imperet.

2. A Prince therefore (...), says the Philosopher, Arist. 8. Eth. c. 11.
if good, has a pastoral care of his Subjects: and as Bodin, Subditorum
libertatem et rerum dominia aeque ac sua tuetur, De Rep. l. ^. c. 3.
defends the Liberty of the Subject, and property of their substance, as his
own: And this kind of Government is called by Aristotle (...): Arist. 8. Pol.
c. 5. De Jure regni apud Sco.
Civil, and (...) of freemen; and as Buchanan, est niter liberos principatus a
principality among Freemen: and is therefore called Civil Liberty, or the
Liberty of the Subject by which the right and liberty of the Subject is
protected, and preserved; and in this sense is Nerva said Conjunxisse
libertatem and principatum, to have conjoined liberty and principality, which
is a mean between an abrupt service under the Dominion of a Tyrant, and
dissolute licentiousness, not much differing from an Ataxy, nor unlike unto
the Parthians, Clap. de arc. Imp. l. 3. c. 3. Silust. Call. 4. H^st.
who lived at random, magis sine domino quam in liberate, or as the
Aborigines, Genus hominum agreste, sine imperio liberum, and silutum, a wild
kind of people living loosely and freely without Government: But as Tacitus,
Optimis principibus modus libertatis placet. To the best Princes the mean of
Liberty is most pleasing: and so to rule their subjects by reason and law, that
they do live civilly without injury, and enjoy quietly their properties, and
liberty. Gessendus discourses exquisitely of the O^igine and Nature of this
Liberty. Men at the first being subject to none, De phil. Epi c. f. 463.
but living as they list, many debates, and dissentions intervened, that no man
could assure any thing for his own use, but that another might snatch it from
him: Neque possit dici libertus cum tot interveniant obstacula: vnde efficitur
vera naturalisque libertas deprehenditur potius in societate, in qua modo quis
pareat, societatisque legibus in commodum suum approbatis, agit quod superest
quicquid lubet, and jus habet in bona propria, quae nomo potest capere propter
publicam potestatem. Neither can this be called Liberty, because so many
obstacles interpose: Hence it is inferred that true Natural Liberty is rather
to be found in a Society: In which so as one obey, and approve the Laws of the
Society for his own good, whatsoever remains he may dispose at his pleasure,
and has right to his proper goods, which no man can take from him by reason of
the public power. So as true Natural Liberty is not to be found but in a
Society, Commonweal, or Empire: which is the Social and Civil Liberty, free
only from Service, Rapine, and Injury.

As the Philosopher: (...), For it ought not to be reputed service but safety,
to live under the Government of a Commonweal, or Civil State: and as the Poet
of a Prince, Claud. 3. Still. Fallitur egregio quisquis sub principe credit
Servitium; nunquam libertas gratior extat
Quam sub rege pio.
He is deceived who does repute it slavery under a good King to live: There is
no Liberty more sweet and gracious then under such a King.


And another to the same sense.

Gunt. Quae tibi libertas poterit contingere major
Quam regi servire tuo?
What greater Liberty can happen unto thee then to do service to thy King?
But I have rolled this stone long enough, and will conclude this point with
the complete description of Heremita Belga, De Helv. repub.
Illa demum vera est libertas, quae sub patrocinio ductuque principis, a
vicinorum incursu tuta, libere suis fruitur bonis: That only is true Liberty
which under the direction and protection of a Prince is safe from foreign
incursions, and freely enjoys his Estate.

3. And if we weigh in equal Balance the condition of a good Prince, with the
quality of a loyal subject, service may ^^ly and truly be ascribed to them
both: Princeps enim, as Joannes as Sasburiensis, De nug. Cur. l. ^. c. 1.
in eo praefertur caeteris, quod cum singuli teneantur ad singula, principi
onera imminent universa: For a Prince in this is prefered before others, that
whereas they are tied to several duties, the universal burden depends on the
Prince: and another to that purpose: Nec rex a populo magis differt, quam ut
majora onera far, Jun. Brut.
ac plura pericula obire teneatur: Neither does a King in more differ from the
people, then that he is bound to bear greater burdens, and undergo greater
dangers: An Empire is onus as well as honos, or onus honorarium; A burden
sweetened with honor, and so ponderous as Saules shoulders were unable, and
Dioclesians unwilling to bear: and which David's shoulders though equal to
Goliahs, stooped under; for Princes brows are girded with a Crown of Thorns as
well as a Crown of Gold. Homer induces Agamemnon complaining of the greivances
of a Prince in this manner: Patric. de Pric. f. 275.
Vitae nostrae dominam multiudiuem sortiti sumus, turbaeque omnino inservire
cogimur: We have taken upon us the charge of a multitude, which is Lord of our
life, and are altogether compelled to serve the multitude; which moved Tiberius
when he accepted the Empire, to exclaim onerosam sibi injungi servitutem; that
a burdenous service was enjoined him.

Antigonus at the best esteemed a Crown but a noble service, who observing his
Son to insult over a Subject, rebuked him, saying: Annon nosti regnum nostrum
nobile esse servitium? Know you not that our Kingdom is a noble service? It
was wise Counsel was given to Rehoboam: If thou will be their servant to day,
they will be thy servants for ever.

Jun. Brut.
To rule well then is not Immanitas, but munus; non vacatio, sed vocatio; non
licentia, sed publica servitus: not a privilege, but an office, Lib. de Civit.
dei. Qui aliorum utilitati nonsulunt, ii vere serviunt.
not a vacation, but a vocation, not a private license, but a public service,
which Augustine proves by an infallible argument, That whosoever does provide
for the utility of others, does truly serve them; who rule well provide for the
utility others; therefore who rule well do truly serve them: And it is the
Philosophers, that a right Prince ought (...), to respect and have a care of
the Common good; and such a Prince, says he, rules rightly, and such
Commonweales must need be right. Lips. polit?
Lipsius styles an Empire so governed Verum and legitimum imperium; and Cicero
Iustum, and legitimum imperium, a right, just, true, and lawful government,
which is undertaken, and ordered for the good and utility of the people: And he
is a right, just, true and lawful Governor, who chiefly casts his eye on the
public good, and believes that only to be lawful in his government, which he
believes to be expedient for the subject: Si ea libenter feceris quae velles
alium facere si ejus imperio subjectus esses. Clap l. 3. c. 3. 5. De arc. imp.
Epiphonema.
And it was Mecoenas advice to Augustus, that a Prince could err in nothing,
if he did those things willingly, that he would have another do, if he were
subject to his Empire.

Great Caesar's, it is a grand burden you bear on your shoulders, your glory is
short, and mixed with peril: for it is a true Apothegme, that he that will
command many, must contend with many; be right, true, just, and lawful Princes.

Virg. Ae. 6. Discite justitiam moniti and netemnite Divos. Arist. l. 5. Eth.
c. 1. vid. Ricob. Ibid.
Learn justice, which contains in it all virtue, and is the Royal Princes
virtue: as admirable as Hesperus, and Lucifer, says the Philosopher, and as
glorious as the Sun, says Picolominy; which is ordained for preservation of
the Commonweal, as the Sun for the conservation of the Universe; with which
being armed and adorned, ye may rule the people in equity, and protect them in
their rights and properties, without any intestine disturbance, or foreign
insolence: The glory and utility of the Nation being the ambitious scope of the
princely Dignity.

CAP. XVI.
1. Taxes are necessary in a Commonweal, or Empire.

2. A Moderation in their imposition to be observed.

3. Especially in the beginning of Government.

AS Arms are necessary for the conservation of an Empire; so are Taxes
necessary for the provision of Arms, without which they can neither be, or
act. According to the golden Sorites of Tacitus Nam neque quies gentium sine
armis, Hyst. l. 4.
neque arma sine stipendiis, neque stipendia sine tributis haberi queant. For
neither the quiet of Nations can be had without arms, nor arms without pay,
nor pay without Tribute: which is paid for the fruition of peace, that the
people may safely in quiet possess their Estates: So the Apostle, Romans 13.
For this cause also pay you Tribute; for they are Gods ministers attending
continually on this very thing; which Augustine expounds, Vt necessarium
militi stipendium praebeatur, That necessary stipend be paid unto the Soldier;
by which the Militia is maintained, and peace and quiet preserved: 2 Ki^. 9.12.
For which reason Solomon imposed Tributes, to fortify Men and Cities: And our
Savior Christ commanded Tribute to be paid, and paid it himself to Caesar:
yet was it an arbitrary Tax, and the production of an Arbitrary power. And as
Curtius, pecuniae sunt nervi belli, moneys are the Nerves of War; and as men
cannot walk without Sinews, no more can Military men march without money,
Quarum ob defectum saepius armae manibus excutiuntur, a^t frigide tractantur:
for the defect of which arms are often dashed out of our hands, Scorb. pol. 12.
or weakly handled: For though as Machiavel, valor is the principal cause of
Military success, yet are monyes the instrumental; And as Cicero, adjumenta
belli: by which the action of the principal agent is completed. Nero upon the
importunate supplications of the people was moved to abolish Tributes, and
Taxes, glorying therein, Quod pulcherrimum donum mortalibus daret: That he
should confer a goodly gift on the people: of which the Senate having notice,
Tac. hist. l. 13.
by their sage advice diverted him from his intention, Dissolutionem imperii
docendo, si fructus quibus respub. sustineretur, diminuerentur: Instructing him
that the desolation of the Empire would ensue, if the revenues by which it
should be sustained, Flo. l. 3.
were diminished. And therefore does Florus call them patrimonium reipub. the
inheritance of a Commonweal by which it is sustained and maintained: which
Publicola an honourer of the people well knew, Tholosan. Synt. Ju. Vniv l. 3.
c. 2.
who augmented the public Treasury by the people, for the good of the people
and Commonweal; And which for the utility of it he called Sanctum aerarium,
Summus ille administrandae Reipub. Magister.
A Sacred Treasury; and it, but in case of necessity, to diminish was
Sacrilege: Whence Cicero the great Master of the Roman Commonweal, infers
this conclusion, Cic. Ep. ad Q. fratrem.
Cum enim Imperium sine vectigalibus nullo modo retineri possit, aequo animo
cives part aliqua suorum fructuum pacem sibi aeternam and otium redimere
possunt; Seeing therefore Empires can by no means be retained without Tributes
and Taxes, the people ought with a contented mind to purchase their eternal
peace and quiet with some part of their revenues: For as Joannes
Sarisburiensis, De nugis Curi. l. 4. c. 6.
Populo nihil utilius quam ut principis necessitas suppleatur, Nothing is more
profitable to the people, then that the Princes necessity be supplied. And
though it is urged by some factious persons, that it is an unjust act in any
Prince upon any occasion to force the people to part from any part of their
property; yet in favorem Reipub. Clap. de arc. Imp. f. 115.
for the benefit and emolument of the Commonweal it is to be allowed and
approved; for God seldom gives any good things in this life which are free
from all evils: As the Poet truly, Omnia cum quodam veniunt incommoda fructu:
Commoditas omnis sua fert incommoda secum.
There Is no incommodity without some gain,
And all commodity with it brings pain.


And therefore that we may have the fruition of such public blessings, we
ought quietly to bear with such private discommodities.

Aut haec cum illis sunt habenda, aut illa cum his amittenda.
Either are these things to be had with the other,
Or else the other with these things are lost together.
Which was the resolve of Levinus Consul of Rome; Live. d. 16.
Quod respub. incolumis privatas res facile praestat; publica perdendo tua
nequicquam serves: The Commonweal being safe, preserves your private substance
safe; but being spoiled, your goods cannot be safe.

In the imposition of tributes and taxes a moderation is to be observed, and
not with heavy and unnecssary taxations, to exasperate the minds of the people:
For as Taiitus, 3. Histor.
we have seen many Princes, pecuniis acerbe conquirendis, plus sibi invidiae,
quam virium addidisse, by the bitter acquisition of moneys to have gained more
envy then power. 5 Pol. c. 6. Perablationes rerum conjuratioones instituuntur.
Turselinus.
And as the Philosopher, by taking away the goods of the people, conjurations
have often been invented, by which many good Princes have been molested, and
others ruined. Augustus, so called for his sanctity, by imposing a new and
grievous tax on the Libertines, that they should bring into the Treasury the
eighth part of their Estates, was the cause, as Dio says, of Tumults,
slaughters, and burning many houses; and, as the same Author writes, Lib. 56.
was compelled to remit the military taxation of the 20th part, which he laid
on the inheritances and legacies of such successors and possessors as were not
next of kin, because it seemed grievous and intolerable to the people. And it
was a dangerous oversight in Henry the seventh, otherwise a wise Prince, who,
as Sir Francis Bacon, crushed his treasure out of his subjects purses, caring
not to plume the Nobility and people to feather himself; for which Perkins in
his Proclamations opbraided him; and which incited the Cornish men to take up
Arms against him, Bacon Hen. 7.
who with their confident forces did shake the frame of his greatness, which
in all probability might have fal^en to the ground, had not fortune taken his
part: Who, as the same Author says, was grown such a partner with fortune,
that none could tell what actions the one, and what the other owned: The
Catastrophe of Dionysius is famous, Justino.
who was slain by his subjects for his intolerable taxes, having by them within
five years space exhausted the wealth of Syracusa: Tholos. Synt. Jur. Vniv. l.
3. c. 4.
And Parthenius, who was the Founder of new impositions among the Franconians,
was by them stoned to death: And what was the principal cause of the revolt of
the Netherlands from the Catholic King, but the immense and unsufferable
taxations imposed on them by the Duke of Alva? who exacted the tenth part of
their vendible goods; by which device in a short space he had almost swallowed
up all the Merchants Estates, Bodin de Repub.
they using to sell the same thing ten times over in a small time.

Quanto rectior Trajanus? who, for his good government might almost be
preferred before all the Roman Emperors, Qui ita gessit Imperium, ut omnibus
prope Romany Imperatoribus praefertur. Turselinus.
and especially for his protestation against extreme exactions; who compared
the public Treasury to the Spleen, by whose excessive increase and swelling,
the other parts of the Politic body did consume and languish: Contrary to the
conceit of Richeleus, who resembled the French to Columbus geese, out of whom
the old feathers being plucked, new ones would grow up the faster. But Adrian,
the Successor of Trajan, both for justice and goodness, so governed the
Empire, Vt sciat populi rem esse non propriam, and suam, That he conceived it
to be the peoples Weal, not properly his own. Ludovici pii Regis Galliae. Bod.
de rep. f. 767.
A golden precious Legacy was it of a dying King to his succeeding Son; A
vectigalibus and tributis abstineto, nisi te summa vis necessitatis, and
utilitatis publicae justissima causa ad hoc impellit; Abstain from Subsidies
and Tributes, unless the exceeding force of necessity, or a very just cause of
public utility compel thee thereunto. For if it could be, that the safety
and glory of a State might consist without extraordinary taxes, the subjects
would be more happy, and also the Princes.

The moderate indiction of Tribute is especially to be practiced by a Prince in
the beginning of his Government: As Tacitus, Novum Imperium inchoantibus utilem
esse clementiae famam, That the report of clemency is profitable to those have
newly taken upon them the Empire; which Germanicus wisely observed, who, after
he had reduced Cappadocia into the form of a Province, diminished some of the
Imperial taxes, Quo mitius Romanum Imperium speraretur, Ann. 2.
whereby they might expect from the Romans a milder government.

Which policy Mithridates neglected, and is for it censured by Tacitus,
acriorem fuisse, quam novo Imperio conduceret to have been more sharp, then
conduced to the settlement of a new Empire: wherein Rehoboam also erred; who,
upon the Inauguration into his Royalty, did not hearken to the supplications of
the Israelites concerning the diminution of their grievous taxes as heavy
burdens.

LIB. III. Of Religious Liberty.
CHAP. I.
1. The knowledge of God, and worship of God, are coincident and inseparable.

2. Religion is the gift of God, and not the invention of man.

3. Religion is the foundation of Humane Society.

4. Those Empires flourished best, were most addicted to Religion.

SOme put a difference between Religion and Piety; as if Piety should denotate
the knowledge of God, and Religion the Worship of God; the one being
Practical, that God is to be worshipped; the other Theoricall, that there is a
God; which are promiscuously used, but indeed coincident and inseparable; for
the Godhead being granted, worship does necessarily follow, Habet enim
venerationem justam quod excellit; Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 1.
for whatsoever excels has his due worship, either civil, or religious.

Religion is not a subtle invention of the creature, nor organum politicum, a
States Figment, or Political Engine, as Matchavel feigneth, forged only to
temper and quiet the minds of men in the times of peace, or to incite and stir
up their affections in the times of war; but it is a divine gift shed into the
souls of men, and so naturally rooted in the heart of man, Phil. Morn. l. 1. de
vera religione.
that it can with less difficulty be extracted out of the heart, then the
heart out of the body.

It is a Celestial Chain whereby God is linkt to man, and one man to another,
and is derived a religando, from binding, which signifies all the offices of
piety by which we are bound to God and our Neighbors; Cicero.
for which it is said to be Fundamentum Humanae Societatis, the Foundation of
Humane Society, by whose precepts and religious offices men are united together
in a Society, and conjoined in peace and amity, which are the foundation and
conservation of a Commonweal, which caused Romulus the Founder of the City,
and Empire of Rome, to begin his Empire by divine predictions, as old Ennius,
Ennius.
Augusto augurio postquam inclyta condita Roma est.

And Numa Pompilius his Successor, Flor.
ob inclytam viri Religionem, for his integrity in Religion, was by the Romans
requested to accept the Empire, who by Religion and Justice, did sway and keep
a Martial and fierce people in peace and concord, which are the two Pillars of
a State, without which it cannot stand; as the Poet truly, Senec. Thy. Act. 1.
Vbi non est pudor,
Non cura juris, sanctitas, pietas, fides,
Instabile Regnum est.
The State's unstable where virtue does not reign,
Nor Faith, nor Justice, nor Sanctity remain.
All which are comprehended under the notion of Religion, as Bodin exquisitely,
De Rep. f. 798.
Ab ea enim subditorum fides in principes, obedientia erga Magistratus, pietas
in Parents, charitas in singulos, justitia in omnes pendent: For from it
depends the loyalty of Subjects toward their Prince, their obedience toward
Magistracy, piety toward parents, charity toward every one, and Justice
toward all; whence it arises, that those Empires flourished best were most
addicted to piety. The Roman without question was the most magnificent and
glorious Empire the Sun ever shined on, and for its spacious extent above
compare: As the Poet, Mart. Terrarum Dea gentiumque Roma,
Cui par est nihil, and nihil secundu^.
Rome of all Nations is the Lady Queen,
To which the like, or second is not seen.
Romanae spatium est urbis and orbis idem. Vid. 2. F. Which as it surmounted
all others in excellency, so yet exceeds all others in piety, ascribing all
their Noble Acts to the Divine Power, believing thereby to gain the Government
of humane things: As Valerius Maximus. L. 1.
Ita humanarum rerum futura regimina existimantia, si Divinae Potentiae been
fuissent famulata: And which they obtained through their unfeigned devotion in
Religion, Hac enim sola Romana gens totum terrarum orbem subegit: Scorbon. Pol.
l. 11. c. 11.
For by this alone the Roman Nation subdued the whole world. Which Augustine
also conceived, Qui existimavit auctum a Deo Imperium Romanum, quod cordi illis
fuerat Religio, licet falsa; Who believed that the Roman Empire was augmented
by God, Grot. de Jur. bell. and pa. fo. 408.
because they did heartily reverence Religion, though a false one. Of which
Lactantius gives the reason, Quia licet summum hominis officium non reipsa,
tamen proposito tenerent. Though they did not really apprehend the chief duty
of man, yet had they a purpose so to do; for a willing mind avails much with
God. 2 Cor. 8.2.


In the next rank to the Roman Empire, for its exceeding greatness, may be
placed the Mohammedan, out of whose ashes and ruin it first did sprout, and for
its vast magnitude and immense power, may be second to it, Europ. Spec. f. 208.
being much larger then all the Territories of the Christian Princes,
embracing, as it is esteemed, eight thousand miles in Land, and of Sea as many;
whence their Prince is commonly called the Great Turk, and styled Imperator ter
Maximus, the very greatest Emperor; which Empire, at this day, is the greatest
the earth ever bare, except the Roman; and continually does his half Moon
increase, and likely still so to do, unless the Christian discords do decrease,
he being ambitions, and vigilant upon any such opportunity to invade any Nation
near him, Europ. Spec.
and that for his very exercise to keep the soldiers in action abroad, and to
avoid tumults at home.

And as the Romans were, so are they, wondrous religious and devout in the
exercise of their Religion: The Sultan reverently respecting the Priests, and
attempting nothing without the advice of his Mufty. The people also being
attentive and observant to their Ministers, and are so fervently zealous in
their offices, and duties of piety and charity, that if we truly weigh, In his
admonition to the Alcaron.
says Mr. Rosse, their justice, temperance, and other moral virtues, we may
well blush at our coldness in devotion and charity, and neglect of virtuous
actions, for which it may justly be feared, that those men will rise up in
judgment against us; And further adds, that surely their devout piety and
works of mercy, are a main cause of the growth of Mahometisme and the Turkish
Empire.

CAP. II.
The Roman and Turkish Empires permitted the exercise of diverse Religions,
without any pressure of conscience, unless they entrenched on the principles
of State or civility; and the objection answered, that among the Infidels many
errors did bear with one another, and that truth cannot stand with error.

THough the Romans abounded in the multiplicity of Gods, yet permitted they all
of what Nation soever to worship any of them, without restraint or pressure of
mind; so as the exercise of their Religion did not entrench upon the principles
of State or Civil Government. And such a reverent esteem had they of strange
Gods, as when they besieged any Town, Godw.
by certain enchanting prayers they would call them out, because otherwise they
believed it a matter impossible to captivate the City.

The Jews were much favored by Augustus, to whom he not only opened the
fountains of his bounty, but enjoined them to offer perpetual Sacrifices at
his own expenses for the safety of himself and Commonweal. Sueton. Tac. l. 2.
Ann. Huic calamitati occasionem frauds praebuisse tectas nomine religionis.
Lips. ibid. Sueton. vit. Cl.
But Tiberius for their frauds and uncleanness, covered with the Cloak of
Religion, fired their religious vestments, confined thousands of their youths
to the Island of Sardinia, and prohibited the rest.

And Claudius Caesar expelled them the City for their continual Commotions,
impulsion of Christ, moved by the confidence of Christ's coming, from whom they
expected a temporal Kingdom, as they now do.

Tiberius also incited by such uncivil insolences removed the Egyptians out
of Rome, who were, as Adrian the Emperor describes them, Genus hominum
seditiotissimum, Crinit. de honest. disciplina l. 12. c. 1.
vanissimum, and injuriosissimum, a most seditious kind of people, most vain,
and most injurious. Claudius utterly abolished the Religion of the Druides
(which under Augustus, Suet.
was only interdicted the Citizens) because it was dirae immanitatis, Caesar
Com. de bello Gallic.
a Religion of inhumane cruelty, and profaned their Altars with humane Hosts,
sacrificing their living friends, and clients to the souls of the deceased:
otherwise all sects, of what Religion soever, with their ceremonies, were
allowed their private exercises, whom the Aediles, Bodin. de Repub.
whose charge was to have a care of the true worship of the Roman Gods, were
not to molest.

And as the Romans, so do the Mahometans also condescend to the free exercise
of all Religions, and suffer all strangers, of what quality soever, to live
according to their several Religions, Clapmer de art. Imperii.
whether Roman, Persian, Greek, or Ethiopian; insomuch as Solomon, of all the
Turks most famous for his moderation and mild Government, could not be induced,
though importuned by the ardent requests of many, to force any religious Person
to the precepts of the Alcaron; whether it was by reason of the Doctrine of
Elharus, by whom the Turks were persuaded, that the Religions of all men were
acceptable and pleasing to God, Bod. de Repub. f 740.
quae a pura mente proficiscuntur, which proceed from a pure mind, or else did
deem it a barbarous act to impose violence on resolved minds, but rather by
gentle and mild means to draw their affections to their Constitutions; Bod. ib.
for which reason some of the Christians are succored by the Turks charitable
largitions: Also that they pray heartily every day in their temples, In his
admonition to the Alcoran.
that the Christians may embrace their Alcoran, and become their Proselites, as
M. Ross relates.

But here is another objection to be refelled, Tholos. Jur. univ. f. 368.
which is strongly pressed, That liberty of Religion among infidells might with
less peril be permitted, because their religions were erroneous, and saepe
errores plures se compatiuntur, and often many errors do bear one with
another; but truth cannot stand with error; which experience convinces of
falsehood. For among the Romans the Religion of the Jews was permitted, which
then was the true Religion: and afterward there were many Christians in Rome,
of whom Paul was one, which then was the true Religion, who were so far from
opposition, that they professed themselves subject to that power, and made
prayers and supplications for it. So are there among the Turks many Christians
who are true professors of the Gospel, and live peaceably without any
reluctance. And whereas it is averred, that truth cannot stand with error: the
opposite is manifest: for among the Jews there were diverse Sects, Scribes,
Pharisees, Essaes, and Sadduces, of which that of the Sadduces was notoriously
erroneous, denying the resurrection of the dead; yet lived they under one
Government, and were admitted to one Temple.

Among the Christians also there always were some errors. Peter denied the
calling of the Gentiles, which Paul preached, Gal. 2.11.
yet were they both Apostles and Coadjutors in the Church: And in the Church of
Corinth there were diverse errors concerning the Doctrine of Baptism, 1 Cor.
1.13.
yet were they of one Congregation. The selected Apostle determines this
doubt, who upon such differences resolves the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.19.
that there must be heresies, which from the plantation of the Church have
been, and so shall continue unto the harvest, the envious man always sowing
tares among the wheat, which by our Saviors rule are not to be plucked up,
lest you root up the wheat also.

CAP. III.
That religious liberty was practiced in the Primitive times among Christians,
and in after-ages permitted by many Christian Princes.

AS liberty of Religion was permitted by the greatest Heathen Emperors, so was
it allowed by the most prudent Christian Princes: Bodin. de Repub. l. 4. c. 7.
For if we survey the state of the Church as it was in its minority before the
constitution of Christian Princes, it will appear that in Tertullians time
there were one hundred and twenty several sects in the Christian Church, and
every one permitted the exercise of their several professions without any
disturbance or discord: And afterward, whenas under Theodosius reign there
chiefly flourished in the Church two sects, Nihil est periculofius quam in
dusas sententias s^indi civitatem. Bodin. de rep. f. 743.
Catholics and Arrians, which number, by the judgment of Bodin, is more
obnoxious to civil dissentions, then that of many; for one by nature is
contrary to one, and not many to one; so as when many differ among themselves,
certain means are interjected between the extreme contraries, which makes them
less perilous, and more peaceable; yet did the prudence of Theodosius so
moderate and temper them, that they by his Edicts were induced quietly to
practice their several Religions; and though all the Provinces were full of
Arrians, Perpiu.
ut nullus fuit angulus orbis terrae, ubi non fuerint Arriani de bacchati, that
there was no corner of the earth where there were not raving Arrians, yet did
the moderate Emperor abstain from coercive violence, and used only pious and
gentle means to reclaim them, and especially by maintaining the Council of
Nice, and educating and instructing his issue and Alliance in the Catholic
Religion, having therein good hope, that they in time might be drawn to follow
his Royal and pious example; by which mild and godly means he by degrees did
attenuate and enervate the vigor of that numerous and furious Sect, and
prevailed more with his goodness and clemency, then all the Arrian Princes did
with their severity or cruelty; for which Athanasius, who by them was thrust
into exile, inveigheth against them, for that they used the judicial power
against those contradicted them, and whom they could not persuade by argument,
they labored by stripes and imprisonment to hale unto them. Grot. de J. B. and
P. f. 78.
Atque ita inquit, seipsam, quam sit pia, and Dei cultrix, ostendit. And
therein, says he, their religion manifests it self how pious and godly it
is: alluding to that place of the Apostle, Galat.
as Grotius conceives, where it is said, But as then he that is born of the
flesh persecuted him that is born of the spirit, even so is it now. Theodoric a
prudent and valiant Prince, though otherwise censured for his cruelty, extended
his goodness and indulgence to the divided Christians then differing in
opinions: and gave them free license to profess their several religions
without any interdiction; which liberty of religion is at this day allowed in
Transylvania, Valachia, and the remains of Hungary, with Poland: of which it is
said, If any one has lost his religion, let him seek it in Poland, and there
he shall be sure to find it: Europ. spec. f. 159
And it was a worthy saying of Stephen King of Poland, That God had reserved
two things unto himself, in which he cannot have his equal, Ex nihilo aliquid
facere, and dominari conscientiis, To make something of nothing, and command
consciences.

So Maximilian, that famous Emperor maintained this Doctrine, that it was an
intolerable tyranny to domineer over men's consciences; and it was his advice to
Henry the third, King of France, that there was no sin so great as to force
men's consciences.

And Charles the fifth his Successor, though of a contrary opinion, yet
permitted he the Religion of the Augustane Confession in all Countries, Cities,
Sleyden.
and places of the Empire, and commanded that all the associates of that
Religion should peaceably use, and freely enjoy their estates, possessions,
requisites and privileges, and afterward by advice of his Theologues employed
those of that Religion in his military affairs, whom he called his black Bands.

And Henry the third King of France, (after many civil wars and bloody
massacres, occasioned by the enthralling of devout consciences, in which were
forty thousand Hugonets miserably slaughtered) observing, Jeam. de Seris.
that notwithstanding their holy leagues, and dubious battles, the Hugonets
still prevailed, learned this lesson, Que le bras, and le chair ne peuvent
forrer les ames; Que les maux spirituelles requirent remedes spirituelles, que
la foy ne se plant point avec violence aux caeurs des homes. That the arm and
flesh cannot force minds, that spiritual maladies require spiritual remedies,
that faith does not plant it self by violence in the hearts of men; for which
reason he granted to the Hugonets freedom and liberty of conscience; to which
the Divine Resolve of the late Parliament of England, etc. may be annexed,
contained in their Declaration in answer to the Letters of the Scotch
Commissioners, Feb. 17. 1648. As for the truth and power of Religion, it being
a thing intrinsecate between God and the soul, and the matter of Faith in the
Gospel being such as no natural light can reach unto, we conceive there is no
humane power of coercion thereunto, not to restrain men from believing what God
suffers their judgments to be persuaded of.

CAP. IIII.
1 Liberty is either external, or corporeal, and may be forced; or internal,
and mental, and cannot be compelled.

2 Our Savior compelled none to receive his Doctrine, and his Disciples had no
Commission to command, but to teach and instruct.

3 It is Irreligion and tyranny to force the consciences of men.

THe power of doing what one will, is the liberty opposite to servitude; and is
external, and possible to be forced. The liberty which is (...), within us, Ar.
l. 1. de An. G^ffend. ne philof. Epicur. in f. 1594.
as Epicurus, is internal in the will and mind, and is (...) impatible; Quod
adeo solum sit vere liberum ut impediri perturbarique nullatenus queat; which
alone is so truly free, that it can by no means be impeded or molested. The
soul is invulnerable and impregnable, and cannot be conquered or inslaved;
which caused some to scorn death; as among the Heathens, Cato, Antony,
Cleopatra, Brutus, Cassius, and many more; and among Christians, the glorious
Army of Martyrs, who triumphed over death.

Currius of Alexander.
The mind of man is by arms invincible, and was not conquered by the great
Conqueror, who could not imperare animis and linguis. And only by ratiocination
and argument it may be convinced, or by consent or belief persuaded; for
Liberty of Conscience is a natural right; and therefore our Savior compelled
none to receive his Doctrine; Grotius.
but est Dominus non cogens, he is not a constraining Lord, but committing his
liberty to the will, said publicly to all, If any man will come after me; and
to his Apostles, Will ye also go away? And his Disciples were not Commanders,
but Instructers and Teachers, which was their Commission: Compulsion and
terrene penalties are out of his Jurisdiction, whose Kingdom was not of this
world, which he acknowledges, not only in speech, but in practice; for when
the Disciples would have commanded fire from heaven to have consumed the
Samaritans, Luke 9.36.
he rebuked them: And when he was apprehended by the Chief Priests and Elders,
Mat. 26.53.
he could have commanded legions of Angels, but would not. It is Irreligion to
take away the liberty of Religion. So Tertullian, Clap. de act. imp. f. 139.
ad irreligiositatis elogium concurrit: This concurreth to the commendation of
Irreligion to take away the liberty of Religion, and strictly to forbid the
opinion of Divinity, that it may not be lawful for me to worship whom I will,
but shall be compelled to worship whom I will not; 2 Cor. 1.29.
and therefore says the Apostle, We have not Dominion over your faith.

The history and Doctrine of Christ is not comprehended by reason and argument,
but by belief and faith, which at the first hearing is not admitted into the
minds of men, unless by the secret assistance of the Spirit of God; the which
to whomsoever it is given, or denied, is for some peculiar internal causes to
us unknown; and therefore as Grotius, Grot. de Ju. B. and P l. 2. c. 20.
non humano judicio punibilis, is not punishable by humane judgment: And for
this reason does the fourth Council of Toledo decree, Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 55.
Nemini deinceps ad credendum vim infer; cujus enim vult miseretur Deus, and
quem vult indurat. That henceforth no man be enforced to believe, for God has
mercy on whom he will, Clap. de arc. imperit.
and whom he will not he hardens; and therefore is such unconscionable force
called by Nazianzen, animorum carnificina, a torture of minds, and is indeed a
spiritual tyranny.

CAP. V.
1 Kings and Emperors were from the beginning, as well Priests as Kings.

2 They had the ordering of the affairs of the Church, as well as of the State.

3 They nominated Bishops, and deposed Popes upon just causes.

4 That the Pope first arrogated to himself Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and
encroached also on the civil, endeavoring by force to abr^gate the Royal
freedom of Princes, and to subject their Consciences by his Bulls of
Excommunications to his tyranny.

IF we revolve the ancient Monuments of the Christian Church, many examples
will occur, in which, as in a glass, may clearly be seen the bloody and fatal
events which usually attended the enforcement of religious consciences; wherein
the Pope, who proudly proclaims himself the Head of the Church, was the
principal Author and Actor, as by the sequel may appear.

Kings and Emperors originally were mixed persons, as well Priests as Kings. Mos
apud Judaeos fuit ut eosdem reges and sacerdotes haberent: Justia. l. 13.
Ir was a custom among the Jews, that Kings and Priests were accounted the
same: As the Poet of Annius.

Virg. Rex idem hominum Phoebique sacerdos. So was it in the Heroique and
ancient times among the Grecians, (...). For the King was an Emperor, 3 Pol.
c. 3.
and a Judge, and Lord of those things concerned Religion: And among the Latins
and Romans, Virgil Aene. inferretque Deos Latio.
King Faunus was the first instituted Religion in Italy, from whence their
Temples were called Fana, which after was propagated by Aeneas, and at the last
reduced into an order by Romulus and Numa; Clap. de arc. imp. fo. 311.
whence it was a Law among the Romans, Rex sacrorum praeses esto, Let the King
be President of sacred things.

And after the expulsion of the Kings of Rome, the same honor was resiant in
the Emperor, from the time of Julius Caesar who first united them, and so
continued in the Christian Empire till Gratian, who first refused the
Pontifical habit, as (...) unlawful to a Christian; and after Theodosius had
dissolved the College of Pontifices, and all the rest of the Priests, did the
Emperors notwithstanding retain the Supreme power over the Christian Church;
as Isaiah prophecieth, Isa. 49.23.
Kings shall be their nursing fathers, and their Queens their nursing mothers;
which Leo in his letter to Leontius intimates; Clap. de arc. imp. f. 32.
Debes, inquit, incunctanter advertere Regiam potestatem, tihi non solum ad
mundi regimen, sed maxim ad ecclesia praesidium esse collatam. You ought,
says he, undoubtedly to observe, that the Royal Power is not only conferred on
you for the Government of the world, but especially for the rule and safeguard
of the Church. And as another, Demetrius Comatenu Clap. ib.
Solo sacrificandi excepto ministerio, reliqua Pontificalia privilegia
imperator repraesentat: The ministerial exercise of sacred duties only
excepted, the Emperor represents all other Pontifical privileges, who is
to dispose and order the affairs of the Church: (a relic, of which in these
corrupted times still remains; of which Mr. Herbert Herbert, Hen. 8. fo. 291.
makes mention, that the Emperor must first put on the habit of a Canon of
Sancta Maria Dellate in Rome, and after that of a Deacon, before he can be
completely invested in his Imperial Dignity) And heretofore the Popes when they
were installed, Pier. de Moulin. b. d. l. foy.
paid to the Emperor, as their Sovereign Prince for their investiture twenty
pounds in gold, and were by the Emperor punished, and deposed, as subjects to
the Emperor: As Constantius, the Son of Constantine the Great chased Pope
Liberius out of Rome, and substituted Faelix in his place.

Whence it is probable, the English Maxim, as many other, dimaned: Rex est
persona mixta cum sacerdote: The King is a mixed person with a Priest, in whom
is comprised both Jurisdictions, as well Ecclesiastical as civil, which caused
William the Second to urge the said privilege of the Emperors against Anselm,
desiring to be an Archbishop, and conspiring to have his Pale from the Pope,
as Matthew Paris historizeth it: Rex Willielmus Secundus allegavit, quod nullus
Archiepiscopus, aut Episcopus Regni sui curiae Romanae, aut Papae subessent;
praecipus cum ipse omnes libertates haberet in Regno suo, quas imperator
vindicabat in imperio. King William alleges, that no Archbishop or Bishop
should be subject to the Pope or the Court of Rome, especially seeing he should
have all the liberties in his Kingdom, which the Emperor challenged in his
Empire; which was to chose Popes and Bishops when he would.

Yet though the Scepters of Kings and Princes were primitively free by all
right, and honored with the Supreme authority in all causes whatsoever, yet
has the Pope in these later days, blown up with boiling ambition, through the
lenity and piety of Princes involated on their Rights and Liberties, and not
only arrogated to himself Ecclesiastical Supremacy, but encroached also on the
civil Jurisdiction, claiming to himself the deposing of Princes, and disposing
of their Kingdoms, Bellar.
either in ordine ad bonum spirituale, in order or relation to a spiritual
good, or else in regard of his Pastoral Authority from Christ, under which
notion he conceives all the world to be subject to him; Azorius.
In quo alii sunt actu, ut Christiani, alii potestate and jure, ut Pagani; In
which some are actually subject to him, as Christians, and others in
possibility and right, as Pagans; and by such subtle relations is he maintained
to be Totius orbis Dominus, The Lord of all the earth. Europ. spe.
And to that purpose does he take upon him the highest place of honor, far
above all Princes and Monarchies of the world, Pier. de Moulin. praef. ib. Buck
de le foy.
setting the Emperors at his feet, ordaining and declaring that all Kings
ought to kiss his feet, and that there is no other name under heaven but that
of the Pope. Thus does he labor to mancipate the divine liberty of Princes to
his humane inventions, and usurped Dominion, and as Christ's Vicar, which title
he affects, would be reputed Lord of all the world, whereas Christ's Kingdom
was not of the world.

An insufferable tyranny imposed on this Royal freedom of Princes, which the
Pope from the times of Gregory the seventh has injuriously usurped, and for
the space of two hundred and threescore years, nothing has been more frequent
with him, then the Excommunications of Kings and Emperors, and the Oblations
and Donations of their Empires and Kingdoms, Pier. de Moulin. b. d. l f 7^
unless of such who have by might maintained their rights and liberties against
his usurpations, whence proceeded infinite bloody wars, above one hundred
battles, and the surprising and sacking innumerable Cities; Clap. de arc. imp.
f. 32.
from whence proceeded the common Proverb, as by Guichardine is observed:
Caesares timere and odisse proprium est Ecclesiae: It is proper to the Church
to fear and hate all Princes, John White in the way to the Church.
and that truly, for the Pope has excommunicated, deposed, and murdered forty
several Princes: And I deem it neither exorbitant nor impertinent to give you a
taste of some of his notorious and abominable tyrannies, and primarily of that
against John King of England, whom for maintaining his privilege in nominating
the Archbishop of Canterbury to the Monks of that Convent, Innocent Third.
he menaced to excommunicate, and interdict his Kingdom; and the King in
requital threatened to abolish the Popes authority, and to expel the Clergy,
which they both acted; but the Pope not only excommunicated him, but conferred
his Kingdom on the King of France, to conquer it at his own charge and peril,
by whose invasion he was enforced to renounce his rights and liberties, and to
subscribe to the Popes tyrannical demands, who gave him Absolution, upon
condition to yield himself Vassal to the Pope, Math. Par.
and his Kingdom fewdary to the Church of Rom; and that he should pay yearly a
thousand mark in silver, as an obligation of his servitude. And most
presumptuous was the arrogance of Julius the Second, God. Hist. Hen. 8. f. 1.
who was more like to Julius Caesar, whose name he assumed, then to Peter,
whose Successor he pretended to be, but indeed was like to him in nothing, more
then in cutting of Malcus his ear, of whom the Poet pithily.

Gunterus. Jam nec far crucem Domini, sed tradere Regna
Gaudet, and Augustus mavult, quam praeses haberi.
To bear the Cross of Christ he does not now rejoice,
But to give earthly Kingdoms is his heavenly choice.
He deposed the King of Navarre, and gave his Kingdom to Ferdinand King of
Castile, the which he obtained, and his Successors as yet retain; who having
Spain on the one side, and the Pyrenaean Mountains on the other, was unequal to
the Popes fury, and the Spanish force.

He also vain-gloriously enterprized to crush and suppress Lewis the XII. King
of France, God. Hist. Hen. 8.
to which design he invited many Princes, and more especially Henry the Eight
King of England into a confederacy against him; but Lewis, swifter then
opinion, marched with all celerity to Ravenna, and in one battle defeated him
and his Allies, Primum Pontificium fulmen a Gallis removit. Bar.
and boldly assembled a Council at Pisa against him, and rounded his French
Crowns with this inscription, Perdam Babylonem, I will destroy Babylon, who was
the first that removed the Pontifical thunder from France, whose glorious steps
the Duke of Saxony follows, and became the Popes terrible Antagonist, who
animated by the powerful pen of Luther, and principally moved with the
ridiculous impostures of his avaricious indulgences, first in Germany opposed
him, and abandoned his usurped authority, and within a few years after through
Luthers fowl discoveries of his abominable impieties, and Antichristian
inventions, he grew so odious and obnoxious to the pious and devout Princes of
Germany, that his Papal power was slighted and exploded by the better part of
it.

Then Henry the Eight of England, (the Popes Quondam Champion, who by his pen
and sword protested to defend him) having by various experiments discovered his
perfidious and ambitious practices, and that he made use of his power for his
own designs, shook off the Pontifical yoke, and declared himself Supreme Head
of the Church, God. Hist. Hen. 8. f. 98.
and maugre his fulminant Bulls called him Tyrannum, praedonem orbis terrarum,
and incentorem Bellorum: A Tyrant for his presumptuous usurpation on the
privileges and liberties of Princes, contending by his Excommunications to
force their consciences to his tyrannical will; and a plunderer of the
Christian world by his Masses Auxiliary and Propitiatory, visiting of Relics,
Obits, fees of dispensation for prohibited Marriages, and especially by his
Indulgences of Grace to remit sins, and free souls out of Purgatory, by which
spiritual Monopolies he had raked to himself and Clergy the most flourishing
Mannours of England, besides huge masses of money, which therefore in the
Statute of Henry the Eight against the Papal Authority, are called, 28. c. 16.
the great impoverishing of the Realm of England.

And lastly, an Incendiary, or an Alarm of war, God Hen. 8. f. 4.
dividing the Christian Princes, and moving them to denounce war against those
he disaffects. Vt tanquam Nero alter sedens otiosus, orbem terrarum incendiis
conflagraret. That as another Nero sitting in his Chair should fire the world
with the flames of war, increasing his own strength by diminishing others. For
which detestable enormities he abolished the Popes authority, demolished their
superstitious Convents, and conferred their Revenues and substances on his
deserving Subjects, and so became the terror and Quartane Fever of the Papal
power; that whereas England in derision by it was reputed the Popes Ass, is now
transformed into a Lion, and is an horror to the Pope, whose magnanimous
resolution, his virtuous Heir Edward the Sixth pursued, and had utterly
extirpated all the Relics of Popery, had he not been unfortunately prevented
by an immature fate; yet was it after prosecuted by the incomparable Spirit of
a Feminine Regent, Queen Elizabeth.
who stoutly withstood the Popes ambition, whom though he degraded and deposed,
exposing her Dominions to conquest, yet did she subdue Sanders, and others his
Substitutes in Ireland, and sink and rout the Spanish invincible Armado,
destinated by him to her destruction: So as that famous Queens Motto, Honi soit
qui mal y pense, Evil be to him that evil thinks; and the common proverb, Malum
consilium Consultori pessimum, Evil counsel is worst to the Councellor, square
fitly with the Popes evil resolutions and deserved confusion; for he that
enterprized and expected with his tyrannical Bulls to have enslaved the
consciences of Christian Princes, was by the divine power prevented, and his
usurped authority abandoned, abolished, and abhorred by the better part of
Christendom, and by vindicating to himself an extorting power over Princes,
lost a main part of his own, which like Sejanus his horse, overthrew his own
Master. Jean. de Seres.
In whom is exemplified the observation of Henry the third King of France, Que
ceux que veulent les consciences Mastister pensens Conquerir le ciel, perdont
souvent ceque p^ssede en la terre: That those who would master the consciences
of men, thinking to conquer heaven, lose often that which they possess on
earth. As the Pope, besides all the reformed Churches, has lost the Supremacy
of Venice, the Spaniard the rule of the Netherlands, and the Emperor the
command of the Helvetians and Basileans, and all for Tyrannical Impositions on
free conscientious minds. And which also is abundantly verified in the deserved
confusion of the late King, which calamity originally proceeded from the
prelatical tyrannizing over men's consciences, who not only chased some
sincerely pious persons out of their native country into foraigne parts, and
howling wildernesses, and imprisoned others, but also attempted to subject the
rigid and resolved consciences of the Scots to the Prelaticall Discipline,
which fomented and bred a dangerous and tempestuous storm in the North, though
happily calmed by the prudence of moderate Mediators; yet upon the like
occasion for liberty, the eradicating of Episcopacy, and abrogating the
Pontifical authority, an implacable war was raised by the provocation of the
Prelates; and the public pretense, No Bishop, no King; which therefore is
truly by Mr. Needham called Bellum Episcopale, as derived from the corruption
and tyranny of the Bishops, and which the late King, being Episcoporius, with
all his might maintained; so as by degrees it infested all the parts and
corners of this Commonweal. For which our puissant Armies, and victorious
General opposed him, marching with this Motto in his mouth, Liberty to all
tender and oppressed consciences; his army also for the most part being
composed of such conscientious, devout, and piously disposed persons, whom all
the money of this Nation would not have tempted to have passed through such
desperate dangers, if they had not had confident hopes of an uncontrouled
freedom of conscience; the which after many fierce encounters, and dismal
disputes, with his conquering arm, supported by the divine power, he obtained:
and which at this time by many Declarations, Ordinances, and Acts is settled in
this State, worthily permitting liberty to those who have won it with their
blood, and gained civil and religious liberty also; whence proceeded the
Tragical Catastrophe of the capital Actor, and the expulsion of his issue out
of these flourishing Islands, which is by act irrevocable, and by reason
unalterable.

Virg. Dicam equidem licet arma mihi mortemque minantur. For God does not an
extraordinary act without an extraordinary end. Now how the Lord has favored
the acts of our renowned General, and worthy Protector, none can better
perceive then his enemies, who by their impatient zeal to introduce Popery,
protect Prelacy, and to corrupt and confound the purity of Religion have settled
the one, and extirpated the other: and whom in their scurrile rimes they
derided with the name of a Scenicall King, have been a means to raise him to
this height of dignity; and may say as Juno said of Hercules, In lauds suas
mea vertit odia. Do you think that God did all these things for nothing? For
whosoever shall in his heart ponder and consider the evident graces and
blessings the Lord has poured on him, cannot believe he will leave him, but
complete and accomplish this wondrous work in him. For the great works of the
Lord are contrary to the conceits of men: and though extraordinary miracles be
ceased, yet the divine power is always assistant to the ordinary power of
nature, by which many times are produced extraordinary acts above the reach of
humane apprehension; which is apparent in the various and mavelous victories
obtained by him in the name of the Lord of Hosts, whose providence among us
are not to be out matched by any story: And if we impartially and judiciously
examine the present postures of the State, we shall clearly see the Lords
workmanship shining in it according to the power of nature, or rules of policy.
For though the malignant and incessant enemy is sedulous in forging stratagems
to its disturbance and distraction, yet is it by the divine finger so firmly
founded on the faithful and pious affections of the more potent party, that
they are presaged before conceived, and prevented before perpetrated. For
though there remain in it many factions, of which the Royal and Papistical
party are most seditious, and both numerous; the one containing in number forty
thousand fighting persons, Europ. Spec.
and the other perhaps more: yet are the first by their just censures of
sequestrations discouraged, and by their late compositions so obliged, that
they tremble to enterprise any public act against the State, unless such as
are fugitives, whose estates are exposed to sale, and no way considerable. As
also the second is much diminished by their recantations, and acceptance of the
oath of abjuration. Many, and some of the chiefest, preferring the blessings of
their estates, before the curses of Rome: and both the less perilous, because
irreconciliably divided as Opposites in Religion, which has a potent sway over
the minds of men; and besides are unarmed, and upon any pregnant suspicion
safely secured, either by transporting them into foreign Islands, or by
removing them to remote places, according to the ancient custom of the Romans,
who were wont so to dispose of their seditious Delinquents: The considerable
party only remains, which generally profess themselves Protestants, and
concord for the most part in the principal Doctrine of Salvation by Faith in
Christ, though they otherwise vary concerning some disputable questions, and
less material, and are the less turbulent, because permitted severally without
restraint to exercise their consciences: Besides, most of them are by strong
and Politic ties linked unto the State, either by public employments, or
private interests; many of them having at a considerable rare purchased the
Revenues and Lands of the late King, Praelates, or Delinquents: that though
some of them through envy, or other sinister conceit distaste the present
proceedings, and others vary among themselves concerning some niceties of
Religion, yet will they upon any turbulent or seditious occasion, as one man,
unite their forces to repel the common enemy, Compellit in unum commune
periculum etiam inimicissimos. Ar. Pol. l. 5. c 5.
as common dangers use to d^aw and force together the greatest adversaries, and
not to expose themselves and estates to the cruelty and tyranny of merciless
Invaders, and the rapine and spoil of a necessitous and ravenous rabole of
desperate malcontents, who suborn furious Emissaries to scatter the seeds of
discord and sedition in every place, which may make all things opportune for
their rebellious incursions, of which we have received an ocular testimony in
the last tumultuous hurley-burley, which was but momentary, by reason that the
Royal Party, for fear of future censures were dismayed, and the confiding party
by rewards and interests incited, whereby that tempestuous sedition was
suddenly suppressed, and like a thundering storm, after a clap or two, vanished
into vanity: So stable is the settlement of this State founded on the rock of a
confident and trusty party, with the true-hearted Militia, that the impetuous
winds of commotions, and outrageous tempests of rebellions, cannot shatter or
shake it; but the more violently they beat upon it, the more miserably are they
dissipated; which is opposite to the conceit of the Royallists, who are led
with a fond hope that the inheritance of the Crown is indissolubly entailed to
the issue, and cannot be cut off; whereas succession was lately invented to
avoid competition and interregnum, and has often been interrupted by arms, and
that Gordian knot cut in pieces by the Sword. As Canutus with his Sword did cut
off the right of Edmond, and was by it crowned King of England: and so by it
did Stephen disinherit Maud the right heir; and in the bloody wars between the
Houses of York and Lancaster, wherein fourscore of the Royal blood perished, he
who had the sharpest sword carried the Crown; and as Baron Thorp, of all those
five and twenty Kings and Queens, which have since William the Conquerours time
ruled among us, there were scarcely seven of them who could pretend legally to
succeed their former Predecessors, either by lineal or collateral title; and it
is malum omen, Turselius
to the Royal Issue, that such Princes as have been for tyranny expelled by
their Subjects, have never been remitted, though they had stronger forces to
attempt it. Though Tarquinius Superbus had valiant sons to second him, Florus.
and the redoubted King of Porsenna with a proud Army to assist him, and force
Rome to his subjection, yet were they ignominiously repelled, and for fear
forced to retreat: And after that, he through the powerful Alliance of Manlius,
had drawn into a confederacy with him thirty several Potentates to restore him
to his Royalty, yet were they by the Dictator Aurelius Posthumus vanquished,
and forced to flight, and the Tarquinian hopes thereby utterly frustrated. The
like was attempted by Hippias, the brother of the Tyrant Pisistratus for his
tyranny slain by Harmodius and Aristogiton, who endeavoring to vindicate his
brothers slaughter, was expelled Athens, and thereupon procured Darius with
formidable forces to invade Athens in his behalf, and for his restitution; yet
were they by the invincible virtue of Milti^des profl^gated, and two hundred
thousand of the enemies destroyed. Atque horret animus meus memoria repetere;
and it makes my heart tremble and bleed to remember how many horrible and
deadly battles (which the large and copious pen of Livy is scarce able to
repeat) the late King and Prince have undertaken to regain their forfeited and
lost Royalty, wherein they have been continually discomfited, to the
destruction of the one, and exclusion of the other, and to the lamentable ruin
of a great part of the Nobility and Gentry.

Quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi. Quae igitur intemporiae illos
tenent? What kind of frenzy therefore possesses these men, who being not
void of reason, will not be instructed by experience, the Mistress of
unreasonable creatures? for the Fish escaping the hook, will carefully beware
of the fatal bait: And as the Satyrist, Hor. l. 2. Sat. 7. Quae belluaruptis
Cum semel effugit, reddit se prava catenis?

But these vanquished, subdued, captived, do still persist in their obstinacy,
and daily subject themselves to inevitable hazards and mischiefs; how much
better and safer were it for them to submit to Gods providence, and not to
fight against heaven, and his Ordinance, or kick against the prick? How happy
would they be to live in peace and unity, and under the Sovereign wings of his
Highness protection, to enjoy the public blessings of peace, plenty, liberty,
and prosperity, by which mutual intercourse his Highness may be the more
encouraged to make this Commonwealth the most glorious Empire in the Christian
world? the which through the Omnipotent assistance, his Highness with all his
nerves, both by Sea and Land, contendeth to accomplish, and perform that which
was heretofore proffered to the late King by him and others, whereby, maugre
the might of any foreign force, he may render Britain incomparable as well as
invincible, which indeed in it self it is; as the Roman Poet acknowledges,
Tib. El. 4. Invicti Romano Mart Britanni. Alb Gent. de armis To.
Unless that it be betrayed by our selves, Per dolos malos, aut per malitias
malas, by wicked treacheries and malicious practices, which may by providence,
and a stable settlement of the State, be prevented, as now it is: As also by an
offensive and defensive league with some foreign Nation, which is easily
obtained, because by it advanced; according to the Motto of Henry the Eight,
Cui adhaereo praeest, Herb H^n. 8.
whose part I take prevails; by which policy he became an honor to his
Allies, and horror to his enemies, comparing Spain and France to a pair of
Scales, and England to the Tongue, which turned either of them it assisted.
Howsoever England with his wooden brazen walls has not been unable to
withstand them both, and to defeat the Spanish invincible Armado, which at this
present never were more potent and victorious, being daily augmented by the
care and providence of our Themisthocles.

CAP. VI.
1. Man's understanding is imperfect, especially in spiritual things.

2. It is the cause of many sects in Philosophy, and more in Theology.

3. Among Philosophers, arguments, not torments, were their moderators.

4. Among Christians in the primitive times, admonitions, not persecutions,
were the weapons of their warfare.

5. The Arrians and other Heretics first used force to maintain their
opinions, and afterward the Pope and his adherents.

THe object of the mind is verity, which is properly attributed to the divine
mind; as that which is credible, to the humane: For truth is the adequation of
the notions of the mind, with the very nature of things; and that is said to be
true, when the mind represents the express image of the very thing, which
the wife Artifex of the Universe had with him from eternity, and therefore
cannot be ignorant of any thing: But there is so great obscurity in the nature
of things, and in the minds of men such obliquity and variety, that oftentimes
they assent to falsities and uncertainties, which they conceive to be true and
firm: and therefore he is said to be happy and wise who can apprehend the
causes of things.

And because sempiternall, spiritual, and matters of faith are remote from
sense, therefore is the knowledge of them more uncertain and obscure, Scalig. de
Sub. Exer. 1.
and as it were umbratilis. To the intellection of which the sharpness of our
conceit being directed, is as weak as the eye of an Owl to the beholding of the
Sun, and which the natural man receives or discerns not, 1 Cor. 1.14
and are such as no natural light does reach unto.

Which natural imbecility has been the impulsive cause of all the Sects in
Philosophy, and heresies in Divinity: And though never so strange, or absurd,
yet have their authors and founders invented probable arguments, or inferred
sacred sentences in their defense.

There are several sects in Philosophy, and more in Theology, because more
remote from sense: The first amounts to the number of ten, and the other to ten
times more. Epiphanius writes against 80. heresies in his time, and Augustine
against 90. general Councils have erred: The Council of Nice condemned
Arrianisme, and the Council of Arminium confirmed it. Pier. du Moulin in his
preface to the Boucl. d'le Foy.
And the day is not more contrary to the night, then the ancient Councils are
to the new. Et fuit hoc omnium aetatum commune malum, says one truly: And this
has been the common calamity of all ages; heresies and schisms daily sprouting
up in the Church, and like Africa, Perpin.
aliquid novi semper pariens, always bringing forth one new error or another.

Among Philosophers, arguments were their arms, who friendly contended to find
out the truth: So did the Prince of the ancient Philosophers deal with Socr.
and Plato, Arist. 1. Ethic. c. 6.
professing, (...): Though they were both his friends, De Sub.
yet he deemed it more sacred to honor the truth: and so the Prince of the
modern Philosophers Scaliger protested, Amicus Plato, amicus Aristoteles, sed
magis amica veritas. Plato was his friend, Aristotle his friend, but truth his
dearest friend. Such inquisitors of the truth used no torments to extort it,
but arguments, non bacillinis sed Philosophicis to find it, and (...) was their
victory.

Among Christians also in the primitive time, though there were sometimes
divisions, questions, envy, and strife of words, yet were they through the
Apostles admonitions contained in charity: And after the Apostles age their
Successors did not use arms and violence to propagate and settle the Gospel;
the weapons of their warfare were not carnal, but spiritual, who did not
contend with Bands of Disciplined Soldiers, but with aid implored of God, not
with arms, but with the Spirit, not by beating, but by admonishing and
reproving.

But after the Church was corrupted, and disceded from the Apostolical
Doctrine, and that by divine Authority they could not maintain their novelties,
arms and all instruments of cruelty were invented for the establishing of their
strange Doctrine, and became more barbarous and inhumane, then ever Nero,
Domitian, Niceph. l. 11. c. 3.
Decius, and Dioclesian were: As the Arrians and the Donatists under the Reign
of Valens, and tyranny of the Vandals, exceeded all the Heathen Persecutors in
cruelty and immanity.

And in these last and worst days, whenas the Bishop of Rome had usurped the
pre-eminency, and began to lord it over other Christian Churches, imposing
greater and heavier burdens on Christian consciences; as Prayers for the Dead,
Purgatory, Indulgences, and other impostorious trumperies: Then began the Popes
tyranny imperiously to reign over Christendom, which did not only infest the
privileges of Princes, as has been asserted, but afflict the purest
professors of the Gospel: Then did his Phalaris Bulls thunder and roar about
the Christian Horizon, fire and sword were the arguments he ejaculated against
devout consciences: The Hussits first come upon the Stage, who submissively
imploring of Ferdinand the Emperor to be admitted to receive the Sacrament
under both Species, Ludov. Aurel. Ann. Eccles. f. 460.
were by Pope Martin interdicted, and a sacred war denounced against them,
wherein Zisca their blind, yet quick-sighted Captain (who saw as much in
military affairs, as Homer did in Poetical Lays, and became so terrible to the
enemy, that he supposed a Drum of his skin would fright an Army) behaved
himself so skilfully and stoutly, that he overthrew the Emperors Army, and
forced him to vail to their conscientious demands, and not only to grant them
the sacred mysteries under both kinds, Id. 46^.
but to permit them to possess those goods they had taken out of Popish
Churches, until they were with the value redeemed, with many other reformed
immunities.

Next ensued the Scene of the Lutherans, the Hussits Successors, who were, as
one styles them, Id. f. 445.
Lutheranorum Antesignani: They likewise marched under their Sacred Banners,
and were confident propugnators and defenders of the Primitive purity; and in
spite of the Popes thundering power, acted their parts so courageously and
piously, that they withdrew Denmark, Swethland, and Norway, with the Duke of
Saxony, Lantsgrave of Hesse, and some other Princes of Germany, from the Popes
Sup emacy, whose pious president the Hugonets in France, and the Protestants in
England, with the reformed Netherlands did follow, to the Popes perpetual
detriment, and preparation to his downfall; the which he fearing, and finding
upon this defeat many in all his Jurisdictions to fall from him, repaired to
his Vulcanian Conclave, Europ. Spec. f. 112.
and there forged the infernal Inquisition, which he per antiphrasin, calls the
Holy House; wherein is executed the more then barbarous tortures on men's
consciences, apprehending any upon the least suspicion of any their supposed
Heresies, of affinity or connivance which Heretics, and the bare reproving
sometimes of the Clergy's lives, or the having any book or edition prohibited,
and especially a Bible in the vulgar language: discovering men by the pressing
of all men's Consciences, whom they charge under an high degree of mortal sin,
Ib. v. 113.
and damnation to appeach their nearest and dearest friends: and if they know
or suspect them to be culpable therein, proceeding against the detected with
such secrecy, and severity, as that they never shall have notice of their
accusers, but shall be urged to reveal their very thoughts and affections.

The which though he intended to have propagated through all the Catholic
Dominious: yet was it not only rejected by Germany and France, Europ spe. ib.
and solely retained in Italy, and Spain: but also most of the Catholics
within their Precincts (who perhaps if need were, would die for Religion)
abhored the very name, and mention of the Inquisition, as being the greatest
slavery the world has tasted: And which inhumane, and unnatural violence of
planting and propagating of Religion was execrably detested of the virtuous
Heathens, and is abominated of devout Christians, as opposite to pious
Principles. For if it were aproved, and grateful to God: why did he send his
Son unarmed and indigent of any external power? why did he restrain, and rebuke
Peter endeavoring with his drawn Sword to defend his Master? why did he send
his Disciples as Sheep among the midst of Wolves, and naked into all parts of
the World, as his Father sent him? And when did it come into the mind of the
Apostles to persuade, and allow of any such violence, or their Successors, in
the Primitive Church to practice any such force? neither is the distinction of
any force, that the Christians deposed not Nero, Dioclesian, Julian, and
Valens, because they were unequal to them in Military power, otherwise it was a
strange dissimulation in Paul to instruct the Romans to obey the power of Nero,
if he lawfully having had power, might have deposed him. Prayers were their
arms, and admonitions their Inquisitors: The Churches Chief Master prayed for
his enemies: and Paul his Selected Apostle exhorts us to pray for all men,
which is acceptable to God our Savior, who would have all men come to the
knowledge of the truth: And it is also his admonition, instruct with meekness
those that oppose themselves: if God peradventure would give them repentance to
the acknowledgement of the truth; 2 Timothy 9.25.
For they who like lost sheep go astray, may be drawn to the fold, and the
rank Tares may become sweet Corn.

CAP. VI.
1. Knowing and obstinate Heretics are after the first or second admonition to
be rejected.

2. What Excommunication is.

3. It was rarely executed in the Primitive Church.

4. Qui argumentis convicti persistunt tamem in heresy propugnanda. Whit. de
sacra script. l. 1. c. 2. Grot. de Jur. Bell. and pac. f. 505
The abuse of it by the Pope and Prelacy, has caused it to be neglected in
most reformed Churches, and to be utterly abrogated in ours.

THere are Heretics Scientes, who know themselves to be Heretics: and who
convinced by arguments as Whitaker, persist in the defense of heresy: either
for some temporal commodity, or desire of vain glory: And who being carried
away with self-love, ambition, or popular applause, build the City of the
Devil upon false and new opinions: not respecting the truth but their
positions, because their own inventions, whom Augustine only places in his
Catalogue of Heretics: Such Heretics after the first and second admonition
are to be avoided and rejected, as the Apostle prescribes. 1. Tim. 3 10. who
offend not from ignorance and infirmity, but from voluntary malice and
obstinate industry.

From the admonishment of such a one we are to abstain, and to leave him to
himself as one condemned by himself, as the Apostle speaks, and Turtullian
interprets, Elegit sibi in quo damnetur, He has chosen to himself his own
damnation.

Excommunication is a separation from the Communion and Congregation of the
Church: C. 8.
and of it is understoood that of Matthew, If he shall not hear the Church, let
him be as an Heathen and a Publican; 1. Tim.
whose body as the Apostle speaks, is delivered to Satan: That is, put out of
the Church, out of which Satan is Lord and Master; as among the Jews grievous
offenders aposynagogi fiant, were cast out of the Church, which was to shun
their Communion, as the Jews did the Samaritans.

Neither does Anathema the greater and more grievous Excommunication, signify
much more; of which in the Gospel we have no example, only a general Precept 1
Cor. 13. Whosoever loves not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be an Anathema:
which by the Glossary is expounded, Esse execrationem extra Communionem honorum
usque ad adventum domini: To be a vehement spitting out from the Communion of
the good, until the coming of the Lord; and it is rendered by Hesychius (...)
execrable, and unsociable, as one unworthy the society of good men: and
according to the Greek Original, signifies Deo dicatum, dedicated to God, and
so separated from the Communion of men for his impiety, that he is only left
to Gods judgment: All which only sets forth unto us a separation from the
Communion of the good, and the dereliction of them so separated to the
judgment of the Lord: Tac. An. 1. l. 1.
Deorum enim injurias Diis curae esse; for offenses against God are by him to
be censured: Upon which ground Tiberius dismissed one to the sentence of
Jupiter, who was accused for a contempt against Jupiter: and all heretical
opinions are properly offenses against God, and therefore to be referred to his
judgment: and as the Civilians in the like case, Satis deum ultorem habent,
have God a sufficient revenger; and how such errors shall be punished at the
day of of Judgment, Grotius de Jur. b. et p.
nemo potest scire nisi Judex, says Salvianus, no man can know but the Judge.
And therefore does Christ, Mar. 6.12. referr the judgment of such as refuse
his Doctrine, until the day of Judgment: and whosoever, as Mr. Ashkam, shall
think himself competent to judge of it here, is nimis Curiosus in aliena
republica.

Excommunication was rarely executed in the Primitive Church, of which we have
but two examples in the Gospel: the one against the Incestuous one, whom Paul
commanded to be delivered to Satan: 1 Cor. 5.
a sin abhorred of the Heathens, and severely punished by them. The other
against blasphemers, 1 Timothy 1.20.
Hymeneus and Alexander, whom Paul also delivered to Satan. An offense mortal
under the Law, Levit. 24. and dangerous under the Gospel, if not repented of:
Math. 12.31. And of all offenses the highest, because it is an impiety against
God himself, whereas other offenses are transgressions against the Law.
Tholos. Synt. Jur. Vniv. l. 33. c. 12. contra ipsa deitatem impie agis.
And this was Paul's rod of Correction which he rarely used; so rare a censure
was Excommunication in the purest times: For the excess of which St. John
condemns Diotrephes in casting his Brethren out of the Church.

But how Excommunication the last, and grievous punishment of the Church, In
his Adue.
as Mr. Whitgift calls it, has been abused under Popery and Prelacy, is
notoriously evident: and especially by the Pope, whose continual practice was
to inflict it on any one as a Delinquent, either in matters of Faith, or
Manners; Pier. de Moul. Buc. de la foy. f. 506.
or by it to press men to restore things lost, and to pay their debts within a
certain time: and sometimes without any cognizance of the cause. Kings and
Emperors were most obnoxious to this censure, who being Excommunicated as the
Pope pretends, could not without sinning exercise their Jurisdiction: and
what Acts and Sentences during the Excommunication they pronounced, were null
and void; by which rule he also deposed them: From whose institutions the
Prelates originally derive their Jurisdiction; and in their discipline do not
much vary, setting the Papal Altitude and Latitude aside: and therefore was our
Arch-Prelate styled Alterius orbis Papa: who likewise transgressed in the
excessive abuse of excommunications, as Whitgift a Patron of Praelacy
acknowledges in these words; In his Admonition.
That excommunication, the last and greatest punishment in the Church, is
commonly used in many trifling matters, and therefore is commonly neglected and
contemned: I pray God, says he, restore it to its first purity: neither was by
either of them the pious end of Excommunication respected, 1 Timothy 5.
which was that for shame of the separation, the separated should be drawn to
repentance: as the Apostle says of the Incestuous one, That his flesh may be
destroyed, and the spirit saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: and also of the
blasphemers, 1 Timothy 1.20.
That they may learn not to blaspheme; whereas their ultimate drift was to heap
up monyes and enrich themselves by formal Absolutions and pecuniary
Satisfactions, supposing gain to be godliness, and through coveteousnesse by
fained words to make merchandise of men's souls, 1 Timothy 5.6.
as the Apostle speaks: For such and like abominable abuses, the Popes
Excommunications are slighted, and despised of most Princes, and the Papal and
Prelatical Iurisdicton neglected in all Reformed Churches; and in our Church
utterly abolished: as it was resolved in the late Parliament by the declaration
of the Lords and Commons in answer to the Scotch papers, the fourth of March
1647. That the discipline of Ecclesiastical censures, and other punishments for
matters in Religion are disclaimed, as grounded on Popish and Preletical
Principles, and not to be revived again under any Image and shape whatsoever.

CAP. VIII.
1. Who out of ignorance and infirmity err, are not to be rejected, but to be
instructed with meekness.

2 Such as abuse their liberty, are to be punished.

THere are others, who out of ignorance and infirmity err; Grot. de Iu. b. and
pa. l. 2. c. 20.
and are called by Salvianus, Haeretici non scientes, qui bono animo errant and
affectu Dei; who err with a good mind and affection toward God, beleiving
that they honor and love God; and such, says Whitaker, are not Heretics,
though they harbor a false and erroneous opinion: De sacr. scrip. l. 1. non
est haereticus, qui falsam and haereticam opinionem colit.
For else Cyprian had been an Heretic, who defended Anabaptisme; and
Augustine, who had been a Maniche; and Peter also, who denied the calling of
the Gentiles, and that they were to be excluded the communion of Saints; yet
was it false, Et in ea Petrum errasse, says Whitaker; and therefore are such
falsities properly errors, as Augustine said of himself, Errare possum,
haereticus esse nolo: For an erroneous conscience may be a good conscience, as
Paul's was when he was a Jew, Bar. Ann. 173.
and Tertullian whilst he was a Montanist.

Such consciences are tenderly to be cured, not to be cauterized; and as the
Apostle advises, 2 Timothy 2.25.
are to be instructed with meekness, and gently to be entreated, or convinced
by arguments, as Augustine did the Manichees, whose divine reasons for their
Elegancy and Excellency merit a literal repetition: Illi saeviant in vos qui
nesciunt, Grotius de Jur. bell. and pac. l. 2. c. 20.
says he, quocum labor verum inveniatur et quam difficillime caveantur
errores: Illi saeviant in vos qui nesciunt quam rarum, and arduum sit carnalia
phantasmata piae mentis serenitate superare: Illi in vos saeviant qui nesciunt
quanta difficultate sanetur oculus interior is hominis: Illi in vos faeviant
qui nesciunt quantis gemitibus, and suspiriis fiat, ut ex quantulacumque part
intelligi possit Deus: Postremo illi in vos saeviant qui nullo tali errore
decepti sunt, quali vos deceptos vident: Ego vero in vos saevire non possum,
quos sicut meipsum illo tempore, ita nunc debeo sustinere, and tanta patientia
vobiscum agere, quantum mecum egerint proximi mei, cum in vestro dogmate
rabiosus, and caecus fui; Let those tyrannize over you who are ignorant with
what labor truth is to be found, and how hardly errors be avoided: Let those
tyrannize over you who are ignorant how rare and painful a thing it is to
overcome carnal imagination with the serenity of a pious mind: Let those
tyrannize over you, who are ignorant with what difficulty the eye of the inward
man may be cured: Let those tyrannize over you, who are ignorant with what
great groans and sighs it may be effected that God may in part be known, how
small or little soever: Lastly, let those tyrannize over you, who are not
deceived with any such error wherewith they see you deceived: But I cannot
tyrannize over you, whom I ought to endure as others did me upon the same
occasion, and entreat you with so much patience as my neighbors entreated me
when I was outrageous and blind, in the same opinion. And thus did the Apostle
Paul also deal with the Jews, who before his conversion was exceeding zealous
in their Religion, and by it had learned to bear with the infirmities of his
brethren, who heretofore was in the same kind weak himself. And therefore
exhorts he himself and others who are strong, to bear with the infirmities
of the weak; and not to please themselves, Romans 14.1.
but to receive the weak in faith, and not to doubtful disputations, lest by
such scruples they drive them away in more doubt then they came; but to apply
arguments to their capacities, and in charity to comply with their simplicity.

Yet are we not to bear with the looseness of such ungodly men, as the Apostle
calls them, Jud. v. 4.
who turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, and prefer natural liberty
before religious and Christian: Not unlike to the Cynique Philosophers, who
supposed nothing to be obscene or dishonest, which was according to the liberty
and course of nature; and what they were not ashamed openly to profess, they
blushed not in the eyes of all men to act; Lud. Aurelius. Ann. Eccles. f. 475.
or rather like unto the Adamites, Quibus, as Aurelius, nullum indumentum,
promiscua erant connubia, vagi concubitus, nulla temporis locique habita
ratione; who wore no apparel, used confused and promiscuous marriages, and
common uncleanness, without any respect to time or place. And such indeed are
the Libertine, Antinomians, Quakers and Ranters in these latter days, who,
under the pretense of piety and Christian liberty, practice all obscenity and
impiety, licentious persons, and loose in all wicked and abominable actions.
Whereas such liberty is slavery, Nam qui facit peccatum, Joh. 8.34.
servus est peccati, He that commits sin, is the servant of sin: And where the
spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty: And therefore such Libertines are not
to be suffered, but ought to be eslaved to the sword of the Magistrate, which
the late Parliament of England, in the Declaration of the 27. of November 1649.
does signify and pronounce in the sight of God and man, That by whomsoever
they shall find this liberty abused, they shall be ready to testify their
displeasure and abhorrencie thereof, by a strict and effectual proceeding
against such offenders: And accordingly, by the Act of August 1650. has it
provided for the removal and punishment of such transgressors, whose
blasphemies are in the said Act recited and severely censured. In pursuance
whereof, by the Government of the Commonwealth of England Art. 37. is liberty
denied to those who abuse it, to the civil injury of others, and the actual
disturbance of the public peace on their parts, or to such as under the
profession of Christ hold forth the practice of Licentiousness.

CAP. IX. The Epilogue, or Conclusion of all.
SEeing then it is clear, that through the weakness of our understanding in
natural as well as spiritual things, which are only preceptible by the light
of the spirit, many errors and heresies of necessity must arise, and that the
envious man continually sows tares among the wheat, and tyrannical
impositions on men's consciencs have augmented and increased the Schisms of the
Church, and have been the fomenters of bloody broils, to the detriment of the
authors; and that Christ and his Apostles in all their teachings and practice
abstained from external violence, in gentleness and meekness instructing all
men, we ought to refrain from all unnatural and unchristian force, and not to
constrain the will of man to believe, or seem to profess that which he
knows not, but to put on the meekness and gentleness of Christ, and above
all things Charity, which is the bond of Christian perfection, and to become
all to all men, to save some, and to pleasure our neighbor for his good to
edification. Which charitable course (the God of love and charity be blessed
for it) is at this present practiced in the purest Christian Churches. As first
in Germany, in which, though wives in doctrine dissent from their husbands, and
parents and children follow diverse Sects, and brothers and sisters sometimes in
one and the same family nourish discrepant opinions, touching many heads of
Divinity; yet as Scorbonerius, one of that Nation writes, Pol. l. 3. c. 11
In politicis and domesticis rebus concordes vivere comprehenduntur, in
politic and domestique affairs are observed to live peaceably, otherwise
hoping that the unbelieving man may sanctify and save the unbeleeving woman,
and believing brothers and sisters the unbeleevers. Then in France are the
Hugonets, and the Catholics as they distinguish them, by the prudency of
their Princes reduced into a charitable and peaceable condition; who wisely by
an Edict have provided that all illiberal revilings and unworthy contumelies on
either part should be removed, and not any thing said or acted which might tend
to uncivil commotions, but that it should be lawful for every one to follow
the judgment of his own mind; whereupon a blessed and placid calm ensued: And
as one, Coalescunt mutua concordia mentes omnium, The minds of all by mutual
concord grow together: Perpinian.
And so rare is their moderacy and temperate behavior, that notwithstanding
the provoking commemorations of the late intestine wars, they have mutual
commerce, Moderator. f. 27.
and frequently dispute together, not only the Clergy, but the Tradesmen one
with another, and defend every one his opinion civilly and peaceably, without
any convitious distemper, in a friendlinesse, and mutual compassionate part,
and perfect charity, each hoping and praying for the others conversion.

In the Netherlands also, though there be within a small compass professed
diverse Religions, Europae specu. f. 176.
and that the Papacy there has two thirds in it; yet does every one peaceably
profess the liberty of his mind without any molestation and contradiction,
which have always been a Receptacle and saving Sanctuary for such afflicted
consciences.

The Helveteans likewise, though of different judgment in matters of Religion,
yet are they united by concord and charity: Daniel Heremita de rep. Helv.
and in civil and public Affairs which concern the safety of the Country,
Ne quic quam nisi in commune consultant, They act nothing but by consultation
in common. And also in Transylvania, Valachia, and the remains of Hungary and
Poland, in which many Religious do abound, notwithstanding their conscientious
diversities, do they embrace each other in the drmes of civility and charity.
And whenever wars and massacres have been made for the cause of Religion,
enquire from whence they have proceeded? whether from the Roman, or from the
Reformed Churches; and we shall understand that the Romanists first provoked
them, and they only took up arms in their own defense. Which in it it self
is apparent, if we call to mind the Sacred Wars, as they call them, but indeed
accursed, both in Germany and France, which were principally, as has been
before intimated, indicted by the Pope and his Confederates, or Holy Leagues,
as they style them. And whence dimaned that abominable and execrable massacre
at Paris, wherein forty thousand persons were inhumanely butchered, which is
notorious and odious to all Christendom, whose children are often frighted
with the memory of it. Neither is the horrible and lamentable slaughter to be
superseded in silence, which lately was perpetrated by Papal Forces on the
innocent and innoxious Protestants in Savoy, where they who by flight escaped
their fury, were driven from their comfortable habitations, and so eagerly
prosecuted, that they were compelled to hide themselves in Caves, or wander on
the Mountains, and either perish for want of food, or common with the Beasts.
Who now begin to revive the bloody differences have a long time been buried in
the bowels of Charity, and to provoke the conscientious Christians to defensive
arms? Woe be to them from whom the offense comes, says our Savior, who
without doubt will raise the spirits of pious Princes, as he always has, to
protect his own cause, and to vindicate the persecutions of his Church. And in
this does their Religion show it self from whence it comes; not from God,
qui odit crudelitatem, who hates cruelty, and abhors all humane hosts, and
bloody devotions: The sacrifice of God is a spiritual sacrifice, and the
weapons of his warfare are not carnal, but spiritual, yet mighty through God
for the pulling down of strong holds, and casting down of imaginations, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: Prayers,
persuasions and tears are the arms of the Church, by which kind of weapons,
Perjin. Orat. f. 528.
as an ingenious Jesuit confesses, Terrarum orbis sub Christi ditionem
potestatemque subjectus erat, the whole earth was subjected under the power and
dominion of Christ. And which kind of Christian combat the Parliament in
answer to the Scotch papers March 13. 1647. prefers, declaring it to be
better to leave God to deal against many Errors, then to use his authority for
the suppressing of one truth, the weapons of fasting and prayer being both more
Christian and available in such cases. Tyrannical Force, and infernal
Inquisitors, being the Devils Instruments to support Error, and too weak and
feeble to withstand spiritual arms, and the power of Christ. The counsel of
Gamaliel therefore which he gave unto the Jews, and persecuters of the
Apostles, in this case is worthy the observation and practice, Acts 5.38.
to abstain from force, and let them alone; For if this Counsel, says he, or
work be not of God, it will come to naught; and if it be of God, ye cannot
overthrow it, lest happily ye be found to fight against God. Ovid.
Exitus acta probat, says the Poet; neque ulla res quale quidque sit magis
ostendit, quam quae quidque sequatur; The end approves the acts; neither does
any thing more demonstrate the quality and quiddity of the thing then the
consequence of that thing.

Esd. 4.41.
Magna est veritas, and praevalet: Great is truth, and mighty above all things,
It is (...), Cansabon.
as it were an immersable Rock that cannot be drowned; and though through
swelling and ambitious waves it may be obscured, and overwhelmed, and not
appear to the sight of such as respect only the present; yet will it without
doubt remain invincible, and at the length gain a full and glorious Victory;
Euro. spect. c. f. 148.
Truth being by infinite degrees stronger then falsehood, having God to bless
it, Heaven and Earth and all the Creatures of God to witness it, that maugre
the malice of all enemies, and craft of all inventions, it must needs in the
end prevail, and have the Victory: So as it may well be hoped, That Universal
Liberty thus moderated, in process of time, the foundation of Heresy may be
rooted out, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine, by drawing their
followers and adherents by gentle instructions, and powerful persuasions; and
Truth being left to the decision of the Conscience, and operation of the spirit
which is one, may in the end prove Universally Victorious, and Christendom
reduced to Unity, and Truth; The contrary effects whereof continually happen by
the Tyranous impositions of opinions on men's Consciences: from whence intestine
and bloody Wars arise, as have been clearly, and fully demonstrated.

But I am stricken with an ingenuous fear, Jun. Sat. 1. Vt nudis pressit qui
calcibus auguem,
Aut Lagdunensem Rhetor dicturus ad naram.
least carried away with an unsatiable desire of the investigation of the
truth, I should incur the popular censure of prolixity and as the Poet, Mart.
Ne nimius videar seraque coronide longus,

And that my discourse should go beyond its last, and the favorable respect
of the Reader; for as Patricius, Non tam dicendi mihi ratio habenda, quam
audiendi; And therefore have I superseded many animadversions, which opportunly
might have been added, and have chosen rather to offend in brevity, then
forgetful of a mediocrity to transgress in superfluity; In which according to
Varro's judgment I shall seem void of reprehension, who averreth, Neminem
reprehendendum esse, qui ad spicelegium reliquit spiculam: That no man is to be
reproved who out of the abundance of a Crop shall leave some ears of Corn for
the Gleaner; And so conclude with the close of the Poet, Horat. Jam satis est;
ne me Crispini sciria Lippi
Compilasse putes. Verbum non amplius addam.


FINIS.

