THE SCOTTS Declaration, In Answer to the Declaration, sent unto them by their
Commissioners now at LONDON, From the Honorable Houses OF PARLIAMENT OF
ENGLAND: Expressing their Care to prevent the effusion of Christian B^ood; And
their Affections to Reformation both to Kirk and State.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons, That this be forthwith printed and published,

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom: Com:



Printed, for Edw. Husbands and John Francks, and are to be sold at their
shops, in the middle Temple, and next door to the sign of the King's Head in
Fleet Street, Septem. 1. 1642.

The Scots DECLARATION.
THe General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland having received a Declaration
sent unto them by the Commissioners of this Kingdom now at London, from the
Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England, expressing their care to
prevent the effusion of Christian Blood in that Kingdom, and their affections
to Reformation both in Kirk and State: And having taken the same to such
consideration, as the Importance of so weighty matters, and the high estimation
they have of so wise and honorable a meeting as is the Parliament of England
did require, Have, with Universal Consent, resolved upon this following Answer:

I.
That from the recent sense of the goodness of God in their own la^e
deliverance, and from their earnest desire of all happiness to our Native
King, and that Kingdom, They bless the Lord for preserving them in the midst
of so many unhappy Divisions and Troubles, from a bloody Intestine War, which
is from God the greatest judgment; and to such a Nation, the Compend of all
Calamities. They also give God thanks for their former and present Desires of
Reformation, especially of Religion, which is the glory and strength of a
Kingdom, and brings with it all Temporal blessings of* Prosperity and Peace.

II.
That the hearts of all the Members of this Assembly, and of all the
well-affected within this Kingdom are exceedingly grieved, and made heavy, That
in so long a time, against the Professions both of King and Parliament, and
contrary to the joint desires and prayers of the godly in both Kingdoms, to
whom it is more dear and precious then what is dearest to them in the world,
The Reformation of Religion has moved so slowly, and suffered so great
interruption. They consider, That not only Prelates, formal professors,
profane and worldly men, and all that are Popishly affected, are bad
Counselors and Workers, and do abuse their power, and bend all their strength
and policies against the Work of God, but the god of this world also, with
Principallities and Powers, the Rulers of the darkness of this world, and
Spiritual wickedness in high places, are working with all their force and
fraud in the same opposition, not without hope of success; they having
prevailed so far from the beginning, That in the times of the best Kings of
Judah of old, and the most part of the Reformed Kirks of late, a through and
perfect Reformation of Religion has been a Work full of difficulties: Yet do
they conceive, That as it ought first of all to be intended, so should it be
above all other things, with confidence in God, who is greater then the world,
and he who is in the world most seriously endeavored. And that when the
Supreme Providence gives opportunity of the accepted time and day of
Salvation, no other work can prosper in the hands of his servants, if it be not
apprehended, and with all reverence and faithfulness improved. This Kirk and
Nation when the Lord gave them the calling, considered not their own deadness,
nor staggered at the promise through unbelief, but gave glory to God. And who
knows (we speak it in humility and love, and from no other mind, then from a
desire of the blessing of God upon our King and that Kingdom* but the Lord has
now some Controversy with England, which will not be removed, till first, and
before all, the Worship of his Name, and the Government of his House be settled
according to his own will. When this desire shall come, it shall be to England,
after so long deferred hopes, a Tree of Life, which shall not only yield
temporal blessings unto themselves, but also shall spread the branches so far,
that both this Nation, and other Reformed Kirks shall find the fruits thereof
to their great satisfaction.

III.
The Commissioners of this Kingdom in the late Treaty of Peace, considering
that Religion is not only the Mean of the Service of God, and saving of souls,
but is also the Base and Foundation of Kingdoms and Estates, and the strongest
Band to tie subjects to their Prince in true Loyalty, and to knit the hearts of
one to another in true Unity and Love, They did, with Preface of all due
Respect and Reverence, far from Arrogance or Presumption, represent, in name of
this Kingdom, their serious Thoughts, and earnest Desires for Unity of
Religion; That in all His Majesty's Dominions there might be one confession of
Faith, one Directory of Worship, one public Catechism, and one Form of
Kirk-Government: This they conceived to be acceptable to God Almighty, who
delights to see his people walking in Truth and Unity; To be a special Means
for conserving of Peace betwixr the Kingdoms, of easing the Kings Majesty and
the public Government of much trouble which arises from differences of
Religion, very grievous to Kings and Estates; of great content to the King
Himself, to His Nobles, His Court, and all His People, when -- occasioned to be
abroad, without scruple to themselves, or scandal to others, all may resort to
the same public Worship, as they were at their own dwellings: Of suppressing
the names of Heresies and Sects, Puritans, Conformists, Separatists,
Anabaptists, etc. which do rent asunder the Bowels both of Kirk and Kingdom;
Of despair of success to Papists and Recusants to have their Profession, which
is inconsistent with the true Protestant Religion, and Authority of Princes,
set up again, and of drawing the hearts and hands of Ministers from unpleasant
and unprofitable Controversies, to the pressing of Mortification, and to
Treatises of true Piety, and Practical Divinity. The Assembly does now enter
upon the labor of the Commissioners, unto which they are encouraged, not only
by their faithfulness in the late Treaty, but also by the Zeal and Example of
the General Assemblies of this Kirk in former times, as may appear by the
Assembly at Edinburgh, December. 25. in the year 1566. which ordained a Letter to
be sent to England against the Surplice, Tippet, Cornercoap, and such other
Ceremonies as then troubled that Kirk, that they might be removed. By the
Assembly at Edinburgh, April 24. 1583. humbly desiring the Kings Majesty to
command His Ambassador then going to England to deal with the Queen, That
there might be an union and band betwixt them and other Christian Princes and
Realms professing the true Religion, for defense and protection of the Word of
God, and professors thereof, against the persecution of Papists and
confederates, joined and knit together by the bloody league of Trent: As also,
That Her Majesty would disburthen their Brethren of England, of the yoke of
Ceremonies imposed upon them against the liberty of the Word. And by the
Assembly at Edinburgh, March 3. 1589. ordaining the Presbytry of Edinburgh to
use all good and possible means for the relief and comfort of the Kirk of
England, then heavily troubled for maintaining the true Discipline and
Government of the Kirk; And that the Brethren in their private and public
Prayers recommend the estate of the afflicted Kirk of England to God. While now
by the mercy of God, The conjunction of the two Kingdoms is many ways
increased, The zeal of the General Assembly toward their happiness ought to
be no less. But besides these, the Assembly is much encouraged unto this duty,
both from the Kings Majesty and His Parliament jointly, in their Answer to the
Proposition made by the late Commissioners of the Treaty, in these words, To
their desire concerning Unity of Religion, and Uniformity of Kirk-government,
as a special means for conserving of peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, upon the
grounds and reasons contained in the paper of the 10 of March; and given in to
the Treaty and Parliament of England. It is answered upon the 15 of June, That
His Majesty, with advice of both Houses of Parliament, does approve of the
affection of His Subjects of Scotland, in their desire of having Conformity of
Kirk-government between the two Nations; And as the Parliament has already
taken into consideration the Reformation of Kirk-government, so they will
proceed therein in due time, as shall best conduce to the glory of God, the
peace of the Kirk, and of both Kingdoms. And also severally; for His Majesty
knows that the custody and Vindication, the conservation and purgation of
Religion, are a great part of the duty of Civil authority and power. His
Majesty's late practice, while He was here in person, in resorting frequently
to the exercises of public Worship, His Royal actions in establishing the
Worship and Government of this Kirk in Parliament. And in giving order for a
competent maintenance to the Ministry and Seminaries of the Kirk; And His
Majesty's gracious Letter to the Assembly (seconded by the Speech of His
Majesty's Commissioner) which contains this Religious expression, Where any
thing is amiss, We will endeavor in a fair and orderly way a Reformation, and
where Reformation is settled, We resolve with that authority wherewith God has
vested us, To maintain* and defend it in peace and liberty, against all trouble
that can come from without, and against all heresies, sects, and schisms which
may arise from within. All these do make us hopeful that His Majesty will not
oppose, but advance the work of Reformation. In like manner the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, as They have many times before witnessed their zeal, So
now also in their Declaration sent to the Assembly, which not only shows the
constancy of their zeal, but their great grief that the work has been
interrupted by a Malignant party of Papists and evill-affected persons,
especially of the corrupt and dissolute Clergy by the incitement and
instigation of Bishops and others. Their hopes according to their earnest
desire when they shall return to a peaceable and Parliamentarie proceeding by
the blessing of God, To settle such a Reformation in the Church as shall be
agreeable to Gods word; And that the result shall be a most firm and stable
Union between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, etc. The Assembly also
is not a little encouraged by a Letter sent from many Reverend Brethren of the
Kirk of England, expressing their prayers and endeavors against every thing
which shall be found prejudicial to the establishment of the Kingdom of Christ
and the peace of their Sovereign. Upon these encouragements, and having so
potent a door of hope, The Assembly does confidently expect, That England
will now bestir themselves in the best way for a Reformation of Religion; And
do most willingly offer their prayers and uttermost endeavors for furthering
so great a work, wherein Christ is so much concerned in his glory, the King in
His honor, the Kirk and Kingdom of England in their happiness, and this Kirk
and Kingdom in the purity and peace of the Gospel.

IV.
That the Assembly also from so many real invitations are heartned to renew
the Proposition made by the aforenamed Commissioners of this Kingdom, for
beginning the work of Reformation, at the uniformitie of Kirk-government: For
what hope can there be of unity in Religion, of one confession of Faith, one
form of worship, and one Catechism, till there be first one Form of
Ecclesiastical Government? Yea what hope can the Kingdom and Kirk of Scotland
have of a firm and durable peace, till Prelacie which has been the main cause
of their miseries and troubles first and last, be plucked up root and branch,
as a plant which God has not planted? and from which no better fruits can be
expected, then such sower grapes, as this day set on edge the Kingdom of
England.

V.
The Prelaticall Hierarchy being put out of the way, The work will be easy
without forcing any conscience to settle in England the government of the
reformed Kirks by Assemblies, for although the reformed Kirks do hold without
doubting their Kirk Officers, and Kirk-government by Assemblies higher and
lower in their strong and beautiful subordination, to be jur^ divino and
perpetual, yet Prelacie as it differs from the Office of a Pastor, is almost
universally acknowledged by the Prelates themselves and their adherents, to be
but an humane ordinance introduced by humane reason, and settled by humane Law
and custom for supposed convenience, Which therefore by humane authority
without wronging any man's conscience may be altered and abolished, upon so
great a necessity as is a hearty conjunction with all the reformed Kirks, a
firm and well-grounded peace between the two Kingdoms, formerly divided in
themselves and betwixt themselves by this partition wall, and a perfect union
of the Kirks in the two Nations, which although by the providence of God in one
Island, and under one Monarch, yet ever since the Reformation, and for the
present also are at greater difference in the point of Kirk-government which in
all places has a powerful influence upon all the parts of Religion then any
other reformed Kirks, although in Nations at greatest distance and under diverse
Princes.

VI.
What may be required of the Kirk of Scotland for furthering the work of
Uniformitie of Government, or for agreeing upon a common confession of Faith,
Catechism and directorie for worship shall according to the order given by
this Assembly, be most willingly performed by us, who long extremely for the
day when King and Parliament shall join for bringing to pass so great, so
good a work: That all Wars and commotions ceasing, all Superstitition,
Idolatry, Heresies, Sects and Schisms being removed; As the Lord is one, so
his Name may be one amongst us, And Mercy and Truth, Righteousness* and Peace
meeting together and kissing one another, may dwell in this Island.

St. Andrews, August 3. 1642. JOHNSTON Cler. Eccl.

At EDINBVRGH, the Eighteenth-day of August, 1642.
THe Lords of secret Council having read heard, and considered the Petition
this day given in to them, in the name of the late General Assembly holden at
Saint Andrews, by their Commissioners appointed for that effect, desiring the
Council to concur with them in their Remonstrance to the Parliament of
England, toward the settling of Unity in Religion, and Uniformity in
Kirk-government in His Majesty's three Kingdoms. And having also heard the
Petition directed from the Assembly to His Majesty, with their Answer to the
Parliament of England, the Scots Commissioners of the Treaty at London, and
certain Ministers of England concerning this matter. And finding the reasons
therein expressed to be very pregnant, and the particular desired much to
conduce for the glory of God, the advancement of the true Christian Faith, His
Majesty's Honor, and the peace and union of His Dominions. The said Lords, out
of their duty to the furtherance of so much wished and important a work, and
affection to their Brethren of the Kingdom of England, Do unanimously and
heartily concur with the said National Assembly, in their earnest desires to
the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England, to take to their serious
consideration the particulars aforesaid, touching Unity in Religion, and
Uniformity in Kirk-government in the said three Kingdoms, as a singular mean of
His Majesty's Honor, the good of the true Christian Faith, and happiness of
His Majesty's Dominions; And to give favorable hearing to such desires and
overtures as shall be found most conducible for the promoting of so great and
good a work.

Extractum de libris actorum secreti Consilii S. D. N. Regis, per me Arch.
Primerose, Cler. S. Cons.
Edin. 26. Aug. 1642.
FINIS.

