THE HEADS OF, SEVERAL Petitions and complaints made against 1 Sir John
Connyers Lieutenant General of the Horse in the Northern expedition. 2 Dr.
Heywood of St. Gyles in the Fields. 3 The Parishioners of St. Mary-Woolchurch 4
Dr. Fuller of St. Giles Cripple-gate. 5 Mr. Booth of St. Botolphs Aldersgate.


Touching the Rayles about the Communion Table: The Pictures in
Glasse-windowes. And weekly Lectures.


And read before the Committee, October 16. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. 1641.

THE Heads of the proceedings at the Committee appointed to sit, during the
recesse.
TUesday the 12. of October, the Committee being met, there was a Petition
against Sir John Connyers (Lieutenant General for the Horse in the late
Northern expedition) by certain Troopers, wherein he was complained of, for
false Musters, deduction of pay, and other things, whereupon the said Sir John
was ordered to attend the Committee on Saturday following the 16. of this
instant month.

Then were diverse other Petitions read, which were formerly delivered by
certain Troopers, against other Commandors (which touched as well my Lord
General as other Officers under whom they had served) the complaints being of
the like nature, and the complainers being heard what they could lay to their
charge; Mr. Pym then answered, that what concerned my Lord General they must
complain to the Lords house for redress; But what concerned the House of
Commons, they should be relieved in, with all convenient speed, praying their
patience in the mean time.

There was also a complaint made against Col. Huncks, who was ordered to attend
on Saturday also.

Likewise a complaint against Dr. Heywood of St. Giles in the Fields, for not
suffering the order to be read in his Church, published by the house of
Commons, concerning the pulling down of the Rayles about the Communion Table,
levelling the Church whereby some apposition was made, and he was ordered to
attend on the Saturday following.

Also a complaint against some Parishioners of St. Mary VVoolchurch, who had
defaced a very fair window, and other Emblem's of antiquity in that Church,
without warrant, to the great prejudice and defacing thereof, and warrants were
granted for the offenders therein.

This day was report made to the Committee that Cornet Ayers was fled into
France.

On Saturday the 16. Sir John Connyers appearing before the Committee, the
several complaints against him were read, unto every paricular of which, he
pleaded Innocence, laying the fault (if any were) upon his inferior Officers,
and that no pay had been stopped, but according to certain Orders (which were
produced and read) that he said were drawn up by a general agreement, which
they denied, pleading them to be an act of his own and some few other
Commanders, and not by general consent. But many things being deposed against
him, amongst which, that he made certain Troopers pay ten pounds for a horse
supposed to be lost, which was afterward found, but they had no restitution
for it, whereupon he confessed he remembered such a thing was, but it was not
his fault, they were not repayd their money again, and then entered into a long
speech in defense of himself, that he had served in foreign wars, and
always respected, but here contrariwise, where he strove to be most beloved,
he was most hated, having been reproched both to his face and behind his
back, and that undeserved, and that in that condition and quality wherein he
was, his Reputation was as dear unto him in that place and quality, he served
as a Soldier, as the greatest Princes in the world, and he deserved worthily
to dye, if those things objected against him, could be proved against him: And
wherein he was calumniated he desired Justice against some particular men,
especially against one Moore (who pleaded much against him) and others, and
that he durst scarce go abroad, his life having been often threatened: Adding
further, that the said Moore was imprisoned at York by my Lord General, for
saying (upon the disbanding) that his Sword was as sharp as the Generals, or
the said Sir John's, and if he could not be satisfied he would get his pay as he
could, (or to that effect) which might intimate some desperate humor. But the
said Moore said he was wronged in that, not denying he was so imprisoned, but
it was upon a wrong intimation, and after long time of hearing, both sides
desiring Justice, it being near two of the clock, and all the Committee rose
but Mr. Pym and one more, It was put off till Tuesday morning at 9. of the
clock, both Sir John and his accusers being ordered to attend.

There was a Petition delivered this day against Mr. Booth Minister of St.
Botolphs Aldersgate, for some opposition by him about levelling the Church, who
is ordered to attend on Tuesday next.

There was likewise a warrant granted for Dr. Fuller, Preacher of Saint Giles
Gripplegate, and some others, for opposing the Thursday lecture there, so are
to attend on Tuesday next also.

Likewise warrants were granted for Coronet Holt and others to attend on
Tuesday next.

Dr. Heywood appeared this day, and so did Coonell Huncks, but the time being
far spent, they are ordered to attend on Tuesday next.

FINIS.

