THE PARABLE OF THE TARES EXPOVNDED and APPLIED, In TEN SERMONS Preached before
his late Majesty KING CHARLES The Second MONARCH of Great BRITAIN.

By Peter Heylin, D. D.

To which are added three other Sermons of the same Author.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

To his ever Honored Cousin LAVRENCE BATHVRST Esquire, Eldest Son of Sr.
Edward Bathurst of Lerhlad in the County of Gloucester, KNIGHT and BARRONET.
IT was the Saying of St. Gregory surnamed the Great, that the holy Scripture
was nothing else but an Epistle sent from Almighty God to his Creature man, by
which he might be rightly informed in all those points which were fit or
necessary to be known and trained up in the practice of all those duties which
were fit and necessary to be done: Quid enim est Scriptura sacra, nisi epistola
Omnipotentis Dei ad creaturam suam, as that Father has it. According to which
great example (though possibly not in reference and relation to it) it has
been the custom of men in all times and nations not extremely barbarous, when
they could not personally express their minds to one another, to manage
intelligence in the way of Letters of Epistles; in which they comprehend all
such particulars as were expedient to be known to either party. Inventae erant
epistolae (as Tully tells us) ut certiores faceremus absentes, si quid esset
quod eos scire, aut nostrum, aut ipsorum interesset. And to say truth they are
our ordinary Messengers of love and friendship, our extraordinary Posts for
dispatch of busines^. By them we commonly receive advice and counsel in our
affairs of greatest moment, and to them we commit the close conveyance of such
secrets, as cannot with like confidence be trusted to friends or servants, His
arcana notis terra pelagoque feruntur, as Ovid's passionate Lady writes to her
dear Hippolitus. In which respect, considering that God has placed us at a
distance, so that I cannot personally acquaint you with some particulars
touching the publishing of these Sermons, which I think fit for you to know,
that you may make them known to others, I am compelled (in a manner) to
express them in this present Epistle. In which I shall first present you with
those impulsives which have induced me (contrary to my former custom and
resolutions to commit these Sermons to the Press, and then to let you know the
reason why I have made choice of your name in this Dedication.

And first I must needs say (and I may say it very truly) that I never did any
thing in this kind, of which I found my self more obliged to render a just
account, then of the publishing the ensuing Sermons; which seems like the
adding of fresh leaves to a well grown tree in the midst of Summer, of stars to
a clear firmament in a Winter night, or finally, of water to a full and
unfathomed Ocean: and you may justly say to me in the Poets words, Quid folia
Arboribus, quid pleno sidera Coelo,
In Freta collectas alta quid addis aquas?
That is to say, Why do thou add fresh leaves unto the Trees,
Stars to the Heavens, or Water to the Seas?
In answer to which objection, I can neither plead the importunity of friends,
the command of superiors, nor the preventing of false Copies from being brought
unto the Press, which I observe to be the common pretenses for printing Sermon
upon Sermon; most of the which, without any sensible loss to Learning, or
disadvantage to the Church, might have been buried in the Studies of them that
made them. And yet I would not have it thought but that I have some reason for
what I do, more then the vulgar desire of being in print, there having been so
much of mine on the Press already, as might have satisfied the folly of that
desire, were I guilty of it: and therefore I shall let you know (and in you all
others who shall read them) thas these Sermons are now published on the same
occasion on which they were first penned and preached, which was briefly this.

It was about the Year 1636. in which the Press began to swarm with libellous
and seditious Pamphlets, destructive of the public peace, and tending to a
manifest desertion of the received Government and Forms of Worship by Law
established in this Kingdom. In most of which the Bishops generally were
accused for having a design to bring in Popery, the regular Clergy of this
Church (my self more frequently then any of my rank and quality) traduced and
defamed for subservient instruments: I had before, and sometimes after, been
cast upon the managing of some of the puritan Controversies, (as they then
called them) particularly in writing the History of the Sabbath, the Answer to
the seditious Sermon and Apology of Mr. H. B. of Fridaystreet, the book
entitled A Coal from the Altar, and the defense thereof called Antidotum
Lincolniense, touching the ancient and most convenient situation of the holy
Table, which so exasperated the spirits of those bitter men, who then disturbed
both Chapter and State with their venomous libels, that hardly any of that numerous
litter had crept into the world in which I was not openly accused of Popery, or
at the least of being an Under-factor unto those who had the chief managing of
that design. For the decrying of which scandal so unjustly raised (for actu^
est de homine, ubi actum est de nomine, as the old rule was) I fell upon a
resolution of preaching these ensuing Sermons before the King, (whose Chaplain
for Ordinary I then was, and had been many years before) upon the Parable of
the Tares; and giving in them such an assurance of my Orthodoxie in Religion
and averseness from Popery, as might declare me for a true son of the Church of
England. And this I did at such a time when the inclinations unto Popery were
thought (but falsely thought) to be most predominant both in Court and Clergy: a
course which gave such satisfaction unto a great part of the auditors, who
before did seem to be otherwise persuaded of me, that some of the more moderate
sort did not stick to say (not to touch here on some comparative expressions
which were used by others) that in the third and fourth of these Sermons I had
pulled up Popery by the very roots, and subverted the foundations of it. Not
much unlike to which was the expression of a great Peer of the Realm, who being
present at the sixth Sermon, was pleased to say, that it was generally affirmed
in the Country, that no Sermons were preached before the King, but such as
might be preached in the Popes Chapel, but that if the Doctor had preached the
said Sermon before the Pope, what breakfast soever he had made for himself, he
would have found but a sorry dinner.

This, as it was the occasion which moved me at that time to make choice of
this parable for the constant argument of my Sermons before the King, so on the
like occasion I am now induced (I may not unfitly say compelled) to make them
public unto others. For, notwithstanding that I have so fully declared my self
against the errors and corruptions of the Church of Rome in my late Comment on
the Creed, yet on a sudden (whither I will or no) I must be a Papist, a Jesuit,
or some Agent for the Sea of Rome, suspected at the least for such by Dr.
Bernard, and (as he tells us) by others, for which consult the book entitled
The Judgment of the late Lord Primate, etc. pa. 115. The author of the History
of the Life and Reign of King Charles ecchoeth the words of Dr. Bernard, which,
like an Echo, he reiterateth ( vocesque refert, iteratque quod audit, as it is
in ovid) in his scurrilous pamphlet called the Post-Hast Reply, etc. It was
accounted for a prudent part in Sophocles (as indeed it was) when he was once
accused of madness, to produce one of his Tragedies then newly written, to read
the same before the people of Athens, and then to ask his Judges, Number illud
carmen videretur esse hominis delirantis, whether they thought it like to be
the work of a man distracted? And I hope it will be counted no imprudence in
me, being again accused of popery, or at the least suspected of it to commit
these Sermons to the Press, to offer them to the reading of the people of Engl.
and then to put this question to them, Whether they think such Sermons could
proceed from the pen of a Papist, some Jesuit, or Agent for the Sea of Rom? Add
hereunto, that finding it wondered at in print, that so many of my books do so
little concern my profession (though I know none that do so little concern the
same as the Pamphlets has it) I hope the printing of these Sermons will take
off the wonder, and that they will be looked upon as in which my profession is
concerned.

Such being the reason of bringing these Sermons to the public view, I shall
observe in the next place with what injustice the Court-Chaplains have been
accused for flattery and time serving, for preaching up the Kings prerogative,
and derogating from the property and liberty of the English subject; in which
if one or two were faulty, it stands not with the rules of Justice, and much
less of Equity, that for the fault of one or two ( unius ob culpam and furias
in the Poets words) a general blemish should be laid on all the rest. Certain I
am, no flattery or time-serving, no preaching up the Kings prerogative, or
derogating from the property of the English subjects will be found in these
Sermons, nor could be found in any other of mine, had they been sifted to the
bran. In confidence whereof, when some exceptions had been made against some
passages in one of my Sermons preached at Westminster by a mistake of some
that heard it, I offered the Committee for the Courts of Justice, before whom
that exception had been started, to put into their hands all the Sermons, which
I had either preached at Court or in Westminster Abbie, to the end that they
might see how free and innocent I was from broching any such new Doctrines as
might not be good Parliament-proof when soever they should come to be examined:
and had they took me at my offer, certain I am, it might have redounded very
much to the clearing of my reputation in the sight of those Gentlemen, and
nothing to my hurt or disadvantage at all.

In the digestion of these Sermons I made it my chief care, rather to inform
the understanding then to work on the affections of them that heard me. For
having for seven or eight years before felt the pulse of the Court, and finding
that many about the King were not well principled in the constitution of the
Church of England, and thereby gave occasion to others to think as sinisterly
of it as they did themselves, I thought that course most fit to be followed in
my preaching, which was like to be most profitable to them that heard me; for
the Understanding being well informed, and the Judgment of men well settled on
so sure a bottom, I doubted not but that their affections would be guided by
the light of their Understanding, and bring them to be all of one mind and of
one soul, like the Christians in Acts 4. 32. Voluntas sequitur intellectum, is
a maxim of undoubted truth in the schools of Philosophy, and holds good in
all the practical duties which concern Religion. Which way of preaching, had it
been more generally followed, (as it might have been) I think it probable
enough, that we might better have kept the unity of the spirit in the bond ^f
peace, then by striving to stir up the affections with little or no improvement
to the understanding. Knowledge without Zeal may be resembled to a candle
carried in a Dark-lanthorn or hid under a bushel, which wastes it self without
giving light to others, and is uuprofitably consumed without any benefit to the
public; but on the other side, zeal without knowledge or not according to
knowledge, may be compared unto the meteor which the Philosophers call an Ignis
Fatuus, which for the most part leads men out of the way, and sometimes draws
them on to dangerous precipices, or to a brush-Bavine-faggot in a Country
Cottage, more apt to fire the house then to warm the chimney.

So much being said as to the Motives which induced me to print these Sermons
upon the parable of the Tares, and to my handling and accomodating that Parable
to the use of the Church, as then it stood established by the Laws of the Land,
I am in the next place to let you know the reason why I have made choice of you
name in this Dedication. And herein I can make as little use of those common
aims, which are so frequent in Dedications of this nature, that is to say,
protection, profit or preferment, as I did before of those common pretenses
which are so frequently alleged for publishing many of those books, which,
without any loss to Learning or disadvantage to the Chapter (as before was said)
might have been reprieved from the Press. Protection I expect none from you in
these perilous times, in which, without a prudent care of your life and actions,
you will be hardly able to protect your self: nor is this dedication made in
the way of gratitude for any benefit or profit formerly received from you, (in
which respect I dedicated my book called Ecclesia Vindicata to my kind and
honored Schoolmaster Mr. Edward Davies) or out of any covetous hopes of being
gratified by you with any profit or preferment in the Church for time to come:
of which if I were capable, I might by the same capability return again unto my
own, and being made incapable, can receive none from you or from any other; and
though, my present condition be not such as to make me the subject of any man's
envy, so neither is it so mean and despicable as to make me the object of any
man's charity. And yet I would not have it thought but that I have some reason
for this Dedication, and if I had no other reason then to give a public
testimony of that dear affection which I have to your person, it neither were
without example, for such as might not justify and endear the action.

But besides this I have another reason for it that concerns my self, which is
the leaving of my picture with you, or rather the picture of my nobler part, my
mind; if whenever it shall please God to gather me unto my Fathers, you may
be able to preserve some remembrance of me. Patricius tells us that the
daughter of Diaburranes the Scitionian, being to take leave of her husband then
going to war, drew the chief lineaments of his face with a coal on the wall,
and this she did ne taedio desiderii ejus contabesceret, for fear lest she
might otherwise languish for the want of his company during his necessary
absence. In imitation of which art it was an ancient custom of the Greeks and
Romans to preserve the Images of their Ancestors and nearest kindred, and
sometimes to advance them in the public places of their Cities with an
inscription of their noblest actions, of their most memorable atchievments,
giving thereby the rewards of virtue to the dead, and brave examples to the
living, sic et defunctis praemiu^, et posteris dabatur exemplum, as Minutius
has it Upon the like reason I have sent you these lineaments of my soul, not
drawn with a coal upon the wall, but (which has some resemblance to it) with
ink on paper: a portraiture not cut in brass or Parian Marble, but cast into a
mould of another metal, which possibly may be as lasting as either of them;
and I have sent them unto you as (next to your Father) to my nearest and best
beloved Kinsman by my Mothers side, to the end that if any question shall be
made in your hearing concerning my sincerity in the true Protestant Religion
here by Law established, when I shall not be in a capacity of advocating for my
self, you need but bring them to the sight of this picture, which will
sufficiently serve to scatter any of those false reports which the
uncharitableness of some and the credulity of others may have fastened on me.

It was my happiness to be bred under such a father as very well understood the
constitution of the Church of England, and was a diligent observer of all
public duties which were required of him in his place and station. And though
my Tutor in Hart-Hall (of which House I was before I went to Magdalen College)
was biast on the other side, and that I was then very young and capable of any
impression which he might think fit to stamp upon me, yet I carried thence the
same principles I brought thither with me, and which I had sucked in as it were
with my mothers milk. Nor found I any thing in all the course of my following
studies which might invite me to a change of those first principles, but very
much which did encourage and confirm me in adhering to them; according to the
which, seconded by the best light of my understanding, I have acted ever since,
and on all occasions, as easily will appear to those who have heard any of my
preachings and consulted any of my writings from the first to the last. In all
which I have really done my best eudeavours to show my self a true son of the
Church of England, not looking with one eye toward Rome, or squinting with the
othr toward G^neva, but keeping both upon the rules and dictates of the Church
alone, in which I have been bred and have lived so long, and by the grace of
God am resolved to die. And therefore I must needs think my self in a sorry
condition in being forced upon those helps for preserving a fair memory in the
eyes of posterity; which neither the importunity of friends (when the
publishing of these Sermons might have been more seasonable) nor any other
private considerations could have wrested from me.

I might here end, but that I am to give you an account of a great hiatus which
you will find betwixt the 6. and 7. Sermons, the one being preached the 21. of
Jan. 1639. and the other not till the 26. of Sept. 1643. To give you the
reasons whereof I must let you know that from the beginning of the long
Parliament Nov. 3. 1640. till his Majesty retired to Windsor on the 10. of Jan.
1641. the Sundaies tu^ns before the K. were preached by such of my Lords the
Bishops as were attending on the service of the Chapter and State; and on the
Tuesdaies, not only all the Lords of the Council, and the principal Officers of
the Household, but most of the Gentlemen of worth and quality about the Court
followed the business of the Parl in their several houses. So that I thought it
not convenient to pursue the parable till I might have the happiness of
enjoying my former auditory which was not, and as it pleased God could not be
till his Majesty and the Court had been settled for some time at Oxon. There I
resumed my former argument, because I found there a great part of my former
auditors, and brought these Sermons to an end; which have lain by me ever since
(without the least alteration in words or matter) as they then were preached,
and as they then were preached so they now are published. Which said, I have no
more to do but desire your pardon for the tediousness of this Address, and that
you would be pleased to accept that Portraiture or Picture which is herewith
sent, to make such use of it as may stand best with your contentment, and
thereby to preserve a fair esteem in your self and others of, Sir,

Lacies Court in Abindon, Jan. 25. 1658. Your most affectionate friend and
Cousin to do you service, PET. HEYLIN.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
THe Reader is to understand that of the three last Sermons which are subjoyned
to those of the Tares, the First was preached in the Chapel of Lambeth House,
at the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Dr. John Towers Lord
Bishop of Peterburg, Jan. 13. 1638. The Second in the Abby-Church of
Westminster, on the fifth Sunday of Lent, commonly called Passion Sunday, Anno
1640. The Third in Windsor Castle before the King, at such time as he had
removed from White Hall, Jan. 24. 1641. Which I thought fit to signify, in
regard that the said Sermons, the two first especially, are fitted to the
particular times and occasions before remembered, and not so easily applyable
unto any other; Advertisement whereof should have been given in the Title of
each of the said Sermons, but that it was unhappily left out when they were at
the Press.

Parabola Zizaniorum.
MAT. XIII. VERSE. XXIV. etc.
24 (...).

25 (...).

26 (...).

27 (...);

28 (...);

29 (...).

30 (...).

Versio Vulgaris.
24 ALiam Parabolam proposuit illis, dicens, Simile factum est Regnum Coelorum
homini, qui seminavit bonum semen in agro suo.

25 Cum autem dormirent homines, venit inimicus ejus, and super seminavit
Zizania in medio Tritici, and abiit.

26 Cum autem crevisset herba, and fructum fecisset, tunc apparuerunt and
zizania.

27 Accedentes autem servi patris-familias dixerunt ei: Domine, nonne bonum
semen seminasti in agro tuo? unde ergo habet zizania?

28 Et ait illis, inimicus homo hoc fecit: servi autem dixerunt ei, vis imus,
and colligimus ea?

29 Et ait, non; ne forte colligentes zizania, eradicetis simul cum iis
triticum.

30 Sinite utraque crescere usque ad messem, and in tempore messis dicam
messoribus, colligite primum zizania, and alligate ea in fasciculos ad
comburendum, triticumautem congregate in horreum meum.

Versio Bezana.
24 ALiam Parabolam proposuit eis, dicens, Simile est Regnum Coelorum homini
serenti bonum semen in agro suo.

25 Quum autem dormirent homines, venit ejus inimicus, and serit Zizania inter
triticum, and abiit.

26 Quum vero germinasset herba, and fructum edidisset, tunc apparuerunt etiam
zizania.

27 Accedentes autem servi patris-familias dixerunt ei, Domine nonne bonum
semen sevisti in agro tuo? unde ergo habet zizania?

28 Ille vero dixit eis, inimicus quispiam hoc fecit: servi autem dixerunt ei,
vis igitur abeamus and colligamus ea.

29 At ille dixit, non, ne colligendo zizania eradicetis simul cum eis triticum.

30 Sinite utraque simul crescere usque ad messem, and tempore messis dicam
messoribus, colligite primum zizania, and ligate ea in fasciculos ad exurendum
ea, triticum vero colligite in horreum meum.

THE PARABLE OF THE TARES Expounded and Applied.
At WHITE HALL Jan. 9. 1637.
MATTHEW. 13. 24. Another Parable put he forth unto them, saying, The Kingdom of
Heaven is likened to a man which sowed good seed in his field.
DEus quantum satis esse judicavit locutus, Scripturam condidit: God, says St.
Austin, having manifested so much of his heavenly will as he thought sufficient
for our use, composed the body of the Scriptures: And in composing of it, he
contrived it so, that it gives wisdom to the simple, and exercises the
abilities of the greatest Clerks. Now as the Scripture is, which is verbum Dei,
such also was the Preacher, which is Deus verbum. In his most heavenly Sermon
made upon the Mount, he taught the people plainly, without tropes or figures.
(...), (...): For, as St. Chrysostom has noted, In Matthew. 13. v. 3.
those unto whom he then discoursed were plain simple men, incapable of
Parables, and Allegories, and such mysterious arts of speaking. But here we
meet with men of another mettle; the Scribes, the wise men of the World, (...),
together with the subtle Pharisees, as Theophylact calls them. In Matthew. 13.
These, as they would believe no Gospel, which did not come accompanied with
signs and wonders, so might they judge all Doctrine to be poor and base which
was not represented to them in an handsome habit. There are some men that are
more taken with those things which they understand not, then such as are
familiar to their apprehensions. Others to whom no truth is pleasing, nisi quod
auditu suave est, as Lactantius has it; Lib. 5. c. 1.
but that which is apparelled in a curious dress. In which regard our blessed
Savior, of whom St. Paul learnt to be (...), did sometimes, as he had
occasion, speak in Parables; partly to make his Auditors the more attent,
partly to grave the deeper and more firm impression in their hearts and
memories, but principally to excite them to a more diligent enquiry after that
which they understood not. Perspicua obscuris miscet, ut per ea quae
intelligunt provocentur ad eorum notitiam quae non intelligunt; In Mat. 13.
as St. Hierome has it.

Besides, our blessed Savior has compared himself to a certain man which
made a great supper, and bad many; Luke 14. 16.
his Kingdom to a certain King, which made a marriage for his Son. Matthew. 22.
2.
Now to a great Supper, or a Wedding Feast, some come for hunger, some for
dainties; and others only out of curiosity, to observe the order of the
entertainment. He therefore that would please all comers, must provide
accordingly, and furnish out his Table with that rich variety, that he has
wherewithal to content each palate, lest else some one or other go away
unsatisfied. And so it was with our Redeemer, whilst being here upon the
Earth, he was at once the entertainer and the feast. Some flocked unto him to
partake of the bread of life, poor souls that hungered after righteousness;
Matthew. 5.
others to pry into his actions, and observe his sayings: and some out of a
curiosity, 1 Kings.
as once the Queen of Sheba came to Solomon, only to wonder at his wisdom, and
from whence it came. One and the same continual manner of discourse was never
likely to have sorted to that variety of humors which resorted to him. And
therefore to poor simple men he spoke home, but plainly; Lo now thou speak
plainly, Joh. 16. 29.
and speak no Parables. But to the captious and the curious, to the wise and
learned, it pleased him to speak sometimes in dark speech and Parables, to set
an edge upon their appetites, and keep them from a loathing of that Manna which
came down from Heaven: God so sets out his word as men do their feasts, De
Doct. Chapter l. 2. c. 3.
ut locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus fastidia detergeret, in
St. Austines Language: as well to quicken and revive our appetites, as allay
our hunger. Nor have we only here a Parable, but we have aliam parabolam,
another Parable; a Banquet superadded to the second course. The Lord, as
Hi^rome has observed, provides his guests of several dainties, in locum.
ut unusquisque secundum naturam stomachi sui varia susciperet alimenta; that
each man's stomach may be fitted with the meat he likes.

Here then we have a Parable, and another Parable; and we have reason also why
our Savior spoke at this time in Parables, in matters which concerned the
Kingdom of Heaven: Some other reasons there are of it, which we shall meet
withal hereafter. The next thing here to be considered, is that very Kingdom,
which in my Text, and other places of this Chapter, is in so dark a way pointed
out unto us. Which Kingdom, whether that it be the preaching of Christ's Gospel,
or the imparting of his graces to the soul of man, it is resembled very fitly
unto the work and travels of the Husbandman, who having labored and manured
his field with his utmost care, and sowed it with his choycest seed, betakes
himself unto his rest, in expectation of a plentiful and joyful Harvest: yet
so it happens many times, that notwithstanding all his cost and travel, it
brings forth tares instead of Wheat, weeds instead of flowers: Longique perit
labor irritus Anni. Ovid. met. lib. 1.
Gods field is many times too like his Vineyard; when he had dug it, and
dressed it, and that there could be nothing done unto it which he had not done,
yet when he came and looked for grapes, it brought forth wild grapes, such as
were only fitted for the Wine Press of his indignation. So that at last the
meaning of the Text will be briefly this, That it so falls out with our Savior
in the administration of his heavenly Kingdom, as with a man that sowed, and
sowed good seed, and sowed it in a field of his own possession; but at the
coming on of harvest, found it full of tares. And he put forth another Parable
unto them, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a man, etc.

Hitherto have we gone in the way of preparation, and spoke as much as was
convenient touching the subject of and in this Parable, the Kingdom of Heaven.
And in the Predicate thereof, wherein the substance of the Text does consist
especially, we have these parts to be considered; The Husbandman, the Seed,
the S^yle. First for the Husbandman, it seems he was a man of action, for we
find him sowing; and next a man of quality, as one that did not all his work
by himself immediately, but used sometimes the ministry of his servants, as
may appear out of the 25. and the 27. Verse compared together. Then for the
Seed, that is to be considered also; first, in the substance, it was Wheat, the
best kind of grain, for the Text tells us of the Tares, that they were sown
in medio tritici, in the middle of the Wheat; and secondly, it was bonum semen,
a good sort of Wheat. Last of all for the field, we will look on that, first in
it self, as it is ager, a place fit for tillage; and then in the Proprietarie,
it was Ager suus, his own field, a field not hired nor rented, but his own
possession. Of these, etc.

Prima Ceres ferro mortales verteret erram Instituit. Georgic. l. ^.
The art of Husbandry is of such antiquity, that it is attributed by the Poets
to the Gods themselves, That and the calling of the Shepherd coeval in a sort
with the very world. Genesis 4. 2.
We read it of the Sons of Adam, that Abel was a keeper of Sheep, and Cain a
tiller of the ground. Both Offices united in the first man Adam, till his
Sons came to age to discharge them for him: and both united also in the
second Adam till he entrusted them to his Apostles, and their successors in the
Evangelical Presthood. Philo has noted to our hands, that the name of
Shepherd was anciently applied unto Kings and Lawgivers, yet not to Kings and
Statesmen only, Lib. de Agricultura.
(...), but that it is as justly attributed to the Lord Almighty. But behold, a
greater then Philo is here. For Christ has told us of himself that he is a
Shepherd, Ego sum pastor bonus, Joh. 10. 11.
I am the good Shepherd, Joh. 10. And his Apostle tells us of him, that he is
Princeps Pastorum, the chief Shepherd; and Pastor animarum, the Shepherd of
our souls, 1 Pet. 5. 4. 2. 25.
Even that good Shepherd which did once lay down his life for his Sheep, and
does still feed them in the pastures of eternal life.

But questionless, the Husbandman is of the two the better Gentleman,
descended, as we use to say, of the Elder house. And therefore Philo in his
Book de sacrificiis Cain and Abel, conceives, that in the distribution of their
Fathers business, Cain having choice of both as the elder Brother, made choice
of Husbandry. (...), (...), as his words there are Indeed it was the first
employment of our Father Adam: No sooner was he fallen and cast out of
Paradise, but he was put to till the Earth; and that too in su^dore frontis,
Genesis 4.
with great care and sorrow. So that being in the infancy of the world the
portion of the elder Brother, and before him, the business of his Father Adam,
sole King and Monarch of the world: it came in fine, to be the exercise and
delight of the greatest Potentates; For it is written of Uzziah King of Judah,
that he loved Husbandry. 2 Chronicles. 26. 10. Hist. Romans l. 1. c. 11.
And Florus writes of Quinctius the Dictator in the State of Rome, that being
taken from the Plough, to manage the affairs of that growing Empire; after the
Wars were ended, and his Triumphs over, he returned back unto his labors;
Rediit ad boves suos triumphalis Agricola. But behold a greater then either
Quinctius or Uzziah is here also. For Christ himself has told us of his
heavenly Father, that he is an Husbandman, v. 1.
Joh. 15. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. So that the
marvel is not much if having likened his most glorious Father to an
Husbandman, he does resemble his most heavenly Kingdom, and his administration
of and in the same, unto a man that sowed, and that sowed good Seed. In this
respect our Savior is as well the Husbandman as he is the Vine; an
Husbandman, whose labor like the Country Plough-mans is never at an end,
Joh. 5. 17.
but runs round in circulo. My Father works hitherto, says Christ our
Savior, and I also work. As if he had thus said in more plain discourse;
Hitherto has my Father worked, Augustine. J^h. 5.
from the beginning of the world to this very time, nec ullum sibi cessationis
statuisse diem, and lost no time, nor intermitted any opportunity of sowing the
celestial seed of life eternal: And I his dear and only son work also, and
am continually employed in doing the will of him that sent me. For wot ye not
that I must go about my Fathers business; and that what ever thing he does, he
does it in and by the Son? Per me enim facit cum fecit, and per me regit cum
regit. God made the world, but by the Son; for by him all things were made,
Joh. 1. And God instructs the world in his holy mysteries, Joh. 6 61.
but it is only by the Son, who is both God the word, and the word of God.
Master, said his Apostle to him, whither shall we go? Thou only have the words
of eternal life. Which institution, being, as it is here called, but a kind
of sowing, has been the care and labor of the heavenly Husbandman from the
first fall of Adam to this very day, and will still be his care and labor,
from this day forwards to the end of all things.

For, the first man being fallen almost as soon as made, became the most
calamitous ruin of a goodly fortune; His understanding darkened with the
clouds either of ignorance or error; his will corrupted, and the affections of
the same depraved, and his Conscience hardened. So that the Earth and he were
both of the like condition: [Both pure and perfect in themselves at the first
creation; the one being framed according to the Image of Almighty God, in
Justice and Integrity; the other bringing forth of its own accord whatever
thing could please the eye, or delight the palate. But presently upon the
curse, the Earth was fruitful only in thorns and thistles; and so was man upon
the fall: those thorny cares and troubles which afflict the mind, those
thistles of corruption which invaded his will and passions.] That stood in need
of tillage, and so did he: the Plough to work and break the one, that so it
might be fit to receive that seed which by the careful Husbandman is designed
unto it; the preaching of the word to prepare the other* for the reception of
the graces and gifts of God: That required sowing at due seasons, and so did
he; the Earth not bringing forth good fruit without pains and labor, yet
yielding good Increase of the seed allotted; nor man producing any thing that
is just and righteous, out of his own corrupted nature, yet sometimes bringing
forth the fruits of plety, according to the seed sown in him, [ Si modo
culturae patientem commodet aurem, as the Poet has it.] Nay, as it seems,
these several kinds of sowing are of equal date; For when it first was laid as
a curse on Adam, that in the sweat of his brows he should eat his bread, it
also was communicated as a blessing to him, that he should find relief in the
promised seed. Genesis 3. 15.
That the first seed of faith and comfort that was sown in Adam, a seed of so
divine a nature, that it did quicken without dying, and dying did give life to
all men; a seed that sowed it self in the Virgins womb, and so became the Son
of man, that by his means poor man might be redeemed from sin and Satan, and
so become the Son of God.

Nor did he only sow in the heart of Adam the comfort and assurance of the
promised seed; but he instructed him to typifie and prefigurate his death and
passion, for the redemption of the world, in the way of sacrifice: For
howsoever the first bloody sacrifice we read of in the holy Scripture was that
of Abel, and that it generally is conceived that he was taught it by his
Father; yet there is no question to be made, but that Adam learnt it of the
Lord. Deus solus docere potuit ut se vellet orari, Tertul.
as Tertullian has it. And for those other seeds of faith and piety, by which,
or they, or Seth or Enoch, or any of the Patriarchs before the Flood, were
quickened and enabled to the works of righteousness, they were all of them sown
by the Lord our God, sometimes by Dreams and Visions, as the Prophets tell us,
and sometimes also viva voce, by a more evident and personal manner of
discourse. Many and frequent were the visits that God made to Abraham, after
that he had called him from his own Country, and his Fathers house; and there
was none in which he did not manifest something to him of his will and
pleasure: Not to say any thing of Isaac, Jacob, and those other good and godly
men, to whom the Lord appeared and spoke face to face, thereby implanting in
their souls the seeds of piety and virtue. But when the house of Abraham was
grown great and numerous, and had withal degenerated from the example and
integrity of their common Parent, then did the Lord begin to commit this part
of heavenly Husbandry to his menial Servants, Prophets, and Seers, Priests and
Levites. Exodus 21. 1.
For it was he that said to Moses, These are the judgments which thou shall
set before the people; the words and judgments of the Lord, as he elsewhere
calls them: Which said unto his Servant Jeremie, cap. 1. v. 9. c. 3. v. 17.
Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth; and to Ezekiel, Hear therefore the
word from my mouth, and give them warning from me. Where we may see, that
howsoever God makes use of men to dispatch this business, yet they are still
Gods words, Gods judgments, the words of his most sacred mouth, which they
impart unto the people. God so disposed of this employment unto his Servants
and Disciples, that still he kept unto himself the power and reputation of the
principal Workman.

Thus in these several ways, Heb. 1. 1.
spoke God in times past to our Fathers; and every several way of these was a
several sowing: 2.
but in these last times has he spoken to us by his only Son, whom he
appointed to be Heir of all things, and by whom also he made the Worlds.
Himself has told us of himself, in the Exposition of this Parable, v. 37.
that he that sows the good Seed is the Son of man. And indeed, what was
all his life, but a continual sowing of the word of God, at Nazareth,
Jerusalem, Capernaum, in Galilee, in the Land of Judah, in the fields and
Cities? Hardly one step in all Judaea which he had not measured, and in the
which he did not punctually perform the Office of a faithful Seeds-man. He
sowed his Word amongst them, and it brought forth faith; he sowed his Grace
among them, and it brought forth godliness; he sowed miracles among them, and
they brought forth followers. And which is yet more mavelous then all the
rest, he sowed Himself, the Christ among them, and forthwith all the World, ab
ortu Solis ad occasum, as Lactantius has it, did in a manner become
Christians: [he sowed the very Kingdom of Heaven amongst them; and every one of
his Disciples did presently grow greater with Gods heavenly Kingdom; Behold,
the Kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17.] No miracle in all the Scripture
parallel to this, that he that was the Sower should become the Seed; and the
same person, at and in the self-same instant, should be the Preacher and the
Gospel. And though it pleased him for a time to withdraw himself, and leave the
pursuit of his work unto his Apostles, Matthew. 28. v. 20. In locum.
yet did he promise to be with them always, even to the end of the World. Cum
vobis and successoribus vestris, always with them and their successors, as
Denis the Carthusian notes it; Always, in reference to his power and Spirit,
by which he is for ever with us; and always, in relation to his care and
providence, by which his Servants and Disciples have been still amongst us: For
some he has given Prophets, and some Apostles, Ephesians. 4. v. 11, 12.
and some Evangelists, and some ^astors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of his body.

So then these Teachers, Prophets, and Apostles which Christ left behind him,
are all of them the servants of that heavenly Husbandman whom we find
mentioned in this Text: Not servants of so mean and poor a quality as the world
would make them; for St. Paul tells us of them, That they are Laborers
together with God, 1 Cor. 3. 9.
the (...), and Fellow workmen of the Lord. It is the privilege of Princes,
and great Commanders, to say unto their Servants, do this and they do it; but
for the Husbandman, he is always one in every business that concerns him, and
does not say unto his people, see that this be done, but let us do it. So that
God does not work the less, because he has so many Servants employed from
time to time in his holy Husbandry; He works not only by them, but he labors
with them: For howsoever Paul may plant, 1 Cor. 3. 6.
and Apollos water, yet it is He alone that gives increase. His Eye it is that
does direct them, and his Hand that guides them, as well as that it is his Word
which is sowed by them. And sow they must continually, in all times and
places, in season, out of season, without end or ceasing; otherwise they will
fall full short of that glorious title of being (...), and Laborers together
with Almighty God.

And on the other side, it is to be observed withal, that as the Priest is
called (...), a Fellow Laborer with God, so are the people called (...), Gods
Husbandry, in that very Verse. For we are Laborers together with God, and ye
Gods Husbandry: Not his field only, nor his V^neyard only, but his very
Husbandry, his business, his employment, his ground ready tilled, about the
which he has bestowed so much care and travel. And being so, it is expected at
your hands, that you bring forth the fruits of good living, that you be
answerable to the vote and expectation of the heavenly Husbandman. The Lord
has pretermitted neither cost nor pains, to make his field exceeding fruitful
of good works; for he has fatned it with the blood of his only Son, and with
the blood of many and most glorious Martyrs.

Luxuriat sacro Sanguine pinguis humus. Ovid.

He has manured it with the hands of his holy Prophets, which has been since
the World began; watered it with the dew of Heaven, and sowed it with the Seed
of his holy Word. What could he do more to it that he has not done? It after
all this care and cost, instead of Grapes, you bring forth nothing but wild
grapes; if when he sowes amongst you his most sacred seed, he finds his field
overrun with thorns and thistles, or that it brings forth Tares when he looks
for Wheat; it cannot possibly be said, that God is wanting unto us, but we are
wanting unto God. Nor can it be replied, (were a man minded to dispute with
Almighty God) that every man is as the Lord has made him, and that the fault
is rather in the seed then in the soil: For whatsoever God created, he looked
upon it, and behold, it was good: and whatsoever seed he sows, let us look
upon it, and we shall find it good also. Gods Kingdom is here likened unto
that man, not which sowed every sort of seed, but the good seed only; the next
particular, and next in order to be handled.

Necesse est sumptum facere qui quaerit lucrum; Plautus.
He that intends to reap must sow. It is not now, as once in the golden Age,
when as the Earth brought forth its fruit without seed or ploughing; Metam. l.
1.
Mox etiam fruges tellus inarata fer^bat, as the Poet has it. And he that
hopes to reap good fruit, must also have a care that he sow good seed; for no
man is to look for Grapes from thorns, or for Figs from thistles. The
Husbandman in the present Parable was well experienced in this rule, and did
not only sow his field, but he sowed good seed. Now for this seed, the context
tells us it was wheat, the best kind of grain, (...), as Galen call's it. And
the Text tells us it was good, the best kind of Wheat, as that of which the
purest bread, the bread of life was to be made, whereby the Children of the
Kingdom are begotten to a lively hope, to an incorruptible inheritance. Bu^ling.
A Protestant writer of good credit does expound it so; Semen, says he,
proprie exponitur verbum Dei, unde enati filii regni. And this with good
congruity enough unto our Saviors Exposition, who having said, that he that
sows the good seed is the Son of man, adds, that the good seed are the
Children of the Kingdom. The Children of the Kingdom then, there is no doubt of
that. And being that Children of the Kingdom are begotten by the celestial seed
of Gods holy Word, the Word of God may put in also for its part, and come
within the compass of the seed here mentioned. In Matthew. 13.
Hierome indeed has given it to us for a rule, that, Ubicunque Dominus exponit
sermones suos, cavendum est ne vel aliud, nec plus velimus intelligere quam ab
eo expositum est. But this, I think, is to be understood of such expositions as
are repugnant to our Saviors, and not subservient thereunto.

But yet to keep our selves more near unto our Saviors Exposition, [the
Children of the Kingdom here, and the Children of the wicked one in the
following words, are not to be interpreted of the men themselves: For, being it
is said, that the enemy sowed tares, and that the tares are the children of the
wicked one, it might then follow thereupon, that wicked men, qua men, are the
Devils children, seeds of his sowing, and people of his own creating. And that
might serve to usher in the damnable impiety of the Manichees, who had devised
two several Gods, the one good, the other evil; the one the maker of good men,
the other the creator of wicked men; as St. Austin has informed us of them.]
When it is said, the good seed are the Children of the Kingdom, it may be
further understood, as of the men themselves adopted to eternal life, of those
sanctified thoughts, of those celestial gifts and Graces, by which a man is
made a Child of the most high God. Quaecunque sunt in hominis animo bona,
Homil. in Matthew. 3.
condita sunt a Verbo quod in principio erat apud Deum, as it is in Origin.
Whatever God sows in the heart of man is most pure and perfect; for being
good himself, yea most infinite goodness, nothing can be supposed to come from
him but what is absolutely good. We may conjecture of the seed by the fruit it
yields; If that the fruit be good, then the seed is such; for an evil Tree
brings not forth good fruit, as our Savior tells us: and then we may be sure
that it is of God. But if the fruit prove evil, we may easily guess from
whence it comes, both from what Sower, and what Seed; even from that seed of
lust and disobedience which was first sown in Adam by the Tempter, and has
since proved too fruitful in all his progeny. The Devil sowed in man the first
seeds of Lust, and lust conceiving brought forth sin. God had no hand therein
at all, more then in executing justice for the sin committed, and imposing
death upon the sinner. Therefore let no man say when he is tempted, I was
tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, James 1. v. 13, 14.
neither tempts he any man; but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away
of his own lust, and enticed. So the Apostle has resolved it.

And well it is, that it is so resolved by the Apostle; otherwise one might
happily have met with some, who not considering that whatsoever God made was
good, and that the Seed he sows is also good, would take upon them to make
him guilty of all the sin and mischief which lewd men commit. Eusebius Hist.
5. 19.
Florinus taught so once in the primitive times, one of the Scholars of
Montanus, and the Cataphrygians.

Thereupon Irenaeus published a Discourse, with this Inscription, (...), that
God was not the Author of sin: And he gave this Inscription to it, as the
Story tells us, because Florinus with great violence and earnestness had
taught the contrary opinion. It seems Florinus was an Heretic of no common
aims, and would not satisfy himself with these vulgar follies which had been
taken up before him, but was resolved ponere os in coelum, to strike at Heaven,
and plant his battery against the very Throne of Almighty God. And therefore it
is said of him by Irenaeus, that he had spread abroad those blasphemous tenets
which never any of the former Heretics (...), had once dared to broach. Yet
bold and venturous though he were we do not find that he became the head of
any faction in the Church; or that his followers, if he had any, ever attained
unto the height of their Masters impudence. Some therefore of the ensuing
Heretics, who in their hearts had entertained the same opinions, did in their
writings recommend them to the world in a different habit; for they had cloaked
and clothed this blasphemy with the more plausible and specious titles of
destiny, and of the Stars; the most inevitable decrees of the one, and
unresistible influence of the other, necessitating men unto those foul actions
which they had committed. Aug. de haeres. c. 35.
Thus are we told of Bardesanes, Quod fato conversationes hominum ascriberet,
that he ascribed all things to the power of fate. And thus it is affirmed of
Priscillianus, fatalibus astris homines alliga^os esse, Ibid. c. 70.
that men were governed by the Stars: which last St. Austin has affirmed
also of one Colarbas, Ibid. c. 15.
save that he gave this power and influence to the Planets only.

But these, if pondered as they ought, differ but little, if at all, from the
impiety of Florinus, before remembered; only they were expressed and published
in a better Language, and seemed to savor somewhat of the Philosopher; for if
the Lord had passed such an unevitable and irreversible Law of Fate, that these
and these men should be guilty of those foul transgressions which they so
frequently committed, it were all one in the true sense and meaning of it, as
if he were proclaimed the Author of those sins which they had committed; and
then why might not every man take unto himself the excuse and plea of
Agamemnon, (...), it was not I that did it, but the Gods and Destiny: or if the
Lord had given so irrefistible a power unto the Stars, as to enforce men to
be wickedly and lewdly given, what differs this from making God the Author of
those vicious actions to which by them we are enforced? and then why might not
every man return his sins upon the Lord, and say as did some such in St.
Austines time, accusandum potius authorem syderum quam commissorem scelerum: De
Genesis ad lit. l. 2. c. 17.
which granted, we might pass an Index Expurgatorius on the holy Creed, and
quite raze out the 7th Article, that viz. of our Saviors coming unto
judgment; for how could God condemn his creatures to unquenchable flames, in
case the sins by them committed were not so properly and truly theirs, as his
in them; or punish them for that whereof he is Author, or unto which he does
enforce them? So excellently true is that which Fulgentius tells us, Deus non
est eorum ultor quorum est author.

But were Florinus, and those other Heretics in the former times, the only men
that broached these Doctrines? and have these latter days, think we, been free
from so great impiety? certainly I could wish they were, though I dare not hope
it, finding the same blasphemous follies charged upon the Libertines, a late
brood of Sectaries. These taught, as did Florinus in the days of old, Calv.
Instruct. adv. Libertinos.
Quicquid ego et tu facimus Deus efficit, nam in nobis est, and so made God the
Author of those wicked actions which themselves committed. The founders of the
Sect, Coppinus and Quintinus, In Quintino.
Flemmings both, and these Prateolus affirms for certain to be the Progeny of
Calvin, and other leading men of the Protestant Churches. Bellarmine somewhat
more remissely, Omnino probabile esteos ex Calvinianis promanasse, and makes it
only probable that it might be so; but neither rightly; for Staphylus reckoning
up the Sects that sprung from Luther, however that in other things he flies out
too far, yet makes no mention of these fellows. Paraus on the other side, in
his corrections on the Cardinal, assures us that they both were Papists,
acquaints us with the place of their nativity, and the proceedings had against
them. Calvin, who writ a tract against them, makes one Franciscus Poquinus, a
Franciscan Friar, a principal stickler in the cause. And we may add ex
abundanti, that the said Sect did take beginning Anno 529. when Calvin yet was
very young, and of no credit in the world, no not amongst those very men, who
have since admired him, and made his word the touchstone of all Orthodox
Doctrine. So that for the reviving of this Heresy in these latter Ages, so
far forth as it is delivered positively, and in express terms, (which was
the blasphemy of Florinus) we are beholding for it to the Church of Rome, or
some that had been members of it, how willingly soever they would charge it on
the Protestant Doctors.

Yet true it is, (for, magna veritas and praevalebit) that some, and those of
no small name in these foreign Churches, which think themselves a pattern unto
all the rest, have given too just a ground for so great a scandal. And well it
were they had observed that caution in their public writings, Plutarch in
Caesare.
which Caesar looked for from his Wife, and that is, (...), that they had been
as free from the suspicion as the crime it self; for howsoever they affirm it
not in terms expressed, which was the desperate boldness of Florinus, yet can it
hardly be denied that they came too near it, to a tantamont, by way of
necessary consequence and deduction, which was the Artifice of Bardesanes and
Priscillian; Calv. Institut. l. 3. c. 23. Se. 7.
for if that God from before all eternity did purpose and decree the fall of
Adam, ut sua defectione periret Adam, (as some men have taught us,) there was
in Adam a necessity of sin, because the Lord had so decreed it: if without
consideration of the sin of man, he has by his determinate sentence ordained
so many millions unto destruction, and that too, necessario and inevitabiliter,
as they please to phrase it, he must needs preordain them also unto sin;
because, as they themselves affirm, there is no way unto the end but by the
means: And then what can the wicked and impenitent do but ascribe all their
sins unto the Lord, by whose inevitable and fatal will they were lost in Adam;
by whom they are particularly and personally necessitated unto death, and
therefore also unto sin: for thus Lycomedes in Plautus pleaded for himself,
when he defloured old Euclio's daughter; Deus mih^ impulsor fuit, is me ad
illam illexit: it was Gods doing, none of his, that he was so vicious.

But let us not deceive our selves, God, as he is not mocked, so he is no
mocker: He tells us by his Son, that his Seed is good; by his Apostle, that
men are tempted by their own lusts; by his Prophets, that a man's destruction is
from himself, Perditio tua est ex te, O domus Israel; for his part, he has
planted in our minds many saving notions, poured out upon our hearts the
influence and dew of his heavenly graces, and kindled many times within us the
flames of an affectionate zeal to his holy service. If that we quench these
flames, and expel these graces, and root out these notions, or else permit the
enemy to sow his false and dangerous T^res, even in the middle of Gods Wheat,
is it not then our faults, either to do the one, or permit the other? God
cannot possibly be accused of sowing other then good Seed, who sows the good
Seed and no other: Should we think otherwise, the smallest error we could fall
into is that of Bardesanes and Priscillian, who ascribed all unto fatality, and
the Stars and Planets; of which St. Austine tells us plainly, that it aimed
principally at the ruin and subversion of our whole Religion, De Civit. l 5.
c. 1.
Nec aliud agit nisi ut nullus omnino aut rogetur aut colatur Deus, as the
Father has it. Well then, the seed God sowes is good, he neither made man evil
at his first creation, nor suggests evil thoughts unto him being once created;
nor did he preordain him unto sin, or dispose him to it: God is the God of
peace, and sowes not dissension; the God of order, and sowes not confusion; the
God of love, and sowes not debate; the God of truth, and sowes not error, or
false Doctrine; the God of Justice, and sowes not iniquity: Nor does God sow
his good Seed only in this man or that, some chosen Vessels of his mercy, some
few selected ones of his own right hand, and neglect all the rest, as not worth
the looking after; not in his Vineyard only, or in his Garden, his Church, the
Congregation of his Saints, but universally over all his field, and every part
and parcel of it; God is here likened to the man that sowed good seed, and
sowed the same in agro suo, in his own field; my next particular.

Ager colendo fit bonus, a field is bettered by manuring; and the more large
the field, the greater culture it requires. How great then is the labor that
Gods field has need of? how great a quantity of seed must be sown upon it?
Himself has told us of this field, that it is the World, viz. the general
corporation, or body aggregate of mankind, the World, and not the Church
alone, and mundus, non tantum Ecclesia, as it is in Origin. This vast and
universal field the Lord has dressed and labored with his mighty hand, and
fatned with his most precious blood of his only Son; For God so loved the
World, Joh. 3. 16, 17. 1 John 2. 2.
as the Scriptures tell us, 1 John 2. 2.
that he gave his only begotten Son to be a propitiation for our sins, and
not for ours only, [ Gods selected ones] but for the sins of all the World,
that the World through him might be saved. It is the will of God the Father, as
St. Paul has told us, that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge
of his holy truth. It is the will of God the Son, that all men which are
heavy laden should come unto him, upon the promise and assurance that he will
ease them. It is the will of God the holy Ghost, that all men should be made
partakers of those means that lead to happiness eternal; who therefore fell on
the Apostles in the similitude of cloven tongues, Acts 2. 3, 11.
that every man might hear them speak in his own Language the wonderful works
of God: which being the will and pleasure of the Godhead jointly, and each
person severally, could not be possibly fulfilled, in case the blessed word of
God had been restrained to any, either place or people, and not proclaimed and
published universally over all the World: and therefore when our Savior sent
forth his Apostles, he gave them a Commission of a large extent, Ite in
universum mundum, Mark 16. 15.
Go into all the world, says he, and preach the Gospel unto every Creature:
nor were they backward in performance of the Lords Commandment, scattering
themselves abroad over all the Earth; and where they could not go themselves,
sending out others in their room; so that they might have taken up that speech
in Virgil, Aene. l. 1.
Quae regio in terris nostri non plena laboris? as well as that which is
reported of them by St. Paul, Exivit sonus eorum in omnes terras, their sound
went forth into all Lands.

The World then is this field, not the Church alone; and in this field, the
Son of man, the heavenly Husbandman, has sown his good seed, generally and
universally, no one part excepted, In toto mundo filius hominis seminavit bonum
semen, so says Origin; for there is no barbarous nation, either past or
present, which may not in the book of nature read the works of God, and so
attain to the first principle of Religion, Deum esse, that a God there is. This
the Apostle has observed, that the invisible things of God from the Creation
of the World, have been plainly seen, i. e. as Austin does expound it, Per
visibilia creaturae pervenisse eos dicit ad intelligentiam invisibilis
creatoris; and they were also well enough informed of this, that God was to be
worshipped by them, (...), and that too in the first place, with a (...), as
Isocrates has it: nor did they know this only in the general notion, which
might be a remaining spark of the light of nature; but some of them, as
Aristotle, Plato, Tully, have written so divinely touching the nature,
attributes, and works of God, that they may seem to have consulted with the
Scriptures: and yet God did not leave them so, as if he had done bountifully
for them in giving them this knowledge that there is a God, and that this God
is to be worshipped; but he revealed so much of his will unto them, as might
enable them to live in a virtuous manner, or leave them utterly inexcusable
before God and man. The Gentiles (says St. Paul) which know not the Law, do by
nature the things contained in the Law, which show the Law written in their
hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness. Hence it is, that the ancient
Heroes attained to such a height in all moral virtues, that for bounty, valor,
magnanimity, chastity, justice, and the rest, they stand ennobled on record
unto all posterity: so that God did his part among them, and sowed good seed,
his seeds of knowledge and Religion over all his field. It was no want in him
that they went no further, that they proceeded not from moral to spiritual
graces; the fault was only in themselves, who when they had received as much as
might make way for their ambition, or vainglory, or esteem with men, cast off
all further progress in the works of piety, as an unnecessary burden, of no
use at all: by means whereof, as St. Paul charge it upon them, they held the
truth of God in unrighteousness, and so became without excuse.

Others there were who made no benefit at all of the seed sown in them, whose
hearts were waxed gross, their ears dull of hearing, such as had closed their
eyes, as it were of purpose, that so they might not see the great works of God:
whence, I beseech you, came this backwardness, this most stupid dullness? not
from the Lord, who is natura naturans; nor from the faulty error and defect of
nature, which is natura naturata; but it came merely from themselves, from
their own evil wills, and corrupt affections, their wilfulness, or negligence,
or both together. The Lord has so made man, that he has naturally in himself
a power of seeing: How comes it then to pass that some do not see? (...), so
says Theophylact; there is none so blind as they that will not see, so says
the Proverb. God gives men ears, that they may hear; and hearing, may conceive
his most holy will: How comes it then to pass that they do not hear, or
hearing do not understand? (...), says mine Author, it was their own fault
only that they are so wilful: And being so wilful as they were, and so
regardless of the mercies and grace of God, no marvel if the Lord withdrew from
them his most heavenly seed, or sowed it with a sparing and less liberal hand.
The careless servant in the Gospel, that hid his talent in a napkin, and
neither did employ it to his own or his Masters benefit, not only was rebuked
for so great a negligence, but had his talent taken from him, and it was given
to one that knew how to use it. Gods field is large, and like a large field it
consists of several parts; some places full of stones, and some full of
thorns, and many times a foot-path, or highway, that crosses over it: God
sows his good seed every where over all his Field; but more in some parts
then in others; more in the good soil, then in the stony or the thorny-ground,
or the highway side; more in the Church, then in the Synagogue; more in the
Synagogue of the Jews, then amongst the Gentiles, according as it gives
increase.

Of this we have a pregnant instance in the Jews themselves: the Word of God
had been long preached unto them, and hearing they did hear, but would not
perceive: the Son of God had been long conversant among them, and they had
seen those wonders that he had performed; which seeing they did see, but would
not believe. They had ascribed the one to Beelzebub; he casts out Devils by the
help of Beelzebub the Prince of Devils: the other t as Diabolical and impure a
spirit; Said we not that thou art a Samaritan and have a Devil? both of them
slighted and contemned in that scornful question, whence has this man this
wisdom, and these mighty things? Such men as these, that had so vilified and
abused the grace of God, could not but make themselves unworthy of a clearer
light, then that which might shine forth unto them, from a Cloud of darkness:
therefore he spoke unto them in a Parable, and without Parables spoke he not
unto them: not that the Lord envied them a more perfect ray of his Divinity, he
being that light which lights every man that comes into the World: or that he
was not willing to impart unto them sufficient means for their salvation, who
would that all men should be saved: not so, but that he found by their former
actions, how his Gospel would be entertained, if it came among them; how strong
a resolution they had made, not to be converted: he that had lessoned his
Disciples, not to cast Pearls before the Swine, had very ill observed his own
direction, had he laid open all the treasures of salvation to such obstinate
Chapmen, as were resolved to buy neither milk nor honey, though they might buy
them without money: yet that he might not leave them destitute of all outward
means, by which they might attain to the eternal life: he speaks unto them,
though far off, opens his mouth to them, though obscurely, in dark speech
and Parables. This served to intimate that he was not yet departed from them,
that he had still a care of their preservation; that he would yet be found, if
they pleased to seek; that even they also should find favor, to understand
the Word of God, if they, as his Disciples were, would be sollicitious to
enquire the meaning, (...), as the Father has it: and he himself has said,
They that seek shall find, and unto them that ask, to them it shall be given,
to know the Mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus also is it with the
Gentiles, with Gods Field in general, God sowes it only with good seed; but so
disposes that good seed, as may be most unto his Glory.

God sowes his good seed in his Field, over all the World, although not over
all in an equal measure; but the Church only brings forth fruit agreeable unto
the seed sown in her; and God rewards this fruitfulness with a further favor,
in speaking to her after a more evident and significant manner, then unto those
that are without. In which regard, the holy Prophet having said, that God had
shown his word to Jacob, his Statutes and his Ordinances unto Israel, exults
with a non taliter, that so he had not done unto other Nations, nor had the
Heathen so exact a knowledge of his holy Laws. God sowes his good seed in his
Church, his best seed in that, as being not his Field only, but his Garden too,
(for so the Spirit calls it in the Book of Canticles:) and men, we know, are
far more curious in their Gardens, then about their Fields: But in this
Church, this Garden dressed with Gods own hand, there are some Plants that
thrive and prosper more then others; and those the Lord has chosen to
inoculate in the Tree of Life; for every branch that bears fruit he purges,
as himself has told us, that it may bring forth more fruit, John 15. Let us
all therefore have a care in our several places, that we amend our lives, and
yield fruits worthy of Repentance, that being fruitful of good works in this
present Nursery, we may be all of us transplanted into the glorious Eden of
eternal life.

I should now speak of Gods propriety in this Field, and show that it is ager
suus, Gods own Field alone; but I have spoken of it sparsim, through and in
each part of this discourse, and cannot but persuade my self, that you all
know the Earth is his, because he made it; and the World his, because he
governs and directs it. And therefore here I will conclude, beseeching God,
etc.

SERMON II.
At WHITE HALL Jan. 21. 1637.
MATTHEW. 13. v. 25. But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed Tares among
the Wheat, and went his way.
SPiritus isti insinceri non desinunt perditi jam perdere, etc. In Octav.
It is the observation of Minutius, that the Devil being alienated from the
love of God, endeavors nothing more then man's destruction. It is too great a
misery, as he conceives it, to be miserable by ones self alone, and Hell too
hot to be ^^dured, if none else should endure it but the Devils: upon this
ground, no sooner had the Lord made man, but Satan labored to undo him. He had
before procured himself a party in the Heaven of glories, and amongst the
Angels, how much more easy was it for him to infect Paradise, and seduce a
woman? In which attempt, the issue proved so answerable to his hopes, that man
became divested of his chief indowments, his Justice and Integrity. Nor was
there any way to repair those ruins, but by the preaching of the word, which
he has labored ever since, either to hinder, that it be not preached at all,
or so to practice on the hearers, that it be preached with little profit. Three
parts of that good seed which God had sown upon his Field, are by those arts
made barren and unprofitable: and for the fourth, that which did fall upon good
ground, and took root downward, and began to bear fruit upwards, even that if
possible, shall be corrupted in it self, or mingled with a grain of different
and dangerous nature; for sin, as Chrysostom. In locum.
has noted; he neither could destroy it in the seed, nor scorch it in the
blade, nor choke it in the stalks, as we are told he did in the former Parable,
(...), he is resolved upon another neat device, not like to fail: this was to
watch his opportunity: and when the servants of the Husbandman were grown no
less careful of their charge, to scatter tares among the wheat, and go his
way, Cum autem dormirent homines, etc.

These words contain in them the two inseparable qualities of the old murderer,
his malice and his subtility; his malice first expressed in this that he is
inimicus ejus, Gods enemy; and secondly, in his devilish plot to destroy Gods
harvest, sevit zizania in medio tritici, his sowing tares among the Wheat. His
subtlety described in this; first, that he took his opportunity, when as the
servants of the Husbandman were fast asleep, cum dormirent homines, while men
slept: and lastly, by his quick and crafty leaving of the place, venit and
abiit, he came secretly, and departed suddenly. Of this his speedy going
thence, and of the manner of his coming, we shall say nothing at this time. It
is not for our benefit, to be too zealous of his company, in a business of this
nature, and therefore abeat, let him go: as for the residue of the Text, we
shall discourse thereof in these several Couplets. First, we shall speak unto
you of the Devil and his diligence, sevit inimicus ejus, his enemy sowed; next
of the Seminary and the seed, zizania in medio tritici, tares in the middle of
the Wheat; and thirdly, of the servants and their sluggishness, cum dormirent
homines, while men slept: of these in their order.

Victoria sine certamine constare non potest, nec virtus ipsa sine host,
L^ctant. de qusecio de c. 20.
virtue is never made more amiable then by opposition; nor should the valiant
man be more remembered then the Coward, if he had no Adversary: how little had
we known of David, had he consumed his time in sloth, and paid perhaps unto
the Nations round about him, for a secure and quiet bondage: for this cause God
has pleased to let his enemy the Devil continue still, and his creatures, and
to continue still a Devil: had he but said the word, he could have quickly made
him nothing; or had he pleased, he could have made him merely passive, and only
capable of torments; but God did leave him as he was, (save that he cast him
down to Hell,) Lact. ibid.
ut eo superando vim suam vel exerceat, vel ostendat, that so there might be
still some enemy, on which to exercise his power, and express his greatness,
I will put enmity (says God) between thee and the Woman, and between thy seed
and her seed, Genesis 3.
not betwixt the Devil and us men, though we do all descend from her, who was
the Mother of all living; but between him and our Redeemer, the promised seed,
the expectation of the Gentiles; he only is of power to bruise the head of the
old Serpent; the Devil therefore is at enmity with him alone: to him an enemy
ex professo, inimicus ejus, his enemy, to us an enemy no further then we have
reference to him, and are the children of his Kingdom, the servants of his holy
Household: with this St. Chrysostom. accords; Satan (says he) does bend his
forces most against us men; In locum.
but the occasion of his malice is not so much in hate to man, (...), as an
inveterate hate to God, whose badge and cognizance we bear: just so the King of
Ammon dealt with David's servants, not that he was displeased with them, (for
how could they poor men deserve the anger of so great a Prince?) but that he
bare no good affection to the King their Master.

In ancient times, the Images of such as capitally had offended, or otherwise
were grown odious with the common people, were broken down, and publicly
defaced in the chief assemblies; on them the people used to express their
fury, when such as they distasted were above their reach, too high for them to
strike at. Thus they of Rome, effigg^es Pisonis in Gemonias traxerant, had
drawn the Images of Piso unto the place of execution, Tacit. Annal. l. 13.
had not the Emperors power withstood it. Thus when Sejanus fell into disfavour
with his Prince, they threw down all his Statues, Hist. l. 58.
and brake them every one in pieces, as if, (says Dion) their fury had been
executed on the man himself. The like has Basil noted of this enemy the Devil;
Immediately (says he) on his Apostasy from God, he grew an open enemy unto
his Creator; but since he could not reach at him, he turns his fury on us,
(...), as being made after the Image of our Maker: Homil. Quod Deus non sit
author peccati.
yet with this difference, that he is naturally and originally a (...), and
professed enemy to God; but a man-hater, a (...), only in reference to this,
(...), because we are Gods Image, and do bear his character and superscription.
So then the Devil is not properly and principally our enemy, inimicus noster,
but Gods alone; and therefore inimicus ejus, his enemy, as the Text here calls
him.

But Satan, as he is Gods enemy, a (...), so he is Gods Ape also, a (...); He
is still haunted and possessed with his old ambition, (...), to be great as
God; and they that aim at the same greatness take commonly the same courses.
Therefore if God, in the advancement of his Kingdom, be as a man that sowed and
manured his field, his enemy will be very diligent in pra^^sing the very
self-same arts, still sowing and still sowing as he finds occasion. As for
example; it pleased the Lord to make a Covenant with Abraham, and as a sign
thereof to institute the Sacrament of Circumcision: consult with Origin upon
the 2d to the Romans Origin.
and there we find, non solum Aegyptiorum Hierophantas, that not alone the
Priests of Egypt had been taught the use of circumcision, but that it had been
taken up by the Phoenicians, Aethiopians and Arabians. The Lord thought good to
teach the Jews, as in a shadow, that certain meats should be reputed as
unclean; (...), etc. Origin.
We are informed by the same Author in his disputation against Celsus, that the
Egyptians and the Pythagoreans did the like, though in diverse kinds. But what
needs more? In many of the miracles which God wrought by Moses, we read that
the Magicians did the like by their Enchantments: And in the body of the
Scripture, we meet not oftener with the Prophets of the Lord, then with those of
Baal.

And what was all this but a kind of sowing, a sowing of such Ceremonies and
religious Ordinances, (though in the object misapplied, and in the purpose
ill-directed) which God had sowed upon his field? But since the good seed is
interpreted of the Word of God, whereby Gods Children are begotten, we will
restrain our selves more punctually to that kind of sowing, which comes
nearest thereunto, At sundry times, and diverse manners, Heb. 1.
(says the Apostle) spoke God in times past to our Fathers, viz. in dreams
and visions, and in the Sanctuaries of the Temple. The Enemy soon learnt this
Order, and will communicate his Counsels also, either in dreams and visions,
called by Philosophers (...); or else by Oracles, delivered in the inmost
Adyta, and most choice revestries of his Temples. After, when as the Lord
vouchsafed to use the Ministry of his Prophets in the composing of the
Scriptures, and had ordained that they should openly be read in the
Congregation, his enemy also did the like: For in an Apish Imitation of Gods
truth, (says Justin Martyr) there were composed not a few Books of Pagan
Theology, Dial. cum Tryphone.
(...), which he procured by his suggestions to be read publicly amongst the
Gentiles: nay, to suppress the Gospel writ by the Evangelists, and to eclipse,
as much at least as in him was, the glorious works of our Redeemer, he set on
work too lewd and shameless wretches, Hierocles and Philostratus, to write the
life of Apollonius Tyanaeus the Magician. This the most divellish and malicious
plot of all the rest, Lib. 5. c. 3.
inventum plane diabolicum, as Lactantius calls it, a stratagem in which the
enemy went beyond himself; for unto this the project tended, ut ostenderent
Apollonium vel paria vel majora fecisse, that Apollonius had done more and
greater miracles then the Messiah. When this succeeded not aright, and that
Gods holy truth did notwithstanding mightily prevail in every place, he then
took order to divulge a Gospel, as I so may say, of his own enditing. This he
entitled The true History of Christ and Pilate, Eusebius. hist. l. 9. c. 4.
though full indeed of dangerous, false, and foolish fancies; and won so
far upon the Emperors then being, (men fit enough for such a mischief,) that
they gave order to all Schoolmasters throughout the Empire, (...), that they
should catechize their Scholars according to the Story so set out and
falsified. So careful is the enemy not to be wanting to his hopes, but still to
be in action, still to pursue those Arts and Counsels which may advance him to
his greatness. If God advance his Christ, the enemy will have his Antichrist;
if God raise up his Jesus, the enemy will have his Jesuits; if God be as a man
that sows, or a Seminator, will not the enemy also have his Seminaries?

I have pursued this Argument, the rather in this manner, because I would not
have the enemy estimated either by his diligence, or by his cunning: not by his
diligence, his constant following of the Plough, his frequent scattering of his
seed; for all his pains, his sowing in our Saviors field, and mingling with
the Sons of God, tends to this alone, to make them filii nequam, the Children
of the wicked one, fit only for the fiery Furnace: nor by his cunning, his
subtle imitation of the ways and paths of God; for God himself has told us
of him, that Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light, and that his
Ministers also are transformed as the Ministers of righteousness. 2 Cor. 11.
14, 15.
Diligence and a seeming sanctity are not the most infallible signs of the true
Husbandman indeed, unless they be applied to their proper end, the furthering
and promoting of Gods heavenly Husbandry. There never was a more industrious
and active generation then the Arian Heretics, either in working on the
choicest and most excellent wits, or in insinuating into the hearts and bosoms
of the greatest Princes. Never did any sort of men bear greater sway amongst
the vulgar then did once the Donatists, by mere appearances of their zeal and
devout affections; and yet both of them doubtless were the Devils Agents. No
question but it is a Trade more full of gain then godliness, to be continually
sowing in the fields of other men, to build upon another ground, to range
abroad and graze, and fat our selves upon other men's enclosures. What then
advise we to be done? only that we would try the spirits, whether they be of
God or not; that we consider of the fruits, for by their fruits, as Christ has
told us, we shall know them. Of us it is expected that we rest not satisfied
with the outward show, that we esteem not of the seed, because the Husbandman
is painful at his Plough continually, and seems in face as was Nathaniel in
his heart, an Husbandman that had no guile: Of us it is expected that we sift
the grain, to see if it be Wheat indeed, or at best but tares. This we shall
easily discern, if we reflect a little upon the nature of these tares, and take
a just view of the same, both in the seminary and the seed; zizania in medio
tritici, tares among the wheat, my next Couplet.

Natural est odisse quem laeseris, Minut. Fe^.
It is a natural vice in man, having once wronged another, to resolve to hate
him; and being once resolved to hate him, to seek occasions how to wrong him. A
vice derived originally from the Devil, in whom my Author first observed it
drawn into practice by them only whom the old enemy of God has instructed in
it; for he by his aspiring sins having displeased his Lord and Maker, conceived
so deep an hate against him, that now it is not possible he should desist from
doing the effects of spite and fury. In the expressing of which hate and fury,
he deals with God as Sampson with the Philistines, when he could hurt him no
way else, he destroys his Harvest. So much the Text affirms for certain, sevit
zizania in medio tritici, that he sowed tares among the Wheat. And of the tares
themselves, what they should be, and how the place must be expounded, it
resolves so clearly, that if we will, we may with ease compose that difference
of opinion which seems to be betwixt the Fathers. Strom. l. 6.
Clemens of Alexander, In locum.
Origin, Hist. Eccle. d. 3. c. 26.
Eusebius, Tom. 2. p. 318. gl.
Athanasius, In locum.
St. Hierome, and Theophylact, conceive by tares, the Devils Doctrine,
haereses, mala dogmata, (...), dogmata haereticorum. Beda will have them to be
generally vices, faeditates vitiorum; not to descend to later writers. And on
the other side, Hexaem. hom. 5.
St. Basil, In locum.
Chrysostom and Euthymius, interpret it of Heretics, of the men themselves.
qu. Evang. in Matthew.
St. Austin makes a question whether the Schismatic should not be added to the
other, and leave it in a manner with a potest dubitari, as a matter doubtful.
St. Cyprian Epist. 3. l. 3.
conceives it generally of the wicked men: and Justin qu. 22. ad Orthod.
Martyr seems to me, to lean more that way then the other. And unto these,
these Fathers that do so expound it, our Saviors gloss upon the Text gives
most advantage, v. 38.
who tells us, that the Tares are the Children of the wicked one, i. e. of the
Devil.

To reconcile which difference, or rather to interpret favorable of those
other Fathers, who seem to have departed from the letter of our Saviors
Commentary, we may thus resolve it; that those whom first we named apply the
Text as in the moral, and that the others keep themselves unto the letter. Or
thus; the tares are said to be the Children of the wicked one, not properly,
but by a Metonymie ab effectu, that is, they are that seed by which the
Children of the wicked one are all begotten. Hemingius in Postill.
A Protestant Writer of good note does expound it thus, Quid fecit inimicus?
Seminavit in agro Domini haereticam doctrinam, ex eo autem semine nascuntur
zizania, i. e. filii nequam: nor does he stand alone herein without some to
second him; for Origin amongst the ancients comes up close unto him; In locum.
In toto mundo seminavit malus ille zizania, quae sunt sermones pravi, ex
malitia orti, mali filii. Where plainly he makes wicked and malicious Sermons,
sermones pravos, as he calls them, to be these tares, these children of the
wicked one; which must needs be, because the children of the wicked one are
many times begotten by them. So then, we draw to this atonement, that we may
understand these tares not only of the Heretics, and other children of the
Dev^l, as in the letter; but of their wicked Doctrine, as in the moral; yea,
and according to our Saviors garb of speech, which was by Allegories, Tropes
and Parables, in the true meaning of the figure.

Sevit zizania inimicus, the enemy sowed tares: And certainly, the Devil could
not more cunningly have expressed his malice then in this particular, for in it
self the tare is of a dangerous and malignant nature; and in particular, Ovid.
it is noted by the Herbalists of all times and ages, lolium oculis officere,
that it hurts the eyes. This Ovid also has observed in his book de Fastis; Et
careant loliis oculos vittantibus agri, as his words there run. An observation
so exact, that lolio victitare, to feed on tares, was grown into a common
Proverb, applied to those which were dimsighted. It is an excellent note of
Aristotle, E^hico^um. l. 1. c. 7.
that as the eye is to the body, (...), that so the mind or understanding is
to the soul: it is that part thereof which does illuminate and direct the rest,
the will and the affections; and if that eye be single, the whole body will be
full of light; but if we feed upon these tares, tares of the Devils sowing, and
doctrines of the Devils raising, how great a darkness will invade us, what a
perpetual night confound us? For if the light be darkness, ipsae tenebrae
quantae? how great then is that darkness, says Christ our Savior? shall we
not then be like the Citizens of Sodom, blind upon the sudden, enquiring for
the Sun at noone, wearying our selves to find that door that is shut against
us? or rather, shall not that great misery befall us, which we find mentioned
in this Chapter, that seeing we shall see, but shall not perceive? Error, and
Heresy, and Schism, how plausible soever they may seem in the outward show,
are but unkind and treacherous guests. We may compare them to those sparrowes
in the Book of T^bit, which roosted in his walls, and made their nests within
his Courts; but when he took his rest, and did least expect it, they muted warm
dung in his eyes, and a gross whiteness came upon them, that he could not
see; nor knew his Doctors how to help him. They are blind leaders of the
blind, says Christ our Saviout, i. e. as Lyra glosseth on it, In locum.
exaecant alios errore suo, they make the people blind with errors.

There is another dangerous quality in the tare as great as this; for being
mixed in bread it procures giddiness. Not. Hist. l. 18. c. 17.
Era (says Pliny) cum est in pane celerrime vertigines facit. Rovillius a
late Herbalist observes, that it is intoxicating also, et temulentiam vini modo
excitare, l. 4: c. 24.
and that it makes men drunk as it were with Wine. So far avowed by
Theophrastus, that it is (...), Hist. Plant. l. 9.
sluggish and dull, and breeds Diseases in the head, the capital and chief
fortress of the Isle of man, which once surprised with ache and giddiness, and
distemper, how easy will it be to subdue the rest? Thus is it also with false
Factions and Schismatical Doctrines, if mingled with the bread of Life. The
Word of God, (...), how excellent is it in it self, how sweet a nourishment
unto life eternal? But if the tares of Heresy and Schism be mingled with it,
then it becomes, as the wise man calls it, Prove. 4. 17. and 20. 17. and 23.
panis impietatis, bread of wickedness; panis mendacii, bread of lies; and
panis mendax, bread of falsehood. Such as do eat thereof, however it may please
the palate, will find it gravel in their mouths, and bitterness within the
stomach, and giddiness within the head. The Cup of the New Testament, how
pleasant is it in it self, how powerful to the remission of our sins? yet if
the juice of these foul tares be mingled in it, then is it vinum iniquitatis,
the wine of wickedness, and vinum prostitutionis, the wine of fornication, as
the Prophet calls it: such as do drink thereof, how drunken will they be with
the Cup of abomination and filthiness, the wine of the wrath of God poured out
in the Cup of his indignation? We note it of this kind of men, with what a
giddiness they are possessed in all their ways, how strangely they are madded
on their own dear fancies, and as it were besotted with the folly of their own
inventions. The Lord has mingled spiritum vertiginis, the spirit of giddiness
and perverseness in the midst of Egypt, and made them err in every work
thereof, Esaias 19. 14.
as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit.

Galen relates in his first Book de facultate alimoniae, how once, Cap. ult.
the year being unseasonable and intemperate, there sprung up an exceeding
quantity of tares among the wheat; the store of wheat in the mean time, was
very small; and therefore neither the Husbandmen nor Bakers did sift it, as
they ought to do, with skreenes and triers for that purpose, but sold the wheat
and tares together: hereupon many of the people began to be diseased, and ill
affected in their heads; but at the coming on of Summer, (...), they brake out
all of them into boyles and botches. On this the wise Physician gives this
Caveat, that we do carefully pick out these tares, (...) (as his words there
are) and part them from our heaps of Corn, lest else we also fall into the same
distempers and inconveniences. Do we not note it also thus in the condition of
false, schismatical, and factious Doctrines, and the progress of them? The
enemy has been diligent, there is no doubt of that, in sowing tares amongst
the wheat; and many of his Bayl^ffs careless in the sifting of them, because
their store of wheat is small; and are not some of them, which are (as were
those Bakers of whom Galen speaks) the makers, the dividers of this bread unto
the people, either on negligence or set purpose, guilty alike of this
Imposture? That such there are, fraudulent and deceitful Bakers of the bread of
life, is more then certain: the destiny of Pharaohs Baker be upon them; for
what can follow hereupon but strange distempers in the head, and foul diseases
in the body, fallings away from God, breach of the common bond of peace; and in
the end, perhaps total Apostasies from the faith and Gospel? And then what
next, but that, in the Apostles Language, as they did not like to acknowledge
God, so does God give them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which
are not convenient. Romans 1. 28.
If Nicolas the Deacon fall away from the holy truth, and overthrow the faith
of some, no question but that he or his will also do those things which the
Lord hates: and Simon Magus, if he have once the Gall of bitterness within,
what else can be expected from him, but a promiscuous and lawless liberty
indifferenter utendi foeminis, ^ugust. de ^eres. c. 1.
which came in fine to be his Doctrine? The Shipwreck of the faith is commonly
attended by as great a Shipwreck of the Conscience; however, for the most part
notably dissembled: for remedy whereof, we will apply the counsel and advice of
Galen in our Saviors Language, Matthew. 16.
Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces: or in the phrase
of the Apostles Purge therefore out the old leaven, 1 Cor. 5. v. 8.
the leaven of wickedness and malice, and let us keep the feasts of God with
the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

But yet the Devil stayed not here, the Devil as in malice he is inimicus, a
malignant enemy, so in his cunning he is serpens, as wise and subtle as a
Serpent: therefore he did not only sow his tares in agro Domini, in the Lords
field* but even in medio tritici, in the middle of the wheat it self; and in
that act played both his prizes: for it is generally noted of the tare, that it
is frugum pestis, the very bane and plague of all other grain, and for that
reason called by Virgil, infelix lolium: nor does the name thereof in the Greek
Originalls assure us of a better Omen; for the zizanion of my Text is in the
grand Etymologicon so called, quasi (...), vel (...), because it grows up with
the wheat, and at last destroys it. And (...), by which name the two great
Doctors, Galen and Theophrastus, have given it to us, in the same work is said
to be derived by a Metathesis (...), which signifies to vitiate, or to corrupt;
the tares corrupting the good seed, by being mixed and made up with it into
bread, as I have told you out of Galen; but that which is the greatest danger,
is, that if not looked to in time, the wheat may chance to be destroyed, and
all the field run over and pestred with them; for Pliny tells us of a certain,
triticum circumligando en^care, De cause. Plantarum, l. 5. 22.
that winding round about the wheat, at the last it kills it; or if not so as
he delivers, yet it devoures it in the end, by growing up with it, and
overspreading all the field in the which it grows, as Theophrastus rather
thinks.

And have we not observed it thus in Heresy, false Doctrine, In locum.
Schism? Has not St. Chrysostom observed, that Satan did forbear his tares,
when there was nothing to be hurt; and that he sowed them when the wheat had
taken root, (...), that so he might destroy the hopes and whole endeavors of
the heavenly Husbandman? And has not Lyra noted well, that therefore did the
enemy sow his tares, In locum.
even in the middle of the wheat, ad ipsius destructionem, only of purpose to
destroy it: destroy it? how? either by winding round about it, or overrunning
all the field in which it is. By winding round about it first, as does the Ivy
with the Oak, till it has sucked out all the juice, and made it fit for
nothing but the very fire. Faction and error so behave themselves to the Word
of God, as Judas did to God the Word. They are both of them cunning Traitors,
killing sometimes in their embraces, and sometimes betraying in their kisses.
Or if not thus, yet they destroy it at the last by over-spreading all the
Church, and eating out the truth of Doctrine; if not, tell me, if in the Jewish
Church the Pharisees had not almost made the Commandments of God of none
effect by their traditions. Tell me, if in the Christian Church the tares of
error and false Doctrine had not even overgrown the Gospel; if the Popes
Canon, and the proud dictates of the Schoolmen, had not usurped into the Chair
and Throne of Scripture: certain I am, that Friar Richard de Man's in the
Trent-Councel did publicly maintain, and with good applause, that all the
points of faith had been so clearly handled by those Schoolmen, ut ea ex
Scripturis discere nil opus esset, Hist. Con. T^id.
that now the word of God was no longer serviceable: so truly was it Satan's
purpose, not only by the sowing of his tares to corrupt Religion, but by that
cunning to supplant it. And all this while, what was become of those to whom
the Lord had farmed his field, and leased out his Vineyard? My Text makes
answer to this question, and tells us that they were asleep, wherein we have
the Servants and their sluggishness, my last Couplet; cum dormirent homines,
while men slept.

Invadunt urbem somno vinoque sepultam. Vi^gil.
Cities are sometimes soonest taken when the siege is raised, and all the
Watchmen made secure; for when the enemy is near, and a Trench cast about the
Walls, the Watch is doubled, and there are Sentinels and Scouts in every
corner, to mark the motions of the Enemy, and observe his purposes: so also was
it with the grand enemy of Gods Field in general; but more especially in
reference to that particular part thereof which we call the Church. As long as
he essayed to batter down the Bulwarks in the House of God, he was more closely
watched, and all men's eyes were bent upon him; but having lulled it once
asleep, drenched it in sensuality, corrupted it with ease and prohibited
pleasures, then was his time to venture on it, and to sow his tares; an
opportunity well watched. No sooner did men sleep, no sooner were the servants
drowsy, and regardless of so great a charge, but he was straight about his
business; no sooner did men sleep: I^ locum.
what men? Lyra makes answer, the Apostles: what of their negligence? no, God
forbid; but of the death, the last sleep and departure of those blessed
spirits. Qu. Evang^^. in Mat.
St. Austin and In locum.
Euthymius do a little touch at this conceit, and they only touch it: but
Eus^b. hist. l. 3. c. 26.
Egesippus with great confidence affirms it, saying, that after the Apostles
deaths, the Heretics did then begin to lift up their heads, and advance their
errors, mingling their tares, (...), their false and commentitious Doctrines,
with the truth and Gospel. This we believe indeed, that then the Heretics
became more insolent and adventurous then before they were, and did oppose the
Gospel, as he tells us there, (...), with the greater impudence; but yet I am
not of opinion, that this should be the sleep, and these the men intended in
the present Scripture.

With how much better reason does the Gloss expound it of a general negligence
both in the Pastor and the people? I^ locum.
a negligence of private men, circa custodiam suae propriae personae, in the
preserving and defense of their several souls; a negligence of the public
Pastors, circa custodiam gregis sui, in the ill tending of the flock committed
to them. This exposition of the Gloss confirmed by Chrysostom, where he
informs us of a misery of no mean quality, like to befall those sleepy souls to
whom the Husbandman had left his field; yet not the Priest or Prelate only,
(...), but the people also: otherwise, as the Apostle said, that if there were
no Resurrection, then were the Christians of all men most miserable; so were
the Priest and Prelate the most miserable of all other Christians, if all men's
sins were rated only on their scores; and they to give up an account of every
soul in their several charges. In locum.
Its true indeed, that both Euthymius and St. Hierome understand here only
magistros and praeceptores ecclesiarum, the teachers and overseers of the
Church. And so far we may yield unto them, that it is meant of them
principally, and as public Ministers, which are to have a care of the common
safety; but so, that every private man is included also in the Parable. The
Devil first makes his advantage of the negligence of private persons, and
whiles they sleep secure and careless, he scatters in their hearts the seeds
of Heresy and error, that so they may be able to infect their brethren. The
enemy never sends out any of his Foxes to destroy Gods Harvest, till he put
firebrarnds in their tails. This done, he seeks occasion to employ them in the
destruction of the wheat, in the infection of the Church; and therein also
makes advantage of the security and negligence of their Superiors, of their
Rulers. These the Lords Bailiffs, as it were, to whom he has entrusted his
holy Husbandry: and if they sleep, if once they grow remiss and careless, what
else can we expect, but that these tares take root, and outgrow the Wheat, and
in conclusion overcome it?

Now in the Church we may observe three several kinds of sleepiness, all of
them in their course predominant, and of ill effect; the sleep of negligence,
the sleep of ignorance, and the sleep of sensuality. The first, the sleep of
negligence; and so St. Austin does expound it, but while men slept, i. e. says
he, Cum negligentius agerent praepositi Ecclesiae, when as the Rulers of Gods
House grew dull and careless of their Watch, and were not mindful of their
duties. This the disease, even of the best and purest Ages; for which is there
almost of the Angels of the seven Churches, which is not branded with this
mark, during the lives of the Apostles, the falling from the love of Christ,
the tolerating of the Nicolaitans, the suffering of the Woman Jesebel to seduce
Gods servants; the want of piety in one, zeal in another, and that poor little
strength of faith which was remaining in the third, what were they but the sad
effects of dull and negligent security in the several Pastors? But the
Apostles being gone, those which did oversee the overseers, there followed by
degrees an infectious drowsiness over all the Church, still more inclining to
this sleep the more they were accustomed to it.

The times of Nazianzen, how watchful were they in respect of those succeeding?
yet he complains, in his Epistle to Nectarius, Orat. 46.
as if the providence of God had been quite wanting to his Church. The Arians
grown so insolent, that they made open profession of their Heresy, (...), as
if they had been authorized and licensed to it. The Macedonians so
presumptuous, (...), etc. that they were formed into a Church, and had a
titulary Bishop of their own Sect. The Apollinarians held the^r Conventicles,
(...), with as much safety and esteem as the Orthodox Christians. And for
Eunomius, (...), the bosom-mischief of those times, he thought so poorly of a
general connivence, that at last nothing would content him but to have all men
else to be his Disciples. Of all which scandalls and disorders, the said
Nectarius then being Patriarch of Constantinople, the greatest Prelate of the
East, is there affirmed to be the cause: A man, as the Historian says of him,
(...), Socrat. Hist. l. 5. c. 8.
of an exceeding fair and plausible demeanor, and very gracious with the
people; one that chose rather, as it seems, to give free way to all men's
fancies, and suffer every man's proceedings, then draw upon himself the envy of
a stubborn Clergy, and a factious multitude. A pregnant evidence, that possibly
there cannot be a greater mischief in a Christian Church then a popular
Prelate: If so, if by the negligence and connivence of one man alone so great a
spoil was made in the Church of God, how busy think we was the enemy in sowing
tares, when as this negligence was epidemical, and in a manner universal over
the people?

The second kind of sleep which did invade the Church of God, was the sleep of
ignorance; a sleep of such a general latitude, that neither Priest nor people
were able to hold up, or to look abroad. The Priests lips destitute of
knowledge, the people so regardless, that they did not seek it; both so
defective in their duties, that at the last the Priest, like those in Irenaeus,
veritatis ignorantiam cognitionem vocant, taught, that the safest knowledge was
to know nothing; and, as they preached, even so the people did believe: if not,
tell me who can what was become of the gift of tongues? is it not noted to our
hands, Quod Graece nosse suspectum foret, Hebraice prope haereticum, that it
was Heresy almost to be seen in Hebrew, and a misprision of Heresy to be
skilled in Greek? And for the Latin, the Books still extant of those times
will inform us easily, that there was nothing left of it, no not the words:
Ennead. 9.
Or of the Arts; does not Sabellicus complain how totally they were forgotten
in the middle Ages, Quanta bonarum artium per id tempus oblivio invaluerit? Or
of the Laws; do we not read how they were buried in a manner with the great
Emperor their Collector, till in the latter days, Lotharius Emperor of
Germany found an old Copy of them at Amalphi in the Realm of Naples? Or of the
Scriptures; was not the Book sealed up for many Ages? and had not worldly
policy so far prevailed above true piety, that it was made unlawful, if not
capital, to look into it? Nor was this ignorance only in the people; but as
the Prophet said in another case, A^ is the people such was the Priest, and as
the Priest was such were the people: nay, In Chronolog.
even the Cardinal complains of an infelix seculum, an unhappy age in which
was neither famous Scholar, nor Pope that cared much how Religion went: which
being so, Divinity it self, and all the Arts and helps unto it, laid to so
long and dead a sleep, no question but the enemy was exceeding diligent, both
in the ripening of his old tares, and in sowing new.

There is a kind of sleep yet left as hurtful ^o the Church as the other two,
the sleep of sensuality, and of immoderate ease and pleasures; a sleep like
that described in the sixth of Amos, They lie (says he) upon benches of Ivory,
and stretch themselves upon their couches; they carouse wine in bowls, and
anoint themselves with the chief ointments. Did not the Prophet think you
reflect a little on the last Ages of the Church? or may not his description
with good reason be applied unto them? if not, why did St. Bernard in a pious
anger upbraid the Clergy of those times with their Stage-like gestures, their
meretricious neatness, their pompous habits and retinue? Incedunt nitidi and
ornati, S^rm. 33. and 37. in Cant.
and circumamicti varietatibus, more like (says he) unto a spruce and
Court-like Bridegroom, then the severe Guardians of the Spouse of Christ. Could
it be thought that men so neat and complete as those, drowned in effeminacy and
ease, and surfeited with too much fulness, would leave the pleasures of the
world, to mind the business of the Church; or shake away their pleasant
slumbers, to entertain so sour a Mistress as the perplexities of learning, and
the severities of Discipline? Pluta^ch.
Nunquam putabam fore, I never thought (said Cicero) that such a curious youth
as Caesar, one that so smoothly combed his hair, and rnbbed his head with his
forefinger, would either have the happiness or the heart to vanquish Pompey.
Though Tully was deceived in the event of that great action, yet his conjecture
had good grounds. And we may well apply it to them; that sure such men as in
those days had the sole managing of the Church when as these tares were sown,
and had brought forth fruit, were never like to cross the enemy in that
purpose, or disappoint him of his hopes, or overcome him at the last in the
main encounter: not that the Priests and Prelates were all such without
exception, (for the worst times have brought forth brave and virtuous men, and
such as stand upon record for their eminent piety;) but that they were thus for
the most part, (...).

Thus have I shown unto you three several kinds of sleep, which had not only
seized the people, but also had surprised the Watchmen, and made blind the
seers, and laid up the Guardians; and hard it is to say which of the three gave
most increase to the Devils Harvest. The Pastors, careless of their duties,
aimed at this especially, that they themselves might live in peace, and die, if
possible, in the general love and good opinion of their people. Here were the
tares first sown, and neither noted in the seed, nor in the blade; for either
the opinion taken up was but the fancy of some few, eminent like enough in
point of learning; or some such innovation in the Churches orders, as seemed
not in it self to violate the sacred truth, or threaten any present danger to
the common quiet. And then what was it but a vain and faulty curiosity, either
to quarrel with a man so much renowned in point of knowledge, or to enquire
into their meaning and intentions who loved the Lord too well to disturb his
Church? By which connivence, this plausible and popular beheaviour of the
Watchmen, the enemy first entered upon Gods inheritance; and having sown his
tares, departed, went away in good assurance of success. Afterward, when this
negligence was lulled into an ignorance, the tares were grown into a stalk, and
began to sprout; but who was able to discern them? Bellarmine counts it an
especial happiness in those days of darkness, ut nullae novae surgerent
haereses, that there arose not in the Church any upstart Heresy. Chronol.
And why so great an happiness, but because that wretched Age neither afforded
learned Scholar to confute them, nor public Council to condemn them? How much
more happy had it been had not those seeds of error which were sown before,
then took advantage to spring up? had not the darkness been so great, like that
of Egypt, that one scarce saw another, neither rose any from his seat, to look
unto the public safety? But in the end, when as the Priest and Prelate became
luxurious and wanton, stretched on their beds of case, and lulled asleep with
too much plenty, then came the tares to bring forth fruit, and to appear in
their own likeness; yet was there then less hope then ever. Did those that
dwelt upon the Nile, and were accustomed to the noise, ever observe the fall
and roaring of the waters? Or grant we, that they saw these tares, and took
notice of them, shall we conceive that men so drowned in ease and pleasure
would undertake a restitution of the ancient Discipline? Was any thing more
odious to the Court of Rome, then the attempts that some of the more pious
Popes had made of a Reformation? rather like the Amyclae, an Italian people,
they passed a Law, Ne quis de hostium adventu famam spargeret, that no man
should presume from that time forwards to give them notice of these tares, or
of the near approach of the common enemy. Nay, at the last this Bastards Reign
shall be legitimated by the Common Counsel, proclaimed to be good seed of the
Lords own sowing; and then what man is he that dare call them tares?

In which so long a night of several and distracted sleeps, in what a wretched
state had the Church been think we, had not the Lord awakened some to have a
care unto his field, and to take notice of these tares? Once the affairs of
Rome were brought unto so low an ebb, that there was nothing of the City left
them but the very Capitol, Aug. de ^ivit. l. 2. 4.
and that too in a possibility to have been surprised, ni anseres Diis
dormientibus vigilassent, had not their Geese been better to them then their
Gods. Hus, as my Books inform me, in the Bohemian Language, of which Land he
was, does signify a Goose; had not this Hus, this Goose, and such men as he,
H^erome of Prague, W^clif and Luther, and the rest, (though men which had, I
grant, their own several errors) discovered by their noise and cackling the
near approches of the enemy, and so awakened all the World out of that dull
security in the which it was, how easy had it been for Satan to have gained
the Capitol; yea, to have rooted all the Wheat out of the field of our
Redeemer? But at the last the World awakened, and being thoroughly awakened,
some discerned those tares which had so long been sown by this subtle enemy;
and having once discerned them, took a speedy order in many places of Gods
field to weed them out: a thing of great offense to the Court of Rome, which
took it very ill to be so awakened and startled from their pleasant slumbers.
Marvel it is, that like unto the sensual Sibarites, their Italian Neighbors
too, they banished not all cocks the verge and territory of their Church, ut
mollus viz. cubarent, nulloque illorum strepitu interpellarentur; for fear
their sleeps should be disturbed, and themselves called on to repentance.

For our parts, as we are a parcel of this common field, it cannot be denied by
our greatest adversaries, that from the sleep of ignorance and sensuality we
have been very well awakened; and we begin to be awakened also from the sleep
of negligence. And certainly it is high time that it should be so, standing
besieged as we do by two several enemies; both laboring to subvert our Church,
and to advance their own in the ruins of it: For, to speak truth, the present
quality of our Church may with most fitness be resembled unto that of the
Primitive times, when both the powerful Arians* and the popular Donatists were
both at once in Arms against it: or if we will, we may compare it no less
fitly to the State of Rome, during the second Punick War. We have the
Macedonians upon all the skirts and quarters of our Empire, calling to mind
the Reputation of their Ancestors, the great Dominion they have lost; and
watching all advantages to enlarge their border. And there is Annibal ad
portas, a nearer enemy at hand, at our very Gates, (...), as the Father called
Eunomius, a bosom Traitor, which grindeth upon our very entrails like
Prometheus vulture. One side assailes openly, and profess their enmity; and by
a sign distinctive, as they please to call it, give us to understand that they
are but tares: These, like the wild Bore in the Psalms, endeavor in a public
way to destroy our Vineyard. Secretior Pompeius Caesare, non melior; The other,
a more close and secret enemy, does not so much assault the Church, as
undermine it; but they aim both of them at the same mark, the subjugating of
the Church, and the chief Sovereignty of the State, and have the same end of
their journey, although they travel diverse ways. Is this a time think we to
sleep and slumber, and stretch our hands in negligence and a careless sloth?
Did ever any Mariner permit his eyes to sleep, or eyelids to slumber, sailing
betwixt Sylla and Charibdis? Or can we think the Romans looked not then about
them, assailed at once by Greece and Carthage? or that the primitive Christians
stood not on their Guard, when both the subtle Arian and Saint-seeming
Donatist did oppose her Doctrine? Assuredly when men are compassed round with
dangers, and that they have not only foreign, but domestic enemies, they have
good reason to be watchful.

Thus, as we see, our dangers are alike on both sides, though we perhaps are
not alike or equally affected in apprehension of those dangers. On the one
side, we think there never can be watch enough, that all those Laws and
Proclamations which are out against them are not sufficient to secure us, and
dispossess us of our fears: And now that his most sacred Majesty has given
new life unto those Laws, and by his royal Edict declared his pleasure, that
no man shall presume hereafter to practice on his weak and unsettled subjects,
for the reduction of them unto the superstition of the Church of Rome; we
think, as true indeed it is, that he has shown his zeal to the House of God,
and that we cannot magnify him as we ought to do. But on the other side, we
think there needs no watch at all, that those few Laws and Canons which are
now in force for preservation of the Churches peace and safety, may very well
be spared, and laid by for ever. And if his Majesty vouchsafe to give command
unto his Prelates, to have an eye unto the unity and uniformity of their
several Churches, and to reduce them to her primitive luster: he is not only
sure to hear of it in those scandalous Pamphlets which every day are offered to
the public view, but shall have many close ill-willers, that secretly repine
and murmur at so brave a piety; I will not say from what bad humor this
proceeds, but sure I am, to say the best, that it proceeds from a
misapprehension of the Churches danger; and that we would persuade our selves,
that the intentions of these men are harmless, and themselves contemptible; and
that their wheat is pure and clean, not any dangerous tare amongst it; but I
could tell you, had I time, and may perhaps take time to do it in prosecution
of this Parable, that they have introduced into the Church the ancient Heresies
of the Novatians, Donatists, Aerians, Priscillianists, and the Apostolici; with
those of Bardesanes and Florinus; which I spoke of lately: not to say any thing
of those dangerous principles which they are known to hold among them against
peace and government. High time assuredly both for Prince and Prelate to have
an eye upon them, and to watch their doings. Gird then thy Sword upon thy
thigh, O thou most mighty man of valor, ride on with Worship and Renown
because of Gods, thine and the Churches enemies. And may it be thine happiness,
as it is thy care, to have thy Watchmen vigilant, thy Servants faithful, and
thy Council circumspect, that so no tare, either of error or false Doctrine,
may ever grow upon those Churches under thy Dominion.

SERMON III.
At WHITE HALL Jan. 28. 1638.
MATTHEW. 13. v. 26. But when the blade sprung up, and had brought forth fruit,
then appeared the tares also.
PRosperum ac felix scelus virtus vocatur: Seneca.
Succesfull mischief is often crowned with the name of virtue; and he is counted
fortunate, whose designs do prosper, how wretched and unjust soever. The
wicked man is not ashamed of doing ill, but of being detected; nor does he fear
the sin but the discovery: this makes them, as they love to sin, so to sin in
secret, as if the darkness would conceal their naughtiness; or if it could be
hid from God, because committed in a corner. But God from Heaven looks down
upon them, and derides their follies, and brings them at the last to the open
light, that howsoever they have sinned in secret, they may receive the wages
and reward of sin in public. And thus it was with Satan in the present
Parable, whose footsteps and example his Disciples follow. When he intended to
destroy Gods Harvest, he did it in a time of darkness, Cum dormirent homines,
when all the servants were asleep. And that he might be sure to avoid
discovery, he did the feat alone, in private, without any company; Venit and
abiit, ^aith the Text, his coming was in secret, his departure sudden, so that
no notice could be taken of him when the deed was doing, and not much neither
being done: for he made choice of such a seed to sow and scatter in Gods field,
which was so like the wheat in an outward show, and promised such a rich
increase to the heavenly Harvest, that it was no small difficulty to
distinguish which was Gods, which his. And all this while who could have
otherwise conceived but that he had been very fortunate in his undertaking, and
his tares good wheat? but yet at last it fell out contrary to his expectation,
God making a discovery of his subtle practices, and manifesting to his Church
the danger in the which it stood. And howsoever that men slept when the seed
was sown, and that they looked not after it when the blade sprung up; yet when
it came to bring forth fruit, then their eyes were opened, and they were able
to distinguish between wheat and tares. But when the blade sprung up, and had
brought forth fruit, Cum autem crevisset herba, and fructum fecisset, then
appeared the tares also.

In handling of these words, I shall consider these things following. First, Of
what kind those Doctrines were which were sown by Satan, and are deciphered
here by the name of tares. Secondly, That there was no way to discern those
Doctrines, the falsehood and ill nature of them in the seed or stalks, until
they came to bring forth fruit. Thirdly, That every Doctrine of what sort
soever does produce some fruit, by which it may be known whether true or false:
and Fourthly, That when the fruits appeared, then it was easy to discover of
what sort they were. Of these, or of as many of them as the time will suffer,
beginning with the nature of these Doctrines which are here intended.

Sapientis est male facere si and utile sit and tutum. Lactan. l. 3. 17.
It was a maxim with the Epicures, that no wise man forbears to pursue his
most wicked counsels, in case they might conduce to profit, and be done with
safety. A dangerous and most mischievous principle, if once put in practice;
and such as could proceed from no other Fountain, then the first Father of all
falsehood. He indeed had been versed therein from the first beginnings, even
from the first attempt that he made on man; in which he took upon himself the
shape and title of a Serpent, the most subtle beast, to work upon the weakness
of a woman, the most feeble sex. The profit that he aimed at in that grand
imposture, was to attain that Empire on the earth over wretched man which he
had failed of in the Heavens, and amongst the Angels. And he conceived himself
secure in the undertaking, both in regard of this disguise, and the condition
of the party that he was to deal with. Thus was it then, and thus it has been
ever since. For the old Serpent is no changeling, Horace.
but still keeps his own, qualis ab incoepto processerit, the same Serpent
still. God had no sooner sown his field with celestial seed, but straight the
Devil was at hand to disperse his tares: by doing which he might not only spoil
Gods Harvest, but increase his own. This was the profit that he aimed at: which
that he might be sure to procure with safety, and not incur the least
suspicion of imposture till his croppe was ripe, he did not only watch his
opportunity whiles the servants slept; but sowed the field with such a grain
that could not easily be discerned when they were awake.

For tares, zizania, if we consider them according to the first appearance, and
in the manner of their growth, are not much different from the wheat. Folio
oblongo sunt, and culmo tritici graciliore, so says Rovillius, and with him
diverse others of the modern Herbalists. Nay many of the ancient writers have
observed no less, In locum.
Zizania tritico similia esse in arundine, dissimilia in fructu; the difference
is not in the blade or stalk, but the fruit alone: So says Euthymius
Zigabenus. Between the tares and wheat, whilst they are yet in herba, in the
blade or stalk, grandis similitudo est, In Matthew. 13.
there is no small similitude: So Hierome. Lastly, To add no more, we are told
by Chrysostom, that it was Satan's cunning to disguise his errors under the
mask and veil of truth, that so he might more easily seduce the simple, and
beguile the ignorant. And for that very cause (says he) he made choice of
these tares, (...), being so like unto the wheat in the first appearing, that
it was very hard to know which was right. [ Tostatus has affirmed as much in
his work on Matthew; Nam herba tritici and zizaniorum similis est, sed grana
dissimilia, the fruit, says he, is different, though the blades be like.] Lay
these particulars together, and they come to this, that the false Doctrines
noted and intended in the present Parable were such as had a show of truth, and
might be easily mistook for sound Orthodox Tenets; but being afterward
discovered and examined, were disproved as dangerous.

So then the errors and false Doctrines which are noted here, and said to have
been sown by Satan, in medio tritici, even in the middle of the Church, were
not like those of Arius, who denied the Deity, or of the Valentinians, who
denied the Manhood of our Lord and Savior; or of the Marcionites and Maniches,
which blasphemed the very Majesty of God the Father; or of the Macedonians, who
quarrelled the Divinity of the holy Ghost: Nor were they, finally, like those
which had been set on foot in the primitive times by those desperate writers,
who in their several turns and courses had impiously opposed and quarelled
every, or any Article of the Christian faith. These we may rather liken unto
briers and brambles, discerned as soon as in the blade, or in the very first
appearance. The Church soon spied those Heresies, and as soon condemned them;
nor ever were the servants eyes so heavy, as not to note the time, and observe
the Authors of those wicked Doctrines, leaving to us upon record the knowledge
and relation of the whole proceedings: so that those wretched and blasphemous
Heresies wherewith the Church was exercised in the Primitive times, were
generally but like Jonahs gourd, In Pseudo lo.
of a days continuance; or the Solstitial Herb in Plautus, quae repentino
ortae sunt, repentino occidunt, almost as soon suppressed as risen. Few of them,
though they had been sown with all care and cunning, came to take deep root;
fewer to cum crevisset herba, to the blade or blossom; but none unto fecissent
fructum, to bring forth their fruit, before they were descried and censured.
And however some of them, as that of Arius, became of universal latitude and
long continuance, so that ingemuit orbis, as St. Hierome has it, the whole
world groaned under the weight and burden of so foul an heresy: yet did it
never pass for Wheat, or was counted Orthodox, but still pursued and execrated
as a wicked blasphemy.

But for these tares, the Doctrines and erroneous tenets of the present
Parable, the case was otherwise. either the servants were not able to discern
them at first peeping forth; or else conceived there was not so much danger in
them as in truth there was; or else were willing to believe that possibly they
might prove wheat, and so become a plentiful addition to Gods holy Harvest. For
either the opinion taken up was but the fancy of few, however had in admiration
for their parts and learning, and so not likely to prevail; or some such
division from the Churches tenets, as did not seem to threaten any present
danger to the common quiet, and so the less to be regarded. And this is that
which is observed by Lirinensis, that many errors and false Doctriens had
secretly been introduced into the Church, Cap. 15.
quos nec cito deprehendere valeas, nec facil damnare fas ducis; which neither
could be soon discerned, nor were thought fit to be condemned on the first
discovery. By means whereof it came to pass, that the said new, but false
opinions, as they were scattered and dispersed when no man saw them, so they
took root when no man marked them. And when they came to cum crevisset herba,
when it came to that, and that the blade sprung up and had shown it self, yet
were they still so like the wheat, both in shape and color, that few there
were of such a searching and discerning eye, as to pronounce aright from what
seed they sprung: nay when they came unto the trial to fecissent fructum, and
that their fruit discovered them to be but tares, yet then they showed
themselves to the public view with such a Copy of old age, and reputation of
Antiquity, that they contended for priority with the wheat it self.

Such are the errors and false Doctrines whereof we challenge and accuse the
Church of Rome; such as a long time passed for truth, and were not noted either
in the seed or blade. Errors which being set on foot by some private men, and
having gotten credit by continuance and long tract of time, were first debated
in the Schools as probable; afterward entertained in the Church as true; and
last of all, imposed on men's souls as necessary. Errors which at their first
appearing did not directly, ex professo, either oppose the Churches Doctrine,
or disturb her peace; but such as seemed to have upon them the character and
superscription of sacred verity, and grew up sensim sine sensu with Gods holy
truth: we charge them not with any of those impious blasphemies, or wicked
heresies, derogatory to the honor of our Lord and Savior, or any other person
of the glorious Trinity, or any other common principle of the Catholic faith,
which Simon Magus, and the rest of that damned crew have opposed and
quarrelled. In that they have done bravely for the Church of Christ, and
publicly opposed those wretched heresies which the Socinians have revived in
these latter days, Utinam sic semper errassent, would they had erred thus
always, had they erred no otherwise, as once the Cardinal said of Calvin. That
which we have to say against them is, that they have forsaken their first love,
like the Church of Ephesus, and cast a stumbling block before the people, like
to that of Pergamus; and suffered the woman Jezebel, which calls her self a
Prophetess, to seduce Gods servants from the right way of his Commandments,
like the Thyatirians. So that the aberration from the Gospel which we charge
upon them, is not from the profession, but the purity of the Christian faith;
not from the outward signs and Sacraments, but the sincerity and soundness of
Religion; not from the Church of Christ, but in it.

And yet I would not be mistaken, as if I thought there were no Heresy to be
found in the Church of Rome: or that their errors which they teach, were
neither positively dangerous in themselves, nor possibly pernicious and
destructive to them that hold them, without true repentance. That which was
first an error only, when first taken up, in them that taught it, may by an
obstinate pertinacy become an Heresy in them that hold it. Its true, that
every deviation from the truth, or opposition made against it, does not
denominate an Heretic: nor does the voluntary taking up of a false opinion,
create such mischief to the Church, as the unwillingness to lay it down. Were
it not for pertinaciter defensa, sponte electa would bear no great stroke in
the definition of an Heresy. This was the case between St. Cyprian and the
Donatists; S. Cyprian and some other holy Bishops of the African Churches,
conceived rebaptization to be necessary in some certain cases; but modestly,
and with submission to the Church of God determining according to his word in
Scripture. The Donatists maintained the same opinion, but they did it
obstinately, refused to hearken to the Church, or to admit of any Judges but
themselves, to decide the controversy. The error was the same in both, the
Doctrine false alike in both; and yet the Donatists stand branded for it by the
name of Heretics, whereas St. Cyprian and his Associates are accounted
Catholics. Why so? because of pertinaciter defensa, because the Donatist
maintained it with so great perverseness, that there was no reclaiming of him
to the sound Doctrines of the Church. And this is that which Lerinensis speaks
of with such admiration, Cap.
O mira rerum conversio! Authors opinionis Catholici, sectatores haeretici
judicantur; absolvuntur magistri, condemnantur discipuli.

This also is the case of the Church of Rome, the enemy had sown his tares in
agro domini, and they sprung up in medio tritici. When they were sown they
were not noted; and having taken root, and put forth the blade, they looked so
like the wheat, with so fair a show, that very few, if at all any, did suspect
them. And so long these of Rome were in the same condition and estate with the
African Prelates: either their ignorance or inadvertency might have salv'd the
sore; but when the fruit discovered them to be tares indeed, and that they
notwithstanding would defend and countenance them, proclaim them to be wheat of
the Lords own sowing, sell them for such to simple people in the open markets,
and make them eat (as one may say) their own damnation, then fell they into the
condition of the desperate Donatist, and that which was an error only in the
first broachers of the Doctrine, is in them made Heresy. And here I may repeat
that of Lirinensis, Authors opinionis Catholici, sectatores haeretici. They
which first set on foot the opinion, whatsoever they were, might have no ill
intention in it, conceiving that which they delivered not to be contrary to the
Churches tendries, though perhaps besides them. And so it might be with them
also which took them upon trust, and assented to them, not having means or
opportunity to come unto the knowledge of the truth in those particulars. But
so it is not with our Masters in the Church of Rome, who have not only means to
know them, and opportunity to consider of the fruit they bear; but having been
informed of that long mistake in which their Predecessors lived, and of the
dangers which those tares do threaten to the Church of God, do obstinately shut
their eyes against the sacred light of truth, and will not see the beams
thereof, shine they never so brightly: In which estate, if they continue wilful
without true repentance, let them take heed lest that befall them which my
Author speaks of, Absolvuntur magistri, condemnantur discipuli: and so I leave
them to Gods mercy, and with them the first point of this Discourse, viz. the
kind or nature of the Doctr. which are here intended, proceeding hence unto the
2d, the difficulty to discern them in the seed or blade, until they came to
bring forth fruit, to fecissent fructum.

Nil magis curant quam occultare quod praedicant. Lib. 1. In initio.
Tertullian notes it of the Valentinians, that they did use to hide their
tenets, and conceal their Doctrines. A Lesson taught them by their sire the
Devil, who when he had a purpose to destroy Gods Harvest, not only did it at a
time when the servants slept, and in so quick a manner that he was not noted,
but sowed Gods field with such a seed, as could not easily be discerned from
the wheat it self, until the very fruits proclaimed it. In all his other
projects to subvert the Gospel, the Watchmen of the Church so traced him, and
kept so vigilant an eye upon him, that all his machinations were detected, and
his hopes made frustrate: he is resolved to cheat the very Watchmen, and
therefore sets on foot such Doctrines in which was no apparent danger, and much
less any visible impiety; that whilst the Watchmen let them pass, neither
examining from whence they came, nor to what they tended; he might by them
effect his purpose with the greater safety, and by degrees endanger and subvert
Religion.

And certainly it is no marvel that they should pass without discovery, and
prevail so far, considering how closely the design was carried, how little
noise it made abroad, and by what leisure and degrees it did gather strength.
For howsoever it be true which the Cardinal tells us, Bell^rm. de Eccl l. 4.
c. 5.
that in omni insigni mutatione religionis, in every notable change and
alteration of Religion, a man may easily discern both the change it self, and
all the circumstances that pertain unto it; yet in the sowing of these tares it
was not so. We neither know the Authors, time or place, by whom, when, where,
the said false tenets were first broached: nor find we any that opposed them
at their rising up, or whether any did take notice of them when the blade
sprung up. And yet it is most manifest, that such tares there were, and that
they had almost corrupted and destroyed the wheat, before the servants had
espied them. The Cardinals Rule holds good in all sudden changes, which are
made publicly and professedly, and all at once, in public and notorious
Heresies, which come in with violence, and aim at the foundation of the House
of God. And any man of common reading can tell as well as he, when, and by
whom, and where, the Macedonian, Arian, Valentinian Heresies, or any of the
rest of so high a nature did at first begin; but between those and these in the
body mystical, the difference is as great and signal, as between open Arms and
Clandestine conspiracy in the body politic, whereof that may be easily
discerned, this not: or an outrageous burning Fever, and a dull Consumption in
the body natural, of which that comes with fury, this grows on insensibly: it
fares no otherwise with the tares in the present Parable, then with the good
Seed in another of our Saviors Parables: which is, as if a man should cast his
seed into the ground, Mark 4.
and should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow
up, but he knows not how.

Our Savior tells us of his Kingdom, Luke 17. v. 20.
non venire cum observatione, that it comes not with observation, but grows
upon us, in us, with us, insensibly and by degrees. And so it is also in the
Kingdom of Antichrist, in the beginning, working and increase thereof: which
with the whole abominations of it, was to be introduced into the Church, not
openly and ex professo, so that all might see it; but mystically, covertly and
silently, without noise or clamor, so that it might deceive even the very
Watchmen. They who advanced this business, were such men as those, Cap. 1.
of whom St. Paul tells us in the first of Timothy, that they should speak all
falsehood in hypocrisy. The meaning is, that they should so disperse their
Doctrines with such a show of godliness, and pretense of piety, that no man
should have cause to suspect their doings, until the very fruits bewrayed
them; and so it proved in the event. That general aberration from the power
and purity of Christ's glorious Gospel, the seeds whereof were sown by Satan,
even in the lives of the Apostles, was not discovered fully till these latter
days: St. Paul, who diligently traced his footsteps, and found by good
conjecture, that he had been sowing, calls it, (...), a very mystery of
iniquity. A mystery in the seed, and in the blade; but in the fruit thereof a
plain iniquity. Had it not brought forth wickedness, iniquitatem, it had not
been of Satan's sowing; and had the working of it been notorious, and sensible
to every eye, it had been no mystery; but it was both, and both together made
up the true nature of it, mysterium iniquitatis. That wicked one in the
Apostles time did already work, although he was not then revealed; but in our
days, mystery, which before was written upon the forehead of the woman, is
quite vanished; and there is nothing to be seen at all, but Babylon the Great,
the Mother of abominations.

And I said well, that mystery was writ upon the forehead, and not only in a
mystical, but a literal sense; for Scaliger in his notes on the Revelation
reports, that in the former times the word mysterium was engraven in Capital
Letters upon the front, or forepart of the Triple Crown; and that it so
continued till the Reign of Julius, who caused the old one to be broken, and a
new one made, and his own titles, Julius Pont. Max. to be inchased with Pearls
where the old word stood. This he delivers from the mouth of D. Montmorency,
who learnt the same at Rome from men of good repute and quality who had seen
the same, upon whose faith we must rely for the truth hereof. But to proceed:

They therefore much mistake themselves, and the condition of the tares here
sown by Satan, who either think they may be easily discerned as soon as sowed,
or that they will disclose their malignant nature upon the first Essay and
Trial. The Scripture tells us of these tares, that they appeared not to be
tares, till the fruits proclaimed them. And Galen notes, D^ facultate al. mon.
l. 4.
that when some covetous and careless Husbandmen, not winnowing their Corn as
they ought to do, had sold both tares and wheat together, those which did feed
thereon found no disease, nor ill effect thereof, at the very instant; but that
on the approach of Summer, (...), they broke out all of them into biles and
sores. When therefore he prescribes this course in the way of diet, that we
should carefully cast away the tares, and sift them from our heaps of Wheat, he
gives this reason of his counsel; for though (says he) the inconvenience be at
first so small, that we scarce feel it for the present, yet at the last, when
the ill humors and corruptions which do thence arise, are grown full and
pregnant, (...), then the malignity of their nature does at large appear. So
is it with the juice of tares, if we drink thereof, (as sometimes it is mingled
with the Cup of Life,) it does not work upon the sudden: that poisoned Cup
wherewith the Princes of the Earth, and the Inhabiters thereof have been made
drunk so long together, was of a soft and gentle nature, not of quick dispatch;
tempered according to the neat Italian fashion: The venom of the same being
insensibly pernicious, brings on death at last, and yet we never feel it
working; which briefly we return for a general Answer unto those Cavils of the
Cardinal, who therefore will allow no tares to have been sown at all in the
Church of Rome, Eo quod tempus certum designare non possumus, because we cannot
tell the circumstances of time, place and persons, when, and by whom, and where
the Devil sowed them. A more particular Answer thereunto is neither possible
nor necessary in the present case.

And first it is not possible as unto the Author, which is the first and
greatest circumstance by him required. All that the Text informs us is,
inimicus sevit, that the enemy sowed them; and that this enemy is the Devil;
but by whose hands the Devil did it, what instruments he used to effect his
purpose, as Christ our Savior has not told us, so are we still ignorant: we
find no further light here then a venit, abiit, that he came secretly, and
departed suddenly, he staid not long upon the place; and for the little time he
stayed, he took his opportunity, cum dormirent homines, when all the servants
were asleep, and did not see him; and if they did not see him, as it is plain
they did not, I would fain know how they could possibly produce him. Besides,
it is most likely that he came disguised in the apparel of some
Houshold-servant belonging to the heavenly Husbandman, having a form of
godliness, and a show of zeal; so that in case the other servants had not
slept, he might have past away without discovery. The Devil when he came to
Eve, came not like the Devil, but in the shape of a Domestic, one of Adams
Family; and of a Serpent, in whose shape he came, Tertullian tells us,
abscondit se serpens quantum potest, to tamque prudentiam in latebrarum
ambagibus torquet, that he conceales himself as much as possibly he can, and
shows his wit in nothing more then in finding lurking-holes: nay, sometimes
when he has a purpose to abuse poor man, he does transform himself into an
Angel of Light, his Ministers into the Ministers of Righteousness: and who
could possibly suspect any hurt or danger from those who are accounted
Ministers of Righteousness, or celestial Angels? Nor is the Rule of Bellarmine
so generally true in this particular of the Author, but that it will admit of
some exceptions; for there were very many Heresies in the primitive times,
acknowledged and avowed for such in the Church of Rome, as viz. of the
Gnostics, Nazarenes, Ophites, Cainites, Sethians, cum multis aliis, mentioned
in Epiphanius, Austin, and Theodoret, and many other ancient Writers, of which
it would extremely puzzle Bellarmine, and all his followers in that Church, to
produce the Authors.

So is it also with the circumstances of time and place in which those heresies
began, which neither he nor any of the best Philologers in the Church of Rome,
can assign precisely, but wander up and down in the search thereof, as their
blind fancies and conjecture lead them; and so the wonder is the more, that
not being able to assign the certainty of time and place, in public and
notorious Heresies, which came in with clamor, they should expect the same from
us, in the detecting of those errors which came in by stealth. In their
authentic vulgar Latin, there are many errors, corruptions, transpositions,
barbarismes, which are by Cajetan, Senensis, Oleaster, and the English
Rhemists, ingenuously confessed and published. Isidore Clarius, a Spanish
Monk, professes that he found no fewer then 8000 errors, some of them very
gross and palpable. And should we turn the scale, and demand of Bellarmine,
when, in whose time, by whose neglect, all the said errors and corruptions
crept into the Text: I trow he would be fain to answer, cum dormirent homines,
that it was done when as the Watchmen were asleep, and looked not to the
public safety of the Church of God.

So for the circumstance of place, all that we know, or possibly can know, at
so far a distance is, that these tares were sown in agro domini, not in this
part alone, or that; but in medio tritici, even in the middle of the Wheat, as
well in one place as another. Dic quibus in terris, were too hard a taste for
the best Apollo in the Conclave; and we may say, Qua terra patet, when they ask
that question. A more particular designation of these two last circumstances,
in all the points debated between them and us, is a thing impossible. The Text
informs us, that these tares were sown, cum dormirent homines, when all the
servants were asleep; and would you have them give account of time and place,
in matters which were done when they were asleep? Such an account indeed they
might have given, as did the Soldiers in the Gospel of our Saviors body, who
gave it out, and stood to it, like brave men of arms, that his Disciples came
by night, and stole it whilst they were asleep. A very likely tale I promise
you; for if they were asleep, as they said they were, how could they tell, that
either any body came to steal him, or that the Lords Disciples were the men
that did it? Adeo mendaci rum natura est, ut cohaerere non possunt, said
Lactantius truly.

Besides, those errors which we note in the Church of Rome, as they came in
privily, so they grew up insensibly. And first of all they came in privily,
there being not only many errors, but even damnable heresies, which came in
privily and by stealth, as St. Peter tells us. There shall arise (says he)
false Teachers in those days, that privily shall bring in damnable Heresies,
sectas perditionis, as the Latin reads it. The Devil in this point is like the
Peacock; as he is Angelus in penna, and can transform himself into an Angel of
light, when he thinks it necessary: so is he pede latro too, a creature of a
silent and a theevish gate, when he sees occasion. It is no easy tracing of
him in his private paths. Secondly, those errors as they came in privily, so
they grew insensibly, like to the finger of a Dial, which we find varied from
the place where before it was, and yet we do not see it vary; for so do private
men's opinions, if they be but probable, gain by degrees we know not how, on the
affection and good liking of particular persons, and after on the approbation
of the Church it self, till in the end of Paradoxes, they became to be counted
School-points, then taken, or mistaken rather, for the traditions of the
Church; and finally received as Articles of the Christian faith. The holy Ghost
has said of Christ, that he is a Rock, Petra autem erat Christus, in St. Paul's
Epistles; and Christ has told us of the Confession of his faith, that it is a
Rock, super hanc petram, in St. Matthews Gospel. Now one of those four things
which seemed so wonderful and unsearchable in the eyes of Solomon, is via
serpentis super petram, that of a Serpent on a Rock; or, if you like the
Application, that of the Devil, in subverting the faith of Christ: nor is it
thus only in the points of faith, but in that of Ceremonies, which by degrees,
insensibly, and without observation, have very much declined and varied in the
Church of Rome from what they were in their original institution, there being
many things ordained of a good intent, as one amongst themselves complains,
quae nunc videmus partim in abusum, partim in superstitionem verti, which are
now changed into abuse, and altered into superstition.

But yet the Cardinal stays not here, we must enquire, quis eam oppugnaverit,
what men opposed these new opinions, and made head against them at their first
appearance, or else all is lost. A Quere not more capable of resolution than
the others were; for if the Authors were not known, the opinions private, and
that there is no Constat of the time or place, when, and wherein the seeds were
sown, then certainly, to look for an opponent, were an excellent folly. And it
is plain, that in the sevit, no man saw them, they were all asleep; in the
crevisset no m^n knew them, they looked so like unto the Wheat; but when they
came to fructify, to fecissent fructum, and that the fruits did yield the
least suspicion to the vigilant servants of an ensuing mischief to the Church
of God, then did God stir up some to take notice of them, and to give warning
to the rest of the common danger: if not, tell me what Caveats had been entered
in the Churches name, by Gregory the Great, against the Doctrine of the Popes
supremacy; by Berengarius, against that of the carnal presence; by Charles the
Great, and all his Clergy in the Synod of Frankford, against the worshipping of
Images; by Huldrich B. of Ausburg, in defense of the married Clergy; by the
Waldenses, Pauperes de Lugduno, Clemanges, Petrus de Alliaco, Wiclif, Hus, and
others, (though men that had, I grant their own personal errors) against the
several corruptions of the Church of Rome, both in faith and manners? Nay, if
we thought that that would please him, we could tell the Cardinal, out of
Rainerius, one of the Popes Inquisitors, that there have never wanted some
since the time of Constantine that have opposed the errors of the Church of
Rome; the names of whom who list to see, may find them in Catalogus testium
veritatis, with their times and qualities: so that the Cardinal might well
have spared this bold expression, non solum pastores sed et Deum valde
dormivisse, that God, not men alone, had been fast asleep, had he not in so
many ages stirred up one or other to make resistance to those errors which were
sown by Satan. A speech, which in another man might be called a Blasphemy; but
coming from the mouth of so grave a Father, may pass among the Oracles of the
Roman Conclave.

But since those circumstances of time, place and person, are pressed so
frequently by the adversary, and that the Cardinal insists so much upon it,
quod nullum horum in nobis possunt ostendere, that we can find none of them in
the Church of Rome: we must answer further, that as the satisfaction of these
Queres is not possible, so it is not necessary. Shall not my Doctor think me
sick, although he find a general decay over all my body, not one sound part
from head to foot, unless I can inform him punctually, both when, and where,
and in whose company I sickoned? or should we conceive him a sorry Architect,
that being called to view an old ruinous Building, would not believe it wanted
any thing, or was out of order, unless I could acquaint him where it first took
wet, and in what part it first decayed, and who then dwelt in it? Do not
corruptions creep into the strictest Governments, labente paulatim disciplina,
the rigor and severity of Discipline, day by day declining? And should we not
repute him a most excellent Statesman, that would think nothing fit for a
Reformation, unless some wiser then himself could tell him, when and by whom,
and in whose Government the abuse crept in? But to restrain our selves to
matters that concern Religion, Antiqu. l. 13. c. 18.
Josephus tells us of the Pharisees, what innovations they had made in the
Jewish Church, and that they published many things as the traditions of the
Fathers, (...), which were not to be found in the Books of Moses. Our Savior
also tells us of them, that they had made the Word of God of none effect by
their traditions. But for the time when they began, and from what Author they
descended, Josephus could not tell us, and our Savior did not, which shows
our Savior did not think it necessary, nor Josephus possible. Our Savior
looked not on the root, but upon the fruit, and by the fruit gave judgment of
the Tree it self, there being no Doctrine of what sort soever, but it bears
some fruit, by which it may be known whether true or false: my next particular,
and next in order to be handled.

Nemo non in vitia pronus est. There are few men but are addicted to some vice,
either by the corruption of their nature, or the iniquity of their education.
We are all sinners from the womb, but are then most sinful, when we are
seasoned with ill Principles; and that the poison of our education is
superadded to the venom of our dispositions. And this is that which Tully
charged upon Mr. Anthony, that he had took great pains, and studied most
extremely hard to be lewd and vicious, ac si putaret se natura tam improbum non
potuisse evadere, nisi accessisset etiam disciplina. But on the other side, the
benefit of a virtuous institution is so great and excellent, that it corrects
in us our most prevalent frailties, and rectifieth the obliquities of our
affections, which made the wise man give this testimony of, and to Philosophy,
that by his knowledge in the same he could live uprightly, and exercise those
virtuous actions of his own accord, (...), which others did upon compulsion,
and for fear of law. How much more operation think we have those Doctrines on
us, which come apparalled in the habit of Religion, and the Cloak of piety? on
a conformity to the which we are persuaded, that all our comforts do depend for
the present life, and all our hopes for that to come. Assuredly these precepts
and instructions which we take from them, whose words and dictates we embrace
as celestial Oracles, are of power incredible, either to make us fit for
mischief, or to enable and prepare us for the works of goodness: so that in
case there were no other way to know what leaders we have followed, and what
instructions have been given us, the fruits of our affections would at full
declare it.

The reason is, because of that dependence which the affections have on the
understanding, that which the understanding apprehends as true, being
recommended to the will as good, and forthwith by the will desired and
followed: so that as often as the understanding is deceived in its proper
object, and entertaineth falsehood instead of truth, so often is the will
misguided, in courting those things which indeed are wicked, but yet are
clothed in the habit of dissembled virtue: upon this ground St. Paul has told
us of the Gentiles, that having their understanding darkened through the
ignorance which was in them, they gave themselves over unto lasciviousness, to
work all manner of uncleanness with greediness. Ephesians. 4. 19.
If so, if that so sad effects did follow upon the darkness of the
understanding, no question but the misperswasion wherewith sometimes it is
effected, produce more wretched consequents in our outward actions; for if the
understanding be depraved with false opinions, the will most commonly is led
aside by vain affections; the errors of the same being far more dangerous,
because more active. Now there is nothing entertained in the understanding
which is not recommended to it by the outward senses, Nil est in intellectu
quod non prius fuit in sensibus, say the old Philosophers. And of all outward
senses, there is none more serviceable to the understanding then the sense of
hearing; for Fides ex auditu, Faith is by hearing, says the Apostle. By means
whereof it comes to pass, that as we preach, even so the people do believe;
and as they do believe, even so they practice. Take we heed therefore what we
preach, and that we sow not tares among simple men, who cannot know them from
the Wheat.

Now of the tares I told you in my last Discourse from Galen, Pliny,
Theophrastus, and many of the best of our modern Herbalists, that they affect
the sight with dimness, and the head with giddiness, and the whole body with
Diseases: And so it is also with the false opinions, those dangerous and
erroneous Tenets intended in the present Parable; for in our eyes, (conceive we
of our understanding) they do occasion such a dimness, that either we cannot
see the way that leads to happiness, or seeing, see the same, but will not
perceive it. And in our heads it does produce so great a giddiness, that we are
constant unto nothing, halting, as once the Israelites, between two opinions,
divided betwixt God and Mammon, in great distraction with our selves, whether
we shall adhere to Christ, or follow Antichrist; continue in old England, or
hoyst sail for New. And for the sores upon the body, the blemishes of our
behavior, the stains and scandalls of our conversation, by which we grieve the
Spirit, and disgrace Religion, what are they but the frequent, though most lewd
effects of a perverted understanding, and a poisoned will?

The Heresies of the Gnostics and the Carpocratians, what vile and wretched
things they were! A man might easily conjecture what fine points they held, by
the condition of their lives, which were so filthy and obscene, that for their
sakes the name of Christian first grew odious to the sober Gentile. Vide
Christianos quid agunt, In illis patitur lex Christiana maledictum, as devout
Salvian often complained. The errors of the Church of Rome in point of judgment
have they not bred as grievous errors in the points of practice? Whence else
proceeds it that the Priests are debarred from Marriage, and permitted
Concubines; that open Stews are suffered and allowed of, so they pay rent unto
the Pope, and supply his Coffers; that Princes may have dispensation to
forswear themselves, and break those Covenants which they have solemnly
contracted with their confederates; that subjects may take arms against, and
depose their Princes, if the Pope do but say the word, and free them from the
Oath of their Allegiance? And on the other side, when we behold men factiously
bent to oppose the Church, seditiously inclined to disturb the State,
disloyally resolved to resist their Sovereign, rebelliously disposed to excite
the people; when men refuse to pay the King his lawful tributes, and yet
consume them on their lusts; when they let loose such rogues as Barrabas, that
they may crucify their Lord and Master; may we not certainly affirm, that they
have hearkened to the Doctrines of Knox and Cartwright, and their successors in
the cause? Such as the Doctrines are which the ear takes in, such also are the
lives which are framed thereafter. Cavete itaque quid auditis, take you heed
therefore what ye hear, lest whilst you lend an ear to those false Apostles,
you partake with them of their sins.

And certainly there is good reason why we should take heed. The Devil never
was more busied in sowing of his tares, then now; nor ever had he better
opportunity to effect his purpose. So dull and sleepy are men grown circa
custodiam propriae personae suae, in reference to themselves and their private
safety, that they are angry with the Prelates for being so vigilant and careful
circa custodiam gregis sui, and having more care of them then they have
themselves: so that if Satan be but diligent, as no doubt he is, and send his
instruments abroad, as no doubt he does, he may disperse his tares securely,
and bring them to fecissent fructum, ere they be discovered. And how comes this
to pass, but for want of heed, for want of taking heed what it is we hear, and
unto whom it is we hearken, False? factious and schsmatical Doctrines are the
seeds of Satan; and many instruments he has, both in the Pulpit and the
Parlor, to disperse those seeds: some speaking evil of Authority, and despising
Dignities; others perverting of the people, and forbidding to pay tribute unto
Caesar: some taking up provision of the choicest wits, and persons of most
power and quality for the Church of Rome; and others leading out whole Families
to seek the Gospel in the Desert. He that does look for better fruit from such
dangerous Doctrines, then discontent and murmuring against their Rulers,
associations and conspiracies against lawful Government, and finally, a flat
Apostasy from the sincerity of that Religion which is here professed, may as
well look for Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from thistles. A good Tree brings
forth good fruit; but for these evil Trees which bear evil fruit, what are they
profitable for but for the fire? that as they are the cause of combustions
here, they may add fuel to the fire hereafter.

Thus have I brought you at the length to that which did occasion the discovery
of the Devils practice. The sowing of these Tares, the Sevit we had seen
before: We have now took a brief view of them in crevisset herba, and brought
them to fecissent fructum. There remains nothing further but apparuerunt, that
they appeared, and how they were discovered; but that must be the work of
another day.

SERMON IV.
At WHITE HALL Jan. 27. 1638.
MATTHEW. 13. v. 26. Tunc apparuerunt and Zizania.

Then appeared the tares also.


LAtet anguis in herba: The Snake or Serpent does delight to hide himself under
the covert of the grass, so that we hardly can discern them till we tread upon
them; and treading on them unawares, when we think not of it, are in danger to
be bitten by them when we cannot help it. Et sic palleat, ut nudis qui pressit
calcibus anguem: so is it also in the Text. Here is a Serpent in the grass,
anguis in herba, in the tares, when they first peeped out, and anguis in
crevisset, when the blade grew up. Yet all this while the enemy was either in
his latitat, and so was not seen; or else disguised and veiled with an alias
dictus, and so passed unknown. And had he not been found in fecissent fructum,
when the fruit was ripe, and men were able to discern him, we might have bin
worse bitten, and more shrewly punished then were the Israelites in the Desert
by the fiery Serpents. But God was pleased to deal more mercifully with his
Church then so. And though it seemed good unto him for some certain space to
let the enemy rejoice, and admire himself in the success of his designs, yet
it held not long; for when his hopes were highest, and his tares well grown, so
that they seemed to have preeminence of the wheat it self, then did the
Heavenly Husbandman awake his servants, and let them look upon the tares in
fecissent fructum, when they appeared to be what indeed they were, infelix
solium, frugum pestis, and whatsoever other name the Poets and Philosophers
have bestowed upon them. But when the blade sprung up, and had brought forth
fruit, tunc apparuerunt and zizania, then appeared the tares also.

The words you see are very few, and so the parts not like to be very many. We
will observe only these two particulars. 1. That the tares appeared at last,
apparuerunt and zizania; when, or how they were discovered, and that we find
in the word tunc, then when the blade had brought forth fruit. Of these in
order, beginning what the Quod sit first, and so proceeding to the Quando.

Veritas non quaerit angulos, Truth seeks no corners, says the Proverb: And
therefore Christ our Savior has compared it unto a Candle set upon an hill,
which shows it self unto the eye of each beholder. We may affirm thereof, as
does St. Ambrose of the Sun, deficere videtur, sed non deficit; the light
thereof cannot be possibly extinguished, although sometimes darkened: Oppressed
sometimes it is, as it has been formerly, by errors, Heresies, and false
opinions; suppressed it cannot be for ever. For magna veritas, great is the
truth, and it prevails at the last, however for a while obscured by men's
subtle practices. That Heresies shall arise St. Paul has told us, and he has
brought it in with an oportet, oportet esse haereses, in the Epistle. And that
there must be scandalls Christ himself has told us, and he has told it too
with a necesse est ut scandala veniant, in the holy Gospel. The reasons both of
the oport^t and necesse, we shall see hereafter, when we shall come to scan
those motives which might induce the Lord to permit these tares; Sinite utraque
crescere, usque ad messem, v. 30. Mean while it does concern us to take special
notice, that as it pleased the Lord to give way to error, and suffer sometimes
heresies of an higher nature, and sometimes false opinions of an inferior
quality to take fast footing in his Church; yet he did never suffer them to
destroy his harvest, but brought them at the last to apparuerunt. The
comfortable beams of truth dispersed and scoured away those Clouds of error
wherewith the Church before was darkened, and by the light thereof the foulness
and deformity of falsehood was made more notorious: so that from hence two
special Queres may be raised, first, why these tares or errors were so long
concealed; and secondly, how they were at last revealed.

And first they were concealed as it were of purpose to let the Church take
notice of her own condition, how careless and how blind she is in the things
of God, did not the eye of God watch over her, and direct her goings. Her
carelessness we had before in dormirent homines, when as we found her sleeping,
and regardless of the common enemy; that time the tares were in their Sevit,
and no man would hold up his head to look unto the public safety. Her
blindness we may note in this, that being left unto her self, she could not see
them in crevisset, when they put forth the leaf, and the blade sprung up, and
that they did begin to spread abroad, and justle with the truth for the
preeminence. If either no false Doctrines had been sown at all, or had they
all been noted at the first peeping forth, the Church might possibly impute it
to her own great watchfulness, pleaded some special privilege of
infallibility, and so in time have fallen into presumption. God therefore left
her to her self, that falling into sin and error, and suffering both to grow
upon her by her own remisseness, she might ascribe her safety unto God alone,
whose eyes do neither sleep nor slumber. The Church is then in most security
when God watches over her; when he that keeps Israel has his eye upon her;
Gods eye, he being ^culus infinitus, as the learned Gentile, and totus oculus,
as the learned Father, is her best defense. Which if it be averted from her,
she walks forthwith in darkness and the shadow of death, subject to every
rising error, obnoxious to the practices of her subtle enemies. And in this
state she stands, in this wretched state, till he be pleased to shine upon her,
and bless her with the light of his holy countenance, the beams whereof
discover every crooked way, and bring them to apparuerunt, to the public view.

And to apparuerunt all must come, every false Doctrine whatsoever, there is no
doubt of that; for Idem est non esse and non apparere. No Tenet is erroneous in
respect of us, till it appear to us to be so; and till it does appear to be so,
we may mistake it for a truth, embrace it for a tendry of the Catholic Church,
endeavor to promote it with our best affections, and yet conceive our selves
to be excusable, in that it is amoris error, not erroris amor. In th^s regard
our Fathers might be safe in the Church of Rome, and may be now triumphant in
the Church of Heaven, though they believed those Doctrines which were therein
taught, or possibly maintained them with their best affections. The errors of
that Church were not then discovered, nor brought to their apparuerunt; and
being taken or mistaken for sound Orthodox Tenets, were by them followed and
defended in their several stations. So that we may affirm of them as once St.
Peter of the Jews, novimus quia per ignorantiam fecerint, we know that through
ignorance they did it: or if we know it not so clearly as St. Peter did, yet we
may charitably hope that it was no otherwise, in those particular points and
passages wherein we know not any thing unto the contrary. He that makes any
doubt of this, what faith soever he pretends to, shows but little charity, and
makes no difference between an accidental and a wilful blindness. There are
some errors in the Church, like some Diseases in the body; when they are easy
to be cured, they are hard to be known; and when they are easy to be known,
they are hard to cured; but every error and disease is of that condition that
it must first be known, and the true quality thereof discovered, or else it is
impossible to prescribe a remedy.

But so it is not now with us, nor any of our Masters in the Church of Rome, as
it was anciently with our forefathers in and of that Church. Those errors
which in former times were accounted truths, or not accounted of as errors, are
now in the apparuerunt, we see them plainly as they are; and by comparing them
with Scripture, the true rule of faith, are able to demonstrate the obliquity
of those opinions and false Doctrines which they have thrust upon the Church in
these latter ages. And we may say of them in Tertullians Language, Ipsa
Doctrina eorum cum Apostolica comparata, ex diversitate and contrarietate sua
pronunciabit neque Apostoli alicujus ess^, neque Apostolici. The difference
which appears between the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, delivered in the
new Creed of Pope Pius quartus, and those which were delivered once unto the
Saints in the old Creed of the Apostles, shows plainly that they neither came
from the Apostles, nor any Apostolical Spirit: so that in case we shut our eyes
against the sacred beams of truth which now shine upon us; or if they so long
after the apparuerunt will not see those tares which are discovered to their
hands* both we and they are all (...), utterly incapable of excuse in the sight
of God. If any man will be so obstinately wedded to his own opinion, as to take
up his Lodging in a Pesthouse, after he has been made acquainted with the
present danger, however we in charity may say, Lord have mercy upon him; yet he
has reason to believe, that God in justice will inflict that judgment on him
which usually does befall those men which do wilfully and perversely tempt the
Lord their God.

Nor was it only necessary in regard of us, of private and particular men, that
the tares should come to their Epiphanie, their apparuerunt; God did it most
especially for his Churches sake, whom he had promised to conduct in the ways
of truth, and to be with her always to the end of the world. The tare is in it
self, as the Poet calls it, infelix lolium, a wretched and unlucky weed, and
frugum pestis, the bane and plague of other grains, as the learned Herbalist.
And of the mischief which it brings to Gods holy Husbandry, either by eating up
the wheat, the Lords own good seed, or overrunning all the field in the which
it grows, I have at large discoursed already. Suffice it that the Devil sowed
them with a devilish purpose, (...), that so he might destroy the labor of
the Heavenly Husbandman. And doubt we not but that he had in fine effected his
malicious ends, had not God brought them in due time to apparuerunt; had he not
made a plain discovery of their noxious nature, and called upon his servants to
take notice of them. We may conceive what reputation they had gained by a
longer sufferance, how ill it would have gone with the Church of God in the
attempt of reformation, in that being so long since detected, and brought to
their apparuerunt, so many in the world are not yet persuaded that there was
any thing in point of Doctrine fit to be reformed. It is with errors now, as
with temples anciently; the more antiquity they have the greater sanctity,
Tantumque sanctitatis tribuerunt quantum vetustatis, as Minutius Felix. God
therefore took his time to detect these errors, and to give notice to the
world, that they were but tares, before they could prescribe to truth, or
challenge such an interest in antiquity, as was not possible to be disproved.

And this the Lord did partly for his own sake too, that so he might acquit
himself of those gracious promises which he had made unto his Churches, and by
that means became her debtor. He promised to be with her always, and
therefore could not possibly forsake her in her greatest need: He promised to
conduct her in the ways of truth; and therefore could not leave her as a prey
to error. He promised that the gates of Hell should not prevail against her,
and therefore could not give her over to the snares of Satan. God never does
forsake his Church, though he sometimes leaves her to her self for her further
trial; nor turn away his face, though he look aside, for her correction and
chastisement; for should he utterly desert it, and leave it as a prey unto sin
and error, the Church indeed were in a very sorry taking; but in the mean time,
where were all Gods promises? Might not the enemy rejoice, and advance his
head, and say that either God did not see his practices, or was not able to
prevent them? that he was only rich in promises, promissis dives, but when it
came to the performance, then Quid dignum tanto? And might not his most trusty
servants have complained with David, Ut quid Deus repulisti in finem. O God
wherefore art thou absent from us so long? we see not our tokens, there is not
one Prophet more, no not one is there among us that understands any more.
This the Lord heard, but would not suffer. And therefore when he had made trial
of his Church, and let her see her own infirmities, he brought those errors and
false Doctrines which did seem to threaten it, to their apparuerunt, to the
open light. And of false Doctrines, many are of that condition, that being once
discovered, they are soon confuted, majorque aliquanto labor est invenire quam
vincere, How this was done, and when, we must next consider, which for the time
thereof was tunc, and for the manner of it, in fecissent fructum; my next
particular, and next in order to be handled.

Rectum est sui index and obliqui. There is no better way to discern any thing
that's crooked then by laying it to a right line; or to discover errors and
erroneous Tenets, then to compare them with the truth. Truth does not only
justify it self, but by the light thereof we are made more able then before to
judge of falsehood. And howsoever many false opinions have passed, and still may
pass for current, in the conceit of those which have took them up; yet by
comparing them with Scripture, which is truth it self, or with the Catholic
tendries of Gods holy Church, the best Expositor of Scripture, their folly and
their falsehood will at once appear. Thus was it with the tares in the present
Parable; They seemed so lovely to the eye in the blade or stalk, that few were
able to discern them. Most took them to be Wheat of the Lords own sowing, a
very excellent piece of Wheat, and such as might have recompensed the labor of
the heavenly Husbandman; but when they came unto fecissent fructum, when both
the Wheat and tares came to bring forth fruit, and that the fruits of each were
balanced in the scale of the holy Sanctuary, then was it no great difficulty to
determine of them, to say that this was Wheat, and that these were tares; that
this was truth, and that was error; that this was seed of Gods own sowing, the
bonum semen mentioned in the 24. and for the others, unde haec? they could
proceed from none but ab inimico. So true is that which Christ our Savior
tells us in another case, igitur ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos, by their
fruits you shall know them. As for example;

The Doctrine of the Popes supremacy, as it is represented to us in the fairest
colors, how specious seems it to the eye, how necessary for the preservation
of peace and unity in the Church of God? how excellent a piece of Wheat would a
man suppose it at first looking on? Nature pleads for it, in regard that all
living Creatures, as Bees and Birds, and Sheep and all other Cattle love to
have some chief, by which the rest may be directed. Rex unus apibus, dux unus
gregibus, and in armentis rector unus, as St. Cyprian has it. Cyprian.
St. Hierome adds, and grues unum sequuntur literato ordine, that the Cranes
also have some Prince whom they love to follow. The Politics stand up in
defense of Monarchy, as the most excellent form of Government, Ethicorum l. 8.
c. 10.
(...), says our Master Aristotle. And that they may not stand alone against
those popular Estates which the world then cherished, they bring the Poets in
for seconds; for whom, and in the name of all the rest it is said by Homer,
(...), that there is never any unity without one supreme. The Theologues or
Divines have affirmed as much, in that the monarchy of all forms of government
comes nearest to the Government of Almighty God, who as he has alone created
all things by his Almighty hand, so he alone does govern all things by his
mighty power. Multoque facilius ab uno regi potest quod est ab uno constitutum,
Lactant.
said Lactantius truly; which being so, as so it is, and that the Church is the
most glorious State of all bodies aggregate, good reason that it should be
ordered according to the most complete and best kind of Government, and be
obedient to the voice of one supreme Judge.

This being taken pro confesso, what can follow next, but that this supreme
Government ought to have been in some one or other of the Lords Apostles? And
of that glorious company who so proper for it as divine St. Peter? whom the
Evangelist^ always make the Marshall in one constant place, and that is primus
Simon Petrus, to whom our Savior said, T^bi dabo claves, super hanc petram,
pasce oves; and whatsoever else might seem to intimate that he designed him for
a Chief over all the rest. Now being that these privileges and prerogatives
were not conferred on Peter's person, but upon him and his Successors, as it is
said they were; where should we look to find them but in Peter's See, the
Renowned City of Rome, the Imperial Seat, the Queen and Lady of all Nations?
Good reason that the Bishops of that most famous Church, whose faith was spoken
of through all the world, Et quae domina^i in caetera possit, and had
sufficient power to command the rest, should sit chief amongst them, chief
President in all general Councels, chief Justice in all public controversies,
yea, and Lord Treasurer too to dispense all indulgences, and other graces of
the Church. Nay, the commodities which the Christian world enjoyes by the sole
benefit of the Popes Supremacy, are said to be so great and weighty, that they
are able to bear down all cavils and objections which are made against it; for
what a signal blessing is it to have one common Father over all the Church, to
whom as to a Catholic Moderator, and indifferent Umpire, all Christian Kings
and Princes may refer their quarrels; one supreme head, to whom as to a visible
and infallible Judge, the Prelates of the Church, and other learned men may
refer their controversies: unity must begin from one; and who more fit to be
this one, then he that can derive unto himself so fair a title?

And a fair title it is indeed, and has been so well pleaded by the Advocates
of the Court of Rome, that for long time together there was no suspicion that
it would ever come in question whether true or false. So fair a field could
bring forth nothing but the purest Wheat, the bread of life, even manchet for
the Lords own Table. He that had thought or given it out that there was any
tare amongst it, much less, tares all over, might possibly have had some
hearers, but few believers. The reason was, because that all this while the
Doctrine was but in crevisset herba, in the blade or stalk; not come unto the
height, to fecissent fructum. But when it came to that, and that the fruits
thereof appeared in their proper likeness, it proved to be so gross a tare,
such an infelix lolium, such a frugum pestis, that a more dangerous was never
sown by Satan in the Church of God. For then it was discovered plainly, that
the Popes in a manner had forsook the claim of being successors to Peter, and
would be Vicars unto Christ; that they had changed Quodcunque ligaveris in
terra, into Omnis potestas data est mihi in coelis; the Priestly and
Prophetical power into the Kingly; and built their rise not on the privileges
which Christ gave to Peter, but upon those which God the Father gave his
Christ; and what did follow thereupon, but that his Courtiers honored him with
the title of Vice-God, or Vice-Deus? as in the Inscription of Paulo Quarto
Vice-Deo: others with that of Dominus noster Deus ^apa, our Lord God the Pope:
some giving him authority to make virtue vice, and vice virtue, as did Card.
Bellarmine; De R. P. l. 4. c. 5.
others, to make a new Creed, and coin new Articles of Faith, as did Thomas
Aquinas: and finally some of them having gone so far, as to condemn our
Savior Christ of great indiscretion, nisi unum post se talem vicarium
reliquisset, had he not left behind him such a Vicar, so absolutely endowed
with all manner of power, as did Peter Berhardus.

So for the Popes themselves, De Jurisd. Eccl. c. 7.
when they had laid the foundation of their Grandeur on those words of Christ,
Omnis potestas data est mihi, how quickly did they turn that primacy which
before they had in point of order, into a sovereignty or supremacy in point of
power? with what subtle blasphemy did they shift the Scriptures, to make them
serviceable to their wicked and ambitious ends? Instead of Tibi dabo claves,
one finds out ecce duos gladios, behold here two swords, the one spiritual,
the other temporal. And thereupon Pope Julius passing over Tiber, drew out his
sword, and threw his keys into the River; affirming openly, that since St.
Peter's keys would not serve his turn, St. Paul's Sword should. Instead of super
petram hane, a second brings in super aspidem and basiliscum: and that Pope
Alexander uses, to justify his treading on the neck of the Emperor Frederick.
Instead of Pasce oves meas, a third has found out Surge Petre occide and
manduca, Arise Peter, kill and eat: and this Pope Paul the Fifth alleged for
an Authority that he might kill, assassinate, and murder disobedient Princes;
and by the same Authority, for ought I can see, he may eat them too. And
finally to mend the matter, the Popes Supremacy thus founded and promoted by
such wretched shifts, mnst be reputed as an Article of the Christian Faith; and
that too primus and praecipus Romanensium fidei articulus, the first and
principal Article of the Church of Rome: certain I am, that so it was defended
in the time of Pope Clement the Eighth, and has been since so ranked and
marshalled in the new Creed of Pius Quartus. Add unto these their practice in
the points aforesaid, proclaiming errors to be truth, and publicly condemning
truth for errors; making new Articles of Faith, and misinterpreting the old;
deposing Kings, disposing of their Kingdoms, and bringing them to be at their
devotion; and tell me if the ordinary fruits of the Supremacy do not discover
it most manifestly for a dangerous tare.

Next for the single life of Priests, when it first sprung up, how lovely
seemed it to the eye? how few had reason to suspect that it was a tare? Paul
seems to advocate the cause, wishing that all men were as he; affirming also,
that for the present distress it were good for all men so to be; 1 Cor. 7. 7.
that the unmarried cares more for the things belonging to the Lord, how he may
please the Lord, then the married does. The Fathers many of them are exceeding
copious, if not hyperbolicall, in commendation of Virginity; especially after
that Jovinian seemed to undervalue it, fideliumque matrimoniorum meritis
adaequabat, and made it of no greater merit then a virtuous Wedlock. Which
general Rules of the Apostle became appropriated to the Clergy, first, by
conforming thereunto of their own accord, as a matter voluntary: next, by the
Authority of the Fathers, who recommended it unto them for a more perfect state
of life then that of marriage; but left it howsoever as a matter arbitrary. But
after-ages finding out further motives to endure the business, as viz. that
being freed from domestic cares they might more readily attend Gods service,
more constantly pursue their studies, more bountifully cherish and relieve the
poor, but specially that they might more cheerfully infeoffe the Church with
their possessions, it came at last, insensibly and by degrees, to be imposed
upon them as a matter necessary. By means whereof the single life being
generally embraced by Clergymen in these Western parts, it grew in time to be
disputed whether ever it had been otherwise in the Church of God. And in
conclusion it was determined, that however in some cases the Clergy were
permitted to retain those Wives which they had taken before Orders, yet that
the Examples of men married after Orders were exceeding few, if at all any
could be found.

Thus was it in the blade or stalk, and no fault found with it. But when it
came to bring forth fruit, to fecissent sructum, then the case was otherwise;
and it appeared, that howsoever continency and virginity were the gifts of God,
yet the restraint of marriage was a tare of Satan's; for what did follow
hereupon, but that the Clergy grew infamous by their frequent lusts? Panormitan
complaining, plerosque coitu illi cito commaculari; Cassander publicly
affirming, ut vix centesimum invenias, that hardly one amongst a hundred did
contain himself within the limits of his Vow: the Canonists withal
maintaining, that Clerks were not to be deprived for their incontinency, cum
pauci sine illo vitio inveniantur, the mischief being grown so universal that
it was thought incapable of any remedy. I willingly pass by their unnatural
lusts, for which they stand accused in the Poet Mantuan; venerabilis ara
cynaedis servit, and that which follows after; nor will I tell you of the
Fish Pond in Pope Gregory's time, wherein were found the skulls of 6000
Infants, ex occultis fornicationibus and adulteriis sacerdotum, conceived to be
the tragical effects of their loose affections. And notwithstanding that these
things were known, and bitterly complained of by such devout and conscientious
men as observed the same, yet to so high an impudency did they come at last,
that John the Cardinal of Cova preaching at noon against the marriage of
Priests, was the night following taken in adultery; and Cardinal Campegius in
the Diet of Norimberg did not shame to say, that it was more lawful for a
Priest to have many Concubines, quam vel uxorem unam ducere, then one lawful
Wife. And why was all this suffered think you? upon grounds of piety? no, but
in point of policy, to uphold the Popedom. For when this matter was debated in
the Co^ncel of Trent, and that the Prelates there did not seem unwilling to
ease the Clergy of that heavy, but more scandalous yoke; the Pope returned his
absolute Negative, and was much offended that they had suffered it to come in
question. Why so? because that Churchmen having Wives and Children, to be as
Hostages or pledges for their good beheaviour, would become more obnoxious to
the secular powers, and more obedient to the pleasure and Command of their
natural Princes; adeoque Pontificem redigere ad solius Romae Episcopatum, which
would in fine prove prejudicial to the Popes Supremacy, and limit his Authority
to the Walls of Rome.

The fruits thus palpably discovering the true condition of the Doctrine, begat
withal a shrewd suspicion that possibly the reasons commonly alleged in
defense thereof might be weak and wrested. And upon search it did appear that
the directions of St. Paul were general, and did no more concern the Clergy
then all people else; some of them being only fitted to the present time, and
therefore not to make a rule for all future Ages: that though the Fathers
magnified and extolled the single life, they imposed it not; or if they did, it
was not more upon the Clergy then upon the Laics: and finally, that Pope
Siricius, who imposed it first, could find no Text in Scripture whereupon to
ground it, and therefore most profanely wrested and abused that place, Qui in
carne sunt non possunt placere Deo, to make it serviceable to his wretched
ends. And it was also found on further search into antiquity, that this
restraint of marriage being proposed unto the Fathers of the Council of Nice,
was by Paphnutius and the sounder part of that great Synod openly rejected;
that it was neither new nor strange to marry after holy Orders, Eupsychius a
Bishop of the Cappadocians, whom Althanasius highly praises, taking a Wife
after he was advanced unto a Bishopric; and of a Bridegroom instantly become a
Martyr, dum adhuc quasi sponsus esse videretur, says the Tripartite History.
The like, as to the point of marrying after holy orders, Vincentius tells us of
one Phileus, an Egyptian Prelate. The same may also be made good not only in
the Eastern Church, where the Priests are not yet debarred from marriage after
Orders taken, as it is noted on the Gloss on Gratian; but for 1000 years
together in these Western parts. So lately it was before the Clergy were
generally minded to yield to that slavish tyranny: nor was it manifest on more
mature deliberation, that marriage in and of it self did any way disable men
from Gods public service, the studying of the holy Scriptures, o^ the works of
charity; Greg. Nazianzen affirming of some friends of his, which lived in
Wedlock, (...), etc. That they were every way as eminent in all acts of
godliness as those that did profess virginity.

Which, with the wretched consequents before remembered, being taken into
consideration by our first Reformers; and being it was observed withal that
the restraint depended upon positive Laws, no Divine Commandment; the wisdom
of this State thought fit to take away those positive laws on the which it
stood, and leave it arbitrary as at first. And this they were the rather
induced to do, by reason that the rigorous necessity of a single life had
formerly affrighted many a man of parts and learning from entering into holy
Orders, and filled the Church with ignorant and infamous persons. By means of
which indulgence granted as before, the gift of continency is become more
eminent in them that have it, and without reproach to them that want it. The
freedom which the Church has given in the use of chastity, makes the virtue
greater; no virtuous action being commendable if it be not voluntary. And since
the granting of this liberty in the point of marriage, how many of each order
has this Church produced, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, that have embraced the
single life out of choice, not force? with far more honor to themselves, and
greater luster to the Church, and a more gracious acceptance with Almighty God,
then if it were imposed upon them by a positive Law. Of whom we may affirm with
safety, as did Minutius of some Christians in the primitive times, perpetua
virginitate fruuntur poti^s quam glori^ntur.

But of this ^are enough; what is that comes next? let it be the religious
Worship ascribed unto the blessed Virgin, which by a name distinct is in the
Schools entitled hyperdulia, being a kind of veneration inferior unto that of
God, but greater then may be communicated to the other Saints. The Church in
the beginning had been exercised with many Heresies touching the incarnation of
our Lord and Savior: The Valentinians hold that he took not from her his
humane nature, but brought it with him from the Heavens; with whom concurred
Apollinaris, and the Secundiani. Nestorius on the other side affirmed, that he
who was born of her was the Son of Mary, but by no means the Son of God:
and therefore he allowed not that she should be called (...), the Mother of
God, but only (...), or the Mother of Christ. Helvidius and the
Antidico-Maritan had a further reach, and envied her the glorious title of the
Virgin Mary, affirming with like impudence and ignorance, eam post Christum
natum viro suo fuisse commixtam, that after our Redeemers birth she was known
by Joseph. In which respects, both to restore her to her rights, and to depress
those Heretics that had so debased her, the Fathers have conferred upon her
many glorious attributes; but yet no more then she deserved. Hence is it that
we find the Titles of (...) and (...), Mother of God, perpetual Virgin. Hence
is it that St. Cyril, a most zealous persecutor of the Nestorian faction, calls
her pretiosum totius orbis thesaurum, etc. the most rich Treasure of the World,
a Lamp that cannot be put out, the Crown of Chastity, and very Scepter of true
Doctrine; sceptrum rectae Doctrinae, and not the Scepter of the Catholic
Faith, as our Rhemists render it. Which honorarie attributes not being given,
(nor possibly appliable) to any of the other Saints in true antiquity, as they
proceeded then from a just necessity, so were they afterward continued without
just offense. For who could reasonably conceive but that a greater reverence
must be due to her then any other of the Saints, whom God had sanctified and
set apart for so great a blessing, as to be the Mother of her Savior?

Hitherto omnia been, for what hurt in this? what soul so dull in her
devotions, so cold in her affections to our Lord and Savior, as not to
magnify the Womb which bare him, and bless those papps that gave him suck?
Who could suspect that possibly there should be any tare in so fair a Field?
who could suppose that any warrantable honor done or tendered unto the Mother of
our Lord (as Elizabeth styled her) did not redound unto the Son? And
certainly, as long as those of Rome contained themselves within the limits of
the ancient Fathers, and that O quam te memorem virgo! their pious flourishes,
Rhetorical Apostrophes, and devout Meditations went no higher then a Religious
commemoration of her life and piety, they did not more then what had warrant
from the Scripture and the Angel Gabriel; Benedicta tu mulieribus would have
born all that: nor had it done much hurt, had they ventured further, even to
nec vox hominem sonat, and made her somewhat more then mortal, had they tarried
there. But when they could not stop in the full careire, and would needs hold
it out to the D^a certe, as Mantuan and Antonius in plain terms have done, and
to create her Queen of Heaven, and call her by the name of Regina Coeli, then
drew they very near to the old Idolaters mentioned in the Prophet Jeremy, in
case they did not go beyond them.

This that we may the better see, and so discern withal what a tare it proved,
let us look next upon the fruits, and we shall find that there is nothing
less in this (...), this Virgin-Worship, if I may so call it, then true Wheat
indeed. Let us but look upon the fruits, and we shall see that Anselm gives
this reason, why Christ when he ascended into Heaven left his Mother here, De
Excel. V. c. 1.
Ne curiae coelesti veniret in dubium, etc. for fear the Court of Heaven might
have been distracted, whom they should first go out to meet, their Lord or
their Lady, that Bernardin Senensis, one of her especial votaries, does not
fear to say, Mariam plura fecisse Deo quam fecit Deus toti generi humano, that
she did more to Christ in being his Mother, then Christ has done to all
Mankind in being their Savior: That Gabriel Biel, a School-man of good note
and credit, has shared the Government of the World betwixt God and her, God
keeping justice to himself, miscricordia matri virgini concessa, and left to
her the free dispensing of his mercies. That Petrus Damian tells us, that when
she mediates for any of her Supplicants with our Savior Christ, non rogat ut
ancilla, sed imperat ut domina, she begs not of him as an Handmaid, but
commands as a Mistress: that Bonaventure, in composing of our Ladies Psalter,
has applied to her what ever was intended by the Holy Ghost for the
advancement of the honor of our Lord and Savior: and finally, that Bellarmine
has made no difference between the veneration due to her, and that which does
of right belong unto Christ as man. Add unto these their usage of the vulgar
sort in point of practice, saying so many Ave Mary's for one single Pater
Noster, hearing so many Masses of our Lady, and not one of Christ's; decking her
Images with all cost and cunning that man's wit can reach, when his poor Statues
stand neglected, as not worth the looking after. These, and the rest if we
should add, what could be imagined but that the Apostles were mistaken when
they made the Creed; and that it was not Jesus, but the Virgin Mother that
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried for the sin of
man?

You see then what most monstrous tares have grown up in the Church of Rome,
under the new devise of Hyperdulia. Let us next see what their (...) carries
with it, what a strange multitude of tares that one word does carry. The
Cardinal makes this difference between the terms, hanc sanctis caeteris, that
that belongs indifferently to all the Saints, illam humanitati Christi and
matri ejus; but this alone to Christ's humane nature only, and his blessed
Mother. The ground of the distinction, and how they differ from (...), or
indeed rather how they differ not, we shall not canvasse for the present.
Suffice it that in this (...) they comprehend both prayers to Saints, and
adoration of their Images. And first for prayers unto the Saints, the Fathers
taught, according to the word of God, that the Saints departed pray for us, as
fellow members with them of that mystical body whereof Christ Jesus is the
head. Which as it is unquestionably true of the Saints in general, so was it
thought by Maximus Taurinensis, and that not improbably, that of the Saints
none were more constant in it then the holy Martyrs, qui and supplicia pro
nobis pertulere, who suffered death for our encouragement and confirmation. In
this regard the faithful of the primitive times used to repair unto their
Tombs, and did there offer up their supplications to the Lord their God; next,
ventured to implore the Lord to grant them their desires and prayers, even for
the blessed sake of those Saints and Martyrs at whose Tombs they kneeled; and
in the end began to implore the Martyrs to recommend their prayers to the Lord
Almighty, for their more quick dispatch in the Court of Heaven. By which
degrees came in the invocation of the Saints, and there with that (...), that
Religious worship of them which the Schools maintain, and is defended for good
Doctrine in the Church of Rome.

This Doctrine, of what sort it is, whether wheat or tare, must be determined
by the fruits: and if we bring it once to fecissent fructum, the true condition
of this Doctrine will at full appear. For what did follow hereupon, but that
the Saints were made our Mediators at the Throne of Grace? every man choosing
some or other of those blessed Spirits to be his Advocate and Intercessor with
Almighty God; our Savior Christ meanwhile neglected, or but little thought of*
Nay, they went so far at the last, that Christ was fain to mediate with the
Saints, as if their passions, and not his, had been the meritorious causes of
Redemption: as in that prayer of the Portuice touching Thomas Becket, Christ
Jesu per Thomae vulnera quae nos ligant relaxa scelera. Nor stayed they there,
but as they made their prayers unto them, so did they come at last to make
their vows, not by but to the Saints departed; and finally, to dedicate unto
their proper and immediate service, Temples, and Festivalls, and Altars, and
set forms of worship; which being all material parts and circumstances of
religious adoration, and so confessed to be even by those of Rome, has so
plunged poor ignorant people into gross and palpable Idolatry; it having been
the constant Doctrine of Antiquity, that all religious worship, of what sort
soever, is so peculiar unto God, that without manifest Idolatry it cannot be
communicated unto any creature. And howsoever those of wit and learning have
found a mental reservation to deceive themselves, yet that will prove no
plaster for the general sore, nor save the common people from the down^ right
sins. The Cardinal indeed thus resolves the case* Licet dicere, S. Petre
miserere mei, etc. that it is lawful for us men to pray unto S. Peter to have
mercy upon us, to save us, and set open to us the Gates of Heaven, to grant us
health and patience, and what else we want, modo intelligamus his precibus and
meritis, if so we understand it thus, Do all these things that I request by thy
prayers and merits. But this I would fain know of Bellarmine, with all his wit,
how many of the vulgar sort have ever learnt or practiced such a reservation;
or if they have, how far it may extenuate and excuse the sin.

So it is also in the point of Images, first introduced into the Church for
Ornament, history and imitation. Sic and defunctis praemium, and posteris
dabatur exemplum, as Minutius has it. Had they stayed there, it had been well,
and no fault found with them. They might have used them so sans question, and
therewithal have given them that respect and reverence which properly belongs
to the similitude and representations of celestial things. Posterity had never
questioned them or their proceed^ngs in the point, had they gone no further.
But when the Schools began to state it, that idem honor debetur imagini and
exemplari, that the same veneration was to be afforded to the Type and
Prototype, then came the Doctrine to the growth, to fecisset fructum. When, and
by whom, and where it was first so stated, it is not easy to determine, and
indeed not necessary. It is enough that we behold it in the fruits. And what
fruits think you could it bear, but most gross Idolatry, greater then which
was never known amongst the Gentiles? witness their praying, not before, but to
the Crucifix, and calling on the very Cross, the wooden and material Cross,
both to increase their righteousness, and remit their sins. Auge piis
justitiam, and reis dona veniam, as the Portesst had it. Nor could we look for
better fruit from so lewd a Tenet, it being defended in the Schools, that the
Image of Christ is to be worshipped with (...), the highest kind of worship in
their own opinion, cum Christus adoretur adoratione latriae, because that kind
of Adoration does properly belong to Christ our Lord. And for the Images of the
Saints, they that observe with what laborious Pilgrimages, magnificent
processions, solemn offerings; and in a word, with what affections, prayers,
and humble bendings of the body, they have been and are worshipped in the
Church of Rome, might very easily conceive that she was once again relapsed to
her ancient Paganism.

Its true, the better to relieve themselves in this desperate plunge, they have
excogitated many fine distinctions, as terminative and objective, proprie and
improprie, per se and per accidens; which howsoever they may satisfy the more
learned sort, are not intelligible to poor simple people. What said I, that
perhaps they may give satisfaction to the learned? No such matter verily; for
Bellarmine himself confesses, that those who hold that any of the Images of
Christ our Savior are to be honored with that kind of worship, which they
call (...), are fain to find out many a nice distinction, quas vix ipsi
intelligunt, nedum populus imperitus, which they themselves, much less poor
ignorant people, could not understand: which makes me think, that sure the
Cardinal was infatuated with the spirit of dotage, himself defining positively
in the self-same page, Imagines Christi improprie and per accidens posse
honorari cultu latriae, that by the help of a distinction, our Saviors Images
may be adored with (...). And this I may account for another fruit of this
Image Worship, that it draws down on them that use it that curse recited in
the Psalms, viz. That such as worship them are like unto them. Add unto these
the scandal which is hereby given unto Jews and Turks, and the great
hindrance which it does occasion unto their conversion, who do abominate
nothing more in all Christianity then this profane and impious adoration of
Images. In which respect we may affirm that of the present Romans, which St.
Paul tells us of the ancient, nomen Dei per vos blasphematnr inter gentes, that
by their means God is blasphemed among the Gentiles.

In^initum est ire per singula; To run through all particulars in this manner
were an infinite business. Suffice it that there is no point in difference
between them and us, the falsehood and absurdity whereof is not discovered in
the fruits, in fecisset fructum, however it lay hid in crevisset herba. The
Doctrine of indulgences and merchantable pardons to be bought for money, what
fruit does it produce but licentious living, when for so small a trifle one
might purchase pardon, non solum pro praeteritis, verumetiam pro futuris, not
only for sins past, but for those to come. The holding back of Scripture from
the common people, and celebrating Gods divine service in an unknown Tongue,
what fruits do they afford but ignorance of Gods holy pleasure, and blind
obedience to the precepts of sinful men, and coldness in the exercise of
devotion; and finally, contempt of Gods word, and whole Commandments? The
equalizing of their own Traditions with Gods holy word, according to the Canon
of the late Trent-Councel, what fruits does it afford but contempt of
Scripture? The Doctrine of that Church in the point of merit, what fruits does
it produce but high presumption? or that of transubstantiation, but most gross
Idolatry? or that of half Communion, but most horrible Sacrilege? Such fruits,
if all means else should fail us, would serve sufficiently to manifest and
declare their noxious nature, and thereby make us able to determine of them,
though none at all observed them when they were in semine, and few were able to
distinguish them, when they were in herba: Nam quod latebat in herba
manifestatur in spica, and quod celatur in germine aperitur in fructu, as says
Paschasius on the Text.

You see by this that has been spoken that there are other means still left
us by Gods infinite mercy, to know Gods Seed from Satan's, the good Wheat from
tares; besides the observation of time, place and persons, Ex sructibus little
cognoscetis eos, by their fruits ye shall know them, says our Savior. And yet
the trial of these tares is not made only by the fruits; the fruits first
brought them to apparuerunt, made them plain and visible, and brought them to
appear in the open Court. But having entered their appearance, they were to be
examined, tried and judged by the word of God. The Lord has given it for a
Rule, ad legem and testimonium* that in all doubtful controversies, we should
have recourse to the law and testimonies. And Christ our Savior being asked
his judgment touching the business of Divorce, refers himself to the first
Institution, saying, Ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so in the beginning. So
that whoever can demonstrate from the Book of God, that either the Doctrine or
the practice of the Church of Rome differs from that which was first preached
and published by our blessed Savior, and the holy Apostles, does manifestly
prove a change therein; nay prove as forcibly that they have departed from the
rule of Faith, which was once given to the Saints, as if he could, or did
demonstrate all the circumstances, when, and by whom, and in what Country,
every particular deviation and corruption did at first creep in. Quid verba
audiam, cum facta videam? what need we search for circumstances, when we have
the substance; or look into the root, when we see the fruit?

But here may those of Rome reply and say, Are there no ^ares at all in your
reformation? are all your Geese Swans? and your Grain good Wheat? Did Satan
never take you sleeping? Whence is it then we see amongst you such opposition
to all public Orders, such a neglect of fasting, such contempt of holy days,
though both of Apostolical institution? such practices and attempts against
Episcopacy, though ordained by Christ? such quarrelling against those sacred
Ceremonies in Gods public service, which you pretend to be derived from most
pure antiquity? Whence is it that we have observed such Covenants and
Combinations against lawful Government; such obstinate and strong, if not
perverse resistance against just Authority of your supreme Lord, as well in
temporal matters as Ecclesiastical; such common stocks and contributions to
support your factions, and relieve those that are condemned for their
disobedience? Whence is it that there are maintained amongst you such
blasphemies, in laying upon God the blame of sin; such Stoicisme in
necessitating all men's actions by the fatality of Gods Decrees; such Donatisme
in appropriating to some few amongst you the names of Saints and true
Professors? Qui alterum incusat probri, etc. you that have found so many tares
in the Church of Rome, had best be sure that your own floor be very thoroughly
purged, and your wheat well winnowed; and that you search not our wounds with
too sharp an hand, till you have cleansed and cured your own.

This they object; and what shall we return for answer? We will be more
ingenious, then they are to us, and confess the action, and so not put them to
the needless trouble of looking after the particulars of time, place and
persons. Too true it is, that some amongst us, though not of us, have set on
foot those Doctrines, and pursued those practices, which are become a scandal
to our Reformation and further will dishonor it, and in time subvert it, if
care and order be not taken to prevent the mischief. We see them in their
fruits already, and that has brought them at the last to apparuerunt. But what
they are, and whose, and what fruits they bear, and what is aimed at in those
innovations which they have thrust upon this Church, and yet cry out of
innovations, as if these were none, I cannot show you for the present. The time
is too far spent, and the season past, to venture on a new Discovery; but what
is wanting now, shall be made good hereafter at next setting out, when I shall
come to the unde haec zizania, in the following verse. Have patience but till
then, I will pay you all: which that I may the better look for, I shall not
tire your patience further at this present time; and therefore here I will
conclude.

SERMON V.
At WHITE HALL Jan. 12. 1639.
MATTHEW. 13. v. 27. So the Servants of the Householder came, and said unto him,
Sir, did not thou sow good Seed in thy Field? from whence then has it
tares?
PRimus felicitatis gradus est non peccare, ^yprian.
etc. The first degree of happiness is not to sin: The second, to be sensible
of a fault committed. It had been well done of the servants in the present
Parable, to have been careful in their Masters business, and not have given the
enemy advantage by their dull security, for the dispersing of his tares. And it
was well done, although not so well, that they discerned them in good time,
before they had destroyed Gods Harvest, and devoured his Wheat. A fault had
been committed by their sloth and drowsiness, that they saw too well; but every
man was willing to excuse himself, Vill. Paterculque.
and cast the blame upon his fellow. Proprium est humano ingenio omnia sibi
remittere, nihil aliis, said Velleius rightly. And tares they saw sprung up
which they had not sown; but how they came there, that they could not tell:
certain they were, that they had sown good seed in their Masters Field, and
that the Field was well manured, and fitted for so great a blessing. To see
this Field so dressed and cultivated, overgrown with tares, and to be ignorant
withal what malicious hand had plotted and performed so great a mischief, must
needs produce both wonder and amazement in their doubtful minds: therefore as
well to satisfy their Master, that they had sown good seed in his blessed
Field, according unto his appointment; and to be satisfied themselves, whence
those tares should come, they came unto the Householder, and said unto him,
Domine, nonne seminasti bonum semen? Sir, Did not thou sow good Seed in thy
Field? whence then has it tares?

In our discourse upon this Text, I shall present you with an Explication, and
an Application: an Explication for the Text, an Application for the time. In
the first general, the Explication, we shall behold the servants of this
Parable in their address unto their Master, and their conference with him. In
the next general, the Application, we shall endeavor a discovery of those
tares and errors which have been sown by Satan in this Field of God. And
first, we must begin with the Explication, and therein with the matter of
address. Sic accedentes s^rvi patris-familias, so the servants of the
Householder came, etc.

Frustra quaeritur quod per viam suam non quaeritur. Lact. l. 3. c. 28.
There is but one way leading to the truth, which they that miss do rather
wander then travel, and shall find their journey at the last, without end or
profit. The servants of the Heavenly Husbandman were at a loss among
themselves touching the unde of these ^ares; That there they were, even ripe
and ready for the Harvest, that they saw too plainly; but how they came there,*
who it was that sowed them, was not yet discovered; nor was it probable, that
they who had committed so great a villainy would confess the action. The taking
of their opportunity, cum dormirent homines, when as the servants were asleep,
did manifestly show, that by whomever it was done, it was intended for a work
of darkness; and therefore very little hope, that they themselves would bring
it to the open light. In this uncertainty, there could be found no better way
to inform themselves, Psalm. 121.
then to repair unto the Lord, the celestial Householder, whose eyes do neither
sleep nor slumber. Gods eye is always open, though his servants sleep; Minut.
Felix.
Interest tenebris, says Minutius, no darkness is so gross which he cannot
penetrate, nor fact so secret and obscure which he discerns not. The Lord is
totus oculus, Ierenaeus.
and totum lumen, as the Father has it; and therefore cannot be kept ignorant
of men's private practices, how close soever they are carried. Can any man hide
himself in secret places, so that I shall not see him, Jerem.
says the Lord Almighty?

Besides, there was a ruled case in the point before, it was the Custom of the
Jewish Church, in all doubtful cases, as long as they continued in Gods grace
and favor, to ask for counsel of the Lord. No resolution so perspicuous, as
that which came from God in his holy Tabernacle, or was delivered by his Seers.
Our Savior Christ, as he is Deus de Deo, God of God; so he is also lumen de
lumine, light of light. His providence as watchful, and his eye as piercing as
that of his Almighty Father. No better resolution of a doubtful case, then that
which might be had from him, Domine quo eamus? Lord, says St. Peter, whither
shall we go? c. 6. 68.
thou have the words of everlasting life. Himself, our blessed Savior, gives
them more encouragement to have recourse to him in their doubts and
difficulties. Ego sum via, veritas and vita, I am the way, the truth, and the
life, John 14. The servants of my Text need not make a question, either of
finding out the truth, which they were in search of, or gaining life eternal,
which they sought by truth: when he which was the Journies end, was the way
also. And therefore in my mind St. Bernard descants very pretily on that Text
of Scripture; Eamus ergo post Christum, quia est veritas, per Christum, quia
est via; ad Christum, quia est vita. Let us walk after Christ, because he is
the truth; by Christ, because he is the way; to Christ, because he is life. St.
Austin also gives us a good hint for our direction in this journey, both for
truth and life; Non est quo eamus nisi ad te, non est qua eamus nisi per te;
Whither O Lord shall we repair but to thee? and which way shall we come unto
thee, if we come not by thee? The Servants here were well acquainted with this
way, they knew none better, that howsoever God inhabits in luce inaccessibili,
in light inaccessible, yet he was easy of access unto them that fear him; and
therefore accedentes, they came unto him.

Accedentes autem servi, So the Servants came. The servants in the plural
number, they came not one by one to make their own excuse apart, they came all
together. They had been faulty all alike, and therefore if a check were feared,
good reason they should be all partakers of it. The Heathen Orator thought it
an equitable point, Tull. pro Marcello.
ut qui in eadem causa fuerunt, in eadem item essent fortuna, that they who had
been interessed in the self-same business, should bear their equal shares in
the self same fortune; but this was not the business that they were in quest
of. Their errand was, not only to be satisfied upon the unde haec zizania,
whence the tares should come; but to enquire their Masters pleasure, what he
thought sitting to be done on the discovery, vis imus and colligimus ea? v. 28.
as it follows after: this was indeed a weighty business, such as required a
general unanimity, and a joint assistance. The reformation of the Church is no
easy work, nor to be undertaken by a single man. It is a business that
requires much help, and many hands, and all those hands to work together to one
end, God blessing their endeavors by his Grace and Spirit. Tacitus tells us of
the Britains, I^ vita Agricolae.
that though a very valiant Nation, yet they were very easily made a thrall to
Rome, quod in commune non consul^bant, because they never held together, never
communicating for the common safety either their counsels or their purses. I
hope we never shall again commit that error, though there be dangerous Symptoms
of it, the servants of my Text may instruct us better: who howsoever they had
done amiss by their former drowsiness, in giving Satan opportunity to sow his
tares, yet now they are resolved to combine together, for the preventing of all
further mischief. Accedentes autem servi, so the servants came.

Well, they are come, and well come, what comes after next? Dixerunt ei, they
say unto him, it seems they stood not mute not fearful,

-- Alter in alterius jactantes lumina vultus, Ovid.

looking on one another who should first begin. They saw the Church in no small
danger of approaching ruin, by the quick spreading of those tares; and
consequently, thought it fit to know truly how the matter stood: not that he
needed to be told, but that he looked that they should tell him. The Lord
knows our necessities before we ask, yet he expects that we should call upon
him in our servent prayers. He knows more of our sins and frailties then we do
our selves, and yet he has enjoined us to confession. And this he does, to
keep on foot an intercourse between Heaven and Earth, to rouse our spirits, and
inflame our zeal, and quicken our devotions. Dixerunt ei, they said unto him,
and that too in the plural number; What, spoke they all together, as they came
together? I believe not so: God is the God of order, not of confusion. They
therefore which repair unto him, must come unto him in an orderly and decent
way: so that it is most likely that they had some Speaker, who had in charge
the representing of the common business; or that they spoke by turns, as
occasion served. And yet they are all joined in dixerunt here, to show that
howsoever they had many tongues, they had all one voice; or that whoever spoke,
spoke the minds of all. Such unity of hearts and tongues is to God most
grateful, being the best expression of the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.

We must not rest upon the quod sit, that they came and said, we must examine
next what it was they said. They craved access upon no other ground and motive,
but to come to conference. That was the thing most aimed at in the accedentes,
in their coming to him. Now in the Proeme to this conference, they propose two
questions: first, Domine, nonne seminasti bonum semen? Sir, did not thou sow
good Seed in thy Field? next, unde haec zizania? whence then has it tares? In
one of these there was no satisfaction needful; for none knew better then
themselves, that God had sown it with his choysest Seed, so picked and
cleansed, and fit for his sacred Field, that there was neither weed nor tare
amongst it. Themselves had labored and manured it, and sowed and harrowed it,
according to the rules of that holy Husbandry. In which respect, St. Paul not
only calls them Laborers, but (...), and Fellow Laborers with God. God
looking on, blessing the piety of their endeavors, and giving his increase
unto it. In Matthew. 13.
Its true indeed, St. Hierome makes the servants here to be the Angels; Servos
Dei non alios accipias quam Angelos. So does Theophylact, and others of the
Fathers also; but this can no way stand with our Saviors Comment, who in his
Comment on this Parable has made the reaping of the Corn, not the sowing of
it, for the work of Angels. This question therefore being asked by those that
knew how to answer it, may pass amongst those data, matters of concession,
which are required in many Sciences. Questions or Interrogatories in the Book
of God are oftentimes equivalent to affirmations, not proposed as doubts.

But for the other question, unde haec Zizani^, that was indeed a true
quaesitum, a doubt considerately proposed, in hope of satisfaction or solution.
And in this question there are two things to be considered, the substance of
it, and the circumstances. The substance or the matter of it does concern the
tares, what kind of grain they were, who sowed them, and from whence they came.
These have been touched upon before, in our Discourses upon the 25. verse, upon
the Sevit, and shall be yet more thoroughly canvassed in the following Answer,
when we are come to the sive fecit inimicus. But for the circumstances of the
question, who asked it, and of whom they asked it, those come in fitly here to
be considered. And first, the men that asked it were the servants of the
Heavenly Husbandman, who having sown no other seeds then the seeds of piety
and true Religion, could not but wonder at the tares. Next, being full of doubt
and wonder, they made repair for resolution to their Lord and Master, whose
(...) and Fellow Laborers they were. They knew not of the Enemy, nor his
subtle practices, and therefore took the speediest course that could be for
the removing of their doubts; and put the question unto him who knew how to
salve it. Not one amongst them but he might have said, Davus sum, non Oedipus.
We have more need to be resolved of you, and come you to us?

The stating of this point might make the injustice of our Romish Adversaries
the more inexcusable. We challenge them of several errors and corruptions in
the Church of Rome: we tell them what they are, how many, wherein they differ
from Gods word, and from the tendries of the Church in the purest Ages. They
make reply unto us with an unde haec, Bellar. l. 4. c. 5.
quo tempore, quo loco, quo autore? Show us, say they, when, and by whom, and
where your said tares were sown, or else they shall not pass for tares. We
have replied to all these Queries in a former Sermon; not on constraint, as
forced unto it by the equity of the demand, but gratis, to demonstrate the
absurdities and the follies of it. But now we answer more resolvedly, that this
is not to make, but mistake the question, to change at once both scene and
Actors. The servants of the Householder asked the question here; there they that
asked it are the servants of the very enemy. He who is asked the question here
is the heavenly Husbandman, whose eyes are always open for his Churches
safety, and who beheld the enemy through all his vizards, even whilst he was
about this deed of darkness. By them a question is demanded of poor ignorant
servants, who either weary of their labor, or inclined to ease, or careless of
their Masters business, had been fast asleep, and knew not what was done till
they were well wakened. If they must needs be further satisfied in these
curious cavills, let them repair to their own Master, and enquire of him, who
being conscious to himself of his own lewd acts, can give them a more punctual
answer. We are no servants of the enemy, nor ever were employed in sins dark
designs, and therefore unacquainted with his plots and counsels. To us,
according to this Parable, the asking of the question appertains, not to the
answer of it.

But put the case the worst that may be, and let it pass for granted, that our
adversaries may pervert and change the question as they list themselves; yet
why should we return them any other Answer then the Lord made unto his
servants? Why may not we make this reply to all their Queries, inimicus homo
hoc fecit, that the enemy did it? The Lord out of his infinite wisdom thought
it not improper to give a general answer to a particular demand. And why should
we be wiser then our Master? The servants ask in special, unde haec zizania?
the Lord returns in general, inimicus fecit. But as for the particulars of
time, place and persons, wherewith our Adversaries press and charge us against
right and reason, those he reserves unto himself, and conceales from us. And
it is a learned ignorance not to know those things which God endeavors to keep
secret. Ea nescire quae magister optimus non vult docere, erudita est inscitia,
as mine Author has it. Some things the Lord reserves to the day of judgment,
when all hearts shall be open, all desires made known, and no secrets hid: And
then we shall be sure to know, what times the enemy made choice of to sow his
tares; what instruments he used in the doing of it; what place or Country he
selected for their first appearance; with all the other curious circumstances
which are so much insisted on by the common Adversary. If this suffice not, we
must finally return that Answer which once Arnobius made to some foolish
questions propounded by the enemies of the Christian faith; l. 2. cont. gentes.
Nec si nequivero causas vobis exponere cur aliquid fiat illo vel illo modo,
sequitur ut infecta sint quae jam facta sunt. In case we are not able to
declare unto them, when, by what persons, in what Countries, the Doctrines by
us questioned were first set on foot, it follows not, that therefore none of
them are tares of the enemies sowing.

I have no more to say for the Explication, most of the points having bin
treated of before in our former discourses on this Argument. And for the
Application, I must give you notice, that it relates not to the matter only at
this time delivered, but to the whole intent and purpose of the present
Parable. I have already laid before you those tares and errors which have been
noted and observed in the Church of Rome. Our own turn is next, and it comes in
agreeably to the Text it self; in which it is supposed as granted, that there
was good feed sown by the Heavenly Husbandman, however afterward the field
became full of tares. According unto which Proposal, I shall first show you in
the Thesis, what special care was taken in our Reformation, that all things
might be fitted to the word of God, and the best ages of the Church. Next, I
shall make a true discovery of those several tares wherewith this Field is
overgrown, and Gods seed endangered. So doing, I am sure I shall not be
accused of partiality, or respect of persons. And therefore (...), encouraged
by your Christian patience, let us on in Gods name.

Si de interpretatione legis quaeritur, De legib. and longa cons^ctud.
inspiciendum est inprimis, quo jure civitas retro in ejusmodi casibus usa
suit. It is a Maxim in the Laws, that if a question do arise about the sense
and meaning of some Law or Statute, the best way is to have recourse to the
decisions of the State in the self-same case. An Axiom no less profitable in
Divinity, then it is in Law. The State Ecclesiastical has her doubts and
changes, as great and frequent as the civil: the body mystical as subject to
corruptions as the body politic. In which condition, either of distractions or
of distempers, no better way to set her right, to bring her to her perfect
constitution, then to look back upon her primitive and ancient principles. Ad
legem and testimonium, was the rule of old: And this the Church of Christ has
thought fit to follow, when she has found her self diseased with plain and
manifest corruptions, or otherwise distracted with debates and doubtful
disputations, Romans 13. v. 1.
as St. Paul calls them. The Law of God, the Gospel of our Savior Christ, for
points of Doctrine; the usage and testimony of the primitive Church, for points
of practice, has always been her rule and Canon in such desperate plunges. In
the observance of which rule, as generally the Church of God has discharged
her duty, as may appear by the inspection of her ancient Co^ncels, and other
Monuments and Records of her acts and doings; Livie.
so, aut me amor suscepti negotii fallit, either I err through too much
filial piety to the Church my Mother, or else there never was a National
Church, in what Age soever, that has more punctually observed this rule then
this Church of England.

For in that great business of the Reformation, those Worthies here, whom God
had raised and fitted for the undertaking, were not possessed, for ought we
find, with any spirit of contradiction, or humor of affecting contrarieties.
That which they found before established, which either was agreeable to the
word of God, in point of Doctrine, or to the usage of the primitive Church, in
point of order and devotion, they retained as formerly: so far endeavoring a
conformity with the Church of Rome, that where she left not Christ and the
Primitive Church, there they left not her. Luther and Calvin, however honored
and admired in the World abroad, were here no otherwise considered then as
learned men, whose works and writings possibly might be counted useful, but not
thought Authentic. Our Prelates here that were engaged in this great business,
Cranmer and Ridley, and the rest of these brave Heroes, were of as able parts
as they, but more moderate spirits. They knew the Church had first been founded
upon the Prophets and Apostles, our Savior Christ being the Cornerstone; and
therefore would not build their reformation on the names of men. Christianus
mihi nomen est, Catholicus cognomen, was Pacianus's Speech of old; Pacian.
but they made it theirs, and still we keep it as our own. But what need more?
The fair succession of the Bishops, and the vocation of the Ministry, according
to the ancient Canons; the dignity of the Clergy in some sort preserved; the
honor and solemnity of Gods public worship restored unto its original luster;
the Doctrines of Religion vindicated to their primitive purity, show manifestly
that they kept themselves to that sacred rule, Ad legem and testimonium, to the
Law and Testimony.

Two things there are especially considerable in the Church of Christ; matters
of Doctrine, and of worship. The first of these we find comprised in the Book
of Articles; the other in the Book of Common Prayer, and other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England. In both of which the Fathers of this
Church proceeded with a temperate hand, having one eye upon the Scriptures, the
other on the practice of the Church of God in her purest Ages; but none at all,
either on Saxony or Geneva. Its true indeed, that Calvin offered his
assistance to Archbishop Cranmer, for the composing of our Articles, Epist.
for. ^00.
si quis mei usus fore videbitur, if his assistance were thought necessary; and
would have crossed the Seas about it. But the Archbishop knew the man, and how
he had been practicing with the Duke of Somerset, Epist Calv. ad Bulling. fol.
98.
ut Hoppero manum porrigeret, to countenance Bishop Hooper in his opposition to
the Churches Ordinances, and thereupon refused the offer. Latimer also tells
us, in a Sermon preached before King Edward, Lat. p. 47.
Anno 1549. That there was a Speech touching Melanchthons coming over; but it
went no further then the Speech. Mel. Epist. Anno 1553.
And he himself, Melancthon, writes to Camerarius, Regiis literis in Angliam
vocor, that he was sent for into England; but this was not till 53. as his
Letters testify: the Articles of this Church being passed the year before in
Convocation, and the Doctrine settled. God certainly had so disposed it in his
heavenly wisdom, that so this Church depending upon neither party, might in
succeeding times be a judge between them, as more inclinable to compose, then
espouse their quarrels. And for this Doctrine what it is, how correspondent to
the word of God, and to the ancient tendries of the Catholic Church, the
Challenge and Apology of Bishop Jewel, never yet thoroughly answered by the
adverse party, may be proof sufficient. But we have further proof then that;
for the Archbishop of Spalato at his going hence professed openly, Spalat.
shifting, etc. p. 90. and page 41.
that he would justify and defend the Church of England for an Orthodox Church
in all the essential points of Christianity; and that he held the Articles
thereof to be true and profitable, and none of them at all heretical. And he
that calls himself Franciscus, a S^ Clara in his Examen of those Articles
denies not, but that being rightly understood, they do contain sound Catholic
Doctrine. Adeo veri^as ab invitis etiam pectoribus erumpet, said Lactantius
truly.

Now, as the Church of England did not (...) (as once the Orator affirmed of
the Grecian Oracles,) in the points of Doctrine: so neither did it Calvinize in
matter of exterior order, and Gods public Worship. The Liturgy of this Church
was so framed and fitted, out of those common principles of Religion, wherein
all parties did agree, that it was generally applauded and approved by those,
who since have labored to oppose it. Alexander Alesius a learned Scot did
first translate it into Latin; In Epist. ad Buceri censaram.
and that, as he himself affirms, both for the comfort and example of all other
Churches which did endeavor Reformation, and increase of piety. The Scots in
their first Reformation diverse years together used the English Liturgy: the
fancy of extemporary prayers not being then took up not cherished, as Knox
himself confesses in his own dear History. And howsoever now of late they have
divulged a factious and prohibited Pamphlet against the English Popish
Ceremonies, as they please to call them; yet in the structure of their
Reformation, they bound themselves by Oath and by Covenant too, to adhere only
to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England; Religionis cultui, and
ritibus cum Anglis communibus subscripserunt, Hist. Scot. lib. 19.
as it is in Buchannan.

So for the other opposite party, those of Rome, they made at first no doubt
nor scruple of coming to our public Service, or joining with us in the worship
of one common Savior. Sir Edward Coke, a man who both for age and observation
was very well able to avow it, both in his pleadings against Garnet, and his
Charge given at the Assizes held in Norwich, and the sixth part of his Reports,
in Cawdries case, does affirm expressly, that for the ten first years of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, there was no Recusant known in England: whose testimony, lest
it should stand single, and so become obnoxious to those scorns and cavils
which Parsons in his Answer unto that Report has bestowed upon it, Sanders
himself, in his seditious Book de Schismate, shall come in for second.
Frequentabant haereticorum Synagogas, intererant eorum concionibus, ad easque
audiendas filios and familiam suam compellebant. So he; but not to stand upon
his testimony, or build so great an edifice on so weak a ground, Arist. Eth.
as the (...), the suffrage and consent of the vulgar Meinie; the Pope himself,
Ann. Eliz. Anno 1561.
as Cambden does relate the Story, made offer to confirm our Liturgy, the
better to make up the breaches of the House of God; which since, the Priests
and Jesuits have dissuaded from, out of a wretched policy to make them wider.
A point which verily that Pope had not yielded to, being a very stiff and
rigorous Prelate, but that he found the Liturgy to be so composed, as it could
no ways be offensive unto Catholic ears. Either the Pope must lose his
infallibility, and become subject unto error, like to other men; or else there
is no error to be found in the English Liturgy.

Thus have we seen a Church reformed, according to the prescript of the Word of
God, by the Law and Testimony. A Church that seems to have been cultivated by
the Lords own hand, planted by Paul, and watered by Apollos, God himself giving
the increase. A Church that grew up in the middle of two contrary factions, as
did the Primitive Church between Jew and Gentile, and was the better
strengthened and consolidated by the opposition. Gods Field was no where better
husbanded, the good seed no where sown with a clearer hand, then it was in
this. O faciles dare summa Deos! But as it fared at first with the Primitive
Church, Lucan:
so it happened here. We must not so far flatter and abuse our selves, as to
conceive there are no tares at all in our Reformation, because it was first
sown with the Lords good Seed. The Devil as he stayed his time, donec
dormirent homines, till the servants slept, so he made use of such a grain, and
used such subtle instruments to effect his purpose, that many will not think
them to be tares of the enemies sowing now they are awake. But being they are
come at lest to fecissent fructum, unto the bringing forth of fruit, we must
needs challenge them for tares, and so pronounce them.

And first it was accounted in Aerius for a capital Heresy, Haeres. 75. n. 3.
(...), that Priests and Bishops were all one, no difference at all between
them. This Epiphanius who records it calls (...), a frantic dotage, and such
as could not then obtain belief or credit. Nor did it otherwise succeed in the
world abroad; Aerius and all his followers being exiled from the society of
mankind, (...), Ibid.
flying to Woods and Precipices, and to desolate places. I hope it cannot be
denied, but that this tare has taken a deep root amongst us. The Bishop is not
only in these days put below the Priest, but thought to be at all no Order in
the Church of God. Aerius was too gentle to ascribe them any thing; nor was he
so well studied in the controversy as we have been since. And here methinks we
may resume, as well the wonder as the words of Lyrinensis: Cont. haer: cap. 9.
Here we have miram rerum conversionem, a strange turn indeed. The world is
finely brought about; It is the Bishop in our times, and not the Heretic, that
is turned out of House and home, pronounced to be an Alien to the Tribes of
Israel; and cursed are they that give them room or entertainment. It was so
ordered in Geneva, when in their Reformation, if I so may call it, they
expelled their Bishop: and they that since that time have embraced their
principles, have ever since pursued their practices. Nor is this Doctrine thus
disseminated, a deviation only from Antiquity, no heretical Tenet; or made to
be an Heresy by the Bishops only, ab episcopis, as Danaeus has it, such as
were Epiphanius and St. Austin, who do so define it: The learned Cracanthorp,
cap. 41. number. 3.
who if he did decline in any thing from the Church of England, it was in
favor of that party, calls it in plain terms Puritanorum haeresin, or the
Puritan Heresy, in his defense against Spalato.

But yet Aerius stayed not here. He had before blown down the Bishops, as he
thought himself, and must now have a blow at the civil State. He could by no
means like of fasting, especially of fasting on set days and times; but would
by all means have it left to men's Christian liberty, to be omitted or
performed as men list themselves. Non celebranda esse statura jejunia, De
haeres. cap. 53.
sed cum quisque voluerit jejunandum, says St. Austin of him. Where we may see
what kind of fastings they were that the man disliked, viz. Statuta jejunia,
fastings ordained by Law, and imposed by Statute: An arbitrary fast of his own
appointment no man liked better then himself. Nay, he was so averse from all
public order, that whereas anciently those Eastern Churches did use to fast
the Wednesday and the Friday, and feast it always on the Sunday; this man and
his Disciples must needs fast the Sunday, Ep^phan. hae^es. 75. n. 3.
(...), and revel it, whosoever said nay, upon the Wednesday and the Friday. I
must needs follow this fine fellow a little further in his courses. The Church
in those most blessed times did use to spend the week which preceded Easter,
the holy week, as pure antiquity did call it, in watching, fasting, prayer, and
other exercises of humiliation; on no day more then on good Friday. Aerius on
the contrary and his Disciples, used not alone to pamper and inflame the flesh
in that holy time, but to deride all those that carefully and religiously
observed the same, (...), Ibid.
as the Father. I put it to the Consciences of those who this day hear me,
whether they have not eaten of this tare too liberally. Certain I am, that many
a pious man amongst us may complain with David, I humbled my self with fasting,
and that was turned to my reproof.

Arius comes somewhat near in sound unto Aerius; and they agreed in other
matters of their Heresy, though not in these. What Arius and Aerius taught in
derogation of the honor of our Lord and Savior, we all know sufficiently. And
though I will not say with some Lutheran Doctors, Dieter. con* Lam. p^d.
Calvini anam religionem ejusmodi principia continere, ex quibus facilis est
prolapsus ad Arianismum, yet one might say, I doubt too justly, that some
amongst us of that party come too near the Arians in their expressions and
behavior. In their expressions, making Christ our Savior no better then an
elder Brother, the first begotten of the Saints, and no more then so. So that
in case these men should hold in Heaven by Burgh English, (as doubtless
wheresoever they come, they will start new tenures) their share in the eternal
glories, for ought I conceive, may be the greater of the two: for their
behavior, that is fitted unto their expressions. For if our Savior be but in
the state of an elder Brother, why may they not be honored when they stand
before him, talk with him as familiarly as with one another, and sit down with
him at his Table? A gesture at the holy Supper, however much desired both here
and elsewhere, which in three several Synods of the Polish Churches, stands
condemned of Arianism^, Ritum sedendi ad mensam dominicam, Consens. Eccl. Pol:
profectum esse ab Arianis tran fugis. It came, say they, expressly from the
Arian Heretics; and to them I leave it: I only note it as a tare of the
Enemies sowing, you may discern it by the fruits.

And now I am fallen upon the point of gesture in the holy Sacrament, I must
needs speak a little of the point of gesture in the act of prayer. Pious and
pure Antiquity used in the time and act of prayer, Apologer:
ad orientis regionem precari, in Tertullians Language, to turn their faces
toward the East. A Custom of such universal latitude, that Epiphanius
reckons it amongst the Heresies, or follies rather of the Osseni, Haeres. 19:
n. 3.
a sort of Heretics mixed of Jew and Christian, that they prohibited their
followers to observe the same, (...), as the Father has it. How much we have
of these Osseni, and how this Church has been traduced in these latter days,
need not now be said. Or were it needful, I should say no more then this, that
Cartwright first began the cry in the late Queens Reign. Burton with his
Associates have since took it up; the Author of the Holy Table opening as wide
as any of the rest to make up the Consort.

But to proceed; Optatus tells us of the Donatists, that they confined the
Church to their private Conventicles, De schism. Donatist. lib. 1.
making that part of Africa wherein they resided to be the Catholic Church of
Christ, the residue of all the world being quite excluded. And this they did,
says he, quia specialem sanctitatem sibi vendicabant, because they challenged
to themselves a peculiar sanctity, not incident to other people. In confidence
of this, lib. 4. Id. p. 122.
they did not only think all Christians else unworthy of their salutation, and
of the common courtesies between man and man; but taught their followers and
Disciples, ne ave dicant cuiquam nostrum, not to bestow an Ave or All hail upon
them. And more then so, scandala contra nos ponitis, they raised false clamors,
scandalous reports against their Brethren: nor was there one of all the Sect,
qui non convitia nostra suis tractatibus misceat, whose Pamphlets were not full
of opprob^ious railings against the Orthodox professors. Id. ibid. p^ 522.
Nay, they went so far at the last, as violently to assault and kill their
opposites; as did Purpurius Lerinensis, who with his own hands killed his own
Sisters Son: and being asked the reason of it, returned this answer, Et
occidi, Id. l. 1.
and occido non eos solos, sed and quicunque contra me fecerit, that he had
done it, and would do the like to any he who durst oppose him. How came they
shall we think to this dangerous height? why certainly, because they had
discl^imed the jurisdiction and authority of the civil Magistrate thinking
themselves exempt from all hum^ne Ordinances; and that not only in such matters
which concern the Church, according to that frequent dictate of Donatus, Id. l.
3.
quid imperatori cum Ecclesia? No, they were better studied in the point then
so, and thought the King, or supreme Magistrate, a most unnecessary calling in
a Christian State. Quid Christianis cum Regibus? Id. l. 1^
What need have Christians of a King, was their common saying, and that went
very high indeed.

Other particular notes and characters of this desperate Heresy I omit of
purpose. These are enough, if not too many, to make plain and manifest how deep
a root this dangerous tare has gotten in our Reformation: for he knows not
any thing who knows not this, that some amongst us have appropriated to their
secret Conventicles the name and title of the Church; and to themselves, the
names of Christians and Professors; that they bestow no better attributes on
such as are conformable to the public Government, both in their Pamphlets and
their prattles, then such as are not fit for the ears of Christians; that out
of an opinion of their own dear sanctity, they will have no commerce, and much
less humanity, with such as they conceive not to like their courses. These
things are notiora quam ut stylo egeant. There are some other points and
circumstances, in which they come more near the Donatist: one Burchet, Cambd:
in Annal. Anno 1573.
a great zelot of the former times, being come at last to be of this opinion
with them, Licitum esse Evangelicae veritati adversantes occidere, that it was
lawful to destroy all those which opposed the Gospel. How the said Burchet put
in execution his own divellish Principles, and what effects they wrought on
that furious Welchman, P: Studley looking-gl. of Schism.
in that most barbarous Assassinate on his innocent Mother, is not now my
business. All I shall say is briefly this, that men are principally led into
these extremities, on this misperswasion, that Kings have no Authority in
sacred matters; and consequently, every man, of what sort soever, in matters
which concern Religion may be a King unto himself. Which if it once be took for
granted, if once they come to ask this Question, quid imperatori cum Ecclesia?
assuredly in little, very little time, they will make bold to alter and invert
the other, and ask, quid regibus cum Christianis? what right have Kings to Lord
it over Gods Inheritance?

Occultior Pompeius Caesare, Hist. l. 1:
non melior. Pompey, says Tacitus, was something secreter then Caesar in his
proceedings, though nothing sounder in his purposes to the Commonwealth. So
stood the case between Priscillian and the Donatist: Priscillian was the warier
of the two, but perhaps more wicked: his Doctrine and his practice too, tending
to the subversion of all public Government and humane society. His Doctrine
was, Aug. de haeres. c. 10*
fatalibus astris homines alligatos esse, that all men's actions were
necessitated by the Stars above. A Paradox by him derived from Bardesanes,
who ascribed all things unto Fate; by Bardesanes from the Stoics. And for
their practice what it was, we may conjecture at it by their so celebrated
Maxim, which St. Austin speaks of, Jura, perjura, Id. ibid:
secretum prodere noli, That swearing, forswearing, any thing was lawful which
did conduce to the concealing of their counsels, and the promoting of their
Sect. The Doctrine of Predestination, as by some delivered, comes home unto the
dreams and dotages of Bardesanes and Priscillian, necessitating all men's
actions by the fatality of Gods Decrees: By which we are informed, Calv: Instit.
decretum esse a Deo ut sua defectione periret Adam, that God decreed the fall
of Adam before all eternity; and that the actions of the Sons of Adam are so
prescribed and limited by the like Decrees, Piscat. ad Vorstium.
ut nec plus boni faciant, nec plus mali omittant, that they can neither do
more works of piety, nor commit fewer deeds of darkness then their stint or
measure. But for the Maxim of Priscillian, and the great use is made of that,
whether for the concealing of their purposes, or the advancement of their
projects, Baner. of l. 3. c 9.
Cartwright himself shall come to give in evidence: who being cited to appear
in a Court of Judicature, indicted an Assembly of his Church in London, and
there proposed this question to them, Whether or not it were convenient for
him, being to be examined upon Oath, to reveal any of the matters which had
passed amongst them? A very tender case of conscience, such as I trust is
neither to be found nor paralleled in all the Casuists and Schoolmen from
Bonaventure down to Bonacina. I only add this, Sulpit. Sever. hist. l. 1.
and so leave Priscillian; and that is, how Justantius, one of his Associates,
and a chief stickler in the Sect, was for his factious and seditious carriage
banished for ever to the Isles of Scilly, Ad Sillinam insulam ultra Britanniam
deportatus, as Sulpitius has it.

But Popery and Pelagianisme are the darling errors, the (...), the
bosom-mischiefs of the time, as some men conceive it. Are none of these crept
up in our Reformation? Pelagianisme some, that is certain: and that no otherwise
esteemed and cherished, than if it were a part of our Saviors Gospel. St.
Hierome tells us of Pelagius, Adv. Pelag. l. 1.
how generally he was offended with the Surplice, how much it went unto his
heart, Ecclesiasticum ordinem in candida vest procedere, to see the Priest
administer the blessed Sacrament in a white Vesture. Pelagians of this kind we
have too too many; such as not only hate the Surplice, and refuse to wear it,
but think the Gospel of our Savior to be unprofitable and of none effect, if
preached by one that does approve it. A learned man who once was of that party,
and pars magna too, D. Burges.
has so informed me in his Books, and I dare take it on his credit.

For Popery, that is grown amongst us to the very height; and in the points and
parts thereof, in which the life and essence of Popedom does consist
especially. The time was, when as Kings and Emperors had the sole power of
calling Councils, of moderating or presiding in them by themselves or Deputies;
and finally, of confirming their Acts and Canons. This power the Popes have
long usurped, and think it a great favor unto secular Princes, if they
vouchsafe to give them notice of their purposes, or trust them with the
execution of their Laws and Ordinances. The time was too when Princes thought
themselves supreme in their own Dominions, accomptable to none but God. But now
the Popes have challenged a disposing power, both of their Persons and Estates:
as being the Vicegerents of Almighty God, the Vicars general of Christ our
Savior. To produce Authors for the proof of such evident truths, especially in
such a knowing and discerning audience, were a foul impertinency, and indeed
sensibile super sensorium ponere, to light a Candle to the Sun.

In these two points, which are the very life and essence of the Popedom, as
before I said, the Puritan is no less Popish then the Pope himself. The power
of calling the Assembly, that appertains no longer unto Kings and Princes; it
belongs only to the Church, that is, themselves. God was mistaken sure when he
said to Moses, Numb. 10. 1, 2.
Fac tibi duas tubas argenteas, that he should make to, or for, himself two
silver Trumpets; it is well if Dathan, Corah and Abiram will allow him one. And
for the civil power, to command that one, according to the Doctrine now, it is
originally in the people too, and in the King by way of derivation only: and
that too cumulative, not privative, as they please to word it; the people
having still a liberty inherent in them to reassume the Government, as they see
occasion. There is much talk indeed of Solomon, and all his wisdom: think we,
he was not out when he broached this Doctrine, per me Reges regnant, by me
Kings reign; or speaking as he did, in Parables and Proverbs, which are hard to
construe, his words may brook some other meaning then they seem to signify? De
Jure Regni.
Buchanan was a learned man too, but speaks plainer far; Populo jus est
imperum cui velit deferat. The people have a power, says he, to dispose of
Kingdoms, from man to man, and line to line, as they list themselves. Nor stood
he single in it neither. Goodman and Knox, the two Apostles of the Sect, led
the way to him, and they first brought it to Geneva; The Kings and Princes of
the Earth must change their styles and tenures, if this Doctrine hold: It is no
longer Dei Gratia that they hold their Scepters, but Populi clementia, by the
peoples courtesy. And Tenant at the will of another man is the worst tenure or
estate in all my Littleton. The greatest Kings and Princes, by their opinion,
are but as Bailiffs and sworn Officers of the Commonwealth, and therefore to be
called to a public reckoning, either upon pretense of mal-administration, or
any popular dislike or disgust whatsoever: nor will there want some Tribunitial
Spirit, when occasion serves, to take them by the throat, and say unto them,
Read rationem villicationis tace, that is to say, as our last Translations
read, Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou shall be no longer Steward.
This is indeed the Doctrine proper to the Sect, for which they have no
precedent nor pattern in the former times; and is withal the true foundation
of that disobedience and desire of liberty, which is become so Epidemical
amongst us. There are none so blind but may discern this for a tare of the
enemies sowing. It is already come to fecissent fructum.

I could now to these points of Popery add a point of Judaisme, in the imposing
of a Sabbath on the Church of Christ; and that to be observed with so great
severity, that they have gone beyond the Jews, and showed themselves more
Pharisaical then the very Pharisees. But hereof I have spoken more at large
elsewhere, and cannot now contract it in a narrower compass. I could say
somewhat also of those Pharisees, both for their Doctrine and their practice:
their Doctrine, in maintaining Fate and Destiny as the Stoics did, and setting
up their own traditions above the word of God and the Churches Ordinances:
their practices, in the compassing of Sea and Land to increase their
Proselytes, the ostentation of their zeal and piety to the public view; the
absolute command they attained unto both on the purses and the consciences of
the common people; and on the strength thereof, their disobedience and contempt
of all Authority: but these I only glance at, and so pass them over. Nor shall
I now insist on the Nazaraei, Epiph. haeress. 29. n. 6. Id. haeres. 76. n. 4.
excluding the necessity of good works out of the Covenant of grace: nor on the
Heresy of the Anomaei, or Eunomians, who for themselves and their Disciples
had cancelled the Obligation of the moral Law; nor of the Apostolici, who had
all things common, or rather common stocks and contributions, for the promoting
of the Sect. August. de haere^. c. 40.
I should be endless in this tedious and ungrateful search, should I present
you all those tares which have been scattered in Gods Field since the
Reformation.

Tares then there are we see in our Churches too, not only in the Church of
Rome: those I discovered to you at my last being here; these I reserved until
this present, with promise then, that if you would have patience, I would pay
you all; and now I hope I have discharged my self of that Obligation. And in
this way I went the rather, for the performance of my duty to Almighty God, and
to your sacred Majesty, as Gods Vicegerent in these Kingdoms; and unto those
who under God and you have the chief ordering of this Church. These tares I saw
not in the Sevit, I was then unborn; nor in crevisset herba, when the blade
sprung up; for if born then, I was then too young. But being now a servant,
though the meanest of the heavenly Husbandman, and having noted and observed
them in fecissent fructum, I have made bold to come before you, as did the
servants of my Text, saying, Sirs, There was good seed sow^n in the Field of
God* but unde haec zizania? but behold these Tares. And having said this, I
have done my duty. God so direct your royal Counsels, and the aviso's of your
P^elates for the Churches peace, for the averting of those mischiefs which
these tares do threaten, that so not any of them, no nor all together may
either prove infectious to the Wheat, the Lords own good Seed, or any way
destructive to the Field it self. And let all good Christians say, Amen.

SERMON VI.
At WHITE HALL Jan. 21. 1639.
MATTHEW. 13. v. 28. Et ait illis, Inimicus homo hoc fecit.

He said unto them, An enemy has done this.


FAcilius est in contubernalibus disputare quam conserere sapientiam. Minut.
Felix.
It is observed exceeding well by Minutius Felix, that men of equal parts and
power may far more easily debate then defend a question. Disputes are sooner
raised then they are determined: and every one that knows how to start a
question knows not how to lay it. Determinations and Decisions are matters of
Authority and Judgment, which howsoever they were agitated and prepared in
Schools, are pronounced ex Cathedra. If the Dispute become so vehement, and the
point so intricate, that neither the Master of the Schools, nor Doctors of the
Chair do determine of it, then Dic Ecclesiae comes in next, devolve the
business to the Church, and hearken with obedience to her resolutions. The
Church is furnished by our Lord and Savior with sufficient power to settle and
compose such questions as are raised within her: nor wants she the assistance
of Gods Spirit to direct that power for the appeasing of the same; yet if the
Church be wavering and unsettled in her resolutions, or that the point in
question be de summa rerum, the safety and subsistence of the Church it self,
then must we do as did the servants of my Text, make our address unto the
Lord, who keeps unto himself the dernier resort. The servants came, but how? in
the spirit of prayer. Accesserunt ad Deum per orationem, as it is in Lyra: In
locum.
Cord and mentis desiderio, in purity of heart, and fervency of spirit, as
Remigius has it. And he whose ears are always open to the affectionate
desires of his faithful servants, lets them know the truth, Diaboli calliditate
hoc factum, that that which they enquired about was of Satan's doing. They came
unto him with an unde, and he makes answer with an ait, He said unto them,
inimicus homo hoc fecit, the enemy has done this.

These words contain in them these two general parts, a quis respondet, and a
quia respondet: first, who it is that answers; and then, what he answers. The
quis respondet in the first words, and ait illis, he said unto them; the quid
respondet in the last, inimicus homo hoc fecit, an enemy has done this. In
this last general, the quid respondet, we have these particulars; first, who
it was that did this mischief, an enemy, inimicus homo; next, by what practices
and arts he did it; which we may easily find, if we look well for them, in the
fecit hoc. I shall speak first unto you of the quis respondet, who it is that
answers, Et ait illis, he said unto them.

Nec Deus intersit nisi dignus vindice nodus Inciderit. De Art Poet.
It is prescribed by Horace, in his Art of Poesy, not to bring in the Gods to
bear a part in any of their scenes and Comedies, but where some special
difficulty did arise, which of necessity might seem to require their presence.
The Parables in Scripture are a kind of Poesy, fitted and framed to our
capacity, and for our instruction. And we may take it for a rule, that in what
Parable soever God comes in discoursing, there is some weighty point in
agitation, which could not be determined of but by him alone. God we find here
discoursing with his Houshold-servants, though not here as God: The Parable
holds in this also a true decorum with the Rules of Poesy, and shows us God
presented in the shape of man, Et Deus humana sub imagine, M^tam. lib. 1.
as it is in Ovid. God here appears unto us like an Householder, or an
Husbandman, the homo seminans of the Text, conferring with his servants, his
subordinate Ministers, about the quality and success of their employment. He in
this place, as (...) and ille in the Greek and Latin, is not demonstrative,
but relative, and does relate unto the Householder of the former verse, the
Pater-familias, as the Latin; the (...), or Master of the House, as the Greek
calls it.

And indeed, call him by which name you will, it comes all to one: Each of them
does express sufficiently both his power and greatness. The whole world, the
united body of all mankind is but one great Family; and who the Pater-familias,
the Father of this Family, but the Father Almighty? His Sons we are, if we
behold our selves in the first Creation; not only as the Father of the first
man Adam, from whose loins we come, but even of all and every one in his
particular. The very bodies of us men are too too excellent a structure for man
and nature to erect: And therefore said Lactantius truly, hominem non patrem
esse, Lib. 5. c. 19.
sed generandi ministrum, Man only is the Instrument which the Lord does use to
raise that goodly edifice of flesh and blood, which he contemplates in his
Children. His servants we are too in our several functions; the King, as the
chief Steward of his Family, to go in and out before his people; the Bishop and
the Priest, to instruct and teach them; the Peers, to countenance and protect
them; the Judge, to regulate and defend them. Some in one place, and some in
another, all servants, all Domestics in that numerous family. And he, as
Father of the Family, does not he take care that every one according to his
place and quality receive his portion of meat in due season? Does not he feast
the rich with dainty, and the poor with plenty? Does not he heal the sick, and
cure the wounded, and comfort the afflicted, and support the weak? Sic curat
unumquemque tanquam solum curet, sic omnes tanquam singulos, as my Author has
it. Never did Father of a Family so discharge his duty. Minu^.


Next, let us look upon the world as it is an House, the general habitation of
mankind, and of all Gods creatures; and who should be the (...), the Lord and
Master of this House, but the Lord Almighty? Deo una domus est totus hic
mundus, Id. ibid.
as says Octavius in the Dialogue. An House so orderly disposed, so well
contrived, so richly furnished, that one may very well conjecture that
certainly it has some Lord and Master of great power and wisdom. They say, the
model of an House is fashioned according to his brain that builds it: Then
sure, the builder of this House is of infinite wisdom, who has contrived and
ordered it in such an excellent manner, as well for state and entertainment as
inferior Offices. And when we come into an House wherein we see the servants
vigilant and laborious in their several stations, neither omitting their own
duties, nor intermedling in those Offices which belong to others, we use to
say, that such an House is prudently and wisely ordered. Crederes universitatis
esse dominum; Minut.
The Lord of all this Universe has his House so fitted, alotting every man
unto some employment, as a bar to idleness; and limiting each man to his own
employment, to avoid confusion. They which will needs be meddling in another
office, either the affairs of Church or State, which they are not called to,
d^sturb the order of Gods House, and subvert the Discipline thereof, and so
become unworthy to be counted servants to so wise an Householder.

But God is not an Householder only, and no more then so, though so translated
in my Text: The Lord is (...) as well as (...), Lord of the soil, as well as
Master of the House; the House being such as has good store of Land, and a
fair demesne belonging to it. Ager est mundus totus, non ecclesia; Origin. in
Mat. 13.
The whole World is the Field of God, and therefore called Ager suus, his
Field. v. 24. and Ager tuus, thy field, the servants speaking to their Master,
v. 27. The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness of it; the whole World, and all
that dwell therein, as the Royal Psalmist has it. Satan was but a silly
braggard, when he said to Christ, Haec omnia tibi dabo, all these will I give
thee. The Kingdoms of the Earth, and the glories of them are of Gods disposing:
And all the Princes of the World, even the Mohammedan and Heathen, hold their
Crowns of God, though they do service for them to the Devil. The enemy is so
far from being Lord in chief of all the Universe, that he has no propriety in
the smallest part: No Field, no not the corner of a Field, which he can
challenge to himself, or say to any of his servants, that is mine own, go
plough, and fallow, and manure it, and then sow my seed. If he be so inclined
at any time as to be sowing of his tares, it must be done in agro Domini, some
part or other of the Lords Field. And then he comes but on the post fact
neither, after the Field was sown with good seed before. For howsoever
Heresies may be antiqua, yet they are not prima; Heresy may be very ancient,
but never primitive. Truth was first sown, though many times it happens by the
Devils practices that Heresy does overcome it. (...), wholesome Doctrines, had
first of all been planted in the Church of Christ; (...), other Doctrines, as
the Apostle calls them, cap. 6. v. 3.
1 Timothy they came in after, as the fruits of a latter sowing.

So much of ille, he, the relative, as it stands marshalled in my Text: and
what did he? Et ait illis; He said unto them. And it was no small grace to his
poor servants that he vouchsafed to look so low as to hold conference with
them, and admit of parlies in matters which himself alone knew how to remedy.
But being it was a matter which concerned his Church, and in the which the
servants did address themselves unto him with so great affection, he thought it
no disparagement to hearken to their information, and return an answer. Nor
stops he here, as if he had done too much for them; but he permits them also to
propose their counsels, vis imus and colligimus ea? in the words next
following: and to that also he replies: Such conferences between the heavenly
Husbandman and his Houshold-servants, God and the Prophets, Christ and his
Disciples, are no rare matters in the Scripture. Not that God either stood in
need of their intelligence, or was made wiser by their counsels; but leaving
thereby an example unto Kings and Princes, and such as are in authority from
and under them, not to despise the information, or undervalue the advice, of
the meanest person, how much soever ranked below them both in place and power.
Such men as are inquisitive in asking questions, or prompt in giving their
advise in emergent difficulties, however they may seem unseasonable, yet if
they do it on good grounds, as the servants here, are not to be rejected as
unserviceable. Certain I am my Householder conceived it so; He neither blames
his servants for their curiosity, with nolo nimium curiosos; nor taxes them of
indiscretion in the delivering of their opinions, with nolonimium diligentes.
For howsoever to their counsel he returns a non, yet he acquaints them fully
with those weighty reasons which did incline him thereunto. And as unto the
unde, to the point proposed, to that he makes such answer as removed the doubt;
which is the quid respondet, and my second general, inimicus homo hoc fecit.
Where first we must consider who it was that did this mischief; and that was
inimicus, an enemy.

Dicuntur in Scripturis inimici Dei qui non natura sed vitiis ejus imperio
adversantur. De civitar. Dei. l. 12. c. 3.
It is a Maxim of St. Austins, That those are called Gods enemies in holy
Scripture, which are not such by nature, in their first creation, but only by
their own corrupt affections. His reason is, Id. ibid.
naturam non esse contrariam Deo, sed vitium, because that nature of it self is
not contrariant unto God, but subservient rather. Sin is the instrument which
first made the breach between God Almighty, and those who in the Book of God
are called his enemies. So was it also with the enemy which is mentioned here,
God made him good, though not unchangeably good. By nature he created him a
living and immaculate spirit, inferior unto none but to God himself. But he
would needs aspire beyond his nature; and so, as many times it happens unto
proud usurpers, lost both the Crown he aimed at, and his own Inheritance. For
whereas God professes of the Angels, that they are (...), and were by him
created to be ministering Spirits, Lucifer, so the Scriptures call him, did not
like of that: He thought himself a creature of too glorious a composition to be
sent on errands, or to be ready at command, Isaiah 14. v. 4.
and therefore aimed at higher matters, et ero similis Altissimo, said the
proud Aspirer; He must be equal to the Almighty, both in place and power. This
pride and blind ambition cast him out of Heaven, and made him of an Angel, and
a Friend of God, to become an enemy, an enemy unto the Lord and to all his
Saints.

This is the enemy which I am to speak of, the enemy that took such pains to
destroy Gods Harvest. We met with him before in the 25. but there we found him
with his clogge. There he is styled (...), inimicus ejus, his enemy; the enemy
of God alone, and there we did consider him accordingly. To God an enemy ex
professo, on the ancient qua^rel, upon the sentence passed against him for his
first aspirings. To man an enemy no further then he wears Gods Livery, and
retains unto him: and therefore in that place, inimicus ejus, Gods enemy. But
here we find him more at large, an enemy; or inimicus quispiam, some enemy, as
Beza reads it. An enemy to God, and to Man, Gods Image, and the Church, Gods
Spouse: to each of these an enemy in their several places. In the first, to
God; to God indeed an enemy, but an harmless enemy. His malice unto God does
consist much more in a continual purpose to resist his will, then a power to
hurt him: non potestate laedendi, August. de civ vit. l. 12. c. 3.
sed voluntate resistendi, as the Father has it. The mischiefs which he means
to God, are but like Arrows shot against a Rock of Adamant, which rebound back
on him that shot them, nihil illi valentes nocere, sed sibi. The hurt he does
is to himself, in filling up the measure of his own iniquities, and thereby
adding to the weight of his just damnation.

Things not succeeding to his wish with Almighty God, his next design is upon
man. With him he had a quarrel too at his first Creation: It grieved him at the
very heart to see poor man, composed of such vile matter as dust and ashes,
adopted unto those celestial glories, Genesis 3:
whence himself was fallen: and therefore he resolves to work him to the like
Apostasy. This onset he then gave, and has since continued, endeavoring
nothing more then the fall of man, that he might triumph on his ruins. For
being alienated from the love of God, he has been laboring ever since the
World began to fill men's minds with false opinions touching God, and to bring
in strange forms of worship, which the Lord abhors. Et alienati a Deo, Minut.
Fell.
inductis pravis religionibus, non desinunt homines a Deo segregare; as mine
Author has it. Hence came the monstrous dotages of the ancient Gentiles
concerning God; the infinite and innumerable multitude of the Gods themselves,
their most ridiculous, and sometimes most obscene and filthy ceremonies at many
of their public Festivals: their barbarous and unnatural sacrifices, not of
the flesh of strangers only, as in Gaul, Pontus, Egypt, yea and Rome it self;
but making their own Children pass through the fire to Moloch, as amongst the
Israelites. If Socrates, Diog. Laert. in vir. Socrat.
or any of the Learned and more noble souls, oppose these manifest impieties,
and seek to vindicate and restore the true knowledge of God, him he will first
disgrace with the common people, deprive him of his fame and substance, and at
last his life. Job c. 1. etc.
If Job, or any pious and religious spirit, live not according to the will of
Satan, and the wicked multitude, him he will labor to accuse before God
himself; that getting him into his hands, to spoil and plague him to the
utmost, he may enforce him in the end to curse God and die. So then we see the
difference of the Devils enmity unto God and man. To God he is an enemy affectu
only, in his mind and purpose; to man an enemy affectu and effectu too; not
only seeking whom he may devour, but devouring many.

Thus deals he also with the Church, with the united body of Gods chosen
servants. Christ had no sooner raised himself from the bonds of death, and
placed himself at the right hand of God in the heavenly places, Apocal. c. 12.
1: etc.
but presently the Woman, the Church of God, however clothed with the Sun,
and crowned with Stars, was by the Great Dragon brought into distress, and
forced to fly into the Wilderness. Nor was it long before there was a War in
Heaven, Michael and his Angels against the Devil and his angels. Apocal. c.
12: v. 7. 9.
And howsoever the Archangel had the better then, and that the Dragon was cast
out and vanquished, to the great comfort of the Saints, yet has he never left
to persecute and afflict the Church. The case stands so between the Devil and
the Church of God, as it was once 'twixt Rome and Carthage. Patercul. hist. l.
2.
Semper inter eos populos aut bellum, aut belli praeparatio, aut infida pax
fuit, as the Story has it. Either they were in open War, or preparing for
it; or if at any time in peace, it was a peace more dangerous then the War it
self. For in the infancy of the Church, what persecutions did he raise against
her? what monstrous Heresies did he raise within her? what havoc did he make
of the Saints of God? what a red Sea did he create of the blood of Martyrs? If
that at any time his wretched Instruments grew weary of their own tyranny, as
sometimes they did, he then prepares the way unto new afflictions, by charging
those poor innocent souls with incestuous mixtures, and drinking the warm blood
of a new slain Infant: which were those (...), Just. Martyr. Apol.
so often confuted and retorted by the ancient Fathers. Nay, when the Church was
settled in a perfect peace by the hand of Constantine, yet was it still infida
pax, a peace but ill observed by the treacherous enemy, intent on all
occasions, watching all advantages, if not to cut it down at once by open
violence, yet to supplant it at the last by his subtle practices.

This to perform, he was to deal in other manner, and by other instruments then
before he did; more like a cunning practiser then an open enemy. Before we
find him styled inimicus simply, or inimicus quispiam, as Beza here. But in
this place he comes in with a special adjunct, (...), as in the Greek, or
inimicus homo, in the vulgar Latin: wherewith agree Castellio and Erasmus, in
their translations of the Text. Our English versions do somewhat differ in the
point. The Bishops Bible, as they call it, reads it a malicious man; that of
Geneva, an envious man* the Rhemists literally, an enemy man. All of them keep
themselves unto the homo as well as to the inimicus; except our last
Translation, therein following Beza. But what the reason is why Homo should be
superadded unto inimicus, that is not yet agreed on. ^n Mat. 13.
St. Hierome is of this opinion, Diabolum propterea inimicum hominem appellari,
quod Deus esse desiit, that Satan is here called inimicus homo, because he left
off to be God. But this I can by no means like of: the Devil in the height of
his ambition aspired not to be God, but like him. It was not ero Deus, cap. 64.
but ero Deo similis, that procured his downfall. Lupoldus in his Book de vita
Christi, tells us, that homo is here joined to inimicus, as Africanus was to
Scipio; to denotate that Conquest which he gains on man, when he subjects him
to his will. Others conceit, that he is therefore called inimicus homo, to show
that correspondence and affinity which is between the Devil and the wicked man:
the Devil in this place being called a man, and Judas in the sixth of John
being called a Devil; but these, as I conceive it, are but tricks of fancy, and
come not home unto the point.

For my part, I should rather think that Satan is here called inimicus homo,
because in sowing of his tares he used the help of envious and malicious men,
whom he had fitted for that purpose. When he first set upon the Church by
violent and bloody persecutions, he made use of Beasts. The Tyrants all from
Nero down to Dioclesian, what were they else but Bears, and Wolves, and Pards,
and Lions; creatures that never sucked the milk of Women? Certain I am, as most
Interpreters agree, that by the name of Lion, c: 4. v. 18.
in the 2d of Tim. St. Paul designs the Emperor Nero; I was delivered, says
the Apostle, out of the mouth of the Lion, Ex ore leonis, In locum.
i. e. persecutoris, says St. Hierome; i. e. Neronis, says Lyranus. (...), so
says St. Chrysostom; with whom accord Theophylact and Oecumenius. And when he
labored to envenom it by scandalous and noysom Heretics, he made use of
Serpents, that by the poison of their impious Doctrine, she might be brought
unto destruction. Certain I am that Epiphanius resembles every several
Heretics unto some special sort of Serpent. Epiphan.
But in the sowing of these tares, in bringing in that deviation from the true
Religion which is intended in this Parable; he then thought it his best way to
make use of men, men who knew how to time it, and to watch advantages, and to
make use of all occasions; and so with more assurance might effect his purpose,
because leas^ suspected. The Devil never went beyond himself but in this
invention, in putting on the shape of man when he did this feat, that he might
pass unseen by the houshold-servants. This is the true cause as I conceive it,
why Satan is here called inimicus homo, the envious and malicious man; or if
you will, the enemy-man, as the Rhemists read it. What kind of men the enemy
made use of to effect his purpose, and how he makes the lusts and passions of
his several instruments subservient to his wretched purposes, we shall see in
the hoc fecit, my last particular.

Aetatis cujusque notandi sunt tibi mores. Horar: de art.
He that desires to be esteemed a Master in the Art of man, must be well
skilled in all the humors and affections, which are peculiar to his nature, and
incident unto his age. Nay, he must be well read in men's wants and weaknesses,
their imperfections and defects: which if applied with cunning, and employed
with care, may prove exceeding serviceable to the aims and projects of the
cunning practiser. And as the thrifty man that desires to prosper, turns every
thing unto his profit, and makes no small commodity out of toys and trifles;
so he that trades in men, and has the art of diving into their affections, may
husband and improve the meanest passion to his great advantage. The Devil, the
old enemy, is a cunning man, a subtle practiser, and is not now to learn this
lesson. When he was once resolved on the fecit hoc, to sow his tares, his
dangerous and heretical Doctrines in the Church of God, he was not to be
taught how to deal with men, how to make use of their affections, of their
lusts and passions, for the promoting of his purpose; or how to use their
weakness and deficiencies, as an help unto it. Whether men be voluptuous,
arrogant, or vainglorious, whether they pine with envy, or are stirred with
choler; or be they rash, or headstrong, it is all one to him. He knows full
well his opportunities, how to apply himself unto them, as the humor takes:
and by their means to do that business, which he durst never undertake
without them. Epiphan. haeres. 75. number. 1.
(...). Not that the Devil has a power, as the Father notes it, to thrust men
into his employments whether they will or not; but that he makes such use of
their lusts and passions as may best suit with his intendments. The enemy in
this business deals by craft, not force.

And first, if we begin with the ambitious man, (as certainly he would take it
ill, if we should do otherwise,) how much has Satan wrought upon this
affection from the beginning of the world? What was it but ambition in our
Father Adam, Genesis 3.
when he desired to be as God, knowing good and evil? And did not Satan work
upon that humor, to the undoing of that wretched upstart, and his whole
posterity? What was it but ambition in Simon Magus, (...), Ep^. ad.
the first-begotten of the Devil, as Ignatius calls him, which made him love to
be entitled the great power of God? Acts 8. v. 10.
And did not Satan work upon that humor, for the promoting and divulging of
those desperate blasphemies, with which the Church was long tormented? What was
it but ambition in the Popes that moved them to affect the Title of Universal
Bishop in the Church of Christ? And has not Satan wrought upon that humor, to
the distraction of the Church, if not the total ruin of it? This Doctrine of
the Cardinal, Si Papa doceret virtutes esse vitia, etc. that if the Pope
determine virtue to be vice, all men are to believe so, without more ado: that
of Aquinas and the Schools, that he may make new Articles of faith; which Pius
Quartus put in practice: that of the Canonists in general, that as the
Vicar-generall of our Savior Christ, he is Lord of all, and consequently has
a power to do what he list; as also to dispense what, and how he list, in
matters which concern the Church, with Oaths and Vows, and Leagues and
Marriages; yea, with the very Law of nature: these and the rest what are they
but the fruits of the Popes supremacy? and what produced the Popes supremacy
but the Popes ambition? I fear a spice of this ambition, and a shrewd one too,
is still left amongst us: in them most visible, who would be every one a Pope
in their several Parishes. The Fathers of the Consistory claim as great
Authority, as ever Pope did in the Conclave; and at their feet, according to
their own dear principles, the P^inces of the Earth must lay down their
Scepters. Huic disciplinae omnes orbis principes fasces suos submittere, De
Discip. Eccl. p. 141, 143.
and parere necesse est, as Travers has resolved it in his Book of Discipline.

Vainglory may come next ambition, and many times they go together. This was
the motive that incited Theudas to take upon himself the name of Acts 4:
some doughty Prophet, Epl. cont: Fundan. Manicha. cap. 6. Se^m. 65. in Cantu.
that he might draw away much people after him, and be counted somebody. This
Austin notes to be the fountain of all Heresies; Superbia matter heres^on, as
the Father has it. St. Bernard speaks it out more fully, captare gloriam de
singularitate scientiae, to get himself a name for a man of eminency. Somewhat
they needs must teach which is not ordinary, to gain themselves opinion, and
increase their followers. St. Dominick, St. Francis, and all the rest which
have so surfeited the Church with their several Orders, what aimed they at in
all their institutions, but the vainglory of a new Invention, and to have
their followers called by their own names? So fared it also with the Schoolmen,
Lombard, Aquinas, Bonaventure, and the rest that followed; every one
superadding some new niceties unto those before them. Those intricate debates
first raised amongst them touching Predestination, Grace, Free Will, the Merit
of good works, as well excongruo, as condigno; the number and nature of the
Sacraments, (...), (...), and the like perplexities; Their new distinctions,
and new terms of Art, new notions, or indeed new nothings, what served they
for, but the ostentation of their singularities in point of learning, to the no
small increase of disputations, and decrease of piety?

Nor has it fared much better with the Chutch in these latter times; She is,
and has been long, afflicted with this New Disease. New Doctrines now are no
less pleasing to the people, Acts 17* 21^
then once news at Athens; and many a man we have, as there, that spends his
time for nothing else then to hear new things, (...), as in the Greek, some
Doctrine of the newest fashion. Ibid. v. 18.
In case they have not what they look for, then presently what would this
babbler have? say some: he seems to be a setter forth of strange Gods, say
others; because perhaps he preached unto them touching obedience, and
conformity to the public Government. Such being the humor of the people,
Sermonibus opinantium faciles praebere aures, Tacit.
to hearken greedily to such Sermons as are fraught with fancies: whoever has
the art to feed that humor, shall have many followers. And who I pray you would
not buy a company at so cheap a rate, for fear of hazarding so poor a trifle as
the Churches peace?

Desire of glory leads the way to desire of gain, or indeed cannot go without
it. He that does feed upon the air of popular applause, and live upon the
breath of acclamation, may carry all his dinner in an empty belly. (...), It Is
money makes the man, said the old Greek Proverb. And therefore they that are
vainglorious, and hunt for popular applause amongst their followers, are for
the most part also covetous, and suck no small advantage from them too. Were
not for spes dolosi affulserit nummi, Pe^sius.
the flattering hopes of filthy lucre, digito monstrari would not serve the
turn. Desire of gain, and love of money, are the predominant affections that
the enemy works on. The love of money, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy c. 6. v. 10.
is the root of all evil; the which whilst some have coveted after, a fide
erraverunt, they have erred from the faith. And if that men subvert whole
houses, and teach things they should not, do we not find it by experience that
it is turpis lueri gratia, Titus. c. 1. v. 11:
even for the sake of filthy lucre? Certain it is, the prosecution of these
covetous hopes has given the enemy no small advantage in the disseminating of
his tares in the field of God. It has been magnus laqueus diaboli, a great
snare of Satan's, who no sooner found that Clergymen were covetous, and intent
on riches, but straight he laid before them, many opportunities to feed that
humor. As for example;

The Church was used, according to the rigor of the primitive times, to enjoyne
strict and tedious penance on the party criminal: why might not this be turned
to money? Hence came the preaching, and the prizing too, of Indulgences and the
year of Jubilee; no small Revenue of the Popedom. Christ had left power unto his
Ministers to absolve the penitent, and to remit the sins of a contrite person:
may not some gain be made of that? may not a pardon be obtained for money, as a
thing of course? yes questionless, and that not for the present only, but many
thousand years to come; not for poor trifles only, or peccadillos; but such as
a religious ear would abhor to think of, Chemnit. Exam. C. Tr.
non pro praeteritis tantum, sed and pro futuris; not for sins past only, but
for those to come: the gates of Heaven are never opened with more speed to the
formal penitent, then by silver keys. Some of the Fathers speak of a fire of
Purgatory, though doubtingly, and as a matter not agreed on: might not that
fire be made to warm their Kitchins, and prepare all them in a readiness for
the common Refectory? The Passion of our Lord and Savior was a sufficient
sacrifice both for quick and dead: Might not the Mass, or the commemoration of
that sacrifice be taught to be of equal value? And having taught the people
so, might they not sell their Masses at a dearer rate then the false traitor
sold his Master, whom the Mass commemorates? The times began to be exceedingly
inclined to superstition: Were not an excellent piece of cunning to feed that
humor, and put the people to the charge of the entertainment? From hence came
shrines, and vows to Saints, and Pilgrimages; and, which was worst of all,
false and feigned miracles, only to gain greater reputation to their shrines
and temples, and the more profit to themselves. I could hunt further on this
sent, but that I have more game to follow; and for the rest, refer it to the
Poet Mantuan.

Now as ambition, and vainglory, and the love of money have prevailed on some,
and made them fit and ready for the Devils service; so discontent and envy have
persuaded as much with others. Florinus never had been so ungracious as to make
God the Author of sin, Eusebius. hist. 1. 5.
or stained the peoples ears with so lewd a blasphemy, but that he had been
formerly degraded from the holy Priesthood; (...), as Eusebius has it. cap. 14.
The discontent he took upon that disgrace made him apt to mischief; and Satan
took the opportunity to make him useful for his purpose. Nor ever had Aerius
broached this foolish fancy, August. de haeres. 53.
Episcopum nulla ratione debere discerni, that Priests and Bishops were all
one, but that he saw Eustathius, his companion on^e, advanced unto a Bishopric
before him. Himself, as Epiphanius does relate the Story, haeres. 74. n^ 1.
(...), did very earnestly affect that dignity; but he could not get it.
Eustathius was preferred before him; Ibid:
hence began the quarrel, (...), as the Father has it. This envy at the
fortunes and preferment of another man made him first quarrel with Eustathius,
though his very Friend; and after with the Calling, with the very dignity. Just
so the Fox complained that the Grapes were sour, because he saw he could not
reach them. Whether this folly, or this frenzy rather (for Epiphanius calls it
in plain terms (...), Id. ibid.
a frantic heresy) be not revived again on the self-same grounds; whether
Episcopacy be not now cried down by those especially who either look with
envious eyes on the preferment of their betters, or else are discontented at
their own misfortune, in not attaining to that eminency in the Church of God,
is no hard matter to determine. This I am sure, and speak it upon good
Authority, that if some men had been advanced unto those honors which they
labored for, and others had attained those Bishoprics which they were in
quest of, we had not been disquieted with those Schisms and ruptures wherewith
the Church of God is now torn in pieces.

Envy and ignorance sometimes go together. Sure I am ignoratio recti and
invidia are so placed in Tacitus; In vita Agric.
This we account not as a passion or affection in the mind of man, unless it
be a voluntary and affected ignorance, but as weakness or defect. And yet of
this the enemy has raised himself a greater fortune then out of any of the
rest. There was a time when ignorance was in request, Ap^cal. c. 20. v. 2.
the tenth Age from Christ, the very next to that wherein hell brake loose; a
dark and sullen night of ignorance, in which the servants of the Husbandman did
not only slumber, Annls. Anno 900. 1.
but slept and snorted. A seculum obscurum, as Baronius; In Chronolog. In Chron.
a seculum infelix, an unhappy Age, wherein was little reading, and less
writing, says the Cardinal Bellarmine: An age quite destitute of eminent men,
both for wit and learning, as their Bishop Genebrard. Can we conceive the enemy
let slip the opportunity of so dark a night, and slept for company? or that he
would not husband it to his best advantage, when there was either none so
vigilant as to watch his doings, or so industrious as to commit to writing what
they had observed? What fitter time then this, to sow the seeds of
transubstantiation, and adoration of the Host; with all those several points
and Articles, those uncouth Ceremonies and gesticulations which depend upon it,
when all divine and humane learning were laid up in silence? What fitter time
then this to seal up the Bible, and take the Scriptures from the Laity, when
there was such a fair pretense, that few or none could understand it? What
fitter time then this, to captivate men's understandings to the Churches
dictates, and to advance their own traditions into the Chair and Throne of the
Word of God, when men were taught, to the great obloquy and contempt of
learning, that ignorance was the mother of devotion? And in a word, what fitter
time then this, to open and bring forth the tares of Image Worship, and
invocation of the Saints, and prayer for the dead, and restraint from marriage;
(the seeds whereof were sown in those slumbring times which ushered in this
Epidemicall and dismal darkness) when men had wilfully sealed up their eyes,
and professed blind obedience to the Popes decrees? Here was a season for the
nonce to spread abroad false Doctrines, and unsound opinions. The Devil had
been an Ass indeed, if he had not spyed it.

And yet it is not easy to determine neither, whether the negligence both of
Priest and people did not as much promote the purpose of the enemy, as did
their ignorance.

Now for this double kind of negligence, that which we charge upon the people
is circa custodiam personae suae, touching the looking to themselves; that
which we charge upon the Priest, Gloss. ord. in Mat. 13. v. 25.
circa custodiam gregis sui, touching the looking to his Flock. ^ The people I
find faulty in these two respects; 1. In not doing of their duties, and 2dly,
In not claiming of their dues. The Church in the first Ages of it used every
day to celebrate the blessed Sacrament, which thereupon St. Ambrose calls
quotidianum cibum, de Sacrament. l. 6. c. 4.
our daily bread. The times were then severe and quick, the people pious and
devout; and few there were that failed to be present at it. But when the Sun of
peace and liberty shined upon the Church, the people grew remiss and careless,
took cold in their devotions, and forbear the Church, and left the Priest, who
by the ancient Canons was to do this Office, to say his lesson to himself. By
this means and no other came in private Masses, wherein the Priest
participates by himself alone; not upon any positive constitution, which
debarres the people, but for defect of piety and devotion in them. Against
Jewel. Art. ^. S. 7.
Harding and other learned men in the Church of Rome, so excuse the matter; and
not perhaps without just reason. But certainly the Priest was to blame the
while, who either did not call upon them to attend their duties, or in default
thereof did not proceed against them, as he should have done, according to the
ancient Discipline. But more to blame no doubt was the Church of Rome, Syn.
Trid. Sess. 22. Can. 8.
who on complaint of the abuse, not only has ordained no remedy for the
recalling of the people to the primitive custom, but has established and
confirmed these private Masses maugre all opposition and resistance, inflicting
an Anathema upon every one that dares d^sprove them.

As then the people were first faulty in the not doing of their duties, so we
shall find them as deficient in the second point, for the not claiming of
their dues. For if the question should be asked, how and by whom the Laity were
first denied the Cup in the blessed Sacrament: It must be answered, the People
lost it by degrees, for want of putting in their claim to assert the title; for
not demanding the performance of our Saviors will delivered and declared in
his holy Testament. Art. 2. S. 8.
That it was instituted in both kinds by Christ, Ibid. S. ^8.
administered by St. Paul in both kinds at Corinth, and that it was so used in
other places during 600 years and upwards, is confessed by Harding in his reply
to B. Jewel. When, and upon what Motives, and by whose Authority, this
innovation was first made, is not yet agreed upon among themselves. De legit.
usu. Eucharist. l. 10
Greg. de Valentia, who took much pains in the examination of this business,
returns an Ignoramus, or a minime constat, unto all these Queries; and at last
is fain to father it upon the usage of the Church, and consent of the
faithful. For the consent, or at the least the not gainsaying of the faithful,
there is no doubt of that, for ought I can find, and that is the point we now
complain of. But for the usage of the Church, which also he pretends, to make
up the matter, that came in of late. Thomas Aquinas, who lived about 300 years
ago, no more, has delivered plainly, calicem in quibusdam locis populo non
dari, that the Cup was not then administered unto the people in some certain
places. An undeniable Argument that it was universally received then in all
places else. Nor was it ever otherwise determined that I can hear of, till the
Assembly held at Constance (for I can hardly think that it was a Council)
decreed it, against Christ himself, with a non obstante; which after was
confirmed and ratified in that of Trent.

Now, as the Prophet once complained, as was the People then, such was the
Priest; and as the Priest was then, such were the People; both ignorant alike,
and both alike negligent: The negligence incumbent on the Priests was of two
sorts also; first, in not teaching of the People as they ought to do; and 2dly,
in not applying speedy and peculiar remedies to emergent mischiefs. The Priests
lips, by the Lords appointment, were to preserve knowledge, and at their
mouths the people were to seek the same: so the Prophet Malachi. Malach^
But when the Priest became quite destitute of knowledge, through affected
ignorance; or had his lips sealed up, through affected idleness; they fed the
People with dumb shows and Images, the Laymens Bible, and with the pomp and
ceremonies of the Mass, the Laymens Idol; or with the counting of their
Beads, the poor peoples Paternoster: Quae non officio mentis, Div. Inst: l. 4.
c. 3.
sed ministerio corporis consistunt, as once Lactantius scoffed it of the
ancient Gentiles. By means whereof the rites and ceremonies of the Church were
grown so numerous, that they became a burden to the Church of God; and being
first ordained as helps and accessories to Gods public worship, came in the
end to be accounted the meritorious and essential parts thereof: and having in
their Institution first no more then usum significandi, a power to signify,
attained at last to usus efficiendi, a power to dignifie, in the production of
the works and effects of Grace.

As for the fault in not applying speedy remedies to emergent mischiefs, that
relates chiefly to the Prelates, as those who are entrusted by our Savior with
the powers of Government. For if at first, upon the broching of some new
opinions which seemed to tend to any alteration in the things of God, the
Prelates had bestirred themselves, tried and examined it by the holy
Scriptures, or by the tendries and expressions of the Primitive Church, we had
not now been troubled to decry those Doctrines which are obtruded on the Church
for Catholic: Or if they had compelled the People to observe those Ceremonies
which had been recommended to them from most pure Antiquity, and not have
suffered others to be thrust upon them, either by practice or connivence we had
not been troubled to discard those usages, which had defiled, if not profaned
the whole Worship of God. So when the Latin Tongue in these Western parts, by
reason of the intermixture of Gohes, Hunnes and Vandalls, and other Nations of
the North, began to alter and degenerate from its ancient purity, if then the
Prelates of the Church had also changed the Language of the public Liturgy,
and fitted it to the understanding of the common people, the Church of Rome had
never been accused of so foul a crime, as to enforce poor people to a Latin
Service, to which they cannot say Amen.

For sure it is an excellent rule of him in Gellius, that men must speak
according to the times in which they live, and live according to the times
which old Stories speak of: Noct. At.
Moribus antiquis, praesentibus utere verbis, as that Author has it. Agreeably
to which good Rule, those in the Church of Rome might have kept together the
ancient Piety and Discipline with the modern Languages.

Hitherto we have noted and surveyed the Devils practices upon the nobler^sex
of man: Think we he holds so wretched an opinion of the other, though the
weaker Vessel, as to conceive them utterly unserviceable for the improving of
his Harvest? If we observe his doings, we shall find it otherwise. He had so
good success with Eve, Genesis 3:
in his first attempt, that he had shown himself at once ungrateful and
unprovident to have left them so. He knew that by the constitution of their
sex, they were weak, but wilful; easily won to entertain new fancies and
opinions, but not so easily to forgo them. He also knew, that by the eagerness
of their affections, and the insinuating powers which they have by nature, they
are most diligent and industrious in draw^ng their Husbands, Children, friends
and servants, to entertain that cause which themselves affect: Upon this ground
he would not send out Simon Magus without an Helena; S. August. de haeres. c.
1. Id. c. 27.
nor would Montanus venture on the Stage alone to disperse his Heresies, but
must have Maximilla and Priscilla joined Assistants with him. And if
Priscillian have a mind to pervert the People, and raise a faction to himself
in the Church of God, Sulpitius Sever. l. 2.
he will not fail to court the Women, and make them fast unto his party.
Sulpitius so assures us of him, that he was much admired and followed by the
female sex, who loving novelties, and being of unsettled judgment, catervatim
ad eum confluebant, resorted to him by whole flocks and multitudes.

So for the sowing of his tares in the middle Ages, what use the enemy made of
Maud the Countess, in the advancing of the Popes supremacy; what of St. Briget
and St. Clare, (if I may so call them) in laying the burden of professed
virginity upon the necks of tender Maidens, which they can neither carry as
they should, nor cast down when they list, the Story of those times can
witness, and these Ages feel. The enemy is still the same, qualis ab incoe ep^o
processerit, the same Satan still, Horat. de Art.
and will not suffer this poor sex to remain in quiet; but works upon them by
his Emissaries, and practices upon them by his Agents, as knowing what fit
Instruments they are to advance a party. Not that he does employ them often in
the setting, but in the selling of his tares; their business lies not in the
Field, but in the Market, to pass them up and down, and from hand to hand, and
raise the price of the Commodity. St. Paul foretells us of a sort of men that
should creep into Houses, 2 Timothy 3. v. 6^
and lead captive silly women laden with sin, and driven about with diverse
lusts. Now we find it verified; where we may note, (and I but note it by the
way) that those who are led captive so, in the Apostles Judgment, are but
silly women, or (...), as he calls them, laden with sin, and therefore easy to
be wrought on, and so not walking in the ways of Gods Commandments; and
driven about with diverse lusts* therefore not rightly grounded in the rules of
constancy. Such women as are there described by the Apostle, silly and sinful,
and unconstant too, let them for me be still led captive; it is a gain to lose
them.

Thus have I represented to you a discovery of the enemies practices; 1. the
use he makes of the affections, passions and deficiencies of his several
instruments, to bring about the fecit hoc which my Text here speaks of. And
though it be a matter of no small difficulty to trace the Prince of darkness in
his deeds of darkness, yet I have done the best I could, directed by the light
of Scripture, and by the Candle of antiquity, to observe his goings. The use we
make of all is this, that we avoid those humors and deficiencies in our
several stations which Satan is so apt to work on; that we be neither puffed
up with ambition, nor tickled with vainglory, nor filled with covetous
desires, nor pined with discontent and envy, nor dulled with ignorance, nor
finally besotted with a lazy negligence. These passions and defects if we
yield not to, we need not fear the enemy, no^ his fecit hoc: For God, even our
own God, shall give us his blessing, and strengthen us in every good, both word
and work. To whom be glory, etc. Amen.

SERMON I.
At CHRIST-CHURCH September. 26. 1643.
MATTHEW. 13. v. 28. part. ult. Vis imus and colligimus ea?

The Servants said unto him, Will thou that we go and gather them up?


TAm vari se gessit, Velleius Pater^. l. 2.
ut nec laudaturum magna, nec vituperaturum mediocris materia deficeret: It is
affirmed by the Historian of Caius Caesar, how he behaved himself in such
different manner, that there wanted not forcible reasons to condemn, yet excuse
sufficient to commend him. The like may we affirm of our Servants here; he that
does look upon them in their sleep and negligence, and finds them ut dormirent
homines, cannot but think them accessory to so great a mischief as Satan
brought upon the Church in sowing Tares. The opportunity they gave him by their
dull security, or at the least their supine carelessness, makes them
parcel-guilty. And he that undertakes to defend them in it, will questionless
as much betray his Client, as they their Cause. But look upon them when they
were awakened, when they had seen their own error, and the Churches danger, and
then how many things are there worthy at once of our applause and imitation? In
servis habemus tam quod laudemus quam quod imitemur, Gorran: in locum.
as my Author has it. First, their fidelity, quod accesserunt, in that they
came unto their Master, v. 27.
made him acquainted with the accident, and so prepared him for the Remedy.
Their coming was an Argument of their good intentions, and that they had not
willingly betrayed the trust reposed in them; they did not fly on the
discovery. And next we have their care, quod quaesierunt, that they could never
be at quiet till they were satisfied in the Original and Instrument of so great
a mischief, till they had learnt the unde, whence the tares should come. And
when their Master had informed them in the fecit hoc, v. 28.
and told them that the Enemy had done it, yet they stayed not here, as if the
question had been made out of curiosity, more to inform their understandings,
then reform the matter. They thought it did concern them to redeem the time,
because their former fact was evil. And as the enemy had entered by their sloth
and negligence, and thereby took occasion to destroy Gods Harvest; so they
conceived it did belong to them especially to labor in the Reformation, and to
reduce Gods Field to its primitive luster by their zeal and courage. This was
the thing most aimed at in the Accescerunt, this the chief reason of their
coming. No sooner had they heard that the enemy did it, Lyran. in locum.
and that this enemy was the Devil, ( Diaboli calliditate factum esse, as it is
in Lyra;) but presently they make an offer of their service to redress the
mischief, and by their joint endeavors to root out those ^ares by which Gods
Field was so endangered. The servants said unto him, Vis imus and colligimus
ea, Will thou that we go and gather them up?

This is the last part which the Servants have to act in this present Dialogue;
and in this part they give a fair expression of their zeal and wisdom. He that
will take their Picture right, shall find that it consists of these five
Lineaments: For first, we have a noble courage, vis imus? Sir, Will thou that
we go and give the onset? It Is not the Devil whom we fear, nor any of his
wretched Instruments, how great soever they may be, both in power and malice.
Vis imus? Say but the word only, and thy servants go. And next, we find an
honest zeal to rectify what was amiss in the Field of God. Vis imus and
colligimus ea? Is it your pleasure that those Tares shall be rooted up? It Is not
the Tares we are in love with, how fair soever to the eye, how plausible soever
they may seem in the opinion and esteem of seduced people. Say thou but faciat
is hoc, and thy servants will do it. In each we have their readiness and
unanimity. First, imus and colligimus, we go and gather, in the plural number;
then imus and colligimus, we go and gather, in the present tense; and last of
all, we have their temper and obedience, guiding their counsels by their
Masters will, and governing their zeal by his direction, Vis imus and
colligimus ea? This we are ready to perform, if you please to have it so; if
otherwise, we neither are so in love with danger, nor so ambitious of
employment, as not to take your Warrant and Commission with us for our
justification. And therefore fiat voluntas tua, not our will, but thy will be
done; Vis imus and colligimus ea? Will thou that we go and gather them up?
These are the features which I am to draw, though I confess with an ignorant
and unskilful pencil; leaving them to be better limmed and polished by your
more seasonable meditations. And first I am to lay before you their heroic
courage; vis imus? will thou that we go?

Scientia parum est nisi accedat and virtus; Lactant. l. 3. c 8.
Knowledge is little worth when it comes alone, when it is neither joined nor
seconded with virtuous purposes. Some desire knowledge only that they may be
known, and this is vanity: some only for the thing it self, to know, and this
is curiosity: others, that they may edify therewith, and this is charity. This
last kind was the desire of knowledge which these servants brought, when they
repaired unto their Master with an unde haec? They only labored to discern
whence the Tares should come, that so they might bethink themselves of some
present Remedy. And having found out what they sought for, a man would easily
have thought they had found enough to save them any further trouble: To tell
them that the enemy was abroad, and that by his false Arts and Practices he had
sown those Tares, might well have been a Supersedeas to all further care; for
who would willingly provoke an enemy, especially in matters which concern the
public, when by declining of the business, and quitting an employment of such
dangerous nature, he may preserve himself both in peace and quietness? But when
this Enemy is discovered further, to be an enemy of no common rank, but even
the very Prince of darkness, qui tot Legionibus imperitat, one that commands so
many Legions; I trow it were no part of wisdom to incur his anger, when by a
plausible and discreet connivence we may hold fair with him.

To go against an enemy of such power and quality were a desperate madness,
such as no man of ordinary brains would be guilty of, when he may safely sit at
home, and take such fortune as the success and issue of affairs should offer:
yet such was the undaunted courage of the servants here, that none of all these
cautions or considerations could preponderate with them, or hinder them from
venturing in their Masters cause; vis imus? Will thou that we go?

And 'twas no mean note of a noble courage that they would be going: It seems
they thought it not becoming to sit still at home, and spend their time in
consultations, how, and by what close means, without the open hazard of their
lives and fortunes, so great a business as that was might be best effected. The
mischief which they feared was imminent, not capable of long debates, of slow
and lingering deliberations. Dum quid sis dubitas, Martial.
j am potes esse nihil. And whilst they spent the time in Disputes and
Questions, casting of doubts, and raising casual or emergent scruples, the
mischief which they feared might have fallen upon them. It Is true, the
enterprise was great, and full of danger; and therefore was to be encountered
with an equal courage, both in the onset and pursuit. The greater the attempt
was conceived to be, the braver resolutions were required in them that durst
undertake it. Poor are the spirits of those men who in a time of common danger,
when the whole Church is threatened, and the State oppressed, dare not go forth
to meet an approaching mischief. To sink under the burden of calamitous fortune,
and not to struggle with adversity, is the next way to tempt and invite it to
us. When troubles are at hand go forth to meet them; Ovid:
Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentius ito, was a brave old Rule, both given
and practiced by the Heathens in matters of far less concernment then the
present business. And 'twas a gallant speech of Pompey, worthy the Reputation
and Renown of so great a spirit, Plutarch. in Pomp.
Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam. He was employed by his Country, the State of
Rome, to scour the Seas, and bring in such provisions of Corn and Victual as
the Town then wante^: from which when some who seemed to be his friends
dissuaded him, urging the difficulty of the action, and the apparent hazards he
was like to run; he answered, that his going was more necessary then his life
could be; Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam. No life could be so precious to him
as his Countries safety; and therefore go he would, though the winds said nay,
and all the forces of the World had been raised against him.

But Pompey shall not go alone; the Church of Christ can yield him Equals,
though Rome yielded none. Pompejusque parem, which was there a Paradox, is here
the ordinary practice of Gods Saints and Servants. More then so, major hic
Pompeio, what special Servant is there of the Lord our God who has not shown
a braver and more noble courage? When Moses was employed by God on so sour a
Message, as to solicit Pharaoh the Egyptian Tyrant for the dismission of the
House of Israel, what dangers might not he have feared? what reasons might not
fairly have been pretended to excuse the Journey? And when he was resolved upon
it, what difficulties did he meet with? how many times was he repulsed with
threats and terrors? yet God no oftener said to Moses, though he said it often,
Ingredere ad Pharaonem, Go unto Pharaoh, that bloody Butcher of my Children,
that merciless oppressor of my people Israel, and tell him that he shall no
longer keep them in that house of bondage; but Moses went immediately upon the
errand. It was no need to bid him have, when the afflictions of his people, and
the necessities of that poor Church did require his going. Moses, though
celebrated in the Scripture for a man of meekness, Numb. 12. 3.
mitissimus super omnes homines, as the Vulgar reads it, wanted not courage to
go on when the Lord commanded. But this perhaps showed more of his obedience
then his resolution; and Moses did no more in this then the other Prophets,
none of which stayed behind, or put off the service (excepting once the Prophet
Jonah) when God bad them go.

Let us next therefore look on the Prophet Esaias, who when God wanted one to
reform his Church, and seemed thus to proclaim his wants, Quem mittam, and quis
ibit nobis? Esaias c. ^. v. 8.
Whom shall I send? who will go forth for us on this desperate and ungrateful
service? made offer on his own accord to undertake it, Ecce ego! mitte me; Here
am I, (says the Prophet) let me be sent, and see if I decline the business, or
dare not put my self on the undertaking. The Prophet was resolved upon the
imus, to go, as soon as he perceived the Churches dangers. He stayed but for
his Mission and Commission; Vis imus? Will thou that we go?

And yet we are not come to the best examples which the Church yields us in
this case. The Prophets, though they were employed by the Lord their God, in
matters of this thankless and invidious nature, yet were they seldom sent
abroad beyond the bounds and limits of their native Country, where they were
countenanced and backed with their friends and kindred. It was not so with the
Apostles, their Ite was of a more large, almost an infinite extent; Ite in
omnes gentes, Go into all the World and preach the Gospel. Matthew. 28.
And they were told before they undertook the business, Ecce mitto vos, Behold
I send you forth as sheep amongst the Wolves; Id. cap. 10.
and needs must tell you beforehand, that you shall be convented before Kings
and Councels, the Rulers of the Synagogue, and the Court of Sanhedrim of the
Elders, by whom ye shall be buffeted and reviled, condemned and executed. More
then so yet; Satanas expetivit, Satan himself desires to sift and winnow you.
And though I give you power to cast out Devils, Luke 22:
yet do not think that Satan will so easily forgo his hold, or lose the Kingdom
which he has so long possessed in the souls of men. It Is neither against
Principalities and Powers, nor only against flesh and blood that you are to
wrestle; but against the Devil and his Angels, against the Rulers of the
darkness of this present world: yet find we not that any of those blessed
Spirits was therewith discouraged, or did not think themselves obliged the
rather to fulfill their Ministry, because it seemed so full of danger. Which of
them did not travel both Lands and Seas, when once the Ite was pronounced?
Which of them might not well have said in the Poets Language, Quae regio in
terris nostri non plena laboris? What corner was there of the Earth which they
went not to, in which they did not cultivate the Field of God; and in so doing
bid defiance to the powers of darkness?

We must not look to find a Parallel to the Apostles in the Ages following.
And yet the servants of my Text, in point of courage, came not much behind;
whom neither the report of so great an Enemy as had been practicing of late in
the Field of God, could terrify from going forth to secure the Harvest; nor
the complexion of the Tares, which was fair and specious, could hinder or
divert from offering their endeavors to root them out. He that had seen the
Fathers of the Primitive times grapling with Heretics, pleading the Churches
cause in their Apologeticks, refusing to comply with those impieties which were
obtruded on them by the secular powers; and sinally, in going to the Scaffold
with no less a bravery then if some Actor had been hired to mount the Theater,
would surely have conceived them to be men of courage: and 'twas no wonder if
the Church did then thrive and flourish when men of courage had the conduct of
her chief Affairs. The like may be observed of the times succeeding, though
somewhat colder in their love to the Lord our Savior, as something further off
from the days he lived in. The renowned Athanasius would not stoop to Arius,
S^crat. hist. ^lccl.
though patronized for a time by the famous Constantine; nor yield a Temple to
the Arians, although required by Constantius to give way unto it. St. Ambrose
was resolved not to submit his judgment in a point of faith to the decisions
and decrees of a Lay-Tribunal, though nothing but apparent ruin was to be
expected on his refusal of the same. Lib. ^. Ep. 32.
Non tanti est Ambrosius ut propter se deijciat sacerdotium. And when he was
commanded to desert his charge, and leave it to Auxentius, an Arian Heretic;
rather then to betray his trust, Id O^^. 5.
he would lose his life. Prius est ut animam mihi quam fidem auferant. An equal
courage unto which we find in Chrysostom, contesting openly with Gainus, Socr.
hist. l. 6. c. 5.
who then commanded all both in Camp and Counsel, (...), though he required but
one Church only within the City, wherein the Arians whom he favored might have
leave to meet. Nor might these latter and degenerate Ages wanted examples of
this kind: Witness that stout and noble courage which appeared in Luther, who
being sent for unto Worms by Charles the Emperor, to render an account of his
Faith and Doctrine, Hist. Conc. Trid. l. 1.
and much dissuaded by his Friends from that desperate journey; returned this
gallant and courageous Answer, that go he would, licet contra se tot
insurrecturi essent daemones quot in tectis aedium cernerentur tegulae, though
all the Houses in the Town were tiled with Devils.

It is a saying of Paterculus, Patercul. hist. l. 2.
Eminentes viros magnis adjutoribus usos esse, that the most eminent sort of
men have commonly the ablest servants. And it concerns them so to have; they
could not else go through with those great affairs which are incumbent on
their places. Josuah and Caleb, Moses Ministers, were they not men of faith and
courage? What notable exploit could Moses have atcheived against his Enemies,
or in the conduct of Gods People to the Land of Canaan, if not so seconded and
assisted? And if we find so many famous Victories obtained by David, was it
not that he was well served and followed by men of Valor and Renown, his
mighty men, as they are called in holy Scripture? Men of weak spirits are not
fit for great undertakings, as being neither constant to their principles, nor
resolute in their conclusions. And therefore it is to be observed in Almighty
God, that when he sent out any of his servants on some great design, he used
this Item most an end, viriliter agite and confortamini, i. e. Be strong and of
a good courage, Deuteronomy. 31. 6. 2 Chronicles. 32. 7.
as the English reads it.

It seems God does not think himself well served when he finds it otherwise;
when those whom he employeth in his public service had rather fly to Tarshish
then go on to Ninive. And being he is the Husbandman intended in the present
Parable, he could not choose but take it kindly from his Servants, that they
expressed so great a courage, as to make offer of their best endeavors for the
promoting of his business; vis imus? Will thou that we go? This shows that
they were resolved upon the imus, to go forth courageously, and not to sit down
idly in a time of danger. But to what end they would be going, and what they
did resolve to do when they were going forth that we shall find in the
Colligimus. We had their courage in the imus; their zeal comes next in the
Colligimus; vis imus and colligimus ea? Wilt ^hou that we go and gather them
up? my next particular.

Qui non zelat non amat. Augustine. Contr. Adamant. c. 13.
Where there is no zeal, there is no love, no sincere affection. A truth so
clear and evident in St. Austins time, that it was grown into a Proverb;
however afterward disputed amongst the Schoolmen. Tho. A qu. 1, 2. qu. 8. S. 4.
In vain do they pretend to love, who are not zealous in behalf of the thing
beloved: they love not God, who are not zealous of his glory; nor cordially
affect the Church, who have no zeal unto her peace: K. David rightly understood
the nature of it, Ps. 119. v. 139.
when he affirmed it of himself, in regard of God, Tabescere me fecit zelus
meus, My zeal has even consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy
words; Psalm. 39. v. 9.
and in relation to Gods Church, quoniam zelus domus tuae comedit me, The ^eal
of thi^e house has eaten me. This last kind of zeal (I must needs say that)
either has been much mistaken, or not rightly practiced: the times being such
wherein the zeal of some Reformers has eaten up many of the Houses of Almighty
God; and doubtless, will devour the remnant of Gods dwelling-places, if not
stopped in time: therefore to set the matter right, that both the Text may be
restrained to its proper meaning, and zeal be regulated and directed by the
holy Text, we will explain those words of David by these words of Austin:
Tract. 10. in Joh.
What is the man, says he, who is devou^ed or eaten by a zeal to the House of
God? Even he, qui omnia quae forte ibi videt perversa satagit emendare, cupit
corrigere, who studieth to amend and rectify whatever stands inneed of a
Reformation: the ordinary gloss makes the same gloss on it, but with some
little alteration of the words and Phrase.

Such was the zeal expressed by the Servants here. No sooner had they seen the
tares in fecissent fructum, and by their Masters answer found from what seed
they came, but they were vehemently zealous to root them out. They knew full
well what mischief would ensue, if it were not looked to, both in relation to
the Field, in danger to be overgrown and mastered by them; and to the Children
of the Church, who when they trusted to be fed with the bread of life, might
unawares be poisoned with the bread of wickedness. In both respects, no course
more proper as they thought, than ire and colligere, to go and gather them,
before they had destroyed the Wheat, or by that Gods people. This they resolved
to do, there is no doubt of that. Their imus and colligimus make that plain
enough; but in what way they meant to do it, has been made a question.

Lyra conceives their purpose was to gather them to root them up, Lyran. in
Mat. 13.
in such a way as was peculiar to the Church, separando eos a communione
Ecclesiae, by severing them from the Communion of the faithful. The like says
Gorran also, Gorran in locum.
and some latter Writers; others, and those of more Antiquity, but far more
eminency in the Church, think rather that their meaning was to cut them off,
not only from the body of the Church, but of all mankind; to go against them
with the Sword; and destroy them utterly.

Chrysostom so conceives it, Chrysostom. in Matthew.
saying, that if they had gone on as they were resolved, in prosecuting of the
Heretic with fire and sword, (...), bloodshed and war must needs have
followed over all the World.

Theophylact goes to work more plainly, Theophyl. in cund.
and tells us, that the servants being offended at the growth of Heresies, by
consequence incensed against the Heretics themselves, (...), were of a mind
to make quick work with them, to rid them of the troubles of this wretched
life, and so to save the trouble of more tedious process.

To which of these two courses their zeal might bend them, is in the next place
to be considered; I conceive the last. And this I am induced to think by the
Masters Answer; who on the hearing of the Proposition returned a non, (for it
is plain, he had a negative voice, of which more hereafter.) He did not like of
the intention: and to dislike their purpose there had been no reason, had their
design been to proceed only by the Churches censures. He that committed to the
Church in St. Peter's name, Matthew. 16.
the power and dispensation of the keys, intended not that they should serve
for nothing but a dumb show, a sign and token only of a powerless Ministry.
And when he gave to his Apostles so direct a power of binding and retaining
sins, and giving over unto Satan the impenitent person, think you, his meaning
was they shonld never use it? Joh. ^0. v. 23.
If so, St. Panl must needs be guilty of no small offense, in dealing so
severely with the man of Corinth: 1 Cor. c. 5. v. 5.
and wonder 'twas, there was no relaxation sued for from the Court of Heaven,
in case of so severe and just a sentence. And to what end serves Dic Ecclesiae,
if the poor Church have power to hear, Matthew. 18.
but not to censure? or if upon the Churches censures, none be so fit to be
accounted either an Heathen or Publican, as he who is entrusted by the Church
to inflict the same? Assuredly God would not disallow the course which himself
prescribed; or by removing from the Church the power of censure, open a gapp to
all impurity both of life and doctrine.

There was a time once in the Church of England, ( I do not say it is so now)
wherein the censures of the Church, under pretense or color of some civil
sanctions, were either quite abolished, or of no effect; to the no small
increase of vice, because it nourished a presumption of impunity in vicious
persons. Of this old Father Latimer does thus complain in a Sermon preached
before King Edward: Sermon. 2.
Lechery (says he) is used in England, and such lechery as is used in no other
place of the World. And yet it is made a matter of sport, a matter of nothing,
a laughing matter, a trifle, not to be passed on nor reformed. Well, I trust it
will be amended one day, and I hope to live to see it mended as old as I am.
And here I will make a suit to your Highness, to restore unto the Church the
Discipline of Christ, in excommunicating such as be notable offenders. Nor
never devise any other way; for no man is able to devise any better then that
God has done, with excommunication to put them from the Congregation, till
they be confounded. Therefore restore Christ's Discipline for Excommunication,
and that shall be a mean, both to pacify Gods wrath and indignation; and also
that less abomination shall be used then in times past has been, and is at
this day. I speak this of a Conscience, and I mean to move it of a will to your
Grace, and your Realm. Bring into the Church of England the open Discipline of
Excommunication, that open sinners may be stricken withal. So far the very
words of Father Latimer. Let every one consider of them as he thinks most
necessary: perhaps the Sermon may be more effectual with some kind of men,
when one is raised up from the dead to preach unto them.

Besides, this could not be the way which was intended by those servants, if
either we consider their Colligimus, or the eradicetis of their Master in the
following words. The servants, or the Church in them might have gone on to
excommunication of the Heretic, and the condemning of the Heresy, without the
least fear or imagination, that by so doing, eradicetur simul cum eis triticum,
the wheat, the Lords good seed would be pulled up with them. The censure of an
Heretic does rather strengthen then destroy the truth of Doctrine, and he that
does correct a stubborn and impenitent sinner, hinders not, but confirms the
virtuous person in the way of godliness. And for Colligimus, that is we know a
compound word, as is (...) in the Original, and does not so much signify a
single gathering, as a gathering up of all together: and so the word is used in
the following Verses. It seems the servants of my Text would have made short
work, and swept away these tares at once, without more ado: which howsoever it
may be done sometimes in ore gladii, which devoures all things where it is
permitted to range at liberty: yet is it seldom done, if ever, in gladio oris,
by Admonitions, Excommunications, or any other kind of spiritual punishments,
Non excommunicandam multitudinem, was the rule of old* The censures of the
Church do only legere, pick here and there a man out of many sinners, by whose
exemplary corrections others may beware of the like offenses. Tormenta paucorum
sunt exempla omnium, Stapleton. in Promp^.
as my Author has it. Colligere is none of hers in this sense and meaning.
And therefore here was no such meaning, as to proceed by excommunication, to
bring these tares to be arraigned and tried at the Churches Bar.

And being their meaning was not so, their zeal though more remarkable, was yet
less warrantable. A zeal like that of James and John, the two Sons of
Thunder, Luke ^. v. 54.
Vis dicimus ut descendat ignis? Will thou that fire come down from Heaven to
destroy these miscreants? No dealing with some zelots of both sides, but by
fire and faggot, by the sword at least; for which they have no warrant I am
sure from either Text. Neither indeed do they which stand most on it fetch
their grounds from hence; or if they did, how wretchedly would those grounds
deceive them? neither the Brethren there, nor the servants here, had any
calling from the Lord, to be the instruments of his vengeance. The Apostles
were ordained by Christ, amongst other things, to offer unto God the sacrifice
of prayer for the sins of the people; but not to sacrifice the people for their
sins to God. No such burnt-offering to be found (Iam sure of that) in all the
Gospels. And 'twas the duty of these servants, not to confound the Heretic,
but to confute the Heresy; rather to pray for the conversion, then practice
the subversion of the wicked man. Our Savior Christ rebuked the two Brethren
for their fiery zeal, v. 55:
nescitis cujus spiritus estis, Ye know not of what spirit you are. Nor fared
it otherwise in effect with the servants here, although the reason of their
indignation was more just and visible. For though we do not find that this
zeal of theirs was openly reproved by their Lord and Master; yet it was tacitly
disproved, because not suffered to proceed unto execution. The goodness of our
God winks at the errors of an honest zeal, and does so love the strength of our
good affections, that it passes over their infirmities. If it transport us, as
it does sometimes, beyond our limits and due bounds, he rather pardons the
exiliencies of our heat and ^ervency, then the indifferences of our
lukewarmness. How highly would the Lord esteem a well-governed zeal, when as
his mercy crowns it many times even with all its faults?

And yet this zeal of theirs, if considered rightly, was neither faulty nor
ill-governed, although mistaken in the means and instruments which God
intended to make use of in so great a work as the eradication of these tares,
the final condemnation of them. God purposed to bring them to destruction, but
not by their hands, not by their endeavors; and thoroughly to purge his field
of a seed so dangerous, though not so soon as they expected, not till the very
coming on of Harvest. The error of their zeal was but in the circumstances, not
in the substance of the work. The work was to be done, but not by them; and at
another time, not then when they made the offer: but this was more then God had
formerly revealed unto them. So as the worst which can be said of this act of
theirs, was, that they had a zeal to the glory of God, but not according unto
knowledge, I mean the knowledge of all points and circumstances which God did
purpose to observe in so great a business. Which zeal of theirs, how infinitely
may it condemn the coldness and stupidity of this present Age, in which there
are so few, if any, that are affected zealously in the cause of God? How few
made offer of their service, when occasion was; I say not to root out, but
suppress those tares which threatened then such imminent dangers, and have since
brought so sad a desolation on this Church of Christ? And now that they are
come so fully to fecissent fructum, how few present themselves to their Lord
and Master, saying, vis imus and colligimus ^a? is it your pleasure that we go
and gather? Hujusmodi si zelus singulorum esset non sic abundarent zizania, as
mine Author has it. Were there more zeal amongst the servants of the Household,
there would not be so many tares in the field of God. There Is no doubt of that;
especially if this zeal be armed with courage, and both these seconded with
readiness and unanimity in the promoting of the work, according as we find it
in the servants here.

For, as was formerly observed, they did not only come before their Master with
zeal and courage, but showed in both their readiness and unanimity. First, imus
and colligimus, we go and gather, in the plural number; then imus and
colligimus, we go and gather, in the present tense. First, imus and colligimus,
in the plural number. And it was wisely done that they went together, they
might have otherwise been foiled in the undertaking. The enemy against whom
they resolved to go, was strong, and his Army numerous, a Legion of them in one
man; how many Legions then were they to meet withal in the present enterprise,
in which so many men were engaged and interessed? Had they gone severally one
by one, as in distracted times men do use most commonly, how easily had they
been made a prey to the roaring Lion? how little good had they been able to
effect, had they escaped his Claws? Tacitus in vit. Agric.
We know who said it well enough, and on what occasion, Dum singuli pugnabant
universi vincebantur: Our Ancestors the Britains when they fought one by one
were all quickly vanquished; when they joined hearts and hands together, they
were then impregnable. If therefore we will go and gather, as becomes men of
courage in a time of danger, let it be imus and colligimus, in the plural
number, as becomes men of wisdom in a common cause. Let not zeal make us
inconsiderate, nor too much gaite de coeur, prompt us to be foolhardy, as they
use to call it. The Servants of my Text had as much zeal and courage as the
work required, (and 'twas a great and weighty work, if we mark it well:) yet
they resolved to join together, not only for their own security, but to assure
themselves of a speedier Conquest. United forces are no less necessary in the
field of God for the suppressing of his enemies, then are united prayers in the
Congregation, for the obtaining of his mercies: therefore vis imus and
colligimus, in the plural number.

Next it is imus and colligimus, in the present tense. They were not only on a
resolution to go and gather, but to do it presently. Their courage was too
great to delay the action, their zeal too fervent to procrastinate so desired a
service. Stapleton in Prompt.
Non aiunt ibimus, sed imus, as mine Author has it. They say not, we will go
hereafter, on more mature deliberation; but were ready to advance as the word
was spoken. They did not only speak of going, but were even going whilst they
spoke. The servants of my Text were too full of courage to trifle and delay the
time in their Masters business, August. Confess. l. 8. c. 5.
as did the Father in the work of his own conversion, with modo, ecce modo, and
sin^ paululum: they cried not with the sluggard in the Book of Proverbs, A
little more sleep, a little more slumber, a little more folding of the hands.
The Father tells us of himself, that modo and modo non habebant modum, and sine
paululum in longum ibat, Id. Ibid.
how one delay begat another, till he had almost lost the opportunity which had
been offered to him by the Lord his God. And one inferior unto Solomon in all
parts of wisdom could say unto his General, toll moras, that to delay the
onset, Lucan. l. 1.
was to lose his Victory. The Iron must be struck when it is at hottest; he
that works on it when it is cold, does but beat the Anvil. And it is an excellent
Rule in Physic, though a Poet gave it, Principiis obstare, to have an eye to a
Disease when it first breaks forth. The Medicine comes too late to remove a
malady, which is confirmed and settled by a long delay. And so it is also in this
case with the Churches Doctors: He that does undertake the cure of a crazie
Church, must be instant in it, not put it off until the morrow. Hodie si vocem
ejus, To day if you will hear his voice, says the Prophet David; and operamini
cum vocatur ^odie, Psalm. 95.
Work whilst it is called to day, says the Son of David. No tense so proper
as the present for this weighty work. If they intend to go and gather, either
by laboring in his Vineyard, or by setting forth against the enemies, it must
be imus and colligimus in the present tense, before their courage is grown
cold, and their zeal abated. Sure I am, so it was with my servants here: and
yet they were not so intent on the present service, as not to take their
Masters leave and instructions with them, guiding their courage by his will,
and governing their zeal by his directions. This shows their temper and
obedience, as before I noted. Vis imus and colligimus ea^ Will thou that we go
and gather them up?

Turpe est in extremo actu deficere. To fail in the last Act in the close of
business, is a foul reproach; and derogates not only from the Agent, but from
the enterprise. The servants had done all things well since they were awakened,
both in their coming and enquiry, the resolute expressions of their zeal and
courage, their readiness and unanimity in the promoting of their Masters
business: There wanted nothing now to dispatch the work but a Commission from
their Master. And certainly it stood with reason, that in a business wherein
their Master was concerned in so high a manner, they should do nothing rashly
without his consent. Had they gone otherwise to work, they had not merited so
much for their zeal and courage, as they had forfeited and lost for want of
wisdom. Saepe honestas rerum causas, ni judicium adhibeatur, perniciosi exitus
consequuntur, as he in Tacitus. Tacitus. hist. l. 1.
Zeal without judgment and advice may be compared to a brush-Bavin-Faggot in a
Country-Cottage, more likely far to fire the House then to warm the Chimney.
And zeal and courage destitute of consent and counsel is but like Sampson in
the Story, when as his hair was grown, and his eyes put out; and seldom serves
to other purpose then to pull the House upon our heads. But here zeal yielded
to obedience, and courage thought it no disparagement to submit to temper. Here
was both modus caritatis, Id. Ibid.
and temperamentum fortitudinis. This made them first consult their Master,
before they went to execute their own desires; and it did well with them: the
bit of respect being oftentimes as useful as the spur of courage. Discretion is
a sure guide to zeal, and only that which keeps it that it breaks not out into
open fury. If good directions do not hold the reins, our good intentions many
times may chance to break their own neck, and the Riders too: and which is yet
most strange of all, without such guidance and instruction our zeal to God may
lead us from him.

Besides, the business which they came about, was their Masters chiefly: the
field of which they were so zealous, did belong to him, as the sole owner and
Proprietary; and therefore Ager suus, his field, v. 24. The enemy against whom
they resolved to go was not theirs, but his; or theirs no otherwise then as
they did retain to him, and wear his Livery: and therefore inimicus ejus, his
enemy, v. 25. Men might have said they had bin desperately bold, and perversely
zealous, if they had entered on his field, and against his enemies, without his
liking and consent. It had been little to the praise of their discretion, of
their duty less; how much soever they might have been admired by unknowing men
for great undertakers. And though they had returned with success and victory,
yet who can tell but that instead of being made welcome with an Euge, Well done
my good and faithful Servant, they might have been reproved at their coming
home with a quis haec quaesivit, who required these things at your hands? It is
the approbation of Authority which makes courage useful; and zeal, if it be
public, warrantable. Without that both become unprofitable, in some cases
dangerous. We may affirm of them as we say commonly of fire and water, that
they are excellent Servants, but ill Masters: Ambrose.
or as St. Ambrose of the Sun, that it is melior in ministerio quam imperio;
never more useful to us men then when the beams thereof are most meek and
gentle, and so the more applyable to our necessities. In these regards the
servants had too much neglected both themselves and him, had they been all for
imus and colligimus, and ascribed nothing unto vis, to the Masters pleasure.

Solomon in the Book of Canticles compares the Church unto an Army, an Army
terrible with banners. And it is indeed an Army most exactly ordered. (...),
Chrysostom.
never was Army better marshalled in the words of Chrysostom. Now it is well
known that an Army is a gallant sight, when it has all one motion, and that so
many thousand bodies seem to be guided by one soul; and every one observes
that rank and station in which he has been placed by the chief Commander, or
other Officers of the field. The poor Centurion in the Gospel, was so far
sensible of his own Authority, Mat. 8. v. 9.
as to appoint the Soldiers under his Command not only what they were to do,
but when it was fit to go, and when fit to come. Had they been doing of their
own accord, without his Fiat, or going upon any action without his vade, or
appointment, no question but they should have felt their error, though they
would not see it. And he affirms it of himself, that he was sub potestate
constitutus, a man under the Authority and command of others* implying this,
that as he did expect obedience from the common Soldier, so he did yield it to
his Colonel, or his Sergeant Major, or whosoever else was in place above him.
The Discipline of War could not else be kept. Ita se ducum autoritas, sic
rigor Disciplinae habet. And if that be not kept as it ought to be, Taci^us
hist. l. 1*
confusi Equites p^ditesque in exitium ruunt, the whole will soon run on to a
swift destruction. Thus is it also with the Church, with the Camp of God, that
Acies castrorum ordinata, as the Scripture calls it. If there be no
subordination in it, if every one might do what he list himself, (as did Gods
people in those days, in which there was no King in Israel,) what a confusion
would ensue, how speedy a calamity must needs fall upon it?

The servants of my Text understood this rightly, and therefore though they
came provided, and desired nothing more then to give the onset, yet thought
they ^it to hear how their Master liked it, and to apply themselves to his
resolution. (...), as it is in Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in Matthew.
They durst not trust, says he, to their own opinion, in a matter of so great
concernment, but referred all unto their Master. Courage and zeal do never show
more amiably then when they are subordinate to good directions: especially,
when they take direction from the right hand, from their Master only, not from
the interest and passion of their fellow servants. Though it be imus and
colligimus, in the plural number, yet it is vis only in the singular. One to
command, and many to obey, makes the sweetest government. 'Twas praise and
commendation enough for them, that they came fitted and prepared to pursue the
action. It was the Masters office to direct, and theirs to execute. Vobis arma
and animus, Tacitus hist. l. 1.
mihi consilium and virtutis vestrae regimen relinquite, as he in Tacitus. Nor
were the two Brethren, those Sons of Thunder which I spoke of, to be taught
this lesson, however they may seem transported with zeal or passion. Though the
Samaritans had incensed them in an high degree, Luke 9.
and that they longed for nothing more, then to inflict some grievous
punishment upon them yet they submitted their affections to their Masters
judgment. They fell not presently on the affront to their imprecations, nor
called for fire from Heaven to consume them utterly, as on the blasting of the
breath of their displeasure: As vehement as their zeal and displeasure was, yet
they proposed the business to their Master first. It is not dicimus ut
descendat ignis, it is our pleasure to command that fire come down from Heaven,
to destroy these wretches; but it is vis dicimus, is it your pleasure that we
shall? Vis imus and colligimus here, and vis dicimus there. In both the Masters
leave and liking, is the thing most sought for.

And 'twas no news this in the Church of God, that they who were in any
public place or Ministry should fit their zeal and courage to the will of God,
and to the guidance of such persons, who under him, and by his appointment, had
the chief ordering of the Church. Isa^ah, though both bold and zealous in the
cause of God, and that his lips were touched with a Coal from the Altar, yet
durst not meddle in Gods matters, before he had both Mission and Commission
too. God had first said, Vade and dices huic populo, Go and tell this people,
before he undertook the business, or put himself upon the work of reformation.
And which is there of all the Prophets that went upon Gods errands without his
consent, and stood not more on dixit Dominus, then on dicam populo? I trow, the
times were then corrupt, and the people sinful. The whole contexture of their
several Prophecies make that plain enough: yet find we none of them so hasty
in rebuking either, as not to take a special Warrant and Commission from the
hand of God. No imus and colligimus in the days of old, in point of
extraordinary mission and employment; but still there was a vis expressed, some
warrant looked for from the Lord, to make way unto it.

So for the way of ordinary Reformation, when the fabric of the Church was out
of order, and the whole worship of the Lord either defiled with superstitions,
or intermingled with Idolatries, as it was too often; did not Gods servants
tarry and await his leisure, till those who were supreme both in place and
power, were by him prompted and inflamed to a Reformation? How many years had
that whole people made an Idol of the Brazen Serpent, and burnt incense to it,
before it was defaced by King Hezekiah? How many more might it have longer
stood undefaced, untouched by any of the common people, had not the King given
order to demolish it? How many Ages had the seduced Israelites adored before
the Altar of Bethel, before it was hewn down and cut in pieces by the good
King Josiah? Where can we find that any of Gods faithful Servants, any of
those 7000 souls which had not bowed the knee to Baal, did ever go about to
destroy the same? or that Elijah or Elisha, two men as extraordinary for their
Calling as their zeal and courage, did excite them to it, or told them it was
lawful for them so to do, without the Fiat of Authority to make good the work?
Where shall we read in the whole course and current of the Book of God, that
the common people in and by their own authority removed the high places, or
destroyed the Images, or cut down the Groves, those excellent Instruments of
superstition and Idolatry; that they appointed Fasts, and ordained Festivals;
or that they did so much as attempt such matters, without this vis, the power
and approbation of the supreme Magistrate?

This was the Doctrine and practice both of the former times, so far forth as
Gods Book directs us in the search thereof: nor ever was it preached or printed
till now of late that it should be otherwise; or that the work of Reformation
belonged unto the common people, in what capacity soever they were clothed and
vested. Of late indeed I find it to be so determined, it being affirmed by
Glesselius, one of the Contra-Remonstrants of Roterdam, that if the Prince and
Clergy did neglect their duties in the reforming of the Church, necesse esse
tum id facere plebeios Israelitas, that then it did belong to the common
people. And it is with a necesse, if you mark it well; they might not only do it,
but they must be doing. Do it, but how? what? in the way of treaty, by
mediation and petition, and such humble means by which the dignity of the
supreme Magistrate may be kept indemnified? not so, but even by force and
violence, licet ad sanguinem usque pro eo pugnent, even to the shedding of
their own and their Brethrens blood. In which it is most strange to see how
soon this desperate Doctrine found as lewd an use; how soon the people put in
practice what the Preacher taught them; but far more strange to see, (and who
can choose but see it, if he be not blind?) how infinitely their Scholars in
this Island, both for the theory and the practice, have out-gone their Masters.
And wonder it is in all this time they made it not an Article of their Christian
Faith, and put it not into the place of some one or other of the twelve which
they think less necessary. Here is a vis indeed, they say true in that; but no
such vis as is intended in the Text. The servants of my Parable knew no other
vis, then that of Proposition only, it being not their intent nor custom,
either to run before or against Authority. And having made the Proposition,
they did with patience and humility attend the Answer of their Master, which
they were faithfully resolved to conform unto, however it might cross their
own dear designs; but what that answer was you may see hereafter. For though
the Master took no time to consider of it, who comprehends all things in one
general view; yet being it is a business of such weight and moment, and that
your patience has been tired too much already, I shall defer the same till
another time. And therefore here I will conclude, desiring God, etc.

SERMON II.
At CHRIST-CHURCH Jan. 28. 1643.
MATTHEW. 13. v. 29. But he said, nay; lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root
up also the Wheat with them.
SPernit coelestis animus humana consilia: Velleius Patercul.
The divine wisdom is not swayed nor balanced by humane advice. God does
sometimes make use of Man as a means and Instrument whereby to compass his
intents; but he takes counsel of himself alone. 1 Cor. 2. v. 16:
For who has known the mind of the Lord that he might instruct him? aut quis
consiliarius ejus fuit, or who has been his Counselor? says the Apostle. How
inconsiderable and impertinent are our opinions, Romans 11. 34.
in matters which pertain to his heavenly judgment? how blind in points above,
or beyond our sight? The Servants of my Text, no doubt, thought themselves fit
and able to advise their Master, and did not make a proffer of their help and
service, but that they thought it likely to be entertained. And though they do
not take upon them positively to prescribe a course for the preserving of the
Wheat which was then in danger; yet by the tender of themselves to root out the
Tares, they declare expressly that they conceived that way most proper to effect
the business. In which, if they exceeded their accustomed duty, or went beyond
the modesty of domestic Servants, yet made they fair amends in that humble
reverence wherewith they did submit to his resolution. Cicurella in Sixto. Qu.
Non multum pugnabant ut sua vinceret sententia, as a late Writer has observed
of a Pope of Rome: They were not so much wedded to their own opinion, but that
a clearer judgment might divorce them from it. And therefore, as before was
noted, Fiat voluntas tua, not their will, but his will be done. They offered
their advise and assistance in it, vis imus and colligimus ea? Will thou that
we go and gather them up? which having done, they did expect his resolution, to
which they were in duty and discretion to conform themselves. And hereto he
returns his non, a plain refusal of their service, grounded upon a plain
dislike of their intentions. Et ait non, But he said, nay; lest while ye gather
up the Tares, etc.

These words contain the Masters answer to the Proposition which by the
servants was presented in the former verse. We may behold therein these two
general parts, His Power, His Providence. His Power first, that he was not
bound to give obedience to their counsels, or to submit his judgment unto
their opinions: His Providence, in having such a tender care of his own good
seed, as not to yield unto the gathering of the Tares in the way proposed, for
fear the Wheat might have incurred some danger by it. His Power we find no
otherwise set forth unto us then in a bare dissent, a plain negative voice, and
ait non, but he said nay: he did not like of their Proposition, and therefore
was not bound to assent unto it. His Providence, first that he left them not
unsatisfied, but laid them down a reason of his Resolution; and then in giving
such a reason as counterballanced their desires of a quick dispatch, and made
them see the error of their former have; Ne forte colligentes Zizania, lest
while ye gather up the Tares, etc. Which reason, though but one in show, that
is to say, the preservation of the Wheat, the good Seed it self, does yet
contain as many reasons as there are several ways and means, by which in
gathering the Tares they might have rooted up the Wheat also. For going the way
by themselves intended, which was in ere gladii, as before was told you, either
in the violence of their proceedings they might have rooted up the Tares and
the Wheat together; or else by prejudice or inadvertency have taken that for
Tares which indeed was Wheat; or finally, by too much have and precipitation
have destroyed some Tares which might in time have proved good Wheat, and so
become a plentiful addition to the Lords Harvest. And therefore non, he did not
like of their intention, nor would give way unto the Proposition which they
brought unto him, ne forte, lest under color and pretense of gathering the
Tares in the way propounded, eradicetur simul cum eis triticum, the Wheat, the
Lords own Seed, might be rooted up. These are the points to be observed, and
these I shall run over as they lie before me, beginning with the Masters power;
and ait non, But he said nay.

Magna negotia magnis egent adjutoribus: Velleius Patere.
Great Honors are great burdens, and therefore do require more shoulders to
support the weight, then those that rest under the quiet and protection of a
private fortune: the man that travelleth in affairs of high and general
concernment, is ill advised, if he trust only to himself and his own abilities,
and use not the assistance of such friends and servants whose wisdom and
fidelity he is well assured of. Plus vident oculi quam oculus, Two eyes see
more then one, was the ancient Proverb: And therefore he shall follow but a
blind direction, who puts out any of the light which is offered to him, and
will see only by the blaze of his own Candle. And on the other side, those whom
great persons do make use of for advice and counsel, should do well to ponder
with themselves, that they are only Adjutores, not Governors themselves, but
helps in Government; that they are Ministers, not Masters; and Counselors, but
not Controllers. He that desires to have an Adjutant to ease him of some part
of the care and trouble which is incumbent on his office; or to instruct and
counsel him in discharge thereof, would yet be loath to have him in the nature
of a Coadjutor, to give him any sha^e in the public Government, or to submit
himself with a blind obedience to all his dictates and prescriptions. That were
to alter and invert the whole course of nature, if the head could not choose
but be swayed that way which the feet would carry it; and make so foul a
Monster of the Body Politic, as either to have too many heads, or else none at
all. The servant may do well to advise his Master for the best, when his
opinion is required; and he should ill discharge his duty, if he did not do it:
but 'twere an high degree of Arrogance in the ablest servant, to think that his
advise must needs be followed; and as great weakness in the Master, should he
submit to every proposition which is tendered him by those whose Counsel he
requires in his great affairs.

The Master in my Text did better understand himself and his place then so: And
therefore though the proposition which was made unto him was both fair and
specious, and seemed most clearly to conduce to the advancement of his service,
and the public good; yet he rejects it with a non, he refused it utterly. He
neither liked their imus, though they came with courage; nor their Colligimus,
although it were accompanied with zeal and cheerfulness; nor indeed any thing
at all in the Proposition, but that they closed it with a vis, and did refer it
wholly unto his discretion. And he accordingly made use of that power and
privilege which properly and naturally was inherent in him; not putting out
his own eyes, in hope to see the better by their Spectacles; much less denying
the use of his own reason, that they might the more abound in their own sense.
But as a negative voice had been vested in him, both by the Laws of nature,
and the rules of Occonomy, so he is resolved to let them see, that as well now
when he was compassed round with dangers, and his field in such a way to ruin,
as formerly in the best and securest times, he knew how to use it, and when
'twas fit to stand upon it. Nay though the Proposition was of no less moment
then the preservation of the Church, and they that moved it to him of no lower
rank then Magistri and praeceptores Ecclesiae, the Rulers and instructers of
the Church, as St. Hierome tells us, yet he still kept himself to his own
conclusions, Et ait non, Hieron. in Matthew:
But he said nay. He would not put the Sword into their hands when they went a
gathering, though they much desired it, and that they thought no way to be so
effectual for the securing of the Harvest.

Nor was this any new Authority which the Master had usurped against former
precedents, but such as he had used and practiced upon all occasions. For if
our Savior be the Master in the present Parable, (as no doubt he was) it was
no news in him to proceed this way, and stand upon his own Prerogative, when
either his own Honor, or the Churches safety did depend upon it. St. Peter
doubtless did conceive that it concerned his Master in point of safety not to
go down unto Jerusalem, Mat. 16. v. 21.
where he was like to be despitefully entreated by the Priests and Pharisees;
and therefore labored to dissuade him from that dangerous journey. And this
most probably he did, with the consent, and on the motion of all the rest of
the Apostles, whose mouth he was, (...), as the Father calls him. Chrysostom. in
Matthew.
But whether it were so or no, no question but the counsel did proceed from
that true affection which the Apostle carried toward his Lord and Master, and
the respect he had to the little Flock, whose preservation and support
depended, as he thought, on the Shepherds safety. And yet our Savior did not
only disapprove the counsel, v. 23.
but told him plainly to his face, quia non sapis ca quae Dei sunt, that it did
too much savor of the World, and of God too little. And the two Sons of
Zebedee did believe as strongly, that it as much concerned him in point of
honor not to put up that foul affront which had been offered him by the
Samaritans; Luke 9* v. 54.
and therefore made this motion to him, vis dicamus ut descendat ignis? shall
we command that fire come down from Heaven to consume these wretches? Which
motion, though it arose from a just resentment of that indignity and wrong
which had been done unto their Master, yet did their Master absolutely reject
the same, v. 55.
not without some dislike of their fervor in it; Nescitis cujus spiritus estis,
in the words next after. In both it is to be observed, that the Lord did not
put them off with any dilatory Answer, as if he either wanted time to consider
of it, or were afraid to stand upon his just prerogative; but gave them a
refusal in plain terms, and gave it with a check to boot, to let them see how
sensible he was of his own Authority.

Nor was it otherwise in this case with the Son of David, then with David
formerly; who though he had a patient ear, and was content to hear his
Servants, (and in matters of the highest points, both of life and Sovereignty,)
yet he conceived himself to be left at liberty either to dissent or assent, as
he thought most fit. Upon which principle of power, 1 Samuel 24. v. 4.
and point of liberty, he absolutely refused to hearken to the counsel of his
Men of War, when they advised him to make use of the opportunity which the
Lord had given him in delivering Saul into his hands. And though he found by
many clear signs and apparent circumstances, 2 Samuel 19. 21. etc.
that the Sons of Zerviah were so potent amongst the Military men, and so
respected of the people, that it was not safe for him, as the case the^ stood,
to oppose their doings; yet he conceived himself not bound to embrace their
counsels, or to assent to every proposition which they made unto him. And
therefore when they pressed him for the death of Shimei, who had so utterly
reviled him in the day of his tribulation, 2 Samuel 19. v. 21, 2^. etc.
that nothing more could have been acceptable to the common people then such a
grateful piece of justice, he had resort unto his negative, and refused
absolutely to give way unto it. The reasons which induced him to dissent, I
regard not here: It Is plain, he thought himself at liberty to assent, or not;
and it is as plain, that he made use thereof when he saw occasion; and yet was
never quarrelled for it, or thought to have usurped a power which belonged not
to him. David had bin in a worse condition then the meanest Subject, if he had
been nothing but a State-Eccho, necessitated to repeat those words which his
servants did prescribe and dictate to him; if ait, aio, negat, nego, which was
the Parasites part in the Roman Theater, had been all the part he was to act on
the Stage of Government.

But to return unto my Parable; It seems the servants were as well persuaded
of their Masters Power in this particular, as the Master was; and thereupon
submitted without more dispute to his will and pleasure. They came not to him
out of Complement, or tentandi causa, to try what metal he was made of,
whether he would give way or not unto their desires; and if not, then to carve
themselves, and to proceed in their own way, to the contempt and scorn of his
Authority. It Is true, that some of the Disciples had so served him once, in the
great case of the Militia: They came unto him with a Question, Domine, si
percutimus eos gladio, Luke 22. v. 49:
Lord, shall we strike them with the sword? shall we betake our selves unto our
weapons in this dangerous time, in which we have not a bare ground only of
fears and jealousies, Grotius Annotat.
but see too evidently that many of our enemies are in Arms against us? But
without tarrying for an Answer, non expectato Domini responso, as my Author
has it, one of them puts himself into a posture of War, and draws his
Sword, and gives the onset, as if they had sufficiently complied with the
Obligation wherein they stood bound to their Lord and Master, by telling him
before hand what they meant to do. But so it was not with the Servants of my
present Text; all which they did, and all they thought they had to do was to
make the motion; and having made the motion, to expect his Answer: which as in
duty they were bound to conform unto, so in compliance with that duty, they
desisted presently from prosecuting their own projects. No sooner had they
found by their Masters Answer, that they had been mistaken in the time and
instruments in and by which so great a business was to be effected, but they
gave over the pursuit, and left the work to be performed by the Heavenly Angel,
to whom their Master had reserved it. No further speech of imus and colligimus,
after their Lord and Master had returned a non.

And certainly this moderation and submission of themselves to their Masters
pleasure showed exceeding lowly, and tends not more unto the commendation of
their modesty, then of their piety. In vain it is for man to dispute with God,
to stand as 'twere on equal terms, and expostulate with him, if our desires
and counsels do not take effect: O homo, tu quis es qui respondeas Deo? Romans 9.
20.
For who art thou O man that disputest with God? says the great Apostle. It
carries something in it of that monstrous War which the Giants made against
the Gods in ancient Fables; Ovidii Metam. l. 1.
Altaque congestos struxisse ad sydera montes, when they heaped hills on hills
to come nearer to them, to fight it out upon even ground. And it is as vain to
set our selves against those Powers, to whom God has not only pleased to
impart some branch of his Authority, but to communicate his name; to think that
we can bind them by our votes or wishes, or circumscribe them by our Counsels.
Romans 13: 2.
It is no Argument of weakness to give way to them who are too strong to be
resisted, or by resisting whom we shall but agravate our own guilt and ruin.
Non turpe est ab eo vinci quem vincere est nefas; Velleius hist. l. 2.
It is no shame, said the Historian, to yield to him whom it were sin to
overcome: nor is it a dishonor to submit to those whom Fortune, or the Gods
rather, have advanced above us. And therefore they who plunge whole States in
Wars, and themselves in miseries, because their propositions may not pass
for Laws, are but like Achitophel, of whom it is recorded that he hanged
himself because his counsel was not followed. 2 King. 17. 23.


It is well said by him in Tacitus, Histor. l. 4.
Suadere Principi quod oportet multi laboris est, that to give good counsel to
a Prince is a work of difficulty; and he that does it well, has discharged his
duty: The issue and success thereof he must leave to God, who has committed to
his Substitutes the supreme power of ^udging what is fittest for them to
consent unto. The virtue of obedience is the Subjects glory: And he may well
persuade himself, that as he had some reasons which induced him to advise one
way, so there were others no less weighty which might incline his Master to
pursue another. Which reasons, if they be made known unto him, he may then
satisfy himself and others whom it does concern: If not, he has no reason to
complain at all; Princes being (...), as the Statists term it, not bound to
render an account of their words or actions, further then as they shall be
pleased of their own accord to impart the same unto their servants, for the
removing of such umbrages and discontentments as the rejecting of their
Counsels might occasion otherwise. This leads from the Masters power unto his
Providence, in that he did not leave his servants without satisfaction, but
laid them down a reason of his refusal, and such a reason as came home to the
point proposed: But he said, nay, ne forte colligentes zizania, for fear lest
while ye gather up the Tares ye root the Wheat up also with them: My second
General.

Majoribus nostris nulla reddita ratione rationis est credere, Tullius.
said the Heathen Orator. It was the easiness and flexibility of some former
times to give belief to any thing which was commended to them by their
Ancients, without examining the grounds and reasons. Which though it was a
course that did not much conduce to the advancement of knowledge, served
notwithstanding very well to train the people up in the Schools of obedience.
But then withal it was observed, that though some tendries were so ancient
that they grew i refragable, some Authors so esteemed of that they grew
Authentical; yet to discerning men, men of abilities and parts in the ways of
learning, neither the Antiquity of the Tenet, nor the Authority of the Teacher,
carried so much sway, as did the reason which appeared in these points and
tendries. Et quanquam in Autore satis rationis est, Velleiu. l. 2.
ratio tamen quemlibet magnum Authorem facit. In which regard, those who have
took upon them to be Guides to others, and to instruct them in the Arts of life
or learning, found a necessity at last of making them acquainted with the
grounds and reasons of that which they did dictate and prescribe unto them. Men
being of a reasonable soul by nature, are best ruled by reason, and then most
ap^ to yield obedience, when they perceive there is some reason in the point
commended to them, some reason for the imposition or command which is laid upon
them. And so it also holds in the Arts of Government, the actions of the
supreme Powers being then most acceptable, when they are pleased to give a
reason of those Acts and Results of State in which the Subjects are concerned.
Tacitus Annal. l. 6.
It Is true indeed which the wise Statesman has observed, abditos Principis
sensus, that the thoughts of Sovereign Princes are most dark and hidden; and
that to pry into them with too curious eyes, is not unlawful only, but
exceeding dangerous. But then withal, it is as true, that sic volo sic jubeo
is but a sorry piece of Rhetoric to persuade obedience; Ovid.
and that the Subject yields but a dull conformity to the Commands of his
Superior, when the imperiousness of those Commands is not backed by Reason,
but founded only upon Will.

The Master in my Text understood this rightly; and therefore when he was
resolved (upon mature consideration of the Servants offer) not to give way to
their imus and colligimus, yet he thought fit to make some answer to the vis,
to let them see the reason why he differed or dissented from them. In this we
have the Servants modesty, and the Masters goodness. The Servants were too
modest to demand the reason why he refused to hearken to the Proposition which
they brought unto him: They knew that he was liber agens, not bound to tell
them any more of his resolutions then he had a mind to; and that it was a
special favor, if he told them any thing which he might lawfully have kept
within the Cabinet of his own bosom. The Master of a Family is a Petit-Prince,
especially as the paternal power stood fortified in our Saviors time, the
Father having then potestatem vitae and necis, Minsiner. in Institut. lib. 1.
tit. 9.
the power of life and death over all the Household. And for the exercise
thereof, He says to this man, Go, he goes; and to another, Come, Mat. 8. v. 9.
he comes; and to a third, Do this, he does it: In no case bound to give a
reason for any of those several Commands he lays upon them, or to set out a
Declaration of those grounds and motives which might induce him to dissent in
opinion from them. But if he please to let them see so far into him of his
own accord, it is to be interpreted for an act of Grace, as it relates unto
themselves; though possibly it be an act of especial providence, is it reflects
upon the service. The servant is then most obedient to the Masters pleasure,
and takes most patiently the refusal of his proffered service, when it is
sweetened by some plausible prevailing reasons.

And so we find it in this case; The Servants of the Text had performed their
duty, in making a discovery of the Tares, and in the offer which they made to
go and gather them before they had destroyed the Harvest. An offer not to have
been slighted, or passed lightly over, but that the Master saw more in it then
the servants did, and found it could not be accepted without greater danger to
his field then the Tares did threaten. Which being visible to him, though
unseen by them, he thought it not amiss to acquaint them with it, and let them
see the error they were fallen upon, in offering such a remedy to remove the
mischief as would have been more mischievous then the Tares themselves which
they made offer to remove. A mischief which the servants did not think of when
they came before him, being transported then by their zeal and courage; and
perhaps might not have discerned it upon second thoughts. Though they were men
of excellent and discerning Spirits, yet they were but men, and could not look
so far into the issue and success of things as the more penetrating eye of
Almighty God. Nil inter Deum hominemque distaret, Lactant. l. 1. c. 1*
etc. There were no difference, said Lactantius truly, between God and man,
were not men subject unto error, and might not sometime lose themselves as well
in the fallibility of their own counsels, as the unsearchableness of his.
Therefore to let the servants understand more clearly how infinitely short they
were of his heavenly wisdom, that all their wit was folly, and their counsels
foolishness, he does not only answer nay, which had been sufficient, but adds
ne forte to his non, and lets them know the reason of his disallowance, that so
they might perceive the danger of their rash design.

A reason then was given, but what reason was it? A reason certainly which
counterbalanced their desires of a quick dispatch, and made them see the error
of their former haste. The way in which they meant to go was in ore gladii,
The^ph. in locum.
to go against them with the Sword, and destroy them utterly, (...), to cut
them off not only from the body of the Church, but of all mankind, as
Theophylact has it; to raise an holy War (if I may so call it) which should
have had some influence (...), Chrysostom. in Matthew.
over all the Quarters of the World, as we find in Chrysostom. And had they
gone this way to work, as they meant to do, no doubt but in the violence of
their proceedings, they would have rooted up the Wheat and the Tares together.
The Sword, though never so well sharpened, is but an ill distinguisher between
Tares and Wheat: and War the most improper Judge that was ever thought of to
determine Controversies in Religion. Where the Sword strikes, it strikes on
both sides; it is gladius Delphicus, and makes as little difference between the
Doctrines, as between the Teachers. And when War rages in a Nation, it
bears all before it: Hallowed places and profane, the innocent person and the
guilty are all alike involved in the same calamity. We may affirm of them, as
the good Writer does of the dreadful Thunderbolts, Sine delectu tangunt loca
sacra and profana; homines noxios feriunt, saepe and religiosos. Minut. Fell.
Apol.
But saepe will not serve our turn, it must be Saepius, or else nothing; and so
indeed it proves most commonly. For when the Sword and War are to act their
Tragedies, the best and holiest men speed worst, as they who least know how to
time it, and to comply with the iniquities of the place they live in. And
therefore saeviente ardore belli meliores potius occumbere, Id. ibid.
says mine Author rightly. But never is the Sword more fatally, nor more
unhappily employed, then when it is managed by those men who ought to know no
other Weapons then the Sword of the Spirit: no War more cruel and unnatural,
then when the bellows of sedition which inflames the State, are blown by those
who should be Ministers of peace. Ne forte is good counsel here: No imus and
colligimus in the way proposed, for fear of rooting up more Wheat then Tares in
the prosecution.

The dangerousness of this design we shall further see, if we look first upon
the Tares, what is meant by them; and then upon the Servants, of what rank they
were, who were so hot upon the service, upon the imus and colligimus of the
former verse. First, for the Tares, V. the 2d Sermon on this Parable.
besides that many, if not most of the ancient Fathers interpret them of false
opinions, of haereses and mala dogmata; St. Chrysostom and others do expound
them of the Heretics, of the men themselves. St. Austin seems to make a
question, whether the Schismatic be not also comprehended in them; and Cyprian
conceives it of the wicked generally, as do also others. But be it which it
will, it comes all to one. War and the Sword are but of little use God knows
in the confuting of the Heretic, or the converting of the sinner, or the
reduction of the Schismatic to the Fold of Christ. Non tali auxilio: the Lord
has chosen other means, and other Ministers for the performance of these
services, and needs no such helps. How far, and in whose hands they may be
serviceable for the correction of the wicked, we shall see anon. In the mean
time we must take notice, that by the Servants in this Parable are meant the
Rulers of Christ's Church, Magistri and Praeceptores Ecclesiae, as before I told
you out of Hierome; to whom our Savior gave the keys, and the Church
afterward the Crozier, or the Pastoralls Staff, the badge and emblem of their
Office. But neither our Savior nor the Church gave them any power to take the
Sword into their hands, or to proceed in ore gladii, when they found any thing
amiss in life or Doctrine which stood in need of Reformation.

Look upon which of these you will, either upon the Servants or upon the Tares,
and we shall quickly find that the Sword and War are never more unfitly
used, then by such men, and in such cases. For the Tares being sown in medio
tritici, amongst the Wheat, v. 25. and growing intermingled with it in the
blade or stalk, v. 26. if the Sword chance to mow them down, down go both
alike. And should the Field be weeded by the hand of War, impossible it is
but that in gathering up the Tares eradicetur simul cum eis triticum, the Wheat
must needs be rooted up at the self-same time. Bonorum malorumque fata mixta,
Min. Fell.
merita confusa. The wicked and the righteous person, the Schismatic and
conformable man, the Heretic and Orthodox Professor* are all alike subject
unto those calamities which the War brings upon a Nation; their Persons,
their Estates, their Families, all comprehended in the mass of the same
perdition: which as they are the ordinary consequents of the Sword and War,
so do they fall most heavily on the Church of Christ; when the Sword is put
into unskilful hands, who neither have a right unto it, nor the Art to use it;
or when the War is undertaken and pursued under the mask and color of
Religion. When once the Successors of St. Peter, as they claim to be, laid
aside the keys, and betook themselves unto the Sword, what havoc did they
make in the Christian Church? how often have they died their Robes in the blood
of the Saints? And when the War begun by the Christian Princes on the Turks
and Saracens, Histor. Albigens.
was turned upon the Albigenses by the Popes of Rome; and that the Cruciata was
proclaimed against those poor souls, only because they differed in some points
of Doctrine from the opinions of that Church; how many hundred thousands of
well-meaning men, who made a conscience of their ways, and erred not, (if they
erred at all) out of pride, but ignorance, were rooted up, and made a sacrifice
to the offended Deities of the Roman Conclave?

The miseries of those Wars, and the nature of them, are but a Glass,
wherein we may behold the troubles and distractions of these latter times, in
which the Sword has been so often made the Judge of controversies; Necessar.
Respons.
and almost all the States in Christendom have been imbroiled in Wars, under
pretense of Reformation. That Maxim of Illyricus, the Father of the rigid
Lutherans, as they use to call them, terrendos Principes metu seditionum, that
Princes must be frighted into Reformation by the fear and threatening of
seditions: that of Gesselius, a more rigid Calvinist, that if the Prince and
Clergy did neglect their duties in the reforming of the Church, the people then
must undertake it, licet ad sanguinem usque pro eo pugnent, Ibid.
although they have no other way to effect the same, then by raising Wars,
and stirring up the Subjects against their Sovereigns: that of some zelots of
our own, Jo. Durant.
who now the Sword is drawn, would not have it sheathed, till it be fully
glutted in the blood of Malignants: what ruin and destruction has it brought
on the Church of God, defiled the Sanctuaries of the Lord, and defaced his
Temples, laid desolate the beauties of our dwelling-places, and made us
Christians both a derision and a prey to the Turks and Gentiles? Lucan.
Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum. Such mischiefs have the Sword and the
War produced, under pretense of imus and colligimus, of gathering up such
Tares as have been thought to grow in the Field of God; and rectifying such
abuses as in long tract of time had risen in his public worship. With how much
better judgment was the Question stated in the Heroic times of Christianity?
when as it was both taught and practiced, Lactant. lib. 5. c. 20.
Defendendam esse Religionem non occidendo sed moriendo, that the Gospel was to
be defended not by blood and slaughter, nor by destroying those who opposed the
same, or harbored any Tenets which agreed not with it; but by submitting our
own lives to the hand of death, in testimony of the truth and a good
conscience, whenever the necessities of the Church shall require it of us.
With how much greater love to the Church of Christ, did the good Father give
this Comment on the present text? Theophy^act. in locum.
(...), God, says he, would not let the Heretics be destroyed by Wars, for
fear the righteous person and the true believer should also suffer with them in
the same destruction.

But what will some men say? Is there no use of the Sword at all in the
confounding of the Heretic, or the reclaiming of the Schismatic, or the
correction of the wicked and flagitious person? I say not so; the Sword may
have its use in all these particulars, and Wars be serviceable in some of
them: But then the Sword must be committed to the hands of the proper Minister,
not to the Servants of my Text, or any Minister of the Gospel of what rank
soever; and Wars must be denounced and pursued by those in whom the supreme
Government of the State is vested, Virgil.
to whom it appertains of right, Parcere subjectis and debellare superbos, to
be indulgent to the quiet and obedient subject, but to pull down the stomach of
the proud and rebellious person. Each of them has their several way, and their
several weapons in the effecting of this work; but each of them must stay the
time. The Heretic is first to be attempted by the power of the word, by which
Apollos mightily convinced the Jews; and which St. Paul assures us is
exceeding profitable, 2 Timothy 3. 18.
not only for Doctrine, but reproof. It is the faithful word, as he elsewhere
tells us, by which the Prelate is enabled not only to exhort, Tit. 1. 9.
but convince gainsayers. The same course must be also taken in the recovery of
the Schismatic, in reduction of the stray-sheep to the Fold of Christ: it
being the duty of the diligent and careful Shepherd to seek out that which was
lost, Ezech. 34.
and bring back that which was driven away. Which means, if they should prove
to be ineffectual, and that the word and Doctrine will not work the cure, it
then pertains unto the Pastor to have recourse unto the censures of the Church,
Et flagellorum terroribus vel etiam doloribus revocare, to fetch them back
again by the Rod of Discipline; and if that fail, to excommunicate them,
August. Ephesians. 50.
and deliver them to the hands of Satan. Further then this they may not go, it is
beyond their bounds: what may be done upon Certificate hereof by the Civil
Magistrate, and how far he may use the Sword in cutting off the obstinate
Heretic, and the perverse Schismatic, we shall see hereafter, when we are
come to look upon the Sinite in the following verse: in which it was appointed
by the heavenly Husbandman, that both the Tares and Wheat should be permitted
to grow up together till the Harvest.

In the mean time there is no question to be made, but that notorious
offenders, (and such S. Cyprian takes to be the Tares which are here intended)
are most immediately subject to the sword of the Civil Magistrate, if single
persons; and to be rooted up by the hand of War, if they unite themselves
together, and by their wretched ma^hinations do imbroyl the State: God gave the
Sword into the hands of the higher powers, Ro^. 3. v. 2. 4.
for no other purpose, but that they should be his avengers, vindices in iram,
says the vulgar, to execute wrath and judgment upon those that do evil, and
amongst other evil that do resist the powers. He that imployes it not to that
end and purpose, and does not make himself a terror unto those which do evil
works, bears the Sword in vain, and gives some countenance unto, the error
shall I call it, or the frenzy rather? Sleidan Comment. 1.
of the foolish Anabaptists, who do affirm expressly, and in terminis, That the
Sword is not to be used by the Civil Magistrate: which were it so, in case the
Magistrate might not use the Sword when he saw occasion, or will not use the
same when he may and ought, God needed not have put the Sword into his hands. A
Scabbard and a pair of Hilts would have served the turn. And as for War, it
is the last remedy which a Prince can use for the correction of a stubborn and
rebellious people; not to be thought on, nor embraced, but in great
extremities. War is then only just when it is necessary, and can no longer be
avoided; and then too to be used with alloyes and temperaments, as Poisons are
sometimes in a Course of Physic. That Prince, as wittily and tartly the
Italians tell us, who upon every slight occasion does take up Arms against his
Subjects, may be compared unto the m^n which sets his House on fire for to roast
his Eggs. But if the Prince has tried all other courses, and can speed in
none; if when he speaks of peace they prepare for War; if they refuse to hear
his Charms, charm he never so sweetly, Luc.
Viribus utendum est quas fecimus, God and the Sword must end the quarrel. Let
him then gird his sword upon his thigh, Psalm. 45:
like a mighty man, according to his Worship and Renown: Let him ride on
courageously against them that hate him; let his right hand teach him terrible
things; and finally, let his Arrows he sharp in the hearts of his enemies,
till the people be subdued unto him; and that he be anointed with the Oil of
gladness above all his fellows. No Physic better then Phlebotomy for corrupted
bodies, when as the spirits are inflamed, and the blood boyles high.

But of this Argument enough. There is another thing to be considered in this
present Answer, in the ne forte of the Master, and that was this; for fear lest
out of prejudice or inadvertency they might have taken that for Tares which
indeed was Wheat; and so have done more hurt to the Field of God then the Tares
themselves. For as I have observed before on the 26. the Tares are very like
the Wheat in the blade or stalk, In locum.
as both Euthymius; Zygabenus, and St. Hierome tell us. So like they are to one
another, (...), says St. Chrysostom, according to the outward show, that he
must have discerning eyes who can distinguish them aright till their fruits be
ripe, Athanas. Homil. de Semente.
who on the first discovery can expressly say, (...), that these be Tares, and
this is Wheat, says Athanasius. And this he does illustrate and exemplify by
the similitude and resemblance which seems to be betwixt the Hypocrite and the
righteous man: Both of them come unto the Church and receive the word, and seem
to entertain the same with such equal joy, that the spiritual Husbandman
himself is many times deceived in them, not being able to determine by the
outward view; but when the Doctrine which they heard comes to bring forth
fruit, then, says he, it is easily seen, (...), who is the true Believer, and
who the Hypocrite. By means of which similitude and resemblance, Id ibid.
as many counterfeit Christians have been taken for right honest men, and
diverse dangerous and unsound opinions found entertainment in the Church for
true Orthodox Tenets; so it is not only possible, but also probable, that either
through prejudice or inadvertency, some honest and religious men may be
condemned for lewd and reprobate; some Orthodox and true opinions rejected as
unsound and dangerous.

First, for the men themselves, let us look on them, and we shall find that
it is not only probable, as before it is said, but even of ordinary course for the
best men to be traduced, and to be branded with some Character of reproach and
infamy. Our Savior Christ himself did not escape so well but that he was
accounted a Samaritan, a Wine bibber and a glutton, a friend of Publicans and
sinners. St. Peter stands accused by the Magdeburgians for a forward fellow, a
rash and inconsiderate person: Cent. 1.
St. Paul by the Athenians for an idle prater, a setter forth of strange Gods,
Acts 17. 18.
a babbler. And who is he of all the gallant Spirits in the Primitive times, who
is not branded on record for incestuous mixtures, those (...), remembered and
confuted in the works of our Christian Advocates? Justin M.
Prejudice blindes the eyes as much as malice, and inadvertency betrays the
judgment to an error with as great facility as either. If we be biassed with
the one, virtue will be accounted vice, obedience treason, loyalty rebellion;
and upon those whom we find guilty of those crimes an imus and colligimus
shall be passed immediately. If we are governed by the other, and judge of men
according to the Character which the World gives of them, each light report or
foolish fear, or slight suspicion, shall serve for a sufficient ground to
condemn the innocent; and though he be right Wheat indeed of the Lords own
sowing, vote him to be a Tare, and the work is done, the imus and colligimus
will come after as a thing of course. Good reason therefore had the Master to
restrain his Servants, to check them in the midst of their hot pursuit, and not
to let them go and gather, quod multi falso deferuntur qui sanctimoniam and
pietatem in occulto colunt, considering how easy a thing it is for the best
men to be misreported, and so accordingly destroyed. And what he said to them
he says to us and others on the like occasions; there is no such need of imus
and colligimus as we think there is.

So is it also with opinions, with some points of Doctrine, which if beheld
with prejudice, or inadvertently looked over, will be counted Tares, though in
themselves of that good seed wherewith Gods Field was sowed from the first
beginning. There is so specious a resemblance, such a fair similitude between
the merit of good works, and the reward that is due unto them according to the
will and pleasure of Almighty God; between the efficacy of good life in the
point of justification, and the necessity thereof in the way of salvation;
between the influence of Gods grace on the will of man, and the cooperation of
man's will with the grace of God; between the conscientious confession of our
sins to those from whom we may receive the benefit of absolution, and that
auricular Confession which has been so abused of late by some Priests and
Jesuits; between the reverence required at the receiving of the Sacrament in
the Church of England, and that unjustifiable Adoration of it which is obtruded
on the people in the Church of Rome; between the dedicating of some days to
the honor of God, with a relation to the creature, and a devoting of them to
the creature with some relation unto God; that the true Tenet in those points,
as in many others, commended to us in the writings of the ancient Fathers, if
either looked upon with the eye of prejudice, or through the false lights of
inadvertence, may be took for Tares. And what can follow thereupon but an
eradication of the Tenet and the Teachers too, if every man may go and gather
when and where he lists, and that ne forte be not laid as a bar before them
by their Lord and M^ster? Indeed there is no reason we should look for other,
or that the Doctrines of the Fathers may not pass for Tares, when the Apostles
Creed it self is subject to the same misprision; one of the Articles whereof
has been already noted with a Deleatur, and all the rest obnoxious to the like
calamity, on the next imus and colligimus, upon the setting out of the
Expurgatorius Index which is now in hand.

Therefore to set the matter right, that neither zeal may be disheartened, nor
the edge of courage taken off, and yet that imus and colligimus may both be
regulated, and restrained to its proper bounds; there is a ne forte in the way,
which shows how far it is fit to go, and when fit to stop. We must so
cherish zeal, and give way to courage, that the Lords work may be promoted, and
his Field preserved; and yet so curb and keep them in when they grow irregular,
that they transport us not beyond our limits, or make us run upon mistakes.
Zeal many times is full of prejudice, and an excess of courage makes us
inconsiderate. In both these cases, (and they are such cases as do happen
often) we are not governed by truth, but by appearances; and he that is good
Wheat indeed is looked upon as a Tare, and condemned accordingly. He that
beholds his Brother with the eye of prejudice, either looks on him through a
Multiplying Glass, which makes his faults seem greater then indeed they be; or
by some new invented Optic, which represents things contrary to what they are.
Acts 12. 2, 3.
And he that does condemn a man on no other grounds then the opinion and esteem
which the world has of him, is but like Herod in the Acts, who when he
stretched out his hands to vex the Church, J^h. 7. v. 34.
killed James and then imprisoned Peter, videns quia placeret Judaeis, because
he saw it pleased the people.] Our Savior therefore gives this Caveat unto his
Disciples, Nolite judicare secundum faci^m, Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judgment. If we took notice of this Caveat as
we ought to do, zeal should not swallow up our charity, or inadvertency put out
the eyes of our understanding: nor should we be so hot and urgent upon the imus
and colligimus as we have been lately, without reflecting on ne fort^, those
inconveniences and dangers which the Church of Christ might suffer by it. 1
Cor. 13.
Now it is a property of charity, Bernard.
as St. Paul has told us, that it thinks no evil; and it is a rule in
charity, as St. Bernard tells us, non temere de fratre mali aliquid credendum
esse, not easily to entertain an ill opinion of our Brother, nor lend too
credulous an ear unto those reports which the world makes of him. And as for
Doctrinalls, which are the proper subject of the understanding, Whitak. Contr.
2. qu. 5. c. 8.
he who does take them upon trust without further search, shall run upon
received opinions, as Calderinus in Ludovicus Vives went to Mass, Eamus ergo
quia sic placet in communes errores; And in defense of these opinions, shall
condemn for Tares, whoever does oppose, or opine the contrary. Ne forte is a
good caution here, as in most things else; which had it been regarded as it
should have been, so many points of Protestant Doctrine had not been rooted up
for Tares, under the odious name of Popery; nor had Episcopacy been so often
and so blindly struck at, under pretense of being but a step to the Throne of
Antichrist; nor Monarchy so openly undermined as inconsistent with the liberty
of the Sons of God: therefore no imus and colligimus, but ne forte first.

This further justifies the non, the wise Masters Negative; but there is one
thing yet to come which indeares it further, and was a seasonable fear, lest
that by too much have and precipitation they had gone and gathered up some
Tares, which might in fine have proved good Wheat, and so become a plentiful
addition to the Harvest. Basil in H^xan. 4.
For such is the nature of the Tare, that though it generally arises (...),
from its own proper seed, as St. Basil tells us; yet, Aretius.
as good Authors do observe, they do often spring, ex corrupto tritici semine,
from some corrupted corns of Wheat, (...), says Theophrastus. Hist. de
Plantis. l. 8. c. 8.
The Greek Etymologians seem to look this way, Aretius in locum. De facult.
Aliment. l. 1. c. ult.
who tell us of those Tares, (...), that not being sown, nor coming from their
proper seed, they took root together with the Wheat, and grew up with it. Of
the same mind is Galen also, who justifies this (...), or transmutation of
the Wheat to Tares, by his own observation and experience. De causis Plant. l.
2. c. 21.
Which transmutation or corruption, as it happens often, so is it then most
frequent and apparent when the Wheat takes wet, (...), as in Theophrastus,
either by some great glut of rain, or from the moorishness of the ground in
which it is sown. Galen affirms it more expressly, who in his first de facultate
alimentorum relates a passage, D^ facult. Aliment. l. 1. c. ult.
that once the constitution of the year being unseasonable and intemperate,
(...), as his words there are; there sprung up an exceeding quantity of Tares
amongst the Wheat, mo^e then had ever been observed in the years foregoing. And
hereunto as other good Authors do agree, so is it further verified and
confirmed by those who are habituated and experienced in the Arts of Husbandry.

Which being so, considering that the Wheat, the good seed it self degenerates
sometimes into Tares, there is no question to be made but that the Tares by
care and husbandry may be restored in time to their first perfection, and prove
Wheat again. The Fathers do resolve it so, especially as they behold it in the
Moral, and look on the condition of such mortal men as in the Tares are
represented. For if by Tares we mean the Heretic, Fieri potest ut ille qui
noxio dogmate depravatus est, cras resipiscat, and defendere incipiat
veritatem: It Is not impossible, says St. Hierome, but that the man who is
infected with unsound opinions, may repent thereof, and prove a zealous
Champion of the Truth and Gospel. Witness St. Austin, once a Manichee, but
after malleus Haereticorum, the greatest Champion of the Church against Sects
and Heresies. If by the Tares we mean the wicked, who makes no conscience of
his ways, Quaest. Evan. l. 3. c. 12.
so he may enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, multi primo zizania sunt,
and postea triticum fiunt, many at first are Tares which at last prove Wheat,
as St. Austin tells us. Witness St. Paul, a persecutor first, and a Martyr
afterward. St. Matthew first a Publican, an Evangelist after. Zachaeus an
oppressor of the poor, but in fine a Confessor; and Mary Magdalen, of an Harlot
made a famous Convert. Or finally, if by the Tares we mean the Schismatic, who
out of pride and arrogance does divide himself from the main body of the
Church; Tertul*
Prodeant ipsae picturae calicum, as Tertullian has it: The very Chalices of
the Church, in which they used to carve the figure of a Shepherd bringing home
the straggling sheep upon his shoulders, is Argument enough that possibly the
Separatist may be gained upon, and reunited to the Church. Witness - And yet to
say the truth, examples of this kind are more hard to find, then either of
converted sinners, or reclaimed Heretics, by how much the perverseness of the
will is more hard to cure then any error of our judgments, or the obliquities
and defects of our conversation.

This being premised, Stapl^ton.
we may more fully see the reason of the Masters Negative; for had the Servants
gone the way which themselves propounded, they had wronged the Harvest. How so?
in rooting up the Wheat: Gorran.
what Wheat? futurum triticum, that which in fine would have proved Wheat, as
one Author has it, quod pia praesumptione, which we may charitably presume
would prove Wheat in time; quod fieri potest triticum, which by the diligence
and care of the spiritual Husbandman, may be made Wheat at last, though it now
be none, as some others tell us. The Fathers generally do incline this way:
Monemur non cito amputare fratrem; By this we are advised, says Hierome, not
to be too hasty with our Brethren, nor to cut them off without great care and
expectation; for he that is to day infected with un^ound opinions, may prove
another man to morrow. Many at first are tares, as St. Austin notes, but
afterward become good wheat; whose reformation and amendment had not God
patiently expected when man intended to destroy them, Question. Evangel.
ad laudabilem mutationem non pervenissent, they never had attained to such a
blessed change. Chrysol. Ser. 97.
Had not Gods patience, says Chrysologus, preserved the tares from
extirpation, from being rooted up on the first discovery, nec Matthaeum de
Publicano Evangelistam, Matthew the Publican had not lived to be an Evangelist,
nor Saul the persecutor to be an Apostle. And certainly, had not God seen more
into this last then Ananias did, who was sent unto him, no notice had been
taken of the service which he was to do unto the Church for the time to come,
but of the spoil and havoc he had made thereof for the time preceding; and
then the Church had lost the benefit of his pains and preaching, the notable
Examples which he left behind him of his zeal and constancy. And therefore very
well says a modern Author, Stapleton in Prompt.
Si Deus eradicasset Paulum persequentem ecclesia non haberet Saulum
praedicantem: If God had rooted up Saul the Persecutor, the Church had wanted
Paul the Preacher. Ne forte is most useful here; There Is no such have of imus
and colligimus, but that we may defer it till a further time.

Here then we see the patience of Almighty God toward sinful men; and here we
see the reasons of it: God bears with men in expectation of their conversion
and amendment; there being none so desperately engaged in a course of sin, but
by Gods grace he may draw back and turn again, and seriously repent him of his
former wickedness. Datur ergo locus poenitentiae, Hierom.
says an ancient Father, there is always place left for repentance: And God
has promised for his part, that when the wicked man turns away from the
wickedness which he has committed, and does that which is lawful and right,
Ezekiel. 28. 27.
he shall save his soul alive. It Is to this end, and on this expectation, that
God shows such a strong and unwearied patience toward sinful man,
notwithstanding all his provocations. Patientia Dei ad poenitentiam invitat
malos, as the Father has it; God does as well invite them to repentance by his
love and patience, as scourge them to it by his punishments. And this St. Paul
does also witness, where he tells us, saying, that God endured with much
long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. Romans 9. v. 22.
Endure them, why? To the intent that being purged from all their evil ways,
2 Timothy 2. 21.
they may be made vessels of mercy, sanctified and meet for the Masters use,
and prepared for every good work, as in that to Timothy. St. Austin by
comparing both the Texts together does expound it so; Inde dicitur Deus
tolerare vasa irae formaliter talia, ut ^iant vasa misericordiae. The showing
of his wrath, and making of his power to be known upon them, which the Apostle
speaks of in the former place, is but at such times, and in such cases, when
neither his promises can woo them, nor his threats reclaim them, nor his
patience win so far upon them, but that they will run headlong on their own
destruction.

This patience of Almighty God must be our instruction, and teach us not to be
too forward in the condemning of our Brethren. Romans 2. v. 4.
Shall God be rich in goodness, full of forbearance and long-suffering toward
sinful man, in expectation of his repentance and amendment; and shall not men,
being all alike obnoxious to the wrath of God, conceive some hopes of one
another? Does God forbear to strike us with the Sword of Justice, and cut us
off even in the middle of our sins; and shall we wrest the Sword out of his
hands, to execute judgment on our selves? Does he expect the reformation and
conversion of the sinner, till the eleventh hour of the day; and will not we
tarry for him till the sixth or ninth? Is God so patient toward the tares, as
to expect whether they will prove wheat, or not, to lay ne forte as a bar in
the way of those who came prepared to go and gather them up without more delay;
and are we men so inconsiderate of their case, and our own condition, as to be
all for imus and colligimus, for ne fort^ nothing? May we not say in this case
with the great Apostle, Romans 2. v. 1, 2.
inexcusabilis es O homo, Thou art inexcusable O man whosoever thou art that
judge another, thou condemnest thy self? or if thou will be judging, take
this rule along which the Apostle gives thee in another place, Nolite judicare
ante tempus, Judge nothing before the time, till the Lord comes, etc. 1 Cor.
4. 4. Assuredly it argues little Christianity, but far less charity, to
condemn them to death whom God means to save; to go about to cut them off, and
bring them unto execution, whom God is purposed to reprieve to a further
trial; to cast them out of the house as Vessels of wrath, who in due time,
though not so soon as thou expectest, may be vessels of mercy. Therefore take
heed of imus and colligimus; be not too hasty and precipitate in acting thine
own Counsels, or in pursuit of those designs which thou have in hand toward
the reformation of the Church of God, the extirpation of those tares which thou
have an eye on, and by the which thou think Gods Field to be so endangered;
but let ne forte hold the reins, and make thee look with care and
circumspection on the work before thee. At least refer it all to Vis, to the
Masters pleasure, and then proceed according unto his directions. So doing,
thou shall more promote thy Masters business, then by following the devices and
desires of thine own heart; for so doing thou shall be entertained in the Court
of Heaven with Euge bone serve, Well done thou good and faithful Servant, enter
into thy Masters joy. Which Christian care and moderation God of his goodness
grant us all, that we may all be made partakers of the like reception in Gods
glorious Kingdom. Amen.

SERMON III.
At CHRIST-CHURCH Jan. 5th. 1644.
MATTHEW. 13. v. 30. Sinite utraque simul crescere usque ad messem.

Let both grow together till the Harvest.


QUantum inter opera divina and humana interest, Institut. div: l. 7. c. 4.
tantum necesse est distare inter Dei hominisque sapientiam: It was the
observation of Lactantius an ancient Writer, That look how great the difference
was between the visible works of Almighty God, and the poor undertakings of us
mortal men, so great or greater was the difference between his Heavenly Wisdom
and our deepest Counsels. Which rule if it be true, as no doubt it is, how
infinitely short must we needs conceive that Solomon's wisdom, though the
wisest of the Sons of Adam; or Moses knowledge, though well trained in all
the learning of the Egyptians; or the Prophetic spirits of Isaiah, Daniel, and
the rest of the ancient Seers, was of the wisdom, knowledge, foresight of
Almighty God? For alas, what proportion hold the Worlds seven Wonders, so
celebrated in the Writings of the elder days, or any of the most heroical
achievements of the greatest Potentates, with the Creation of the World, nay,
with the composition of the meanest creature, in which there is not any thing
but what may breed both wonder and astonishment in the mightiest Monarch? The
wisdom of the wise is it not foolishness with God? 1 Cor. 1. 20.
says the great Apostle. Does not the same Apostle tell us, that our knowledge
is imperfect and our foresight blind; seeing no more then in Aenigmate, 1
Cor. 13. 12.
through a dark Glass, or a broken Perspective? We know, says he, in part,
and in part we prophecy. 1 Cor. 13. 9.
And if in part only, then is neither perfect.

A clearer instance of this truth we can hardly find, then in the process of
this Parable, comparing the advice of the Houshold-servants with the decree and
final resolution of their heavenly Master. The servants thought there was no
safer way to secure the Harvest, then an eradication of those dangerous tares
which had been sown during their negligence and security by the crafty enemy.
To this end they made offer of their help and service, vis imus and colligimus
ea? Will thou that we go and gather them up? v. 28. and they expected thanks at
least for the proposition, if not an approbation of their course and Counsel.
But contrary, their Master seeing further then the servants could, and being
apprehensive of the dangers which might follow on it, had their advice been
entertained, first countermands their offer with an absolute Negative, v. 29.
Et ait Non, but he said Nay, he did not like of their intention: the gathering
of the tares in the way proposed would have procured more mischief to the Field
of God, then the tares themselves did seem to threaten. And more then so, he
lets them see, (which all the wisdom of the world would have never thought of)
that the best way to save the Harvest, and preserve the Wheat, was to permit
the tares and wheat to grow up together till they were ready for the Reapers;
and then to gather them and dispose them in their proper places, according to
the will and pleasure of the Lord their God. This the coherence of the Text
with the former passages, this the Text it self, Sinite utraque, etc.

In these words we have these two general parts to be considered; the
sufferance of Almighty God, and the season of it: 2ly. the condition of the
Church, and the causes of it: the sufferance of Almighty God toward sinful
man, in the first word Sinite, suffer them both to grow together; the season of
it in the last, usque ad messem, till the Harvest. The condition of the Church
represented to us in the intermixture of the Wheat and Tares, both which are
here permitted simul crescere, to grow up together till the Harvest: the causes
of this intermixture not expressed in terminis, but to be found, if sought for,
without much ado. In the first general we shall examine these three points;
1. What is meant by messis, the approaching Harvest, and the use thereof. 2.
What induces the Heavenly Husbandman to give so long a sinite to the Tares,
when means and opportunity was offered for their extirpation. And 3. Whether
the sinite of the Text delivered in the Imperative mood, be so strong and
binding, that in no case the tares are to be rooted out till the Harvest come.
In the next general we shall show you, 1. That the Church here militant is of
such condition, that good and bad, the Orthodox Professor and the Heretic, are
so intermingled, that there is no perfection to be looked for here: and 2. That
there want not great and weighty reasons why it should so be; of which some
relate unto the Tares, some unto the Wheat, some to God himself, whose glory is
most chiefly aimed at. These are the points to be considered: and of these I
shall discourse in order, beginning with Gods sufferance, and the season of it,
and therein with the first enquiry, What is here meant by messis, the
approaching Harvest; and what use we may make thereof for our own advantage.

Prius dividendum quam definiendum; Tull.
It was the Orators Rule of old, First to distinguish of the terms, before we
take upon us to state the question. A Rule exceeding necessary in the present
business, and much conducing to the Explication of the points in hand. For the
word messis is (...), a word of various significations, according to the scope
of the several places where it does occur. And first, not taking notice of it
in the literal sense in the 9th Chapter of St. Matthew, v. 7.
it signifies the times and seasons fit for the preaching of the Gospel. There
read we messem esse multam, that the Harvest was great, i. e. that there were
many people whose minds were cheerfully prepared to receive the word. And
there is another Harvest which the Baptist speaks of, Matthew. 3.
the bringing forth of fruits meet for repentance, fruits worthy of the
Preachers pains, and the hearers diligence; the (...), the Harvest of good
works which we find in Chrysostom. In locum.
But we have other Corn to thresh, and therefore must look out for another
Harvest; an Harvest not of hearing, nor of fructifying, but of receiving the
reward of our several labors; an Harvest in the which each workman shall
receive his wages, according to the works which he has wrought in the flesh,
whether good or evil. And this again is either taken for the day of Gods
temporal judgments upon particular Men, or Sects, or Collective bodies; or
for the day of general judgment, when all flesh shall appear before the Lord
to receive its sentence. In this last sense the word is taken in the 14 of the
Revelation, where the Angel said to him that sat upon the Throne, mitte falcem
and mete, Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time is come, v. 14.
and the Harvest of the Earth is ripe, i. e. all Nations were now ready to
receive that judgment which God in his just anger should pronounce against
them. And in the other sense it is said by the Prophet Jeremy, c. 51. v. 30.
The Daughter of Babylon is a threshing-floore, the time of her threshing is
come, yet a little while and the time of her Harvest will come. Tempus
messionis ejus veniet; and what time was that? even that wherein she had made
up the measure of her iniquities and abominations, and was to be given up for a
prey to the Medes and Persians.

I know that most Interpreters, as well old as new, do take the Harvest in my
Text for the general judgment, that which our Savior does describe in the
25. of this Gospel: And they expound it thus for this reason chiefly, because
our Savior gives this descant on his own plain song, v. 39. Messis est
consummatio seculi, the Harvest is the end of the World. A man would think the
sense must be very obvious, even to the vulgar wits, when he that writ the Text
made the comment also. But then a question may be made what our Redeemer means
by consummatio seculi, or the end of the World, or the (...), as the Greek Text
has it. Assuredly not always the last day precisely, but the last times
generally, or the particular time appointed by Almighty God for the effecting
of some special and particular purpose. For in the 9 Chapter to the Hebrews
the same words occur, where the Apostle treating of the passion of our Lord and
Savior, says it was done (...), in consummatione seculi, in the end of the
World. Beza in Heb. 9.
Ask Beza what is meant there by the end of the World, by the (...), and he
will tell you that it is the same which the Apostle calls in another place
plenitudinem temporis, or the fullness of time, i. e. says he, and so both
Caietan and Ribera do expound the Text, Seculorum perfectionem and
complementum, the full perfection and accomplishment of some time appointed.

So then upon this disquisition we have gained thus much, that though the
Harvest in my Text be for the most part understood of the general judgment, of
which hereafter in the next; yet may it also mean the time of Gods temporal
punishments upon particular men, or Sects, or Collective bodies: Whom though
God suffers for a while till their sins be ripe, and lets them flourish and
grow mighty both in power and wickedness, yet have they all their several
Harvests, in which they shall be mowed, and threshed, and winnowed, to his
greater glory. The sickle of the Lord is always ready, Matthew. 3.
and his van always in his hand. And when his Harvest-time is come, and the
fruits of wicked men be ripe, he shall not only mow them down, Esaias 17. 5.
as when the Harvest-man gathers the corn, and reapeth down the ears with
his arm, in the Prophets language; but he will thoroughly purge his floor, and
make them like the chafe, Psalm. 2.
in the Psalmists words, which the wind drives away before it. But for the just
and righteous person, he either shall be saved from the day of trouble, or
preserved in it: Or if he fall, as fall he may sometimes into the hand of the
Reapers, like a good ear of corn well grown, or Grapes fully ripe, he shall be
congregatus in horreum, gathered into the barn of the heavenly Husbandman. In
execution of which acts of his will and justice he many times makes use of
Angels, literally and properly so called, which are the Reapers of this verse
and the 39, and many times of other Ministers who do supply the place of
Angels, and may be called so in a borrowed, metaphorical sense; as Attila the
Hun, the scourge of the impenitent Western Christians, was in the Stories of
those times called Flagellum Dei.

That there have been such Harvests in former times, and that such Harvests are
in the compass of our Saviors meaning, the Stories of Gods Book, and all the
Monuments of the Church do most clearly evidence. And to say truth, did not the
Text admit such Harvests, all the seditious aggregations of unquiet men; all
the Idolatries of Rome Heathen, and superstitions of Rome Christian; the Pride
of Babylon, and the filths of Sodom, with all the rabblement of pernicious
Heretics, and factious Sectaries, which have disturbed the Church in foregoing
Ages, must be still extant and unpunished to this very day. But they have had
their several Harvests, and the Lord has reaped them, reserving them with the
Apostate Angels, 2 Pet. 2. v. 4*
in eternal chains, to the judgment of the great and terrible day. And though
this be a truth so clear that it needs no proofs, yet we will instance in some
few, the better to set forth the necessary truth of this, together with the
longanimity and justice of Almighty God. In the old World, the sins of men
were very great, Genesis 6. v. 2, 5.
all the imaginations of their hearts corrupt and evil, so that the very
Sons of God were tempted to go in to the Daughters of men; and yet God spared
them a long time, and added 120 years unto the days of their repentance. But
when their sins were grown so ripe that God repented him at last of Man's
creation, he brought the flood upon them, and destroyed them all; but saved
righteous Noah, and his Household with him. The Citizens of Sodom had long
swelled in pride, Genesis 7.
and surfeited on fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness, as the Prophet
tells us; Ezekiel. 16.
and yet God suffered them to live, and fulfill their lusts. But when the voice
of their sins became so loud, as to cry unto the Heavens for vengeance, and to
occasion God himself to come down and see majorne infamia vero, Ovid.
whether their sins were answerable to the cry which was come unto him, Genesis
18. 21.
then were they ready for the sickle, 'twas high Harvest then; and the Lord
sent his Angels to consume their City, Genesis 19.
and rained down fire from Heaven upon them; but delivered Lot and his small
Family, like a firebrand snatched out of the flames.

Pass we on forwards into Egypt, and we shall find how patiently the Lord
expected that the proud Egyptians would at the last dismiss his people with
peace and safety; Exodus 14.
but when that did no good upon them, when they had added tyranny unto
oppression, and unto both a proud contempt of his Word and Messengers, he
brought his people out with a mighty hand; the Angel of the Lord going before
the Camp of Israel, but overwhelming Pharaoh and his Host in a second deluge.
And if God did not presently invest his people in the possession of the Land so
often promised, it was not only for their disobedience, or their unbelief, nor
for their murmuring against God, and groundless exclamations against Moses and
Aaron; though these did all concur to retard their entrance: The Scriptures
give another reason, and questionless the true reason of that long suspension;
Genesis 15. 16.
nondum completa est iniquitas Amorrhaeorum, the wickedness of the Amorites was
not yet full, 'twas not Harvest yet, and therefore God had not given order to
the Land to spew out her Inhabitants. Thus do we read in holy Scripture of the
Harvest of Babylon, Esaias 17. 5. and 51. 33.
and of the Harvest of Damascus, i. e. of those appointed times, in which for
their Idolatries and abominations they were to be delivered over to the hands
of their several enemies. And for those very Jews themselves, though God
spared them long, notwithstanding all their provocations, and only visited them
sometimes with War or thraldom, yet he stayed not there; for when they had
made up the measure of their Fathers sins, and added to the same the blood of
the Son of God, more precious then the blood of Abel and of all the Prophets,
then did the Lord destroy their City, and disperse their people, making them
that they were no longer to be called a Nation, but a poor scattered remnant of
what once they were. But for the persecuted Saints of Christ which lived
amongst them, Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 5.
the Lord withdrew them from that plague, warning them (...), by a Dream or
Oracle, to remove thence to Pella, a small Town of Syria, before the first
approach of the Roman Armies.

Thus was it also with the Church since the time of the Gospel; The Princes of
the Earth sometimes raged against it, and harried it with fire and sword, and
all kind of torments: And though the souls of them which were slain for the
word of the Lord had cried unto their God for vengeance, Apoc. ^. 9, 10, 11.
yet was it said to them from above, ut requiescerent adhuc modicum tempus,
that they should rest yet for a season, and tarry till their Brethrens blood
was cast into the balance also to make up the weight. Which time being come,
the Lord did plague the persecutors with such grievous plagues, that in the
anguish of their souls, and guilt of conscience, they cried unto the Rocks to
fall upon them, and on the hills to hide them. Never Dog barked against the
Cross but he grew mad after it, Fox in the Acts and Mon.
says the Author of the Book of Martyrs. So for those vile and wretched
miscreants which did afflict the Church of Christ with Schisms and Heresies,
they did exalt their horns a while, and bare all before them; Vincent. Lerinens.
the Arians especially being so predominant, ut jam non portiunculam quandam,
that they thought scorn to be confined to one Church or Nation, but like a
general scab or Leprosy, had invaded almost all the parts of the body
mystical: yet when their pride was greatest, and their power most formidable;
when their impieties and blasphemies were so strongly backed, that these few
Orthodox Professors which were left untainted did tremble at the apprehension
of the present danger, God then conceived them fit for vengeance, and put in
his sickle, the time being come for him to reap, and the Harvest ready; so that
of all those Sects and Heresies which did afflict the Church in her purest
Ages, there is scarce any thing remaining but the name and infamy. And though
the Christians of those times being delivered from the fear of their deadly
enemies, had surfeited on peace and prohibited pleasures, yet God reprieved
them a long time from the hand of punishment; but when their sins were grown so
public, and so full of scandal, ut pateretur lex Christiana maledictum,
Calvin.
that even the Gospel grew to be ill reported of by the Jew and Gentile, then
poured he out the Nations of the North upon them, who sacked their Cities, and
laid waste their Palaces, and in conclusion dispossessed them of their
Countries also.

Now by this Standard we may take the measure both of Gods patience and his
justice, in all parallel Cases: If we see Sects and Heresies rise up to disturb
the Church, and not to rise up only, but grow strong and prevalent, and in a
way like Pharaohs seven lean Kine to devour the fat; if we see wickedness grow
successful, and rebellion prosperous, and the best men become a prey to the
cruel spoylers, we must not think that God is all this while asleep, and
regards it not; Psalm. 122.
not so, the Lord that keeps Israel neither sleeps nor slumbereth. But when
the sins of men be ripe, and the time of wrath is come that they should be
judged, the God that dwells in the Heavens shall scourge them with a whip of
Scorpions, and break them into pieces like a Potters vessel. Psalm. 2.
And though some of them have the hap, or the seeming happiness, to go down
into the grave in peace, yet God will find them at the last, and meet with
these sour grapes in his general vintage, and tread them in the wine press of
his indignation. And to say truth, there are as great and weighty reasons why
some men's punishments should follow after them, as that the rest should have a
trial and essay of their future miseries by those which they endure in this
present life; for, as St. Austin well observes, should all men's sins be
punished in this present life, nihil ultimo judicio reservari putaretur, De
Civit. D^i l. 1. c. 8.
it would occasion some to think that there were no necessity nor use of the
general judgment: as on the other side, if none, nulla esse divina
providentia crederetur, others would be too apt to think that there were no
God; or at least rob him of his Providence, and say with him in David's Psalms,
Tush, God does not see it. If therefore God permit the Tares to grow up
together with the Wheat, it is to show his patience and longanimity in
expectation of their conversion and amendment; but that he brings them to the
Harvest, and moweth them down at last, is to show his justice. And doubt we
not, but that the Lord in his just judgment will destroy those Tares which at
this present threaten ruin to his blessed Field, when they once be ripe, and
that we are sufficiently awakened out of that dull security which had seized
upon us; God dealing still with wicked and seditious men, as heretofore with
Haman, Abs^lom, Achitophel, and such other instruments; when they have served
his turn then he hangs them up.

But I must tell you this withal, that if we do exexpect an Harvest of Gods
temporal judgments upon the heads of those that lay wast his Church; we must
first put away those customary unrepented sins, which have drawn them down upon
our selves. Horat. de Art Poet.
Si vis me flere dolendum est primum ipsi tibi. If we desire that God be
pitiful to us, in freeing us from those which do play the Tyrants over our
bodies and estates, we must be pitiful to our selves, in laboring to free our
souls from a greater tyranny, that of sin and Satan. We must first repent us of
the punishment that is due unto them. But I see little hopes of so great a
change; or indeed any hopes at all, either great or little, except it be unto
the worse, in the corrupting of those means which should work our peace. For
tell me I beseech you, is not our fasting grown so formal, and our humiliation
mixed with so much hypocrisy, that we are sicker of repentance then before of
sin? Is not our common talk so overgrown with oaths and prodigious cursings, as
if we meant to bid defiance to the Host of Heaven? and our devotions in Gods
House so cold and careless, as if we thought as poorly of the Lord himself, as
of the Preacher, or the Prayers? And can we look for blessings from the hands
of God, when we send curses to his ears? or that the Lord should work a double
miracle upon us, whether we will or not; one in removing from us a deserved
punishment, the other in forgiving unrepented sins? Assuredly, unless we make
our peace with God, and wrest deliverance from him by our prayers and
penitence, the Lord in his just anger will afflict us further, and give us over
for a prey unto those that hate us. God is not bound to bring upon the wicked
and seditious person, the Heretic and Schismatical man, the Harvest of his
temporal judgments, though sometimes he do it: sometimes he lets them pass
till the general Harvest, and calls them not unto account until he bring them
at the last to the final reckoning. But whether it be first or last, it
pleases him to give the Tares a longer Sinite then his servants did desire he
should, and suffered them to grow in his holy Field, when means and
opportunity was offered for their extirpation. What might incline him
thereunto, and how far we are bound by this present Sinite, are the next
enquiries.

Experta morbi molestia evidentior fit jucunditas sanitatis. De Civit. Dei, l.
14. c. 17.
No man can judge so well of health, as they that have been long afflicted with
a wounded body, or visited with some grievous sickness: nor set so high a price
on the light of Heaven, as he who has been lodged in a doleful Dungeon. Now
that which darkness is in the Air or Firmament, and wounds and sickness in the
body, the same are errors and corruptions in life and Doctrine, (or scandala,
and qui faciunt iniquitatem, as our Savior tells us of these tares, v. 38.) in
the Church of Christ: darkness best sets off light, wounds and sickness health;
and so does error truth, and corruption purity. God therefore does sometimes
permit the ungodly man to have his habitation with the just and righteous, that
so the justice of the righteous might be made more eminent: of which we shall
say more anon in the Simul crescere. And sometimes he permits his People to
walk in darkness, and wander in the crooked lanes of deceit and error, that
when they come into the light, and to the saving ways of truth, they may
embrace the same with the greater fervor: were it not for this reason, and in
this respect, it is not probable that God who is the God of truth, and the
Father of lights, would suffer any Heresy, or erroneous Tenet to be sown or
rooted in his field; but either would discover them on the first appearing, or
cause them to be rooted up on the first discovery; at least he would have
harkened to the Proposition, to the vis imus and colligimus of the former
verse, were it not that the light of truth would appear more brightly, after it
had been long eclipsed with the Clouds of error; Tacit. Annal. l. 1.
Et sic deterrima comparatione gloriam sibi compararet. For contraries when
they are looked upon together, do appear most visibly.

Besides, Oportet esse haereses, there is a farther use of Heresies, 1 Cor. 11.
19.
which brings them in with an Oportet, as we read of in the 18. of St. Matthew,
necesse est ut veniant scandala. v. 7.
Scandala says St. Matthew, haereses says S. Paul; but in both Texts the
same, says the Learned Scholiast; and both attended or brought in by the same
necesse. G^otius in Matthew. 13.
Not a necessity simpliciter dicta, an absolute necessity that so it must be,
as if truth could not stand without them; but an Oportet, a necessity secundum
quid, it being expedient that so it should be, because truth stands the better
by them. How many excellent tractates, grave discourses, learned and pious
writings had these Ages wanted, had not the Primitive Church been exercised
with so many Heresies? In what an ignorance had we lived in matters which
concern the glorious Trinity, the powers of Grace, the influences of the holy
Spirit; had not the Arians and Pelagians startled those opinions which put the
Church to a necessity of setting learned men on work to confute and crush them?
And doubt we not but that Posterity will fare the better for those monstrous
Paradoxes in Divinity which have been vented since the meeting of this new
Assembly, and penetrate more thoroughly into some deep questions which now
disturb the peace both of Church and State, then any of the former Ages.
Firmior multo fides est quam reponit poenitentia. August.
Faith, says the Father, stands more firmly when it is built upon repentance;
as doubtless Peter's faith was most strongly settled, after he had denied his
Master. And it is no otherwise with truth then it is with says, best settled,
and confirmed and planted, when struggling long with error or heretical
Doctrines, it has got the victory. God, as before I said, is the God of truth,
and they that wilfully oppose the least truth of Gods, are Rebels against God,
and against his truth. And 'twas known to be an experiment in the School of
Politics, Tacit. Annal.
conatus subditorum irritos imperium semper promovere, that the rebellion of a
people when it is suppressed, does make a Prince more strong and absolute then he
was before.

But the Oportet goes yet further; it reaches not to the truth alone, but to
all those who do defend it. There must be heresies, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
says St. Paul, ut qui probati sint, that those who are approved amongst you
may be known and manifested. St. Austin tells us of two sorts of enemies which
do afflict the Church of Christ: August.
whereof the one is blind with error, and the other with malice. And then he
adds, That if these enemies have leave to afflict it corporally with any kind
of persecution, exercent ejus patientiam, they give the Church occasion to show
forth her patience; but if they do assault the same with Sects and Heresies, or
male sentiendo, with their false opinions, exercent ejus sapientiam, they give
her opportunity to declare her wisdom. There were no need of Champions to
defend the truth, should there be none that did oppose it: nor could we know by
any means who would take part with Christ, and who sight against him, were it
not brought unto the trial. Hectora quis nosset felix si Troja fuisset? Hector
had never been so famed for his feats of Arms, had not Troy been beleaguered by
the powers of Greece: Nor had the valor and fidelity of Joab, the wisdom and
fidelity of Cushai, 2 Samuel c. 17, 18.
the bounty and fidelity of Barzillai, the piety and fidelity of the Priests
and Levites; no not so much as Shimeis slanderous tongue, or the inconstant
mutability of the vulgar herd been manifested and made known to David, had not
Achitophel contrived, Absalom actually raised, a War against him. What had we
known of Athanasius, had not the Arian faction joined themselves together in a
League against him, and spent their whole united forces on his single person?
Lucan. Phars.
Parque novum fortuna videt concurrere bellum, Atque virum. As if that holy
Patriarch had been born unto Ishmaels destiny, to have his hand against every
man, and every man's hand against him. How little had been left unto us of
Irenaeus, Basil, Hierome, Austin, and all the brave Heroes of the Primitive
times, had not the Gnostics, Valentinians, Arians, Donatists, afforded them
occasion to express their piety, and manifest their zeal to the cause of
Christ? And to come nearer to our selves; where had been all the glories of
renowned Jewel, or of incomparable Whitgift, had not this Church been crucified
from the first beginning, between the Popish superstitions and the Puritan
frenzies? All men are apt enough to profess the Gospel in a time of peace, and
to declare themselves for truth, when there are no heresies: therefore Oportet
esse haereses, that so it may be known more clearly, as Tertullian notes it,
tam qui in persecutionibus steterint quam qui ad haereses non exorbitaverint,
De praescript. advers. haeres.
as well who dare stand bravely out against persecutions, as who dare bid
defiance unto Sects and Heresies.

So then there are some notable reasons for the present Sinite, and suffering
of the Tares and Wheat to grow up together till the Harvest, besides the
dangers mentioned in the former verse. But then a question will be made,
whether the Sinite in this place be so strong and binding, that in no case the
Tares are to be rooted up till the Harvest come. Where first we take it for a
truth unquestionable, which we find in Chrysostom, in Matthew. 13.
(...), etc. It is not here forbidden, says that learned Father, either to
curb the Heretic, or silence him, or suppress his insolences, or to prohibit
their Assemblies, or disperse their Conventicles. God has not so disarmed his
Church, as to lay it open to the assaults and violence of malicious enemies,
and left her with no other weapons then defensive only. In the spiritual
Armorie which St. Paul describes, Ephesians. 6.
there is as well the sword of the spirit, as the shield of faith; and truth
appointed for a Girdle, as well as righteousness for a Breast plate. Gods Church
is furnished with a power to convince gainsayers, as well as to exhort, or
rebuke the sinner; and may employ the pen, though not toss the Pike. Else not
the Heretic, but the true Professor would be put to silence, and God should
send out men to fight, and yet bind their hands. And more then so, the Lord
has given his Church Authority to deal with obstinate Heretics, and with
perverse Schismatics, as St. Paul did with Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.
v. 19, 20.
who having made shipwreck of the faith, were by him cut off from the society
of the faithful. For though some men of eminency in point of learning, out of
their love to that libertas Prophetandi now so much in fashion, would have the
Church be very wary in exercising this authority; Grotius in Matthew. 13.
yet they profess they have no purpose utterly to deprive her of that power and
privilege, segregandi eos a suis coetibus qui doctrinam adulterant, of
excommunicating those who corrupt her Doctrines.

What then is that which is denied the Church in the present Sinite? Assuredly
not to restrain the Heretic, or confute the Heresy, (...), but to kill and
slay them. Chrysostom. in Mat. 13.
The Servants, as we told you formerly, were much scandalized to see Gods Field
endangered by those wretched Tares: errors in Doctrine, and corruptions in
point of manners being grown so prevalent, that there was little hope to
preserve the Church, but by a sudden extirpation of them, of what sort soever:
and thereupon they purposed as before I told you, to go against them with the
Sword, to raise an holy War, and destroy them utterly. Which how unfit a way
it was, either to plant the Gospel, or reform Religion, I then told you also:
War being a Tragedy of such a nature, as commonly destroys the Stage
whereupon it is acted; and no such Weapon as the Sword, (except it be the sword
of the Spirit) committed to the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, which are
the Servants aimed at in our Saviors Parable. It is the Civil Magistrate, and
it is he alone which has jus gladii materialis, as our Lawyers call it, the
power of the material Sword, and the right to use it. And if he use it not as
occasion serves, Bract^on.
in cutting off notorious Malefactors, and punishing seditious or rebellious
persons, frustra gladium gerit, he bears the Sword in vain, Romans 13.
as the Scriptures tell us. But how far he may use the same in cutting off
the obstinate Heretic, and the perverse Schismatic, after the Church has
done her part, and that Certificate be returned of her whole proceedings, is a
point worthy of a further and more punctual search. At this we only touched
before, referring the full disquisition of it to the present Sinite, as a place
more proper for that purpose.

And first perhaps it will be thought but an easy Controversy, and of no
great difficulty to determine, in which the disagreeing parties are so well
agreed. The practice of the Church of Rome makes it clear enough what they do
hold in point of Doctrine; although they have not yet improved it (for ought I
can tell) into an Article of the faith, as many of their School-points were in
the Tridentine Council. Bellarmine gives it for a Maxim, or a ruled case
rather in the Divinity of that Church, De Laicis l. 3. c. 21.
Posse haereticos ab Ecclesia damnatos temporalibus poenis and etiam morte
mulctari, that Heretics condemned at the Churches bar are to be executed on
the Scaffold of the Civil Magistrate. And this he labors to make good, as
his Custom is, both by Authority of Scripture, and consent of Fathers, though
he bring some sorry proof from either. Our Savior tells us of false Prophets,
that they should come in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly were ravenous Wolves;
and that whoever comes not into the fold by the ordinary door, but climbs in
at the Window, is a Thief and a Robber. At Lupi rapaces optimo jure occiduntur;
But Wolves, says he, are justly killed, and it is well known what punishment
belongs to Thieves; and thereupon concludes without more ado, that Heretics
are to be punished like Wolves and Robbers. Would any man believe that so great
a Clerk could be so seriously foolish in a matter of such main concernment as
the life of his poor Christian Brother; or that he meant good earnest when he
urged those Texts? Might not a man conclude with as good a Conscience (I am
sure he may with as much equity and Logic as the Cardinal does) that Christ
our Savior ought to be crucified again at his second coming, because he tells
us of that coming, that it will be Sicut fur in nocte, like a Thief in the
night? and we well know what punishment belongs to Burglarers: or, that
profane and wicked persons are to be cherished in their riotous and licentious
courses, because the Scripture likeneth them to a dog which returns to the
vomit? 2 Pet. 2. 22
and yet such dogs are often times cherished by their Masters. The Cardinal had
never set so light a price on the life of his Brother, had he considered at how
great a price it was bought by Christ.

So also for the Protestant Doctors, though at the first they did unanimously
detest both the opinion and the practice of the Church of Rome in this
particular, (and certainly they had good reason so to do, as the case then
stood) yet they soon altered their opinion; for after that Servetus had been
burnt at Geneva by the instigation of Calvin, and Valentine Gentilis executed
at Brasil by the Command of the Switzers, the Allobrogian party set their wits
on work to defend the action, and after drew in many others of the Protestant
Churches to concur with them in that point. Calvin first sets it down in thesi,
haereticos jure gladii coercendos, that Heretics were to be restrained by the
Sword of the temporal Magistrate; which though it was in generals only, yet
did he make it serve the turn for the present shift. But Beza, building a large
Tract upon his foundation, entitled, De haereticis a Magistratu puniendis,
sets up this Position, almost the same in terms with that of Bellarmine, viz.
haereticos interdum capitali etiam supplicio a magistratu coercendos, that
Heretics sometimes are to be punished by death. For which, though he produce
no evidence from the Evangelists or Apostles, which are the best Judges in this
case, but that of Ananias and his Wife Saphira, Acts 5.
both whom St. Peter most miraculously condemned and executed by a word of his
mouth; yet he confesses of this instance, non posse in exemplum trahi, that it
is not to be drawn into example. Bez. ibid.
And if not to be drawn into example, as he says it is not, then certainly no
such proof to confirm the point as he thinks it is: yet that we might not think
him singular, or to stand alone, he brings in Bullinger, Melancthon, and
Wolfgangus Capito, as being of the same judgment with him; to whom Aretius
might be added, in his defense of the proceedings against Valentine Gentile,
and some others since: so incident it is to our humane frailty to square our
judgment by the rule of our private interests; and not so much to ponder what
we ought to do, as to find Pleas and Arguments to defend our doings.

But notwithstanding this agreement of the adverse parties, we may resolve upon
the question, as our Redeemer did in another case, quod ab initio non fuit sic,
it was not so from the beginning. The Primitive Fathers knew of no such means
for the confuting of an Heretic, or the suppressing of an Heresy, as the fire
and faggot. St. Chrysostomes judgment in the point you have heard already,
take St. Austins now; who tells us of himself, that he was once persuaded,
neminem ad unitatem Christi cogendum esse, August. in Ep. l. 48.
that no man was to be compelled by force and punishments to join himself unto
the Church. But afterward, upon experience of the peace and benefit which did
most commonly redound to the Church thereby, he so far altered his opinion,
as to allow of banishment, or fine and ransom, in case of obstinate
perverseness; but by no means of death in what case soever. And this the
Cardinal confesses, Bellarm. de Laic. l. 3. c. 21.
though against himself, ingeniously affirming of that holy Father, semper
excepero supplicium mortis, that always he excepted death as too sharp a
remedy, and inconsistent with the meekness of our Saviors Gospel. It Is true,
that Valentinian, Martian, and other of the following Emperors, when they
could find no other way to restrain their insolences, have added also poenam
sanguinis in their public Edicts: But this was only in terrorem. No execution
done upon them in a long time after, and then but by some Arian Kings of the
Goths and Vandalls, in the declining times of the Christian purity. Sulpit.
Sever. hist. sacr. l. 2.
Only the Tyrant Maximus, who usurped the Empire, though otherwise an Orthodox
Prince, caused the Arch-Heretick Priscillian, and some of his Associates to be
put to death, at the instigation of Ithacius, a Catholic Bishop, whom the
impieties of the man had extremely stirred. Concerning which Sulpitius Serverus
tells us, that though they were homines luce indignissimi, men most unworthy of
the light, yet they were pessimo exemplo necati, and that their execution was
of dangerous consequence to succeeding Ages. And as it seems, the French and
German Prelates did conceive so of it, by whom Ithacius was deprived of the
Communion, for no other reason, then that he had been a chief Actor in that
woeful Tragedy. Thus also when Alexius of Constantinople had caused Basilius and
others of the Bongomili to be burnt to ashes, Zonar.
(Heretics lewd enough of conscience, if their Opinions have been transmitted
to us by ingenious hands) the Eastern Prelates generally disallowed the fact.
But what need further search be made in this particular, when we have
confitentem reum? Annal. Eccl.
For even Baronius does acknowledge, though otherwise a professed Champion both
of the customs and corruptions of the Church of Rome, that anciently it was the
usage of the Christian Bishops, when they addressed themselves to the secular
powers in matters of this present nature, so to insist on the correction of the
Heretic, ut tamen a capitali supplicio inferendo dehortati sunt, that they
dissuaded them by all means imaginable not to shed their bloods. From which
sweet moderation of the Primitive Prelates, how miserably the Church has
deviated in these latter days, the public Martyrologies of both sides do
declare too evidently.

What then, may some men chance to say, shall Thieves and Murderers die the
death, which only rob us of our goods, or destroy our bodies, and shall the
Heretic which robs us of our precious faith, and damn both soul and body to
the pit of hell, either escape unpunished, or be punished only with some light
pecuniary mulct, or short imprisonment? Is there no case in which the desperate
Heretic may be rooted up, and such vile tares be liable to an extirpation? I
say not so. The Lord himself decreed in his holy Law, (and caused execution to
be done upon it) That whosoever did blaspheme the name of the Lord should be
stoned to death; Levit. 24. v. 16.
and that if a Prophet did arise which did entice the people after other Gods,
Deuteronomy. 13. v. 1. etc.
they should also slay him, without either pity or delay. The Jews, though
they transgressed in the second case, were always zealous in the first; and
howsoever they connived at some gross Idolatries, would not spare a blasphemy.
This made them when they sat in judgment on our Savior Christ, to balk all
other Accusations, and lay hold on this; interpreting some words of his, Matthew.
^6. v. 65, 66.
in which he called himself most truly the Son of God, for blasphemous
passages. And then the high Priest said (with great joy no question) what need
we any further witnesses? we have heard his blasphemy: and thereupon they all
concluded he is guilty of death. In which the ground was true and justifiable,
it was Gods own Rule; but the judgment wicked and erroneous, as being utterly
perverted in the Application. Now though these Laws were given particularly to
the Jews for their square and measure, by which they were to punish
malefactors of that odious nature; yet in the equity thereof they relate to us,
to whom the honor of Almighty God ought to be as precious as ever it was among
the Jews, and all blasphemers of his name to be held as execrable as in the
Commonwealth of Israel. If therefore there arise an Heretic which belcheth his
blasphemous follies against the Majesty of God, or any person of the holy
undivided Trinity; or seeks to draw the people after other Gods, or add the
Jewish Ceremonies, or the heathenish sacrifices to the pure worship of the
Lord, as did the Manichees of old, Nic. hor. hist. Eccl.
and Anatolius in the close of the sixth Centurie; let the Sword in Gods name
pass upon him. My eye shall neither pity him, nor my house conceal him. There
are some Heresies as well as sins, which if unretracted, are neither pardoned
in this World, nor in that to come. Such wretched miscreants as these in the
body mystical are like a gangrened member in the body natural, and must be cut
off in due time, or else will suddenly infect and destroy the whole: Metam. l.
1.
so true a Rule is that in the Poet Ovid, -- Namque immedicabile vulnus
Ense rescindendumest ne pars sincera trahatur.


Next to the Majesty of God is that of Kings and Sovereign Princes; to whom God
has not only pleased to impart his name, but delegated a great part of his
royal power: And therefore if an Heretic set on foot such Doctrines as tend
to the destruction of the Princes person, or the seducing of his Subjects from
their due allegiance; or otherwise grow practical, and embroyl the State, for
the promoting of their dreams and dotages, though of lower quality, let them
receive the wages due to their lewd attempts. There are as well seditious
Doctrines as seditious practices, both dangerous alike, and therefore to be
punished with the like severity: and this have the chief Priests of the Jews
understood full well, when having brought our Savior to the Judgement-hall,
and fearing Pilate would be little moved with the noise of blasphemy, they cast
their accusation in another mould; We found (say they) this fellow perverting
our Nation, forbidding to pay tribute unto Caesar, and calling himself Christ a
King: and then if Pilate will not hasten to his condemnation, he shall be
instantly proclaimed for no friend of Caesar's. In which, although they showed
themselves to be false accusers, yet they declared sufficiently, that in their
opinion, and in the opinion of a vigilant and careful Magistrate, all Doctrines
which may tend to perturb the State, or rather that all such, whoever, which
have raised factions in the State to promote their Doctrines, were worthy of a
Crucifige. And so far we may take St. Paul along for Company, who tells us of
coitiones in Synagogis, seditions raised in the Synagogues as well as in the
streets or City, Acts 24. Of either of the which if his malicious enemies
could have proved him guilty, he had deserved to die, as himself does intimate,
Acts 25. v. 11. And this no question was the reason why some Roman Emperors
proceeded more severely against the Donatists, then against many other Heresies
of an higher nature; because they were an active sect, and cared not to
distract or subvert a Province, so they might settle their opinions, and
increase their Proselytes: though, to say truth in this and all such parallel
cases, it was their faction not their faith, not their Religion, but rebellion
which was punished in them. In these two cases, and these only, dare I set any
edge on the temporal Sword, though even in these it be a remedy to be last
applied; and more to be commended where it may not, then where it may possibly
be spared.

In other cases where the error lies in the understanding, although most
commonly backed with obstinacy and perverseness in the will and affections, the
adverse parties in the Church have been too far transported beyond their
bounds, and drawn too much blood from one another, though both pretend the
Laws for their justification. For who sees not how little it does savor of
the spirit of Christ, to hale young boys, and silly women, and poor ignorant
Tradesmen to the Funeral-Pile, because they could not fathom the deep Mystery
of transubstantiation; or thought it not an acceptable sacrifice to devour
their God; or found not Purgatory in the Scriptures; or did not think it fit to
invocate the Saints their Brethren, when as the way lay open unto God their
Father; or durst not give that honor to a painted Crucifix, which properly
belonged to their crucified Savior? And on the other side, it wants not
reprehension amongst moderate men, that Christians should be dragged unto the
Scaffold for no other reason, then taking sacred Orders from a foreign hand,
or treading on prohibited ground; not being otherwise convicted by sufficient
evidence, either of practicing against the State, or laboring to seduce the
Subjects from their natural duties. The Christians of the Primitive Ages had
lost the most effectual part of their Apologies, if difference in Religion only
had been a crime sufficient, without further guilt, to draw those fiery storms
upon them under which they suffered. And though I say not of these Laws, to
which each parties do pretend for their justification, Plutarch. in Solo^.
that they are (...), like unto Draco's Laws of old, which were written in
blood; yet one might say, and say it without just offense, that they were
neither made nor executed within these Dominions, but either when the Dragon
was a chief Supporter of the Arms Imperial; or else on those unfortunate
wretches, who have since fallen in regionem Draconum, into the place of
Dragons, as the Psalmist calls it. Certain it is, that by those bloody
executions both sides have rather been confirmed then weakened, and both have
given advantage to the growth of Heresies. Just as Sulpitius has observed,
Hist. Sacr. l. 2.
that by the execution of Priscillian, which before I spoke of, non tantum non
repressa est ejus haeresis, sed and propagata, his Heresy was so far from
being suppressed, that it grew the faster for the cutting. Christ's Sinite
stands not here for nothing; but shows, that till the time of the general
Harvest, there will be tares amongst the Wheat, do we what we can: Which leads
me to my last particular, to the condition of the Church here militant,
delivered in the Simul crescere, in that the tares and Wheat are ordered to
grow up together. Of which, and of the reasons of that intermixture, I shall
crave leave to insist a little, and so commend you unto God.

Perplexae sunt istae duae Civitates in hoc seculo, Aug. de Civit. l. 1.
invicemque permistae: It was the saying of St. Austin, that the two Cities
which he was to write of, the City of the Lord, and the City of Satan, were so
intermingled, that there was little hope to see them separated till the day of
Judgment: The same may we affirm of the Church of Christ; it is of such a mixed
condition, compounded so proportionably of the good and evil, the Heretic and
true Professor, that neither of the two is likely to suppress the other, till
God take up the controversy in the day of doom. And therefore not without good
reason is the Church compared to a threshing-floore, Mat. 3. 12.
on which there is both wheat and chafe; and to a Fold, wherein there are both
Sheep and Goats; Mat. 25. 33.
and to a casting-net, which being thrown into the Sea, drew up all kind of
Fishes, Mat. 13. 47.
whether good or bad; and to an House, in which there are not only vessels of
honor, as of gold and silver, but also of dishonor, and for unclean uses; 2 Timothy 2. 20.
and in my Parable, to a field, wherein besides the good seed which the Lord
had sown, Infelix lolium and steriles dominantur avenae, the enemy had sowed
his tares. And this is thought by some of good note and learning to be the
chief intention of our Saviors Parable, who tells us, that he meant not by the
Sinite so far to patronize the Heretic, or protect the wicked, as to respit
either of them from the censure of the Church or State, under pretense of
calling them to an account at the general Audit; but to set forth the true
condition of the Church here militant, in which the wicked person and the
righteous man are so intermingled, that there is no perfection to be looked for
in this present World: Beauxamis in locum.
and therefore very well said a modern Author, Docetur hic non quale sit
officium nostrum, aut magistratus, aut Pastorum, sed tantum quae futura sit
Ecclesiae conditio: Christ does not here inform the Minister, or the Civil
Magistrate, or any private person, what they are to do, but only represents
unto his Disciples the true condition of his Church till the end of the World;
which can be never so reformed and purified, but that some errors and
corruptions will continue in it.

But whether it be so or not, certain it is, that such is the condition of the
Church in this present World, that it is subject to corruptions, and never
absolutely free from sin and error. There is much dross amongst her gold; 1
Cor. 3. 12.
and although that her foundations be of precious stones, yet there is wood and
hay, and stubble in the superstructure; which are so intermingled and made up
together, that nothing but a general fire can exactly part them, I mean the
fire of conflagration, not of Popish Purgatory. Were it not thus, we need not
pray for the Church militant, but glory as in the triumphant. And yet the
Church is counted holy, and called Catholic still, this intermixture
notwithstanding; Catholic in regard of time, place and persons, in and by
which the Gospel of our Savior is professed and propagated: Holy, secundum
nobiliores ejus parts, in reference to the Saints departed, and those who are
most eminent in grace and piety: And it is also called Ecclesia una, one holy,
Catholic and Apostolic Church, though part thereof be militant here upon the
earth, and part triumphant in the Heavens; the same one Church both now and in
the world to come. The difference is, that here it is imperfect, mixed of good
and bad; there perfect, and consisting of the righteous only, according to
this determination of St. Austin, In Collat. cont^* Donatist.
eandam ipsam unam and sanctam Ecclesiam nunc habere malos mixtos, tunc non
habituram. For then, and not till then, as Hierome, Augustine, and others do
expound the place, Ephesians. 6. 27.
shall Christ present her to himself a most glorious Church, without spot or
wrinkle, and marry her to himself for ever. Till that day come, it is not to be
hoped or looked for, but that many Hypocrites, false Teachers and licentious
livers will couch themselves under the shelter of the Church, and pass for
members of it in the eye of men, though not accounted such in the sight of God.
The eye of man can possibly discern no further then the outward show, and mark
who join themselves to the Congregation to hear the Word of God, and receive
his Sacraments; 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Dominus novit qui sunt sui, the Lord knows only who are his, and who are
those occulti intus whose hearts stand fast in his Commandments, and carefully
possess their souls in truth and holiness.

And yet some men there are, as here has been formerly, who fancy to
themselves a Church without spot or blemish, and dream of such a field as
contains no tares; of such a house as has no vessels but of honor, sanctified
and prepared for the Masters use: And where they find not such a Church, they
desert it instantly, and cry, Go out of her my people, (...). ^8. v. (...).
be not partakers of her sins. The Cathari in the East, the Donatists in the
South, and the Novatians in the West, which made one faction only, though of
several names, were anciently of this opinion, and set up Churches of their own
of the new Edition; for flattering themselves with a conceit of their own dear
sanctity, they thought themselves too pure and pious to join in any act of
worship with more sober Christians; and presently confined the Church, which
before was Catholic, to their own private Conventicles, and to them alone; or
intra partem Donati, as they phrased it then. Who have succeeded them of late,
both in their factions and their follies, we all know too well: The present
ruptures in this State do declare most evidently, that here is pars Donati now,
as before in Africa. A frenzy which gave great offense to the ancient Fathers,
who labored both by speech and pen to correct their insolences; and of such
scandal to the Churches of the Reformation, that Calvin, though a rigid man,
did confute their dotages, and publicly expose them to contempt and scorn.
Insti^u^. l. 4. c. 1.
The Ancients and the Moderns both have agreed on this, that though the Church
of Christ be imperfect always, and may sometimes be faulty also, yet are not
men rashly to separate themselves from her Communion, and make a rupture for
poor trifles in the Body mystical. It argues little faith, less charity, says
renowned Cyprian, if when we see some tares in the Church of God, Epla. 3. l. 3*
de Ecclesia ipsa recedamus, we presently withdraw our selves, and forsake her
fellowship. And here we might bring in St. Austin, and almost all the ancient
Writers to confirm this point; but that they are of no authority with the
captious Schismatic, and now of late disclaimed by our neater Wits.

Therefore for further satisfaction to the stubborn Donatist, let us behold the
constitution of the Church in the Book of God, and take a view of the chief
types and fortunes of it, to see if we can sinde such a spotless Church as they
vainly dream of. In Adams Family, which was the first, both type and Seminary
of the Church of God, Genesis 4. 8.
there was one Cain, a murderer, that slew his Brother: and in the Ark, the
next, and perhaps the greatest, a Cham, which wretchedly betrayed the nakedness
of his aged Father. 9. 22.
In Abraham's house there was an Ishmael, 21 9
which mocked at Isaac, though the Heir, and the Heir of promise. In Isaac's,
25. 31.
a profane Esau, who made his belly his God, and sold Heaven for a breakfast.
In Jacob's, there was Simeon and Levi, 49. 4, 5.
Brethren in evil, besides a Reuben, who defiled ^is old Fathers bed. And in
the Church of Israel, when more large and populous, how many were mad upon the
worship of the golden Calf, more mad in offering up their Children to the Idol
Moloch; thousands that bowed the knee to Baal; ten thousands which did
sacrifice in the Groves and prohibited places? yet all this while a Church, a
true visible Church, with which the Saints and Prophets joined in Gods public
worship. Let us next look upon the Gospel, and we shall find that when the
bounds thereof were so strait and narrow, that there were few more visible
members of it then the twelve Apostles, yet amongst them there was a Judas
which betrayed his Master. When it began to spread and enlarge it self to the
number of one hundred and twenty, there were among them some half-Christians,
Acts 1.
such as Nicodemus, who durst not openly profess the Gospel, but came unto the
Lord by night; Joh. 19. 39.
and some false Christians, 2 Timothy 4 10.
such as Demas, who out of an affection to the present world, forsook both the
Apostle and the Gospel too. See them increased to such a multitude, that they
were fain to choose seven Deacons to assist the work; Acts 6. 5.
and one of them will be that Nicolas the founder of the Nicolaitans, Apoc. 2.
15.
whom the Lord abhorred. Follow it out of Jewrie to Samaria, and there we find
a Simon Magus, as formal a Professor as the best amongst them, Acts 8. v. 13,
15.
yet full of the gall of bitterness within. Trace it in all its progress
through Greece and Asia, and we shall see the factiousness of the Corinthians,
Apoc. c. 2. and 3.
the foolishness of the Galatians, and six of the seven Asian Churches taxed
with deadly sin. Good God! into what corner of the Earth can the Donatist
run, to find a Church without corruption, free from sin and error? It must be
sure into the old Utopia, or the new Atlantis, or some fools Paradise in Terra
incognita, which no Mapp takes notice of; unless (as Constantine once said unto
Acesius a Novatian Bishop) (...), they can erect a Ladder of their own
devising, Sozomen. l. 1. c. 21.
and so climb up unto the Heavens; whilst they are here upon the Earth, they
have no such hopes. God better knows then we what he has to do; and he
already has determined of a Simul crescere, that both the Tares and Wheat
shall grow up together.

Nor wanted his eternal wisdom some especial reasons which might incline him
thereunto: First, in relation to the wicked, who owe their preservation chiefly
to this intermixture; For certainly, the note is true, Stapleton in locum.
Deum propter bonos sustinere malos; That God gives many temporal blessings to
ungodly men, because they live so intermingled with his faithful servants; and
respites them sometimes from the hand of punishment, not for their own, but for
the righteous persons sake amongst whom they dwell. The Lord, Genesis 30. 27.
we know, blessed Laban for the sake of Jacob, and prospered the whole house of
Potiphar, out of the love he bare to Joseph. 39. 5.
If Sodom stood so long unpunished, it was in part because of righteous Lot,
18. 32.
who sojourned with them: and possibly it might have stood to this very day,
but certainly have escaped that fiery storm which fell upon it, had it contained
no more then ten righteous persons. Far is it from the Lord our God to slay
the righteous with the wicked, the Judge of all the World is more just then so.
When God rains vengeance from above on the wicked man, it cannot be but that
the righteous must partake of the common miseries which do befall the State or
Nation in the which he lives; as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob did of the several
famines which God had sent upon their Neighbors. Genesis 12. 10. 3^. and 42.
There are not always such distinctions as was between the Land of Goshen and
the rest of Egypt: God therefore sometimes holds his hands, Exodus 8. 22.
when the sins of wicked men cry loud for punishment, out of his favor and
compassion on the righteous person; or else abbreviates the time of their
tribulation, out of regard to his Elect: or, Mat. ^4. 22.
if they both partake alike of the common miseries of Famine, Pestilence and
War, as sometimes they do, it is because that even the best men have their
imperfections, and ever and anon commit some foul sins which God thinks fit to
expiate with a temporal Purgatory.

Now as the righteous do this service to the wicked man, in reference unto his
temporal conservation; so he receives in lieu thereof a far greater benefit,
in reference to his own spiritual conversation: For first, the filthy lives of
ungodly persons are as a glass wherein Gods Children see the foul face of sin,
and thereby learn to frame their lives by a better rule. Gloss. Ord.
Permixti bonis mali sunt, ut eorum comparatione ad melius nitantur, as mine
Author has it. Just so the Spartans used to show their drunken slaves to
their Sons and Nephews, that they might bring them to a loathing of that
beastly vice. And then they make them far more careful of their lives and
actions, yea of their words and speeches also: David resolved, and 'twas a
necessary resolution if you mark it well, to set a bridle on his mouth, Psalm.
39.
for fear of offending with his Tongue; but it was only for quamdiu, quamdiu
impius in conspectu, as long as the ungodly was in his sight, who hearkened
unto his discourses, as the Jews did unto our Saviors, only of purpose to
betray him. And this was it which made the Primitive Christians so severe in
their conversations, and keep so diligent a watch upon all their actions,
because the inquisitive and malicious Gentiles amongst whom they lived, were as
so many spies upon them to observe their doings. They durst not else have stood
so stoutly on their justification, defied the favor of their Judges, and
openly professed before all the world, Tertul. Apolog. c. 2.
non scelus aliquod, sed nomen, that there was nothing in them which deserved
either bonds or death, Gloss. O^d.
but only the bare name of Christian. And last of all, they serve as means and
instruments, per quos exerceantur boni, by which the Saints have opportunity to
manifest their faith in Gods gracious promises, and to set forth their patience
in the time of trouble. The Israelites had never cried so fervently to the Lord
their God, had not the Canaanites, like pricks in their sides, spurred them on
unto it: and where had been the story of Jobs memorable patience, had not the
Chaldees and wild Arabs been near neighbors to him? So that in this respect we
may cross the Proverb, Est aliquod bonum propter vicinum malum, There comes
much good assuredly from an evil neighbor. In each of these respects, or in
all together, the Lord permits the wicked man to live and tarry out his time in
this present world, as being very useful to his faithful servants, which grow
the better for them, and the wiser by them.

And yet the Lord has other reasons which incline him to it, and such as do
relate to himself alone, viz. to show his grace and goodness over all his
creatures, whether they be the sheep of his Pasture, or the work only of his
hands. This makes him send his rain promiscuously on the just and wicked, Mat.
5. 45.
and cause his Sun to shine alike on the sinner and the righteous person;
Psalm. 145. 16.
opening his hands, and filling all things living with plenty. And more then
so, he gives them such a general hint toward their salvation, that by the book
of Nature, and general notions of the Spirit, they may attain this principle of
the saving faith, (...), that God is, and that he is a rewarder also of all
them that seek him. Heb. 11. 6.
By means whereof, he does not only show his grace in their great
unworthiness, Aug. de civit. l. 22.
melius and potentius esse judicans etiam malis been facere, by doing well to
those who deserve ill of him; but makes them all (...), or without excuse, in
matters which relate unto life eternal. Finally, as they are the Objects of his
power and goodness in this present world, so by ill using of his gifts, and by
neglecting of the means which is offered to them, shall they become the
objects of his wrath and justice, and serve as special instruments to set forth
his glory in the world to come; when he shall say unto his Angels, (which are
the Reapers mentioned in the following words) Gather the Tares together, and
bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the Wheat into ^y Barn. Which as
it is to be the work of a further time, and the last act of justice which the
Lord shall execute in consummatione seculi, in the close or consummation of the
world present; so shall the handling of it be the business of another day, in
the conclusion of my Meditations on this present Parable.

SERMON IV.
At CHRIST-CHURCH, March 12th. 1634.
MATTHEW. 13. v. 30. And in the time of Harvest I will say to the Reapers, Gather
ye together first the Tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather
the Wheat into my Barn.
RUmpit, Vellcius hist. l. ^.
interdum moratur proposita hominum Fortuna, The projects and designs of us
mortal men are many times delayed, and sometimes overthrown by higher Power.
Which power, though the Historian being a Courtier, (who ascribes all things to
good luck) entitled by the name of Fortune; yet the Philosopher, or
contemplative man, who had been studied in the Government of humane affairs,
would have called it Providence. That divine Axiom, Proponit homo, disponit
Deus, Man purposes, and God disposes, was the Rule of this; the Rule by which
it was first squared and fitted to the use of men; the Rule by which we are
instructed to submit our selves, our Counsels, our desires, our actions to the
will of God. And this we find exemplified and made clear unto us in the design
and purpose of the Houshold-servants, touching the extirpation of the Tares so
often mentioned; which God delayed as to the time, and utterly overthrew, as
for the hopes they had conceived of their dealing in it, and consequently of
the course which they meant to take. The servants were hot upon the spur, had
not patience to defer the action till a fitter time, but would have fallen upon
it instantly, with more have then speed; Vis imus and colligimus? in the
present Tense, without deliberation or delay at all. And they intended to have
gone in so sharp a way, which in the heat and violence of ungoverned zeal must
of necessity have been dangerous to the Lords good Seed, and pulled up many a
man for suspected Tares, which either were right Wheat of the Lords own sowing,
Chrysostom. in Mat. 13.
(...), or in due time, according to the course and seasons of the heavenly
Husbandry, might have been changed unto the better, and become good grain. How
did the Lord approve this project? What comfort did he give them to pursue
their Counsels? No, says the Lord, as to the time, there is no such have,
Sinite utraque simul crescere, let both grow together till the Harvest, till
their fruits be ripe, until they may be gathered up in a safer way, more to the
glory of the Lord, and less unto the hurt of his faithful people. If they
desired to have these Tares destroyed, (as no doubt they did) and to destroy
them in a way which should bring neither wrong nor danger to the Wheat it self
(as was fit they should, Id. ibid.
) (...), they must expect a fitter and more proper time, which the Lord had not
yet bin pleased to make known unto them. And No, says he, as to themselves,
whom he intended not to use in so great a business; knowing full well, that if
they did go on according to the proposition which they made unto him, how much
they would be biassed by their own affections? what damage might redound to
his Church thereby? We must (says he) have care and patience toward these
Tares, of which you have complained in such sensible terms, and let them grow
until the Harvest, in hope they may prove better then you are aware of. But if
this do no good upon them, if they make no more use of this longanimity, then
to bring forth the fruits of customary unrepented sins, (...), vengeance and
Hell shall overtake them at the last, Id. ibid.
there is no other remedy: For then in the conjuncture of those circumstances,
in the time of Harvest, I will cause the Ministers whom I mean to use, to
appear before me, and say unto them being come, My Reapers, Colligite primum
zizania, Gather ye together first the Tares, etc.

These words contain the full and final resolution of the heavenly Husbandman,
in the disposing of the Tares, so much, so earnestly complained of. In which we
must behold him in the quality of a Judge or Magistrate, pronouncing his
determinate sentence in an open Court, upon the pleadings and debate of the
point before him. And here we have two genenerall parts to be considered, the
Judgment and the Executioners: The Executioners, the Ministers rather of the
Court, are the Heavenly Angels (though here represented to us by the name of
Reapers) to whom it appertains to bring forth the Prisoners, and to see
justice done upon them in the form pronounced. The Judgment does consist
especially of these two Acts, t^^ condemnation of the wicked, the exaltation of
the just: The condemnation of the wicked, the sentencing of the Tares to the
f^re of Hell, we find delivered briefly in these three particulars; Colligite,
colligate, comburite: Gather them first, for they shall be no longer suffered
in the field of God. 2. Bind them, and bind them in the chains of eternal
darkness, to let them know there is no hope, no possibility to escape their
punishment. 3. And having bound, then cast them presently into the everlasting
flames, to fire unquenchable. This is the Judgment of the Tares, of the wicked
man. In that which does concern the Wheat, we have these two parts, an Action
first, and that is congregate, gather; Gather the several corns thereof in a
Body or a Congregation: next, the Repository, the place it self in which they
are to be disposed of, Horreum meum, the Lords Barn, the House or Habitation of
his Heavenly glories: There Is the condition of the Wheat, of the righteous
soul. Of these I shall discourse in order, as they lie before me; beginning
with the Executioners, or the Ministers rather of the Court, the Angels: And in
the time of Harvest I will say unto the Reapers, Dicam messortbus, that is the
first.

Eminentes viri magnis adjutoribus usi sunt, Patercul. hist. l. 2.
The greatest persons have commonly the most able Ministers, whether it is in
point of Counsel or of execution. And he that is well studied in the art of
men, will so employ his Ministers and their abilities, as may be fittest to
advance the business which he has in hand. Every man's Talent lies not in the
Camp or Senate; some are for the Ministerial or more servile Offices, but yet
as useful to the public in their several places, though not so honorable in
themselves; and these too have their proper and distinct Activities, beyond the
bounds whereof if they be commanded, they become dull and sluggish, and
unprofitable, and rather do incumber then promote the service. Thus it is also
in the Economy of the Heavenly Husbandman; The Lord has several sorts of
Ministers, some for cultivating and manuring of his holy Field, others for
bringing in the harvest: That the employment of the Prelates and inferior
Clergy; this of the holy Angels, of the Hosts of Heaven; Messores autem Angeli
sunt, the Reapers are the Angels, v. 39. And it is an excellent Rule which St.
Hierome gives us in this business, Quae exposita sunt a Domino his debeo
accommodare fidem, That in those things which are expounded by our Savior, in
Mat. c. 13.
it were absurd to look for any clearer Commentary. Which makes me wonder by
the way, that Hierome should so easily forget himself and his own good rule, as
to expound the Servants of the 27. of the Angels also. Assuredly the Servants
of the 27. with whom the Master does discourse throughout this Parable, must
needs be different from the Reapers of this present Text, of whom he speaks
unto those Servants, as distinct Ministers designed to their several Offices.

So then the Reapers are the Angels, there is no doubt of that. And they we know
are (...), ministering spirits, says the Scripture, employed by God, as often
as he sees occasion, in his affairs of greatest moment; in none more
frequently then such as do relate to the Sons of men, either in point of
punishment or preservation. We told you not long since of a double Harvest,
within the compass and intention of the present verse; an Harvest of Gods
temporal judgments upon particular men and Nations, and collective bodies: an
Harvest of Gods general judgment, when all flesh shall appear before him to
receive their sentence. And in both these the Angels are the Ministers of that
dreadful Court; the ordinary Officers or (...) of the Almighty Judge, and
bound to execute the mandates which are issued thence, whether men's sins be
ripe for vengeance, or that affliction and repentance make them fit for mercy.
First, in the ways of temporal punishment, it is most clear and evident in
holy Scripture, Genesis 19. v. 13.
that God sent down his Angels with a full Commission to destroy Sodom and
Gomorrah, two rich populous Cities, after they had so long abused his patience,
and their own prosperities; and that he sent his evil Angels amongst the
Egyptians, Ps. 78. 49, 50.
when neither signs nor wonders could prevail upon them; by whom he gave their
life over to the Pestilence, slew the firstborn in all their dwellings, and
finally overwhelmed them in the red Sea. Where note, Bellar. and Lorin: in Ps.
77.
that they are there called mali angeli, or evil Angels, not that they were so
in themselves, but ab effectu, by reason of the several evils which they did
inflict on that perishing and wretched people, by the Lords appointment. Thus
do we also read of a destroying Angel, by whom, according to the Word and
Command of God, no fewer then 7000. of the Jews were consumed in an instant,
when once they boasted in their numbers, and did presume too far in the arm
of flesh: 2 King. 19. v. 35.
and of another which went out and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians no less
then 185000. men, after they had blasphemed the Lord, and put a scorn upon the
holy one of Israel: not to say any thing of Herod, who when he had beheaded
James, Act. 12. 2, 3. 23.
imprisoned Peter, and troubled certain of the Church, was miserably smitten by
an Angel, and consumed by worms. It pleased God to employ them in these acts of
vengeance, though well affected in themselves to the good of mankind; and a
necessity was laid upon them to obey his pleasure. Nec quicquam est in Angelis
nisi parendi necessitas, l. 2. c. 17.
said Lactantius truly.

So far the point is clear from the Book of God; and if we will believe the
Learned (as I think we may) there is no signal punishment of ungodly people
ascribed to God in holy Scripture but what was executed by the Ministry of
these blessed Spirits, except some other means and Ministers be expressly
named. That great and universal deluge in the time of Noah was questionless
the work of God; Behold I, Genesis 6. v. 17.
even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the Earth: But this was done
Ministerio Angelorum, by the Ministry and service of the holy Angels, whom God
employed in breaking up the Fountain of the great deep, and opening the
Cataracts of Heaven, for the destruction of that wicked unrepenting people. v.
24, 27.
Thus when it is affirmed in the 14. of Exodus That the Lord looked into the
Host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire, and overthrew them in the
midst of the Sea: non intelligendum est de Deo, sed de Angelo qui erat in nube,
Tostat. in Exodus 14.
we must not understand it of the Lord himself, but only of the Angel, or that
ministering spirit, of whose being in the Cloud we had heard before. And when we
read, that in the Battle of the five Kings against the Israelites, the Lord
cast down great stones from Heaven upon them, in the 10. of Josuah, Id. in Jos.
10. qu. 8.
it is not to be thought, as Tostatus notes it, quod Deus mitteret, sed Angeli
jubente Deo, that this was done by Gods own hand, but by the holy Angels at the
Lords appointment. The like may be observed of those other acts of power and
punishment, whereof we find such frequent mention in the holy Scripture, that
though they be ascribed to God as the principal agent, yet were they generally
effected by his heavenly Angels, as the means and instrument.

But the most proper office of the holy Angels is not for punishment, but
preservation; not for correction of the wicked, but for the protection of the
just and righteous; not for the rooting up of the Tares, but for the safety of
the Wheat; for they are ministering Spirits (says St. Paul) sent out to
minister unto them who shall be heirs of salvation. H. b. 1. v. 14.
That Is the chief part of their employment, the business which they most
delight in; and God accordingly both has and does employ them from time to
time. For, by the Ministry of his Angels did he deliver Ishmael from the
extremities of thirst, and Daniel from the fury of hunger, Lot from the fire,
and trembling Isaac from the Sword; our Infant-Saviour from one Herod, his
chief Apostle from another; all of them from the common prison, into the which
they had been cast by the Priests and Sadduces. But these were only personal
and particular Graces: Look we on those which were more public; and such as
did concern his whole people generally, and we shall find an Angel of the Lord
encamping between the Host of Israel and the Host of Egypt, to make good the
passage at their backs, till they were gotten safe to the other side of the
Sea: Another Angel marching in the front of their Armies; as soon as they had
entered the Land of Canaan, and he the Captain of the Lords Host; Jos. 5. 15.
Princeps Exercitus Domini, the vulgar reads it; some great and eminent Angel
doubtless, but whether Michael, Gabriel, or who else it was, the Rabbis may
dispute at leisure, and to them I leave it; More then so yet; That wall of
waters which they had both on the right hand and upon the left, Exodus 14. v. 22.
when they passed through the Sea as upon dry ground, Tostat. in in Exodus 14.
facta est a Deo per Angelos exequentes, as learned Abulensis has it, was the
work of Angels, directed and employed by Almighty God. Which also is affirmed
by the Jewish Doctors of the dividing of the waters of Jordan, Id. in Jos. 3.
to make the like safe passage for them into the promised Land which the Lord
had given them. P. Mart.
The like says Peter Martyr of the raising of the Syrians from before Samaria,
when the Lord made them hear the noise of Charets, 2 King. 7. v. 6.
and the noise of Horsemen, that this was Ministerio Angelorum, effected by the
Ministry of the holy Angels, whom he employed in saving that distressed City
from the hands of their enemies. And by an Angel, Eus^b. hist. l. 3. c. 5.
or at least an Angelical vision, (...), by a Dream or Oracle delivered unto
them in their sleep, as Eusebius tells us, did he forewarn the Christians
dwelling in the Land of Palestine, to remove thence to Pella, a small Town of
Syria; and so preserved them from the spoil and fury of the Roman Armies.

This was Gods way of preservation in the times before us; and for his way of
preservation in all Ages since, God is the same God now as then, his holy
Angels no less diligent in their attendance on our persons, then they have
been formerly. Let us but make our selves by our faith and piety worthy to be
accounted the Sons of God, and the Heirs of salvation, and doubt we not of
the assistance of those ministering Spirits in all the times of personal or
public dangers. It Is true, the apparition of the Angels in these latter times
has been very rare, and God dealt very graciously with the sons of men, that
they come so seldom; for, being too many are so prone to give divine honors to
the Images of the Saints departed, how easily might they deceive themselves of
their reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels (which was the
fault of the Colossians, 2 Col. 15.
and after the Heresy of those whom Epiphanius and St. Austin call Angelici)
did they appear unto us ordinarily in some visible glorious form. But then it
is as true withal, and one of the most eternal truths of holy Scripture, That
the Angel of the Lord encampeth about them that fear him, Psalm. 34 7.
and delivers them. Whether we see, or see them not, it comes all to one; and
so resolved by Clemens of Alexandria, an old Christian Writer, (...): Stromat:
lib. 6.
The Lord says he, does still preserve us by the Ministry of his holy Angels,
though we behold them not in any visible shape, as the Ancients did. When
therefore and as often as we fall into any danger, let us address our prayers
to the Lord our God, that he would please to give command unto his Angels to
come in to help us; that he would make our enemies like the chafe before the
wind, and the Angel of the Lord scattering them; Psalm. 35. 5.
and having so made known our desires unto him, to look for their assistance
accordingly. This is warranted unto us in the words of Calvin, Ut in periculis
constituti a Deo petamus protectionem Angelorum, and confidamus eos ex mandato
Dei praesto fore. Institut^ l. 1. c. 14.
But behold a greater then Calvin here; for we are warranted as much both by
the Doctrine and the practice of the Church of England, who teaches us to
pray, and we pray accordingly, That God who has ordained and constituted the
service of Angels and men in a wonderful order, would mercifully grant that
they which do him service in Heaven, may by his appointm^nt, succor and defend
us upon the Earth; as in the Collect for the day of St. Michael the Archangel.

But this is but a (...) to the main design; for though these temporal
judgments and deliverances may come within the compass of the Harvest which is
here mentioned, yet is the Harvest chiefly meant of the general Judgment, when
all flesh shall be brought before Gods Tribunal, and brought before it by the
Ministry of the holy Angels, who are the Reapers of my Text, the Ministers or
(...) of that dreadful Court. For proof whereof, we need but look into the
process of St. Matthewes Gospel, Mat. 24. v. 30.
in which we find, That the Lord shall come to judgment, riding on the Clouds
with great power and glory, accompanied with Angels and Archangels, and the
sound of the Trumpet. So great a Judge coming to hold his grand Assizes, cannot
be ushered in with less Pomp and Majesty. And to what purpose serve those
Angels? Assuredly, not only to fill up the Train, to make the manner of his
coming the more brave and glorious, but for some other special and more weighty
use. And therefore when our Savior has informed us this, That the Son of
man shall come in his glory, Mat. 15. v. 30.
and all the holy Angels with him; he tells us in the following words, That
before him shall all the Nations of the World be gathered. Gathered together,
but by whom? by these very Angels. Then, says he, shall he send his Angels
with a great sound of a Trumpet, 24. 31.
and they shall gather together the Elect from the four winds, from one end of
Heaven unto the other. What the Elect, and none but they? Not so. These Reapers
must root up the Tares as well as gather in the Wheat. Our Saviors Exposition
of the Text makes that clear enough, where we shall find, that at the end of
the world, the Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather
out of his Kingdom all things that offend, v. 40. etc.
and them that do iniquity. And in the Parable of the casting Net, That the
Angels shall come forth at the end of the World, v. 49:
and sever the wicked from the just. There are two sorts of men to be brought
together, the Elect and Reprobate; two sorts of Grain which must be gathered by
these Reapers; but how they must be ordered, being brought together, and what
the Angels have to do in execution of those orders, we shall soon find by
looking over the particulars of the second general: where we have, first, the
condemnation of the wicked represented to us in three words, Colligite,
Colligate, Comburite, Gather ye together first the Tares, and bind them in
bundles to burn them. Of this next in order.

In Patrefamilias habemus qu^d amemus and imitemur. Gorran. in locum.
There are four things remarkable in the Heavenly Husbandman, as he is
represented to us in this present Parable, worthy of our applause and
imitation: His goodness first, Seminando bona, in that he sowed his field with
the good seed only; his patience next, tolerando mala, in suffering the Tares,
though otherwise a corrupt and adulterate seed, to remain ungathered till the
Harvest came. In the next place, we have his wisdom, praecavendo pericula, in
taking such especial care to preserve his Wheat, which doubtless had been
subject to some notable mischief, had he embraced the other which his Servants
made, the imus and colligimus of the 28. And last of all, we have his justice,
reddendo secundum merita, in giving unto every one as he had deserved,
according to the works which he has wrought in the flesh, whether good or bad.
Praemium and Poena, Reward and punishment have in all Ages been esteemed the
Rule and measure, not only of all Earthly Governments, but the Heavenly also.
Who would endeavor piety and the works of virtue, were there not some reward
to allure him to it? or rob his Genius of the dalliances of this present life,
and not give way unto the sensuality of his lusts and Appetite, were there not
punishments in store to affright him from it; were not the punishments so
grievous, and of such eternity, as far surmount the sweetness of these sinful
pleasures, which in themselves are short and momentany, and enjoyed only for a
season? The fear of punishment and Hell are of greatest efficacy to affright
many a man from sin, (whom the love of God and godliness will hardly work on;)
and well it were if the consideration of it would prevail so far.

Of this, the condemnation of the wicked, I am first to speak, the method of my
Text does invite me to it; and the first word we meet with is Colligite, gather
ye together, (...), as the Greek Text has it; and that does signify such a
kind of gathering as intimates a plucking up by the roots withal. We had it in
this sense in the former verse, where the Servants having made an offer to go
and gather up the Tares, were absolutely refused, on this reason chiefly, ver.
29.
ne forte colligentes zizania, lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up
the Wheat. Certainly, had the Tares been gathered, either by pulling off the
ears, as the Apostles did the Corn on the Sabbathday; or breaking off the
stalk in the very midst (each of which ways they might have gone) they might
have gathered in the Tares, and not hurt the Wheat, at least as to the rooting
up, the total eradication of it. (...) then is not to gather only, but to
gather up; (...), to gather up the Tares by the very roots; which shows the
desperate and remediless condition of the wicked man, if once delivered over
unto condemnation; for where there is a gathering or a rooting up, there is no
hope that ever it shall grow again: weeds which are only mowed may spring up
again; and Tares that have their ears pulled off, and no more then so, cumber
the ground at least, if they do not worse; they have still place and footing in
the Field of God, and take up so much room therein, that they permit not Gods
Seed to enlarge large and spread it self, and yield such fair increase to the
Heavenly Husbandman as it would do otherwise; but if they once be gathered up,
or pulled up by the Roots, which comes all to one, they are then past growing
any more; they shall be able from thenceforth to do no more hurt, or work unto
the Wheat any further damage.

But then (...) is withal a compound word, and does not only signify a
gathering up, but a gathering up of all together: Gather ye the Tares together,
so the English. All of them, not a Tare excepted; neither the Heretic nor the
Schismatic, the formal, nor the false Professor; neither the counterfeit not
the false-faced Protestant, the open nor the secret sinner, shall escape the
gathering. Though they procure the Rocks to fall upon them, and the hills to
hide them, yet shall these Reapers find them out, and gather them from every
corner of the Earth, be they where they will. And we may say of them, as Moses
of the Herds and Cattle of the House of Israel, ne ungulam esse relinquendam,
that not an hoof of all these unclean beasts shall be left behind. Though they
have flattered their poor souls, and said, Tush, God will not see it; or have
disguised themselves with fig leaves, out of a silly hope to conceal their
nakedness; or wiped their lips so cunningly, with the Harlot in the Book of
Proverbs, that no men can discern a stolen kiss upon them, yet all this will
not serve the turn: God for all this will bring them every one to judgment,
and apprehend them by his Angels, the Ministers of the mighty Judge, when they
go a gathering. There shall not one of them escape the hands of these diligent
Sergeants, ne unus quidem, not so much as one. It is colligite in the Text, a
gathering up of all together. And yet this is not all contained in this
gathering neither; it is a gathering in which implies a severing, or a
separation, and then it is (...), i. e. (...), gather them up, that is to say,
sever them, set them by themselves to receive their sentence. v. 49.
For in the following Parable of the casting-Net, the gathering of every kind
of fish had a severing with it. The Angels shall come forth, (...), and shall
sever the wicked from the just. And in that of the Sheep and of the Goats, in
the 25. v. 31.
the gathering of all Nations before the Lord, brings in a separation, or
(...), of the one from the other.

So then Colligite in this place must be separate, Sever them from the Wheat,
from the Lords good grain, that their impieties and iniquities may appear more
evidently; and separate them from the presence of the Lord their God, of whose
most blessed vision they deserve not to be made partakers. First, sever, or
part them from the Wheat, let them stand alone. Though in this World the Lord
does sometimes spare the wicked and ungodly man, Stapleton.
propter praesentiam justorum, as my Author has it, out of his love to the
Elect; or in profectum humanae salutis, for the salvation of his Saints,
Hilarious.
to whom they serve for an increase both of faith and patience, as we read in
Hilary; yet in the day of judgment they shall find it otherwise. In that day
they shall neither be partakers of Gods blessings with them, nor receive any
benefit or protection by them; and much less borrow any of their Oil to trim
their Lamps, or enter with the Bridegroom by that borrowed light. The ungodly
shall not then stand in the judgment with them, Psalm. 1. 5.
nor sinners in that Congregation of the righteous, as the Psalmist has it.
And next, they shall be separated from the presence of the Lord their God, of
whose most blessed and beatifical vision they deserve not to be made partakers;
for being severed from the just, and standing before God in their own
uncleanness, without the light of faith, and the robes of charity, there
follows a Discedite a me, Depart from me ye cursed, Gorran. in locum.
get you far from hence. And this is dira and infelix discessio, a miserable
and most wretched case, in case it went no further then a poena damni, a loss
of those inseparable comforts which do arise unto the Saints upon the sight of
God. Discedite a me, Depart from me: O the most terrible sentence of a most
just Judge, which neither the guilty can escape, nor the condemned man
withstand; against which no sinner can except, and from which the damned cannot
appeal! Depart from thee! why, whither shall we go, O God, being driven from
thee? whither, but from the Paradise of glories to a world of shame, from the
Father of lights unto utter darkness, from the fullness of joy to howling and
perpetual lamentation, from pleasures unto weeping and gnashing of teeth?

The gathering being finished, next comes in the binding: It is Colligite
first, and Colligite primum, before we come to alligate; First gather, and then
bind them fast. I know that some Interpreters refer this primum to the order
of the several judgments; first, gather up the Tares, then bring in the Wheat.
But this does ill agree with our Saviors method used in other places; for in
the Parable of the Net cast into the Sea, the good fish were first gathered
into Vessels, v. 48.
before the bad were thrown away: and in the other, of the Sheep and of the
Goats, Mat. 25.
Venite has precedence of discedite; the blessed of the Father were first
absolved, before the cursed were condemned to the pit of torments. Nor will it
serve the turn which is said by some, Gorran. in locum.
that though the merits of the just are pri^s in discussione, first taken into
consideration and inquired into, yet shall the punishment of the wicked and
ungodly man be pri^s in executione, first put in execution, and inflicted on
them; Mar^ 19. v. 28.
for this as ill agrees with those Texts of Scripture, where it is said, not
only in particular of the twelve Apostles, that they shall sit on twelve
Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel; but also of the Saints in
general, 1 Cor. 6. v. 2: Estius in 1 Cor. 6.
Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the World? and that not only sola
comparatione, by upbraiding their impieties and impenitencies, in which respect
the Ninevites and the Queen of the South are in the Gospel said to condemn the
Jews; but approbatione divinae sententiae, by approving and applauding that
most righteous judgment which Christ the supreme Judge shall pronounce against
them: which could not be, in case the wicked did receive their final sentence
before the righteous were admitted into some participation of the heavenly
glories. The gathering of the Tares is here first propounded, not because first
in order of the several judgments, but because they gave occasion unto this
discourse betwixt the heavenly Husbandman and his houshold-Servants, for no
other reason. Colligite primum, first gather, in that sense, but in no sense
else; alligate next.

First gather, and then bind. And binding is a term derived or borrowed from
the Courts of secular Judges, according to the course whereof the condemned
Prisoners are led bound to their execution, so to prevent all hope and
possibility of their escape, and make them yield unto their punishment with the
less resistance. I Lictor, liga manus, verberato, infeliciarbori suspendito:
Livius passim.
Here Lictor, bind the Prisoner, scourge him, or hang him on the Gallow-Tree,
as the sentence varied. But whether verberato, or suspendito, there was still
Liga manus, as a part of the punishment. Thus when the great Tyrant
Nebuchadnezzar had condemned the three Hebrew Children to the fiery Furnace,
Dan. 3.
he first commanded them to be bound, and then to be cast in the midst of the
flames. And when the Priests and Pharisees had voted our Redeemer to be guilty
of death, they led him bound to Pontius Pilate, Matthew. 27.
( vinctum adduxerunt, says the Text) to have their bloody sentence put in
execution. This binding of the wicked after condemnation is the first poena
sensus, the first part of the sensible torments which they are damned unto by
the righteous Judge: and a great aggravation of their torments it is, if you
mark it well; it takes away all hope and possibility of escape, as before was
said; letting them see, that how intolerable and extreme soever their damnation
be, they must endure it to the utmost, there is no after-remedy. And therefore
alligate ut non possint evadere, says my Author well. Gorran.
The Chains in which they are here bound are everlasting Chains, aeterna
vincula, as St. Jude calls them: and therefore they which are thus bound, are
bound for aye and everlastingly, without expectation on of release. There is no
saying in this case, rumpamus vincula, let us break their bonds in sunder, and
cast their cords from us; Psalm. 2, 3.
they are aeterna vincula, everlasting these.

Next, it deprives them of all ease, of all means and help, of lessening any
part of those terrible torments which the most righteous Judge has inflicted
on them. It is a great refreshing unto one that languisheth under the rage and
tyranny of a burning Fever, that he can sometimes shift his side, and tumble
from one part of the bed to another; no small comfort to a Prisoner, if he have
liberty to walk or stir up and down, in the midst of all the torments which are
laid upon them: But they which are tormented in the flames of Hell, and laid up
in that dreadful Dungeon, have not the liberty to move, and to change their
places, further then as it shall seem good unto their tormentors, for the
multiplication and increase of their pains and miseries. And this we may be
sure of also, that the greater Libertines we are here, the more licentiously we
live in this present world, the greater shall our thraldom be, the more strict
our bonds, in the estate of condemnation in the world to come. Too many which
profess the Gospel have been loosly given, addicted unto all uncleanness and
lasciviousness; and therefore alligate, bind them, make them fast enough. A
binding to the good behavior to the purpose this: others have had their feet
swift to shed innocent blood, and lifted up rebellious hands against Gods
anointed. I Lictor, lig a manus, Hold Satan, take him hence, bind him hands
and feet, in the eternal chains of darkness, never to stir a foot in the way of
peace, or lift up a repenting hand to the God of mercy; never to be restored to
liberty, nor released from misery: the Fable of Prometheus being bound in the
mountain Caucasus for a perpetual prey to devouring Vultures, has some
resemblance unto this: but that was but a Fable, this a most sad truth; never
were known such bonds as these, such a binding never.

And yet the binding is the worse, and the torment greater, in regard they are
not severally bound, every one by himself in his own Irons, but in fasciculos,
in bundles, every man with his fellows and Associates which were guilty of the
same sin with him; that sin I mean which either was most grievous in the sight
of God, or most predominant in the heart of the sinful man. It is not alligate
simply, but alligate in fasciculos, bind them in bundles, so the English; or
into Fagots rather, as the words do signify; and Fagots are the fittest fuel
for the fire of Hell. This shows that God does punish sinners in the world to
come, non secundum statum quem in hoc seculo habuerunt, sed secundum delicta;
according to the nature of their several crimes, Stapleton.
not of their qualities or degrees; and that as men confederate together in the
acts of sin, so they shall burn together in the fires of horror; for besides
what is said to confirm the same by Gregory and Austin, two old Catholic
Bishops, Greg^^n Job. l. 9. c. 47.
who spoke herein according to the light of Scripture; the Heathen Orator,
though guided by no other rule then the common Principles of Justice, has
resolved it so; by whom it is affirmed as a thing most equitable, Aug. (...).
30. (...) de (...).
ut qui in eadem causa sint in eadem item essent fortuna, that they who were
partakers in the sweets of sin should be made partners also in the smarts of
punishment. Tull. pro Lig^^io.
They then that have defiled themselves in the selfsame filth, how different
soever in estate and quality, must be bound up together in the self-same Faggot.
Facinus quos inquinat aequat, Lucan.
said the Poet rightly: The Murderers, and such as kill without the Sword of
Authority, shall make one Faggot, the secret and the open Traitors another; the
Adulterers and Adulteresses shall make one Faggot, and the Fornicators another;
the Heretics shall make up one Faggot, the Schismatics and Sectaries shall be
bound up in another; the Idolaters shall make one Faggot, they that commit
sacrilege to pull down Idolatry, shall make up another; the Glutton, whose
belly is his God, shall make one Faggot, the Drunkard whose glory is his shame,
another: The Thief, that knows no other Trade to maintain himself but by
undoing of his Neighbor; the cunning Hypocrite, who makes a gain of godliness,
and puts his Religion unto usury; and they who basely and perfidiously invert
the public money to their private profit, shall each make up their several
Fagots. Pares cum paribus, says St. Austin; every man shall be punished in the
world to come, according to the sin which he has committed, and in the company
of those with whom he has most offended. And though it be an old said Saw,
Solamen miseris, that it is a comfort to those in misery to have others bear a
share in their griefs and sorrows, (a miserable comfort at the best, there is no
doubt of that;) yet it is nothing so in the present case; for of that nature
are the punishments which attend this binding, that the pains thereof are
nothing lessened by being communicated, but are then multiplied when divided.

Well, being bound, and bound in bundles, what comes after next? Ad
comburendum, says the Text, bind them in bundles for to burn them. And here
the case is somewhat altered, as it relates unto the Ministers, though still
the same as it has reference to the Malefactors. It was before colligite and
alligate; here, not comburite, but ad comburendum. The holy Angels were the
Ministers to attach the sinner, to bring him before Gods Tribunal; and after
sentence was pronounced to lay hands upon him, and make him ready for the
punishment which he is condemned to; but that being done, they give him over to
the fiends of Hell, v. 34.
to the tormenters, (...), as our Redeemer calls them in the 18 Chap. The
Officers of the Court, or the (...), which he speaks of in the 7 of Matthew.
differ from these tormenters, from these (...), of which he tells us in the 18.
as the Usher or Crier of a Court from the Executioner, or the Undersheriff
from the Hangman. The Angels then, I mean the holy and good Angels, they only
do colligere and alligare, and having so gathered and bound them up, deliver
them ad comburendum, assign them over by Indenture to the Executioners, to see
them punished and tormented according to the will and sentence of the dreadful
Judge. The holy Angels are the Ministers, the Devil and his Angels are the
Executioners, who bearing an old grudge to man, as being adopted by the Lord
unto those felicities from which he miserably fell, will doubtless execute his
office on him with the most extremity: Non desinunt perditi jam perdere, Min.
Fell*
said Minutius truly. It has been his chief work to tempt man to sin, out of
an hope to have him at his mercy one day; and be we sure he will not spare him
when he has him there. The Devils chief delight is in man's calamity: And
could we fancy such a thing as an Heaven in Hell, the Devil would enjoy it in
this opportunity of tyrannizing over those whom he has seduced and brought
into that pit of torments.

Ad comburendum, v. 41, 42.
to be burnt; for that is the punishment appointed to the wicked in the Book of
God. Here, in the Exposition of this Parable, it is said by Christ, that the
Angels shall gather out of his Kingdom all things which offend, v. 50.
and them that do iniquity, and shall cast them in caminum ignis, into a
furnace of fire. And in the Parable of the Net, Luke 16. v. 24.
we have it in the very self-same words, in caminum ignis. Thus the rich
Glutton in St. Luke, is said to be tormented in the flames: And in the 20th. of
the Revelation it is called expressly Stagnum ignis and sulphuris, v. 10.
a Lake of fire and brimston, a most dreadful Lake. A truth communicated to and
by the Prophets of the former times, Isa. 30. 35.
who give us this description of Tophet, or the Vallie of Gehinnon, that the
Pile thereof is fire and much wood, 34. 10.
that the breath of the Lord is like a stream of Brimstone to kindle it; and
that the stream thereof shall be turned to Pitch, c. 4. v. 1.
and the dust into Brimstone. And Malachi speaking of the day of Judgment,
tells us, that it shall burn like an Oven, and that all which do wickedly
shall be as the stubble, Et inflammabit eos dies veniens, whom the day that
comes shall burn up. A truth so known amongst the Gentiles, whether by
tradition from their Ancestors, or conversation with the Jews, need not now be
argued; that, by the verses of the Poets, and the works of the most learned
Philosophers, Min. Fell. in Octav.
illius ignei fluminis admonentur homines, men were admonished to beware of
that burning Lake. And unto those it were impertinent to add the testimony of
the ancient Fathers, by some of which it is called Divinus ignis, poenale
incendium by another, L^ctant. Minut. Austin.
ardor poenarum by a third, aeternus ignis by a fourth, Et sic de caeteris. And
though a question has been made, (as all things have been questioned in these
captious times) whether this fire be true and real, or only metaphorically
called so in the Book of God: yet by all sound Interpreters, it is thus agreed
on (as a learned Jesuit has observed) metaphoram esse non posse quae sit tam
perpetua, Maldonat. in Marc. 9.
that such a constancy of expression does exclude a Metaphor.

Now as it is a fire, a devouring fire, so is it ignis inextinguibilis, v. 12.
a fire unquenchable, in the third; ignis aeternus, v. 41. Isa. 34. 10.
an everlasting fire, in the 25. of St. Matthew, the smoke whereof goes up for
ever, in the Prophet Esaias; a fire which feeds both on the body and the soul,
yet shall never consume them: and such a fire as breeds a kind of worm within
it, Mar. 9. v. 48.
which shall never die, but always gnaw upon the conscience of the man
condemned, and create far more anguish to him then all bodily torments. And
to this truth all the old Catholic Doctors do attest unanimously, whether
Greeks or Latins: Tatian. adv. gent.
Tatianus, one of the most ancient of the Greeks, calls the estate of the
damned in Hell, (...), a death which never dies, an immortal misery.
Tertullian, the most ancient Latin, cruciatum non diuturnum sed sempiternum,
not only a long and tedious torment, but an everlasting one. St. Austin
answerably unto that of Tatianus, does call it mortem sine morte; adding
moreover of those fires, punire, non finire corpora, that they torment the
body, but destroy it not: he goes further, and says, that it burns the body,
but repaires it also, and calls it flammam nutricem, a fire which so devoures,
as it also nourishes; with whom Lactantius does consent; so also does Minutius
Fell. Prudentius, Cas^iodorus, and indeed who not? And why should this be
thought a wonder so far beyond the reason and belief of a mere natural man,
or such who taking on themselves the name of Christians, will yet believe no
more then may stand with reason? Exodus 3.
Does not the Scripture tell us of a burning bush, a bush that burned with the
fire, and was not consumed? and the Historians of the Hills of Aetna and
Vesuvius, which do almost continually send out dreadful flames, and yet never
wast* and the Philosophers of a Worm, or Beast, which they call the Salamander,
whose natural Habitation is in the midst of the fire? and the Poets of
Prometheus and Titius Vultures, which having fed so many hundreds of years upon
their bowels, had not yet devoured them? Does not experience tell us daily,
that the lightning glanceth on our bodies often, but does seldom hurt us? and
does not Ovid say expressly, Nec mortis poenas mors altera finiet hujus, that
there is a second death which shall never end? yet I confess, that the
prevailing Heresy which pretends to such wit and piety, has no small reason
to declare, interire posse animas, Ovid. in Ibin. Ap. Grot. in Matthew. 25.
aut ab exitio liberari, that the souls of wicked and impenitent men shall
either be annihilated, or in fine released; for we may safely say of those new
pretenders, in Octav.
as once Minutius did of the old Philosophers, malunt extingui penitus, quam ad
supplicia revocari; Considering how they have subverted all the fundamentals of
the Christian faith, it is all the reason in the world that they should rather
wish the soul annihilated, then survive to torments, such torments as do know
neither end nor measure.

O the most sad condition of the soul condemned! which being cast into the lake
of fire and brimston shall be always burning, and yet never consumed;
continually falling, yet never come to the bottom; perpetually dying, and yet
never dead: where he shall hear no noise, but weeping, howling, and gnashing of
teeth; nor voices, but of blasphemy and execrations; nor music, but the woeful
tune of lamentation: where he shall see no light but the fire which burns him;
nor company, but that of the Devil and his Angels, which take a pleasure to
torment him: where he shall have no other food then hot burning coals; nor
drink, but from a stream of fire and brimston; nor comforts, but variety and
change of torments, which howsoever they be dressed in several fashions, yet
are they still but torments, everlasting torments; tormenta quibus nec modus
ullus nec terminus, Min. Fe^. in Octav.
torments which never know any ease of pain, nor ever shall admit any end of
time: of which the least which can be said is this, that they are unsufferable,
and the most this, that they are unspeakable. And yet unto this miserable and
calamitous end come the Tares at last, after so long a flourishing in the field
of God. They had been cunningly sown at first, v. 25.
cum dormirent homines, whilst the servants were supine and careless, and
looked not to their Masters business as they ought to do. Being sown, they
passed a long time undiscovered, and went for very good Wheat, v. 26.
even with knowing men, till they came unto fecissent fructum, till their
fruits betrayed them, and that they neither would nor could be concealed
longer, and by this time were grown to so great an height, and threatened so
much danger to Gods sacred Field, that the awakened servants thought there was
no other way to secure the same, then by a quick and general extirpation of
them all together. v. 28.
Which though the Lord refused to give ear unto, v. 30.
but was resolved to suffer them to grow till the Harvest came; yet, when their
time was come, and their fruits were ripe, he brought some of them to the
Harvest of his temporal judgments; and for the rest, condems them (as we see)
to everlasting and unquenchable flames. Far otherwise is it with the Wheat,
with the Lords good seed, which though it do endure some danger and oppressions
here, sometimes in fear to be destroyed and brought to nothing, by the growth
and spreading of these Tares, yet in the end shall be preserved, and laid up
safely in the barn of the heavenly husbandman: which is the exaltation of the
just, and my next particular, Congregate triticum in horreum meum, Gather ye
the Wheat into my Barn.

Deus adversus impios rectissimus Judex, Iastitut. l. 1. c. 1.
ita erga pios indulgentissimus Pater. God (says Lactantius) as he is a just
and terrible Judge toward the wicked and ungodly, so toward his conformable
and virtuous Children, a most gracious and indulgent Father. And if a Father, a
gracious and indulgent Father, as no doubt he is, no question but he will
provide his Children of all things necessary in this life, and settle them in
an inheritance immortal, undefiled, and which never fades in the life to come.
1 Pet. 1.
Though he do sometimes feed them with the bread of sorrows, chastning those
most frequently whom he loves most fervently; expose them unto many dangers,
and suffer them to be affronted and despised by the worldly wicked: yet by
those ways, though they may seem to lead to the vale of misery, does he
conduct them at the last to the hill of mercy; and lets them see, there is no
readier way to the Land of Canaan, then through a Wilderness of trouble, Virgil.
and a Land of enemies, Per varios casus and tot discrimina rerum, as Aeneas
traveled into Italy. In prosecution of which Journey as he vouchsafes them the
assistance of his holy Angels, whom he has given in charge to encamp about
them, and to defend them in all their ways; so when the time is come that they
must be gathered to their Fathers, they shall be carried on the wings of Angels
into Abraham's bosom, and laid up safely at the last in the Lords Repository, in
the Heaven of Glories, whether we look on Congregate, or on horreum meum, they
both say the same.

Congregate, that is the action here, and the first word to be considered, which
though our English renders Gather, yet is it a far different gathering from
that which did occur before. Before it was colligite, congregate here, gather
them into a Church or a Congregation; Before it was (...), pluck them up
together; but here it is (...), draw them into a Synagogue, a place of general
Assembly. This is the old word by which the Fathers used to denote the Church
of God amongst the Jews, before the coming of our Savior; and that the new, by
which they many times express the Church of God amongst us Christians since our
Saviors passion. Both of them words of Ecclesiastical use and notion, and both
do signify the same, though in diverse Languages. They which be true and
faithful members of the Church of God, whether it be under the Law, or under
the Gospel, shall all be drawn into one Synagogue or Congregation in the day of
the Lord; and all, together with the holy Patriarchs before Moses time, shall
make up that one glorious Church which is entitled in the Scriptures
Universalem Congregationem, the general Assembly, the Church of the firstborn
whose names are written in the Heavens. We have the word thus used, Heb. 12.
as in other places, so in the 24. of St. Matthews Gospel, where it is told us
of these Angels, (...), congregabunt electos, that they shall gather the Elect
out of every corner of the world, i. e. that they shall gather them in sacram
Synaxin, in sanctam congregationem, into an holy Congregation, a religious
Assembly. So that the gathering of the Saints together in the day of Judgment
is but a Translation of them from one Church to another; or rather from that
part of the same one Church which is here militant on the Earth, to that which
is triumphant in the Heaven of glories. The Saints both here and there make but
one Communion; we praising God for manifesting his great power and Grace on
them, they praying unto God to send his choycest blessings of grace and mercy
upon us. The difference is no more then this, that here it is exposed to
disgrace and ignominy; sorrows and age have ploughed deep wrinkles on her face;
too many spots there are in her feasts of charity; and sometimes she takes cold
in her affections, like the Church of Ephesus, starting aside from her Redeemer
like a broken bow; Ephesians. 6.
but there shall Christ present her to himself a most glorious Church without
spot or wrinkle, and marry her to himself for ever: Here we have Tares amongst
the Wheat, more Tares perhaps then Wheat in too many places; but there shall be
no place in Heaven but for Wheat alone; no unclean thing shall enter into the
new Jerusalem, no Tares into the Barn of the heavenly Husbandman; that was
provided for the Wheat only, and for none but that.

For so it follows in the Text, Congregate triticum in horreum meum, Gather
the Wheat into my Barn, the place designed by all good Husbands for the
disposing of the Wheat, their best sort of grain. Not in a Barn, according to
the literal sense, (we shall have too many Congregations held in Barns, if this
world go on) but according to the mystical meaning. In horreum meum, into my
Barn, i. e. as he expounds himself in the 25. in gaudium Domini, into the joy
of the Lord; Heb. 4.
regnum a constitutione mundi paratum, the Kingdom prepared for the righteous
from the foundations of the World, v. 12.
i. e. as the Apostle tells us, in requiem Domini, into the rest of the Lord;
in civitatem Dei viventis, the City of the living God. So then it is a rest, a
joy, a glorious City, an eternal Kingdom; and all of these may serve in part
to set forth the condition of this heavenly dwelling: A rest for them which die
in the Lord, in which they rest from all their labors. And this sit of which
St. Paul speaks in the 4th to the Hebrews, c. 4.
There remains therefore a rest for the people of God: a joy of so divine and
sublime a nature, that no tongue is able to express it, nor heart so large as
to conceive it; for, in his presence is the fullness of joy, and at his right
hand there is pleasure for evermore; Et nunquam turbata quies, and gaudia
fi^ma. A City of pure Gold, and as clear as Crystal; the Walls of
Jasper-stone, and the Gates of Pearl; watered with the most pleasant Rivers of
the waters of life, according as it is described in the Revelation: the man of
God describing the full glories of the new Jerusalem in such a manner, and by
such materials, as he conceived to be most estimable in the sight of men. And
finally, a Kingdom, an eternal Kingdom, (...), the Kingdom, as it is called by
way of excellency; in which each true believer shall receive his Crown,
according to the eminency of his faith and piety; a Crown of martyrdom for
those who patiently submit themselves to the hands of the persecutors, in
maintenance of Gods Church and the true Religion; a Crown of Virginity for
those who subdue concupiscence, and give no entertainment to prohibited lusts;
a Crown of chastity and fidelity for those who have faithfully kept the vow of
wedlock, and the bed of Marriage undefiled; a Crown of charity for those who
have exhausted their estates in the works of mercy, and the acts of piety, in
founding Temples for the Lord, or Hospitals for relief of the poor and needy;
and finally, a Crown of righteousness for all those who walk unblameably in
their Conversation before God and man. When all the Monarchs of the Earth have
laid down their Scepters at the feet of Christ, God shall be still a King of
Kings, a King (to speak the truth) of none but Kings; Rex Regum, Dominus
dominantium, always, but most amply then. Never was corn so housed, so laid up
before.

Thus, as before we brought the Tares, the worst sort of weeds, unto the fire
of condemnation; so have we brought the Wheat, the best kind of grain, (...),
as Galen calls it, to the barn of glory: A grain, which as it does require a
ground well tilled and cultivated, so lies it longest buried in the earth of
any, before it spring into a blade; and being sprung into a Blade, does endure
much hardness, congealed sometimes with snow, sometimes nipped with Frost,
before it grow into a stalk; and when the stalk is grown, the ear is formed, it
is exposed to many hazards, drencht with unseasonable showers, and scorched
with as intemperate heats; laid flat upon the ground by tempestuous winds, some
of the grains thereof being scattered by those blasts over all the field,
before it is brought into the Barn. Ecce jam seges cana imbre corrumpitur,
grandine caeditur, as Cecilius noted in the Dialogue. And so it is also with the
just, with the righteous person; He does require much Husbandry, great care and
Tillage, in fitting him to receive the seeds of faith and piety; and lies long
struggling in the womb of regeneration, before he does come forth a spiritual
man, and is renatus, born again, advanced unto the state of a man regenerate.
Multa tulit fecitque puer, Much must be suffered, and much done, before it come
to that, there is no question of it. Suppose him brought so far in his way to
Heaven, as that he has received the Seal of his regeneration and adoption, the
testimony of the Spirit, that he endeavors nothing more then the advancement
of Gods glory and increase of piety, shall he not be reviled and howted at like
the Owl among the wanton birds, forsaken by his old acquaintance and familiar
friends, like a Pelican in the desert Wilderness? Shall not he presently be
exposed unto the heats of persecution, and colds of poverty, and drowned in the
Waves of cruel and unprosperous fortune? Shall not the storms of trouble and
affliction show their fury on him, till they have laid him flat on his very
back, and scattered his dispersed and mangled members over all the Earth? yet
shall this man, this faithful and religious man, that has endured so great a
measure of affliction, such a s^o^m of tyranny, be gathered at the last in
horreum Domini, into the Barn, the safe Repository of the Heavenly Husbandman.
Not one of all those scattered limbs, not a broken bone, but shall be
recollected by the Angels when they go a gathering, made up into the same one
body which before it was, and laid up in the Lords Barn with joy and triumph;
that the body which fell in dishonor may be raised in honor, and the bones
which have been broken may rejoice together.

Come then thou blessed Soul into the place of thy rest; Thou have been long a
wearied Pilgrim on the face of the earth, tossed from one station to another,
spent with continual travel, and worn out with labors, yet all this while
could find no rest for the sole of thy foot: Here is an everlasting rest
provided for thee, Enter thou good and faithful Servant into the joy of the
Lord; Thou have been faithful in a little, employed thy Masters Talent to the
best advantage, and for so doing have been reviled and beaten by thy
fellow servants, wounded and shamefully entreated by those Husbandmen to whom
the Lord let forth his Vineyard; and slain in fine, in hope the Lords
Inheritance would be shared among them. Here is a joy, a perfect everlasting
joy, made ready for thine entertainment. Welcome thou glorious Citizen of the
new Jerusalem to the continuing City thou have so long looked for; in which
thou shall enjoy, after all thy troubles, the Beatifical vision of Almighty
God, the goodly fellowship of Prophets, the glorious company of the Apostles,
the noble Army of the Martyrs, the dear society of those who have died before
thee in and for the Lord. Mount, mount victorious Soul* into the Throne
prepared for thee; where thou shall presently receive the immarcessible Crown
of glory, which Christ the righteous Judge shall give thee in that joyful day
with great pomp and triumph; millions of the celestial spirits attending on the
solemnities of thy Coronation, and the harmonious quire of Angels singing with
thee, and with the residue of the Saints departed, Allelujah, Gloria in
excelsis Deo, and all the holy Anthems extant in the Book of God. And for our
parts, although we are not worthy in this humane frailty to sing in quire and
consort with those blessed spirits, yet let us bear the burden of those
heavenly ditties which are chanted there; singing with heart and voice all with
one accord, All honor, praise, and power, and glory, be unto him that sits
in the highest Throne, and to the Lamb, and to the blessed and eternal Spirit,
now and evermore. And let all the people say Amen.

SERMON I.
At LAMBETH, Jan. 13. 1638.
ACTS 20. 30, 31. Also of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them; Watch therefore.
I Might here shut the Book and end, and say as did our Savior in another
case, Impleta in nostris haec est Scriptura diebus; this day is this Scripture
fulfilled in our eyes; So many are there of our selves that rise up
continually, whose lips speak proud words, and pervert good meanings, that so
they may be followed and cried up, and draw away much people after them. St.
Paul foresaw this mischief, and forewarns us of it; and of a Preacher instantly
becomes a Prophet: He does begin his charge with an Attendite, Take heed unto
your selves, and to all the flock; and he concludes the same with a vigilate,
Watch therefore, and remember that you have been warned. Reason enough there
was for both, as well for the attendite as the vigilate: Wolves, grievous
Wolves were entering in, and such as would not spare the Flock; that follows
close on the attendite: and perverse Fellows rising up to make a rupture in the
Church, and draw away Disciples after them; that goes immediately before the
Vigilate* Attendite and vigilate are two good Caveats, and entered here by the
Apostle in the name of Christ, that so he might preserve that interest in the
Church of God, which he had purchased to himself with his own dear blood. In
one of these he arms his Prelates contra saevitiam persecutorum, against the
fury of the persecutors, which assault without; and in the other he prepares
them contra fraudulentiam deceptorum, against the fraud of the perverters; and
other secret sicknesses which infect within. In both he lays before them the
Churches dangers, that so they may bethink themselves of convenient remedies.

As for the words now read unto you we may consider in them these two generals;
the sickness of the Church, and the cure thereof. The sickness is a swelling,
or a rising up of certain ill-affected humors in the body mystical: which we
shall first consider in the thing it self, Exurgent viri, then shall men arise.
Secondly, in the unde, from what part or place, Ex vobis ipsis, from our
selves. Thirdly, in the effect, what they do being risen; loquuntur perversa,
speaking perverse things: And lastly, what it is they aim at; ut abducant
discipulos post se, to draw away Disciples after them. In the next general, the
Cure, we have these particulars: 1. The Physician, that is the Prelate, to whom
the charge promised is given. And 2. The Medicine here prescribed, which is the
care and vigilance of the Prelates, Vigilate igitur, Watch therefore. Of these,
etc.

Exurgent viri, that is the first. And sure it might be well supposed, comparing
these two dangers with one another, that the poor Church were in no mean degree
of safety, having escaped those grievous Wolves, to fall into the hands of men;
for homo homini fit Deus, as the Proverb has it. But, if considered as it
ought, the danger is no less then before it was; for homo homini fit lupus, is
a Proverb too. There we had men who for their rage and cruelty were entitled
Wolves; here Wolves, who for their seeming gentleness and humanity are
entitled men. But here and there their purpose is the same to subvert the
Church; there openly by force and violence, here secretly by fraud and cunning:
and therefore here the danger greater, because less suspected, as undermining
is more dangerous to beleaguered Cities then an open battery. As long as Satan
had no other instruments to subvert the Church then those grievous Wolves, he
took great pains to lose his labor: The Tyrants all from Nero down to
Dioclesian, when they made havoc of the faithful, what did they but confirm
them in their resolutions, and increase their numbers? Nec quicquam proficit
exquisitior crudelitas vestra, illecebra sectae est, as Tertullian has it. The
Heretics all from Simon Magus to Priscillian, the last that stands upon the
Register in St. Austins Catalogue, when they did openly assault the faith it
self, and struck at the foundations of it, what did they but occasion only that
the faith became the better settled, and that all those which were approved were
made more manifest? In which regard that of Euagrius is most true, that from
those very men and matters which made so many ruptures in the Church of God,
(...), by those the Doctrine of the Church was confirmed and settled.

This when the Devil had perceived, he called in his Wolves, and exercised the
Church no more with Heresies and persecutions: He found it more expedient to
make use of men, who knew how to time it, to watch their opportunities, and
espy advantages; and so with more assurance might effect his purpose, because
less suspected. The Serpent never had beguiled poor Eve, had he not used the
voice of man; nor had the Syren^ captivated and bewitched so many passengers,
had they not had the face of Women; Virginei vultus, and vox humana remansit,
as the Poet has it. Of all the instruments of mischief which the world has
bred, there is none like man, the Master workman, whose winding wit, and subtle
reaches make him most fit for all employments. Xerxes, when as with all his
forces, his most numerous forces, he could not force an entry through the walls
of Babylon, met with a man, Zopyrus, by whose craft and cunning he found the
gates set open to him; which made him oftentimes affirm, malle se Zopyrum
integrum quam viginti Babylonas, that he preferred Zopyrus before twenty
Babylons. No battery does assault so forcibly, nor mine work so surely, as the
wit of man; which if it be once set on mischief, is indeed most mischievous.
Our Savior Christ, when he was led by Satan into the Wilderness, found neither
Bear nor Wolf, nor Lion, that durst set upon him; but when he came into the
open Country, and conversed with men, then was he assaulted on the one side by
the Scribes and Pharisees, and on the other side by the Herodians, all of them
lying in wait how they might betray him. And therefore when he sent out his
Disciples, he arms them with this wholesome Caveat, Cavete itaque ab hominibus,
beware of men; Ab ipsis potius hominibus quam a feris timendum, as Beza
glosseth on the place.

And yet there is no fear of men, if they would be quiet; the danger is not in
the men, but in their rising, it is the (...) that works all the trouble. And
indeed (...) in this place is an active word, or verbum operativum, as the
Lawyers call it. This aggravates the Churches dangers; for when the Wolves came
in, they came in with intrabunt, at the common entrance: The whole Church saw
it, and observed it, and knew how to trace them; but for these risings, it is
hard to say whence they take beginning, or to what they tend, or who it is that
does support them. When Jupiter had transformed his Io into an Heifer, and was
demanded whence she came; the crafty God returned this answer, that she did
rise immediately from the very earth; ut author desinat inquiri, that so there
might no further search be made of what herd she was. And so it is in all these
risings, Jupiter e terra genitam mentitur; there is no man will confess from
what root they came, or own them till they grow into a body, and are made ready
for an head. And when it is come to that, it is a rising still; a popular,
seditious, and tumultuous rising. The word so used twice for failing in the 5th
Chapter of the Acts, (...), Before those days arose up one Judas, (...),
(that is the word,) boasting himself to be somebody, to whom a number of men
joined themselves. In the next verse, (...), After this man rose up Judas of
Galilee, (...), that is the word again, in the days of taxing, and drew away
much people after him. Here have we risings, popular and seditious risings; the
one against the civil Magistrate, in the point of taxing, the other against the
peace and polity of the Church in matters which concern Religion; both of them
laid before us in that very word which my Text makes use of; which shows us
that the rising mentioned in my Text is like that of Theudas, or of Judas, a
sudden and tumultuous rising of unquiet men.

Yet were this but a rising simply, and no more then so, the danger were not
great, if any; for men may sometimes rise and sit down again, rise, and repent
them of their rising upon better thoughts; and having so repented, set them
down without more hurt done. Such was the rising of the holy Pilgrims in King
Henry's time, who bound themselves by solemn Covenant to defend Religion,
although then changing to the better; but on the first report of the Kings
approach disbanded and went home again; every man to his House O Israel. But
this we must not look for always. The (...) of my Text, as it does signify to
rise, so it does intimate unto us such a rising as brings destruction with it,
and desolation after it. The word so used oftentimes in the best Greek
Authors; as (...), eversa est civitas, and (...), to raise a City. Such
risings as those are which St. Paul here mentions, however they may hap to
speed, aim at the utter ruin of that State against which they rise; nor do the
risers think themselves in safety whilst there are any to resist: They never
use to talk of peace till a desolation, Et ubi solitudinem faciunt pacem
appellant, as he in Tacitus.

And yet we do not see the bottom of our danger neither; Some risings have been
easily suppressed by art and wisdom, and other some dissolved by force and
power: But this is such a kind of rising, that though it be suppressed a while it
will up again; and, like Antaeus in the Poet, rise up with greater strength
then before it had, majorque accepto robore surgit, as it is in Lucan. The word
in the Original does signify resurgere as well as surgere; and then we have an
insurrection with a resurrection, a rising that will still be rising, if
composed only for a while, or settled only for the present. The Church is never
safe in such storms as these, until it happen to these risers as unto Theudas
and his followers, of whom the Story says, that both himself and as many as
believed on him (...), were scattered and confounded, and brought to nothing;
Redacti sunt ad nihilum, as the Latin has it. And when we once come to
annihilation there is no resurrection.

You see here is ground enough for a Vigilate, and that as well a part ante, to
prevent these risings, as afterward a part post, to quiet and appease them
when they once are up: Both necessary, though the first more safe; as commonly
preventing Physic stirs the humors less, then when the sickness is confirmed
by some long delay. And yet though this be ground enough for a vigilate, the
duty is far more necessary in reference to the unde whence the danger rises,
which is ex vobis ipsis, from amongst your selve. As long as Christ our Savior
did foretell his followers, Mark 13. 8.
Exurget gens contra gentem, That Nation should rise up against Nation, and
Kingdom against Kingdom in the latter days, the matter seemed not very great,
the World had long been used to the like hostilities; and therefore it is said
of those wars and troubles, that they were initium dolorum, the beginnings of
sorrows: But when it came to this, exurgent filii in parents, that Children
should rise up against their Parents, and Brother should betray his Brother,
then could not any thing be added to the Churches miseries but the abomination
of desolation, spoken of by the Prophet Daniel. It was not bella per Emathios
that made Rome complain; v. 14.
she had before advanced her Standards in the field of Macedon with success and
honor: plus qu^m civilia was the thing which did all the mischief; the cruelty
and the unnaturalness of the civil Wars which consumed her forces, and at
last brought her unto bondage. The damage which the Church has sustained by
Wolves has indeed been great, yet not to be compared unto those calamities
which she has drawn upon her self by her own dissentions. And this St.
Chrystome confesses, (...), that the danger here is greater then it was
before; (...), in that it was a civil War which is here forespoke of.

Ex vobis ipsis, from your selves, from men of holy Church, that do partake
with you in the same profession, and have given up their names to Christ, and
do wear his Livery. Were it not for ex vobis ipsis, the danger were not great
from exurgent viri. The time was when the Kings of the Earth rose up, and the
Rulers took counsel together against the Lord and against his anointed: But
what became of them and their machinations? Psalm. 2. v. 2.
He that dwells on high laughed them to scorn, and the Lord had them in
derision: bruising them with a rod of iron, and breaking them in pieces like a
Potters Vessel. Non posse Romanos nisi suis armis vinci, The Church was never
overcome but by the Church, nor Christ betrayed by any but his own Disciples.
Our Savior read his own and the Churches destiny, in that general speech,
inimici hominis sunt domestici ejus, that a man's enemies are those of his own
house. That this has always been the destiny of the Church of God is St.
Cyprians note, Inter initia mundi Abel justum non nisi frater occidit, etc.
Abel, says he, had none to kill him, Jacob none to persecute him, nor Joseph
any to make sale of him, but their Fathers Children. Which said, he adds, how
Christ foretold us in that general Maxim before delivered, ips^s qui
sacramento unitatis copulati fuerint, se ipsos invicem tradituros, that those
who had been joined together in the holy Sacraments should betray each other.
So that as well in this regard, as in that of sin, we may take up the saying
and complaint of the Prophet Esaias, Perditio tua ex te est, Thy destruction is
from thy self O House of Israel.

Ex vobis ipsis, from your selves. What, from the Elders of the Church, the
Overseers of the flock, should men arise from them to pervert the people? No
question but it was so meant by the Apostle; For to the Elders, to the
Overseers, did St. Paul give this charge, and direct this Caveat, Attendite
vobis ipsis and universo gregi, Take heed unto your selves and to all the
flock. There have we vobis ipsis, vobis ipsis here; which makes it manifest and
apparent that even from them should men arise speaking perverse things, to draw
away much people after them. The Elders here were Priests, there is no doubt of
that; Pastors and Teachers of the people: Nor is it any miracle that such men
as those should have their hands or heads in those public quarrels wherewith
the Church has been distracted. The first disturbance which befell the Church
was by certain men which came down from Judaea, and taught the people; And what
did sollow thereupon but disputations and dissentions, as the Text informs us;
and those so great, and followed with such heat and violence, that the Apostles
had no small ado to compose the business? Our Savior Christ foresaw this
mischief, and therefore has repeated no one caution more then, Cavete a
Pseudoprophetis, Beware of false Prophets and of false Apostles: For they, and
such as they, as they teach false Doctrines, so are they too indulgent to their
own affections, too easily inclined to foment a party, and contribute their
utmost to those frequent quarrels which have afflicted and disquieted the
Church of God. Examples of which I could show you many, both in our days, and
in the days which were before us, did I conceive the Elders mentioned here
were but simply Priests.

But sure, (as I shall show anon) the Elders which assembled here were of an
higher rank, a superior order; Bishops, or Overseers, call them which you will.
And shall we think that any of the holy Hierarchy could take so little heed
unto themselves and to the flock, as either openly or covertly to foment a
faction, and to hunt counter to the Church, and her public Ordinances; I would
be very loath they should. And yet I cannot choose but tell you, that I have met
in my small reading with some of them: Meletius had his name from (...), a
Greek word signifying care: but he was not Episcopus sui nominis, not a true
Meletius; for he showed little care of the Churches peace, but his whole
designs were to increase his party, to draw Disciples after him; as dangerous
for the time, but not of such a long continuance, as that of the Novatians
before remembered: Novatus had no sooner received the Episcopal Order, but
presently he set himself upon Cornelius, his chief Bishop, the Patriarch at the
least of the Roman prefecture; professing a more rigid kind of piety then the
Church allowed of, making himself the head of a Schismatical faction, and
drawing many Disciples after him, not only in Italy it self, but in Greece and
Asia. But as Novatus was his name, so Innovation was to be his business; and he
plied it well, being the founder of the Cathari, as they (in some respects) of
our English Puritans. The like may be affirmed of Meletius also, an Egyptian
Bishop, raising a long and tedious Schism against the Patriarch of Alexandria,
to whom the Canons of the Church had made him subject. The like of many of the
African, or Southern Prelates, so wedded to the cause and faction of the
ancient Donatists, that they confined the whole Church intra partem Donati,
within the pale and limits of the faction of these Donatists only; and in some
points were not unlike the Anabaptists of these latter times, drawing so many
Disciples after them, that in the end they grew a terror to the Orthodox party.
Assuredly the Church was most unhappy in these popular Prelates, how fortunate
soever they conceived themselves in the multitude of their Disciples, in being
countenanced and abetted by the common people. And so she is in those who
pursue their courses; who being placed as Overseers in the Church of God, do
not alone neglect their duties in the attendite and the vigilate which are here
prescribed, but have their part in the exurgunt, a principal and leading part
in the rising up. Great pity it is that either they, or any other of the flock
of Christ, that ought to speak peace to the Church, should rise up against it;
and being risen up in so soul a manner, should spend their tongues and talents
to so lewd a purpose as speaking perverse things, (...), to draw away much
people after them, and be the leaders of a party. Yet this the humor and the
aim of these rising men, loquuntur perversa ut abducant discipulos post se; my
next particular, and next in order to be handled.

David complains of a vexatious people in his days, which used to say that
with their tongues they would prevail, and that they were the men which ought
to speak, without regard to any power that was above them; Quis noster dominus
est? Who is Lord over us, say they, or shall command us not to speak when
opportunity is given us to advance our selves, and draw away Disciples after
us? Such lawless Tongues as these does St. Paul here speak of, who that they
might be sure to possess the people, cared not what they said, whose actions
they traduced, whose good name they slandered, or whose good meaning they
perverted. The word (...) used in the Original, does signify perverse or
froward, as in the 17th of Matthew, (...), O faithless and perverse
Generation. And in the 2d to the Philippians, (...), in the middle of a froward
and perverse Generation. This shows us that these exurgentes are a perverse
and froward people, very hard to please, and such as will take nothing in good
part, how real and sincere soever: A sullen and unsociable race of men, quorum
superbiam frustra per obsequium and modestiam effugeris, whom when we strive to
please we lose them, being still further off the more sought after: A stubborn
and untractable Generation, quos nunquam persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris,
Tacit. in Agric.
that will adhere to the conclusion, though they be beaten off the premises;
and will not yield to reason, although vanquished by it.

And yet this sad and froward humor would not hurt any but themselves, did
they keep it in; but here is a (...) that brings all to naught: This froward
humor must be vented and break wind in speech, and having broken out in
speech, is as full of frowardness as was the stomach whence it came. The
perverse humor which affects them would else eat them up, and gnaw upon their
entralls like Prometheus vulture. This makes them seek out such as are like
themselves, or easily inclined to give ear unto them; to whom they power out
their complaints, and bemoan the times, as if the Church were like to fall, did
not they support it. St. Paul and they so equal in their jurisdiction, that it
is very hard to say which of them has the greatest care of all the Churches;
Hence is it that they fill the heads of poor ignorant people with most
groundless fears of innovation in Religion, and changes in Gods public
worship; the Church continually traduced, as if she were unsound in her
intentions toward Christ; the Prelates generally accused as Factors for the
mystical strumpet; and the inferior Clergy which submit themselves to the
Commands of their superiors in the Lord, what are they counted but the wretched
instruments to usher in those innovations which are so much feared?

And certainly this is perversa loqui, in the proper sense, in the true meaning
of the word; when men are grown to such a measure of perverseness, that we
pervert the words and purposes of all public persons, and wrest them to a
meaning which they never dreamt of. For (...) in the Greek is properly and
truly to distort and wrest; as (...), to wrest a matter from the truth, in the
famous Orator: A thing not seldom used by these perverse speakers, who, to set
off their projects, and promote their cause, not only wrest the words and
actions of their innocent Brethren beyond their true intent and meaning, but
too too often wrest the Scripture, even the most blessed Word of God, to make
it serviceable to their factious and seditious ends. The Scribes and Pharisees
of old, when they watched our Savior, seeking occasion to betray him, what did
they else but wrest and pervert his actions? reporting that he cast out Devils
by the help of Devils, that all his miracles were forged, and his Doctrine
false, tending to introduce a new Religion, and annul the old. And what,
conceit you, was their aim, but to animate the people by those perverse
speeches, that in a zeal unto the preservation of Religion they might combine
together with them, unite themselves in some strict Covenant against the Lord
and his anointed, and cry out nolumus hunc regnare with the better stomach?

This is indeed the utmost mischief which (...) carries with it; the word not
only signifying to distort or wrest, but by so doing to seduce and pervert
poor people. Thus read we Luke 22. (...), Acts 13.
We found this fellow perverting our Nation; and so of Elymas the Sorcerer,
(...), that that he endeavored to pervert the Deputy, and turn him from the
faith of Christ. This is the thing they aim at in their perverse speakings, to
captivate, seduce and bewitch the people, and make them fit for any mischievous
attempt which they shall please to animate and excite them to* We find in Ovid,
that when ^allas had commanded Cadmus to sow Vipers teeth, motae supponere
terrae vipereos dentes, as the Poet has it, there presently rose up an Army
very well appointed, crescitque seges clypeata virorum. Nor have we reason to
expect any better Harvest, when these men sow their Vipers Tongues; when by
calumniating and traducing both the Church and State, they do not only stir up
envy and great thoughts of heart, which were the wonted strifes of Reuben, but
lay a groundwork also for sedition, which is the ordinary consequent of the
gainsaying of Corah. The holy Leagues, Covenants and Associations which this
age has bred, and the like combinations against lawful Government, and lineall
succession unto Crowns and Scepters, what are they but the natural, though sad,
effects of these perverse speakers? Certain I am, that by these male-contented
and seditious artifices they augment their numbers, and increase their
followers, and draw away Disciples after them; which is the only thing they aim
at.

To draw away Disciples after them. This is strange indeed: Has there been any
age so happy in which the people need be drawn to embrace new fancies, to
hearken after factious risers, and lend too credulous an ear to their perverse
speeches? I cannot tell, I would be loath to brand all preceding times; though
in my slender reading I have met with none of so composed and fine a temper, no
Age wherein men were not prone enough to hearken to perverse and seditious
talkers: Sponte sua properant, the people commonly are too hot of their own
accord to follow after such pursuits, and need little drawing. But drawing in
this place is no word of force, unless it be of forcible and strong
persuasions; as when it is affirmed in Scripture, That no man comes unto the
Son, except the Father please to draw: Except the Father draw him; how? not
by compelling of the will, or forcing men to Heaven whether they will or not;
or drawing them velut inanimatum quoddam, as men draw after them a Log or
Stone, as sometimes Luther pleased to phrase it: Not so, but by inviting men to
their salvation, calling upon them to accept it by his holy word, and working
on them by the operations of his holy Spirit. So the word traho has been used
in best Latin Authors; Trahit sua quemque voluptas, in the Poet Virgil; me
trahit invitam nova vis, in the Poet Ovid. What? by applying any outward
violence? No, but by hearkening to the motions of our own desires, and giving
way to our affections; for so it follows in the Poet, aliudque cupido, men's
aliud suadet; Our understanding and our lusts draw two several ways: and we
may properly be said to be drawn by either, when either we submit our selves to
the rule of Reason, or follow the dictamen of our lusts and passions. And such,
and none but such, is the present drawing, the drawing of weak men by more
subtle wits, to hearken to their perverse speakings, and thereby to become
their followers and be accounted their Disciples.

Nor do they only ducere, but they do abducere, not only draw, but draw away:
the (...) in the Original must be so interpreted, and is so used in other Texts
of holy Scripture. Draws them away? from whence? from the main body of the
Church, the Congregation of Gods chosen. The Church is often called in
Scripture the body of Christ, of which each faithful Christian is a special
member. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular, as said St.
Paul to those of Corinth. They therefore which withdraw a Christian from the
Church of Christ, not only pierce his side, as the Soldiers did, but tear a
member from his body, which the Soldiers durst not. And therefore Beza reads
the word, ut abstrahant; and gives this reason why he does so read it, Loquitur
Luca^ ut de membris crudeliter corpore suo avulsis. But it would little profit
these perverse speakers to draw poor people from the Church, to make them
disaffected to the present Government, and so give them off; what should they
get, if any, or if every man were so misperswaded? There Is a post eos in the
Text which they chiefly aim at, to make men so leave the Church as to follow
them. Not one amongst them but will be a leader, and must have followers of his
own, some fair retinue to come after him, for the greater state. Such men as
these stand more upon post eos, then upon abducunt; and be their Proselytes
what they will, noble, ignoble, rich or poor, they must come behind. Post nos
bonus mos, is the best rule in all their Ethics; and, primus ibi ante omnes
magna comitante caterva, accounted by them the most heroic verse in all
Virgils works. The Scholar must not be above his Master; there is no sense in
that: And therefore that they may be sure not to lose post eos, their Scholars
shall be Scholars still, still learning, like St. Paul's old women, but never
coming unto the knowledge of the truth.

And certainly there is good reason why the holy Spirit does not entitle those
which are drawn away by the name of followers, or dependents, but by that of
(...), Disciples. Men commonly reward their followers, but they take pay of
their Disciples; and something has some favor, as the saying is. Dignus est
operarius mercede sua, The Labourer is worthy of his wages: Gal. 6. 6.
And he that is taught ought to communicate unto him that teaches in all good
things, so says the holy Scripture. Administer in all good things that is true,
but in what proportion? In omnibus bonis, in all his good things, says the
true Apostle; omnia bona sua, even all his goods, say these false Apostles. The
better pay, the better Scholars while you live; A matter out of which the
Pharisees sucked no small advantage, becoming so much master of the peoples
purses, that being once fined by Herod for their disobedience, a principal Lady
of their faction mustred up her store, Joseph. l. 17: c. 3.
(...), and paid the fine down for them without more ado. Besides, the
Disciple is obliged to believe his Master; oportet discentem credere, as the
old rule is, and if he yield up his belief to his Masters dictates, his Master
may dispose of him as his own creation. Hence is it that these exurgentes have
attained such credit, that their words pass for Oracles with their credulous
followers: And when they once have misperswaded them of their superiors in the
Lord, whether Prince or Prelate, it is not in the power of men or Angels to
bring them to a right opinion. Josephus tells us of the Pharisees, Antiqu. l.
13. c. 18.
that they had gotten much footing in the affections of their followers, (...),
(...), etc. that whatsoever they pleased to say either of the high Priest, or
the King himself, how false and scandalous soever, it was received for truth
without further question.

And now I am fallen upon the Pharisees, I shall add this further, that the
great pains they took in compassing both Sea and Land to increase their
Proselytes, and add unto the number of their dear Disciples, showed plainly
that they aimed at more then obedient greatness. The power and sway they had
with the common people had so far enabled them, (...), Ibid. l. 13. c: 23.
to hurt their enemies, and promote their friends; that happy was the man could
be favored by them. Nay, more then this, they would have Kings and Princes
stand at their devotion, and be directed by them in all matters both of Church
and State, or else control and terrify them with their numerous followers,
the multitude of their Disciples. Which lest I may be thought to report without
book, we need but look into Josephus, where we shall find that Alexandra durst
not enter on the Government in her Childrens nonage, until she had permitted
all things unto their disposing; Ibid.
(...), etc. and promised to do nothing without their directions. What was the
reason, think ye, why that excellent Lady humbled her self so lowly to so proud
a Sect? marry she did it by advice of her dying Husband, whose Government
proved not so successful as the Prince deserved, (...), in that he had offended
that prevailing faction. We need not doubt but that all such as have pursued
the courses of these Pharisees do propose their aims, laying the foundation of
their greatness upon the backs of their Disciples; whom if they have infected
with their dangerous principles, there is no man so safe, whom they may not
mischief, nor any estate so sure which they may not ruin. Examples of the
which, in the Priests of Meroe, and that command they held on the Aethiopians,
I could tell you some, but desire rather to refer you to Diodorus Siculus for
your satisfaction. So true is that of Quintus Curtius, Multitudinem vana
religione captam melius vatibus suis quam ducibus parere, The common people
once possessed with a false Religion are more obedient to their Priests then
unto their Princes. Thus have I brought the Churches sickness to the pitch or
(...), the utmost extremity of this strange Disease. Pity it were to leave her
in this desperate state; and therefore I make have, all the have I can, to call
in the Physician, and attend the cure, Vigilate igitur, Watch therefore.

There is a great similitude between the body natural and the body mystical,
the bodies of us men, and the Church of Christ: each of them has their
infancy, their youth, their age; each of them their peculiar maladies, and
their proper cures. And as in bodily Diseases, no sooner we begin to be
ill-disposed, but presently we look out for the Physician; so in these griefs
and sicknesses which befall the Church, it is not safe to trifle or delay the
time, but have recourse to the Physician with all speed that may be. Now the
Physicians in this case, the Churches Doctors, are those to whom this charge
was given by the Apostle, and they are said to be the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus. What the Lay Elders of the City, men of shops and Trades; this day a
bencher in the Consistory, the next a botcher on the stall? Not so, though some
have so delivered; but such as were at least in sacris ordinibus constituti,
men in holy orders, such as had parts to feed the flock, and power to rule it.
The word (...) in the 28. will admit both duties, and so exclude Lay Elders
from being any way concerned in the present business. Those of the Laity must
either lose the name of Elders in the present sense, or else take the office;
and if they undertake the charge, they must be Pastors, and not Laymen. The
Office proper to these Presbyters was that which Christ commended to St. Peter,
and that was pascere greg^m Dei: If they did this, then were they Pastors; if
they did not, they were no Presbyters, the name and Office here must needs go
together. And though in our Translation both here and elsewhere, we render the
word Presbyter by that of Elder, yet when we find it so translated, we must
take it thus, that howsoever for their age they were called Elders, yet by
their Office they were Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments, such as had
senectutem cordis, though not corporis, in St. Gregory's language. Priests they
were then that here assembled, (...) in the Church-construction; and yet not
simply Priests, and no more then so, but such as were above the rest both in
place and power, the Bishops and chief Rulers both of that and the
neighbor-Churches. The Text is plain, in quo vos Sp. S. posuit Episcopos, that
the holy Ghost had made them Bishops, or Overseers, as we read in the last
Translation. And I said well, that so we read it in the last; for ab initio non
fuit sic, it was not so in the beginning. An ancient M. S. Translation, which
by the Character and Language I guess to be as old as Wiclif, reads it plainly
Bishops. So does that also of Miles Coverdale, a fervent Protestant in King
Henry's days, and no great friend unto the calling, although one himself.
Beza, though he dislike the Hierarchy, and makes it a device of man, if not of
Satan, yet renders it Episcopos, as the vulgar does. And so do the Divines of
the Lutheran Churches, though generally in common speech they rather do affect
the Title of a Superintendent; and so ex Graecis bonis Latinas fecere non
bonas, as the Poet has it. Only our last Translators, of all people else, when
as they might have kept themselves with safety to the Greek Originals, have
brought us in an Overseer for a Bishop. Which if it were not done ut placerent
populo, to please the people, yet possibly it might be done quia timebant sibi
a populo, because they were afraid to offend the people. A vein of which
timidity one may easily find in many places of the Acts and Writings of the
holy Apostles.

But Overseers let them be, the Overseers, if you please, of Christ's Will and
Testament, the overseers of the Clergy, which are the Executors of that Will
and Testament, appointed to administer the Word and Sacraments, which are the
Legacies Christ left behind him unto all the people. And Overseers let them be
in name and dignity as well as Office; For being that the Priest may be called
a Seer, according to that meaning of that notion, in the first of Samuel, (He
that is now called a Prophet was before called a Seer,) 1 Samuel cap. 9. v. 9.
then certainly, the Bishop being over and above the Priest may well be called
an Overseer. And so all circumstances pondered and compared together, we have
gained thus much; that those to whom this charge was given were Bishops, or
Overseers if you will, such unto whom the oversight of the flock was trusted;
such unto whom St. Peter speaks in his first Epistle, Pascite gregem Dei qui in
vobis est, Feed you the flock of Christ which is amongst you, (...), says the
Text, playing the Bishops in the same, or taking the oversight thereof, as the
English reads it. Nor does it any way contradict this Tenet, that those who are
entitled Bishops, or (...) in the 28. are called (...), Priests or Elders only
in the 17th verse; For Beza tells us in his Notes on the first of Peter,
Generale nomen est Presbyteri, that the word Presbyter is so general in some
Texts and places, ut ipsi quoque Apostoli hoc nomine comprehendantur, that even
the holy Apostles are comprised therein. If so, as so it is, and that the
Apostles may be comprehended in the name of Presbyters, then certainly it is no
absurdity or incongruity to say, that the Presbytery in the 17th verse, whom
St. Paul called from Ephesus and the Neighbour-Cities, ( ab Epheso and a
reliquis proximis civitatibus, as in Irenaeus,) were not simply Presbyters, but
such as had preeminence above the rest, whom the Text honored in the 28. with
the name of Bishops. The Bishop of Ephesus was anciently a Metropolitan, and
had many Suffragans; which possibly may be the reason why Ephesus is only named
in the relation of this Story.

Having thus found out the Physician, I need not dwell upon the remedy, but
leave that to them; credendum est artifici in art sua. We have had many
Phormio^s lately which take upon them to instruct their betters, and teach the
Bishops how to govern. All that I have to say is but vigilate, that it
concerns the Prelate to be very watchful; and that not only in regard of
Wolves, Heretics, and all such as are counted Heretics, as some men would
have them; but in relation unto subtle practisers, and such as would fain rise
in the Churches fall. Not only heterodox and heretical teachers, but factious
and perverse Preachers are brought within the compass of this vigilate; and
that by the direction of St. Paul himself, who had his Warrant from above, and
knew how to use it. And indeed vigilate is the safest Physic in the present
case, not only to prevent, but remove the sickness. If vigilate be well
followed, either men will not rise at all, or being risen, dare not talk
perversely; or if they do, it must be closly and in corners; and that will draw
away but few Disciples to follow after and admire them. Other the Ministers of
God and his holy Church are Watchmen in their several places over the little
flocks committed to them, the Bishop is Praefectus vigilum, the Captain of the
Watch, the common Sentinel, who by his Office is to walk the round, and see
that the inferior Watchmen do discharge their duties. The tidings of our
Saviors birth was first proclaimed unto a company of Shepherds keeping watch
over their flocks by night; their care and vigilance deserved that comfort
which the Angels gave them, Nolite timere, Fear not, I bring you tidings of
great joy. The Watchmen which expect the like grace and favor must not be
short of them in their pains and travel; if they expect from God or his holy
Angels at Christ's second coming, Evangelizo vobis gaudium magnum, they must be
vigilantes super gregem suum.

Ezekiel tells us of the living Creatures which he beheld as in a vision, totum
corpus plenum oculis in circuitu, that they were full of eyes round about them:
the perfect Emblem of a vigilant and careful Prelate, who must not only see
before him, but have his eyes in every corner of his Diocese, in every member
of his body: Eyes in his head, to understand his place and function, that he be
able to perform what belongs unto him: Eyes in his feet, to have a care unto
his goings, that he give no offense or scandal in so high a calling: Eyes in
his hand, or Oculatus manus, as he in Plautus, that he ordain no man
unworthily: Nay, even his Crozier he must have eyes, he must have oculatum
baculum, as Antiochus has it, that so he punish none but those that deserve
correction. In a word, as the good Father Iraeneus said of God Almighty, that
he is totus oculus, and totum lumen; so should it be reported of a careful
Prelate, that he is eye all over, and sees round about him. Which if he do,
however he may wink at some things out of humane frailty, and possibly connive
at others out of just necessity, yet will he still have one eye open to have a
care upon the main.

The Tale of Argus with his hundred eyes, how they did watch and sleep by turns
when the guarded lo, how he was voce nova captus, and virga medicata tactus,
won with a song, and blinded with a touch of a charmed rod, is a pretty fable,
but very useful in the moral: And it does plainly show the Prelate this, that
if fine words can win him, and corruption blind him, he will become a prey to
every Mercury, and in conclusion, lose himself and the Church together.
Vigilate igitur, watch therefore, you that are this day advanced to so high a
dignity: And what I say to you I say to all the rest in their several stations,
Vigilate, Watch.

Now unto God the Father who keeps Israel, whose eyes do neither sleep nor
slumber; to God the Son, the chief Shepherd, and Bishop of our souls; and
unto God the holy Ghost, which has made you Bishops to feed and rule the
Church of God, let us ascribe all honor, praise, and power, and glory, now and
for evermore. Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED At WESTMINSTER.
JOHN 10. v. 11. I am the good Shepherd, The good Shepherd gives his life for
the Sheep.
AMongst those several Allegories which are used in Scripture to signify the
state of the Church of God, there is not any one which does more lively
represent the same unto us then that of the Shepherd and the Sheep: The
Shepherd vigilant and intent, not only in the feeding, but the preservation of
the flock committed to him: the Sheep obedient to the voice of the careful
Shepherd, and apt to follow in the way which he leads before them. The Office
of this heavenly Shepherd, as it relates unto the feeding of his flock, we
find most punctually expressed in the 23. Psalm of David; but as it does
concern them in their preservation, we find it no where more exactly then in
this whole Chapter of St. John. His life he laid down for his Sheep, for their
Redemption, v. 17.
that he might take it up again for their justification. This made him take
unto himself that glorious attribute of Pastor ille bonus, that good Shepherd;
good absolutely in himself as the Son of God, and good respectively to us as
he is a Shepherd; especially if we reflect upon the hireling and the Thief,
which here he speaks of; for if we mark the situation of the Text, we find it
crucified in a manner between two Malefactors, the Thief upon the one hand, and
the hireling on the other. The Thief we find in the 10th verse, who comes into
the Fold to no other end, nisi ut furetur, and mactet and perdat, but to steal,
and kill, and to destroy. And this does manifest the more our Saviors
goodness, who came not to destroy, but to save the Flock. The hireling he comes
after, v. 12. who undertakes the charge with no other purpose then that of
Balaam the son of Bosor, 2* Pet. 2. 15.
amans mercedem iniquitatis, even for the wages of unrighteousness. And
therefore when he sees the Wolf, he takes care for one; not for his sheep, (for
the Text tells us, v. 13. that he cares not for them) but for himself: He
leaves the sheep and flies, and the Wolf catches them, and scatters them.
v. 12.
This does the more advance the reputation of the good Shepherd of my Text, who
knows the sheep, and loves them as his own; and for a Pledge and Testimony of
his great affection, chose rather to expose his own life to a certain ruin,
then that his flock should run the hazard of a dissipation. And so we briefly
fall on the words themselves, Ego sum Pastor ille bonus, I am the good
Shepherd, etc.

These words contain in them these two general parts, a Position and an
Exposition: the Position in the first, Ego sum Pastor ille bonus, I am the good
Shepherd; the Exposition in the last, Matthew. 11. v. 3.
Bonus pastor animam suam dat proovibus suis, The good Shepherd gives his life
for the Sheep. We may resolve them both into this Proposition; Our Savior
Jesus Christ is that good Shepherd which lays down his life for his Sheep.
Now in this Proposition we have these three parts; the Person first, and that
is Christ himself who speaks it, Ego sum, I am. 2. The office; and that is a
Shepherd, (...) in the Greek, that Shepherd; and last of all his eminent piety
in the discharge of that employment, he is Pastor bonus, the good Shepherd.
Where in the Greek, as we had (...), ille Pastor, so have we (...), ille bonus
too. And so our Savior is that Shepherd also, the best no doubt that ever was,
none ever laying down his life for his sheep but he. These are the parts, and
these I shall discourse of as they lie in order, beginning with the Person
first, which is Ego, I.

Ego sum, I am; So the Text expressly: But who this Ego is, that we find not
here. This must be looked for in the 7th verse. Dixit eis iterum Jesus, then
said Jesus unto them again: And having found this we need seek no further, nor
ask with John's Disciples, art thou he, or shall we look for another? This Ego
is that (...), he that was to come, whom St. John asked after, that Jesus whom
the other John, v. 7.
St. John the Evangelist, in the beginning of this period, does call ostium
ovium, the door of the Sheep: the door there, and the Shepherd here; but both
secundum similitudines, non secundum proprietates, says St. Austin; A door in
a similitude, a Shepherd in a Parable, but in propriety of speech a Savior, a
true Jesus verily, so called before his birth by the holy Angel; Matthew. 1. v.
2^.
Jesus by name, the Son of God by nature and propriety, filius unicus de
patre in aeternum ab aeterno genitus, begotten by his Father before all worlds,
God of God, Augustine in Joh^
light of light, very God of very God, as the Creed instructs us. And yet a
Shepherd and a door, a Rock, a Vine, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; besides
those many other Attributes which are accumulated on him in the Scripture,
secundum aliquam similitudinem, according to the trope or allegory.

But of all adjuncts given unto him, those of the Sheep and Lamb, do seem most
incompetible; for if he be a Sheep, who is then the Shepherd? and if he be a
Lamb, who takes care to feed him? And yet a Lamb he is, even that Agnus Dei,
that Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World, as was vouched of him
by St. John: the holy Lamb, the very Paschall Lamb indeed, whose blood being
sprinkled on our doors, keeps away the destroying Angel that he come not near
us. And yet a sheep he is, Esaias 53.
even that harmless sheep whereof Esaias speaks, which being afflicted and
oppressed opened not his mouth, but like the sheep before the Shearer he was
dumb and silent. And this the sacred name of Jesus, if there be any faith to be
had in Anagrams, does either intimate or presuppose; for out of that most
blessed name, as it is written in the Greek, the original Tongue, those which
have traded in that art, have found this Anagram (and a most excellent one it
is indeed) (...), thou art that Sheep, that namely whereof Esaias prophesied, and
in whose name (according to the transposition of the Elements) the Eunuch was
baptized by the Evangelist. Acts 8. v. 38.
So then this Ego of my Text has somewhat in him more then ordinary, being
both the Shepherd and the Sheep; Ille and Pastor est and Ovis, as the Father
has it.

But all this, as before I said, secundum similitudines, as in a figure or
resemblance. Would you be pleased to know what he is indeed, in his own nature
and condition, as he is Ego, I, one of the persons in the Syntax of the blessed
Trinity? Si quaeras a me proprietatem, as St. Austin has it; In Joh.
would you be satisfied in that? then know assuredly, that he is filius hominis
and filius Dei, the Son of God and man, even the man Christ Jesus; Sym^ol.
A^h^n^.
God of the substance of the Father, begotten before all worlds, man of the
substance of his Mother, born in the world: As God, the second Person in the
glorious Trinity, begotten by his Father before all time, generatione, (...),
in an unspeakable manner, without any concurrence or act of woman: As man, the
first person of the Sons of Adam, born of his Mother in the fullness of time,
generatione (...), in a most supernatural way, without help of man. The very
true Melchisedeck which the Scriptures speak of, who in the unity of his
person, being God and man, is without Father, Heb. 7. v. 3.
without Mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of
life: Without a Father as the Son of man, without a Mother as the Son of
God; in both respects without descent, nam generationem ejus quis enarret? Esaias
53. v* 8.
for who can tell the manner of his Generation, or derive his Pedigre? Without
a Father, yet the Son of God; without a Mother, yet the Son of the Virgin
Mary; here without Father, without Mother there. In terris sine Patre, in
coelis vero sine matre, as it is in Origin. Shall we explain this Riddle by
another? Know then, that in despite of Grammar and the Rules of Accidence, Ego
is here the second person, and yet as worthy as the first.

That God by his means would repair the ruins of our mortal nature, himself
had frequently foretold in holy Scripture: It was the first promise made to
Adam, to comfort and revive him after his defection, that the seed of the woman
should bruise the Serpents head; Genesis 3. 15.
that he should crush the sting of death, and swallow up the grave in victory.
It was the first promise which God made to Abraham, when he commanded him to
leave his own Country and his Fathers House, Genesis 12. v. 3.
that in his seed should all the Nations of the World be blessed. Promises not
to be fulfilled but in him that made them, never to be accomplished till God
descended so much beneath himself, as to come down from Heaven, and be
incarnate in the womb of the Virgin Mary. This the great mystery of godliness
which St. Paul inculcates, God manifested in the flesh; the Verbum caro factum,
which St. John remembers. Jo^. 1. 14.
For who but he that is the Word could by his words procure this testimony from
his enemies, Joh. 7. 48.
nec vox hominem sonat, never man spoke as this man speaks? Who but God
manifested in the flesh could by his works extort this true Confession from his
executioners? Matthew. 27. v. 54.
Surely this was no other then the Son of God. Adeo veritas ab invitis etiam
pectoribus erumpit, Institut.
said Lactantius truly.

And yet besides Gods gracious pleasure, and the necessity of man's estate that
so it must be, it stood with most convenience that so it should be. Qui alterum
erigit seipsum incurvat, He that lifts up another must first stoop himself, and
bow down his own body first, before he can raise up a man that is fallen. And
this was it for which the second person in the glorious Trinity became the
first in the construction of my Text; He made himself the Son of man, that so
we might be made the Sons of God. He for a time did bow down the Heavens, and
remained with us on the Earth for a certain season, that man created of the
Earth, might be taken with him up to Heaven, and there live for ever. His
incorruptible did put on our corruption, that so our mortal might be clothed
with his immortality. And this in the good Fathers Language, Augustine in Joh.
non similitudo, sed res ipsa est, is neither Allegory, Trope nor Figure, but a
most sacred necessary truth, and of all men to be believed who have not
forfeited their faith to advance their wits; or rather have not forfeited those
great wits they boast of, in bringing all the Principles of the Christian faith
to be indicted and arraigned at the Bar of Reason. Lactant.
Id fides credat, intelligentia non requirat, was the Fathers Rule, but thrown
aside in this unlucky Age, wherein men are so apt to dispute themselves out of
all Religion, and set up a new Creed of their own devising.

So then this Ego of my Text relates to Jesus, v. 1. and that unto the first of
Matthew, where he had his name, and where he was proclaimed by the heavenly
Herald to be conceived of the holy Ghost by the Virgin Mary. Ego here, Jesus
there; in both Texts a Savior, a person of a mixed condition between God and
man, such as a Savior ought to be; For being sensible of our infirmities as a
man, and able to relieve us in them as our God, as God and man he mediates for
us, that being freed of those infirmities which are inherent in our flesh, we
may hereafter reign with him in his endless glories. We read in Livie, that
when the Romans had violently surprised the Sabine Women, and taken them to
their Wives, the angry Sabines took up Arms to revenge the injury. The Armies
being ready for the fight, the Women seriously taking into consideration, that
as they were begotten by the one, so they are now as flesh with the other
people, rush in between them, Hist. Romans Dec. 1. ^. 1.
Hinc viros, inde Patres orabant, Sometimes they pray unto their Fathers to
remit the wrong, and sometimes call unto their Husbands to admit a Parley;
never desisting from that pious office, till both the Armies were made friends,
and an eternal League was sworn between them. The Application is so easy and
familiar that I need not press it: Only I note, that this great work of our
Reconciliation could not be wrought by any but a Savior, and such as had
relation to both parties, both to God and man; that being jealous of the honor
of the one, and zealous for the preservation of the other, he might make up
that peace betwixt us which all the powers of Hell should not interrupt. Which
work of reconciliation, being a special part of that Pastoral charge which he
has taken to himself, leads me on fairly to my second general, which is the
Office of our Savior; Ego sum ille Pastor, I am that Shepherd.

And here perhaps it may be said, that we have took great pains to a little
purpose: Have we endeavored all this while to prove our Savior to be the
Son of the eternal ever-living God, and do we now so much debase him as to
make him a Shepherd? Have we advanced him up on high, and set him at the right
hand of God in the heavenly places, ut lapsu graviore ruat, Claudian.
only to make his fall the greater? Or with the Tempter in the Gospel, have we
advanced him to the top of the highest Pinnacle, and told him that he was the
Son of God, and then come out with mitte te deorsum, cast thy self down as
far as poverty and contempt can make thee? This were a cunning piece of
malice, if it were so meant, in case the office of a Shepherd were so
contemptible and inconsiderable as some men have made it. But if we look upon
it well, we shall find the contrary; there being no inferior place of charge
or Government, more like unto the Kingly Office then the Shepherds is: Upon
which ground Homer calls Agamemnon, de Agricultura.
(...), the Shepherd of his People. And Philo gives it for a Rule, that not
Homer only, (...), but the whole Tribe of Poets also have honored good Princes
with the same Attribute. Nay, in his Book of the life of Joseph he gives this
note, that the best Shepherd makes the best King: and in his Tract de vita
Mosis does affirm expressly, (...), that the best preparation to the Kingly
Office is to be a Shepherd. In which regard St. Basil tells us, (...), that the
Pastoral and Imperial Offices were near of kin; the one being but a (...), or
preparation to the other. But behold a greater then Philo or St. Basil here:
For God himself has said of Cyrus, Esaias 44. v. 28:
that he was his Shepherd; and purposely exalted David from the Sheepfold to
the regal Throne, that he might know the better how to feed Jacob his people,
and Israel his Inheritance, Psalm. 78. v. 70.

Nor has the name of Shepherd been accounted anciently an honorary adjunct
only to the greatest Princes, (...), but to God himself, as Philo has observed
in his Book of Husbandry. An observation not so strange in Philo, by birth a
Jew, and so acquainted with the Scripture, as it may seem to be in Plato, Plato
de Reg^o.
who was a mere stranger to the Covenant: And yet in Plato do we find it, and
that in terms no less expressive then in those of Philo; for speaking of the
peaceable and happy lives which men are said to lead in the first Ages, he
gives this reason for it in his Book de Regno, (...), etc. God, says he, was
their ^hepherd, and he did lead them and conduct them as now Princes do; whom
therefore we are bound to honor in the next degree to the Gods immortal. A
Speech so excellent and divine, that nothing but the written word can go beyond
it. But behold a greater then Plato is here also; for God has told us by the
mouth of his Servant David, that he is a Shepherd; Dominus Pastor meus, the
Lord is my Shepherd, Psalm. 23. and hear O thou Shepherd of Israel, v. 1. v. 1.
Psalm. 80.

If therefore God may, without diminution of his power and greatness, assume
unto himself the name of a Shepherd, assuredly the Son of God will think it
no disparagement to be called so too. Or if it were, what poor and low
condition would not he gladly undergo for the sake of man, whose bowels yerned
so often within him, Matthew. 9. v. 36.
when as he saw his wretched and neglected people wandering like sheep without a
Shepherd? And certainly, if we consult the Scriptures, we shall there find
that God designed him to this Office, long time before his incarnation, the
taking of our flesh upon him; v. 23.
for in the 34. of Ezekiel, thus says the Lord about his flock, I will set up
one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, and ipse erit eis in Pastorem,
and shall be their Shepherd. A Prophecy accomplished by our Lord and Saviou^
in the whole work and business of his life amongst us* for being appointed by
Almighty God to be the Shepherd of his people, Luke 2. 8. 12.
he caused the first tidings of his Birth to be proclaimed to a company of
shepherds; and chose a stable, or a sheep-coat rather, (as most Fathers think)
to be the place of his Nativity. Conversing here amongst us men, he took unto
himself the name of a Shepherd, v. 11. 14.
being styled so in this Chapter twice, and talking of his Sheep throughout the
whole. After all this, being to take his farewell of us, (for as much as did
concern his bodily presence) he left no greater charge unto his Disciples, Joh.
21. v. 16, 17.
then, Pascite oves meas, to feed his sheep. One further evidence to this
purpose we will make bold to borrow out of Plutarchs works, who tells a Story
of one Thames, that as he sailed toward Greece, was by a strange voice, but
from whence he knew not, commanded to make known when he came on Land, that Pan
the Shepherds God was dead. This Pan the Author takes to be the son of
Mercury and Penelope, Plutarch de Oracul. cessat.
when the Gentiles worshipped: But they which looked with more advice into the
matter, conceive it rather to be meant of the Son of God, and the Virgin
Mary; who much about the time which that Author speaks of, did suffer death
upon the Cross for our redemption, and was indeed the true God Pan, chief
Shepherd of the soul of man.

A Shepherd then our Savior was, there is no doubt of that; we might have took
it absolutely on his Ipse dixit. But how he does discharge the office, is in
the next place to be considered. And this we shall the better see, by looking
for a while on the Country-shepherd, whose duty does consist in three points
especially; 1. In the feeding, 2. In the ordering, And 3. In the guarding of
the sheep committed to him. For feeding first, there is no question to be made
but that it is a part of the shepherds office. The very name does intimate so
much unto us; for Pastor a pascendo, a shepherd is so called from feeding, and
that not in the Language of the Latins only, but in Greek and Hebrew. This
duty mentioned in the Georgicks, Luciferi primo cum sydere frigida rura
carpamus: in which he does advise his shepherd, that at the dawning of the day
he unfold his sheep, and drive them out into their Pasture. And this
exemplified in Jacob, Genesis 30, 31.
and the sons of Jacob, honest shepherds all; it being said of Jacob in the
Book of God, 37. 12.
that he did feed the Sheep of Laban; of Jacob's sons, that they did feed
their Fathers flocks in Sichem. And finally, this took for granted in Almighty
God, in his expostulation with the Priests and Prophets of the House of Isra^l,
Ez^k. 34. v. 2.
nonne greges a Pastoribus pascuntur? should not the Shepherds feed the Flocks?

That Christ does punctually discharge this duty, v. 25*
is past all controversy: The Prophet has foresignified that he should so do;
I will set up one Shepherd over them: and the Evangelists declare that he did
so do, For what were all those heavenly Sermons, those frequent exhortations
unto faith and piety which he so often made unto them, but a spiritual feeding
of the inward man, a sweet refection of the soul, a celestial nourishment? His
feeding of so many thousands by a few Loaves of Bread, and two small fishes,
what was it, though a signal miracle, compared with those many millions which
he does feed continually with the bread of life? We need not doubt of the
success, when he that fed them with the Word was the Word it self; or of the
spreading of the Gospel, when he that was the Preacher was the Gospel too; or
of the nourishment of the Guests in the fruits of godliness, when he that
carved unto them the life of bread was of himself the bread of life. For he
indeed was magnus ille panis qui mentem replet, Augustine.
non ventrem, that holy bread which feeds the soul, and not the body, as the
Father has it; the living bread (as himself tells us of himself) which came
down from Heaven, of which whosoever eats he shall live for ever. Joh. 6. 51.
Which bread, if it be meant of Christ, who is God the Word, we then partake it
principally in the Sacraments; but if we understand it of the Word of God, in
Psalm. 1. 47.
(as St. Hierome does) we must then look for it in the Scriptures. By these two
means, the preaching of Gods holy Word, and the administration of his
Sacraments, are we still fed and nourished unto life eternal; 1 Pet. 5.
if not by Christ himself, the (...), or chief Shepherd, as St. Peter calls
him, yet by those Underofficers, those inferior Ministers to whom he has
entrusted that most weighty duty.

First, for the preaching of the Word, that belongs equally to all his
Ministers; to whom he granted a Commission to this end and purpose, when he
commanded his Apostles, and in them all other Ministers of his holy Gospel,
Mat. 28. 28.
to teach all Nations; or, as St. Mark does change the Phrase, Mark 16.
to preach the Gospel. This the most excellent kind of feeding, and most
peculiar to our Savior in his Pastoral Office; the feeding of our bodies
appertaining rather unto God the Father, who on the opening of his hand fills
all things living with plenteousness. Psalm. 145.
In which respect, our Savior tells us in his Gospel, that man lives not by
bread alone, but by every word proceeding from the mouth of God. This is that
part of heavenly nourishment from which we are at no time barred; from which no
age, no sex, no quality is to be repelled. Universos homines, ^^ct. l. 1. M^n.
Fell.
sine discrimine sexus vel aetatis, (Minutius adds vel dignitatis) ad coeleste
pabulum convocamus. This bread is offered unto all, of what condition or estate
soever; and being offered unto all requires the more hands to make tender of
it. And therefore all the Ministers of the Church in their Ordination have this
authority entrusted to them, that they should preach the Gospel, where and
whenever they are appointed thereunto.

For the administration of the Sacraments, especially the holy Eucharist, that
belongs only to the Priests, who has power to consecrate and bless the
creatures, which are appointed by the Lord our Savior for the commemoration of
his death and passion. Hoc facite is there the Priests Commission, to take the
bread, and bless and break it? hoc edite, hoc bibite, take, eat and drink, are
a Commission to the people to partake thereof: And certainly, never was Table
better furnished then that of our Redeemer in the blessed Sacrament; a Banquet
of all others the most rich and nourishing, where Jesus Christ is set before
us, and he himself is both the Entertainer and the Feast. If any hunger, here
is the bread of life, Joh. 8. 51.
spiritual Mannah, far better then the food of Angels; whoever eats of this
Bread he shall live for ever. Is any thirsty, here is the well of life eternal,
far better then the well of Jacob, or the waters of Jordan; Whoever drinks
of these waters he shall never thirst. Ioh. 4. 14.
Will you have more? and in that more the proof and reason of the whole; he
tells us, that his flesh is meat indeed, and that his blood is drink indeed,
in St. John's Gospel. A bountiful and liberal feast, and such whereof our
blessed Savior is no niggard; we may participate of it monthly, weekly,
daily, as our spiritual necessities and estates require: Panem hunc dat
quotidie, in Psalm. 18.
dat omnibus, dat semper, as Ambrose has it.

The second duty of the Shepherd is, that he order and direct the Flock
committed to him: so to direct them that they do not wander; or if they do,
that he reduce them back to the Fold again; to order them, both when they are
in state of health, and when they chance to fall into those Diseases to which
they naturally are inclined. The word (...) in the Greek does imply a
Government; the Poet else had not called Agamemnon (...), the Prince or
shepherd of his people. And so we find it also in the Book of God, in which
(...) is interpreted to rule or govern; v. 6.
as in the 2d of St. Matthew, for out of thee shall come a Governor, (...),
which shall rule my people Israel. Now for the exercise of this part of his
Office, the shepherd has not only his Oils and waters, and other implements of
Surgery, Scyllamque helleborosque graves, nigrumque bitumen, as the Poet
has it; but he is armed also with his Shepherds Crook, which is the Scepter of
his Empire; called therefore Pedum in the Latin, eo quod retineat pecudum
pedes, as Servius notes it upon Virgil. In this regard the shepherds in the
Book of Jeremy are called Optimates gregis, the Princes, or the principalls of
the Flock, 25: 34.
as the English reads it, as having principal authority in ordering and
disposing of them. And David, when he kept his Fathers sheep in Bethlehem, is
represented to us with his Shepherds staff, 1 Samuel 17. v. 40.
Et tulit ba^ulum suum in manibus suis, He took his staff in his hand, as the
Text informs us, i. e. the staff or Shepherds Crook wherewith he used to order
and direct his flock, and pull them in as often as they went astray.

Thus also deals our Lord and Savior with the sheep of his Pasture: Did any of
them prove unsound? he then applied himself unto the cure, Et medicas adhibere
manus ad vulnera, Virgil:
and to the salving of their sores. Witness that heavenly speech of his, when
being taxed for keeping company with Publicans and sinners, he returned this
answer, that the whole had no need of the Physician, Mat. 9. v. 12.
but the sick. Did any of them go astray? he tells us of himself by his holy
Prophet, that he would seek that which was lost, and bring back that again
which was driven away; Ezekiel. 34.
and tells us by himself in his holy Gospel, that the Son of man was come to
seek and save that which was lost; Luke 19. 10. etc.
which in the Parable of the lost sheep is at large exemplified. Were they
grown wanton and unruly? we find him armed with power to destroy the fat and
the strong, and pascere illos in judicio, and to feed them with judgment,
Ezekiel. 34. to feed the flock of his inheritance with a rod, v. 10.
Micah 7. and finally the Prophet David does represent the Lord his Shepherd,
v. 14.
with a rod and a staff, Psalm. 23. i. e. as Austin does expound it, with a
corrective power, with the Rod of Discipline, according to the quality of the
offense, August. in Psalm. 23.
and the condition of the offender. Disciplina tua tanquam virga ad gregem
ovium, and tanquam Baculus ad grandiores filios, as he states the business.

This power of Government, the Lord when he withdrew himself from the sight of
man, transmitted over to the Church, and the Ministers of it. Whether
indifferently to all alike, that is the point in question. Bellarmine looking
through the Spectacles of the Popes Ambition, ascribes this solely to St.
Peter, and to his Successors in the Sea of Rome. de R. Pont. l. 1. c.
His reason is, because the charge of Pasce oves meas, Pasce agnos meos, was
given peculiarly to Peter, and to him alone: But herein he and those of his
opinion, are destitute of that antiquity and consent of Fathers, which usually
they do pretend to. In this the Fathers leave them to themselves to make good
the cause, and run a very different opinion from them. A Jury of them at the
least might be here impanneled, which opine the contrary. And if St. Austine
were the foreman, he would find it thus; de Agon. Chr. c. 40:
that P^ter oftentimes in the holy Scripture, sustained the person of the
Church, Et cum ci dicitur, ad omnes dicitur, pasce oves meas. And therefore
when our Savior said unto him, feed my Sheep, he said the same in him, unto
all the rest. So then the rest of the Apostles have as much interest in this
weighty charge, as St. P^ter had, they being all equally invested pari
consortio potestatis and honoris, with an equal measure both of power and
honor* as Cyprian, Cypr.
and generally all the Fathers tell us.

The next enquiry will be this, whether that all the Ministers of our Saviors
Gospel be equally entrusted with a power of feeding, and may all equally take
upon themselves the name of Pastors. Some would fain have it so indeed; for
seeing that the word of God is the food of the soul, Moulin ad Winton.
non video cur Pastor non dicatur, qui pabulum hoc subministrat, we see no
cause say they, that those who preach the Word of God, should not be honored
also with the name of Pastors. And Pastors let them be, if the name will please
them, though ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so from the beginning; for
anciently the Prelates only had the name of Pastors. St. Austin knew no other
Pastors in the Church of God, then the Apostles and the Bishops, in the 47.
Tract on John. Our learned Andrews is resolute upon the point, ^^nton. ad Moul.
neminem veterum sic locutum, that the Ancients never otherwise understood the
word. And Binius in his notes upon the Councils, excepts against a fragment of
the Council of Rhemes, as being not of that Antiquity which is there pretended:
Tom. 3. part. 2.
quod titulum Pastoris tribuat Par^cho, because the name of Pastor is
communicated to the Parish^Priest, contrary to the usage of those elder times:
But Pastors let them be in Gods name, if the name will please them, so they
usurp not on the power: Pastors, as Pasco is derived from (...), which
signifies to feed, but not to govern,

For whereas there are diverse acts of the Pastoral charge, 1 These. 5. 14.
as viz. to beat down the body of sin, to warn the unruly, comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak, to infuse balm into the sick and wounded soul,
and with all care and industry to call the sinner to repentance: all these do
equally belong to those, who are invested by the Church with holy Orders. The
Parish-Presbyter would very ill be called a Rector, did we not grant him this
authority, And for the power corrective, let him take that too, so far as he
may do it with the sword of the spirit, Et virga oris sui, and with the rod of
his mouth, Esaias 11.
as the Prophet calls it. But for the power of correction, by the Rod of
D^scipline, or the staff of punishment, or by the censures of the Church, that
pertains only to the Prelate, the superior Pastor; and it concerns him
highly, that he use it well. For many times it happens, that the straggling
sheep will not be brought into the Fold by fair persuasions, or by the
Ministry of the Word. What then? Ad diligentiam Pastoralem pertinet, it then
belongs unto the Pastor, Flagellorum terroribus vel etiam doloribus revocare,
to fetch him back again by the stripes of D^scipline, August. E^. 50.
by the coercions of the Church. Which power, were it committed to the hands of
each several Minister, would doubtless prove the greatest tyranny, that ever
the poor Church of Christ did suffer under. This is not (...), but (...), and
pertains solely to the Prelate, as an act of Government; Who therefore
anciently was armed with his Crozier, or Pastoral staff, (and by the Law of
England he may use it still) that by the same he might reduce the stragler, and
correct the stubborn, and rouse up the affections of the sluggish person.
According to the good old verse,

-- Attrahe per primum, medio rege punge per imum; A perfect Emblem of his
duty: for howsoever that of Nazianzen be exceeding true, Nazianz.
(...), that the good Shepherd should oftener use his Pipe then his.
Shepherds-staffe: yet the Sheep become unruly, and will not hear the
Shepherds-pipe, pipe he never so sweetly; he must needs take his staff in
hand, there is no other remedy. But I touch only on these Controversies, and so
pass them by.

The third and last duty which pertains unto the Shepherd is, that he guard his
sheep, and keep them safe, from the devouring malice of the enemy. In which
regard, it is the Custom of those Countries which are plagued with Wolves, to
lodge their sheep at night in defossis specubus, in some strong Caverns under
ground, and free from violence. In which regard, the Poet Virgil does advise
his shepherd to provide himself of some fierce Mastives, acres molossos, as he
calls them, by whom the flock may be defended, during his own necessary
absence. And finally, in this regard the faithful Shepherd does expose his
person unto much peril, many inconveniences, and several assaults of enemies.
Thus Jacob tells us of himself, that when he kept the sheep of Laban, the
drought consumed him by day, Genesis 31. v. 40.
and the Frost by night, and that sleep departed from his eyes. And in the
Story of Gods Book we are told of David, that when he kept his Fathers sheep,
and that a Bear and a Lion had surprised a Lamb, 1 Samuel 30, 35.
he set himself against the fury of those ravenous Beasts, and delivered the
poor Lamb out of their paws, and in a single combat slew them both.

So is it with our Savior Christ in the protection of his Church, in the
defense of those who are the sheep of his Pasture. It was his glory, as it was
his comfort, John.
that of all those whom God had given him, he had lost not one. And 'twas his
comfort as it was his care, that he had lodged them in a place of such strength
and safety, even in his strongest hold, his holy Tabernacle; against the which
the Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail. A place in which if we
continue, we need not fear the violence of Satan that roaring Lion, 1 Pet.
who walks about the Fold continually, seeking out whom he may devour. And it
is well said that he walks about; for get into the Fold he cannot: and
therefore does he walk about it, that so if any of the flock do forsake the
Fold, him he may make his prey, and ravish him into his Den. It Is true, that
Christ has sent us out like sheep among the Wolves, as himself has told us.
But then it is as true withal, that he has furnished us with dogs, and
placed them round about his Church, in each corner of it; that by their
fierceness, and their watchfulness, and continual barking, they may keep far
aloof the common enemy, by whom the straglers are endangered. Vigilant enim and
latrant boni Canes, and pro Pastore, Epist. 59.
and pro Grege, as St. Austin has it. The Wolf and other enemies of the flock,
know this well enough, and indeed labor all they can to destroy these
Mastives. Which when they could not do by violence, they treated with the
sheep, as the Fable has it, to deliver them up into their hands; but mark what
followed thereupon. Oves presidio Canum destitutas laniant, the dogs being
gone, they fell upon the sheep and worried them, and brought them to a swift
destruction.

Lastly, He has supplied his Church from time to time with faithful Pastors,
for the defense and custody thereof from the common enemy: such as have
evermore exposed their persons to apparent dangers, their good names to the
calumnies of malicious tongues, their fortunes many times to apparent ruin;
all for the safety of the flock, for the defense of Christ's and the Churches
cause. Witness those many sufferings of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13.
as St. Paul describes them, reviled, yet blessing; persecuted, yet still
suffering; defamed, and yet entreating: and in a word, ut mundi purgamenta
facti, accounted as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things
to this very day. 2 Cor. 11. 24, 25.
And more then so, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by
their own Countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the City, in
perils in the Wilderness, in perils by Sea, in perils amongst false Brethren.
And to make up the total sum of their afflictions, in stripes above measure,
in prisons more frequent, in deaths often. The Devil knew how much the safety of
the Flock depended on the care and vigilance of the Shepherd, and therefore he
aims most at them. Percutiam Pastorem and dispergam gregem, is the best Text in
his Divinity. This he has practiced in all times and ag^s, upon the Prophets,
the Apostles, Prelates, Pastors; the Shepherds of all ages many, of all places
some; but upon none more visibly then our Savior Christ, who was not only il
Pastor fido, the faithful Shepherd, whose eyes do neither sleep nor slumber,
that so his sheep might feed in safety on the Hills and Mountains; but Pastor
ille bonus, the good Shepherd too, even that good Shepherd of my Text. Not
only willing to expose his person to contempt and scorn, as many of his
followers since have done; but also to lay down his^ life to save his sheep,
which never any did in this world but he. And so I come unto the eminent piety
of our Savior, in the discharge of this employment; being not only ille
Pastor, that Shepherd, but ille bonus Pastor, that good Shepherd also; my last
particular, and now in order to be handled.

Ego sum Pastor ille bonus, I am the good Shepherd. And first this goodness of
the Lord, though indivisible in it self, has been divided by the Schoolmen,
with good propriety both of words and meaning, into two kinds or species. The
first they call (...), Original, the other (...), exemplified. Illa in Deo
existens, haec in creatur is expressa: the first existing solely on the Lord
our God; the other copied out* and manifested in his creatures. That which they
call (...), or original, we may define to be an everlasting and unalterable
quality in Almighty God, qua modis omnibus and sum bonus est, whereby he is
supremely and entirely good. In which regard Plato has said of God, that he is
(...), good only in and of himself, A^rian. E^^ctet.
(...), the only* saving good, as others of the Heathen called him. And he that
knew him best, our most gracious Savior, has given this to us for a Maxim,
That there is none good but only God. Mat. 19. v. 17.
So good, that the most blessed Vision of the Almighty is the most excellent
good, the summum bonum, which any of the Saints or Angels can aspire unto.
Philosophers may wrangle and dispute amongst themselves, of man's chief
felicity, and may ascribe it, if they please, to pleasure, or riches; or as the
wiser sort have done, to the works of virtue. But we that are the sheep of our
Saviors Pasture, look for this summum bonum, only in the Lord our God, and
there we shall be sure to find it.

The other kind of goodness called by the Schoolmen (...), or exemplified, is
that which God has mani^ested on his creatures, and imparted to them. This
they divide again into general and special, that being extended unto all his
Creatures, this more particularly restrained to his chosen servants. This
general goodness clearly manifested in the Creation of the World, ( quid enim
aliud est Mundus quam Deus explicatus, said the old Philosopher) and in
preserving of the same created, clothing the Lillies, and feeding the young
Ravens when they call upon him; making his Sun to shine as well upon the
sinner, as the righteous person; Psalm. 145.
and in a word, opening his hand, and filling all things living with his
plentiousness. In which respect, David most truly tells us of him, repleta est
terra bonitate Domini, Psalm. 32. 5.
the Earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. But that which most especially
does concern this business, is his special goodness, restrained unto his chosen
servants, to such as fear his name, and observe his precepts. The Lord is good
to Israel, Psalm. 73.
(says the royal Psalmist) his qui recto sunt cord, even unto all such as are
of a clean heart. And the Book of Lamentations, The Lord is good to them that
wait for him, to the soul that seeks him. This goodness is manifested and
declared in delivering them from evil, the evil both of sin and punishment; and
in accumulating on them his most sacred blessings both of grace and glory. For
if an earthly Father, (as our Savior urges) though full of evil in himself,
Matthew.
knows how to provide good things for his natural Children: how much more
shall our Father which is in Heaven, bestow good things on those whom he has
adopted. This is enough to make us sensible of Gods goodness to us. And yet the
way by which this goodness is procured for us is far more admirable: Romans 8. 32.
the Lord not sparing his own Son, but delivering him up for us all, that
with him he might also freely give us all things, as St. Paul instructs us.

This is indeed the highest point of heavenly goodness. And very hard it is to
say, whether deserve more of our admiration, either that God the Father should
appoint it so, or God the Son considered in our flesh, should act the
Tragedy. I shall no longer wonder at the strange Command which God once laid
upon our Father Abraham. Abraham take now thy Son, Genesis 22. 2.
thine only Son Isaac, whom thou love, and offer him for a burnt Offering
to the Lord thy God. Here find we God the Father really performing what he
imposed on Abraham, tentandi causa, only for trial of his faith, and his
obedience. Nor shall I much admire at the zeal of Moses, desiring in a pious
fervency, that he himself might be blotted out of the Book of God, Exodus 3. 32^.
upon condition that the peoples sins might be forgiven them. Here find we God
the Son actually laying down his most precious life, not only for his own
people and the sheep of his hands, but even for those which were not of his
Fold, and did never know him. Alias enim Oves habeo. For other sheep I have
which are not of this Fold, as in the 16. of this Chapter. An action beyond all
example; and such wherein our blessed Savior went beyond himself. Himself had
given it for a Maxim, John 15. 1^.
that greater love could no man show then this, that a man lay down his life
for his friend. And yet behold how willingly he gave his life for those who
either were false friends, or apparent enemies, Never did Sheepherd act such a
part of goodness, never were sheep so much obliged unto the goodness of their
Sheepherd.

O the unsearchableness of Gods mercy! the most unlimited extent of his grace
and goodness to mortality! It had been far above the possibility, either of
our merit or requital, had he but only bowed the Heavens and come down to visit
us. It had been such a prodigy as would have startled the most settled minds
of the sons of nature, to have heard only this, that for a good man's sake,
some peradventure would yet dare to die. But God (says the Apostle) commends
his love to us in this, in that whilst we were yet sinners, Romans 5. 8.
Christ di^d for us. The Lord and giver of life, submits himself unto the
death; mortem autem Crucis, to the reproachful death of the accursed Cross. He
yields himself to the most shameful of all deaths, the accursed Cross for the
most wretched and unworthy of all his Creatures, rebellious man. Rebellious
man, which had so often provoked his God to anger, and crucified as it were the
Lord of Glory, before his coming in the flesh. And which does add unto the
miracle of his goodness to us, divinitatem dat in proemium, he died for us that
we might live with him for ever; August.
and therefore put on our corruption, that we might all be clothed with his
immortality. Good God! how gladly could I wish unto my self, the tongues of men
and Angels at this present time, that I might speak a little of thy Grace and
mercy. And yet O Lord, the tongues of men and Angels would fall so short of
true expression, that they would seem no better then a sounding brass, 1 Cor.
13.
or a tinckling Cymball. Thou only have ability to relate the history of thine
own great mercies, who had alone the power to do them. The story of thy
sufferings will be then best told, when we shall see thee face to face; and
thou which were the Argument, art the Author too.

Christ died then. Animam suam posuit pro Ovibus suis, and laid down his most
precious life to preserve ^is flock. Besides his gracious pleasure that so it
should be, there was in a manner a necessity that so it must be. Heb. 9*
Without the shedding of blood (says the Apostle) there is no remission; and
what blood else could have that efficacy, but his that speaks far better
things unto us, then the blood of Abel. No saving of the sheep, but by the
blood of the Shepherd: no raising of the sons of men to the life of
righteousness, but by subjecting the Son of God to the death of nature. c.
53. v. 5.
For our transgressions was he wounded, for our iniquities was he bruised, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed, says
the Prophet Esaias. Percutiam Pastorem is salvation here. Besides, the enemy
against whom he fought, had been else invincible. For as upon some sudden
exigents, the surest way to conquer is to flee; so here, the readiest way for
him to get the victory, was to lose his life. Novum ad victoriam iter sanguinis
sui semita aperuit, Florus hist* Romans l. 1.
as the Historian said of Decius. This was indeed a battle of a strange
condition, in which the Conqueror must first lose his life, before he could
obtain the victory, and live again before he could enjoy it. No other way to
subjugate the powers of death, and ransom his distressed sheep from the hands
of Satan, c. 2. v. 14.
but by his death to overthrow him which had the power of death, which is the
Devil. So the Apostle to the Hebrews, A miracle says the Gloss indeed, that
the Devil should be beaten at his own weapon; and being the first that brought
in death, should be conquered by it. Mors enim erat arma per quae vincebat
diabolus, and per en victus est a Christo. So the Gloss expounds it. Closs.
O^dinar


Thus punctually has the Lord our Savior discharged the duty of the good
Sheepherd unto us; and somewhat we must do reciprocally in the correspondence
thereunto. But what that is, will be too long a business, to be discoursed of
at this present. The 27. of this Chapter will be a more convenient Theme,
whereupon to build an Application of the present Doctrine; as it relates unto
the Pastoral charge of Christ our Savior, in feeding of our souls with the
bread of life, curing our wounded consciences with the Physic of the Word,
correcting out obliquities with the rod of Discipline; and lodging us in a most
safe and secure place, whilst we are made partakers of his heavenly comforts.
But as our present Text relates to the Sheepherds goodness, the Application
will be here more proper then it can be there: the hearing of his voice, and
the requital of his goodness in a mutual suffering, being of very different
natures. For questionle^s, as Christ out of his infinite goodness did will^ngly
lay down his life for us; so may ^e well expect a mutual readiness in us, not
only to die with him, but to die for him^ also, when our ^piritual necessities*
and the extremities of his Church shall so require. The first of these two
ways, is by dying with him, cruc^^ying our sins upon his Cross, burying our
corrupt affections in his Grave, mortify^ng our earthly members, and killing in
our selves the whole body of sin. This to be done by chastising of our souls
with watchings, fastings, labors, patience, afflictions, sufferings. Duties so
thoroughly practiced in the former times, by many of the Primitive Christians,
that their very flesh was rarefied into spirit; and the whole man so fitted for
eternal glories, as if they did not look to die, but to be translated. Which
duties, as they are at all times to be practiced by us, so most especially on
those days and times, which are designed according to the pattern of pure
Antiquity, for fasting, prayer, and such like acts of Christian humiliation:
though now not only generally neglected by most sorts of men, as if there were
no difference between Christian liberty and antichristian licentiousness; but
branded and defamed as superstitious, if not somewhat worse. So that I fear we
may too truly take up the complaint of the Royal Psalmist I humbled my self and
fasted, and put on Sackcloth, and it was turned to my reproof.

The second way of mutual suffering with our Savior, is by dying for him. This
was the salt wherewith he seasoned his Disciples, and^ it preserves their
memories most sweet and fragrant to this very day. A matter not so gracious I
confess unto flesh and blood, but such as may be entertained without great
difficulty, in any heart that is truly Christian; by any one who seriously
considers how much the most that he can suffer for the sake of Christ, comes
short of that which Christ has suffered for the sake of man: he being
immortal, and not subject unto death, unless he would; we mortal, and of
necessity to die, how much soever w^ decline it. Death is a sleep, which first
or last must bind up all our senses; and in the bottom of the Grave we shall
all be lodged. This all the difference, that some of us may be sooner had to
bed, and not laid down so easily as the others are. Add unto this the
comfortable words of Christ our Savior, in St. Matthews Gospel, qui perdiderit
animam suam propter me, Mat. 10. 39
he that loses his life for my sake, shall be sure to find it. And tell me
then if thus to die, be not the readiest way to live for ever: if thus to
venture all for the sake of Christ, be not the surest way to keep all from
hazard, and to receive our own with usury. Thus must we be resolved, if ever,
as God knows how soon, there should be occasion: and though there never be
occasion, (as God grant there be not) yet must we all be thus affected, at the
least in voto. So doing, we are Martyrs though we do not suffer, and shall die
whilst we live. And dying for him, whilst we live in our earthly Tabernacles;
we shall live with him when we die in his endless Glories. Which God of his
great mercy vouchsafe unto us all. Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED At WINDSOR, Jan. 25. 1641.
JOHN 10. v. 27. My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
THe Sheepherd and the Sheep are a kind of relatives, and there are mutual and
reciprocal Offices to be done between them. The Sheepherd calls the Sheep by
name, and they hear his voice; he leads them in the way, and they follow him.
This Sheepherd who it is we have seen already; it is Christ our Savior, the
great Sheepherd of the Sheep as St. Paul; the (...), or chief Sheepherd, as St.
Peter calls him. Heb. 13. 1 Pet. 5.
But what need more be said of this, then what our Savior has affirmed in
that kind before, who did not only take upon himself the name and office of a
Sheepherd, but challenged to himself the title of the good Sheepherd too, the
best without all question that was ever known; none ever laying down his life
for the sheep but he. So for the sheep, look we but on our selves, we shall
quickly find them: Psalm. 95.
we being all of us, oves manuum ejus, the sheep of his Hands, the workmanship
of his Creation, and oves pascuae ejus the sheep of his pastures, fed and
brought up by him in the works of godliness. And this the good Father Greg.
N^ss. does reckon as a principal part of our felicity, (...), that Christ does
cause us to be called his sheep, and feed us with the viands of eternal life.

How far our blessed Savior has discharged his Office, not only as a
Sheepherd, but the good Sheepherd too, we have shown already. Superat pars
altera curae lanigeros agitare greges; That which remains behind, does concern
our selves, the duties wherein we stand bound by the Lord our Sheepherd. For
certainly, it is to be expected, that if he speak unto us, we should also
hearken; if he preach to us, we should practice. More then this he requires not
of us; and less then this we could not do, did he not require it. The hearing
of his voice when he speaks unto us, is an easy piety: and we should ill
deserve the benefit even of outward sense, did we not hearken unto him who made
the ear; or lend an ear to him, who first gave it us. The following of his
steps in the way of godliness, may perhaps seem an harder duty; and yet of no
such difficulty, if considered rightly, when he which leads the way does
support us in it. We shall ill find the way to immortality, if we were left
unto our selves; who cast such doubts, and make such poor excuses to delay the
journey, having so sure a Guide, such a brave Conductor, not only to direct us
that we do not err, but to sustain us also that we do not fall. These the
chief duties which he looks for from us; and these he gives us in the words now
read unto you. Oves meae vocem meam audiunt, My Sheep hear my voice, and follow
me.

These words, as they relate unto our selves, present unto us these three
things to be considered. 1. The condition of Gods people, as they are
represented to us in the name of sheep: first Oves, and then Oves meae, Christ's
Sheep, the sheep of his most blessed Pastures. 2. The duties here expected from
them, which are audire and sequi, to hear and to follow; or rather so to hear
that we may follow the better. 3. We have the object of this duty, which is
twofold also, vocem meam, me; not my voice only, but my footsteps too. These
are the points to be considered* beginning first with the condition of Gods
people, as they are represented to us in the name of sheep: first single in
themselves as Oves, then as united in one fold, under one chief Shepherd, oves
meae, my sheep, the whole flock together. First then,

Ovis est molle pecus, corpore inerme, animo placidum. The sheep is said by
Isidore, to be a creature of a very meek and quiet nature, of great, both
innocence and simplicity: disarmed, and so by consequence disabled from doing
the least hurt or injury to any other. In this regard, our Savior Christ was
likened by the Prophet Esaias, unto a sheep before the Shearer. Who though he was
not only shorn, 53. 7.
but fleeced; nay both oppressed and afflicted, as the Text informs us: yet he
endured it all with patience. He opened not his mouth, but was dumb before
them; reviling not again when he was reviled, nor using threatening words when
he suffered wrongfully; but withal, meekness and humility committed his whole
cause to him who 1 Pet. 2. 23.
judges righteously. In this regard, our Savior being to warn his followers
of those false Prophets, which the Devil did intend to send amongst them, he
lets them know that they should come in Sheeps clothing, i. e. that they
should be apparelled with all shows of meekness, innocence and humility, and
such like amiable qualities, such as win most on the affections of misguided
men. Nay it is noted by Aquinas, in nomine Ovis innocentiam and simplicitatem
per totam scripturam designari; that through the whole body of the Scripture,
innocence and simplicity are expressed unto us under the notion of the sheep.
Which though perhaps it be not universally true (as perhaps it may be) yet does
it very well agree with the condition of the sheep, which is not only molle
pecus, a creature of a mild and tender nature; but for the most part white of
color, quam dives nivei pecoris, as he in Virgil, which is the sign or robe of
innocence.

Such also are the sheep of our Saviors Pasture, walking in their vocation, as
St. Paul advises, with all lowliness and meekness; washing their hands in
innocence with the* Prophet David; putting away high mindedness and pride, and
arrogance, as things which are not competible with their Christian Calling. Our
Savior Christ has not only taught us to be wise as Serpents, but to be
innocent as Doves also. Nor has he called upon us only that we be holy as he
is holy, and per^ect, as our Father in Heaven is perfect: but he would have us
learn of him, how to be meek and lowly of heart, ut requiem inveniamus animabus
nostris, that we may find rest unto our souls. Humility is the first step in
that sacred ladder which reaches up from Earth to Heaven; and there we must
begin our rise, if ever we intend to attain the top. And for the Gates of
Heaven, they are strait and narrow, and can be entered only by the meek in
heart, by the poor in spirit. Luke 1.
It was the lowliness of the Virgin Mary that the Lord regarded; the humble and
the meek that he exalts. The wise man Chilo, though an Heathen, could have
taught us this. Who being asked what Jupiter did use to do, Laert in chil.
returned this answer, (...), etc. the very same with that of the Magnificat.
Deposuit potentes de sede sua, He does put down the mighty from their Seat, and
does exalt the humble and meek. Exalt them then he will, for himself has said
it; and that not only in this world above their Brethren, but in the world to
come amongst the Angels. Man. 5. 5.
That Christ who has assured us this, that blessed are the meek in heart, for
they shall inherit the Earth; he also has affirmed, that blessed are the poor
in spirit, quoniam ipsorum est Regnum coelorum, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven.

These qualities of lowliness, meekness and humility, as they are at all times
very necessary; so most especially at that time, when we come to hear, to
exercise that Office, and perform that duty which is here required. The proud
man hates to be instructed, and the impatient will not brook a reprehension.
The one thinks no man good enough to be his remembrancer; the other storms and
flies out into fury on the least reproof. The one thinks scorn to come to
Christ, wh^lest he is preaching in the Temple, and such public places; They
expect rather, and King Herod did in the holy Gospel, Luke 23.
till he be brought unto their Houses: and then too, if they be not satisfied
in their curiosities, they set him at naught, laugh at him to his very face,
and vest alb^ indutum illudunt, put the fools coat upon him, and so send him
going. The other come about him like the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.
and hearken greedily to his words. But if he touch upon their vices, if he
denounce a woe against them for their pride and arrogance, their covetousn^ss,
hypocrisy, and desire of glory, they then take counsel presently, how they may
destroy him. Neither of these are in a fit condition to repair to Christ; or if
they do, are like to get but little by their coming to him. Dirigit mansuetos
in judicio; they are the meek only whom God guides in judgment, the meek whom
he instructs in his holy ways. In vain do they resort unto him to hear his
voice, who use to come with hardened, not with humbled hearts.

But there is another quality of the sheep, as necessary to the work of hearing
on the Post^fact, as meekness and humility in the preparation, or a part ante:
which is the chewing of the Cud, as we use to call it. The Latins call it
rumination. Illice sub nigra* pallentes ruminat herb as, as the Poet has it.
And they derive that term from the old word rumen, which signifies that little
bag or ventricle, into the which it is conveyed before the second chewing of
it; or else as Servius has it in his notes on Virgil, from the most prominent
part of the throat, called Ruma, per quam demissus cibus revocatur, by which
they do recall that food into their mouths, which they had lodged within their
stomachs. The reason of this rumination I regard not here, (...). It properly
belongs to the Philosopher, and to him we leave it. All I shall note from hence
is this, that ruminare by a Metaphor, is sometimes taken for in memoriam
revocare, to call again to our remembrance: the recalling of such things into
our memories, which either have been lost out of them, or mislaid in them,
being much of the same nature in a man, as is the other in a Beast. The sheep
comes hastily to feed, and in that have, does not so thoroughly chew and prepare
their food, and fit it for digestion, as do other creatures: but when the fury
of their Appetite is a little slackned, they bestow upon it as it were a second
eating, that it may be more perfectly concocted, and made fit for nourishment.
Atque iterum pasto pascitur ante cibo, as it is in Ovid. And this no question
is required in every one who does desire to be accounted for a sheep of our
Saviors Pasture, and comes with have and hunger to hear his voice. It was the
Precept given by David to the great Kings Daughter, not to hear only, but to
consider: hearken O Daughter and consider, Psalm. 45. And '^was the greatest
commendation of the Virgin Mary, a Daughter of the great King also, that she
did keep the sayings of her Lord and Savior, conferens in cord suo, Luke 2.
19.
and pondered them duly in her heart. This is that commanded by the Lord to his
people Israel, that they should lay up his words in their hearts, Deuteronomy. 11. 18.
and meditate on the same both day and night; commended by St. Luke in the
Beroeans, who did not only receive the Word with all readiness of mind, but
carefully compared it with the holy Scriptures: Acts 17. 11.
and is indeed an excellent chewing of the cud, a profitable art of benefiting
by the word revealed. For they who thus do chew the cud, are of all others the
most likely, not only to preserve the word in their hearts and memories, but to
observe it also in their words and actions.

This is indeed the principal end both of our preaching and your hearing, ^^ra.
ut ^a retineatis in mente, impleat is in opere, that you do keep it in your
minds, and manifest the same in your conversations. And happy were it with us
all, did we employ our memories to so good a purpose; could we take counsel of
the sheep, and learn this excellent art of chewing the cud as we ought to do;
for as it happens too too often, the soul has never less command upon the
memory, then in those things which appertain to its own salvation. Trifles and
toys, conceits and pleasant passages of wit float on the top thereof, and are
still at hand. Posco and adsunt illico, as St. Austin has it. But such things
as concern Christ's Kingdom and his holy words, Confess.
these either are quite lost, and we look not after them, or so mislaid, we
cannot find them. Such is the common frailty of us mortal men, that the best
things are last learnt, and first forgotten. A frailty no way to be rectified,
but by a frequent pondering of the word of God, a due revolving of it in our
thoughts and memories: whether we read it in the Scrip^ures, or hear it
published in our Churches. By doing whereof, we shall not only hear Gods Word,
nor peruse it only, nor only keep it in our memories, as a tale or Story; but
turn the words thereof to works: and thereby verify that good note of Bernard,
Bernard.
Is legit recte scripturas sanctas qui verba vertit in opera.

This if we do, we shall come nearer to the condition of the sheep then before
we were: which is a very profitable creature and exceeding fruitful of good
works. For whereas it was either profit or pleasure which first brought Beasts
into the service and acquaintance of man; the sheep has the pre-eminence of
them all in the point of profit. Quadrupedum qua^ utilitatis causa homines
incluserunt, Histor. Animal.
primas fuisse oves, says Conradus Gesner. And certainly from that little
creature, we have not only all things necessary for the life of man, but many
things which are for pleasure and convenience. Thus have we Clothes of courser
wearing from their Skins, of finer from their Wool; meat from their flesh,
medicine from their blood, and Music from their Bowels. And when the Sun
withdrawes his comfortable beams from the sight of man, we make our selves an
artificial day by their fat and Tallow. Nay, they afford us an increase also,
both of Bread and Beer; and in some parts are beneficial to their Masters, in
all the bounties of a Dairy. Varro de re Rustica.
Ad cibum lac and caseum praebent. So Varro, and such others who have written
of the arts of Husbandry. For further proof, consult the 25. of St. Matthews
Gospel, where our Redeemer gives the sheep this commendation. v. 35, 36.
I was (says he) an hungry, and you gave me meat; thirsty, and you gave me
drink; naked, and you clothed me; a stranger, and you took me in; sick and in
prison, and you came to visit me. Which as it does express most fully the
bountiful condition of the sheep, (which questionless, is the most plentiful
and liberal Housekeeper of all creatures else:) so does it also show, what
kind of men they ought to be which are the sheep of our Redeemer, that most
glorious Shepherd; free in imparting all those blessings wherewith by his great
mercies we have been enriched.

But here some men may chance to say, what means have we of yielding any profit
to our Lord and Master, the great Shepherd of our souls, 1 Pet. 2.
as St. Peter calls him. He dwells not near us, that we should invite him to
our Feasts or Banquets; nor can we see him face to face, to make him partaker
of our substance. But this, although it be a common, is a false pretense. God
dwells amongst us in his poor, and in his Prophets; and he expects that we be
bountiful to them whom he has substituted in his place, either as instruments
of our edification, or objects of our liberality. The Prophet or the Priest,
call him which you will, is in the Scriptures called a Sheepherd; and all that
are committed to his charge and care are his Sheep, his Flock. And does not
equity require and the Scriptures dictate, 1 Cor. 9.
that he which feeds the Flock, should also feed himself with the milk of the
Flock, and sometimes cloth himself with the Fleece thereof? The Law of nature
and of Nations have resolved this case. And he must needs rebel against both of
them, who grudgeth the poor Priest that maintenance which the Law allows him;
or shall compel him to make up his full tale of bricks, and take away the straw
and stubble which before he had. So for the poor, they also have a warrant
dormant; or if you will, a general Letter of Attorney, to receive our bounties;
and to receive them also in the name of God. Verily says our Lord and Savior
to his blessed sheep, Mat. 25.
in as much as you have done these works of mercy unto the least of these my
Brethren, ye have done them also unto me. An excellent motive unto bounty and
the works of charity.

There is another quality in the sheep, which Albertus speaks of, viz. that
mutual love and correspondency which is between them. Oves se mutuo amant, and
una condolet alteri, as he tells us of them. Some also have observed* that if a
sheep that is strong and healthy do see another of the same Fold sick and
fainting, Soli pro eadem se objicit, and umbram ei obtendit, he will stand
betwixt him and the Sun, and keep him from the fury and the heats thereof.
Which if it be so, as I have no reason to suspect the Authors, it is a
sympathy full of scandal to the sons of men; who for the most part, are so
far from making shade to the afflicted and oppressed, that if their ruin and
destruction will any way conduce unto our advantage, we use to lay them in the
Sun. Such miserable comforters were the friends of Job, who when they should
have labored to revive his spirits, endeavored to afflict his conscience: and
such the Ziphites unto David, instead of being a comfort to him in the time of
his exile, they practice to deliver him into the hands of Saul. We are all of
us apt enough to comply with one part of St. Paul's injunction, which is gaudere
cum gaudentibus, to rejoice with them that do rejoice, to share with men in
their prosperities, and be partakers of their glories; and do it, though we be
not bidden. But for the other part thereof, which is dolere cum dolentibus, to
weep with them that weep, and bear a part in their affliction; we will by no
means yield to that, though we be entreated. In that quite contrary to the
counsel of the wise Philosopher, who would have no man come uncalled to a
friend or neighbor, (...), but in the times of his affliction and his
adversity.

Next, let us look upon the sheep, as they are a flock; as they are Oves first
in the plural number, and secondly, as Oves meae, my sheep, the sheep of
Christ, a multitude, or number, under the command of one supreme Sheepherd.
First, Oves in the plural number, otherwise Christ could have no Church, and
the great Sheepherd would have never a Flock. One sheep can no more properly be
called a Flock, then one Swallow may be said to make a Summer; and on the other
side, a multitude of sheep without rule or Government, is no more a flock, then
several shreds of Cloth may be called a Garment. So is it also with the Church,
one man though never so replenished with celestial Graces, cannot so properly
be called a Church, as a Chapel of Ease: and multitudes of men that live not
under one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, cannot with such propriety be termed a
Church, as a confusion of opinions. To the making therefore of a Church, a
Flock; there is a number first required, and next an union or consolidation of
those numbers. Its true, this number has not been at all times eminent, nor
equally conspicuous in all places; and yet there have been still a number.
Seven thousand knees there were in Israel, which Elijah knew not, that had not
bowed themselves to Baal, and infinite numbers in the Realm of Judah, who never
offered sacrifice to that wretched Idol; visible Professors of Gods saving
truths and devout worshippers of his holy name. Nor ever was the Church so
destitu^e of the grace of God, as not to hold those necessary fundamental
Doctrines which are required unto salvation: and those professed and taught in
some place or other according to the will and pleasure of Almighty God. Since
God first had a Church, there have still been numbers of Professors; though
more or less, according unto times and seasons, more in some places then in
others, although not always in such whole and sound condition, so free from
erro^ and corruptions as it ought to be.

But number simply, is not so great a strength to the Church of God, as is the
unity thereof. For as the holy Ghost in the Book of Psalms, Psalm. 122.
compares the Church not unto men, c. 6. v. 4.
but to a City, a City at unity in it self, and in the Canticles, not unto
Soldiers, but an Army, v. 6.
an Army terrible with banners; so does he liken it not unto sheep, but to a
flock, a flock new come from washing, in the same Song of Solomon; a little
flock, c. 12.
as himself calls it in St. Luke. And if a flock, it must be then united and
collected into one Fold, under the leading and command of the same one
Sheepherd: unum ^vile, and unus Pastor, being joined together in this Chapter,
v. 16. To find this one Sheepherd who it is, we need seek no further then my
Text, it is Christ our Savior; who therefore calls them oves meas, his own
sheep; his as the chief sheepherd and proprietary, the Lord and owner of the
flock. And this supreme and universal sheepherd we acknowledge gladly, and
should account our selves in an ill condition were we not under his command,
fed by his blessed Word and Sacraments, and safely sheltered under the wings of
his protection. There is indeed another who pretends to this, this universal
Empire over all the Flock: one who cries out with Polyphemus in the Poet, Ovid.
Met. 1. 13.
Hoc p^cus omne meum est, that all the sheep upon the Downs are his; or like
the sheepherd in the Eclogue, Mill meae Siculis errant in montibus Agnae, and
so are all the Lambs on a thousand Hills. Virg. 2.
And whereas anciently it was conceived to be a perfect definition of the
Church of Christ, viz. that it was a body of men professing one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism: our Masters in the Church of Rome, have now added this,
sub unius Christi in terris Vicarii, Bellarm. de Eccles. l. 3. c. 2.
Romani Pont. that this collected body must be under the command of the Bishop
of Rome. A patch subjoyned to the old definition of a Church, much like the
piece of new Cloth put to an old Garment, which our Savior speaks of. That
which is added to it to make up the rent, Mat. 9. 17.
takes from the beauty of the Garment; Et scissura fit pejor, says the Text,
the Schism or rupture is made worse then before it was. For by this patch,
this new addition, the Churches of the East which are large and numerous; those
of the Moscovites and A^thiopians, which are far more entire, though not so
populous; and all the Churches also of the Reformation are cut off for ever
from having any part in David, or hope of an inheritance in the son of Jesse.
But with this new Divinity we have naught to do. We know but one chief
Sheepherd only, even the Lord Christ Jesus, whose voice we are to hear, whom
we ought to follow.

If it be asked, whether the number or the unity of the flock, be the more
considerable; no question but we must determine it in behalf of unity. A small
flock if it hold together, are less obnoxious to the Wolf, then multitudes of
sheep dispersed and scattered without rule and order. Luporum insidiis oves
minus patent, quod ita catervatim incedant, and a reliquis non aberrent, as
mine Author has it. When the sheep keep together in a flock, a Body, the Wolf
dare hardly meddle with them; for it were madness in him to attempt a flock.
But if he meet them single, or in scattered Companies, divided from the main
Body of their fellows; or otherwise straggling from the Fold: then takes he his
advantage of them, and destroys them utterly. As long as Dinah kept her self
within the Sanctuary of her Fathers House, fenced by the valor of her
Brethren, and guided by the counsels of a careful Parent; it went well with
her, she preserved her honor. Genesis 34.
But when the gadding humor took her, and she must needs abroad to see the
Daughters of the Land; she forthwith met with Sichem the Son of Hamor, who
seized upon her and defiled her. And so it also is with the straggling
Christian, such as do peevishly divide themselves from the Communion of the
Church, and wander from the rest of that sacred Body; They either fall into the
jaws of the roaring Lion, 1 Pet.
who walks about in expectation of his prey, seeking out whom he may devour;
or else by hearkening to the voice of strangers, John 10.
whom they should not follow, they make themselves a spoil unto Thieves and
Robbers. Keep we then all together in one Fold, one Flock; and so we need not
fear the violence of Satan, nor the power of Hell, nor any mischievous design
of malicious men. And if we would preserve the spirit of unity in the bond of
peace, we cannot do it with less hazard, nor with more assurance, then if we
hearken diligently to the voice of Christ, and tread with patience in his
steps, which are the duties to be done, and come next in order to be handled.

(...), the sense of hearing (says our Master Aristotle) is the sense of
Discipline, de sens. and s^nsibil.
that sense whereby we are made capable of learning; and thereby gain unto our
selves that knowledge, which could not be begotten with us by our Parents. We
may upon the same grounds, call it the sense of salvation. Romans
For Fides ex auditu, Faith comes by hearing, says St. Paul. And without
faith, it is impossible we should be saved, because it is impossible that
without faith we should please the Lord. Now no man brings this knowledge of,
or this faith in Christ, into the World along with him; nor can a man believe
in the Son of God, into whose soul the Doctrine of belief is not distilled
and infused through the outward senses. Faith, though an habit principally of
the Lords infusing, yet requires somewhat on our parts to be done and acted, as
hearing, reading, conference, and such like preparatives; whereby our
understandings are informed, and our minds enlightened, and so prepared to
entertain it. Besides, it is the observation of an ancient Father, that many
faculties of the soul, Basil. in Psalm. 33.
(...), are likened and resembled to the outward members. Upon which ground,
the ear may not improperly be called (...), the spiritual mouth, by which we
do receive both food and Physic for the languishing soul. It has been noted
of the sheep that it is naturally subject to the rot. Ossa minutatim morbo
collapsa trahebat, Georgic. 3.
as the Poet has it. Which as it naturally does arise from the moist and
phlegmatic constitution of their bodies; so is it then most frequent and
predominant in them, when to the natural moisture of their bodies is added also
the corrupt moisture of their Pastures. No way to help it or prevent it, but to
change their Pastures, to lead them up unto the Mountains, to places of a
sweet, but more wholesome Herbage. So is it also with us men, with our Saviors
sheep. We are all rotten from the womb: in sin our Mothers have conceived us,
says the Royal Psalmist: but then most dangerously affected with it, when to
the natural corruptness of our disposition are added also the diseases of our
education: Tully in Phil. 2
Crederes nos natura non tam improbos esse, nisi accederet etiam disciplina.
But being thus diseased and ill-affected, what means is left us for the cure?
surely there is no other way to remedy the diseases of our conversation, but by
the physic of the Word; nor other way to make that physic efficacious, but by
applying it to the ear, That is the mouth wherewith we must take down those
potions which the Physicians of our souls have prescribed unto us.

Next let us look upon the Word as it is our food, man living not by bread
alone, but by every word proceeding from the mouth of God; food fitted for all
Ages and for all conditions. Are we but Novices in the things of God, but Babes
of yesterday? then it goes for milk. As newborn babes desire ye the sincere
milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, so St. Peter has it. 1 Pet. 2
Are ye of riper years and more settled judgments? then it stands for meat.
Strong meat belongs to them that are of full age, who have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil, Heb. 5. 12.
so St. Paul has told us. Are ye of curious tastes and affected palates? then
it is a banquet, a banquet of all others the most rich and nourishing. A
banquet full of all Varieties; in which there are both Sweetmeats to delight
the Taste, Salsado's to revive the Palate, Tart stuff to set an edge upon the
Appetite, Lenitives to open and unknit Obstructions, Cordials to heighten and
advance our Spirits. And by what means do we become partakers of those heavenly
Viands, but only by the mouth of our Understanding; de resur. carnis.
auditu devorandus est hic panis, Intellectu devorandus, Fide digerendus. This
sacred and celestial food must be first swallowed with our Ears, chewed with
our Intellect or Understanding, and finally digested by our Faith, as
Tertullian has it: so that in each of those respects and in all together, Qui
habet aures audire, audiat, He that has ears to hear let him hear: and yet
that is not all.

Not all assuredly, there is no thought of that; the way to Heaven were very
easy if it should be so. There Is not a Scribe or Pharisee in all the Gospel
but had been Sainted long before this time, if hearing only in it self, ex
opere operato, as the Schoolmen phrase it, could have brought them thither.
They heard the voice of Christ, none oftener, but they only heard it; and in
this place audire goes a little further. The hearing, Servius in Aeneid. 3.
as it is the sense of discipline, so was the ear (the instrument of hearing)
of old times consecrated to the memory. Physici dicunt singulas corporis parts
Numinibus consecratas esse, ut aurem Memoriae, Guil. in Joh.
frontem Genio, as Servius notes it upon Virgil. We must so hear then that we
do remember, not make our ears a thorough-fare, and no more then so: and yet
this is not all we must look to neither. Audire est credere and obedire, as
mine author tells me. To hear is to believe and practice; first to believe that
what we hear delivered in the Word is true, and then to practice it as fit and
necessary to be done: this is the hearing we must trust too if we look for
Heaven. It Is not the shutting of our eyes, and turning all the body into an ear
that will save our souls; there is somewhat else which must be thought of.
First to commit to memory those saving Doctrines which we have heard delivered
from the Word of God, and next to express the power thereof in our lives and
actions, in 2 Pet.
(...), as in Oecumenius, with all alacrity of mind and spirit; for not the
hearers of the Word, but the doers of it shall be justified, so the Apostle to
the Romans.

Nor is it strange that hearing in the Book of God should be interpreted
Obedience. It was the first quarrel which God had with Adam, Genesis 3.
quia audiisti vocem uxoris tuae, because he had hearkened to the voice of his
wife. What, had God given her to him for a comfort, and does he now find fault
that he heard her speak? what comfort can there be in a sullen woman? in a dumb
woman none at all. Not so: 'twas not the hearing of Eves voice that the Lord
condemned, but his obeying of the same, his yielding to her wanton motions, and
attributing more unto her desires then to Gods Commandments. Audisti, i. e.
adimplesti, to hearken there is to obey; because thou have obeyed the voice of
thy wife, and wilfully transgressed the precepts of the Lord thy God,
therefore the Lord shall curs^ the earth, and make thee labor for thy living;
v. 22.
so in the 1 of Samuel and the 15th Chapter, Melior est obedientia quam
victimae, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of
Rams. Where auscultare and obedire to hearken and obey are plainly used as
words of the same signification, the same in sense though not in sound; and
therefore when Almighty God did give this testimony of our Savior, Mat. 3.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, and then immediately
subjoyned audite ipsum, hear ye him, it is not to be thought that he required
no more then their outward ears: That had been to invite his followers to that
very fault which he blamed in others, which was audientes non audiunt, the
people heard his word, and yet heard it not: i. e. they heard the Word but did
not do it. They only hear his Word aright, which do hear with profit: which if
we do, we shall not only hear his word as is here commanded, but shall so hear
his voice as to follow him, which is most chiefly here intended; but of this we
shall speak more anon.

In the mean time we must take notice of the object which we are to hear.
Audite ipsum, hear ye him, so says God the Father* audite voce^ meam, hear my
voice, so says God the Son, and both these are one. Ipse there, which is God
the word, is here vox mea, or the word of God, both most apparently the same.
Indeed it is not to be thought, that he which is the Word should more
conveniently express himself in any other way then by his voice: for howsoever
that of the Apostle be most unquestionably true, that God at sundry times and
in diverse manners spoke in times past unto our Fathers by the Prophets, Heb. 1.
1.
yet still we are at locutus est Deus, that God spoke unto them, and speak he
could not properly but by a voice; nay, if we look upon it well, we shall
surely find that the first external action ascribed to God in holy Scripture is
dixit Dominus, the Lord spoke; Genesis 1.
and that was a miraculous kind of speech indeed, he spoke not only words but
works. He spoke the word and it was made, he said the word only and they were
created. Psalm.
From that time forwards unto this* God never did express himself in a cleerer
way then by that of speaking, either in dreams and visions as unto the
Patriarcks, or Angelorum atque hominum ministerio, by the tongues of holy men
and Angels, as unto the Jews, till in the last days locutus est nobis in
filio, he spoke unto us by his Son the heir of all things. This is that He, and
his that Voice which we are to hear; and well it is, and most agreeable to our
infirmities that he should speak to us by a voice. For should he speak unto us
now as at the giving of the Law in Sinai, Exodus 19.
in thunder and lightning, what flesh were able to abide it? Or should he speak
unto us in a cloud of darkness, and cum clangore Tubae, and with the sound of a
Trumpet, what ear were able to endure it? Exodus 20.
Speak thou unto us (said the Jews to Moses) and we will hear, but let not God
speak to us lest we die, i. e. let not the Lord so speak unto us that we dare
not hear, or show himself in such a terrible way unto us, that we dare not
approach unto him. Indeed it is not often that God speaks otherwise unto us,
then in a still and gentle voice, such as the Jews call Bath-col, filia vocis,
4 v. 16.
a small slender voice; such as Job calls vocem aurae lenis, a still silent
voice; such as may charm but not astonish, and which is fitter to invite
attention then to excite our fears.

Now of this truth we find a very pregnant instance in the history of Elijah,
as it is represented to us in the Book of Kings, God called upon him to go
forth and stand upon the Mount before him, and then it follows, And behold the
Lord passed by, and a great strong wind rent the Mountains, 1 Kings 19. 11, etc.
and broke in pieces the Rocks before the Lord, but the Lord was not in the
wind, and after the wind an Earthquake, but the Lord was not in the Earthquake;
and after the Earthquake a Fire, but the Lord was not in the Fire; and after
the Fire a still small Voice, sibilus aurae tenuis, as the vulgar has it, and
in that voice the Lord appeared unto the Prophet, and signified his will unto
him. Which, as it does most excellently express the manner of Gods speaking to
his people in the former times, so is it, as it were, as history of those ways
and means by which the Lord has spoke to us (to us particularly of this
Nation) in these latter days. The time was when the Lord passed by us in a
mighty wind, a wind that blew down violently before it those majestic
structures which had been consecrated anciently to religious uses and the
service of God, but sure God was not in that wind; next he passed by us in an
Earthquake in King Edwards days, an Earthquake or Commotion as the vulgar
reads it, by which the very foundations of the State were almost utterly
subverted by rebellions, and the whole fabric of the Government dissolved by
potent factions, At non in Commotione Dominus, but the Lord was not in that
Earthquake. Post commotionem Ignis, after the Earthquake came a Fire, a cruel
and devouring Fire, a Fire more raging then the Babylonian Furnace, not heated
for three only but for thrice three hundred; a Fire intended for the utter
ruin of Gods Saints and Servants, though it proved rather in the event a fiery
Chariot, such as was that provided for Elijah, for their conveyance into
Heaven, At non in igne Dominus, I am sure God was not in that Fire. At last he
showed himself unto us in sibilo aurae tenuis, in a still small voice; a voice
of comfort and of consolation, a voice which for these eighty years has spoken
far better things unto us then the blood of Abel: a voice which we must hearken
to with fear and reverence, as did Elijah to that still small voice which
appeared unto him, as being vox Dei there, and vox mea here, no difference at
all between them.

But what may some men chance to say, How shall we know whether the voice that
speaks unto us, and which we go so greedily to hear, be the vox mea of the
Text, since every one pretends to the like Commission, and has a dixit Dominus
in his mouth, be he who he will? The readiest way to satisfy this doubt, is to
look back upon the story of Elijah, and resolve our selves: for if the Preacher
speak unto you in a still small voice, if he deliver nothing to you but the
truth with soberness, Acts 26.
verba veritatis and sobrietatis as the Apostle calls them, then doubt you not
but God is present in that voice, and it is your Christian duty to give ear unto
it: but if he speak unto you in Fires and Earthquakes, in Storms and Tempests,
or like the sons of Boanerges call for fire from Heaven, it is a shrewd
conjecture that God is not there. Those voices savor of a different spirit
from the Lord our Sheepherd, whose lips dropped Myrrh, who spoke unto his
people in so mild a way, that his reproofs were gentle, his corrections sweet.
No Fire, nor Storm, nor Earthquake in that sacred voice wherein he speaks unto
his Flocks, nor can it stand indeed with his pastoral Office, or with the
safety of his sheep that it should be otherwise. The sheep is naturally of a
timorous and weak condition, easily frighted from their food should they be
terrified with the cries of Wolves, though false and counterfeit; or the
continual barking of the dogs, though perhaps their own. In which regard the
Poets often represent the Sheepherd with his pipe and songs, and his flocks
feeding round about him, Stant and oves circum, etc. Such is the voice we are
to hear, a still silent voice, vox aurae lenis, or sib^lus aurae tenuis, a
still small voice, a voice proceeding from a meek and humble spirit: and yet it
is not vox and preterea nihil, not a bare voice only which we are to hear, but
there is a guide also whom we are to follow; audire vocem ejus will not serve
the turn, if we do not sequi. The voice but leads us on to him whom we ought to
follow, and we are bound to hear his voice for no other reason, but that we may
the better know how to follow him, my next particular and very briefly to be
handled.

Oves meae vocem meam audiunt, and sequuntur me, my sheep hear my voice and
they follow me, i. e. they do so hear his voice as to follow him. They stand
not gazing after him like men astonished, as did the men of Galilee at his
ascension, or as Elisha did upon Elijah at his assumption, but are still going
and in motion, if they follow him. And if we follow him as we ought to do, in
all the paths of piety and virtue which he has pleased to lead before us, we
shall be hearers of his voice, there is no doubt of that, and hearers of it to
the purpose. And I said well, if we do follow him through all the paths of
piety and virtue which he has pleased to lead before us: for many things our
Savior did, in which it is impossible we should follow him; or else not
necessary if we could. Miracles, and such works of wonder as he wrought daily
by the power of his Divinity, are objects of our Faith only and our
admiration; and in these we cannot follow him. Particular actions, whether of
Ceremony, as his sitting whilst he taught the people; or Circumstance, as his
administering the Sacrament in an upper Chamber, are left arbitrary; and in
these we need not follow him. But in all Moral duties whatsoever, as Prayer,
and Fasting, and Alms-deeds, in pardoning such offenses as are done unto us,
and humbling our selves under the mighty hand of God; in these he has
commanded an obedient imitation, and in all those we ought to follow him.

If therefore Christ has taken up his Cross, and is gone before us, it is no
small part of our obedience to take up our Crosses also, Luke 24.
and to follow after. Oportet primum haec pati, we must first suffer all these
things, Afflictions, Persecutions, Buffetings, Revilings, yea and Death it self
before we enter into glory. As he has led the way before us in all the works
of Godliness and the fruits of Mercy, what better can become us then to do so
too? to tread in his most sacred steps as he makes us able: Himself has so
commanded, and we must obey, Ephesians. 5. 1.
Be ye followers of God as dear children, says the great Apostle, i. e. as
children love to imitate the gestures, speech, and other actions of their
Parents, so must we follow the example of our heavenly Father, Virgil.
sequimurque patrem non passibus aequis. St. Peter to the self same purpose,
that Christ has left us an example, 1 Pet. 2. 21.
ut sequamur vestigia ejus, that we should follow his steps. And though St.
Paul does in another place exhort those of Corinth that they should be
followers of him, 1 Cor. 11. 1.
yet he subjoyned this limitation, sicut ego Christi, as I am of Christ. Were
it not for this tie, sicut ego Christi, we might be Pharisees in our youth, and
Persecutors in our age, (as too many have been) and justify our selves in both
by St. Paul's example. So that however that of the Poet be exceeding true,
Claudum.
vivitur exemplo melius, that men are guided easier by example then they are by
precept, yet it concerns us all to be very careful in choosing of the patterns
which we mean to imitate; and not to follow any man how great soever, further
then he does follow Christ the chief Lord of all.

And certainly our Savior did not limit and restrain this duty, and tie it to
himself alone without special reason. He knew, none better, the faulty humor
of the sheep; how apt they are (out of their natural inclination) to run that
way which some of their unruly fellows have first led before them, though
contrary to the direction of their Sheepherd, and many times to their own ruin
and destruction. Ubi mares viam ducunt, Aristotle in Hist. Animal.
reliquus grex facile sequetur. Aristotle long ago did observe this in them, in
his Historia Animalium, and it holds good still in our own observation. Thus is
it also with us men, we are all apt to follow bad example, especially the
example of some noted Bell-wether; and few there are which are not very much in
love with the faults and errors of their betters: which as it may advise all
those of more eminent rank, to have a special care of their ways and actions,
because their actions many times are made exemplary, so may it lessen those of
the lower sort, that to be governed by the example of frail sinful men, is at
the best a simple and sheepish quality. O Imitatores stultum pecus, Horat.
said the Poet truly, the reason is because the best men have been guilty of
notorious crimes, and therefore should we make their lives a general pattern
unto ours, we may be drunk with Noah, and incestuous with Lot, swearers with
Joseph, Murderers with David, Idolaters with Solomon, Persecutors with Paul,
Deniers of the Lord with Peter, and indeed what not. It Is not sequuntur then
which is here commanded, an art of Imitation only which is here required, for
then our Savior had not told us in their commendation, Alienum autem non
sequuntur, that they would not follow after strangers. It Is the word me that
makes all sure, the following of the Lord our Sheepherd, and of none but him,
which in the end will bring us unto life eternal. He is the carkase which is
gone before us, and we the Eagles that must follow after him, and follow after
him to that place where our reward is gone before, and provided for us: For
doubt we not but if we follow our most gracious Sheepherd in all those paths of
grace and godliness which he has gone before us in this present world, but we
shall also follow the Lamb whether soever he shall go in the world to come.

And yet I must not leave my Text: there is one word more to be considered, and
such a word as is of special use and efficacy to move us to the following of
our Savior, and of none but him, and this is Et cognosco eas, and I know the
sheep. A knowledge not in general only, how many and how fat they are, of what
size and color, which every one may quickly know as well as he, but a
particular knowledge of their several states, of their strength or feebleness,
how they have prospered in his pastures, to what infirmities they are subject,
and the way to cure them. A knowledge so exact and punctual, as to know them
every one by name, and proprias oves vocat nominatim, he calls them every one
by name, in the third of this Chapter; such as ascertains them of his favor
here and his glories hereafter. For Dominus novit qui sunt sui, The Lord knows
who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
says the great Apostle; and this he terms fundamentum firmum and signaculum,
(...), as the Greek text has it, the sure foundation and the seal of our
Christian hope; the sheepmark if I may so call it, of the heavenly sheepherd:
more then this yet: It is a knowledge which begets a mutual confidence and
acquaintance in and with one another: I am the good sheepherd and know my
sheep, and am known of mine, ver. 14. He knows them so as to take special
notice of them, and to observe whether they follow him or not, as they ought to
do. Not one of them can go astray but his eye is on him, nor hide himself so
closely that he cannot find him; and having found him at the last, will either
bring him back to the fold in triumph, or leave him if he find no hope of his
reduction, with some brand or other that all the rest may be admonished to
forbear his company. And they so know him on the other side as to rest assured
that he will lead them in no other paths then the paths of righteousness, nor
conduct them unto any other pastures then the green pastures of the Word, or
drive them to any other waters then the waters of comfort, Psalm 24.
whereof David speaks. No Vallie of the shadow of Death, no dreadful Precipice,
no dangerous or uncomfortable walk to be feared at all, if we take care to
follow him: they are all sure enough of that, and this assurance does proceed
from cognosco eas, that knowledge which he is pleased to take of his sheep
particularly, and to vouchsafe them of himself and his favors toward them.
Follow him then we may with safety, for he will lead us only in the way to
Heaven; and follow him we must with care, for he takes notice of our wanderings,
of going astray; and follow him we must both with hope and confidence, for he
knows our frailty, and will provide us of all necessaries for so long a
journey. And then we may be sure of this, that as we do our best to follow him
in the paths of righteousness, so he will do his part (for he knows our hearts)
that Grace and Mercy shall attend us in the course of this life, and bring us
in conclusion to the house of the Lord our God, where we shall dwell for
evermore: and to this house God of his grace and merry bring us all even for
Christ his sake; to whom with God the Father and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed
all Honor, Praise and Glory, now and ever more, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 28. for surdore r. sudore. p. 15. l. 22. for of those r. so of
those. p. 24. l. 23. for witness r. witnesses, etc. p. 30. l. 19. dele no. p.
31. l. 20. for and r. amongst. p. 35. l. 11. for as r. it. p. 38. l. 13. for
presipus r. praecipuus. p. 99. l. 13. for endures r. endeare. p. 123. l. 12.
de. sive. p. 124. l. 31. de. lo. p. 140. l. 8. for Justantius r. Instantius. p.
142. l. 17. for Geneva r. from Geneva. p. ib. l. 30. for tare r. tuae. p. 146.
l. 25. for quia r. quae. p. 183. l. 16. for might r. have. p. 210. l. 6. for
utterly r. bitterly. p. 211. l. 30. for lowly r. lovly. p. 315. l. 29. for is
r. as. p. 223. l. 22. for evil r. those evils. p. 235. l. 21. for another r.
wherein thou judge another. p. 236. l. 13. for for r. and for. p. 257. l. 2.
for some r. but. p. 262. l. 26. for Rescindendum r. Recidendum. p. 268. l 26.
for here r. there. p. 272. l. 1. for 7000 r. 70000. p. 290. l. 14. for false r.
half. p. 312. l. 31. for promised r. premised. p. 314. l. 13. for faces r.
faces and tongues. p. 327. l. 17. for much r. so much. p. 344. l. 11. for as
flesh r. as one flesh. p. 347. l. 23. for Thumes r. Thamus. Ibid. l. 28. for
when r. whom. p. 356. for yet r. yet if the.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THou have here a few Questions proposed by one, who desires to lie low in his
own eyes: and after all his Reading, rather to doubt, (doubting is no more the
way to error, than to truth) than to assert. I know not how long thou may
be in perusing them, I am certain they were not long in penning: yet this thou
may be secured of, tha^ the citations here are not obtruded upon thee a^
second hand, being not transcribed out of men that mis^lledged them, but
fetched from their Original Authors. H^^^ho queried, did not so much as trust
(...), or juvenile collection, but brought all (...) by a faithful reveiw. The
interrogatories (...) of such ^^men^, that he thought they might deserve a
satisfactory answer: and he had observed that neither the P^lpiteers, nor
VVriters of these tim^s did contribute by their labors any thing toward such
conscience-work, though the posture of their Affairs require it. He thought fit
in his questions, to produce such testimonines as made for the Negative and
Heterodoxe part. Unto which process he was inclined by several reasons: One
is, because that the general prejudices of many in this age, are such, that if
he had not done this, they would not have thought these things questionable.
Secondly, he had a tender regard to those who have made the subject of these
queries to be their Assertions: in the behalf of these, he did set down what
you see, that their Opponents (though they pride themselves with the conceit
of learning and esteem of others as illiterate) may at last own them for less
than fanaticall and groundless Opinionists. He did not allege any proofs for
the other part* both because he knew that others would do that for him; as also
because he had not that esteem for quotations to the contrary, which he had for
these: not that he is much prepossessed through prejudice, but upon an old
protestant consideration, that records and presidents differing from the
received ways and interests of men, are more to be regarded from any that make
for them; since the forgeryes and falsifications of precedent Ages make it
propable, that such passages might be inserted and foysted in, but why or how
these should be adulterated he did not see. Even in matters of common
transaction, in our English Courts of judicature, he thought he had been told,
that one precedent or verdict against the juri^diction of a Court is of more
validity than a thousand for it: because it is supposed that none will,
contrary to right and equity, infringe their own power. Further; if any should
oppose the sayings of others in the behalf of humane learning, to what he had
vouched, he hoped they would produce them out of Authors contemporaries with
his, or else they should not imagine that he would think any such averrements
to be contradictory to what his query may seemingly assert, nor yet
satisfactory to the question, nor does he think (and. Heraldus, Ouzelius and
others concur with him herein) that out of Antiquty they can alledg any such
quotations. If they oppose his query with the practice and use of humane
learning which is found in Clem. Alexandr. Orig. Tertullian, Lactantius,
Arnobius, Minucius Felix, etc. He shall not think such dealing to be fair:
since the question is what was their judgment? not what they did practice? Of
the latter no man will suppose the querist to be ignorant; and if any should,
yet would the Objection be of no value, until they shall evince that every man
did in those times live up to the light he had; and acted as he spoke. He
thinks it may have been with the Ancients as with [ Vega] that excellent
methodest in Physic, who being sick of a feavour, a friend visited him, and
found him drinking wine; whereupon he charged him with having formerly
prohibited the use thereof in feavours by his writings: The infirm replied, in
my books you see the practice of Physic, but in me the practice of Physicians.
He supposes that after persons have been brought over from Paganism to
Christianity, something may stick by them, as an ill scent may when one comes
out of a jakes, yet that is their failing, not their justification. If Moses
learnt the Egyptian skill, it was whilst he remained in Pharaoh's Court: And so
Paul was learned in Heathen Authors, but it was before he came to the School of
Christ, he has used them but three or four times in his works, whereas now
they are more frequent than Texts of Scripture. Athanasius against the
Gentiles, says the Scriptures are sufficient to declare the truth of
themselves; and that if his friend Macarius did read other Religious writers,
It was but (...), as a lover of ^legance, not as a lover of Christ. Other
things there were which he saw might be objected, which he will not now insist
upon, having weighed them in the balances and found them light. About the call
of the Ministry and the first Reformers, he hopes not to be opposed with the
afterjudgment of Luther, or the rest. He is not of their Opinion, who think
the first reformers did use that Artifice of bending a crooked stick, as much
the other way, that so it may at least become straight. Such dealings are not
to be admitted in the service of our God, who is a consuming fire: It is to
charge them with a great hypocrisy (since they never owned any such actions,
but delivered all as precious and glorious Truths) and to make them guilty of
the ruin of those poor souls, who dyed in the profession of a belief their
teachers did not intend them. In fine, it is to make the first Reformation as
bad (or not much better) a way as that of Popery, and all that embraces it, and
adhere thereunto, to be in a different only, and sinful estate. It is a slur
to the greatest wonder God has produced after the Churches being 1200. years
in the Wilderness: How much more ought we to prejudge all succeeding times from
their Doctrines? and having such pregnant motives to believe they were spirited
by God, let us impute their afterchange to failings upon carnal
considerations, when Luther went to settle himself Pope in Germany, and his
writings were advanced as the test of truth; and an Oligarchy of Ministers
settled elsewhere. Let us owe our Reformation to God and not Belial or
Antichrist, to the call and excitement of the former, not consecration of the
latter. Let us acknowledge their zeal, their chatity and those more glorious
principles of spiritual graces, rather than prudentiall contrivements. Are not
those there first works which are here quoted? are not those the works by which
Luther said he would have men and Angels tried? If you say, that there is a
difference betwixt a Church settled and unsettled: a question will arise (if that
can be questioned) whether the Papists did not say their church was then
settled? and whether any settlement political will suffice to debarr those
actings? for then the first Reformers, yea, first Christians, and Christ
himself, all are cast. If only what is a settlement of truth, or
Gospel-settlement be intended, does not this resolve all into a trial of
doctrines? and a proof that the present way is the sole Gospel-way? Which
whosoever shall avow, he need not want employment for his thoughts from the
several writings of Papists, Episcoparians, Presbyterians, Independents, etc.
however the Questionist should rest.


