A LETTER FROM AN OFFICER in His MAJESTY'S Army, to a Gentleman in
Gloucestershire.

UPON OCCASION OF certain Querees scattered about that Country.



Printed in the Year, 1643.

A LETTER FROM AN OFFICER IN HIS MAJESTY'S ARMY, to a Gentleman in
Gloucestershire. Upon occasion of certain Quaerees scattered about that COUNTRY.
Sir:
I Have received your Letter and your Quaerees, which you say makes a deep
impression in many of whose honesty and public Affections I have a very good
esteem, and that they are made by one who has a great desire to receive case
and satisfaction himself, as being of a nature very undelighted and passive in
these distractions. The first (how strange soever it seems to Reason) I must
believe, especially when I find your self, whom I have often known very easily
to master more difficult Contentions, brought to some pause, as it somewhat
were said to you, you could not well get from; no doubt many other of less
subtle understandings, and it may be hurt by the necessary pressures, and
provoked by unwarrantable Insolences of the Kings Soldiers, are, or seem to
be really puzzled. But for the Author of those Quaerees, you must pardon me if I
do not believe him to be a man of so innocent a nature as you would imply:
doubtless these scruples never sprung from a mind in labor to find out
truth; but are contrived by a Person very well able to answer his own
Objections, and having pretended Conscience against his own understanding has
found these little excuses to make a party amongst weaker men.

The first Scruple seems to be a tenderness of the Act for continuance of this
Parliament, which that Gentleman would apprehend to be broken by His Majesty's
not consenting to all the Counsels now given Him by both Houses; If I thought
this Objection to be of moment to you, I should give your understanding for
lost, and expect your cure only by that which misled you, Success; but I must
observe to you the uningenuity of your honest man, who would make the People
believe that by His Majesty's consenting to pass that Act, that Assembly were
authorized to command, and His Majesty obliged to obey whatever they
prescribed; when that Gentleman well knows nothing is enacted by that law, but
that this Parliament shall not be dissolved but by Act of Parliament. You well
remember in what Condition things stood at the passing that Law, two Armies in
the Bowels of the Kingdom at 800001. the Month, so much to be raised for the
support of them, and a much greater sum to Disband them; all this Money was
to be borrowed, and upon such security as Money in those happy days used to be
lent, for the new merry security of the public faity, by a Vote of both
Houses, was not then current enough to be obtruded to the people, the Credit of
many worthy Persons was to be used for the procuring this supply, and it seemed
no unseasonable wariness of those who exposed themselves and their fortunes to
this hazard; to desire that the body, at whose instance they undertook those
Engagements, might not be dissolved, before it had taken some course to secure
such undertakings, and provision should be made for the indemnity of those who
had submitted to such burdens. This Reason, and this alone prevailed with His
Majesty to agree that this Parliament should not be dissolved without their
consent, who seemed voluntarily to engage themselves for the Peace and benefit
of the Kingdom. How this continuance of the Parliament should now give both
Houses the Prerogative they have assumed, I cannot understand, and themselves
have publicly acknowledged in their Declarations, that they were to blame if
they undertook any thing which they would not undertake, if it were in His
Majesty's power to dissolve them to morrow; Think now with your self if the
King should argue with both Houses upon their own Grounds, that the Trust being
broken, the power may be reassumed immediately into the hands which reposed
that Trust, might he not justly say, that they had betrayed and forfeited that
Trust* by using the means which was given them to disburthen the Commonwealth
of a debt which was then thought insupportable, only to plunge it irrecoverably
into a greater, and to ruin the Kingdom to prefer half a score men. And if
the People should follow their Logique and be tried only by the Equity of the
Law, might they not charge them with the breach of Trust, in changing the whole
frame of the Government of the Kingdom, and subjecting them to so unlimited an
Arbitrary power, that no man can know at the sitting of the Houses, what he
shall be worth at their rising? Did they intend, when they let these men into
that Assembly, that they should shut the Door, and keep those that sent them
for ever from those Counsels? Did the King intend that they should rob, depose
and murder him? And did the people intend that their fellows and Companions
should imprison, plunder and destroy them? and if the abused King, and injured
people should now declare this Act to be void and in it self against the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and so this Parliament to be dissolved,
would not your Principles and foundations bear them out? You are one of the
oldest Parliament men I know, and, however you may have since changed your
mind, have to me seemed the most scandalized at the Indignities offered to the
very being of Parliament, by the wildness and fury of this. Did not you
passionately reprehend the pert Burgess of your own Town, for arguing against
the Kings negative voice, because then it may fall out that the Commonwealth
might be ruined for want of a supplementall Law, which the perverseness of one
man would not consent to? Did you not then, after you had showed the
impossibility and madness of such suppositions, and that from the beginning of
this Monarchy to this day, no inconvenience had happened of that kind, say, that
you were persuaded in your Conscience, that the Laws of the Kingdom were so
very complete, in order to the Government of the Kingdom, that if there should
never more be made, so the old were faithfully observed, the Kingdom would be
at least without any diminution of its happiness: on the other side if the
Kings Consent were not necessary, you said all those Bills which had heretofore
passed both Houses, and for want of the Royal Assent had been laid by, would
now rise up (...) so many Laws to as great a confusion as these Ordinances
have made? Did you not then say, that when Parliaments left their modesty, they
would loose their Reputation, and when they walked in any other Path then of
their known Presidents, and judged by any other Rule then the known Laws,
they would advance a Tyranny more insupportable then ever Rome or Greece
endured? your Privileges, which are freedom of Speech, and freedom from
Imprisonment, (except where the Law says you may be imprisoned) where are
they? how violated? and by whom, but by your selves? How many men, chosen and
sent by their Countries, have you turned out of the House for not concurring
with you in opinion? How monstrous is it that the King may not commit a Member,
who attempts to kill Him, without your leave; and you may commit another for
but desiring to kiss His hand? And whilst you will not suffer His Majesty,
without breach of Privilege, to commit Traitors and Felons, because they are
Members of either House, you are content that Alderman Pennington, or any of
the City Captains commit those who sit amongst you, and you have not the
courage to reprehend them. Do you think the people of England can look long
upon sixscore or sevenscore men (for both Houses do not contain a greater
number) as upon the high Court of Parliament? when the Major part of those too
are Persons of such desperate fortunes, and contemptible understandings, as off
from those Benches were never thought fit for sober and honest Counsels. You
may break what lests you please upon the King and the Cavaliers, and say, that
if He were in His own Power He would quickly return to His Parliament, but
truly the Court here has so much Charity to believe, if both Houses were at
liberty to do according to their Consciences this public fire would be
quickly quenched. Believe it no sober man looks upon you under any other
Notion, then as men besieged by the desperate common Council of London and
their Adherents, who awe and fright you to their wicked and damnable
conclusions: Nay, the close Committee it self, is a greater breach of the
Privilege of Parliament, then the Kings coming to the House, and the taking
the five Members from thence could have been. I am as little pleased with the
perpetuity of this Parliament, as I have been with the untimely breaking of
others; and let me tell you, all the dissolutions of Parliaments from the
beginning of them to this time, has not done half that mischief, as the
continuance of this has done; and yet since it has the countenance of a Law,
I wish it may never be dissolved but by a Law. What designs these men have
even upon Parliaments themselves, is too evident, whereas if the King
prevails, parliaments are again restored to their full Luster; you have read
His Protestations solemnly made in the presence of God for the defense of the
Privileges of Parliaments; He is too Just and too pious a Prince to break
those promises, and to reproach Himself with His own Declarations; but if He
should, enquire whether the Persons about Him, even the Officers of His Army
are likely to concur with Him in those ends? I am persuaded it would be no more
in His Power to employ His Army to the destruction of the Law, then you once
thought it was to raise one for His preservation. In a word, as you esteem and
reverence real Parliaments, abhor these men who would use the word
Parliament only as a stalking Horse to destroy all acts of Parliament; there
cannot be a more irreverent mention of Parliaments then to call the fanatique
actions of a few desperate seditious persons the proceedings of Parliament. A
Parliament is the great Council of the Kingdom, graciously called by His
Maiesiies Writ, confidently to present the grievances of the people, and humbly
to offer their advice and Counsels for Reformation; if they come unsent for,
irregularly call that a greivance, which the Law allows, and insolently
command, instead of modestly advising the Royal power, by whose Authority they
come together, they do, as much as in them lies, dissolve the Parliament by
proceeding against the nature, of Parliaments.

The next scandal this wise Gentleman takes, is at the protecting Delinquents;
does this trouble you too? Call your memory to an account, I think I have heard
you say, you have been of eight Parliaments. How many Delinquents have you
known sent for in seven of them? and what were they? were not most of them,
only such as had presumed to sue or arrest privileged persons? How many men in
your time have you known committed by the House of Commons before this
Parliament? do you think it reasonable that they who cannot examine, should
have power to Judge? you had need take the course you do to slight and
undervalue all Oaths, that they may not be thought necessary to legal and
regular proceedings, and yet why do you then at all intimate your own
incompetency by some times desiring the Lords to help you examine men by Oath?
How comes it that you confess Oaths at some time to be necessary for finding
out the truth, and pass it over as impertinent at other? When you have
evidence you think it a popular thing to use it, if you have none, you can
Judge as well without it. You have a trick to be satisfied in your own
Consciences, (Consciences that can commit Treason, Felony, Rapes, and
Sacrilege in the fear of God) and then all forms and essences of
proceedings, which can only distinguish right from wrong, must be dispensed
with. If a Treason were committed, how comes my Lord Chief Justice to be left
out in the enquiry, and no other Minister employed but your Sergeant? why
should not the Commonwealth hear of Treason and Misprision of Treason in
Westminster Hall, where the terms are understood, but only in the House of
Commons? If a man should come to the House of Commons-Barre, and desire the
Sergeant of that House should be sent for a man as Delinquent, who took his
Purse from him upon Black Heath, or picked his pocket in Smithfield, if the
Theif were not a Member of either House (God forbid but they should have the
Privilege to Judge one another) would you not think the fellow mad, and wish
him to go to the next Minister of Justice? How come you to be so subtle to be
able only to Judge and define Treasons; about which your Ancestors have been so
careful, to leave it in the view of any man what it is? Tell your self
without blushing, who you think are meant by Delinquents: Is it not visible to
all the world, that you intend all such who are not or will not be Traitors to
the known Laws, to be Delinquents to both Houses? and it is a notable breach
of Privilege that His Majesty will protect these Delinquents from you; look
over your own votes, and see if all men who do not assist you in your pious
work of murdering the King, and destroying the Commonwealth, (for you have
faithfully required the lazy Gentlemen who desired to be lookers on) are not
comprehended in the number of Delinquents: What was St John Hotham for denying
His Majesty admittance into His own Town of Hull? A privileged Person and an
upright Patriot, what were they who attended His Majesty when He presumed
desperately and rebelliously to offer to go thither? Delinquents: And yet His
Majesty will not suffer those who kept Him out, to Judge those who would have
gone in with Him; wonderful breach of privilege, and protecting of
Delinquents! If we cannot recover Law again, for Gods sake let us have sense
restored to us, and not grow Beasts in our understanding as well as in our
Liberty; it will make us love mankind the worse to see men with sad brows, as
if they believed themselves, seriously urge things in public, which in
private would make friends quarrel for the scorn and Indignity offered to
reason, such is all your discourse of Privileges and Delinquents.

But you have at last found a pretty obligation upon your selves to Rebel
against Law and Reason, your late Protestation requires all this at your hands,
in the behalf of the Privileges of Parliament, which by that you are bound to
defend, and so you rescue your selves from the duty of Allegiance, to which you
have regularly and legally sworn, by a voluntary Protestation to do somewhat
you do not understand; If there be any thing by that Protestation enjoined to
be done, which was unlawful to be done before the Protestation was taken, it is
no more to be justified by that Act, then any other unlawful thing is by a
rash and wicked Vow, entered into by a Person who desires to do mischief; If
there be nothing in it, but what before was the duty of every man, there needs
no Argument from the Protestation; The truth is, though I like not the use has
been made of it to poison and mislead simple people, nor the irregularity (to
call it no worse) of compelling men to take it, when no Law requires it, I know
nothing promised or undertaken in that Protestation which every honest man does
not, and always did hold absolutely to be his duty, no man being obliged by it
to do any thing, but as far as Lawfully he may. And would not a stander by
think a man mad, that should swear to defend the Kings Person, and to maintain
the Privileges of Parliament, and immediately draw His sword upon the King
whose Person he knew, in the behalf of somewhat he is told is Privilege of
Parliament? we are gotten again into the old circle of folly and madness.

Your last Scruple I will be serious with you in* it is that (however thrown
among the people maliciously, and indeed against the Conscience of the
Contrivers) which I know startles many well meaning, and well wishing men, you
are afraid of the Papists, and that if the King prevails, that Religion will
have too great a countenance and growth, to the scandal of ours; Indeed if
this fear were well grounded, you would have so many partners with you in your
trouble, that you would even be satisfied in your company, and by that, think
your self secure against your fears; what makes you doubt this, an Inclination
in the King Himself? Let His life be examined, His continued public Acts of
Devotion, (examples indeed for a through Reformation) His understanding the
differences between the Church of Rome and us, and so not only utterly
dissenting from them, but knowing why he does so, and He will be found above
the reach of Envy or Malice, and indeed above your own fears and jealousies:
Take a list and survey of His Servants and Counselors, who are suspected to
have the least interest in His favors and inclinations, you will not find a
man under the least taint that way, and most of them (till your dishonest
uncharitable distinction of Popish and Popishly affected was thrown among the
people) thought eminent advancers of the true Protestant Religion established.
And let me tell you, if there should be a breach made upon that Religion, these
men would stand in the Gap, when half your Zelots would submit to an
Alteration, if it brought any satisfaction to their worldly Ambition. But you
say the Queen is of that Religion, and She has a great influence and power
over His affections, and you think it an unkingly thing to be a good Husband,
and whilst your selves are guided and swayed by other men's Wives (for it is not
Women you are angry with, you allow them whole sharers with you in your
mischiefs) you cannot endure He should so much as advise with His own; indeed
I cannot blame you to desire to keep Him from any Conversation with one you
have used so ill: But how comes this Melancholy upon you now, Is She more a
Catholic now then She was fifteen years since? Why did not these Fears and
Iealousies break out into Rebellion when He was first Married? before the
Nation knew any thing of Her, but Her Religion? After the experience of so many
years; after the enriching the Kingdom with so hopeful and numerous an Issue,
after the obliging all sorts of People with Her favors, without disobliging
any body that I have heard of, after fifteen years living here with great
expressions of Love and Affection to the English Nation, without any other
activity in Religion, then to live well, and wish well to Her own, with equal
esteem of those who are not of the same Profession, to desire to break and
interrupt that excellent Harmony in Affections, is an ingratitude, an impiety
worthy the contrivers of these bloody distempers: Look into the Persons who
have received the greatest testimonies and evidence of Her favors, you will
not find them to be Popish or Popishly affected, but in the list of your own
Religious Men and Godly Women; If you will convert Her, let your Charity and
Humility, the principles of true Religion, let your Obedience and Loyalty, the
effects of true Religion, be an Evidence to Her that yours is the right; the
course you take will rather fright good People from any, then invite them to
yours; She is a Lady too well understands Her own share, and Her own adventure
in the public distractions, not to endeavor with Her soul a reconciliation
of them, I would your Ladies were like Her, She is as far from revenge of
Injuries and Indignities, as from deserving them. You have the advantage in
your Provocations, you have met with tempers as apt to forgive, as you are to
offend, who are as unlimited in their mercy as their enemies are in their
insolences, make good use of it, set your hearts upon Peace, and you will
easily find the* way to it, be once ingenious, and you will be quickly safe.

But oh the great Army of Papists, if that were disbanded, your fears and
jealousies would infinitely abate; that is well; pray observe how these Papists
come together: Remember Nottingham when you had a formed Army of 10000. men and
His Majesty not 800. Muskets at His command in all His dominions? if you had
then fallen upon Him and destroyed Him, as, if Your Pride had not been greater
then your Loyalty, you had done; you meant to strip Him by Votes and Ordinances
of all Succors and Assistance, that He should be compelled to put Himself into
your hands for Protection, and so confess your Army to be raised for His
defense. Would not now all Christian Princes have thought His Majesty guilty of
His own undoing, who would not suffer Himself to receive Aid from any of His
own Subjects, though they were Papists* You tell me the Author of these Queries
is learned in the Laws; pray get him to show you one Law, whereby the Papists
are inhibited to serve their Sovereign against a Rebellion, because Papists
may not come near the Court without the Kings leave, or wear Arms, may not a
Papist ride post to tell the King of a design to murder Him? or being present
take away a sword from that man who attempts to kill Him? Sure there is no Law
has prohibited the Allegiance of the Papists, and because they will not come
to Church, forbid them to be Subjects. If a Fleet arrived from France or Spain
to invade us were it not law full for a Papist to endeavor to destroy that
Fleet? and must he sit still in a Rebellion, and see his Sovereign, and the
Laws of the Land (in which he has an equal interest with any other Subject)
in imminent, visible danger to be destroyed, and must not (...) either? yet
observe now (how much soever you seem to be scandalized at it) what you your
selves have done toward the raising this Army of Papists, and indeed if there
be such an Army, whether your selves have not raised it, without breaking your
own Jests and saying ^^is mysed by the power of both Houses, as yours is by the
Kings Authority you seize upon all the papists estates, plunder their Houses,
imprison their persons, without the least Color of Law, leaving them no place
to breath in but under the shelter of the Kings Army, and thence you would have
the King drive them too, for being papists. You suffer Mr. Griffith to raise a
Troop of that Religion for your service and when they cashiere their Captain,
and come in to His Majesty, you would have Him disband them because they are
Papists. For Gods sake get one of your Orators to make a Speech for the King to
a papist, who shall say to him; Sir, I have lived modestly and dutifully at my
own House, without assuming to my self any License which the Law gave me not,
I have humbly submitted to the penalties imposed on me, and contented my self
with what the Law has left me, I am driven from thence by force of Arms, my
Estate taken from me, my liberty endeavored to be so too, I am Your Subject,
and You are my King, vouchsafe me the Protection You owe me. what answer shall
He make; Sir, you are a Papist, and you shall not come near Me, or, Sir, I am
content you shall be under the shelter and security of my Forces, but upon your
life use no weapon, bear no Arms, help them not though they are in danger to
be cut in pieces before your face. Let a sober man find a way to get out here,
to be a King and not protect them. And after all this what a goodly Army of
Papists has His Majesty got together, not to compare with you, for you say
it is no matter what number of Papists you have, because there are no Fears and
Iealousies of your favoring of popery; I am confident and I have my
Information from no ill hands, that in all His Majesty's Armies the Papists
cannot make one good Regiment. Get but the honest sober, true Protestants once
of your mind, and my life upon it, you shall not see the papists grow above the
Reach of the Law.

Here is an end of your Author, a word now to your own Letter, I find you much
transported with the apprehension of Gods wonderful Blessings upon the
proceedings of both Houses, that their progress and Success hither to has
not been less then miraculous; Indeed there are negative Miracles, as well as
affirmative, for God to forbear what according to his Justice and goodness,
and other attributes We might expect from him by the way of punishment and
revenge, is a miracle of his mercy, in this Sense, the world which has seen
your Treason and Rebellion, your Acts of Injustice, Cruelty and Inhumanity,
your Lying and Blasphemy, your Profaneness and Sacrilege (if your Divines have
left you the apprehension of such a Sin (and by the way if they have, pray
send me word what they mean by it) they who have observed the ill Arts you
have used to compass things in themselves lawful, and the wicked Arts you
daily use to compass things unlawful, and see that stones in the Streets have
not risen up against you, and fire from Heaven has not consumed you, must say
you have tempted God so far, so insolently, that less then a Miracle could
not preserve you. Bate me this one Miracle, and tell me if the hand of God has
not been upon you and pursued you from the first hour you entered into
Rebellion, are you not fallen from your universal Interest and Reputation with
the people, to that degree of hatred that they curse you to your face? Are you
not shrunk from the honor and Reverence due to a Parliament to the Imputation
of a vile crowd of mean, guilty, seditious persons? Do nor your friends every
day forsake you, and those persons of Quality whom'you mislead, with more
bitterness fall from you, then your first Delinquents? Are not your own
Weapons turned upon you, and are you not afraid of those Petitioners, whom with
so much skill and Industry you taught to Petition? Is not your own Army,
raised and maintained by your selves, grown so undevoted to you, that some
Commanders every day leave you, and others are committed by you for fear they
will do so too? Are you not brought to that strait as to fear a Mutiny for
want of Pay, and not to dare to pay for fear of a disbanding? Have you not by
blood and Rapine, with the curses of all good men gotten the Treasure of the
Kingdom into your hands, and wasted it so, that your wants are as not orious
as your Crimes? Lastly, are you not so jealous, so divided amongst your selves,
that if your Army prevailed to morrow, you were as far from compassing your
own ends, as when you began your desperate undertaking, your principal
Commanders being as far from their ends, who couzened them into this
Rebellion, as the prime Cavaliers in the Kings Army, excepting only their
Affection to the Kings Person. -- There is the Miracle on your parts; see now
what God has done for His Anointed? Call back your memory to the 10th of
January, look upon Him driven furiously from White Hall, with His Wife and
Children, for fear of His Life, whilst His own Servants for their security
durst not be near him; look upon him at Hampton Court, scornfully accused of
leavying War against Himself, and the Sheriffs and Constables appointed to
disperse his Army; Remember Him at Windsor without ordinary, necessary support;
think of the 20th of January, when you would not vouchsafe to tell Him what you
would have, requiring nothing but His submission to your Counsels: Remember
Him at York and Beverley, after you had Possessed your selves of all His
Arms, Castles, Forts, Towns, and Ships, and seized upon all the Arms of the
Kingdom, stopped His Rents, and incensed the people in all parts against Him;
Oh think upon Him at Nottingham when you would not vouchsafe to Treat with
Him, only giving your great General power of receiving him to mercy, when you
had reduced him to that Condition, that He had neither Arms, Men, or Money, or
knew as you thought where to have any, and this at a time when you had a wanton
flourishing Army of 10000 men within two days March of him, to bring Him back
to London, here is an Argument for a Miracle; observe Him in a moment, as if
Regiments fell from the Clouds, hasting his own March to the place where he
was expected without staying to be called upon at Shrewsbury, view Him at
Edgehill, with a handful of men (and if they were more, imagine how he got
them) finding out this formidable Army, and dispersing them, Himself taking as
much pains to save those who came to destroy him, as others had done to seduce
them; Instead of being brought up by the Earl of Essex, as by the vote of both
Houses He ought to have been, See Him making his own way, scattering those at
Reading, and showing himself at Brainceford, that if indeed He were so much
desired at London, and might be worthily received there, they might have their
wish. Believe it Sir, His Majesty has not so great a Journey to the Conquest
of Spain, as he had from Nottingham to Brainceford. If you cannot suddenly
find how this Army was raised, enquire how it has been kept together, a fit of
Loyalty and Affection, a little dislike and indignation to see a good King ill
used, might procure a present supply; but that this Army raised without Money,
and armed without Weapons, should live and grow six months together, that no
Soldier should starve for want of Meat, or murmur for want of Pay, that the
King should have a Magazine, and you want Arms, that the King should pay his
Soldiers, and you have no money, is such an instance of the power and presence
of the Almighty, that if any such Argument were current with you, your
principal Members would no longer have tempted God in this Kingdom, but have
sought him in a strange Land. Improve all these instances by your own
Observations, and tell me sadly on whose side the Miracles have appeared.

You would know my Opinion what the Burgess of D. should do, and you tell me,
his Honor will not suffer him too apparently to recede from those with whom he
has kept so much Company. I know not what Counsel to give upon that
principle, If his Honor and his Innocence have not a care of each other,
neither can be safe; Me thinks the King himself has given you a rare Pattern
of Modesty in this point, he did not satisfy himself with consenting to new
laws, but acknowledged passed Errors. Reparation is as Sovereign a thing as
Bounty, and except there be this Ingenuity, Reformation can never be perfect,
you say, he doubts what he has done formerly will be more remembered then what
he has since done or shall do for the future; he is too blame, he has not a
generous nor a Christian mind, who thinks ill services may not be thoroughly
repaired by future duty. I am so far from that opinion, as though his
mistakes have been of as ill consequence to the public as most men's, I
believe he has so good an opportunity by some eminent service to repair
himself, that he may even lay an obligation of Gratitude upon the King, not
only to forgive but reward his Affection. There is no such way to have what he
now does, not valued, as by justifying what he has done, so contrary to this:
it is no scandal to be deceived, less to confess he was so. Let him take the
same pains to oppose and suppress unreasonable Persons, as he does to
persuade others to consent to what himself thinks unreasonable, and the work
is done. As he has a task to do somewhat that is noble, so he has a fair
game before him having done it.

I know nothing of yours unanswered, you must give me leave hereafter not to
believe you, if you stumble any more at these straws, rather consider what he
is to Answer to God, the King, his Country and Posterity, that sits idle
without resisting the violence and indignity offered to all four, that is
content to see this precious game of Religion, Liberty and Honor played at
other men's Charges, and possibly in hazard of being lost for want of his
Assistance; Consider whether you and the rest who first exercised the Militia
in Gloucestershire, and so discomposed the Government, and first taught the
People a new obedience, have not to Answer for all the miseries, and pressures
which have since befallen that poor Country. Let those who have contributed to
the raising, and maintenance of that Rebellious Army, think sadly, whether they
are not guilty of all the bloodshed on either side, and in this meditation
that virtuous Lord, (who had long since been starved but for the Kings Meat,
and been naked, but for His Clothes,) may find himself guilty of the murder
of his Father; Remember the blessed Condition we were in Eighteen Months
since, and be proud if you can of the State you have now brought us to. Think
of the firm, stable happiness our Ancestors enjoyed, and resolve there cannot
be security but by the same Rule. It Is not laying down Arms makes a Peace, but
such a Union of affections, that neither party unpleasantly remembers the way
to it. If King or People be enforced to give away that which properly belongs
to them, it will produce rather rest then Peace, and the memory there of will
be so grievous to the looser, that perpetual Iealousies, and discontents will
be between them; Insist upon your Rights, let all doubts which may concern
Religion, Liberty, and Property be cleared, and secured; Let Parliaments
recover their good old Privileges, these are all our Birthrights, and has
been that which has made the happiness and freedom of the English Nation
loved and envyed throughout Christendom; we will not part with a tittle of
them, but when they shall be in danger will join with you in their Defense. But
let us rest here, Press not the King to part with what properly belongs to
Him, it is our right to see that He enjoyes His, the hour that he grows less
a King, We have lost a part of our freedom, if the power of Subjects be once
enlarged, we are loosers by it, and affect an Authority will destroy us; Do not
think the Kings love of Peace, can invite Him to part with the benefits of
Peace; what would the world thing of Him, if after the taking up Arms for the
defense of His own, he should, upon Condition he might lay them down again,
part with that, for the maintenance of which He took them up? would he not
justify what has been done against Him, if He yielded that now, which if He
had 8. Months since, all this Confusion they will say might have been
prevented, and will he not leave an excellent Encouragement to Posterity, to
tread in their Fathers steps, and to follow the example of their prosperous
wickedness? Do not think a Jewel plucked out of the Royal Diadem, can help
it is brightness, and luster in any other place, it is a loss to the Nation,
which cannot be repaired by an access of power to private hands; If this be
Reason, Let not the folly and madness of other people make you quit it; War
it self is not half so grievous, as the Jurisdiction of these men who would
have you resign your understanding to their fury and madness. Let them shift
for themselves, and you shall quickly see what a contemptible People they will
prove: Let Religion, Reason, Law, Justice, and Honor be your guides, the
Kingdom will flourish, and we shall again be happy in each other.

From my Quarter this 10th. of April. 1643.
FINIS.

