A Relation of the good success of the Parliaments forces under the Command of
General Lesly, the Earl of Manchester, and the Lord Fairfax, Against the
forces commanded by Prince Rupert and the Earl of Newcastle, on Hesham-Moore,
on Tuesday July 2. 1644.

Sent by way of Letter from a Captain there present, to a friend in LONDON.

July 10th Cambridge

Printed by W.F. 1644.

A relation of the great victory obtained (by Gods assistance) by the
Parliaments Forces, over those great Forces under the Command of P^^^^e RUPERT.
SIR,
THose many and very great courtesies I have formerly received from you,
(especially your bounty in promoting my endeavor for Scholarship) commands me
to watch all opportunities to do you service. But the substance of this ensuing
Letter is such, that I know with you (...) will claim a fair acceptance, though
I present you (...) with the plausible show of a Preamble. Briefly the^ ^us:

SIR, By Gods bles^ing I can tell you I am alive, and so are you, and by Go^^^
victorious arm, the Church of God: Last night he she^^d us what the fury of
its enemies could do, which w^^ ^o powerful and performed with so much
resolution and audacity, noise and terror, that you could not but have thought
they now at last had moved even Hell gates. But to proceed orderly, (for now I
am recollected, having brushd off the dust and fury of war, and fallen into a
calm of gratitude to my Protector, and desiring you and all like your self,
to show your selves also such to him that has saved you and the Commonwealth)
After many assaults upon the city of York performed with great courage, and
also the often receiving the resolute sallies of a strong enemy, we heard by
our Scouts on Friday last, being the 28. of June, that behind us their Goliath
had made his near approach, with men not to be numbered; a vast body indeed it
was: this being considered by a Counsel of War, it was determined to raise
the Siege with all convenient speed, which beginning the next morning, it was
fully completed before Monday at noon, the Enemy making small skirmishes all
the while with us, and we with our forlorn hope of Horse drawn up for that
purpose still repulsing them.

On Tuesday the second of July we pitched in Hesham. Moore, where no sooner
looking about us, but the enemy with displayed colors entered the same place,
bending toward the left hand, by reason of some advantage they perceived
there; which we striving to prevent, made for it, before they should possess
themselves of it; in the mean time the main body of their pitched in that very
place and near unto it which we left.

Our Army consisting of three Generals, had a General for every part to
conduct it: The main body was the Scots led on by General Lesley, the right
wing by the Lord Fairfax, and the left wing by the Earl of Manchester. They
drew up their battalie likewise with much gallantry, something larger then ours
in appearance, commanded by the Prince, the Marquess of Newcastle, Sir Charles
Lucas. Thus the Moore commonly called Hesham Moore being six miles long, and
generally a mile broad, was bespread and covered with the two battailions. We
began about two of the clock in the afternoon with our great guns, which
continued till between 7 and 8 with equal success, then the main bodies
joining, made such a noise with shot and clamor of shouts that we lost our
ears, and the smoke of powder was so thick that we saw no light but what
proceeded from the mouth of gunnes. For the first; their brave Chivalry in the
left wing gave such a Cavalier-like assault that presently they routed our
right, consisting of my Lord Fairfaxes men, made up with some regiments of
commanded Scots, who by the help of good horses ran so far before they looked
about, that this morning I passing toward Hull-ward for releife of my
wearisomenesse I found all places possessed with the noise of the total
overthrow of the Parliament forces. But nothing so, God be thanked, for the
right wing being fled and eagerly persued, in the mean time we under the
command of my Lord of Manchester and Colonel Crumwell then leading up our
Brigade of horse, gave them so brave an onset, that God seconding it with his
blessing, in less then an hour we had totally routed their foot on the right
wing. In the mean time it was hotly disputed between the two main bodies, ours
consisting of the Scots led up by General Lesley, theirs by Prince Rupert: but
theirs at last perceiving their friends thus flying, began likewise for their
own safety to betake themselves to their heels. Thus the field was totally
cleared, their right wing and main body beaten out by fine strength, their left
wing leaving it in persuit of their victory. We followed the chase of them
almost as far as York (which is four miles distant from the Moore) whether
the most part of their forces fled for shelter, and had not night prevented us
our execution on them had been far g^eater. Thus returning and total masters
of the field, we possessed our selves of all their Cannon, match, Powder,
Carriages, being very many and well furnished. As for the number of the slain I
cannot give you a just account, but upon our first veiw on both sides they
seemed to be four thousand, of which I verily believe nigh (...) were theirs.
The Arms of the fields being gathered made in show 5000. Besides we hear the
soldiers have since gathered up many at diverse places cast away by them in
their flight. As for prisoners taken they are many, but the just number or any
man of notice in particular as yet I cannot inform you.

If you should expect the commendation or valor of any particular man your
friendor mine, by displaying of that I should seem to take off from others, who
all did so gallantly this day, that the commendations of one may justly seem
the wrong of another. And as for the enemy the truth is they behaved themselves
with more valor and resolution then ever man saw coincident with so bad a
cause. Whose eyes I pray God to open, and our victories shall be of as great a
value with less blood: In a word we were hardly put to it, partly by the power
of our enemies, but most by our own wants, all provisions being at that time
very scarce amongst us: and our soldiers hungry and tired with a lingering
siege. But you see Gods power is above man's want.

Your friend at all times ready to serve you W. H.
NOw as I am writing we hear the Prince is rallying his shattered forces some
twelve miles off toward Scarbrough, where he expects the conjunction of some
help from those parts to make up a body again, which we hope to prevent.




