A CONGRATULATION To our newly restored PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH of
ENGLAND.
HAIL, Sacred Commonweal; for sure thou art
The joy and comfort of each honest heart.
How were thou clouded in thy Virgin-birth,
That made our Zion soon lose all her mirth?
Thou firstborn of great Jove, and yet kept under
By sons of Earth, which was our greatest wonder;
But now it does revive our hearts affection,
To see again thy much wished resurrection.
Can a true English heart now silent be,
Being freed from Bondage and from Tyranny?
And will it not loud 10 Paeans sing?
And shout forth praises to our Heavenly King?
What makes our Muses silent now to be
In this great change? Were all for Monarchy
Inspired and tuned? Athens I Am sure free State
Brought forth great Captains, as well men of pate.
Your Fountain's dry, or else your great Pan's dead,
Are all come life-lesse sourls ha'ing lost your head?
Or has the second birth of our Free State
Sent ye all packing hence, and wrought your fate?
Some say that in a freeborn Commonweal
Wits will increase, and come more liberal.
That all are silent struck, I much admire;
Did Interest or gain your souls inspire?
If your great Hero were alive again,
He Would little thank such mercenary men,
That clawd the Father, and when he was gone,
Eat up their words, and then forsook his Son.
Sure it is just that each one should inherit
The due reward of his great Acts and Merit.
And though great Caesar vowed Romes slavery,
Yet Rome grew great by Caesar's gallantry:
His fault was Caesar's, aiming at a Crown,
T'enslave the Public, tread our freedoms down.
But who would not of men a Caesar be,
So sweet is Rule and Royal Soveraigntie?
But thanks Great Senators, who'd not forgot
Out Public freedoms, nor the common Plot
Of the stout Royalists both new and old,
That to enslave us all were grown so bold.
Blessed be providence 'cause ye again up stand
Without new Wars, by small help of man's hand.
Be wise then now ye Rulers, Kiss the Son,
Be not self-seekers, but let all be don
In Righteonsnesse and Justice unto all,
Then by the hands of foes you shall not fall;
And let th'Oppresseds loads be laid aside;
Let trust and charge in honest hands reside.
So will you flourish, and the World shall see
The righteous fruits of your new Olive Tree:
And then I Will say, predict and prophecy,
Your State will stand to perpetuity.
So prays W. H.

LONDON, Printed by J. T. in the year 1659.


