A more perfect and particular RELATION OF THE Late great VICTORY in Scotland
Obtained over Montrosse and the Rebels there, by the Forces under the Command
of Lieutenant-Generall David Lesley, certified by an Express the 16. of this
instant from Hadington.

Together with a List of the chief men of note taken prisoners and killed in the
battle, and after in the pursuit.

To which is likewise added a Letter written from Master Balsame Minister at
Berwick, and dated the 17. of September. 1645. to a Minister in London concerning
the said Victory.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by M.B. for Robert Bostock at the Kings head in Paul's
Churchyard. 25. Sep. 1645.

A more perfect and particular Relation of the late great VICTORY in SCOTLAND,
etc.
I Received yours of the 9. current and in return have sent you a short
account of this late happy victory the Lord has given us over our enemies:
After the defeating of our Forces near Kilsyth, all the Malignants in the
Country run in to him, but did not all much increase his strength; the
addition he received was in Horse and Dragoons, whereof he stood in greatest
need, being removed into the low Country from the hills, which were upon all
occasions to him a shelter and place of retreat; the number of his Horse and
Dragoons were made up to about two thousand, and so far as I can learn, his
whole strength in Horse and Foot did not amount to seven thousand, but all
these were not present at this last battle, for upon the releasing of Lodowick
Lindsey sometime Earl of Crawford out of prison, there arose some difference
amongst the Rebels, Montrosse having promised to the Lord Gordon to make him
General of the Horse, for which the Earl of Crawford having a Commission from
the King before his imprisonment, was preferred by Montrosse. This gave great
cause of discontent to the Lord Gordon, and thereupon he retired with 500. men
to his own Country. Another occasion of the diminution of his force was, That
the Marquess of Argyles Forces and the Earl of Seaforts had possessed
themselves of the Rebels Lands and Houses in the North, and was taking order
with their friends and adherents to reduce them to obedience; which moved the
Enemy to send back into the North Colkittoch with 800. men to protect their
lands. With the rest of their Forces the Enemy marched Eastward to interrupt
the leavy of our Forces that were raising in the Eastern and Southern parts
of the Kingdom. But upon Lieutenant-Generall David Lesleyes coming into
Berwick-shire, and East Lothian, he marched South toward Selhirke, where he
might have the assistance of the Malignants and disaffected that live upon the
Scottish and English borders. Upon Friday the 12. of this instant (which was a
day of Fasting and Humiliation) Lieutenant-Generall David Lesley with his
Forces advanced within three miles of the Enemy, who were quartered in Philip
Haugh, not far from Selhirke, that night he sent out two parties, who fell in
upon their quarters, killed some, and gave them the alarm, which made them
continue all night in Arms, and ours did the like. The morrow being Saturday
the 13. our Forces marched toward the Enemy, and came within view of them about
ten in the morning; according to their usual manner they had made choice of a
most advantageous ground wherein they had entrenched themselves, having upon
the one hand an unpassable Ditch, and on the other Dikes and Hedges, and where
these were not strong enough, they further fortified them by casting up
Ditches, and lined their Hedges with Musketeers. After viewing one another,
there came out three horses from each side, and after skirmishing very
gallantly about a quarter of an hour, the Enemies three were beaten in; after
this, the Enemy sent out a partee of 200 Musketeeers, who were forced by ours
to retreat in great disorder, whereupon the Van of our Forces advanced, and for
almost an hour (being between eleven and twelve of the clock) it was hotly
disputed, our Horse endeavoring to break through, and the Enemy with great
resolution maintaining their ground; at length Lieutenant-Generall David Lesley
charging very desperately upon the head of his own Regiment, broke the body of
the Enemies Foot, after which they went all in confusion and disorder, and the
Horse wanting their Foot were not able to make great opposition; the Foot were
all cut off and taken, whereof an hundred were Irish, who were all since shot
at a Post, many of the Horse killed upon the place, and many taken, but more in
the pursuit, for they rallied again, which occasioned their greater overthrow,
and gave opportunity to our Horse to reincounter them: Here the Earl of
Crawford the General of their Horse was killed, the Lord Ogleby, and Nathaniel
Gordon one of their most active Commanders were taken: of the Foot and Horse it
is conceived there is between two and three thousand killed. I have herewith
sent you a List of the chief Prisoners taken, and the persons of note that
were killed, so far as is yet come to our knowledge, there are diverse others
killed and taken, whose names I have not for the present, but shall send them by
the next occasion. It is remarkable, that God should cast into our hands again
those prisoners that were delived up basely by the Malignants in Edinburgh. We
lost of our side Captain Barclay, and Captain Dundasse, and a very few
Soldiers, but have diverse wounded, yet killed and wounded there are in all not
above an hundred. The Lord of Hosts put a spirit of courage in our Officers and
Soldiers, and all of them behaved themselves resolutely: If I were to speak to
the praise of men, I might say much for Lieutenant-Generall Lesley, and
Generall-Major Midaleton, and others, but though they deserve it, I know they
desire it not, but that we should magnify him that enabled them. Montrosse
himself escaped with a few Horse, leaving behind him all his Baggage, amongst
which is found his own Commission from the King; and diverse other Commissions
for Lieutenants in the several Counties, together with a Roll of all such as
have received protections from him, which will be a good vidimus for the
payment of our Soldiers. Some say that Montrosse is fled to the Castle of
Dowglasse, others report him to be taken about Evingdall, but I can report none
of these for a truth, only it is certain, he is not visible but in corners.
Since the battle diverse of the Enemies Soldiers are killed and taken by the
Country people. Lieutenant-Generall Lesley is gone to Glasgow, and
Generall-Major Middleton to Sterling, to intercept at these two passages such
of the Enemy as shall endeavor to go Northward. Sir James Hacket is sent to
the General to stop his march Northward, and I hope Lieutenant-Generall Lesley
shall return shortly with most of the Horse.

The mercies of the Lord our God have been wonfull toward us, we had many
warnings before this late sad hour of darkness, but the Lord has delivered
us as in a moment, he has wrought salvation for his own Names sake. O how
free, how undeserved, how seasonable a mercy, not only destroyed our professed
enemies, but discovered our secret and bosom adversaries. To God be all the
glory, and let his people have the comfort and right use of it, which is the
earnest desire and hearty prayer of

Hadington 16 Sept. 1644. Your affectionate friend, W. H.
It was generally reported here that Major-Generall Monro was landed in the
West with two thousand men; but I can assure you there is no such thing, he is
far advanced in Ireland with his whole Forces.



Prisoners of note taken, besides those were killed at the Battle fought at
Philip-Haugh, within three miles of Selkirk in Tiviotdale. upon the 13.
September. 1645. and since in the pursuit.
Persons of note taken.
THe Earl of Traquaire. Lord Seaton. Lord Drummond. Lord Ogleby. Lord Gray.
Lord Linton. The Lord Napers eldest Son. The Baron of Drum, younger. The
Baron of Reasyth. The Lord of Derceys eldest Son, Grandchild to the late
pretended Archbishop of S. Andews The Lord of Pury Ogleby the younger. Sir
Robert Spotswood, pretended Secretary of State, and Son to the late pretended
Archbishop of S. Andrews. Sir John Hay, sometimes Clarke Register. Sir James
Douglas, Son to the Earl of Morton- Sir David Murray. Sir John Byres. Sir
Nathaniel Gordon. Sir Alexander Lesly, Sergeant Major General. Sir William
Rollock. William Murray, Brother to the Earl of Tullibrand. Colonel William
Stewart, adjutant-Generall. Coloneli James Hay. O Cain, Lieutenant-Colonell to
the Irish. The Sergeant Major to the Earl of Antrim, and diverse Gentlemen.
Persons of note killed.
Lodwick Lindsay, sometime Earl of Craford, General of the Horse. The Barron
of Junerleith. The Barron of Tough. The Barron of Cambusnethen younger.
Soldiers, between two thousand and three thousand.
A true Copy of a Letter written by Master Robert Balsome, one of the Preachers
sent by the Committee of Parliament into the North, to a Minister in London.
Dear Brother:
I Will tell thee good news, Scotland is living, newly raised from the dead,
Montrosse utterly overthrown, being as ripe for judgment as ever I heard of
any wretch, either in these or former times: Master Row told me, who was at
the Fight, that many women when his Army came. were forced by the violence of
the unchaste Soldier, and diverse young Virgins were carried away Captives in
the Army, with whom the Soldiers committed filthiness in open places where
the Camp lay, the Officers first taking, and then the Soldiers in joying what
they left: it was the voice of the Country, almost in every woman's mouth, God
has shamed us, and whether shall we cause our shame to go? But behold when
the Enemy was thus ripe in sin, the Lord cuts him off in an instant: Many
things are very remarkable, as 1 That having so long a time after the last
great Victory before Lesly came, yet had they not gotten many thousands
together. 2 That all this time not one Minister has complied with them, either
to preach to them or pray with them. 3 That the Lord gave the Victory in the
space of an hour. 4 That it was by an inconsiderable Party, not above five
Regiments of Horse. 5 It was only with the loss of fifteen Common Soldiers,
and one Captain on our side. 6 That it was the next day after the Fast. 7 That
a paper Book was taken, in which were the names of all that either were come
in, or intended to come in to Montrosse, so as that all the rotten Members in
the Kingdom are discovered in an hour, and many of them cut off in a short
time; the Soldiers after the Victory cried out, Give all the Glory to God and
none to us.


We have had in Barwick, since these troubles, many of the best affected in
Scotland, I have not met with such a people, not one of them, as I could either
speak with, or hear of, that differed from the rest in opinion; a gracious
praying people, laying hold on Christ, who is the only subject of their
discourse; I am persuaded, though they are not many in comparison of the
Kingdom, in whom is found the power of Religion, yet their being of one mind
and one soul, makes them exceeding prevalent with God I could give thee many a
Relation concerning them, which would glad thy heart, but I am in haste; I hope
you will hear more large Relations from others; many Prisoners are taken up
every day by the Country people, many of them they kill in the place where they
find them; But I must conclude, Remember me to all with thee, fail not to
write by the next Post, to him who is

Barwick, September. 17. 1645. Thine in the best Bonds, To. BALSOME.

FINIS.

