The Queens Majesty's MESSAGE AND DECLARATION TO The Right Honorable the Peers
of England, assembled in Parliament; concerning the Kings Majesty, and the Army;
presented by another Ambassador from France, the 9 of this instant MDCXLIX.

AND The Declaration of the House of Peers concerning the King; with the
proceedings of the Commons, and what Government shall be established, a new
Broad Seal to be erected, which is to have engraven on the one side, the House
of Commons; on the other, the Arms of England and Ireland.

With several new Proposals from the Citizens of London, to the
Common Council, concerning the trial of the KING.

A Declaration of the General Council of the Army, concerning Mr. Will: Pryn,
and the rest of the secluded Members; and his Excellencies Declaration
concerning the King, and all those who have assisted Him.

Subscribed, T. FAIRFAX.

Published by Authority.

Printed for L. White, and are to be sold in the Old-Bayley.

A Declaration of the PEERS OF ENGLAND To the Kingdom;
Wherein they declare That no Act of the Commons house is binding, not being
consented unto by the Lords in Parliament.
ON Tuesday the 9 instant, diverse of the Lords met, and assembled in the house
of Peers, where they fell into debate upon several things, in relation to
their late Vote, that the King could not commit treason against the Parliament,
which they still persist in: After some debate thereupon, they took into further
consideration the chief reasons and motives which did induce them there unto,
and had some further debate, that a Committee draw up a Declaration to the
Kingdom, which shall give reasons why they rejected the Commission for trial
of the Kings and to draw up another Declaration to the Kingdom, in which they
are given to understand, that no Act of the Commons house is binding, not being
consented unto by the Lords in Parliament And the 10. of this instant, they sat
a while, and adjorn'd, but proceeded not upon the subject in debate the day
before.

The day before they adjornd, the French Ambassador had audience in the House
of Peers, where he presented a declaratory message from the Queen of England
to their Lordships, purporting, That she earnestly desired, that their
Lordships would be pleased to admit of her coming into England, for the
visiting of the Kings Majesty, before his being brought to trial, and that she
might have assurance of her safe return. But their Lordships resolved to lay it
aside, and not to insist thereon at present.

The house of Commons (after some time spent in debate what kind of Government
to erect in England) agreed to have a new broad Seal brought in forthwith,
which is to have engraven on the one side the house of Commons; on the other,
the Arms of England and Ireland, round, shall be impressed the year of its
original, as the first of freedom or liberty to the people.

Diverse of the most eminent Lords that have served the King in the late
difference, have presented a message, and offered to his Excellency the Lord
General Fairfax, an assurance. That his Majesty shall sign what offered at the
treaty, and else, as shall be desired,

Letters from the North say, that the Scots are exceeding weary of warlike
commotions, and desires to negotiate with the two Houses of Parliament, and his
Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax, in behalf of their dread Sovereign, to the
end, that no prosecution for trial, may be put in execution against his royal
person, without the advice and concurrence of that Nation thereto, and that
nothing be done or acted, contrary to the Solemn League and Covenant between
the two Kingdoms. Our intelligence from thence further says, That diverse of
the Scottish peers have transmitted a Message to the Kings Majesty, intimating,
Their loyalty and affection to his Royal person, and their Resolution to leave
no means unaessayed, for the advancing his Honor and Greatness. But
notwithstanding their great forwardness, to make the Royal party glorious, yet
there are many dissenting Brethren amongst them, who are resolved to confide
with the parliament of England and the Army. The revolutions and transactions
of affairs in this kingdom, now give a caution to all the well-affected in our
Neighbor Nation, to carry a strong hand, and an Eagles eye, over the
proceedings of the Adverse party. We hear of a new storm arising in
Lancashire, and of great under hand listing there; but the well-affected are
putting themselves in a posture to receive them and have in readiness 4000
Horse and Foot to attend their motion. We hear that the honest party in the
West of England have also put themselves into a posture of defense, and have
raised and listed 12000 Horse and Foot, to engage with the parliament and army
(upon any occasion) for common Justice, Freedom, and Safety, and for promoting
the Remonstrance of the Army, to the end, that impartial Justice may be
executed upon the capital Enemy of this Nation.

Leeds 8. Jan: 1648.

The General council of the Army gave reasons to the common concerning their
securing, and secluding of the Members of Parliament (which Mr. Pryn says are
above 200 in number) (...) for your better satisfaction for so much as I shall
make use (...) this kind, I shall give you in the Officers own words, vizt.

First, for those Members who are yet detained in custody, they are either such
who have been formerly impeached, and (in part) judged by the house for
treason, or other high crimes, and never acquitted; and against whom we can and
very shortly shall produce new matter of no less crime: or else such who have
appeared most active and united in Counsels with them, against whom also we
are preparing, and shall shortly give matters of particular impeachment.

Secondly, For those others who have been wi^hheld by the Guard from coming
into the house, as nothing but such necessity, as aforesaid, and the clear
denial of any ground of distinction by voluntary discrimination admitted
amongst your selves, should have made us in such manner to exercise our own
judgment and power in the case; so you having since by your Resolutions of the
12 and 13 of December last, declared many of those Votes (wherein chiefly the
public interest has been of late diserted) to be dishonorable and
destructive: and having admitted the entering dissents against the Vote of
December the 5 last, wherein the will of all the rest seems comprehended and
closed up (as far as God would suffer it to proceed,) and many faithful
Members having thereupon publicly declared, and entered their dissents from the
same; By which means there are now clearer grounds of discrimination begun
amongst your selves, and a competent number of Members, of whom by their
dissents registered, we can publicly take notice of men standing entire to the
public trust, and in whose judgments we may repose: We shall therefore
henceforth forbear to proceed any further in the exclusion of any upon our own
judgment or information gained from without, and shall refer to the knowledge
and judgment of those whose dissents from that Vote already an^, or hereafter
shall be entered, both to consider what other Members have stood clear from the
series of those corrupt Councels; you have so declared against, and who have
been notoriously guilty thereof, and accordingly to determine which shall be
readmitted as having kept to their trust, and which excluded, as having
diserted the same. But we most earnestly desire, as you tender the good and
quiet of the Kingdom, with the easing the burdens and ending the troubles
thereof, and would for the time this Parliament shall continue, prevent an
irrecoverable relapse of all things into their former miserable condition, and
avoid the numerous evils and endless troubles, which the renewed prevailing of
the same corrupt Councels, or but of like divisions and unsetlednesse in your
Councels, would evidently produce; that therefore you would resolve to exclude
henceforth from the house, and make the stricktest caution, and provision, to
keep out all such who are known to have carried on, or to be guilty of that
series of corrupt Votes which you have so justly branded, as aforesaid, and
that none may be readmitted amongst you, who shall not either by their own
protests, or upon your certain knowledge, be pareicularly acquitted therefrom.

(...) 8. 1648, Signed in the name, and by the appointment of the General of
the Officers of the Army. JO. RUSHWORTHSecr.


The rest of the day was spent in debate on the manner of proceedings at Law,
and in what name processes shall issue forth, all Writts at Common Law issuing
forth in the Kings name by our NORMAN Laws: but this came not to any result.

Yet before I proceed any further, I shall re-mind you of diverse things which
have been acted within four weeks, which the people failed in their expectation
of, for above four years before, viz. The removing the cause of the manifold
obstructions which continually happened when any great business was moved in
the house. 2. The taking away the negative power of the King and Lords, which
the people did attribute to be the cause, why former Parliaments were called
and dissolved (after the peoples purses were drained) without giving any
redress in public grievances heard and redressed.

2ly. That there may be a freedom in Trade and commerce, all Monopolies cease,
and no man to suffer by any Law, against which he has not transgressed,

The Proposals of the City of London.
1 That impartial Justice may be executed upon all offenders either by Land or
Sea, who have been Actors or Abettors in the former or late wars, and that from
the highest to the lowest without respect of persons. 2 That all places of
power and trust in the kingdom and Navy, may be entrusted in the hands of those
persons that may be safely confided in, for their known and approved fidelity.
3 That some effectual course may be taken for recovering the almost lost
Trade of the City and Kingdom.

His Excellencies Declaration.
These are to require all persons who have engaged for the King in the first or
second war, and have adhered unto or assisted him, or his party therein, and
are now residing in London, or within ten miles distant therefrom, that within
(...) hours after the publication hereof, they depart from the said City and
Suburbs, and all places within ten miles distance thereof, and not to return
for the space of one month next ensuing, after the publication hereof; and
whosoever shall be found and taken contrary hereuntu, they shall be dealt
withal as prisoners of war, except such as are excepted in the Order of
Parliament.

Subscribed, T. FAIRFAX.

FINIS.

