The Queens Letter From HOLLAND: DIRECTED TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.

Brought to the Parliament, and delivered to the custody of -- Hen. Elsing
Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Whereunto is added His Majesty's late Speech.

AND The Copy of another Letter sent from an English Merchant in Holland to
his brother in London concerning the manner of the Queens Preparation to come
for England.

London printed for I. Underhill. feb. ^^ 1647

The Queens Letter SENT TO The KINGS most excellent Majesty from Holland.
MOst Royal and Illustrious Monarch of great Britain, my great, my good and
worthy Liege, the most regal object of my loving heart, best affections and
utmost endeavors;
Be pleased to let this paper in all humility to salute your Princely hands,
and to give your Princely cogitations some account of my endeavors, (as I am
bound in duty, and as I am your spouse and loyal wife) for your Majesty in my
absence, my love having now no other ways left of expression, but by being
your humble and faithful Agent in accommodating and promoting your high
affairs, wherein if my words, the pledges, and earnest sollicitors for the
improvement of your present fame and glory, may carry in them any strength of
persuasion, I would earnestly incite your Princely thoughts to a remembrance of
your Majesty's resolution to carry forward your designs until they grow to a
famous maturity and ripeness: maintain and continue your cause in the hardy
prosecution of your affairs, without any mitigation, unless an honorable
satisfaction may make you disbandon and raise your former intentions: Now you
have a large field given you, wherein the illustrious virtues inherent in your
royal Person may be actually expressed, and give the whole Christian world
which are now spectators, and the eye of all Christendom upon your Person, a
clear approbation and testimony that your Majesty merits that noble attribute
annexed to your royal Title, Defender of the Faith: for by such like actions
as these, Princes live when they have paid their debt to nature, and will be
their own monument, which shall be everlasting, and more durable then that of
Marble. Be therefore constant in your Princely resolutions, full of your own
cause, and your Majesty shall never want external accommodations and foreign
compliances, which by my earnest endeavors and solicitations have of late been
somewhat advanced, having obtained a list from our Brother the Prince of Orange,
from whence as the special merit did distinguish them in worth, I have selected
out of that number some choice, well-experienced and serviceable soldiers,
such as shall be forward with courageous affections to maintain your Princely
affairs, and to amplify your renown and glory in the in gagement of present
actions: and out of these deserving men, I have chosen stout Commanders, who
will be always ready to do Your Majesty service in your Army, and that I
might further supply and serve your present occasions, I have caused 400.
barrels of Powder, and 10, pieces of ordnance, to be conveyed to your
Majesty, besides good store of all other Ammunition, necessary upon all warlike
occasions, the compliance of our noble Brother the Prince of Orange is so
settled in a firm complexion, simpathising, and affectionately agreeing with
the present condition of affairs, that he has by many demonstrations given
testimony thereof, and by raising diverse sums of money for my use has
endeavored the inclination of his particular affections, amongst other
accommodations least your Majesty should be any way necessitated, I am to
certify your Majesty, that the Jewels of your Crown are for present receipts
engaged to some certain Jews of Amsterdam. Moreover I am to give your
Highness cause to esteem the cheerful undertakings and forward alacrity of
our Brother the Prince of Orange, who will with all careful vigilancie be
ready to take all opportunities for your Majesty's advantage, and will with
clear intentions wherein you may repose trust, be ready to express himself
in all Christian Offices: My acknowledgment of Prince Roberts valiant courage
and love expressed in personal actions, and those adhering to your Majesty,
being arrived to my knowledge by a letter lately sent to Mr. Jermin, must needs
deserve my approbation and highest commendation, since his worth and noble
actions are of such transcendent expression of Princely merit. Amongst the
other endervours of my affectionate desires, the States have been carnestly
solicited for their aid and assistance, which as yet cannot be induced upon
them to grant, nor can J by any persuasion obtain the effect of my urgent
motion, though J hope my Letters sent unto my Brother the French King, shall
infuse a Royal flame into his breast, and make him through accompable
fulness of your Highness Cause, give such aid unto your Majesty, as may
express him Royal in his thoughts, and tender of his Regal relation unto
your Highness; but if my Letter should be so unhappie as not fully to inflame
and instigate his mind to awake his power in your aid and defense, J cannot
nor will not see your actions brought on with so much expectation any way
disanimated, but since the Ages hopes must be the production and business of
Your weighty affairs, my personal solicitation shall at my going into France
enduce and incline my most Christian brother to appear in pramoting and
assisting your Majesty's cause and actions, which are so full of honorable
Justice: though absent till we be resident in your Princely heart, and believe
my affections and endeavors are ever ready to serve your Majesty.

Sir, I am and always shall be your most dutiful wife and liege woman.
HENERETTA, MARIA,

The Substance of a Letter sent from A Merchant in Holland, to his Brother in
London.
Our Queen is within nine Miles of the place where we now are, she is again to
take shhipping for England, we saw twelve States men of War that are to
carry her for England, and here at Rotterdam, where we now are, four Ships
and Hoyes laden with Powder Ammunition, and Horses, and there is so many more
at Amsterdam, laden with Ammunition. all to go with the Queen to the King, this
is of a truth I was an Eye witness of it.

F. VV.

His Majesty's Speech and Protestation on Sunday Feb. the 5, before the Lords
and University of Oxford, for the renouncing of Popery.
ON the fifth of this present Month, his Majesty being resident at Oxford, and
attended with a brave Train of the Nobility, heard a Sermon that morning in the
Cathedral Church: which being ended, and the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist,
being that day celebrated, his Majesty beholding a great multitude of his
Nobility round about him, spoke thus unto them.

My Lords;
Although J am not bound to give account to any of my thoughts but unto God
alone, yet for your better satisfaction, and that my People might understand
how much J have suffered by prejudicate Rumor and opinion; J this day protest
before the face of Almighty God, and before you all, that in my heart I am
far from Popery, and so by Gods grace will continue unto the end of my life;
neither did my Queen ever to my knowledge so much as persuade me once to alter
my Religion.

FINIS.

