Here is Great News for England. And good News for England.
WAS not a Woman the first that Christ sent, and shall they not be the last?
For they shall have the hardest Task? They are the finest of the Mold, and they
shall tell you things not yet told: Christ loved a Woman best, because he laid
on her Lap and sucked on her Breast.

A Woman shall not be run down, for consider a Woman wore the Crown: A Woman
brings forth the young, and is the finest because she has so done: A Woman's
the sweetest Bread, if she will but hear what the Spirit has said: Then she is
God's own, for a Woman was made out of the Bone. A Man was made out of the
Earth, he cannot so well convince the Turk: The Earth will forsake, the Earth
will give way, a Bone will give none, of a Bone came he that is, and was, and
ever will be God's own. By a Woman came the fall, and freely without your
Money, they will help to draw you up all, that will obey your call: A Woman cut
off Holiferne's Head, she neither drank his Drink nor eat his Bread; Yet by her
the whole Army run and fled: What is it a Woman has not done, that a Man never
did, brought our Savior to Bed, the Virgin Mary was the first Preacher, for at
the Dinner, she said what he bids you do, that do; ay and she was a Counselor
too, and they took her Council, so that when he spoke, they filled the Water
pots, 'twas the best Wine that ever was drank, and if you was to hear him
speak, you would find that it was the best Wine that ever you did drink. And
the Woman at the Well of Samaria run into the City and said come see a Man that
has told me all that ever I did: And Mary Magdalen was the first that savv him
after he arose again, says he go tell my Apostles that I am risen, was he not
angry with the Apostles because they did not believe the Woman.

Here is the Christians Letter to all that has in them no Religion at all.
Says some is the Quakers way, the right way; yes, ye;, for they directed me to
him, he is in the inward Soul of Man that will be inwardly read all my Books
and they will direct ye to him; I believe this inward teaching is no less then
the teaching of Christ, I have joy in the hearing of it, and joy in the writing
of it, and joy in the Printing of it, and exceeding joy in the Preaching of it,
and I rejoice when I meet with a Minister that I like, and I give him a Book
freely, and he takes it be as much as you can alone, as you may have the
teaching of God and not be thrown, that that checks you for Sin is the Spirit
of Christ within, and if you will but mind it, and obey it it will make you
wiser than all your teachers; Is not Christ to teach his People himself, now
find out who is his People that he teaches himself; I believe I know them that
lies low, some Men has outward learning a deal, but can ye tell me what the
Spirit does to ye reveal, I speak now to elderly Men, come hold your Tongue and
be no more a Reader, but let Christ be your Teacher; the sooner the better ye
come from the Letter, for the Letter kill(...)

Lie lovv, live lovv, and then ye will be the easiest and the happiest, and
the most know; Come seek for the Blood of the Lamb, for that is now the
Spirit teaching, there is Life in that, and joy and peace in the holy Ghost,
Christ's followers was all led by it, when they came to it; I tell ye the
truth what I believe, I am called chosen, sealed, redeemed, elected and new
born, and I have the Gospel to Preach, and woe to me if I hold my Tongue,
neither a mock, nor a laugh, nor a jar do I fear; carnal Men will laugh at
Spiritual Men, and much more at Women; Oxford and Cambridge is to blame, for
they make more Ministers then they can maintain, for no Man ought to be a
Preacher before he has the spiritually teacher, are you taught by God, or are
you taught by Man; for Prayers that comes from on high, ascends up on high such
Warriors, I knevv I long to be so too, Anne Anderson, Anne Frame, and Charles
Marshal's Wife, and Thomas Upshot, and William Penn, and Leonard Fell; said a
Man cannot have a good thought, but as God puts it in his Mind, and yet he may
have a Prayer by wrought with a Laughter, he drevv up their Belief, but
before he had done, he made a great many vveep; I would vvait on God, and I
believe he will Proclaim me through the City. I am like a War Horse to the
Battle, I hear the Drums beat up for Volunteers, the War is now begun and I
cannot hold my Tongue, here is Trumpets put into Mouths that will blovv, let
the Storms beat never so; It was said to me blovv your Trumpet, it shall not
be in vain, throvv your Bread upon the Waters and you shall find it again,
shall I have a Trumpet, and I shall sound it well, for I am cut from all the
Earth, and all therein does dvvell, my thinks this inward teaching is like my
Husband's Father, Colemine that runs under Ground; you know not the vvorth of
it, nor the depth of it, it is more vvorth then seven hundred a Year; I will
not sell it, nor game it away from my Children dear but work and get Rich,
all my Day I would not loose no time; I say, no Dancing, no Singing, no Music
for me, Dancing should make ye dread, because for it John the Baptist lost his
Head, Singing alures Men to Whoring, I don't love no outvvard Music to please
an outvvard Ear, for that is not right, for it does all the Spiritual Worship a
fright: O! happy Day may come to me at three score and three, and at four score
and four, sorrovvs may not trouble me no more, and at a hundred Year old I may
be more Beautiful, then now humble, meek and patience then ever, then People
may mind me more, when I deliver both inward Riches and outvvard Riches: O!
that will be Beauty indeed.

Who knows what shall be done seven Years hence, I don't know but God knows I
hope well for me and mine, who knows what shall be done ten Years hence, better
and better, for them that ^weth God and comes further in the Letter, and them
that lives twenty Years louger and can see the Gospel increase will have a
noble Feast, and I believe in five and thirty Years and four, in a glorious
Body that will decend down, for me to lance in, when I go out of this mortal
Body then where is Purgatory, there is no such thing; Purgation is here when
you are in Sorrow and Sin fear, some is judged now while their here well, and
some not till they die and just a going to Hell; if ye have done Evil and will
do it again and again, there is a Gulf to fall in, but if ye will repent and
Sin fear, the greatest Sinner may become the greatest Saint; therefore let no
Man faint, and the greatest Sufferer may become the greatest Preacher, to tell
you the Truth I believe I shall be rich and sent by God to Preach. I would uot
be hindered from being a Preacher, nor for all the World I would not loose this
heavenly Teacher, I believe I shall rise as the Sun at Noon Day, and all my
Enemies will go away.

I hope when the Romish Priest sees the Substance of all Things is come, Hell
bid my youngest Daughter hold her Tongue, and the Abbey Common Prayer Men my
Mother; the Carnal Man would if they could Laugh the Spiritual Men to Scorn;
but they cannot if their Sealed and new Born, are you come to the Spirit of
Christ's Teaching then are you not Sealed and new Born, he that Lives is Faith
his Living is safe! O it is rare to live in Faith and not in fear, ^t it is
rare for (...) to Preaching, (...) to Smoking or to Drinking for all elderly
People, will take to something. Ay often to a Concubine, where they lose their
Strength, and sight if you don't a^ree with your wife before you die, fear you^
Damned to all Etenity; which did first offend, to agree let them first send.

Prophecy: Prophecy, what must I Prophecy; He that does with another Man's
Wife lie shall surely in Sin dye and you Whore, be sure you shall pay the
Score for watching the Woman's Husband, in and out of his Door, a Whore is
like a Louse if you don't keep your self fat and greasy, and seldom shifting of
ye a Louse vvon't stay long with ye, but will drop away from ye, and so
will a Whore, if you have Substance for her no more.

The Whores they trap the Men in the Night, and (...) Wives are waiting and
weeping when they should be Sleeping. A Whore is a deep Ditch, a nasty Sink the
way to Hell, utter ruin and Confusion.


