THE QVEENS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS ANSWER TO THE LORD DIGBIES LETTER, And the
Parliaments Censure to the 18. Rebels. With the Examination and Confession of
Captain Butler, before the COMMITTEE.

Likewise the true Relatton of 36. other Rebels, apprehended and taken in
Milford-Lane, by many Constables, and a strong Watch* who intended to fire the
City of London, had they not bin prevented

The Names of those 36. Rebels.
Captain Griffin, Captain Hornway, Captain Spencer, Lieuten. Williams, G.
Coppinger Mr. Ric. Crab, Master. John Tompson, Henry Barton, Thomas Leidor,
Adam Wheeler Will. Hafford, Garret Rya^t, I. Duport, Dan. Thornlie, Morgan
Meridith Rich. Boys, Patrick Teenam, Thomas Lemon, Nich. Wright, Robert Delen,
Darbie Kufoy David Speeloo, Ioh. Greenoraugh, Will. Barwicke. Jonas Kipling,
Peter Fotheogill, David Bodurdo, Gefferie Roberts, Thomas Trig Adam Bedford,
William Grimes, John Daveris Henry Scarebie, Patricke Coots David Powell,
Darbie Cobois.
Printed at London for Tho. Powell, and averred by I. B. Cler.

Her Majesty's gracious Aswer to the Lord Digbies LETTER.
MY LORD,
WE respectively entertain great alacrity in Our joyful mind, to receive the
undoubted fidelity, which you expressed to Us in your last Epistle. You may
boldly adventure to write unto Us with freedom, as well as by expresses, the
time being come, that you have a Cipher, which I vouchsafe to confer upon you;
I am exceeding joyful to know, that the humblest, and most faithful Servant I
have in the World is now at Middleborough; where (We desire) you may remain in
the privatest way you can, till you receive farther instructions how you may
more faithfully serve the King, and Us in those parts. The King having betaken
himself to a safe place, where he does, and will avow, and protect his Servants
from rage, and violence (for from Justice you cannot implore it) you may then
live in patience, and joy, having the freedom to wait upon Us. But he having
betaken himself to the easiest and complaintest way of accommodation, confirm
your confidence, that then you may serve him more by your absence, then by all
your industry: and let it be a comfort to you in all calamities, that you may
serve Us by your Actions only, and in no kind by your Sufferings for Our sake:
that you may have no measure of misfortune, but happiness in this World, which
you may derive from Our gracious value of your affection, and fidelity.

CANTERBVRY. Feb. 3. 1641.
C R

royal blazon or coat of arms
THE PARLIAMENTS CENSVRE, TO THE REBELS:
LOng have the insolency of the Rebels in Ireland, insulted over the Protestant
Party, tryumphing in their barbarous inhumanity. And as they began to increase
in their absurd Cruelties; so likewise they did corroborate their opposite
forces, still daily expecting assistance, and propitious opitulation from
foreign Countries.

But the all-discovering eye of the Almighty (which cannot permit disloyalty to
sleep in impunity) did impartially behold the inveterate resolutions of some
Rebels. The singularity of Gods omnipotent mercy distended toward England is
so miraculous, that we are more bound to praise his propitious Name, then any
other Nation under the Clymact^riall Zodiac or collateral Zenith of the
Caelestiall Pole.

First, the dexterity of his infinite misericord shown, and apparently declared
unto us in diverting the Spanish Armado from us, then in dissipating that Hell
nourished Plot of Gunpowder Treason, which alone pretended a prodigious
demolition to this Realm, Again, in confounding the assiduous stratagems and
conspiracies of the Papists, or at least their Adherents, which privacy of
plotting treachery, they have not only hatched, but also pretended against this
Kingdom lately. Yet amongst all others his miraculous mercies perfected, and
declared unto us, this especially ought not to be forgotten; for it was neither
less dangerous, nor treacherous: which I will relate in the subsequent
description hereof, and refer (as our Genius suggest unto us) a plenary
satisfaction in a more perspicuous Declaration.

Eighteen of those Rebels being apprehended, and suspected justly to be
Confederates with those in Ireland, were according to the Warrant published by
the House of Commons, committed to Newgate the 7. of this present Month, and
likewise called to the Parliament House before the Committee to answer the
Impeachments objected against them, they thus gave their Responsals as
follows.

The Examination, and Confession of Captain Butler, before the Committee the
said Captain answering for them all.
FIrst, they examined him, concerning their Religion; but he answered without
any praetermissive negation, that they were all brought up in the Catholic
Faith, and that they moreover resolved themselves never to remove their Faith.

Secondly, they questioned him concerning their audacious presumption in daring
to appropinquate any Coast in England, without Commission: but he answered,
that they were beaten thither by an impetuous wind, and averse Tempest:
Moreover, that it was not their least resolution to have stayed there long.

Thirdly, he was examined, whither they were going, and to what intent; he
replied to Ireland, then they demanded of him, whither they were resolved, or
intended, either to assist the rebels there, or the Protestants: but he
occluded his mouth with silence, and did not answer one word to that
interrogatorie; but we may easily conclude therefrom his meaning, because
silence gave consent.

Fourthly, they examined him, whither they had no more Confederats, or where
they were residing, and the number of them: he then answered, that they
expected many more, and if they had not bin interrupted, they conceived
credibly they should have seen more concomitants to conjoin with them. With
that, the Committee demanded of him again, where these their Confederates were,
in what place, and the quantity of them. But to this Proposition he would give
no answer, but replied they knew not, only they expected their conjoinment very
suddenly. With that the Comittee seemed to question him no more, but remitted
him, and committed him to the custody of the Keeper of Newgate, from whence he
came. Then they consulted amongst themselves, what verdict they should give
unto them, and concluded unanimouslie, as follows.

The Parliaments Censure to the Rebels.
THen they respectively consulted, what they should do with these rebels; and
to what condign death they should condemn them. The Vote passed twice, that
they should be hanged: but afterward they unitly concluded; that they should
continue in Newgate awhile till the Sessions, and then they should be hanged
and quarterd, and their limbs to be set upon every Gate, this Vote passed
many times showing exemplarie punishment to all those, that shall presume to
connive at the Rebellion in Ireland, or shall dare to assist them.

The Apprehension of 36. more Rebels in Milford-Lane.
AFter intelligence was given to some joint Confederats with the Rebels, that
18. were sent to Newgate, they amongst themselves appointed a meeting in
Milford-lane, where they consulted to set the City of London on fire, in
Vindication of their Friends; and taking an Oath amongst themselves to confirm
their resolution, credible Information was given to diverse Constables, who
summoned a strong Watch, and apprehended 36. more of them, who are now
committed to safe Custody.

FJNJS.

