royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

A COPY OF THE QVEENS LETTER From the Hague in HOLLAND to the Kings Majesty
residing at York. Sent from the Hague by one of her Majesty's Gentlemen
Ushers, March 19. 1641.
THE memory of your Royal person, and the due obedience which I owe unto your
Majesty, have respectively induced us to commend our Devotion unto you; But the
Fears and Jealousies fomented betwixt your Parliament and your Majesty, have
at the first audience affrighted us, to our great grief and astonishment: Yet
be still constant (my Liege) to lenity and patience, and doubt not but God in
his good time will right all injuries reflected on you: We confess your
passion at our departure, with which we likewise did mutually sympathize, but
since that former passion is reduplicated by new acerbities, we are also
possessed with the greatest part of the same. Our entertainment here at
Holland was first very Noble, but of late we perspicuously see, that the Dutch
liberality is much extenuated, notwithstanding the Princes generosity is still
royally contributed to Us daily. The States of Holland do not well accord with
the Prince, which has oftentimes grieved and perplexed Our thoughts; they
intend to create a new Officer over the Army, and will trust the Prince no
longer for the payment of the Money, which greatly troubles and perplexeth his
Highness: But we have labored to the highest extent of our power to compose
that variance and disunion between them both: And since we find these
distractions, fears and Jealousies, to assimulate and comply with those in
England, we are fully resolved to return again with expedition, and you may
suddenly expect Us at York, where we intend to be perhaps sooner then you
imagine. In the mean time (dear Husband) consolate your self with clemency,
and let not too deep a passion conquer your captive thoughts for by that
means you will both unload your heart of sorrow, and elevate your mind with
innocence.

Our pious cogitations have been daily invocated on the divine Providence for
your secure prosperity, and our sollicitous indulgencie for our dear Son,
and other children has been so careful, that we were never forgetful of
either. The supposed danger of the Prince of Orange is now almost ended. But we
hear for certainty and by credible information, that our Cousin the King of
Denmark is set forward with a Fleet for England, his intent God knows: That
our royal Brother likewise the King of France, with the King of Spain, and
the States of Venice are in a preparation of a great Navy, but God of his
infinite mercy prevent the effusion of blood, that the Branches of peace and
tranquillity may not spring from a bloody root. For our own part, we condole in
a serious deploration the distractions and confusion of those Kingdoms, and
do confirm our former resolution, intending to visit your Majesty suddenly,
being resolved either to live or dye at your sacred feet, and in your own
Kingdom.

London, printed for John Price. 1642.


