THE IDEA OF THE LAW CHARACTERED From Moses to King Charles.

Whereunto is added The IDEA of GOVERNMENT AND TYRANNY.

By John Heydon Gent. (...).

(...).

(i. e.)

The whole Law is like to a Living Creature, whose body is the literal sense,
but the Soul the more inward and hidden meaning covered under the sense of the
letter.

(...)

Soli Deo Laus and Potentia.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold in St. Dunstans-Church-yard
in Fleet-shreet, 1660.

Vera et viua Effigies Johunis Heydon Equitis (...) Not: 1629: Die. 4 Sept: 10:
P. M. Gaudet patientia duris. T. Cross Sculpsit


To the Right Worshipful, RALPH GARDENER Esquire, Justice of the Peace, and
Counselor of Estate to the supreme Authority of England; John Heydon wishes
External, Internal and Eternal Happiness.
Much Honored, etc.
MY blushing disabilities have presumed to salute you, unprovided of any other
Ornament then sincere Loyalty devoted to you: in this condition, I can say
nothing of you, but what all men know, such is the greatness of year Renowned
Fame; such is the greatness of your virtues and splendour of Learning, and
frequent making of Acts, and giving of Laws with solid Prudence, and Elegant
readiness of Speaking and Writing; Knowledge of many things, Constant in
Religion; Assisting the Poor in their Just Causes; and delivering the
Imprisoned out of the hands of blood-thirsty Creditours: And these are the
Commendable conditions with which you are endowed beyond the common custom of
others: I say nothing of those Ancient Monuments of your eminent Nobility, the
Treasure of your Riches both old and new, the Largeness of your Spirit in
Arms, with the Excellency whereof you excel, together with the comely form and
strength of the body: Though all these be very great, yet I esteem you far
greater then all these, for those your Heroic and superillustrious virtues, by
which you truly have caused, that by how much the more any one is Learned and
loves virtue, so much the more he may desire to insinuate himself into your
favor; whence I also am resolved that your favor shall be obtained by me; but
after the manner of the People of Italy (i. e.) not without a Present: which
custom of saluting Princes, and men of honor is indeed derived from Plato,
Aristotle, and the Ancient Greecists unto these very times, and still we see it
observed. And when I hear of certain Learned men to furnish you with fair and
great presents of their Learning, least I only should be a Neglector of your
Worship, I durst not apply my self with empty hands to your greatness. Now
being thought full, amongst the secrets of Nature, which I have laid up
choicely and closely in my study with my other Curiosities, Behold, The Idea of
the Law presently offered it self, as I attempted to Character it when I
followed the Practice of an Attorney in the Upper-Bench at Westminster, etc.
And now the Revolutions of Troublesome Tyrants, and my own Misfortunes being
almost past, I presently made have, as it were to pay my vows, to present it to
your Worship to complete; Truly I was persuaded that I could give nothing more
acceptable to you, then a Method of this Nature, which none have, I dare say,
hitherto attempted to restore: Yet it is not writ to you, because it is worthy
of you; but that it might make a way open for me to gain your favor. I beseech
you if it may be, let it be excused by you: I shall be devoutly yours, If this
part of Law shall by the Authority of your greatness come into Knowledge, envy
being chased away, by the power of your Worthiness; there remain the memory of
it to me, as the Fruit of a good Conscience; And so you shall know, that I
shall all my Life be,

Your most Affectionate Friend and Servant, John Heydon.
April 27. 1660.
To the Truly Noble by all Titles, WILLIAM WILD Esquire; Sarjeant of Law,
Recorder of London, and one of the Members of Parliament; All Happiness be
wished.
Serene, etc.
COncerning the Choice of the Subject matter of my present Pains, It is the
first of this race that ever was dedicated to any person, and had I not thought
it the best, It should have been taught a less ambition, then to choose such a
Princely Patron: I shall say no more, then that the sole inducement thereto,
was his singular learning in the Law and Gospel; the former of which is so
conspicuous to the world, that it is universally acknowledged of all; and for
the latter, there is none that can be ignorant thereof, who has ever had the
happiness, though but in a small measure of his own free and intimate Converse.
As for my own part, I cannot but publicly profess, I never read of any more
wise and virtuous, and so truly and becomingly Religious, and where the right
Knowledge of the Laws of God given to man, bears the enlightened mind so even,
that it is as far from doing any wrong, as Justice it self: And my present
labors cannot find better welcome, or more judicious acceptance with any, then
with such as these; for such free and unprejudiced spirits, will neither
antiquate Truth for the oldness of the Notion, nor slight her for looking so
young, or bearing the face of Novelty: He alone, above other men of honor,
has made goodness his Friend, as well as greatness his Companion; Besides
there are none that can be better assured of the sincerity and efficacy of my
present design, which is appointed to run through the midst of the Laws of God
and men; for as many as are not mere sons of the Letter, know very well, how
much the more inward and mysterious meaning of the Idea of the Law makes for
the reverence of the holy Scripture.

Wherefore my design being so pious as it proves, I could do nothing more fit
then to make choice of so true a lover of the piety of the Law, as your self,
for a Patron of my present labors; especially, you being so well able to do
the most proper office of a Patron; to defend the Idea of the Laws and Statutes
of England, that is here presented to you, and to make up out of your rich
treasury of Learning, what my penury could not reach to, or inadvertency may
have omitted: And truly if I may not hope this from you, I know not whence to
expect it: for I do not know where to meet with any so universally and fully
accomplished in the Law and Gospel, and indeed in all parts of the choycest
kind of Learning; any one of which acquisitions is enough to fill, if not
swell, an ordinary man with great conceit and pride, when as it is your sole
privilege to have them all, and yet not to take upon you, nor to be any thing
more Imperious or Censorious of others, then they ought to be who know the
least: These were the true considerations that direct me in the Dedication of
this little treatise of the Law, which if you accordingly please to take into
your favorable Patronage, and accept as a Monument or Remembrance of good
will, You will oblige,

Your most Affectionate Friend and Servant, John Heydon.
April 27. 1660.
TO THE MOST EXCELLENTLY ACCOMPLISHED THE HONORABLE, NOBLE, LEARNED AND MOST
HIGHLY OBLIGING OF ALL GENEROUS SPIRITS, PHILIP GREEN of Staple-Inne, Esquire JOHN
HEYDON, In testimony of the Honor he bears to him, humbly presents the Idea
of the Law, or A Monarchical Form of Government.

Fitted to the Genius of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and useful for the
Practitioners of all Courts, viz. Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, etc. and
all Courts of Equity, or of Penalty.

The Preface to the Reader.
THe Idea of the Law, is my present design; And first, I shall endeavor to
follow the Method of God. Man, if you look on his Material Parts, was taken
out of the great World, as woman was taken out of man: You read in Genesis,
that God made him out of the Earth; This is a great mystery, and you may find
it in my book called, The Temple of Wisdom. Now I refer you therefore thither,
to avoid Repetitions; but now let me tell you in a word; it was not the common
Pot-clay, but another thing, and that of a far better Nature; He that knows
this, knows the Subject of the Rosy Crucian Medicine, to procure long Life,
Health, Youth, Riches, Wisdom and Virtue; how to alter, change and amend the
state of the body; as you may read in my three first Books which Elias Ashmole
Esquire, made public, imperfect and rudely Deficient, calling it, The way to
bliss: In my true Copy of which, there are four Books, all wearing the same
Title, except the last, which is called, The Rosy Crucian infallible Axiomata;
there you shall find what destroys or preserves the Temperament of Man.

I will in this Preface Digress, but not much from the purpose; because I will
show you the Nature of man, how he fell, and wherefore Laws were given, etc.
Now in my Vacation I studied Man; and in him I found three principles
homogenial with his life, such as can restore his decays, and reduce his
disorders to a Harmony. They that are ignorant in this point, are not Competent
Judges of Life and Death; but Quacks, and such as daube their follies and
abominable deceipts, and horid cheats upon every wall, post and pissing place,
etc.

The Learned Viridiamus calls this matter Multiplices Terrae particula
singularis; if these words be well examined, you may possibly find it out: And
so much for the Body; let me speak a word of his Soul, which is an Essence not
to be found in the Texture of the great World; and therefore merely Divine and
Supernatural. Tebelenus calls it Divini spiritus aura, and vitae Divinae
Halitus; He seems also to make the Creation of Man, a little Incarnation; as if
God in this work had multiplied himself: Adam (says he) received his soul, Ex
admiranda singularique Dei Inspiratione, and ut sic loqui sit fas
fructificatione. St. Luke also tells you the same thing; for he makes Adam the
Son of God; not in respect of the exterior Act of Creation, but by way of
Descent: And this St. Paul confirms in the words of Aratus; for we also are his
Generation. The soul of man consists chiefly of two Portions; Ruach and Mephes;
Inferior and Superior; The Superior is Masculine and Eternal; The Inferior
Faeminine and Mortal. In these two consists our Spiritual Generation. Ut aute^
in caeteris animantibus, atque etiam in ipso homine Maris ac faminae conjunctio
fructum propagationemque spectabat Naturae singulorum dignam; ita in homine
ipso ille Maris ac faemenine interior, arcanaque societas, hoc est animi atque
animae Copulatio ad fructum vitae Divinae Idontum producendum comparabitur,
atque huc illa arcana benedictio, and faecunditas concessa huc illa declarata
facultas and monitio spectat, Crescite, and multiplicamini and replete Terram,
and subjicite illam, and Dominamini. Out of this you may learn, The Law of
Marriage; That is, a Comment on life; a meet Hieroglyphick or outward
representation of our inward vital Composition: for Life is nothing else but an
union of Male and Female Principles: And he that knows this secret, knows the
Mysterious Law of Marriage, both Spiritual and Natural; and how he ought to use
a wife. Matrimony is no ordinary trivial business, but in a moderate sense
Sacramental: It is a visible sign of our invisible union to Christ; which St.
Paul calls a great Mystery; and if the thing signified be so reverend, the
signature is no ex tempore, contemptible Agent. When God had thus finished his
last and most excellent Creature, he appointed his residence in Eden, made him
his Viceroy; and gave him a Law with full Jurisdiction over all his works;
that as the whole man consisted of body and spirit, so the Inferior Earthly
Creatures might be subject to the one, and the Superior intellectual Essences
might minister to the other. But this Royalty continued not long; for presently
upon his preferment, there was a faction in the Heavenly Court, and the Angels
scorning to attend this piece of clay, contrived how to get a Habeas Corpus for
to remove him: The first in this Plot was (...), and he got a Lattatat of
Azazell, and a warrant from Hilel, and so goes about to nullify, reverse and
violate, that which God had enacted; that so at once, like an Inferior
Bailiffe, and his Dog, as they call him, he might over reach him and his
Creature: This Policy he imparts to Egin, (...), Mahazael, Paymon, Azael, and
some others of the Hierarchy I will not name here; and strenghens himself with
Conspirators: But there is no counsel against God; the Mischief is no sooner
contrived, but he and his Confederates are expelled from light to darkness: and
thus Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft. A Witch is a Rebel in Physics, and
a Rebel is a Witch in Politics: the one Acts against Nature, the other against
Order, the Rule of it; but both are in league with the Devil, as the first
father of Discord and Sorcery. Satan being thus ejected, as the condition of
Reprobates is, became more hardened in his Resolutions, and to bring his Malice
about, arrives by permission at Eden.

Here this old Serpent, cunningly assaulted or arrested Adam with such
warrantable conference, as would surely make him believe all was well; and so
pleased his faeminine part, which was now so invigorated with life, that the
best news to her, would be tidings of a warrant to do any thing: Wherefore the
Serpent deceitfully said to the faeminized Adam; why are you so demure, and
what makes you so bound up in spirit; Is it so indeed, that God has confined
you to obey his Law, taken away your Liberty, and forbidden you all things that
you may take pleasure in?

And Adam answered, saying; No, we are not forbidden any thing that the Divine
life in us approves as good and pleasant. We are only forbidden to feed on our
own will, and to seek pleasures apart and without the warrant of the will of
God: for if our own will get head in us, we shall be Arrested, and assuredly be
carried into the prison of Mortallity, and there lie in the state of death.

But (...) and his Dog, said unto Adam; Tush, this is but a Panick fear in you
Adam; I warrant you, you shall not so surely dye as you conceit; be ruled by
me. The only matter is this: God indeed loves to keep his Creatures under a
Law; holding them in from ranging too far, and reaching too high; but he knows
very well, that if you break his Law, and but take your liberty with us; and
satiate your selves freely with with your own will; your eyes will be
wonderfully opened, and you shall meet with a world of variety of Presidents
and experiments in things; so that you will grow abundantly wise, and like
Gods, know all things whatsoever, both good and evil. Now the faeminine part
in Adam, was so tickled with this deceiver, that the Concupiscible began to be
so immoderate, as to resolve to do any thing that may promote pleasure and
experience in things, and carried away by this warrant Adams will and reason,
by his heedlesness and inadvertency: So that Adam was wholly resolved to obey
the power of this Writ, signed with a counterfeit mark according the various
toyings and titillations of the lascivious life of the whitle: no longer
calling for God or taking any Assistance of the Divine Genius.

And when he had tired himself with a rabble of toys, and unfruitful and
unsatisfactory devices, rising from the devil, and the multifarious working of
the Particles of his Vehicle, at last the eyes of his faculties were opened,
and they perceived they were now naked; he having as yet neither the covering
of the Heavenly nature, nor the Terrest^ body; only they sewed Fig Leaves
tog^her, and made some pretenses of excuse from the vigor of the Plantal life,
that now in a thinner manner might manifest it self in Adam, and predispose him
for a more perfect exercise of his Plastic Power, when the prepared matter of
the Earth shall drink him in.

In the mean time the voice of God, or the Divine Wisdom spoke for them in the
cool of the day, when the writ was served, and Adams word taken for appearance;
yet he knew no Atturny now to give a plea to (...) Declaration; but was grown
so out of order, and so much afraid to plead his own cause being guilty, and
now estranged from the life of God, so much that they durst not come before
God, but hide themselves from him.

But the Divine light in the Conscience of Adam, persued him and upbraided unto
him the case he was in: And Adam acknowledged within himself how naked he was;
having no Power, nor Ornaments, nor Abilities of his own, and yet that he had
left his obedience and dependence upon God, and submitted to the false feigned
Latitat of that cursed Bayliffe and deceiver (...), wherefore he was ashamed
and hid himself, at the approach of the Divine light manifesting it self unto
him to the reprehension and rebuke of him.

And the Divine Judge charged all this Misery and confusion, that had thus
overtaken him, upon the following the Luscious dictates of his will.

But Adam again excu'sd himself within himself; that it was the vigor and
impetuosity of that life in the vehicle, which God himself implanted in it;
whereby he miscarried the woman that God had given him.

And the Divine Judge spoke in Adam concerning woman, What work has she made
here but the woman in Adam excused her self; for she was beguiled by that grand
deceiver Valifer the Bayliffe as Irictericus calls him: In this confusion of
mind was Adam by forsaking the Divine Judge, and letting his own will get head
against it; for it so changed the Nature of his vehicle, that (whereas he might
have continued in an Angelical and Ethereal condition, and his faeminine part
been brought into perfect obedience to the Divine light, and had joys
multiplied upon the whole man, beyond all Expression and Imagination forever)
he now sunk more and more, and by habeas corpus is carried toward a Mortal and
Terrestial Estate; himself not being unsensible thereof, as you shall hear when
I have told you the Judgment of the Eternal God, concerning the Serpent and him.

Things therefore have been carried on in this wise; the Eternal Lord God
decreed thus with himself concerning the Serpent and Adam: That this old
Serpent, the Prince of the rebellious Angels, should be more accursed then all
the rest: and (whereas he Lorded it aloft, in the higher parts of the Air; and
could glide in the very Ethereal Region, amongst the innocent and unfaln Souls
of men, and the good Genii before) that he should now sweep the dust with his
belly, being cast lower toward the surface of the Earth.

And that there should be a general enmity betwixt this old Serpent, as also
all of his fellow Rebels, and betwixt mankind; and that in progress of time,
the ever faithful and obedient soul of the Messiah should take a body, and
should trample over the power of the devel, very notoriously here upon Earth:
and after his death, should give Rule and Supersede all mankind; being now
constituted the Supreme and Principal Attorney, Counselor and Prince of all
the Angelical orders what ever in Heaven: And concerning Adam, the Eternal Lord
God decreed that he should indeed be removed down to the Earth, and that he
should not there indulge to himself the pleasures of the body, without the
Concomitants of Pain and Sorrow; and that his Faeminine part, his Affections,
should be under the chastisement of the Law of his Reason. That he should have
a wearisom and toylsom Labor an Travel in this World; the Earth bringing forth
thorns and thistles, though he must subsist by the corn of the field;
wherefore in the sweat of his brows, he should eat his bread, till he retured
unto the ground, of which his terrestrial body is made. This was the Counsel of
God concerning Adam and the Serpent. Now as I was telling you, Adam though he
was sinking apace into th^se lower functions of life, yet his mind was not
grown so fully stupid, but he had the knowledge of his own condition, and added
to all his former Apologies, that the Faeminine part in him though it had
seduced him, yet there was some use of this Miscariage; For the Earth would
hence be inhabited by intellectual Animals; wherefore he called the life of his
vehicle Eve; because she is indeed the Mother of the generations of men that
live upon the Earth.

And at last the Plastic power being fully awakened, Adams soul was cast into
the Prison of the prepared matter of the Earth; and in due process of time,
Adam appeared clothed in the skin of Beasts; That is, he became a down right
Terrestrial Animal, and a mortal creature upon Earth. For the eternal God had
so decreed; and his Wisdom, Mercy and Justice did, but if I may so speak, play
and sport together in the business; and the rather because Adam had but
precipitated himself into that condition, which in due time might have fallen
to his share by course; for it is fitting there should be some such head among
the living creatures of the Earth as a terrestrial Adam; but to live always
here, were his disavantage. Wherefore when God by Habeas Corpus, removed him
from the higher condition, he made sure he should not be immortal; nor is he in
any capacity of reaching unto the Tree of Life, without passing through his
fiery Vehicle, and becoming a pure defaecate Ethereal Spirit: then he may be
admitted to taste the fruit of the tree of Life and Immortality, and so live for
ever.

But some may reply, Seeing that God made all things very good, as it appears in
his review of the Creatures on the sixth day, how could it be a sin in Adam, to
eat that which in it self was good? Verily, the sin was not grounded in the
nature of that which he did eat, but it was the infringement of the
Commandment, in as much as he was forbidden to eat it. And this is that which
St. Paul tells us, that he had not known sin, had it not been for the Law; And
again in another place, the strength of sin is the Law: but presently upon the
disobedience of the first man and his transgression of the Commandment, the
Creature was made subject to vanity: for the curse as you heard followed, and
the impure seeds were joined with the pure, and they reign to this hour in our
bodies.

Now Christ has nonsuited the Devil, and taken Judgment and Execution against
him, and set man at liberty; his soul being now satisfied with nothing but God,
from whom at first she was removed; in the body, she is in dirt and mire; out
of the body in a trice she is above the Moon.

Celsior exurgit pluviis, auditque ruentes
Sub pedibus Nimbos, and coeca Tonitrua calcat.
But this is nothing, if she were once out of the body, she could Act all that
which she imagined in a moment; in this state she can movere humores majores
animales, make general commotions in the two Spheres of Air and Water, and
alter the complexions of times; span Kingdoms in a thought, and fly up to
Paradise in a moment.

Euterpe.
O Sweet Jesus, it is thy voice, If I
Be lifted up, I Will draw all to the Sky;
Yet I am here, I am stifled in this clay,
Shut up from thee, and the fresh E^st of day.
I know thy hand's not short, but I Am unfit,
A foul unclean thing to take hold of it;
I am all dirt, nor can I hope to please,
Unless in Mercy thou love a disease.
Diseases may be cured, but who will reprieve
Him that is dead? tell me my God I live;
It Is true I live, But I so sleep withal;
I cannot move, scarce hear when thou do call.
Sins Lullabies charm me when I would come;
But draw me after thee and I will run:
Thou know I Am sick, let me not feasted be,
But keep a Diet and prescribed by thee;
Should I carve for my self, I should exceed
To Surfeits soon, and by self murders bleed.
I ask for stones and scorpions, but still crossed,
And all for love; should thou grant, I were lost.
Dear Lord deny me still, and never sign
^y will, but when that will agrees with thine:
And when this conflict's past, and I appear
To answer what a patient I was here,
How did I weep, when thou did woe, repine
At my best sweets, and in a childish whine
Refuse thy profer'd Love! yet cry and call
For ratles of my own to play withal;
Look on thy cross, and let thy blood come in;
When mine shall blush as guilty of my sin.
Then shall I live being rescued, in my fall
A text of mercy to thy Creatures all;
Who having seen the worst of sins in me,
Must needs confess, the best of love's in thee:
Now has the Night spent her black stage, and all
Her beauteous twinkling flames grow sick and pale,
Her Scene of shades and silence fled, and day
Dressed the young East in Roses, where each ray
Falling on fables, made the Sun and Night
Kiss in a chequer of mixed clouds and light.
'Twas my thoughts as I walked from Cliffords Inn Garden to the Temple, etc.

(...),
(...).
Rid of this body, and the Ether free
I reach, henceforth Immortal I shall be, etc.
(...). (behold Elim.
It Is day O Crystial Thames, now the sad night
Resigns her place as Tenant to the light:
See the amazed mists begin to fly,
And the victorious Sun has got the sky!
How shall I recompense thy streams that keep
Me and my soul awaked when others sleep!
I watch my stars, I move on with the skies,
And weary all the Planets with my eyes.
Shall I seek thy forgotten birth and see
What days are spent since thy Nativity;
Did run with Kison? can thou tell
So many years are holy Hiddikel?
Thou are not paid in this, I Will leavy more,
Such harmless contributions from thy store,
And dress my soul by thee as thou do pass,
As I would do my body by my glass.
When a clear running Crystal here I find,
Sure I will strive to gain as clear a mind,
And have my spirits freed from dross and light,
That no base puddle may alay their flight.
How I admire thy humble banks! naughts here
But the same simple vesture all the year.
I Will learn Simplicity of thee, and when
I walk the streets, I will not storm at men,
Nor look as if I had a mind to cry,
It is my valiant cloth of Gold; and I,
Let me not live but I Am amazed to see
What a clear Type thou art of Piety;
Why thy floods enrich those shores that sin
Against thy liberty, and keep thee in;
Thy waves nurse this proud City, which inslaves
And captivates thy free and spacious waves.
Most blessed Tutor, I will learn of those,
To show my charity unto my foes;
And strive to do some good unto the Poor,
As thy streams do unto the barren shore;
All this fair Thames, yes and more
I am for many virtues on thy score;
Trust me thy waters yet; why will thou so?
Let me but drink again and I will go:
I see thy course anticipates my Plea,
I Will have to God as thou do to the Sea;
And my eyes in waters drown their beams,
The pious Imitation of thy streams.
May every holy, happy, hearty Tear
Help me to runn to heaven as thou do there.
Donec longa dies perfecto Temporis orb
Concrelam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
Aethereum sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem.
(i. e.)

Till that long day at last be come about
That wastes both all ^th and foul desire,
And leaves the Soul Ethereal throughout,
Ba^hing her senses in pure liquid fire.
To come into the flesh amongst the natural sons of Adam, those men who were
best of repute for their Wisdom, Learning, Sincerity and of greatest
Experience, might set up Laws in any City or Nation. Thus you see when Laws
were first given, Moses in a strange age was made Ruler and Captain among the
Hebrews; his Laws you shall find in the following discourse. Afterward amonst
the Hebrews, their Lawgivers were called Zephiriaus; after them Zaleucus, in
Imitation of the Spartans and Cretians, was thought to have received ancient
Laws from Minos, who gave severe Laws, and found out suitable punishment; he
left rules whereby men might try their Actions; so that many afterward were
frighted into good manners: For before Laws were not written, but the sentence
and state lay in the Judges breast; afterward the Athenians received Laws from
Draco and Solon; upon which they proceeded in all Courts of Judicature, from
whom the Romans who lived after the building of the City, 300 years, had the
Laws of the 12 Tables published by the Decemviri; and those in process of time,
being enlarged by Romans, and the Caesar's, became our civil Law until King
Charles, who lately made Christian Laws, both good, and wholesome, for his happy
Kingdoms, that then flourished in Arms and Learning, during his Reign, etc.

Other Nations also had their respective Lawgivers, as Egypt had Priests and
Isis, who were taught by Mercury and Vulcan: These were Golden Laws, and such
as owed their Birth to Philosophers; Babylon had the Caldeans, Persia had
Magitians (i. e.) Wisemen, India had Brachmans; Ethiopia had the Gymnosophists,
amongst the Bactrians was Zamolsis, amongst the Corinthians was Fido, amongst
the Milesians was Hippodamus; amongst the Carthaginians was Coranda, amongst
the Britains were the Druides, amongst the Rosie-Crucians was Eugenius
Theodidactus my good friend; and his Laws to the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross
are these;

1. That every one of them who shall Travel, must profess Medicine and cure
gratis.

2. That none of them notwithstanding their being of the fraternity, shall be
enjoined one habit; but may suit themselves to the mode of those Countries in
which they reside.

3. That every Brother of the Fraternity, shall upon the day C make his
appearance in the place of the Holy Genius, or else signify by Letters the
cause of his absence.

4. That every Brother shall choose a fit person, to be his successor after his
decease.

5. That the word R. C. shall be their Seal, Character or Cognizance.

6. That this Fraternity shall be concealed seven years, until King Charles the
second shall make void the Laws and Statutes of the Tyrant Oliver Cromwell and
his brethren; after three years Mercy and Truth will meet together,
Righteousness and Peace will kiss each other.

7. And they are Sollemnly sworn each to other, to keep and observe these
Conditions and Articles; in all which I find nothing either Prejudicial to
themselves, or Hurtful and Injurious to others; but that they have an
excellent scope and intention, which is the glory of God, and the good of their
Neighbor.

To this Fraternity, you shall go in a certain Night when your Genius will
appear to you like a beam of light; the place will be very delightful with
Music, and pleasant with sweet smells of fresh Roses, Gilliflowers and
Perfumes; prepare your self by prayer; for Immediately you will see a Boy, and
a Lady, or a white Heart, or a Lamb: Whatsoever you see of these, be not afraid,
but follow your guid^; it is necessary then that you Arm your self with Heroic
Courage, least you fear those things that will happen, and so fall back; you
need no sword, nor any other bodily weapon, only call upon God; for a good and
holy man can offer up no greater, nor more acceptable Sacrifice to God, then
the oblation of himself, his Soul.

And these good Genii appear to me, to be as the benign eyes of God, running to
fro in the world with Love, and Pity, beholding the innocent endeavous of
honest single-hearted Men, and ever ready to do them good. They appear in many
Forms.

Now when one of these has brought you to (...), many Miracles will appear;
but be resolute and follow your Genius, and when you are among the Rosy
Crucians, you shall see the Day Star arise, and the dawning will appear, and
they will give you great Treasures, Medicines, Tinctures and Telesmes; when
being used as the the Genius shall teach you, these will make you young when
you are old, prolong Life, preserve your health and make you Rich, Wise and
virtuous, and finally alter, amend and change the temper of the body, and you
shall perceive no disease in any part of your bodies.

I have seen one of these Genii like a young Scholar or Philosopher resolve
Claudius Malbrank Esquire. 1. When old Oliver Cromwell would Dye. 2. When his son
Richard would lose his Honor. 3. When the Parliament would be Dissolved. 4.
When Lambert would lose his Power. 5. When the Committee of Safety and the City
would fall out. 6. When that Commitee would come to Nothing. 7. When the
Parliament would be Dissolved, that should pull down the Gates of the City. 8.
When another Parliament and their General should fall out with London, and when
the Parliament and he will not agree. 9. When London and King Charles will
kindly embrace each other. 10. When the City of London will Crown him King of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and prevent the intended war of France and
Spain against us. 11. When the King of Sweeds would lose his Power, Life or
Country. 12. And when the King of Denmark will be Victorious over his Enemies.

When good to make golden Telesmes consecrated against the incursions of
Enemies; such a one was the Trojan Palladium, no (...) says Galahad, but
(...), or as Anthusius quoteth the Place to Verulanus, (...) Telesmatically
consecrated under a good Horoscope by Asius the Philosopher, and presented to
the founder Trumpoigniflus (...) (i. e.) as a Statue enabled by Art to preserve
the City, wherein it should be laid up in a victorious and impregnable State,
etc.

When good to go to Law, when good to marry; and finally it resolves all
manner of questions; but if any happen to converse with Angels, and be
acquainted with Rosy Crucians that daily send these Genii abroad in the world,
let him not Arrogate any thing to himself, because of his present Power, but be
contented with that which his Genius shall say unto him; praise God perpetually
for this familiar Spirit; and have a special care that it is not used for any
worldly pride, but employ it in such works which are contrary to the world, use
it rightly, and enjoy it as he that has it not; live a temperate life, and
beware of all sin, otherwise my friend you Genius will forsake you, and you
shall be deprived of happiness; for know this of a truth, whosoever abuses
this Genius and lives not exemplarily, purely and devoutly before men, he shall
lose this benefit, and scarce any hope will there be left ever to recover it
afterward.

These Genii teach and give Laws to the Servants of God, for to deliver to the
people. These Genii command us to forgive our Enemies, and regard not any that
speak evil against us: for what has a good man to do with the dull approbation
of the vulgar? Fame like a River, bears up all light things and swollen, but
drowns things weighty and solid: I see the lowest virtues draw praise from the
common people; the middle virtues work in them Astonishment; but of the highest
virtues they have no sense or perceivance at all.

Regard not therefore vain praises, for praise proceeds more out of bravery,
then out of merit and happiness; rather to vain and windy Persons, then to
persons substantial and solid.

My Genius has had some contest with me in the disposal of The Idea of the
Law, the subject being cross to the deceit of the times, which is both
malicious, corrupt and spleenatick; it was my desire to keep it within doors,
but the relation it bears to my former discourses and my practice, has forced
it to the Press; it is the last glass of my thoughts, and their first reflex
being not complete, I have added this to perfect their Image and simmetry,
hoping it will be profitable. The Genius of the Law of England and of the City
of London, is naturally the same that King Charles has, who is called King of
Scots; and there is no Government that will be established with good and
wholesome Laws, but Monarchy; who can incorporate Fire and Water? The people
will not be happy without the King

And it is esteemed more Honor, Excellency and Majesty amongst the Legitimate
Nobility and Gentry of the world, for a General to restore or make a King, then
to be a King, etc.

My humble and hearty desire is, that the Laws of England, the Privileges of
Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and the property of all things, may be
asserted according to the first Declarations of the King and Parliament, in the
beginning of the unfortunate War.

That the true Protestant Religion in the best sense of the Church of England
may be professed and defended, all Heresies, Sects and Schisms discountenanced
and suppressed, a lawful succession of godly and able Ministers continued and
encouraged, and the two Universities, Oxford and Cambridge, and all Colleges in
both of them may be preserved and countenanced: And this is for the prosperity
of the Nation.

I have now done, Gentlemen, but how much to my own prejudice I cannot tell; I
hope I have offended no man, yet I am confident this shall not pass without
noise; but if I have erred in any thing, (and yet I have followed the best
presidents of Lawyers in the World) I expose it not to the mercy of man, but of
God, who as he is most able, so also he is most willing to forgive in the day
of our account.

And if any more zealous Pretenders to Prudence, Policy and Piety, shall oppose
the Idea of the Law, I shall expect from them these following performances:

1. A plain positive Exposition of all the passages in this Book, without any
injury to the sense of their Author; for if they interpret them otherwise then
they ought, they but create Errors of their own, and then overthrow them.

2. To prove their Familiarity with the Genius of the Idea of the Law, and
Knowledge in these Divine and Natural Statutes; let them give the Reader a
punctual discovery of all the secrets thereof. If this be more then they can
do, it is argument enough that they know not what they oppose; and if they do
not know, how can they Judge? or if they judge, where is their Evidence to
Condemn?

3. Let them not mangle and discompose my Book with a scatter of observations,
but proceed Methodically to the censure of Appologue, Book, and the account at
the end, expounding what is obscure, and discovering the very intents of my
Book, in promoting the practice of good Laws, for the benefit of my Country;
that the reader may find (if I write for any other end then to disabuse the
Nation) my positions to be false, not only in their Theory, but if he will
assay it, by his own particular experience.

I entreat all Ingenuous Gentlemen, that they will not slight my Endeavors
because of my years, which are but few; it is the custom of most men, to
measure knowledge by the Beard; but look rather on the Soul, an Essence of that
Nature quae ad perfectionem suam curricula temporis non desiderat: and that
they would not conclude any thing rashly against me.

Thus have I Published that knowledge which God gave me, Ad fructum bonae
Conscientiae; I have not bushell'd my Light, nor buried my Talent in the
ground. I will now whilst the poor Communalty are Plaintiffs, and Exrcise-men
Defendants, humbly move for the Plaintiffs, and put up my Idea of the Law to
the Judge, and so let the Attorney and his Counsel on the other side, show cause
why we may not have judgment against them; the Devil being Nonsuited, and my
Council has put all his enemies under his feet, Sentence being given, I humbly
pray the Execution may be served upon the last Enemy; that my Counselor, Judge,
Prince and King, may deliver up the Kingdom to his Father: For now is nothing
covered that shall not be revealed, and hid that shall not be known.

From my House in the East Side Spitle Fields, next door to the Red Lion
without Bishops-gate, near London. April. 27. 1660. JOHN HEYDON.

In Honorem viri vere eruditi Domini Johannis Heydon generosi in operam suam
elaboratissimam, Legis Ideam.
Praeteritum tempus scribis, scribisque futurum;
Illustras radiis tempus utrumque tuis;
Praeteritum praesens red dis, praesensque futurum,
Nulla tuis oculis non patefacta latent.
Si tibi praeteritum praesens, notumque futurum,
Inter coelicolas tu quoque caelicola.
The past and future time, thy pregnant qui^
Illustrate 'bove the reach of humane skill;
Future and past both present are with thee,
There Is nothing hid from thy perspicacie;
The present Future, past to him's all one,
Who in the heavens has his Station.
Thomas Revel Arm.

To the truly Ingenious, his highly deserving Friend John Heydon, On his
Learned Work, Entitled The IDEA of the LAW.
COuld I of our Antipodes but give
A true Description; Tell how Those persons live
That there Inhabit; Acquaint the World how all
Things stated are, on that side of Earth's Ball:
Relate the curious Customs that appear,
On each side of us, without being there;
I might commend this Learned Work of thine
Which proves thy Pen, and Fancy all Divine.
But my dull stock of Learning cannot aid
Me to the Tithe of praises might be paid
Unto your Skill, for this your Idea;
The form and figure of all Mundane Law.
Let learned Lawyers beat the better Brains,
And fix Encomiums on you for your pains,
That may be fit so quaint a Subject; Let
True Poets pay their sharper Verses, that
Are your just right: That (like a General)
Your Book may march in Equipage, amongst all
With its due State and Train; That it may ride
Whilst other Law Books Lac'quey by it is side.
Let Cook and Littleton give place; their days
Have long enough continued; let the Bays
Be given to those deserve it better: and
Let Shepherd know, That Heydon may command
The Lawyers Lawreat as his proper due
For this choice treasury, so learned, so true.
And let it not your greater-Lawyers grieve,
To Retrograde themselves, whilst they receive
Another into Honor; for you know,
Lord Mayors of London once a year do so.
John Gadbury (...).

In Johannis Heydoni viri doctissimi Ideam Legis.
IDeam Legis monstras, (Heidone) nec illan
Commonstras solum, sed bonus art doces.
Tempora distinguis; mores critico ungue rebels
Indicat and carpit pagina docta tua.
Sic Legis formam dum tu monstrasque doc esquire
Doctoris faelix nomen and omen habes;
Macte pia virtute precor, nec desine pensum,
Inque annos multos te rogo vive, vale.
The Laws-Idea learned Heydon shows,
And (open-brested) teaches all he knows,
Twixt times distinguishing; and what is bad
Wisely both shows and taxes: Thus is had
The Laws true form, plainly both showed and taught,
In teaching which, I find omitted naught:
Go on (Learned Sir,) and finish this your Task;
Live long and happily, is all I ask.
George Starkey Eirenaeus, Philoponus, Philalethes.

THE IDEA OF THE LAW.
1. WHen GOD had made the Heavens and the Earth; the Mundus vitae, the World of
Life, and Forms or (...); And thus completed his work in the Senary;
comprehending the whole Creation in Six Orders of things: He ceased from ever
creating any thing more, either in the outward Material World, or in the World
of Life. But his Creative power retyring into himself, he enjoyed his own
eternal Rest, which is his immutable and indefatigable Nature, that with ease
oversees all the whole Compass of Beings; and continues Essence, Life, and
Activity to them; and the better rectifies the worse; and all are better
rectifies the worse; and all are guided by his eternal Word and Spirit: but
nothing New has ever been Created since the Six Days Production, nor shall
ever be hereafter.

2. Then man fell, after all was perfect, into disobedience, by his Feminine
Faculties, and the Pride of the Serpent. And being in this sinful Estate, his
Firstborn Cain killed his brother Abel, and therefore had the mark (...) Thau
set in his Forehead: it was done by God, and according to his Promise instead
of Death: he was enabled to walk and live securely among the wildest of
Terestrial Creatures: (...)

(...) (i. e.) A sword could not enter him, fire could not burn him, water
could not drown him, the air could not blast him, nor any thunder or lightning
could strike him, etc.

3. And afterward, Laws were given to men to be executed, One not to oppress
another, but to fear God, do his Statutes, and keep his Judgments.

4. And thus God forgave Cain, and saved his life: which I cannot account a
downright Punishment, but indulged by the mercy of God, and necessary to the
multiplication of Mankind, etc. So Laws were established amongst men before
Moses.

5. And I look upon Moses mainly in reference to the public Inducement, in
which, after this a few generations, he appeared admirable, viz. As a
Politician or Lawgiver. In which his skill was so great, that even in the
Judgment of Heathen Writers he had the pre-eminence above all the rest: the
Rosie-Crucians place him in the head of their Infallible Axiomata: of the most
Famous Lawgivers under the name of (...), if Eugenius Theodidactus be not
mistaken: or, if he be, at least he bears them company that are reputed the
best, reserved for the last, and most notable Instance of those that entitled
their Laws Divine, and made themselves spokemen betwixt God and the people:
This Mneues is said to receive his Laws from Mercury, as Minos from Jupiter,
Licurgus from Apollo, St. Chrystopher Heydon from his (...), his good Genius,
As Moses from Jao, that is Jehovah; (...), But they speak like mere Hystorians
in the business that say so, (...) is the word which they boldly abuse, to the
diminution of all their Authorities promiscuously: It is said, they feigned
they received Laws from these Deities: And Aristotle adds the reason of it
too; but like an errant Statesman, or an incredulous Philosopher, (...); (i.
e.) Whether it be (says he) that they judged it an admirable and plainly
Divine Project that redounded unto the Profit of a multitude, or whether they
conceived, that hereby the people looking upon the greatness, and Supereminence
of their Lawgivers, would be more obedient to their Laws Pretorian or
Censorian: That saying in the Schools is not so trivial as true, Quicquid
recipitur, recipitur admodum recipientis; Every thing is as it is taken, or at
least appears to be so: The tincture of our own natures stains the appearance
of all objects.

6. But to leave Aristotle to his Ethnicism and incredulity: As for us that
ought to believe Scripture, and obey the Laws of our Land, established in the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, being a President for all Laws and Statutes.

7. And first, if we will not gainsay the authority of the Greek Text, we shall
not only be fully persuaded of Moses his receiving of Laws from Gods own mouth,
but have some hints to believe, that something Analogical to it may have come
to pass in other Lawgivers, (...) etc. Deuteronomy. 32. When the most High divided the
Nations, when he separated the Sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the Nations
according to the number of the Angels of God, but Jacob was the portion of
Jehovah, that is, Jao, etc. So that it is not improbable, but that as the great
Angel of the Covenant, he whom I in my Book named The Wisemans Crown: and in
another entitled, A new Method of Rosy Crucian Physic call (...), (i. e.)
The eldest of Angels, the Archangel, the Word, the Beginning, the name of God,
which is Jehovah: I say, that as he gave Laws to his charge, so the titular
Angels of other Nations might be Instructors of those that they raised up to be
Lawgivers to their charge: Though in process of time, the Nations that were at
first under the Government of good Angels, by their lewdness and disobedience
might make themselves obnoxious to the power and delusion of (...) tyrannical
devile: But this is but a digression, that which I would briefly have intimated
is, how Laws were received, and how Politickly they are now used; And that the
great Lawgiver of the Jews was a man instructed of God himself, to Prudence and
true Policy.

8. And therefore I make account, if we will but with diligence search, we may
surely find the Footsteps of unsophisticate Policy in all the Passages of the
whole Pentateuch: And here in the very entrance it will offer it self unto our
view, where Moses shows himself such as that noble spirit Plato desires all
Governers of Commonwealths should be, who has, in his Epistle to Dion, and his
friends, foretold, That mankind will never cease to be miserable, till such
time as either true and Right Philosophers rule in the Commonwealth; or those
that do rule apply themselves to true and sound Philosophy: And what is Moses
his Bereshith, but a fair invitation thereto? it comprehends at least the
whole Fabric of Nature, and conspicuous Furniture of the visible world: As if
he dare appeal unto the whole Assembly of Gods Creation, to the voice of the
great Universe, if what he propounds to his people, over whom God has set him,
be not righteous and true; And that by acting according to his Precepts, they
would but approve themselves Cosmopolitas, True Citizens of the world, and
Loyal Servants of God, and Secretaries of nature. It is Mr. Thomas Heydon his
Interpretation upon the place; which, how true it is in Moses veiled, I will
not here dispute: That it is most true in Moses unvailed, Christ our Lord is
true, without all Dispute and Controversy; And whosoever follows him, follows
a Law justified by God, and the whole Creature, they speaking in several
Dialects the mind of their Maker. It is a truth and life that is the safety of
all Nations, and the earnest expectation of the ends of the earth; Christ, the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever, whose Dominion and Law neither time nor
place does exclude; as you shall find anon: But to return to Moses.

9. The Laws and Ordinances which he gave to the Israelites, were given by him
(...), (i. e.) as Statutes received from God; And therefore, the great Argument
and Incitement to Obedience should lie in this first, and highest Lawgiver, God
himself, the great Jehovah; whose wisdom, power, and goodness could not better
be set out, then by ascribing the Creation of the whole visible World unto him:
So that, for his power he might be feared, admired for his prudence, and
finally for his goodness be loved, adored, and Deified: That, as he was truly
in himself the most High God, so he should be acknowledged of the people to be
so.

10. For, certainly there is nothing that does so win away, nay ravish, or
carry captive the minds of poor Mankind, as Bounty and Munificence, all men
loving themselves most affectionately, and most of all, the meanest and basest
spirits, whose souls are so far from being a little raised and released from
themselves, that they do impotently and impetuously cleave and cling to their
dear carkases; hence have they, out of the strong relish and favor of the
pleasures and conveniences thereof, made no scruple of honoring them for Gods,
who have by their Industry, or by good Planets produced any thing that might
conduce for the improvement of the happiness and comefort of the body; And thus
Moses received his Laws from God; Josuah from Moses, etc.

11. Now Christ teaches us other Laws: as for example, when the Pharisees
came to him, and asked, Is it lawful for a man to put away his Wife? tempting
him.

And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses command you?

12. And they said, Moses suffered to write a Bill of Divorcement, and and to
put her away.

13. And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardness of your hearts
Moses wrote this Precept;

14. But, From the beginning of the Creation God made them male and female.

15. For this cause shall a man leave his Father and his Mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife.

16. And they twain shall be one flesh.

17. What therefore God has joined together let no man put asunder, Mark 10.

18. Wherefore dare any of you, having a Matter against another, go to Law
before the unjust, and not before the Saints?

19. Do ye not know, that the Saints shall judge the World? And if the Saints
shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?

20. Know ye not, that we shall judge Angels? How much more things that partain
to this life?

Brother goes to Law with brother; and that before the Unbelievers.

21. Now therefore there is utterly, a fault among you, because ye go to Law
one with another,: Why do ye not rather take wrong? Why do not you rather
suffer your selves to be defrauded?

22. Nay you do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren?

But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute
you, Mat. 5.

23. Wherefore then serves the Law? It was given because of Transgressions,
till the seed should come, to whom the Promise was made, and it was ordained
by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.

24. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we
might be justified by Faith, Gal. 3.

25. Now let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers, for there is no
power but of God; the powers that be are ordained of God.

26. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God;
And they that resist receive to themselves Damnation.

27. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil: Will ye then
be afraid of the Power? Do that which is good, and you shall have praise of the
same.

28. For they are the Ministers of God to you, for good; But if you do that
which is evil, be afraid: for they bear not the sword in vain, for they are the
Ministers of God, and Revengers, to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

29. Wherefore ye must needs be Subjects, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.

30. For this cause pay you Tribute also: For they are Gods Ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

31. Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due,
Custom to whom Custom is due; Fear to whom fear; Honor to whom honor.

32. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: For they that love one
another, have fulfilled the Law.

33. For this, Thou shall not commit Adultery; thou shall not Kill; thou shall
not Steal; thou shall not bear False-witness; thou shall not Covet: and if
there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying;
namely, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

34. Love works no ill to his Neighbor; therefore, Love is the fulfilling of
the Law,

35. Romans 13. And all other Laws depend upon these: The Politic part of all
Law is this following, which ought, as I have prescribed, to be practiced
according to the Basis of Moses and the Prophets, and Christ and his Disciples.
The Method advises you how to rectify the Errors of all Courts after this
order in the Paragraphs, grounded, as you heard before, in the Old and new
Testament. And these Rules you must observe.

36. In all Civil Society either Law or Power prevails; for there is a Power
which pretends Law, and some Laws taste rather of might than right, Wherefore
there is a threefold Source of injustice: Cunning Illaqueation, under color of
Law, and the harshness of Law it self.

37. The Force and Efficacy of private Right is this; He that does a wrong by
the Fact, receives Profit or Pleasure, by the Example, incurrs Prejudice and
Peril: others are not Partners with him in his Profit or Pleasure; but take
themselves interessed in the Example, and therefore easily combine and accord
together to secure themselves by Laws, lest Injuries by turns seize upon every
Particular: But, if through the corrupt Humor of the Times, and the generalty
of guilt, it fall out, that to the greater number, and the more potent, Danger
is rather created than avoided, by such a Law: Faction disanulls the Law, which
often comes to pass.

38. Private Right is under the Protection of Public Law: For Laws are for
the People, Magistrates for Laws. The Authority of Magistrates depends upon
the Majesty of Kings, and the form of Policy, upon Laws Fundamental:
Wherefore if this Government be good, sound, and healthful, Laws will be to
good purpose: If otherwise, there will be little security in them.

Yet notwithstanding, the end of Public Law is not only to be a guardian to
private right, lest that should any way be violated, or to repress Injuries,
but it is extended also, unto Religion, and Arms, and Discipline, and
Ornaments, and Wealth. Finally, to all things which any way conduce unto the
prosperous estate of a Commonwealth.

39. For the end and aim at which Laws should level, and whereto they should
direct their Decrees and Sanctions, is no other than this, That the people may
live happily: This will be brought to pass, if they be rightly trained up in
Piety, and Religion, if they be honest for moral conversation, secured by Arms
against Foreign Enemies, munited by Laws against Seditions and private
wrongs: Obedient to Government and Magistrates: Rich and flourishing in Forces
and wealth: But the Instruments and Sins of all blessings are Laws.

40. And to this end, the Laws we received successively, by Moses, were first
from God, and then from him by Josuah, and from Joshua by the 70 Elders, etc.
But the best Laws we received from Christ, the Apostles delivered them to the
Bishops, etc. And the end they attain, you read before: But many Laws miss
this mark: For there is great difference and a wild distance in the
comparative value and virtue of Laws: For some Laws are excellent, some of a
middle temper, others altogether corrupt. I will exhibit, according to the
measure of my Judgment some certain Laws (as it were) of Laws, whereby
Information may be taken, what in all Laws is well or ill received by Massora,
and established, or by Tradition tinctured with the virtue or vice of the
Judges, and their Brethren.

41. But before I descend to the Body of Laws in particular, I will briefly
write the Merit and Excellency of Laws in general: A Law may be held good,
that is certain in the Intimation, just in the Precept, profitable in the
Execution, Agreeing with the Form of Government, in the present State, and
begetting virtue in those that live under them.

42. Certainty is so Essential to a Law, as, without it a Law cannot be just,
Si enim incertam vocem det Tuba, quis se parabit ad Bellum: So, if the Law give
an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to obey: A law must give warning
before it strike: And you do not read, that Cain killed any after God had
marked him: and it is a good President, That is the best Law which gives least
Liberty to the Arbitrage of the Judge (and that is the reason of Moses his
strict charge to the people, that they should not come nigh the Mountain) which
is that the certainty thereof effects.

43. Incertainty of Laws is of two sorts, One, where no Law is prescribed: The
other, when a Law is difficile and Dark: I must therefore first speak of Causes
omitted in the Law, that in these likewise there may be found some President of
certainty.

44. The narrow compass of man's wisdom cannot comprehend all Cases which time
has found out: and therefore New Cases do often present themselves. In these
Cases there is applied a threefold Remedy or Supplement, either by a Proceeding
upon like Cases, or by the use of Examples, though they be not grown up into
Law, or by Jurisdictions, which award, according to the Arbitrament of some
Good Man, Moses or Christ; as you may read in the Old and New Testament, how
Controversies were decided, according to sound Judgment, whether in Courts
Pretorian, or of Equity, or Courts Censorian, or of Penalty.

45. In new Cases your Rule of Law is to be deduced from Cases of like nature,
but with Caution and Judgment, touching which these Rules following are to be
observed: Let Reason be fruitful, and Custom be barren, and not breed new
Cases; Wherefore, whatsoever is accepted against the sense and Reason of a Law:
or else, where the Reason thereof is not apparent, the same must not be drawn
into Consequence.

46. A singular public Good does necessarily introduce Cases pretermitted;
Wherefore, when a Law does notably and extraordinarily respect, and procure the
Profit and Advantage of a State. Let their Interpretation be ample and
extensive. It is a hard case to torture Laws, that they may torture men: I
would not therefore that Laws penal, much less capital, should be extended to
new Offenses: Yet, if it be an old Crime, and known to the Laws, but the
Prosecution thereof falls upon a new Case, not foreseen by the Laws, You must,
by all means depart from the Placits of Law, rather than that offenses pass
unpunished.

47. In those Statutes which the Common Law (especially concerning Cases
frequently incident, and are of long continuance) does absolutely repeal, I
like not the Proceeding by Similitude unto New Cases: For, when a State has
for a long time wanted a whole Law, and that, in cases expressed, there is no
great danger, if the Cases omitted expect a Remedy by a New Statute.

48. Such Constitutions as were manifestly the Laws of time, and sprung up
from emergent Occasions then prevailing in the Kingdom: I think now it is
called so by Carolus Magnus secundus, The State often times now changed, they are
reverenced enough, if they may conserve their Authority within the limits of
their own proper Cases: And it were monstrously preposterous any way to extend
and apply them to Cases omited, as in Olivers time.

49. There can be no Sequel of a Sequel: but the extention must be arrested
within the Limits of immediate Cases, otherwise you fall by degrees upon
unresembling Cases, and the Subtilty of wit will be of more force than the
Authority of Law.

50. In Laws and Statutes of a compendious Style, extention may be made more
freely: But in those Laws which are punctual in the Enumeration of Cases
particular, more warily; For, as exception strengthens the force of a Law, in
cases not excepted, so enumeration weakens it, in cases not enumerated.

51. An explanatory Statute damms up the streams of a former Statute; neither
is the Extention received afterward, in the one or the other: For there is no
Superextention can be made by a Judge, where once an extention has begun to be
made by a Law.

52. The Form of words and Acts of Court does not admit an Extention upon like
Cases; for that loses the nature of Formality, which departs from Custom to
Arbitriment; And the Introduction of Olivers Tyranical new Heavy Cases imbaseth
the Majesty, and cloggs the purity of the late Sacred King Charles his Statutes.

53. Extention of Law is aptly applied unto cases Post nate, which were not
existent in Nature, when the Law was enacted: For, where the Case could not be
expressed, because there were not such extant, a Case omitted is accepted for a
Case expressed, if the reason be the same: So for extention of Laws in Cases
amiss, let this my Direction suffice: Now I shall speak of the use of Examples.

53. It follows now I speak of Examples from which Right is inferred, where Law
is imperfect: As for Custom, which is a kind of Law; and for Presidents,
which by frequent Practice are grown into Custom, as into a Tacit Law, I will
speak in due place: But now I speak of Examples or Presidents which rarely and
sparsedly fall out, and are not yet grown up to the strength of a Law, namely,
when, and with what caution a Rule of Law is to be derived from them where Law
is imperfect.

54. Your Presidents must be derived from Queen Elizabeth, King James, King
Charles, and his happy Son, being good and moderate: and not from the bloody
Factions, or dissolute Times of the Tyrant Oliver Cromwell, and his Sons; For
Examples fetched from such times are a Bastard Issue, and do rather corrupt
than instruct.

55. In his late Sacred Majesty's time, the Examples are to be reputed the
best, and most safe; for those were but lately done, and no inconveniences
ensued: Now, Why may it not be done again? Yet nevertheless recent Examples are
of less Authority, and if perchance it so fall out, that a Reformation, Modern
Presidents taste more of their own times, than of right Reason.

56. But those Presidents betwixt Christ his Apostles, and the late King
Charles must be received with caution, and choice. For, since our Savior
Christ two hundred years, the revolution of an Age altered many things; so as,
what might seem ancient for time, the same, through perturbation and
Inconformity, to the present Age, may be altogether new: Wherefore leaving
Moses, Joshua, and the Elders, and the succeeding Prophets to the Laws and
Statutes of their times, and following the Examples of Christ, his Apostles,
Bishops, and the Judges of a middle time are best; or of such an Age as best
sorts with the present times, which now and than the time farther off better
represents, than the time close at hand.

57. Keep your selves within, or rather on this side the limits of an Example,
and by no means surpass those bounds: For, where there is no Rule of Law, all
ought to be entertained with Jealousy: Wherefore here, as in obscure cases,
follow that which is least doubtful.

58. Beware of Fragments, and Compounds of Examples: and view the example
entire, and every particular p^ssage thereof: For, if it be inequall and
unreasonable before a perfect Comprehension of the whole Law, to make a
Judgment upon a part, or Paragraph thereof: much more should this Rule hold in
Examples, which, unless they be very square and proper, are of doubtful use
and application.

59. In Examples, it imports very much through what hands they have past, and
have been transacted: For if they have gone current with Clarks only, and
Ministers of Justice, from the course of some Courts, without any notice taken
thereof by Superior Counselors, or with the Master of Errors, by the people
they are to be rejected, and little to be esteemed of: but, if they have been
such precise Presidents or Counselors of Estate, Judges, to Principal Courts,
as that it must needs be, that they have been strengthened by the ^acite
approbation, at least of Judges; they carry the more reverence with them.

60. Presidents that have been published, however less practiced, which being
debated, and ventilitated by Discourses and dis^ptations have yet stood out
unargued, are of greater Authority: but such as have remained buried, as it
were, in Closets and Archives are of less: For Examples like Waters are most
wholesome in the running stream.

61. Examples that refer to Laws I would not have them drawn from Writers of
History, but from public Acts, and more diligent Traditions: The Hebrew word
is, (...) Kibbel, and it is an Infelicity familiar, even with the best
Hystorians, that they pass over Laws, and Judicial Proceedings too slightly:
and, if perhaps they have used some Diligence therein, yet they vary much from
the authentic Constitutions.

62. An Example which a contemporary Age, or a time nearest unto it has
repealed, should not easily be taken up again, though the like Case should
afterward ensue: nor makes it so much for an Example, that upon Experience
they have now relinquished it.

63. Examples are admitted into Councils, but do in like manner prescribe or
command: Therefore I advise you to let them be so moderated, that the
Authority of the time past, may be bowed and plied to the practice of the time
present; and thus much concerning Advice, and Direction, from Presidents; where
Law is imperfect: it follows next, that I speak of Courts Pretorian and
Ceuforian: Courts of equity, and of penalty, as I practiced of Cliffords Inn,
where I was sometime a Clerk.

64. I advise you let there be Courts and Jurisdictions, which may define
according to the Arbitrament of some good man, and according to sound Judgment
for the Law, (as is observed before) cannot provide for all cases, but is
fitted to such occurrences as commonly fall out; and time (as was said by the
Ancients) is a most wise thing, and daily the Author and Inventor of new cases.

65. New cases fall out both in matters Criminal, which have need of penalty,
and in matters Civil, which have need of relief, the Courts which respect the
former, I call Censorian: which respect the latter Praetorian.

66. I advise you to let the Censorian Courts of Justice have Juridiction and
Power not only of punishing new offenses, but also of increasing penalties
assigned by the Laws for old crimes, if the be cases heinous, and enormous; so
they be not Capital, for a notorious guilt, is as it were, a new case.

67. Observe also to let, in like manner, the Pretorian Courts of equity have
power to quallify the rigor of Law, that none be imprisoned but those taht are
able to pay their debts: their goods and chattels ought not to be engaged, but
at the discreation of some good man: let time given be for payment, for the
supplying the defects of Law; for if a remedy ought to be extended to him whom
the Law has past by, much more to him whom it has wounded.

68. Take care that these Censorian and Praetorian Courts be by all means
limited within cases extraordinary, not invade ordinary Juridictions, least
peradventure the matter extend to the supplantation, rather than the supplement
of Law.

69. Let these Juridictions reside only in the highest Courts of Judicature,
and not be communicated to courts Inferior: for the power of extending, or
supplying or moderating Laws, little differs from the power of making them.

70. But let not these Courts be assigned over to one man, but consist of many:
nor let the decrees thereof issue forth with silence, but let the Judges alledg
reasons of their sentence and that openly in the Audience of the Court, that
which is free in the power, may in the fame and reputation be confined.

71. Let their be no rubriques of blood, neither define of Capital crims, in
what Court soever, but from a known and certain Law: for God himself first
denounced death, afterward inflicted it; nor is any man to be put to death,
but he that knew beforehand that he sinned against his own life.

72. In Courts of Censure, give way to a third trial, that a necessity be not
imposed upon Judges of absolving, or of condemning, but that they may pronounce
a non Liquet; so in like manner, let Laws Censorian, not only be a penalty but
an infamy that is, which may not inflict a punishment, but either end in
admonision; or else chastise the delinquet with some light touch of Ignominy,
and as it were a blushing shame.

73. In Censorian Courts let the first aggressions, and the middle Acts of
great offenses, and wicked attempts be punished: yea although they were never
perfectly accomplished: and let that be the chiefest use of those Courts,
seeing it appertains to severity, to punish the first approaches of wicked
enterprises, And to Mercy to intercept the perpetration of them by correcting
middle Acts.

74. Special regard must be taken, that in Pretorian Courts, such cases be not
countenanced, which the Law has not so much pretermitted, as slighted as
frevilous or as odious, Judged unworthy redress.

75. Above all, it most imports the certainty of Laws, that Courts of equity do
not so swell and overflow their banks, as under prtence of mittigating the
rigor of Laws, they do dissert or relaxe the strength and sins thereof, by
drawing all to Arbitrament.

76. I advise you not to let Pretorian Courts have power to decree against
express Statutes, under any Pretense of equity, for if this should be
permitted, a Law Interpreter would become a Law maker, and all matters should
depend upon Arbitrament.

The Recorder of London; is of opinion, That the Jurisdiction of defining
according to equity and conscience; and that other, which according to strict
Law, should be deputed to the same Courts: but Judge Roll says to several, by
all means let there be a separation of Courts, for there will be no
distinction of Cases, where there is commixtion of Jurisdictions: but you shall
have Arbitrament incroach upon, and at last, swallow up Law.

77. The Table of the Pretors amongst the Romans came in use upon good ground:
In these the Praetor set down and published aforehand, by what form of Law he
would execute Judicature, after the same example, Judges in Pretorian Courts:
The Kings Bench, Chancery, Common, Pleas, etc. should propound certain Rules to
themselves (so far as may be) and openly publish them, for that is the best
Law, which gives least liberty to the Judge; He the best Judge that takes least
liberty to himself: you see how time alters Laws since Moses recieved them from
God: and what Laws Christ gave you in the Gospel: and now how Pollitickly they
are practiced: by tedious Clerks, proud Students, covetous Counselors
Self-willed Sergeants: whose Learning is great: yet at last the Patient Clients
are willing to go home, where they lament their losses, sustained through the
Errors of proceedings: the Crasy Judge he sits quietly willing rather to sleep,
then to prescribe a method of good wholesome Laws to the People: And thus the
poor suffer: but I hope to give you a clear way in passage only, through all
Courts that with these Rules before a Judge you may know and understand your
Case, and the Judge also may give true and sound Judgment, and supply that
which is omitted by the Law, fot the worst Tyranny is Law upon the rack: And
where there is made a departure from the letter of Law, the Judge, of an
Interpreter becomes a Lawgiver.

78. I have found that there is likewise another kind of supplement of Cases
omitted, when one Law falls upon another, and withal draws with it cases
pertermitted, this comes to pass in Laws or Statutes, which (as the usual
expression) look back or reflect one upon another, Laws of this nature, are
rarely and with great caution to be alleag'd, for I like not to see a two faced
Janus in Laws.

79. Arguments brought against Testimonies accomplish thus much, that the case
seems strange, but not that it seems true, and he that goes about to elude and
circumvent the words and sentence of Law by fraud and captious fallicies,
deserves in like manner to be himself ensnared by a succeeding Law: wherefore
in case of subtle shifts and sinester devices, it is very meet that Laws
should look back upon, and mutually support one another, that he who studies
evasions, and eversion of Laws present may yet stand in awe of future Laws.

80. Laws which strenghten and establish the true intentions of Records and
Instruments, against the defects, and forms, and solemnities, do rightly
comprehend matters past, for the greatest inconvenience in a Law that refers
back, is, that it disturbeth; but these conformitory Laws, respect the peace
and feeling of those cases which are Transacted and determined; yet you must
take heed that cases already adjudg'd be not reverst or violated.

81. You must be very careful, that not those Laws alone, be thought to respect
things past, which invallide cases already desided; but those also which
prohidite and restrein future cases necessarily connext with matters past: As
for example, If a Law should interdict some ki^d of Tradesmen the vend of
their Commodites; for hereafter, the Letter of this Law is for the future: But
the sense and meaning takes hold of the time past: for now it is not
warrentable for such persons to get their Livings this way.

82. Every declaratory, although there be no mention of time past, yet by the
force of the Declaration, it is by all means to be extended to matters past,
for the Interpretation does not then begin to be in force, when it is declared,
but is made contemporary with the Law it self, wherefore never enact
declaratory Laws but in cases where Laws may in equity refer and look back one
upon another: and thus I have shown you the incertitude of Laws also; where no
Law is found, I shall now engross the imperfections, perplexity and obscurity
of Laws.

83. Obscurity of Laws spring from four causes: either from the excessive
accumulation of Laws, specially where there is a mixture of obsolete Laws; or
from an ambiguous, or not so perspicuous and delucide description of Laws: or
from the manner of expounding Law, either altogether neglected, or not rightly
pursued: or lastly, from contradiction and incertainty of Judgments,

84. The Prophetical Lawgiver says, Pluet super eos Laqueos, now there are no
worse snares than the snares of Laws specially penal, if they be immense for
number; and through the alterations of times unprofitable; they do not present
a torch, but spread a net to our feet.

85. There are two ways in use of making a new Statute, the one establishes
and strengthens the former Statute about the same Ject: and then adds and
changes something; the other abrogates and cancels what was decreed before, and
substitutes de integro, a new and uniforme Law, the latter way I approve: for
by the former way Decrees become complicate and perplexed; yet what is
undertaken is indeed pursued: but the body of Law is the mean time corrupted;
but certainly the more diligence is required in the latter where the
deliberation is of the Law it self, that is, the Decrees heretofore made are to
be searched into and duly weighed and examined before the Law be published;
but but the chief point is, that by this means the Harmony of Laws is notably
designed fot the future.

86. It was a custom in the State of Athens, to deligate six persons for to
revise and examine every year the contrary Titles of Law, which they called
Antinomies, and such as could not be reconciled, were propounded to the people,
that some certainty might be defined touching them, after this Example let such
in every State, as have the power of making Laws, review Anti-nomies every
third or fifth year, or as they see cause: And these may be searched into and
prepared by Committees assigned thereto and after that exhibited to Assemblies,
that so what shall be approved may be suffrages, be established and settled.

87. Now let there not be too scrupulous and anxious pains taken in reconciling
contrary Titles of Law, and of Salving (as Mr Phillip Green terms it) all
points by subtle and Study Distinctions, for this is the web of wit, and
however it may carry a show of modesty and reverence, yet it is to be reckoned
in the number of things prejudicial, and being that which makes the whole body
of Law ill sorted and incoherent; it were far better that the worst Titles were
cancelled, and the rest stand in force.

88. I advise you to let such Laws as are obsolete or grown out of use, as
well as Anti-nomies, be propounded by delegates as a part of their charg to be
repeall'd: for seeing express Statute cannot regurarly be voyded by Disuse, it
falls out that through a Disestimation of Old Laws, the Authority of the rest is
somewhat embased: And the Cromwells Tyrannical Torture ensues, that Laws alive
are murdered and destroyed in the fear of God, with the deceitful
imbracements of Laws dead: But above all beware of a Gangreen in Laws.

89. For such Laws as are not lately published let the Pretorian Courts have
power, in the mean space, to define centrary to them; for although it has been
said, not impertinently, No man ought to make himself wiser then the Laws: yet
this may be understood of Laws, when they are awake, not when they are asleep:
on the other side let not the more recent Statutes, which are found prejudicial
to the Law public be in the power of the Judges, but in the power of the King
and the Counselors of Estate, and supreem Authorities for redress, by
suspending their execution through Edicts and Acts, until Parliamentary Courts,
and such High Assemblies meet again, which have power to abrogate them, least
the safty of the Commonwealth should in the mean while be endangered.

90. If Laws accumulated upon Laws, swell into such vast volumes, or be
obnoctious to such confusion, that it is expedient to revise them a new, and to
reduce them into a sound and solid body, intend it by all means and let such a
work be reputed an Heroical noble work: and let the Author of such a work, be
rightly and deservedly ranckt in the number of The Right Worsh. Ralph Gardener,
Esquire Justice of Peace and Councellor of Estate to the Supreme Authority of
England etc. And such Founders and Restorers of Law.

91. This purging of Laws, and the contriving of a new Digest is five ways
accomplished; first let obsolete Laws which Mr. Thomas Heydon terms, old fables
be left out. Secondly, Let the most approved of Antinomies be received, the
contrary abolish't. Thirdly, Let all coincident Laws which import the same
thing be expunged, and some one, the most perfect among them retained of all
the rest: Fourthly, If there be any Laws which determine nothing, but only
propound Questions, and so leave them undecided, let these likewise be
Casheer'd. Lastly, let Laws too wordy and too prolix, be abridged into a more
narrow compass.

92. And it will import very much for use, to compose and sort apart in a new
Digest of Laws, Law recepted for Common Law, which in regard of their beginning
are time out of mind, And on the other side, Statutes super-added from time to
time: seeing in the delivery of a Juridical sentence the Interpretation of
Common Law, and Statute Laws, in many points is not the same: This Judge Roll.
did in the Digests and Code.

93. But in this Regeneration and new Structure of Laws, retain precisely the
Words and the Text of the Ancient Laws, and of the Books of Law, though it must
needs fall out that such Collection must be made by Centoes and smaller
portions: then sort them in order: for although this might have been performed
more aptly, and (if you respect right reason) more truly, by a new Text, than
by such a Consarcination, yet in Laws, not so much the Style and Description,
as Authority, and the Patron thereof, Antiquity, you must carefully observe,
otherwise such a work might seem a Scholastic business, and Method, rather
than a body of Commanding Laws.

94. In this new Method of Laws, upon good advertisement a Caveat has been put
in; that the Ancient volumes of Law shall be utterly extinguished, and perish in
oblivion, but at least remain in Libraries, though the common and promiscuous
use thereof might be retained; for in Cases of weighty consequence, it will not
be amiss to consult and look into the mutation and continuation of Laws past:
and indeed it is usually to sprinckle modern matters with Antiquity, and this
new body of Law must be confirmed only by such, who in every State have the
power of making Laws, least perchance under color of digesting Ancient Laws,
new Laws under hand be conveyed in.

95. I could wish that this Idea of Laws might be Perused, Practiced, and
Exalted, in the understanding of Learned and Wise men: in such times as now
when Philosophy, Reason, Nature, and Experience, excels those more Ancient
times, whose Acts and Deeds they recognize: which fell out otherwise in Acts of
Oliver Cromwell; For it is a great unhappiness to the people, when the deeds of
Henry the eight must be imposed upon them Tirannically maimed and compiled by
the Judgment and choice of a less wise and Learned man. Thus have I showed you
the obscurity of Laws arising from the excessive and confused accumulation
thereof: I shall next speak of the dark and doubtful description of them.

96. Obscure description of Laws arise either from the Loquacity o^ Verbosity
of them; or again, from extreme brevity, or from the preamble of a Law
repugnant with the body of a Law.

97. I shall now instruct you how to enlighten the obscurity of Law, ariseing
from a corrupt and crooked description thereof. The Loquacity and Prolixity,
which has been used in setting down Laws I dislike: neither does such a writer
any way compass what he desires, and labors for, but rather the quite
contrary: For, while a man endeavors to pursue and express every particular
case in apt and proper terms, hoping to gain more certitude thereby,
contrary-wise it falls out that through many words, multitude of Questions are
engendered: so as more sound and solid interpretation of Law according to the
genuine sense and mind thereof is much intercepted through the noise of words.

98. And yet notwithstanding a too concise and affected brevity for Majesty's
sake, or as more imperial, is not therefore to be approved specially in these
times, least Law become perchance a Lesbian Rule: wherefore a middle tempered
style is to be embraced: and a generallity of words well stated to be sought
out; which though it do not so thoroughly pursue Cases comprehended, yet it
excludes Cases not comprehended deerly enough.

99. Yet in ordinary and politic Laws and Edicts, wherein for most part no man
advises with his Counsil, but trusts to his own Judgment, all shall be more
amply explicated and pointed out, as it were with the finger, even to the
meanest Capacity.

100. So neither should I allow of preambles to Laws which amongst the Ancients
were held impertinencies, and which introduce disputing and not Commanding
Laws: If I could well away with Ancient customs: But these prefaces commonly
(as the times are now) are necessary prefixed, not so much for explication of
Law, as for persuasion that such a Law, may pass in the solemn meeting of a
State, and again to give satisfaction to the Communalty, yet so far as possible
may be, let Prologues be avoided and the Law begin with a Command.

101. The mind and meaning of a Law though sometimes it may be drawn not
improperly from Prefaces and Preambles, (as they term them) yet the Latitude
and Extention thereof must not be fetched from thence, for a Preamble by way of
Example, sometimes fetches in, Lays hold upon some of the most plausible and
most specious passages; when yet the Law compriseth many more: or on the
contrary, the Law restraines and limits many Cases, the reason of which
limitations to insert in the preface were superfluous, wherefore the dimention
and Latitude of a Law, must be taken from the body of a Law: for a Preamble
often falls either short or over.

102. And there is a very vicious manner of Recording of Laws, that is, when
the Case at which the Law aims, is expressed at large in the Preamble,
afterward from the force of the word (the like) or some such term of relation,
the body of a Law is reverst into the Preamble, so as the Preamble is inserted
and incorporated into the Law it self, which is an obscure and not so safe a
course, because the same diligence uses not to be taken in pondering and
examining the works of a Preamble, as there uses to be done in the body of a
Law it self. Touching the incertainty of laws proceeding from an ill
description of them, I shall handle more at large hereafter, if this be
acceptable: I shall next teach you how to expound Laws, and by what ways.

103. The ways of expounding Law and Solving doubts are five: for this is done
either by Court Rolls and Records, or by Authentic writs: or by Subsidiary
books or by prelections, or by responses and resolutions of wise men, all these
if they be well instituted and set down, will be singular helps at hand against
the obscurity and errors of Laws.

104. Now especially above all, let the Judgments delivered in higher and
principal Courts of Judicature, and in matters of grave importance, specially
dubious, and which have some difficulty and newness in them, be taken with
faith and diligence: for Decrees are the Anchors of Law, as Laws are of the
Republic.

105. The manner of collecting such Judgments and reporting them let this be,
Register the Case precisely, the Judgments exactly; annex the reasons of the
Judgments alleged by the Judges, mingle not Authorities of cases brought for
example with cases principal, as for perorations of Sarjeants, Counselors, and
Barresters etc. Unless there be something in them very remarkable, pass them
over with silence.

106. The persons which should collect these Judgments, ^t them be of the order
and rank of Sarjeant Wild, Mainard, Twisden, Sr Peter Ball etc. the Learned
Advocates, and let them receive a liberal Remuneration from the State, let not
the Judges themselves meddle at all with these Reports, least perchance,
devoted to their own opinions, and supported by their own Author^ty they
transcend the limits of a Reporter.

107. Digest these Judgments according to the order and continuation of times,
not according to Method and Titles: for writings of this nature are as it were,
the History and Reports of Laws; nor do the Decrees alone but their times also
give light to a wise Judge.

108. I advise you to let the body of law be built only upon the laws
themselves which constitutes the Common Law; next of Decrees or Statutes; in
the third place of Judgments, enrolled; besides these, either let there he no
othere Authenticks at all, or sparingly entertained.

109. Nothing so much imports certainty of Laws (of which I now discourse) as
that Authentic writings, be confined within moderate bounds; and that the
excessive multitude of Authors and Doctors of the Laws, whereby the mind and
sentence of Laws are distracted, the Judge confounded; proceedings are made
immortal, and the Advocate himself despairing to read over and conquer so many
Books, betakes himself to Abridgmen's be discarded: It may be some good Gloss,
and some few of Classick writers, or rather some small parcels of few writers,
may be received for Authenticks, yet of the rest some use may be made in
Libraries, where Judges are Advocates, may as occasion is offered, read their
discourse^; but in cases to be pleaded at the Bar, let them not be permitted
to be brought, and alleged in the Court nor grow ^p into Authority.

110 I advise you next, that you do not let the knowledge and practice of the
Law be destituted, but rather be well provided with Auxiliary Books; they are
in general six sorts, Institutes, of the signification of words; of the Rules
of Law; Ancient Records Abridgments of Forms of Pleadings.

111. Young Students, and Clerks, are to be entered by Institutes, that they
may the more profoundly and orderly draw and take in the knowledge and
difficulties of the Laws; compose these Institutes after a clear and
perspicuous manner; In these Elementary Books run over the whole private Law,
not passing by some Titles, and dwelling to long upon others, but briefly
touching something in all; that so coming to read through the whole body of
Laws nothing may be presented altogether strange, but what has bin tasted, and
preconceived by slight notion, touch not the public Laws in Institutes, but
let that be deduced from the Judges of themselves.

112. I advise you to compile a Commentary upon the Terms of Law, be not too
curious and tedious in the explication thereof; and of rendering their sense for
the scope here, is not exactly to seek out the definition of words, but such
explications only, as may clear the passage to the reading of the Books of Law;
digest not this Treatise by the Letters of the Alphabet; leave that to some
Index: Or amend that Book already extant called The Terms of the Law: And let
such words as import the same thing be sorted, together, that in the
comprehension of the sense, one may Administer help unto the other.

113. A sound and well l^ured Treatise of diverse Rules of ^onduceth (if any
thing does) ^certainty of Laws, a work worthy the Pen of the greatest Wits,
and wifest Jurists, nor do I approve of what is extant in this kind. And not
only noted, and common Rules are to be collected, but also othesr more subtle,
and abstru^e, which may be abstracted out of the Harmony of Laws, and Judged
Cases, such as are sometimes found in the best Rubricks; and these are the
general Dictates of Reason, and the Primum Mobile as it were of Law.

114. But all Decrees and Placits of Law, must not be taken for Rules, as is
wont absurdly enough: For if this should be admitted, then so many Laws, so
many Rules, for a Law^s nothing else but a Commanding Rule; But accept those
for Rules, which cleave to the very form of Justice, from whence for most part,
the same Rules are commonly found through the (...) Laws of different States,
unless (...) they vary for the Refferen^ (...) forms of public Government.

115. After you have delivered in a brief and substantial comprehension of
(...), let there be, for explication an^t ^ples, and most clear and lucudent
decisions of cases, distinctions and exceptions for limitations; points
concurrent in sense for Amplification, of the same Rule.

116. It is well given in precepts, that a Law should not be drawn from Rules
from the Law in force, neither is a proof to be taken from the words of a Rule;
as it were a Text of Law: for a Rule (as the Mariners Needle does the Poles)
Indicates only, not determines Law.

117. Besides the Idea of Law, it will avail also, to surveigh the Antiquities
or Ancient Records of Laws, whose Authority although it be vanished; yet their
reverence remains still; And let the writings and Judgments concerning Laws be
received for the Antiquities of Laws, which in time preceded the body of Laws,
whether they were published or not; for must not be lost therefore; out of these
Records select what ever is most useful (for there will be found much vain and
frivolous matter in them) And collect them into one volume, lest old Fables,
(as the Learned Buxt^ calls them) be mixed with the Laws themselves.

118. (...), because the foundation of this Treatise, lies in the Spirit of the
Bible, thus collected as you see, and it much imports the practick part of
Laws, that the whole Law be digested into places and Titles, whereto a man may
have (as occasion shall be given) a sudden recourse, as to a furnished
promptuary for present practice, these Books of Abridgments, both reduce into
order what was dispersed, and abreviate what was disused and Prolix in Law, but
caution must be taken that those Breviaries make not men prompt for the
practick part, and slothful for the knowledge it self: For their proper use and
office is this, that by them the Law may be tilled, over again, and not
thoroughly Learned; and these Summaries must by all means be collected with
great diligence faith and Judgment, least they commit Felony against the Law.

119. (...) (i. e.) The Secret of the Lord is for them that fear him, and his
Commandment is to make them know it. Thus you see the Mysteries of God and
Jesus Christ lies not bare to false and adulterate eyes in the Laws of the Old
and New Testament, but are hid and wrapped up in decent coverings from the
sight of vulgar and carnal men.

120. You Lawyers that are Servants of God, and Secretaries of Nature, make a
collection of diverse Forms of Pleading in every kind, for this conduces much
to the practick part: and certainly these Forms do discover the Oracles and
secret mysteries of Laws; but in Forms of pleading, they are better and more
largely displayed like the fist to the palm.

121. Some course you must take for the cutting off, and saisfying particular
doubts which emerge from time to time; for it is a hard case that they which
desire to secure themselves from error, should find no guide to the way, but
that present businesses should be hazarded; and there should be no means to
know the Law before the matter be dispatched.

122. That the resolution of the wise, given to Clients touching point of Law,
whether by Advocates or Professors, should be of such Authority, that it may
not be Lawful for the Judge to depart from their opinion, I cannot approve, let
Law be derived from sworn Judges.

123. To feel and sound Judgments by fained Cases and Persons, that by this
means, men might find out what the course and proceeding of Law will be, I
approve not, for it dishonors the Majesty of Laws, and is to be accounted a
kind of prevarications o^ double dealing: and it is a fowl sight to see places
of Judicature to borrow any thing from the Stage.

124. Wherefore let as well the Decrees, as the Answers and Counsels proceed
from the Judges alone; those of Suits depending; these of difficult points of
law, in the general, require not these decisions whether in causes private or
public, from the Judges themselves (for this were to make the Judge an
Advocate) but of the King, or of the State: From these let the order be
directed unto the Judges: And let the Judges thus Authorized hear the reasons
on both sides, both of the Advocates or of the Committees deputed by the
parties to whom the matter appertains; or of them assigned by the Judges
themselves if necessity so require; and weighing the Cause, let them deliver
the Law upon the Case and declare it, let these verdicts and Counsels, be
recorded and notified amongst Cases adjudged, and be of equal Authority.

125. Next in order let your Lectures of Law, and the exercise of those that
address themselves to the Studies of Law, be so instituted and ordered, that
all may tend rather to the laying asleep, than the awaking of Questions and
Controversies in Law For (as the matter is now carried) a School is set up, and
open amongst all, to the multiplying of Alterations and Questions in Law: as if
their aim was only to make ostentation of wit; and this is an old desease, for
even amongst the Ancients, it was, as it were, a glory, by Sects and Factions
to cherish rather than extinguish many Questions concerning Law. Provide
against this inconvenience.

126. Judgments become uncertain either through immature and too precipitate
preceedings to sentence; or through Emulation of Courts; or through ill and
unskilful registring of Judgments; or because there is a too easy and expedite
way open of reversing and rescinding them, wherefore it must be provided that
Judgments Issue forth not without a staid deliberation had aforehand, and that
Courts bare a reverent respect to one another, and that Decrees be drawn up
faithfully and wisely; and that the way to repeal Judgments be narrow, rocky
and strewed as it were with sharp stones.

127. If a Judgment has been awarded upon a case in a principal Court, and the
like case intervene in another Court, proceed not to sentence before the matter
be advised upon in some solemn Assembly of Judges: for if Judgments awarded
must needs be repealed, yet let them be interred with Honor.

128. For Courts to be at debate and variance about Jurisdictions is a humane
frailty; and the more because this intemperance, through a misprision and vain
conceit (that it is part of a stout resolute Judge, to enlarge the privileges
of the Court,) is openly countenanced and spurred on, whereas it has need of
the bridle: but that out of this heat of stomach Courts should so easily
reverse on both sides Judgments awarded, which nothing pertain to Jurisdiction,
is an insufferable evil, which by all means should be repressed and punished by
Kings or Counsels of State, or the form of Government, for it is a president of
the worst Example, that Courts, that should distribute peace, should themselves
practice Duels.

129. Let there not be too easy and free passage made to the repealing of
Judgments by appellations, and writs of Errors or re-examination, etc. It is
maintained, by a Judge in the Common Pleas, that a Suit may be brought into a
higher Court, as entire and untried, the Judgment past upon it set aside but
the execution thereof may be staid; in the Kings Bench is of opinion that the
Judgment it may stand in force, but the execution thereof may be staid; neither
of these is to be allowed, unless the Courts wherein the Judgment was awarded
were of a base and inferior Order, but rather that both the Judgment stand,
and the execution thereof go on, so a Caveat be put in by the Defendant for
damages and charges if the Judgnent should be reverst.

130. Now all they which have written of Laws hitherto; have handled many
things goodly for discourse but remote from use; that I ave written is received
from the best presidents ^n the world, and is what humane society is capable
of, what makes for the Weal publiek, what natural Equity is, what the Law of
Nations, And how Moses received them from (...) (i. e.) The all enlightening
recess of Souls, how the law Christ commanded was love one another, and to do
to all men, as they would be don unto, before his glorious Resurrection and
Ascension into heaven where he sits at the right hand of God: (...) (i. e.)
And thus shall he come again to Judgment, as he was seen to go up answerable to
what he himself said, as the Lightning comes out of the East and shines unto
the west so shall also the coming of the Son of man be etc. therefore let us
serve God, whose Divine Majesty I humbly implore through his Son, and our
Savior, that he would vouchsafe graciously to direct and accept these and such
like Sacrifices of hum^ne understanding, seasoned with Religion as with salt,
and incensed to his glory.

In Natures Law, it is a plain case to die,
No cunning Lawyer can demur on that;
For cruel death and fatal destiny,
Serve all men with a final Latatat.
FINIS.
THE IDEA OF GOVERNMENT.

BEING A Defense for the Idea of the Law. MADE According to the Divine
President in Nature, Reason, and Philosophy

By John Heydon Gent. (...)

Prudens tenebrosa penetrat.

Proverbs 24. 21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King: and meddle not
with those that are given to change, for Calamity shall arise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both?

London printed in the year 1660.

To the Reader.
I Am confident, he that measures my Fancy by my Effigies, is more my fool than
my fellow: And the Hound that couches upon the Table, some fondly concieve it a
Devil but they are mistaken: that Dog's call is Lilly, he is white, with a red
Circle about his neck, down his back is a list like a gold chain, and a spotted
Bitch whose call is Beauty, I couple to him and for all Games, they are quick
of scent, and good Buck-hounds; these, when I walk by the Water side to behold
the delightful streams and Fishes playing, willingly go with me: and when I
am in the Woods these are there also: So well do I love Hounds, that I would
have them with me. I now appear to the World as if I were bound to the Angels
of the Day and Planets of the Hours: God save the King, and Christ be with us
all. You will wonder now where this drives, for it is the fortune of deep
writers to miscarry because of obscurity; thus the spots in the Moon with some
men are Earth, but I am informed they are Water, there is no Day so clear but
there are Lees toward the Horizon: so Inferior wits, when they reflect on
higher intellects leave a mist in their beams.

When envious fools read my writings, they do not understand, being not able to
confute me, by Reason, then they go about to do it by Scandals, saying, as the
Jews did to our Savior, Thou art a Samaritan and have a Devil: now if Hounds
be Devils, why do they eat Hares? there is a great difference betwixt those
Hell Hounds that pursue and Arrest men, and those that catch Foxes; one tells me
if the season permit, the scrambling pens of Idiots will prove false Prophets,
some happy success being near this time designed for his Majesty of Sweden.
Alas silly Soul! some men will tell me a lie, and show me a reason for it: but
this can not confute me with flattering nonsense, lies, and ignorance.

The King of Sweden is dead, and my friend Eugenius Theodidactus told you the
time when he would die in his Almanac, and advice to a Daughter 1658.

But how this King of Sweden being now dead before March 1660 shall be
succesful in April either by Sea or Land I know not, his success in October and
November is a flattering noise and nonsense indeed: and until this Astrologer
take's Coach in a Cloud, and discover the true knowledge of the Planets, I am
resolved to say there is as much certainty in Geomancy as there is in
Astrology: for near this time the King will be Crowned in London: and J shall
see Monarchy established 1662 in dispite of all Merlines, Bulls, Bears, Moles,
and Dunes Oxen, and such Cobwebs of folly. Now God defend! what will become of
me? I do not flatter, lie, and decieve any man with false Predictions, I have
not consulted these Independent Prophets, nor Anabaptists, nor Quakers, the
Astrologers of this Religion shall pardon me for this (...); There is a Mystery
in their profession, Coelum stellatum Christianam, A new Geomantick heaven
fancied on the old Earth; here I look on this life as the progress of an
Essence Royal: The Soul quit her Court to see this Country; Heaven has in it a
Scene of Earth; and had she been contented with Ideas, she had not traveled
beyond this Map: But excellent patterns commend their Mi^es: Nature that was so
fair in the Type, could not be a slut in the Anaglyph. This makes her ramble
hither to examine the Medal by the Flask; but while she scans their Symmetry
she forms it, thus her descent speaks her Original, God in love with his own
beauty frames a glass to view it by reflection, and gives it a Law; but the
frailty of the matter excluding Eternity, the composure was subject to
desolution. Ignorance gave this release the name of death, but properly it is
the Souls birth and a Charter that makes for her liberty: she has several
ways to break up house, but her best is without a disease, this is her
mistical walk, an exit only to return; when she takes air at this door, it is
without prejudice to her tenement: thus I write my fancies, and if the
Roundheads like not my humor, let them not tell me of it, least I laugh at
them, etc.

And now I will send a Genius whose name is Phoebus, a Spirit that rises like a
man in the middle of Gemini, Phoebus, go to White Hall and hear what News there
is, that may make the poor honest Communalty happy: and if nothing, but the
King will Crown their desires, go find the King out, and bring me word again.

His wingy shoes of gold he buckles on,
With which fair plumes, for expedition,
Bare him aloft, quite over Sea and Land
With a swift gale; then quick he takes his wand,
With which he calls the hideous Souls from Hell
And others sends to Scotland's dungeon fell:
He gives, bereaves sweet sl^ep, from death preserves,
Therewith he drives the winds, and with winged nervs,
Swims through the clustring clouds: and now in's flight
Of craggy Atlas tops and sides has sight;
Of Altas, whose huge hight the Heavens do prop,
On whose pine-bearing head black clouds do stop,
And daily's girt, often dash't with wind and rain,
Thick drifts of Snow, do on his shoulders drain,
Then down his Aged chin thick floods do flow,
With frosty Ice his beard does grisly grow;
Cyllenius fluttering wings first staid him here,
And headlong hence to th'waves his corpse does bear
Much like a Bird, which 'bout the shores and sides,
Of fish full Rocks, with hovering smoothly glides,
Above the waves, about the banks even so,
Mercurius Phoebus did go too and fro;
Flutter ore Sea and Land, and winds, did s^ine,
And Dunkirks sandy shore touch in a trine,
His windy feet no sooner did alight
On Brussels Towers, but straight he saw in sight
Charles ^orts to raise, rooms to repair,
And he himself girt with a hanger rare,
With yellow Jasper stones like Stars bedeckt,
And a rich sword: In cloths of rich respect.
A Gold laced Scarlet cloak on's corpse cas^ carelessly which rarely showed etc.
Having thus found him, I humbly present, my self upon my knees before his
Divine Majesty: Now I come to the matter in hand, and that which indeed I
intend to say, is this, let Charles the Son of King Charles be King of England,
for without the head, the body is dead; and these three Nations will never
cease to be miserable, until such times as this King of Scots reign in the
stead of King Charles, that was murdered at White hall; you may consider
though many of the Kings of Judah, and Israel, were extraordinary sinful,
Idolatrous, bloody, Tyranical, and great oppressors of their people, yea
shedders of Priests, and Prophets, and other good men's Innocent blood, not only
in the wars, but in peace: yet there is no president in the old Testament of
one King ever Judiciously impeached, arraigned, deposed, or put to death by the
Congregation, Sanhedrin or Parliament of Judah, or Israel, but those who slew
any of them in a tumultuous manner, or by Treason, were for the most part slain
themselves, either in a tumult, or else put to death by their Children who
succeeded to the Crown; or by the people of the Land: and that the Israelites,
after their revolt from Rohoboam, had never any one good King, or good day
almost among them: but were overrun with Idolatry, profaneness, Tyranny,
invaded by enemies, involved in perpetual wars, civil or foreign, and at last
all destroyed and carried away captive into Babylon, as the Book of Kings and
Chronicles will inform you: that the Rule in the old Testament is, not to take
any wicked King from their Thrones and behead them; but take away the wicked
from before the King, and his throne shall be established in righteouness: And
the Rule in the New Testament is to be subject to Kings, and the Higher
power's, and to submit unto them even for conscience sake, and for the Lords
sake, and to make prayers, supplications, and intercession for them, that under
them we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty; for
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior: not to despose or
shead their blood, for which their is no precept nor president in the Gospel,
but only of the bloody Jews, who with wicked hands crucified Jesus Christ the
King of the Jews by birthright, and Lord of glory, whom they rejected and
disclaimed for their King, before they crucified him, which brought speedy and
exemplary desolation upon their whole Nation ever since till now; And is not
this plain way of God, the safest for you, and the Army and Cromwels bloody
Saints and Jesuits to follow, yea the short cut to peace and settlement?
ruminate upon it, and then be wise, and bring the Kingdoms also, etc.

Thus from my heart I wish England may Flourish in the Protestant Religion in
peace and plenty under the Government of the King and Parliament.

The Major, Aldermen, Merchants, Tradesmen, and Common people in general will
never be happy until King Charles be Crowned King of England, and if you erect
a figure of Astrology and project a figure of Geomancy in a Telesme, you shall
find five Angels of God, Commissionated to fight for the King against those
that oppose him, and these are their names Michael, Gabriel, Phoebus, Hamaliel,
Muriel, and these command two Genij, Teriel, and Elim, to preserve him against
one enemy, and his two servants Pallas, and Barchiel; but the Genij, keep him
in the Protestant Religion against all Sects, in Charity and Prayer: Now it is
a vain thing to fight against God, turn him a Papist or an Anabaptist etc. and
these Angels will forsake him, and he shall lose his life or all that belong to
his happiness in this world, etc.

He that desires to know more of what shall come to pass, in England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Spain, Italy, Sweden, Poland. etc. let him read my Book
of Geomancy, entitled, by the Rosy Crucians, The Temple of wisdom, and he
shall find what he desires and the Spirits that signify these things, and what
strange things will happen in London before 1665. God bless the City from
destruction, the Devil is willing to make war between the King, and
Parliament, that Popery may be built upon their ruin, I desire mercy and truth
may meet together, Righteousness, and peace kiss each other, then will England
be happy

From my house in Spittle-feilds next door to the red Lion, on the east side,
London near Bishopgate this 27. of April 1660. John Heydon.

On the Idea of the Law, retrived by his Ingenious Friend Mr. Jo. Heydon.
APelles viewed the Beauties of all Greece,
That he by them might limb a curious piece
Resembling Venus; Heydon surely saw
As many wits to Ideize the Law,
In its perfection; so sublime a tract
As this appears, may legally exact,
A subsidy of praises, to usher't forth,
By virtue of its own inherent worth,
Great volumes are but the periphrasis
Of what you have epitomized in this
Plato's Licurgus, Laws et Cetera.
Are summed up by you in this Algebra;
On this your Specilagium when I look,
Each Paragraph presents me with a Book,
And with an Idea the n^r was known,
To any age or person, but this one,
The Macrocosm may be by this Law freed,
From the Convultions Tyranny did breed;
Platonic Laws shall be no more Divine
Reputed, since we have these Laws of thine.
Tho. Fige. (...)

A Monsieur Monsieur Jean Heydonsur son admirable Idee des to^h emciennes et
modernes.
LE grand flam beau du mond a toute sort
Des animaux par ses caions confoote,
Et toy (moncher Heydon) par ton espoit,
Ecllairs nostr' ignoranle; ton esloist
Par la recherche de ta belle Industry
A trace les tenebras, et gueri,
Nostr' avengless, les chooses plus chachces
Rendant tout claires et tout Illumintes;
Advance donc toutjours par ton ge^a
a sutmonter les assauts de l'annie.
LUIS FROISAND. Eque

Al molto Illustre amico mio honoratissimo Il Sigr. Giovanni Heydon sopra
l'opera sua accuratissima l' Idea delle Leggi.
IL Cielo, e terra, e tu^t' i suoi se ereti
Al tuo cercar' non resteranno cheti,
Volgi, e vivolgi tutto, e non si trova
Cosa ch' a tu' Ingegno sia nova;
L' antico e novo a te, e non v' e cosa,
Nova a tiche paja tenebrosa;
E poiche tuito a tua vista appare,
Noll' sdegnial Cieco se colo mostrare.
Castruccio Castracani. Cavilero.

THE PROAEMIUM.
THE Idea of the Law you have read, being the only way to establish a good
Government, and to Crown the Peoples desires with the King, and happiness: And
this may be so strange and unexpected, That, the Defense it self, which should
cure and cease your amazement, may not occasion in any passage thereof, any
further scruple or offense: And this following, shall strengthen the foregoing
discourse.

And for my own part, I cannot presage what may be in any show of reason
alleged, by any man against me, etc. unless it be: The Form of Government I
would have; and the King enthroned: The Liberty, welfare, and prosperity of the
people, etc. The Common Prayer, etc. In a word, Episcopacie will warrant the
easy and familiar sense that I shall set upon The Idea of the Law in the
literal meaning thereof, unto which if I advise, reasons from the pious
prudence of the holy Lawgiver, showing how every passage makes for greater
Faith in God, and more affectionate obedience to his Law; there will be nothing
wanting I think, (though I shall sometimes cast in some notable advantages also
from Critical Learning) that may gain belief to the truth of the Kings Form of
Government, etc.

To prevent any further trouble in making good the sense I have put upon
Monarchy, being the best Form of Government in the world, for the advantage of
the people, I shall here at once set down the Tyranny of the Times: in one
example of the Errors of the Laws of Oliver Cromwell, and his fellows: How much
like the Popes, their Laws and Statutes were, The late King Charles his Law,
showed the difference between true and false, just and unjust, honest and
dishonest: But the Pope and the Emperor boast, that they have the Laws laid up
in the chest of their breast, to whom Will alone serves for Law, with the
Arbitrament whereof they presume to judge and rule all Sciences, Arts,
Scriptures, Opinions, and the works of men whatsoever they be: For this cause
Leo the Pope, straightly commands all Christian people, That no man in the
Church should presume to judge any thing, nor any man, to justify nor to
discuss any matter but by the authority of the holy Councils, Canons, and
Decretals, whose head is the Pope: and also, that you cannot use the
determination of the best learned men, of all the holiest Divines, but so far
forth as the Pope does permit, and shall authorize by his Canons: And in
another place the Canon does forbid, that no other Volume or Book by the
Divines, (yea throughout the whole world, says he) but the same, which is
allowed throughout the Romish Church by the Canons of the Pope: The like Laws
the Emperor pretended to have in Philosophy, Physic, and other Sciences,
granting no authority to any knowledge, but so much as is given them by the
skilfulness of the Law, whereunto (as he says) if all Sciences and Arts that
are, be compared, they are all vile and unprofitable.

For this cause Vlpian says, the Law is King of all things, both Humane and
Divine, whose virtue is, (as Oramasus says) to command, to grant, to punish,
to forbid, then which dignities there is found no Office more great: and
Pomponius in the Laws, defines, that it is the gift and invention of God, and
the determination of all wise men: because these ancient Lawmakers, to the end
they might purchase authority by their decrees among the ignorant people, they
made semblance that they did as they were taught by the Gods: As you may read
in my Preface of this Book.

Behold now you perceive how the Popes Law presumes to bear sway over all
things, and exercises Tyranny like O. Cromwell and his fellows: and how by
woeful experience you see, it prefers it self before all other Disciplines,
as it were the first begotten of the Gods, does despise them as vile, although
it be altogether made of nothing else but of frail and very weak inventions and
opinions of Vserpers, Rebels and Traitors: which in the fear of God do Rob and
Murder even their King, which things be of all others the weakest, and will be
altered very suddenly by Charles his son.

The beginning of the sin of our first Parents when they were arrested, and
carried into flesh, was the cause of all our miseries. Now the Law of the Pope,
O. Cromwell, and his fellows proceeded from Tyranny and cruel usurpation,
whose notable Decrees are these; It is lawful to resist force with force; he
that breaks promise with thee, break thou promise with him; it is no deceit
to deceive him that deceives: a guileful person is not bound to a guileful
person in any thing; blame, with blame, may be requited; Malefactors ought to
rejoice, if justice nor faithfulness. Injury is not done to him that is
willing: It is lawful for them that traffic, to deceive one another: The
thing is so much worthy as it may be sold for: It is lawful for a man to
provide for himself with the loss of another: No man is bound to an impossible
thing; when it must needs be that you or I be confounded, I should choose
rather that you be confounded then I; and many such things, which afterward
were written among the Roman Laws: and now lately practiced since King Charles
the First was murdered: Finally there is a Law, that no man should die for
thirst, for hunger, for cold, or in Prison for debt; nor be put in Prison by
his Creditor without six pence a day, and a penny loaf of bread, and two quarts
of Ale every morning at eight of the clock. And if any be put in Prison upon
the Kings account, or at the Kings suit, he ought to be allowed two shillings
six pence a day, and two bottles of Wine; and the like Law ought to be given by
all Governors of Countries, and duly paid every Saturday at five of the clock
at night. And no man is bound to hurt himself by watching and labor.
Afterward the cruel Law of Nations arose, from whence war, murder, bondage
were derived, and Dominions separated: after this came the Civil, or Popular
Laws, from whence have grown so many debates among men, that as the Laws do
witness, there have been made more businesses, then there be names of things;
For, whereas men were prone and inclined to discord, the publishing of Justice,
which was to be observed by means of the Laws was a necessary thing; to the end
that the boldness of lewd men might in such wise be bridled, and among the
wicked innocence might be safe, and the honest might live quietly among the
dishonest: And these be the same so notable beginnings of the Law, wherein
there have been innumerable Lawgivers, of which Moses was the first, etc.

The Civil Law is nothing else, but that which men will do with a common
consent, the authority of which is only in the King and the People: For without
a King this is all void, and of none effect; for this cause Pheroneus says,
that the Laws bind us for no other cause, but that they have been approved by
the judgment of the King and People; wherefore if any thing please the People
and the King, this then stands in force both by Custom and Ordinances of Law:
although there appear Error, for common Error makes Law, and the Matter
judges Truth, which Ulpian a Tyrant, and a Lawyer in times past has taught us
in these words, viz. that he ought to be taken for a Freeman, of whom sentence
has been given, although in effect he be a Libertine, (that is to say) a bond
man made Free, because the matter judged is taken for Truth.

Mr. Jeremy Heydon says, That one Sed^ Mahomet Book^, a Barbarian who ran away
from his Master, demanded at Rome the Pretorship, the which he administered, and
at length was known; it was judged that none of those things should be altered,
which he being a servant, did in the covering of so great a dignity; the same
man after returned to Sally where he was Consul: And in Sidmouth in Devonshire,
a Gentleman is so much esteemed for his royal heart to the King, and knowledge
in matters of Justice, that many would that men should argue with his words.

Seluhanus and Paulus, the best learned among the Romans say, For the use of
the Pope, if a Cistern of silver be reckoned among silver, that it is
understood silver, and not household stuff, because, error makes their Law; the
same he openly confesses of the Laws and Decrees of the Senate: that a reason
cannot be given of all things, which have been ordained by our Elders.

Hereof then you know, that all the knowledge of the Civil Law depends upon
the only opinion and will of the King and People, without any other reason
urging and enforcing to be so, then either the honesty of manners, or commodity
of living, or the authority of the King, or the force of Arms, which if it be
the Preserveress of goo^men, and the Revengeress of wicked men, it is a good
Discipline: It is also a most wicked thing, for the naughtiness which is done,
when the Magistrate or the King neglects it, suffers it, or allows it:
But that more is, the opinion of Demonartes, was, that all Laws were
unprofitable and superfluous, as they which were not made neither for good, nor
ill men, forasmuch as they have no need of Laws, and these be made never the
better for them: Furthermore Sinensis confesses, that unless any Law can be
made, which to all men may be profitable, and in that which very often it does
happen, that Equity fights with the rigor of the Law Maim^n also defining
equity, calls it the Correction of a righteous Law, in which point he
fails, because it is made generally. Is it not then sufficiently declared by
this alone, that all the force of the Law and Justice does not so much depend
upon the Laws, as upon the honesty and equity of the Judge?

Another error proceeds from the Civil law to the Canon Law, or the Popes Law:
which to O. Cromwell and his Fellows the Fanatique Parliamentiers appeared most
Holy, so wittily it does shadow the Precepts of Covetousness, and manners of
robbing under the color of Godliness, albeit there be very few things ordained
appertaining to Godliness, to Religion, to the worshipping of God, and the
solemnity of the Sacraments: I will not speak of some which are contrary and
repugnant to the Law of God, I accuse not D. Owen Vice Chancellor of Oxford, he
knows them; all the residue are nothing but contentions, strifes, pride, pomp,
means to gain riches, and the decrees of the Popes of Rome, to whom the Canons
be not sufficient, which were in time passed made by the holy Fathers, except
they continually add to them new Decrees, extravagancies, Declarations, and
Rules of Chancery, so that there is no end nor measure of making Canons, which
alone is the ambition and desire of the Bishops of Rome (that is to say,) to
make new Canons, whose arrogance is grown so far, that they have commanded the
Genii and Angels in Heaven, and have presumed to rob and bring their booty out
of Hell, and to put in their hands among the spirits of the dead: and on the
Law of God also they have sometimes exercised their Tyranny, interpreting,
declaring, and disputing, to the end that nothing might want, or be derogated
from the greatness of his power. Is it not true, that Pope Clement in that
Leaden Bull, which at this day is yet kept in Lievorno, vulgarly called Legorn,
and at Venice, and in other places in Italy, in the Coffers of Privileges,
commands the Angels of Heaven, that they should bring into everlasting joys
the soul of him that uses to go in pilgrimage to Rome for Indulgences, and
there dying, being delivered out of the pains of Purgatory; saying moreover, We
will not in any wise that he go to the pains of Hell: granting also to them
that be signed with the Cross, that at their Prayers they may take three or
four souls out of Purgatory, which they list; which erroneous and intolerable
Tymerity, I will not say Heresy, the Schools of London in the Kings time
openly detested and abhorred: But the Fanatic Parliament intended very
shortly, if Kings Charles the Second do not come the sooner, to interrupt the
Hyperbolical zeal of Clement with some Anabaptistical godly shaking Invention,
that the thing may rather flourish then perish; seeing that for their
affirming, or denying, nothing is altered in the deed and authority of the
Pope, whose Canons and Decrees have in such sort bound all Episcopacy and
Presbytery etc. in a cord for Damnation, because they detest the Popes Canons;
and after this example they fear their own Clergy, so that none of all their
Divines or Jesuits, be he never so contantious, dares to determine; no not
imagine or dispute any thing contrary to the Popes Canons, without protestation
and leave.

Furthermore we have learned out of these Canons, and Decrees, that the
Patrimony of Christ, his Kingdoms, Castles, Donations, Foundations, Riches and
Possessions, and that Empire and Rule, belongs to the Bishops and Priests of
Christ, and to the Prelates of the Church, and the Jurisdiction and Temporal
Power is the Sword of Christ; And that the Person of the Pope is the Rock,
being the foundation of the Church, that the Bishops are not only the Ministers
of the the Church, but also Heads of the Church; and that Evangelical Doctrine,
the fervency of Faith, the contempt of the world, are not only the goods of the
Church, but Revenues, tenths, Offerings, collections, Purples, Mitres, Gold,
Silver, Pearl, Possessions, and Money, and that the authority of the Pope is to
make war, to break truce, to break oaths, and to assoyl from obedience, and of
the House of Prayer to make a den of Thieves; and so the Pope can depose a
Bishop without cause; and Oliver Cromwell could cut off Doctor John Huit his
head by the same rule. The Pope can give that which is another man's; Cromwell
and the Fanatique Parliament, after the same president, sold the Kings Lands,
and the Church Lands: that he can commit Symony, that he can dispense against
his vow, against his Oath, against the Law of Nature: And did not Cromwell and
his Fellows do so too, and none may say unto him, Why do thou this?

And also he can, as they say, for some grievous cause, dispense against all
the New Testament; and to draw not only a third part, but also the souls of the
faithful into Hell. That the duty of Bishops is not now as it was in time past
to preach the Word of God; with Crosses, to Confirm children to give Orders, to
Dedicate Churches, to Baptize Bells, to hallow Altars, and Challices, to
Consecrate and bless Vestments and Images, and Geomantical Telesmes, which
esteem their wits more meet for higher matters, and leaving the charge to
certain Bishops, which have nothing else but the Title, go in Embassage to
Kings; they be Presidents of their Oratories; or attend upon Queens; excused
for a sufficient great and weighty cause not to serve God in Churches; so that
they royally honor the King in the Court: Hereof these Cautles took their
beginnings, by means whereof at this day without Simony Bishoprics and
Benifices be bought and sold; and moreover, what Fairs and Markets soever be in
Pardons, Grants, Indulgences, Dispensations, and such like manner of robberies,
by whom also there is a price set in the free remission of sins given by God,
there is found a Mean to gain by the punishments of Hell.

Furthermore, that false Donation of Constantine proceeds from this Law, albeit
in effect, and with the Testimony of Gods Word, Caesar cannot leave his charge,
neither the Parson of the Clergy ought to usurp the things that belong to
Caesar, but of infinite Laws of Ambition, of Pride, and of Tyranny: These are
Errors crept in with Cromwell amongst the Laws of England.

He that will diligently examine the Laws and Statutes of Rome, shall find how
much the Fat Fa^atique Parliament has borrowed of them, and corrupted our
Laws. But the Idea of the Law will put all in Order. The Method and Rules you
read before.

Another Error in Laws you shall perceive in the great and mavelous hidden
Mysteries of the Canons, which some Popes of Rome do fructify, turning also
the things which are spoken elsewhere in the holy Scripture, and sometimes
counterfeiting them, and with these their devises likening and applying them;
from hence sprung those Concordance, as Dr. Owen calls it, of the Bible, and of
the Canons. Moreover then this so many titles of Robberies, of Clokes, of
Indulgences, of Bulls, of Confessionals, of Pardons, of Rescripts, of
Testaments, of Dispensations, of Privileges, of Elections, of Dignities, of
Preb^nds, of Houses, of Holy Churches, of Liberties, of the place of Judgment,
of Judgments, etc.

Finally, the whole Canon Law is of all the most Erroneous and Deficient; and
that same Christian Religion, at the beginning whereof Christ took away
Ceremonies, has now more then ever the Jews had, the weight of which being put
thereto, the light and sweet yoke of Christ is become much more grievous then
all the rest, and the Christians are enforced to live rather after the order of
the Canons, then after the Gospel. It is a great error, when the whole
knowledge of both Laws is occupied about nothing but transitory, frail,
flitting, and vain things, worldly affairs, entercourses, enmities of the
Canons, about the murders of men, robberies, thefts, spoils, factions,
conspiracies, wrongs, Treasons, and the cases of the Censorian Courts.

Moreover then this, Perjuries of witnesses, falsifications of Notaries,
conclusions of Advocates, corruption of Judges, ambitions of Counselors,
Revenues of Presidents, by whom widows are oppressed, Pupils undone, good men
exiled, poor men trodden under foot, innocents condemned; and as J. Cleveland
says, The Crows unharmed escape, the Doves be vexed sore: And blind men have
altogether prepared for themselves, and incurred those things which they have
thought themselves to eschew by the means of the Laws and Canons, because these
Laws and Canons come not from God, nor be addressed to God, but are derived
from the corrupt nature and wit of men, and are invented for gain and
covetousness.

To follow my Idea and Method of Law, which is Monarchical and Episcopal, you
must next in order correct another Error in the practice of the Law, which is
full of deceits, craftily set out with a color of persuasion, which is nothing
else, but to know how to entreat the Judge gently with persuasion, and to know
how to use the Laws of their fantasy, or else inventing new cases and strange
Pleas, to make and unmake all Laws according to their pleasure, or to avoid
them with all manner of subtle slights, or to prolong deceitful controversy,
to allege the Laws in such wise, that the Praetorian Court is turned into
falsehood; to entangle the Authority of the Atturneys in such sort, that the
meaning of the Lawmakers is subverted; to cry out with a loud voice; to be
shameless, presumptuous, and clamorous, and obstinate in pleading, and
declaring; and he is accounted the best Practitioner, which allureth most to
variance, and puts them in hope to overcome, persuades them to go to Law,
and incenseth them with wicked counsels, which seeks for appeals, which is a
notable Barrator, and Author of variance, which with the babbling and force of
his tongue, can prate of every thing, and also can make one case better then
another, with conveyances of Judgments, and by this means to make true and
righteous things appear doubtful and naught, and with their arms to banish,
destroy, and overthrow Justice.

That nothing may defile the Idea of the Law; you must correct the blots and
errors of the Proctors and Notaries: whose injuries, damages, naughtiness, and
falsities you patiently endure, forasmuch as they seem to have gotten credit,
license and power to do all things through Apostolic and Imperial authority;
and among them, they be the chiefest, which know best how to trouble the place
of Judgment; to cause Controversies; to confound causes; to forge false Wills,
Obligations, Supplications, and Writs; to know also excellently to deceive,
beguile, and when it is needful to forswear and write false; to dare to do all
mischiefs, and suffer not themselves to be overcome by any in imagining
deceipts, wiles, crafts, malicious alterations, snares, entrappings, subtle
practices, incombrances, controversies, circumventions, Scylla's and
Charibdis's: Furthermore, no Notary can make so sure an instrument: as Mr.
Michael Petty terms it, but that it is necessary to go to Law afresh, if any
adversary will go about to disanul the same; For he will say, either there is
something left out, or that there is deceit, or else he will lay some other
exception or demur, to impugn the credit of the Bill, Bond, Lease, Deed, or
Morgage, or other: And these be the remedies of the Law, whereunto they teach
contentious persons to flee: these be the watches unto which William Hill Esquire
says that the Law gives succor, except there be some that had rather fight
then strive: For he shall have so much Law, as with his power he shall be able
to defend: wherefore the Law says, that we cannot resist them that be stronger
then us: The Lawyers of all Courts of Judicature interpret diversely one from
another; And I have a Controversy with them, as sometime my Predecessor Doctor
Nicholas Culpeper had with the College of Physicians; he desired the health of
his poor Countrymen, amending the Bill of the Doctors, and prescribed good
Medicines for poor people, and being envyed, it is supposed he was poisoned.
Now I hope to correct the Errors of the Law by the Idea, and as briefly as I
can I have showed what is good, and what is evil. But indeed they have brought
forth with most unhappy fruitfulness, so many storms of Opinions, and so many
Annotations of most subtle Counsels, and Cautles, with which naughty Practices
Atturneys are instructed and maintained: which do so much bind their reputation
with the famous memory of those Laws through ever^ Period, as my beloved Friend
Mr. Windsor Chumbers terms them Paragraphs, as though the verity consists not
rather in reasons, then in confused testimonies drawn out of the vile multitude
of very obstinate and trifling persons, among whom is so much deceit,
wrangling and discord, that he which disagreeth not from others, (as I have
heard an ingenuous man, and no Lawyer) Mr. Heydon say; He that knows not how
to gainsay other men's words with new opinions, and bring all apparent things in
doubt, and with doubtful Expositions to apply well invented Laws to their
devises, is accounted little or nothing learned, etc. I have heard another
industrious man, Mr. William Hobbs the Astrological Fencer say, All the
knowledge of the Law is become a naughty Counsel and a deceitful not of
iniquity. Now I am ashamed to see how England is Governed; and what strange
Laws and Statutes are established to abuse the simple honest people by
Fanatique Parliamentiers.

These hate the King; and from these come those gorbellied Committee of Safety,
and the Grand Oliver; who hurl low Secretaries into places of honor undeserved,
and base people into places of preferment, to whom all matters of weight be
committed, which sell and compel men to buy of them all things, Placards of the
Tyrant Protectors gifts, Benefices, Offices, Dignities, Letters of Cromwell, or
the Parliament, and Writs, moreover right, Justice, Law, Equity, and honesty:
Sometimes it fortunes according to the judgment of Chancellors and
Secretaries, the friends and enemies of Kings are reckoned, with whom according
to their pleasure they sometime make League, and sometime make mortal War. And
when they from most base estate, by means of a most covetous selling of their
voice, have climbed to so high a degree of Dignity, they have therewithal such
a mischievous boldness, that sometimes they dare condemn Kings, and without
determination of the Council, and without declaring the cause, do condemn them
to be Beheaded; and thus have they transferred us to misfortune; they being now
puffed up with Pride by robbing and spoiling, theeving, pilfring, plundering,
breaking of houses, and Sequestring the people, and taking away their riches,
etc.

You have now also read the Errors of the Law: And you see how necessary it is
for to Crown King Charles: That the Idea of the Law may with Mercy and Truth,
Righteousness and Peace be practiced and established in the three Kingdoms,
England, Scotland, and Ireland, to the glory of God, and the good of our
Country: Thus have you the Idea of the Law clarified, and the dross taken from
it; being fit now to establish in a happy Commonwealth under the Government of
King Charles.

May the 2. 1660. John Heydon.

THE IDEA OF GOVERNMENT.
THe first Rule that I laid down in my Introduction to the defense of the Idea
of the Law, I need not here again repeat, but desire all Gentlemen only to
carry it in mind: I have shown you the Errors of the Law, in all Courts, and
have done what lies on my part, that you may peruse this Defense of my Idea of
the Law, without any rub or stumbling: let me now request but one thing, which
you are bound to grant; which is, that you read my Defense without Prejudice,
and that all along, as you go, which is but a little way, you make not your
recourse to the customary conceits of your fancy, but consult with your free
Reason, (...), as Plato, De Leg. For Custom is another Nature; and therefore
those conceits that are accustomary and familiar, we unawares appeal too, as if
they were indeed the Natural light of the mind, and her first common notions.

2. Now before I can represent unto you the Idea of the Law, you must Crown
King Charles the Second, Son of King Charles the first, lately murdered, and
then I shall show you the frame and fashion of the Just Notion of the Idea of
the Law in General, according to my Telesmatical Genius; and Hortensius gives
this shadowy interpretation of it: Lex est quaedam regula and mensura secundam
quam inducitur aliquis ad agendum, vel ab agendo retrahitur; but Heliani^
offended with the latitude of this definition, esteems it too spreading and
comprehensive, as that which extends to all Natural, I, and to Artificials too:
for they have Regulas and mensuras operationum. Thus God has set a Law to the
waves, and a Law to the winds; Nay, thus Clocks have their Laws, and Lutes
have their Laws; and whatsoever have the least appearance of motion, has some
rule proportionable to it, whereas these workings were always reckoned to be at
the most but inclinations, and Pondera, and not fruits of a Legislative Power.
But yet the Apostle Paul to stain the pride of them that gloried in the abuse
of the Law, ruining many poor people for a fee, calls such things by the name
of Law, as were most odious and anomalous; thus he tells you of (...), and
(...); though sin be properly (...) Thus he mentions Legem membrorum, the same
which the Lawyers call Legem fomitis.

3. And yet this is sure, that a rational creature is only capable of a Law,
which is a moral restraint, and so cannot reach to those things that are
necessitated to act ad extremum virium.

4. And therefore Cook does give you a more refined interpretation, when he
tells you Lex est mensura quaedam actum, moralium, ita ut per Conformitatem ad
illam, Rectitudinem moralem habeant, and si ab illi discordent, obliqui sint. A
Law is such a just and regular turning of actions, as that by virtue of this,
they may conspire into a Moral music, and become very pleasant and harmonious.
Thus Plato speaks much of that (...) and (...) that is in Laws. After this he
does altogether discourse of Harmony, and does infinitely prefer mental and
intellectual Music, those powerful and practical strains of goodness, that
spring from a well composed spirit, before those delicious Blandishments, those
soft and transient touches that comply with sense, and salute it in a more
flattering manner; and he tells you of a spiritual dancing that is answerable
to so sweet a Music, to these (...), whilst the Laws play in Consort, there
is a chorus of well-ordered affections that are raised and elevated by them.
And thus, as Aristotle well observes, some Laws were wont to be put in verse,
and to be sung like so many pleasant Odes, that might even charm the people
into obedience.

5. It Is true, that conceited Philosopher gives the reason of it, they were put
into verse (...), that they might remember them the better: But why may not I
add a reason also to share with it, that they might come with a greater grace
and allurement, that they might hear them as pleasant as they would do the
voice of a Vial, or an Harp, that has Rhetoric enough to still and quiet the
evil Spirit? But yet this does not sufficiently paint out the being of a Law,
to say, that it is only regula and mensura: and Littleton himself is so
ingenious as to tell me, that he cannot rest satisfied with this
Interpretation, which he wrote but with a blunt pen. And therefore I will give
him some time to engross it fair. And in the mean time I will look upon that
speculative Lawgiver, Plato I mean, who was always new modelling of Laws, and
rolling Political Ideas in his mind.

6. Now you may see him gradually ascending and climbing up to the description
of a Law, by these four several steps, and yet he does not reach the top and
(...) of it neither. First he tells me that Laws are (...), such things as are
esteemed fitting: but because this might extend to all kind of Customs too, his
second thoughts limit and contract it more, and tells me that a Law is (...),
Decretum civitatis, yet because the Mass and bulk of people, the rude heap and
undigested lump of the multitude may seek to establish (...), as he calls it,
therefore he bethinks himself how to purge out the dross from it, and tells me
in the next place that it is (...), inventio ejus quod vere est, where it is
very remarkable what this Philosopher means by (...), by which he is wont
usually to point out a Deity, which is styled by Aristotle (...), but it is not
capable of this sense here, for thus Laws are not (...) but rather (...), Lex
est inventio vel donum Dei, (...) therefore in this place speaks these two
particulars, (...). for all rectitude has a being, and flows from the Fountain
of being, whereas obliquities and irregularities are mere privations, and
non-entities; and it is a notable speech in Plato, (...) the very same
expression which the Apostle gives to the Law of God, when he calls it The
Royal Law; (...) implies (...); every thing that is profitable, has a being in
it, but you can gather no fruit from a privation; there is no sweetness in an
obliquity, and therefore a Law is a wholesome mixture of that which is just and
profitable. Thus do I interpret the first, second and third Paragraphs of my
Idea of the Law, and this is (...) as Plutarch speaks, whereas Turpe praeceptum
non est Lex, sed iniquitas, for obligation that is the very Form and Essence of
a Law: Now every Law Obligat in Nomine Dei; but so glorious a Name did never
bind to any thing that was wicked and unequal, (...), and that only is
countenanced from heaven (...), the Golden chain of Laws, it is tied to the
chair of Jupiter; and a command is only vigorous as it issues out either
Immediately or remotely by the Genii from the great Sovereign of the world: So
that (...) is my Foundation of the Idea of the Law. And in all true kinds of
Government, there is some Supreme Power derived from God himself, and fit to
contrive Laws and Constitutions agreeable to the welfare and happiness of those
that are to be subject to them: and (...), and the Rosy Crucians are the
fittest makers of Laws.

7. Plato did not lay stress enough upon that binding virtue, which is the very
sinew, nay life and soul of a Law, according to my fifth Paragraph; That these
three Descriptions, (...), intend only humane Laws, and so are engrost fair,
for the pure notion of a Law in general.

8. And though the same other branch (...), may seem to defend my Idea, yet it
is too obscure too much in the clouds, to give a clear manifestation of the
Idea of the Law; and yet Aristotle does not in this supply Plato's defects, but
seems rather to Paraphrase upon the descriptions, or rather Interpretations of
Humane Laws, and tells me in more enlarged language, that (...) where yet he
cannot possibly mean that every individium should give his suffrage, but
certainly the Representative consent of the whole will content him.

9. But I see these ancient Philosophers are not so well furnished to lend me
any thing to defend my Idea of the Law: But I must return to London again, and
see what assistance William Prinne Esquire and other Lawyers of the Temple will
lend me; who by this time have lickt their former Interpretations into a more
comely form. I will look upon W. Prinne Esquire first, Lex (says he) est ordinatio
rationis ad bonum Commune ab eo qui curam habet Communitatis promulgata. It is
a rational Ordinance for the advantage of the Public good, made known by that
power, which has care and tuition of the Public.

10. And Judge Roll, his Picture of a Law, now, that it is fully drawn after
Littleton, by Cook, and then by Roll, has much the same Aspect, Lex est
Commune Praeceptum, Justum ac stabile, sufficientur Promulgatum. A Law is a
Public Command, a just and immovable command, lifting up its voice like a
Trumpet, and in respect of the Lawgiver, though it be praesupponere actum
intellectus, as all acts of the will do: yet it does formally consist in actu
voluntatis; not the understanding, but the will of a Lawgiver makes a Law. But
in respect of him that is subject to the Law, it does consist in actu Rationis;
it is required only that he should know it, not in actu voluntatis, it does not
depend upon his obedience. The want of his will is not enough to enervate and
invalidate a Law when it is made; all Laws then would be abrogated every moment:
His will indeed is required to execution and fulfilling of the Law, not to the
validity and existence of the Law. And thus all the Laws of God do not at all
depend upon the will of man: (and thus interpret my seventh Paragraph of the
Idea of the Law:) but upon the power and will of the Lawgiver. Now in the
framing of every Law there is to be Intentio boni communis; and thus that
speech of L. Verulam, Vtilitas Justi prope matter, and aequi, if it be took in
this sense, in which it is thought he meant it, is not so much as tolerable
Lawgivers should send out Laws with Olive branches in their mouths; they
should be fruitful and peaceable; they should drop sweetness and fatness upon a
Land: Let not then Brambles make Laws for Trees, as O. Cromwell and his fellows
did for King Charles, and his Dukes, Earls, and Lords, etc. least they scratch
them and tear them, and write their Laws in blood, as you have seen lately.

11. But King Charles will send out Laws, as the Sun shoots forth his Beams
with healing in his wings. And thus that elegant Plutarch speaks. God (says
he) is angry with them that counterfeit his Thunder and Lightning, (...), his
Scepter, and his Thunderbolt, and his Trident, he will not let them meddle with
these. He does not love they should imitate him in his absolute Dominion and
Sovereignty, but loves to see them darting out those warm and amiable, and
cherishing (...), those beamings out of Justice, and goodness, and clemency.
And as for Laws, they should be like so many green, and pleasant pastures, into
which these (...) are to lead their flocks: where the people may feed them
sweetly and securely by those refreshing streams of Justice, that run down like
water, and righteousness like a mighty Torrent. And this Consideration would
sweep down the Cobweb-Laws of Bradshaw, Lenthall, Prideaux, Oliver Cromwell, and
the Fanatique Parliament, etc. that argue only the venom and subtilty of them
that spin them; this would sweep down many an Achitophels web, and many an
Hamons web, many an Herod's web, and every Spiders web in England that spread
Laws only for the cathing and entangling of weaker ones; such Lawgivers are
fit to be Domitians Play-fellows, that made it his Royal sport and pasttime to
catch Flies, and insult over them when he had done. Whereas a Law should be a
staff for a Commonwealth to lean on, and not a read to pierce it through, Laws
should be cords of love, not nets and snares; Hence it is that those Laws are
most radical and Fundamental, that principally tend to the conservation of the
Vitals and Essentials of a Kingdom; and those come nearest the Law of God
himself: as I interpret my eight Paragraph of the Idea of the Law; and are
participations of that Eternal Law, which is the Spring and original of all
inferior and derivative Laws, (...), as Plato speaks: and there is no such
public benefit, as that which comes by Laws: For all have an equal interest
in them, and privilege by them. And therefore as Aristotle speaks (...). A Law
is a pure intellect, not only without a sensitive appetite, but without a will.
It Is pure Judgment without affections; a Law is impartial, and makes no
Factions; and my Idea of the Law cannot be bribed, though the Judge may; and
that Philosopher does pretty well prosecute this; If you were to take Physic,
then indeed it is ill being determined by a Book, it is a dangerous taking a
printed Receipt, you had better leave it to the breast of the Physician, to his
skill and advice who minds your health and welfare, as being most for his gain
and credit. But in point of Justice the case is very different: you had better
here depend upon a Rule, then to leave it to the Arbitrary Power of a Judge,
who is usually to decide a controversy between two; and if left to himself,
were apt to be swayed and biased by several interests and engagements, which
might incline him to one more then another.

Nay, now that there is a fix^ Rule, an immovable Law, yet there is too much
partiality in the application of it; how much more would there be, if there
were no rule at all?

13. But the truth is, the Judge should only follow the ultimum and practicum
dictamen legis; his Will, like a Caeca potentia, is to follow the Novissimum
lumen intellectus of this (...) that is to rule and guide him, and therefore
Justice was painted blind, though ipsa Lex be oculata, for (...), and the Will
is to follow the ultimum nutum capitis, the meaning of the Law in all
Circumstances.

14 In a Lawgiver, there is to be Judicium and Prudentia Anchitectonica ad
ferendas leges, the Egyptian Heiroglyphick for Legislative power, was oculus
in sceptro: and it had need be such an eye that can see both (...); it had need
have a full and open Prospect into public affairs, and to put all advantages
into one scale, and all inconveniences into another.

15. To be sure that the Laws of God they flow from a fountain of Wisdom; and
the Laws of men are to be lighted at this Candle of the Lord, according to the
sense of the ninth Paragraph of the Idea of the Law, which he has by a Genius
set up; and those Laws are most potent and prevalent that are founded in light,
(...). Other Laws are (...), they may have an iron and adamantine necessity;
but the other have a soft and downy persuasion going along with them, and
therefore as he goes on, (...). Reason is so beautiful, as that it wins and
allures, and thus constrains to obedience. There is to be Sigillum Legis, I
mean Electio and determinatio Legis, after a sincere aim at public good, and a
clear discovery of the best means to promote it, there comes then a fixed and
sacred Resolution, Volumus and statuimus, this speaks the Will of the
Lawgiver, and breaths life into the Law, it adds Vigor and Efficacy to it,
But yet notwithstanding,

16. There must be Vox Tubae, that is, Promulgatio and Insinuatio Legis, The
Law is for a public good, and ought to be made known in a public manner: for
as none can desire an unknown good, so none can obey an unknown Law; and
therefore invincible ignorance does excuse; for else men should be bound to
absolute impossibilities. But whether it be required to the publishing of a Law
that it should be in a way of writing, which is more fixed and durable, or
whether the manifestation of it in a vocal or oral manner will suffice (which
yet is more transient and uncertain) I leave the Lawyers and Statesmen to
dispute it. This I am sure, that all the Laws of God are proclaimed in a most
sufficient and emphatical manner. And thus much in defense of my ten
Paragraphs. Next in order I shall give you the sense of the Eternal Law of
Jesus Christ. Now I am come to the Spring and Original of all Laws, That
fountain of Law, out of which you may see the Law of Nature bubling and flowing
forth to the sons of men: for as L. Verulam does very well tell me, The Law of
Nature is nothing, but Participatio Legis aeternae in rationali creatura, the
copying out of the eternal Law, and the imprinting of it upon the breast of the
rational being: that eternal Law was in a manner incarnated in the Law of
Nature.

17. Behold all the Verses to the thirty fifth Paragraph, and they are so clear
and plain, that there is no need of any farther explication or defense; for
this Law is not really distinguished from God himself in Trinity and Unity: Nil
est ab aeterno nisi ipse Deus, so that it is much of the same nature with those
decrees of his, and that providence which was awake from everlasting. For as
God from all eternity by the hand of infinite wisdom did draw the several faces
and Lineaments of being, which he meant to show in time; so he did then also
contrive their several frames with such limits and compass, as he meant to set
them; and said unto every thing, Hither shall thou go, and no farther.

18. This the Platonists would call, (...), and would willingly heap such
honorable Titles as these, Prophetically upon it, (...). And the greatest
happiness that other Laws can arrive unto, is this, that they be (...),
ministering and subservient Laws: as you shall find them in the one hundred and
thirty Paragraphs of my Idea of the Law, waiting upon this their Divine royal
Law, (...); Or as they would choose to style them, (...), some shadows and
appearances of this bright and glorious Law, or at the best they would be
esteemed of them but (...), the noble Offspring and Progeny of Laws, blessing
this womb that bare them, and this breast that gave them suck.

19. And now the Law of Nature would have a double portion, as being Lex
primo-genita, the firstborn of the Law of God, and the beginning of its
strength. Now as God himself shows somewhat of his face in the glass of his
creature, so the beauty of this Law gives some representations of it self in
those pure derivations of inferior Laws that stream from it: And as we ascend
to the first and supreme being, by the steps of second causes; so we may climb
to a sight of this eternal Law, by those fruitful branches of secondary Laws,
which seem to have their root in earth, when as indeed it is in heaven; and
that I may vary a little that of the Apostle to the Romans, The invisible Law
of God long before the creation of the world, is now clearly seen, being
understood by those Laws which do appear, so that (...) manifested in them, God
having shown it to them. Thus as the Lawyers say well (Omnis Lex participata
supponit Legem per essentiam) every impresion supposes a seal from whence it
came; every Ray of light puts you in mind of a Sun, from which it shines
Wisdom and power; these are the chief Ingredients into a Law; Now where does
Wisdom dwell, but in the head of a Deity: and where does Power triumph, but in
the Arm of Omnipetency?

20. A Law is born Ex cerebro Jovis, and it is not brachium seculare, but
Co^leste that must maintain it: even humane Laws have their virtue radicaliter
and remote (as Atturney's declare) from the Revolution of Law. Thus Tully
expresses the Descent of Laws in this golden manner, Hanc video
sapientissimorum fuisse sententiam, Legem namque hominum ingeniis excogitatam,
neque scitum aliquod esse populorum, sed aeternum quiddam quod universum
mundumregeret imperandi prohibendique sapientia: Ita Principem illam Legem and
ultimam mentem dicebant omnia ratione ^ut cogentis, aut vetantis Dei: (i. e.)
Wisemen did ever look upon a Law, not as one a spark struck from humane
intellectuals, not blown up or kindled with popular breath, but they thought it
an eternal Light shining from God himself, irradiating, guiding, and ruling the
whole Universe; most sweet and powerfully seeing what ways were to be chosen,
and what to be refused: and the mind of God himself is the center of Laws,
from which they were drawn, and into which they must return.

21. And Doctor Flud R. C. a Learned Philosopher by fire in his Alphesi,
Inventious, Contemplative, or in discourse, seems to resolve all Law and
Justice into the Primitve and eternal Law, even God himself: for thus he told
me, Justice does not only (says he) sit like a Queen at the right hand of
Jupiter when he is upon his Throne, but she is always in his bosom, and one
with himself, is (...), As he is the most Ancient of days, so also is he the
most ancient of Laws; as he is the perfection of beings, so is he also the rule
of operations.

22. Nor must I let slip that passage of Plato, where he calls a Law (...) the
Golden Scepter, by which God himself Rules and Commands: for as all Protestant
Kings have a bright stamp of Divine Sovereignty, so his Justice, Kings and
Laws are anointed by God himself, and most Precious oil drops down upon
them to the Skirts of a Nation. And the Divine and Natural Jdea of the Law had
the oil of gladness poured upon it above its fellows.

23. So then, that there is such a primo and Supreme Law is clear, and
unquestionable, Moses is sufficient defense for that: But who is worthy to
unseale and open this Law, and who can sufficiently display the glory of it,
you had need of a Moses that could ascend up into the Mount, and converse with
God himself, and yet when he came down he would be feign to put a veil upon
his face, and upon his expressions, lest otherwise he might dazzle inferior
understandings, but if the Lawgivers will satisfy you (and you know some of
them are styled Angelical, and Seraphicall) you shall hear, if you will, what
they I say to it.

24. Now this Law according to them is Aeterna quaedam ratio practica totius
dispositionis, and gubernationis universalis, It Is an eternal ordinance made
in the depth of Gods Infinite wisdom for Regulating and governing the whole
world, which yet had not its binding virtue in respect of God himself, who has
always the full and unrestrained Liberty of his own Essence, which is so
infinite, and that it cannot bind it self, and which needs no law, all
goodness and perfection being so intrinsecall and essential to it: but it was
a binding determination in reference to the Creature, which yet in respect of
all Irrational beings, did only fortiter inclinare, but in respect of
Rationals, it does formaliter obligare.

25. By these thirty five verses of this great and glorious Law, you must
understand, every good Action was commanded, and all evil was discountenanced,
and so bidden from everlasting; according to this Righteous Law all rewards and
punishments were distributed in the eternal thoughts of God. At this command
of this Law all created beings took their several ranks and stations, and put
themselves in such operations as were best agreeable and conformable to their
beings; by this Law all essences were ordained to their ends by most happy and
convenient means. The life and vigor of this Law sprang from the will of God
himself, from the voluntary decree of that eternal Lawgiver, minding the
public welfare of beings: who when there were heaps of varieties and
possibilities in his own most glorious thoughts, when he could have made such
or such words in this or that manner, in this or that time, with such species
that should have had more or fewer individualls, as he pleased, with such
operations as he would allow unto them, he did then select and pitch upon this
way and Method, in which you see things now constituted; and did bind all
things according to their several capacities to an exact and accurate
observation of it.

26. So that by this you see how those Divine Idea's in the mind of God, and
this Idea of the Law, do differ. I speak now of Idea's, not in a Platonical
sense, but in a Lawyers, or my own (unless they both agree, as some would have
them) for Jdea est possibilium, lex tantum fa^urorum, God had before him the
picture of every possibility, yet he did not intend to bind a possibility, but
only a futurity, besides Ide'as they were situated only in the understanding
of God; whereas a Law has force and efficacy from his will; according to that
much commended saying of my Kinsman Mr. Thomas Heydon, in Coelesti and Angelica
curia, voluntas Dei lex est, And then Idea does magis respicere Artificem, it
stays there where first it was: but a Law does potius respicere subditum, it
calls for the obedience of another, as Mr. Sarjeant Twisden does very well
difference them.

27. Neither yet is this Idea of the Law the same with the providence of God,
though that be an Jdea also, but as Mr. Cook speaks, So Lex se habet ad
providentiam, sicut principium generale ad particulares conclusiones, or if you
will, sicut principia primae practicae ad prudentiam; his meaning is this, that
providence is a more punctual particular application of this binding rule, and
is not the Law it self, but the superending power, which looks to the
execution and accomplishment of it, or as Judge New degate said, lex dicit jus
in Communi Constitutum, providentia dicit curam quae de singulis actibus haberi
debet.

Besides a Law in its strict and peculiar Notion does only reach to rational
things, whereas providence does extend and spread it self over all. But that
which vexes the Lawyer most, is this, that they having required promulgation,
as a necessary condition to the existence of a Law, yet they cannot very easily
show how the Idea of the Law should be published from everlasting: But the most
satisfactory account that can be given to that, is this, The other Lawgivers
being very voluble and mutable, before their mind and will be fully and openly
declared, they may have a purpose indeed, but it cannot be esteemed a Law; But
in God there being no variableness nor shadow of turning, this his Law has a
binding virtue as soon as a being: Yet so, as that it does not Actually and
formally oblige a Creature, till it be made known unto it: either by a Genius
familiar, or some Revelation from God himself, which is possible only, or else
by the mediation of some other Law: of The Idea of the Law, which is the usual
and constant way that God takes for the Promulgation of this his eternal
Divine Idea of the Law, for that (...), That sacred manu-script which is writ
by the finger of God himself in the hears of man, is a plain transcript of
this Original Law, so far as it concerns man's welfare: And this Genius you see
does most directly bring me to search out the Natural Idea of the Law: and
this is the interpretation of thirty five paragraphs:

I shall in order lay down the cause of the nature of the Idea of the Law
concerning its subject, and interpret sixty three paragraphs: and give you the
Divine sense of them, and you shall see the soul of the Jdea of the Law where
it lies under the sense of the letter etc.

28. That Law which is intrinsecall and Essential to a Rational Creature, is
Natural, and such a Law is as necessary as such a creature; for such a creature
as a creature has a superior to whose providence and disposing it must be
subject, and then as an Intellectual Creature it is Capable of a Moral
Government, so it is very suitable and connatural to it to be regulated by a
Law, be giuded and commanded by one that is Infinitely more wise and
intelligent then it self is: and that minds its welfare more then it self can,
Insomuch that the most bright and eminent Creatures, even Angelical beings,
and glorified souls are subject to a Law, though with such an happy privilege,
as that they cannot violate and transgress it; whereas the very dregs of
entity, the most ignoble beings are most incapable of a Law: for you know
Inanimate beings are carried on only with the vehemence and necessity, of
Natural inclinations: Nay sensitive beings cannot reach or aspire to so great
a perfection as to be wrought upon in such an illuminative way as a Law is:
they are not drawn with these cords of men, with these moral engagements, but
in a more Impulsive manner, driven and spurred on with such impetuous
propensions as are founded in a matter; which yet are directed by the wise and
vigilant eye, and by the powerful hand of a providence to a more beautiful
and amiable end, then they themselves were acquainted with. But yet the Lawyers
Mr. Sergeant Maynard Mr. Leigh and others, The Civilians, Mr. John Cleaveland,
Doctor Oriens Heydon, and others would fain enlarge the Law of Nature, and
would willingly persuade me, that all sensitive creatures must be brought
within the compass of it: For this one of them tells me, Jus natural est quod
natura omnia animalia docuit, nam jus illud non solum humani generis est
proprium, sed omnium animalium, quae in terra marique nascuntur, avium quoque
commune est. Nay they are so confident of it, as that they instance in several
particulars, Maris and faeminae conjunctio, Liberorum procreatio, educatio,
conservatio, plurima in tutelam propriam facta, Apium respub. columbarum
conjugia, but not the Critics, but the Rosy Crucians also do sufficiently
correct our brethren the Lawyers for this their vanity, for some of them mean
to bring beasts, birds and fishes into their Courts, and to have some fees out
of them. Perhaps they expect also that the doves should take licenses before
they marry: it may be they require of the Beasts some penitential, (or which
will suffice them) some pecuniary satisfaction for all their Adulteries: or it
may be the Pope will be so favorable, as to give his fellow beasts some
dispensation for their irregular and incongruous mixtures.

29. But yet notwithstanding, they prosecute this their notion, and go on to
frame this difference between (...), and (...), Jus gentium, and Jus natural^,
the Law of nature (say they) is that which is common with men to irrational
creatures also: but the Law of Nations is only between men: but this
distinction is built upon a very sandy foundation; what the true difference is,
I will show you hereafter: Now all that can be pleaded in the behalf of the
Lawyers, is this, that they err more in the word then in the reality: They
cannot sufficiently clear this Title of a Law, for that there are some clear
and visible stamps and impressions of nature upon sensitive beings, will be
easily granted them by all, and those instances which they bring, are so many
ocular demonstrations of it, but that there should a formal obligation lie upon
Bruits, that they should be bound to the performance of natural Commands in a
legal manner, that there should be a (...) upon them, (...), so as that they
should be left without excuse, and lie under palpable guilt, and be obnoxious
to the punishment for the violation of it, this they cannot possibly find out,
unless they could set up this Idea of the Law of God in sensitive creatures
also: whereas there is in them only some (...), as Eugenius Theodidactus calls
them, which I render, Virtutum simulacra, some Apish imitation of Reason, some
shadows of morality, some counterfeit Ethics, some wild Oeconomicks, some
faint representations of Mercurius Politicus the lying flatterer, who is called
amongst his brethren, Marcheman Needham, a silly lying Scribler to the
fanatique Parliament: but this fellow is crept in, as his custom is, amongst
any Law: bear back: This Government will not admit such Chamelion Sycophants
amongst them. This Government all this while, without King Charles is as far
distant from the truth of a Law, as they are from the strength of reason, but I
have digrest a little.

30. The Lawyers may see some sparks of the divine power and goodness: but you
cannot see the Idea of the Law of God. Now these men might have considered, if
they had pleased; that as for the prints and footsteps of nature, some of them
may be seen in every being. For Nature has stamped all entity with the same
seal; some softer beings took the impression very kindly and clearly some
harder ones took it more obscurely.

31. Nature played so Harmoniously and melodiously upon her Harp and Viol, as
Mr. Allen Baker says, as that her Music proved not only like that of Orpheus,
which set only the sensitive creatures on dancing: but like that of Amphion,
inanimate Beings were elevated by it, even as the very stones did knit and
unite themselves to the building of the universe:

Show me any thing, if you can, that does not love its own welfare, that does
not seek its own rest, its center, its happiness, that does not desire its
good, (...), as Nidus speaks: pick out an entity, if you can tell where, that
does not long for the continuation, for the diffusion and spreading of its own
being, yet surely the Lawyers themselves cannot imagine, that there is a Law
given to all inanimate beings, or that they are accountable for the violation.

32. Let them also demurre a while upon that Argument which I shall urge
against them, That these sensitive creatures are totally defective in the most
principal branches of the Natural Idea of the Law, o^ the Law of Nature, and in
the acknowledging of a Duty, in the adoring of a Deity, where is there the
least adumbration of divine worship in sensitive beings; what do they more then
the heavens, and the seven Planets and the Stars, which declare the glory of
God in their influence upon all terrestrial creatures? or the firmament, which
shows his handiwork, in transferring Idea's from the Etherial Region to the
Genii of men; unless perhaps the Lawyers can find not only a Commonwealth, but
a Church also among the Bees, some canonical obedience, some laudable
Ceremonies, some decency and conformity amongst them: I will call the spirit or
Genius of a Poet only to laugh the Lawyers out of this opinion: And here old
Hesiod appears freely, and tells them, (...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
what are these Laws that are observed by rending and tearing Lions, by
devouring Leviathans? Does the Wolf oppress the Lamb by a Law? Can Birds of
prey show any commission for their ravening violence, thus also that amorous
Poet shows that these sensitive creatures, in respect of lust, are absolve
Antinomians: for thus he brings in a To auton, pleading, -- Cocunt animalia
nullo
Caetera delicto, nec habetur turpe juvencae
Far patrem tergo; fit equo sua filia con^ux.
Quasque creavit init pecudes caper, ipsaque cujus
Semine concepta est, ex illo concipit ales.
And what though you meet with some (...), some rare pattern of sensitive
temperance? a few scattered and uncertain stories will never evince that the
whole heap and generality of Bruits act according to a Law: you have heard it
may be of a chaste Turtle, and did you never hear of a wanton Sparrow? It may be
you have read some story of a modest Elephant, but what say you to whole flocks
of lascivious Goats? yet grant that the several multitudes of all species of
these irrational Creatures were all without spot and blemish in respect of
their sensitive conversation, can any therefore fancy, that they dress
themselves by the glass of a Law, is it not rather a faithfulness to their own
natural inclinations? which yet very justly may condemn some of the sons of
men, who though they have seen the Idea of the Law of God: yet they degenetate
more then these inferior beings, which only have some general Dictates of
nature.

33. This is that motive with which the Satyrist quickened and awakened some of
his time.

Sensum e Coelesti demissum traximus arce,
Cujus egent prona and terram spectantia;
Principio indulsit communis conditor illis mundi
Tantum animas, nobis animum quoque --
A Law it is found in Intellectuals, in (...) not in (...), it supposes a noble
and free-born-Creature: for where there is no liberty, there is no Law, a Law
being nothing else but a Rational restraint, and limitation of absolute
liberty; Now all liberty is radicaliter in intellectu; and such Creatures as
have no understanding, have no choice, no moral variety.

34. The first and supreme being has so full and infinite a liberty, as cannot
be bounded by a Law: and these Laws and slavish beings have not so much
liberty as to make them capable of being bound: Inter Bruta silent leges, there
is no turpe nor honestum amongst them: No duty nor obedience to be expected
from them; no praise or dispraise due to them; no punishment nor reward to be
distributed amongst them.

35. But as Vlpianus does very well observe, Quoniam in bestias proprie
delictum non cadit, abi bestia occiditur, ut in Lege Mosis ob concubitum cum
homine, non ea vere poena est, sed usus dominii humani in bestiam, for
punishment in its formal notion is (...), (as the Greek Lawyer speaks) or as
Primasius describes it, It is Malum passionis quod infligitur ob malum
actionis. In all punishment there is to be some (...), and (...), so that every
Damnum or incommodum is not to be esteemed a punishment, unless it be in
vindictum culpae.

36. So as for those Laws given to the Jews, where sometimes the beast was to
be put to death by Moses Law: The learned Diodorus Siculus gives a very full
and satisfactory account of it out of the Jewish writings, and does clearly
evidence, that the meaning was not this; that the beast was guilty of a crime,
and had violated a Law, and therefore was to be condemned, and put to death;
but it was in order to the happiness and welfare of men: for Bestia cum homine
concumbens, was to be stoned; partly because it was the occasion of so foul a
fact, and so fatal punishment unto man: and partly that the sight and presence
of the object might not repeat so prodigious a crime in the thoughts of men,
nor receive the memory of it, nor continue the disgrace of him that dyed for
it. But there was another reason in Bove cornupeta, for there, as Maimonides
tells me in his Morech Nebachim, it was ad poenam exigiendam a Domino: the
putting of that to death was a punishment to the owner, for not looking to it
better: for I cannot at all consent to the fancy of the Jews, which the
renouned Josephus mentions, (...), although the forementioned Critic give a
better sense of it, then it is likely the Author ever intended, non in
Alimentum sumi debuit unde scilicet in Domini commodum cederet: but how such an
interpretation can be extracted out of (...), is not easily to be imagined: for
those words of Josephus plainly imply, that the Jews thought such an Ox could
not yield wholesome nourishment; or at the best, they looked upon an unclean
beast, which was not to be eaten, which indeed was a fond and weak conceit of
them; but they had many such, which the learned Author loves to excuse, out of
his great favor and indulgence to them, yet which is very remarkable, if the
Ox had killed a Gentile, they did not put it to death, it seems it would yield
wholesome nourishment for all that. But this I am sure of, that as God does not
care for the Oxen (which the renowned Seldom does very well understand of Cura
legislativa, for otherwise God has a providential care even of them) so
neither does he take care for the punishment of Oxen, but it is written for his
Isreal's sake, to whom he has subjected these Creatures, and put them under his
feet.

37. Neither yet can the proper end of a punishment agree to the sensitive
Creature: for all punishment is (...), as Plato says, (...), it is not in the
power of punishment to recall what is past, but to prevent what is possible. The
Greek Lawyer speaks the same which God speaks to Moses, That Israel may hear
and fear: and thus punishment does (...).

38. But none of these ends are applyable to sensitive Creatures, for there is
no more satisfaction to Justice in inflicting an evil upon them, then there is
in the ruining of inanimate beings, in demolishing of Cities or Temples for
Idolatry, which is only for the good of them that can take notice of it, Quam
stultum est his irasci, qua iram nostram nec merneruut, nec sentiunt: No
satisfaction to be had from such things as are not apprehensive of punishment:
and their Annihilation, though a great evil, yet wants this sting and
aggravation of a punishment for a Creature is not sible of it.

39. Much less can you think that a punishment has any power to amend or
meliorate sensitive beings, or to give example to others amongst them.

40. By all this you see that amongst all irrational beings there is no (...),
no (...), and no (...): from whence it also follows, that the Law of nature is
built upon Reason: Reason the Idea of the soul of man; whose Genius describes
the Idea of all humane Law to him: And the original of all is, the divine Idea
of the Law of God.

41. There is some good proportionable and nutrimental to the being of man, and
some evil so venomous and obstructive to his nature, as that the God of Nature
does sufficiently antidote and fortify him against the one, and does maintain
and sweeten his essence with the other. There is so much harmony in some
actions, as that the soul must needs dance at them: and there is such an harsh
discord and jarring in others, as that the soul cannot endure them.

42. Therefore Mr. Hobs does thus describe the Law of Nature, Jus natural est
dictatum rectae rationis, indioan^, actui alicui ex ejus convenientia, vel
disconvenientia cum ipsa natura rationali, inesse moralem turpitudinem, aut
necessitatem moralem; and consequenter ab authore naturae ipso Deo, talem actum
aut vetari aut praecipi: which I shall thus render, The Law of nature is a
streaming out of Glory from the Idea of the Law of God, powerfully discovering
such a deformity in some evil, as that an intellectual eye must needs abhor it:
and such a commanding beauty in some good, as that a rational being must needs
be enamoured with it; and so plainly showing that God stamped and sealed the one
with his Command, and branded the other with his disliking.

43. Philo Judaeus makes mention of this (...), and tells me, that it is,
(...), a radical and fundamental knowledge planted in the being of man, budding
and blossoming in the first principles, flourishing and bringing fruit,
spreading it self into all the goodly branches of Morality; under the shadow of
which, the soul may sit with much complacency and delight. And as he pours out
himself very fluently, (...), there is no need of Oratory to allure men to it,
you need not heap up arguments to convince them of it, it is easily found, it
is easily attained; it grows spontaneously, it bubbles up freely; it shines
out clearly and pleasantly; it was so visible, as that the most infant age of
the world could spell it out, and read it without a Teacher, (...), as he goes
on, it was long extant before Moses was born, long before Aaron rang his golden
Bells, before there was a Prophet or a Judge in Israel, men knew it (...). They
had a Law of Gods own making: They had the Statutes of God within them. By this
Idea of the Law, Adam and Eve knew that (...) had deceived them and arrested
them: and when by Hab. Corp. they were removed from their former condition,
they discovered their nakedness: And that again by Alias Hab. Corp. they should
be removed to the prison of the flesh.

44. This Idea of the Law flamed in Cains conscience, and the letter (...) then
in his fore head. And this Law was proclaimed in his heart with as much terror
as it was published from mount Sinai, which filled him with those furious
reflections for his unnatural murder. Enoch when he walked with God, walked by
the Genius of this Idea of the Law. Noah the Preacher of Righteousness, took
this Idea of the Law for his Text. Hard-hearted Pharaoh saw this Idea of the
Law, when he cries out, The Lord is righteous, but I and my people have sinned.
Cromwell and the fanatic Parliament were terrified by this Idea of the Law,
after they had destroyed King Charles: nor will the three Kingdoms be in peace,
until King Charles the second be crowned King of England and Ireland, and that
Family again restored, etc.

Hence it was that God when he gave his Law afresh, gave it in such a
compendious Brachygraphy, he wrote as it were in Characters, without any
explication, or amplification at all. He only enjoined it with an imperatorious
brevity; he knows there was enough in the breasts of men to convince them of
it, and to comment upon it; only in the second Command there is added an
enforcement, because his people were excessively prone to violation of it; and
in that of the Sabbath there is given an exposition of it, because in all its
circumstances it was not found in the natural Idea of the Law: so that in Dr.
Barlowes language of Oxford, the Decalogue would be called, (...), Gold in the
Lump, whereas other Lawyers and Atturneyes use to beat it thinner. And there is
a sort of men termed petty Foggers, that have the voice of Advocates engraffed
in them, which either of want of Clyents, or riches, incense the poor and silly
men of the Country to go to Law, and hearing their causes, affirm them to be
good, supplying the place of Counselors, and raising up for the value of a
shilling, great contentions, and do make of a fiery sparkle a burning flame
that destroys many.

46. But to return to the purpose of this Law, as it is printed by nature, Dr.
Ward tells me, Right reason is that fixed and unshaken Law, not writ in perishing
paper by the hand or pen of a Creature, nor graven like a dead letter upon
liveless and decaying Pillars, but written with the point of a Diamond, nay,
with the finger of God himself in the heart of a man: a Deity gave it an
Imprimatur; And a Genius gave it in an immortal mind. So as that I may borrow
the expression of the Apostle, the mind of man is (...); And I take it in the
very same sense, as it is to be took in the Church. It is a Pillar of this
Truth, not to support it, but to hold it forth: neither must I forget the
saying of Mr. Thomas Heydon (says he) the royal Law of Nature was never shut
up in a prison, nor never confined or limited to any outward surface, but is
was bravely situated in the Center of a rational Being, always keeping the
soul company, guarding it, and guiding it; ruling all its Subjects (every
obedient action) with a Scepter of Gold, and crushing in pieces all its
enemies, (breaking every rebellious action) with a Rod of Iron.

47. The Idea of the Law, which is the Queen of Angelical and humane Being,
does so rule and dispose of them, as to bring about Justice, with a most high
and powerful, and yet with a most soft and delicate hand.

48. You may hear Plato excellently discoursing of it, whilst he brings in a
Sophister disputing against Socrates, and such an one as would needs undertake
to maintain this principle, (...), That there was an untunable Antipathy
between Nature and Law: that Laws were nothing but Hominum infirmiorum
commenta, that this was (...), the most bright and eminent Justice of Nature,
for men to rule according to power, and according to no other Law: that (...)
was (...) and (...); that all other Laws were (...); nay he calls them
cheatings and bewitchings, (...), they come (says he) like pleasant songs,
when as they are mere Charms and Incantations. But Socrates after he had stung
this same Callicles with a few quick interrogations, pours out presently a
great deal of honey and sweetness, and plentifully shows that most pleasant and
conspiring Harmony that is between Nature and Law. That there is nothing more,
(...) then a Law, that Law is founded in Nature, that it is for the
maintaining, and enobling, and perfecting of Nature: Nay; as Plato tells me
elsewhere in Philebus, There is no way for men to happiness, unless they follow
those steps of Reason, those footsteps of Nature. This same Law L. Verulam
does more then once acknowledge, when he tells me, a positive Law with him is a
more private Law, but Natures Law is a more public and catholic Law, which
he proves to be a very sovereign and commanding Law: for thus he says, The Law
that is most filled with Reason, must needs be most victorious and triumphant:
And thus much in defense of sixty three Paragraphs of my Idea of the Law.

49. Right it is I should interpret the meaning of twenty eight paragraphs more
as they appear in the Jdea of the Law, Reason is a most beautiful Law, a Law
of pure Complexion, of a Natural color, never fades, never dies; it encourages
in obedience with a smile, it chides them and frowns them out of wickedness:
good men hear the least whispering of its pleasant voice, they observe the
least glance of its lovely eye, but wicked men will not hear it, though it come
to them in thunder; nor take the least notice of it, though it should flash out
in lightening: None must enlarge the Philacteries of this Law, nor must any
dare to prune off the least branch of it: Nay, the Malice of man cannot totally
deface so indelible a Beauty. No Pope, nor Protector, nor King, nor Parliament,
nor People, nor Angel, nor creature can absolve you from it This Law never
paints its face, It never changes its color; it does not put on one Aspect in
London, and another face at Westminster: but looks upon both Royal Cavaleirs
and fanatique Roundheads with an impartial eye, it shines upon all Ages and
times and conditions, with a perpetual light, it is yesterday and to day and
for ever There is but on Lawgiver, one Lord and supreme judge of the same
Law: God blessed for ever more. He was the contriver of it, the Commander of
it, the publisher of it, and none can be exempted from it, unless he will be
banished from his own essence and be excommunicated from humane nature.

50 This punishment would have sting enough, if he should avoid a thousand more
that are due to so foul a Transgression.

51 Now the most high and Sovereign being, even God himself, does not subject
himself to any Law; though there be some Actions also most agreeable to his
Nature, and others plainly inconsistent with it, yet they cannot amount to such
a power as to lay any Obligation upon him, which should in the least notion
differ from the liberty of his own Essence.

52. Thus also in the Commonwealth of humane Nature, that proportion which
Actions bear to reason, is indeed a sufficient foundation for a Law to build
upon, but it is not the Law it self, nor a formal obligation.

53. Yet some of the Lawyers are extreme bold and vain in their suppositions so
bold, as that I am ready to Question whether it be best to repeat them; yet
thus they say.

54. Si Deus non esset, vel si non uteretur Ratione, vel si non recte judicaret
de rebus, si tamen in homine idem esset dictamen rectae rationis, quod nunc
est, haberet etiam candem rationem Legis quam nunc habet.

55. But what are the goodly spoils that these men expect, if they could break
through such a crowd of repugnancies standing for my Defense of The Idea of the
Law, And should they defeace my Jdea of the Law, The whole result and product
of it will prove but a mere cipher, like the world, for the Idea of Government
is the King; and he is my defense of the Idea of the Law: now reason as it is
now, does not bind in its own name; but in the name of its supreme Lord and
Sovereign, by whom Reason lives and moves, and has its being, for if only a
Creature should bind it self to the conditions of this Law, it must also
inflict upon it self such a punishment as is answerable to the violation of
it: but no such being would be willing or able to punish it self in so high a
measure as such a Transgression would meritoriously require, so that it must be
accountable to some other Legislative power, which will vindicate its own
commands, and will by this means engage a Creature to be more mindful of its
own happiness, then otherwise it would be.

55. Now there are not only bona per se, but also mala per se, as the Lawyers
say) which I shall thus demonstrate: Quod non est malum per se potuit non
prohiberi, for there is no reason imaginable why there should not be a
possibility of not prohibiting that which is not absolutely evil, which is in
its own Nature indifferent. But now there are some evils so excessively evil,
as that they cannot but be forbidden, I shall only name this one, Odium Dei,
for a being to hate the Creator and cause of its being, If it were possible for
this not to be forbidden; it were possible for it to be Lawful; for ubi nulla
Lex, ibi praevaricatio: where there is no Law there is no (...); where there is
no Rule, there is no Anomaly; if there were no prohibition of this, it would not
be sin to do it, But that to hate God should not be a sin, does involve a whole
heap of Contradictions: so that this evil is so full of evil, as that it
cannot but be forbidden; and therefore it is an evil in order of nature before
the prohibition of it: besides as the Philosophers love to speak, Essentiae
rerum sunt immutabiles, Essences neither ebb nor flow, but have in themselves
a perpetual unity and Identity. And all such properties as flow and bubble up
from beings, are constant and unvariable; but if they could be stopped in their
Motion, yet that state would be violent, and not at all conatural to such a
subject.

57. So that grant only the being of Man, and you cannot but grant this also,
that there is such a constant convenience and Analogy, which some objects have
with its Essence, as that it cannot but incline to them, and that there is such
an irreconciliable Disconvenience, such an eternal Antipathy between it and
other objects; as that it must cease to be, what it is before it can come near
them.

58. This Judge Glyn, terms a Natural obligation and a Just foundation for
Law; but now before all this can rise up to the height and perfection of a Law,
there must come a command from superior powers, whence from will spring a
Moral obligation also, and make up the formality of a Law: Therefore God
himself, for the brightning of his own Glory, for the better regulating of the
world, for the maintaining of such a choice piece of his workman-ship as man
is, he has published his Royal Command, and proclaimed it by the principle of
Reason, which he has planted in the being of man: which does fully convince
him of the righteousness, and goodness and necessity of this Law, for the
Materials of it; and of the validity and Authority of this Law, as it comes
from the mind and will of his Creator. Neither is it any Eclipse or diminution
of the liberty of that first being; to say that there is some evil so foul and
ill favored, as that it cannot but be forbidden by him; and that there is some
good so fair and eminent, as that he cannot but command it.

59. For as the Lawyers plead, Divina voluntas, licet simpliciter libera sit ad
extra, ex suppositione tamen unius Actus liberi, potest necessitari ad alium.

60. Though the will of God be completely free in respect of all his looks and
glances toward the Creature, yet notwithstanding upon the voluntary and free
precedence of one act, we may justly conceive him necessitated to another by
virtue of that indissoluble Connection and concatenation between these two acts,
which does in a manner knit and unite them into one.

61. Thus God has an absolute Liberty and choice, whether he will make a
promise or no, but if he has made it, he cannot but fulfill it. Thus he is
perfectly free, whether he will reveal his mind or no; but if he will reveal
it, he cannot but speak truth and manifest it as it is.

62. God had the very same liberty whether he would Create a world or no, but
if he would Create it, and keep it in its Comeliness and proportion, he must
then have a vigilant and providenttiall eye over it; And if he will provide for
it, he cannot but have a perfect and indefective providence agreeable to his
own wisdom, and goodness, and being, so that if he will create such a being
as a man, such a Rational creature furnished with sufficient knowledge to
discern between some good and some evil: and if he will supply it with a
proportionable concourse in its operations, he cannot then but prohibit such
Acts as are intrinsecally prejudicial and detrimental to the being of it:
neither can he but command such Acts as are necessary to its preservation and
Welfare.

63. God therefore when from all Eternity in his glorious thoughts he contrived
the being of man, he did also with his piercing eye see into all conveniences
and disconveniencies, which would be in reference to such a being: and by his
eternal Law did restrain and determine it to such Acts as should be
advantageous to it, which in his wise Economy and dispensation, he published to
man by the voice of a Reason, by the mediation of this natural Law.

64. Whence it is, that every violation of this Idea of the Law is not only an
injury to man's being, but ultra nativam rei malitiam (as the Lawyers plead) it
is also a vertual and interpretative contempt of that supreme Lawgiver, who
out of so much wisdom, and love, and goodness, did thus bind man to his own
happiness. So much then as man does start aside and apostatize from this Law,
to so much misery and punishment does he expose himself.

65. Though it be not necessary, That the Idea of the Law should discover the
full extent and measure of that punishment which is due to the Breakers of this
Law: for to the Nature of punishment, Non requiritur ut praecognita sit poena,
sed ut fiat actus dignus tali poena, the Counselors and Atturneyes both will
acknowledge this principle.

67. For as Numenius Appionus has it, Sequitur reatus ex intrinseca condition
culpae, ita ut licet poena per legem non sit determinata, Arbitrio tamen
competentis judicis puniri possit; Yet the Idea of the Law will reveal and
disclose thus much, That a being totally dependent upon another, essentially
subordinate and subject to it, must also be accountable to it for every
provocation and rebellion; And for the violation of so good a Law, which he
has set it, and for the sinning against such admirable Providence and Justice
that shines out upon it, must be liable to such punishment, as that glorious
Lawgiver shall judge fit for such offenses; who is so full of Justice, that he
cannot, and so great in goodness, that he will not punish a Creature above its
desert. And thus have I cleared one hundred Paragraphs, hoping you will crown
the King according to his deserts, that my Idea may be proclaimed, that the
King, Parliament, Priest and People may live happily, etc.

68. And there was never any partitition-Wall between the Essence of King
Charles and the Parliament. Now the Law of Nature is founded in Essentials; And
that which is disconvenient to that rational Nature, which is in a Cavileir, is
as opposite and disagreeable to the same Nature in a Parliamentier, Roundhead,
Presbyterian, Anabaptist, Independent and Quaker: as that good which is
suitable and proportionable to a King or Cavileir in his rational being, is
every way as intrinsecal to the welfare of a Parliamentier Roundhead, etc.
that does not differ essentially from him: so likewise for the promulgation of
this Law, being it does equally, concern them both: It is also by my Idea of
the Law equally published and manifested to them both.

69. The Extent of the Idea of the Law, I shall lastly manifest in these thirty
Paragraphs, and so conclude; there are stamped and printed upon the being of
man, some clear and undelible principles, some first and alphabetical Notions:
by putting together of which it can spell the nature of my Jdea of the Law,
there is scattered in the soul of man some seeds of the Divine Idea, which till
it with a vigorous Pregnancy, with a multiplying fruitfullnesse; So that it
brings forth a numerous and sparkling Posterity of secondary Notions, which
make for the Crowning and encompassing of the Soul with happiness.

70. All the fresh springs of Common and fountain Notions are in the Soul of
man, for the watering of his Essence, for the refreshing of this heavenly
Plant, This Arbor inversa, this enclosed being, this Garden of God.

71. And though the wickedness of man may stop the pleasant motion, the clear
and Christalline Progress of the fountain, yet they cannot hinder the first
rising, the bubbling endeavors of it. They may pull off the Leaves of the Idea
of the Law, and pluck off the fruit: break through my Defense, and chop off
the Branches, yet the root of it is eternal. And the foundation of it
inviolable. Now these first and Radical principles are wound up in some such
short bottoms as these: Bonum est appetendum, malum est fugiendum; Beatitudo
est quaerenda: Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, And Reason thus
(...), incubando super haec ova, by warming and brooding upon these and oval
Principles of her own laying, it being it self quickened with an heavenly
vigor, does thus hatch the Idea of the Law of Nature.

72 First you must not, nor cannot think that the Idea of the Law is confined
and contracted in this Government of England, but Reason like The King, with
one foot fixed a Center, and with the other measures a Parliament, and spreads
out the circumference of the Common peoples happiness and welfare, and draws
several conclusions which does all meet to make three Prosperous Kingdoms,
which is only in this sacred centrall principle.

73. For men must not only look upon the Capital letters of this (...), but
they must read the whole context and coherence of it; they must look to every
jot and Apex of it, for heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, then on jot or
tittle of this Law shall vanish,

74. Discourse is the usual Inlet of error, and too oftengives an open
admission, and courteous entertainment to such falsities as come disguised in a
Syllogistical form, which by their sequarious windings and gradual
insinuations, twine about some weak understandings: yet in the Nature of the
thing it self, it is impossible to collect an error out of a truth, as it is
to gather the blackest night, out of the fairest sunshine, or the fowlest
wickedness out of the purest goodness. A conclusion therefore that is built
upon the sand, you may very well expects its fall, but that which is built upon
the Rock is impregnable and immovable.

75. For if this Idea of the Law, should not extend it self so far, as to
oblige men to an accurate observation of that, which is a remove or two distant
from first principles, it would then prove extremely defective in some such
precepts, as do most intimately and intensly conduce to the welfare and
advantage of an intellectual being.

76. The Idea of the Law, as it is thus brancht forth, does bind in foro
conscientiae, for as that noble Author Des Carts speaks very well in this,
Natural conscience it is centrum notitiarum communium, and it is a kind of
sensus communis in respect of the inward faculties, and that other in respect
of the outward senses. It is a competent Judge of this Idea of the Law, it is
the natural pulse of the soul, by the beating and Motion of which, the state
and temper of men is discernable: The Apostle thus felt the Heathens pulse, and
found their consciences sometimes accusing them, sometimes making Apology for
them, yet there is a great deal of difference between the Law of Conscience and
the Moral Law, for as the Lawyers plead, it is Dictamen practicum in
particulari, it is a prosecution and application of this Natural Idea of the
Law, as providence is of that Divine Idea of the Law.

77. Nay conscience sometimes does embrace only the shadow of a Law, and does
engage men, though erroneously, to the observation of that which was never
dictated by any just legislative power, nor is it content to glance only at
what is to come, but Janus like it has a double Aspect; and so looks back to
what is past, as to call men to a strict account for every violation of this Law.

78. Which Law is so accurate as to oblige men, not only ad actum but ad modum
also: it looks as well to the inward form and manner, as to the Materiality
and bulk of outward Actions: for every being owes thus much kindness and
courtesy to it self, not only to put forth such acts as are essential and
intrinsecal to its own welfare; but also to delight in them, and to fulfill them
with all possible freeness and Alacrity, with the greatest intensnesse and
complacency, self love alone might easily constrain men to this natural
obedience. Humane Laws indeed rest satisfied with a visible and external
obedience; but natures Law darts it self into the most intimate Essentialls,
and looks for entertainment there.

79. You know that amongst the Moralists only such Acts are esteemed Actus
Humani that are Actus voluntarii: when my Natural Idea has tuned a Rational
being, she expects that every string, every faculty should spontaneously sound
forth his praise.

80. And the Divine Jdea that has not chained nor fettered, nor enslaved my
Natural Jdea, but has given it a competent liberty and enlargement; the free
diffusion and amplification of its own essence; he looks withal that it
should willingly consent to its own happiness, and to all such means as are
necessary for the accomplishment of its choycest end: and that it should
totally abhor whatsoever is prejudicial to its own being, which if it do, it
will presently embrace The Jdea of the Law, if it either love its God and King,
or it self, and the welfare of the People, The command of its God and the King,
or the good of it self and happiness of the People.

81. Nay the precepts of this Idea of the Law, are so potent and triumphant, as
that some acts, which rebel against it, become not only illicit but irrite, as
both the Counselors and Atturneys observe, they are not only irregularities,
but mere nullities, and that either ob defectum potestatis and incapacitatem
materiae, as if one should go about to give the same thing to two several
persons; the second Donation is a Moral non entity, or else propter perpetuam
rei indecentiam, and turpitudinem Durantem; as in some an omalous and
incestuous Marriage; And this Idea of the Law is so exact, that it is not
Capable of an (...), with the Lawyers Emendatio legis: but there is no mending
of Essences, nor of Essential Laws, both which consist in puncto, in
indivisibili, and so cannot Recipere magis and minus, nor is there any need of
it, for in this Law there is no rigor at all, it is a pure praetorian Court of
equity, and so nothing is to be abated of it, neither does it depend only a
mente Legislatoris, which is the usual rise of mitigation; but it is
conversant about such acts as are per se tales, most intrinsecally and
inseparably.

82. Yet Notwithstanding this Law does not refuse an interpretation, but the
Natural Idea does gloss and Aspect upon her soul the Divine Idea, as in what
circumstances such an act is to be esteemed murder, and when not; and so in
many other branches of the Idea of the Law, if there be any appearance of
intricacy, any seeming knot and difficultly, the King will give edge enough to
cut it asunder: There are many Laws and statutes in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, bordering upon this Idea of the Law, Jus gentium, juri naturali
propinquum and consanguineum, and it is medium quoddam inter jus natural and
jus civil. Now this Jus gentium is either per similitudinem and concomitatiam,
when several nations have yet some of the same positive Laws, or else (which
indeed is most properly (...)) per communicationem and societatem, which as Mr.
Tho. Hobs describes, ab omnium vel multarum gentium voluntate vim obligandi
accipit, i. e. when all or many of the most refined Nations bunching and
clustring together, do bind themselves by general compact to the observation
of such Laws, as they judge to be for the good of them all, As the Honorable
entertainment of an Ambassador, or such like.

83. So that it is jus humanum non scriptum it is (...) for as Theodosius tells
me, usu exigente and humanis necessitatibus, Gentes humanae quaedam sibijura
constituerunt. Whereas other humane Laws have a narrower sphere and compass,
and are limited to such a state as William Prinne Esquire styles leges populares,
the Hebrews call their positive Laws, (...) sometimes (...), Though the one do
more properly point at Ceremonials, the other at Judicials: Plotinus renders
them (...). Abaris calls them (...), as some call natural Laws (...) which the
Mosaicall Philosophers render (...) but according to the Greek Idiom these are
termed (...) and the others (...). Now, though the formality of Humane Laws do
flow immediately from the power of some particular men, yet the strength and
smew of these Laws is founded in the Idea of the Law, or Moral, and Natural
Laws: for my Idea does permissively give them leave to make such Laws as are
for their greater convenience: and when they are made, and whilst they are in
their force and vigor, it does command and oblige them not to break or violate
them; for they are to esteem their own consent as a sacred thing; they are not
to contradict their own acts, nor to oppose such commands, as ex pacto were
framed and constituted by themselves.

And thus much in defense of one hundred and thirty paragraphs of my Idea of
the Law: which I have explained and amplified by the Idea of Government, which
is the King.

FINIS.
THE IDEA OF TYRANNY, OR ENGLANDS Mysterious Reformation, FROM The beginning of
the Wars to this time unridled, to the dis-abuse of this long deluded NATION.

Made public by John Heydon Gent. for Eugenius Theodidactus.

Gal. 1.10. If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Jesus Christ:
But I am a servant of God, and Secretary of Nature.

LONDON, Printed in the year. 1660.

AN EPILOGUE.
BEhold the King of Angels is angry, because you will not crown his Messenger
and servant KING. Amongst all the Orders and Inhabitants of heavenly unbodied
souls and immortal Genii, there is one King; and he is angry because you will
not obey the Laws of the Emperor and King of the whole world, God.

Amongst the Stars the anger of God is transferred, and you have made discord
in the Court of heaven, and his Messengers and Planets meet and oppose
wonderfully. In 1642. Saturn and Jupiter fell out about Subjects Rebellion
against their King. And it may be observed, that since Churchmen dabled in
Politiques, and Statesmen in Divinity, Law and Religion have been still
subjected to the sword, and in effect, those same excursions and adulterate
Mixtures, are but the workings of a party already in motion toward that end.
He that designs a change of Government, must begin by imposing a delusion upon
the people: And whatsoever is necessary to his purpose, must be accommodated to
their humor.

The Pulpit by these glosses, and puzling distinctions under the Doctrines of
conditionate obedience, suggesting liberty, cousens the multitude into a
Rebellion; Oaths and Covenants are but the Jugglers-knots, fast or loose, as
the Priest pleases. The weaker sort being thus prepared, and poisoned by a
seditious Clergy; it is then the States-mans part to push those mutinous
inclinations into action, and to divide the cause betwixt Conscience and
Property, the better to involve all interests in the Quarrel under the Masque
of Piety, and publickness of spirit of holy men and Patriots: the Crafty cheat
the simple, engaging by those specious pretenses the rash mis-guiding people
(with good intentions, but wanting care and skill) in Sacrilege and Treason.
And indeed now all the planets are retrograde, except the Sun and Moon, which
sometimes are eclipsed, and dart down these influences upon the earth.

This was the very Root, and this has been the proness of our evils; for under
the Notion of Gods glory, the safety and honor of the King, The fundamental
Laws, and Freedoms of the people, the privileges of Parliaments, etc. The
Kingdom was gulled into a compliance with an ambitious and scismatical
faction: the main pretense was the Assertion of the Subjects legal Rights
against the grand prerogatives: And that directed only to the limitation of an
intended arbitrary power, that regulation of such and such misgovernments, and
all this saving their Allegiance to his sacred Majesty, whose Person, Crown and
Dignity, they had so often sworn deeply to maintain.

This was a bait so popular, it could not fail of drawing in a party, and that
produced a War. The former story of the Quarrel is little to my purpose: The
Logique of it less, How by the same authority of Text and Law, both King and
People could be justified against the other: I meddle not, let it suffice, that
Saturn and Jupiter backed with a Comment few years before threw down, after six
years conflict, a vast profusion of blood and Treasure, the King a prisoner,
and his whole party scattered and disarmed: The Commons found themselves
disposed to end our troubles, and passed a Vote to treat with his Majesty in
order to a settlement: This met with little opposition, for all the planets
were then in Trine, except Mars, his people, who having gorged themselves
already upon the public ruin, were not yet satisfied without their Sovereigns
blood, the death of Monarchy it self, and the subjecting of a tame and slavish
people, to a Conventicle of Regicides; there were not many of so deep a
tincture, but what these few could not effect by number, they did by force: for
by the malice of mutual Aspects, the planets showered down six months before:
then Sir Hardresse Waller, Pride and Hewson moved by this influence, upon the
sixth of December, 1648. they seized and imprisoned 41. of the Commons house,
clapped guards upon all Passes leading to it: some 60. more were given in upon
a List to those that kept the door with an express direction from several
leading members to oppose their entrance: about 40. more withdrew for fear of
violence, their crime was only the carrying of a Vote for peace already
mentioned the day before: This action was so erroneous, that the very
Contrivers of it were ashamed to own it, transferring that upon the
Army Officers, which was done by their own appointment. They passed however a
formal disallowance of the violence, and ordered their discharge, which yet the
Officers refused upon a combination now most evident; observe,

A Comet and a grand Eclipse of the Sun alters the matter: for that which they
told me in 48, was an Act of the Army Officers, In 59. they call a Judgment of
Parliament, and they justify and continue that very seclusion, by a Vote of
Jan. 5.59. which they themselves condemned and discharged by several Orders in
December. 48. The particulars of these transactions by Sir Michael Heydon are
excellently delivered. And thus you see how God by the Planets shoots down his
Angry sword, and how they are now all set upon revenge, their influence is
furious: and so will continue until the King be crowned in England, etc.

I will now return to the great test of the spirits, and designs of the
several parties and Members of the House, and from that Judgment, and
discrimination of persons and humors, we may learn seasonably to provide
against after-claps: This Blow brake the house of Commons into three-peices,
one party adhered to the Vote opposed the violence, declared against it,
claimed from time to time their own and the peoples Rights, pleaded the
Covenant and their Declarations, and stood it out. The second sort, was not
prepared for Martyrdom, a kind of Barnacle, neither fish nor flesh: this was a
party that flew at first, but soon retracted: Headed again* and went along for
company: My charity persuades me well of diverse of them, and that they mixed,
rather in hopes to moderate the rest, then in design to strengthen them. A
party rather weak and passive then malicious: But nothing can excuse those sons
of Belial, the perjured Remnant; no, nor express them: beside their Oaths and
Covenant, they have above an hundred times in printed Declarations renounced
the very thought of what they have since executed. Read the exact Collections,
We are (say they) so far from altering the fundamental constitution and
Government of this Kingdom by King, Lords and Commons: that we have only
desired, that with the consent of the King, such powers may be settled in the
two houses, without which we can have no assurance, etc.

These are the very words of their Declaration, April 17. 1646. published by
the House of Commons alone, toward the end of the War, and most remarkably
entitled, A Declaration of their True intentions, concerning the ancient
Government of the Nation, and securing the people against all arbitrary
Government.

Let this Quotation serve for all, lest I exceed my limits, not to insist upon
things known and public: How faithfully these people have managed their
original Trust, how strictly they have kept their Oaths and Promises, how
tenderly they have observed the Laws, and asserted our freedoms, how poor
they have made themselves to make us rich, how graciously they have assumed the
Legislative power, and then how modestly they have exercized it: In fine, how
free and happily we lived under their Government, till Geomantick Devils were
called upon by the power of Angry Planets, and loost in their Influence, then
Oliver stepped in, and threw them out by a trick of their own teaching: And thus
the King of Planets was angry with the Moon that eclipsed his Glory in March,
52. And thus in April 1653, he showed himself how displeased he was at the
Kings death, and revenged he was upon the Parliament. It were worth the while
to enquire into the good they did us, during that six years session, but that I
leave to their Mercurius Needham; Nor shall I far examine the Protectors Reign;
by whose advice, by what assistance, or by what Laws he ruled, how many of our
late Republicans forgate themselves, and swore Allegiance to a single person:
how many things like Parliaments he dispersed (for the Army has got a jadish
trick, and will not leave it) It is enough, at last he died in despite of
Priests and Poets, Owen and Wythers, the former telling him from heaven, he
should escape that fit; the other telling us so needlessly: His Highness, having
other things to think on, left his Successor doubtful, till (as they say) his
Secretary (then, one of ours now) with John Owen (his prophetique Confessor)
swore his son Richard into the Protector-ship; but he, good Gentleman, did not
much hurt, but peaceably resigned to Fleetwood and Disborough, (not a word of
the King of the Saints, for he desires to be private) and they quite at a loss,
for want of Brains and courage, called in the Fag-end of the old house to their
Assistance; so that the Members which descended in April 53. rose again, and
ascended upon the 7. of May, 59. But still the Planets are opposite as God
would have it, which make the Members act as impetuously as ever; Then they
were once again unseated by the Army, as the Planets predict and Geomantick
Genii: The 13. of October last the Influences took effect, and then the
Committee of Safety was invested with the supreme Authority, (it is but a
slippery title that of the sword) This change gave his Excellency the Lord Monk
occasion to remember his love to the King, and to show his Charity to his
Native Country: by whose curiosity and Conduct, the honest and suffering party
was relieved, and the Phanatique Army dispersed without blood; Hereupon the
Soldiery tacked about once again, lamenting their backslidings: and on the
26. of December, the good old cause men re-enthron'd themselves more eagerly
now then formerly against the readmission of the secluded Members. This
barbarous and arbitrary proceeding put the whole Nation upon a necessity of
procuring a full and free Parliament: to which. end they purposed modestly and
fairly the restoring the excluded members, and filling of the house: or else
the liberty of a New and legal choice: for bringing letters, Sir Robert Pie and
Major Faicher were imprisoned. This was an Insolence too gross, to do much
mischief but to themselves: Are these the men (the people cried) That put the
King to death only upon pretense of a design, to erect and uphold in himself an
unlimited and Tyrannical power, to rule according to his Will, and to overthrow
the rights and liberties of the people; yea, to take away, and make void the
foundations thereof, and of all redress and remedy of misgovernment, which by
the fundamental constitutions of this Kingdom were resolved on the peoples
behalf, in the right and power of frequent and successive Parliaments: these
are the words of the charge;

That which was Treason in our lawful Prince, how comes it to be Law now with
these Fellows? They took away the Kings life, for but discoursing the very
thing they act: and we are to be imprisoned and murdered, for asking only that
they swore they fought for: No; they are a Pack of Knaves, they cut off his
head, that they might rule themselves: The plot was grown so rank, the common
people smelt it, and without more ado, associated to free themselves from an
infamous and perpetual Bondage, witness that Union in their declarations, both
of Demand and Resolutions: against the Equity whereof, no man has hitherto
pretended the least objection, the supreme Trifle, perceiving an universal
Application to the General in his passage, and all speaking the same sense;
finding withal, that his Excellency suspended, till he might hear both
parties: and conscious to themselves of no imaginable reason to oppose: Besides
seeing themselves declined and hated, nay, endangered by a peremptory Agreement
of this Nation, They did at last most graciously descend to promise us a full
Representative: but no secluded Members to be admitted, nor in effect any other
then Phanatiques.

His Excellency well weighing what was reasoned, pro and contra, made way for
the Return of the secluded members. This Justice brake the neck of a Design
just then on foot. This is the short on it, the people were to be held at gaze,
in expectation of a further satisfaction, till those Troops which the backside
had ordered to that purpose, should have seized all the considerable persons of
the Kingdom: nay, they are impudent enough, to tempt the General himself into
a complication with them, but he was too discreet: not to distinguish where to
observe, and where to leave them, In fine the Stars and Planets above, and the
Rulers and Ideas below in their Characters and Figures of Astrology and
Geomancy Telesmatical arrested, do predict a check to their impetuous madness
and brutish fury.

Next to our gratitude to heaven, let us have a care, not to be wanting in
point of prudence to our selves; nothing undoes us but security, we see, who
are our friends, and who are our enemies, whom we may trust, and whom we must
not, we have paid dear for our experience, and sure we have a tittle to the
benefit of it, we must look back, and learn from thence the meaning of the
future.

It is a tedious while this Nation has been tossed betwixt two factions: One
in the Army, the other in the Council; both well enough agreed to destroy us;
but jealous still one of the other, as Don says of Ignatius, concerning his
Competitor in Hell: He was content he should be damned, but loath he should
govern; that is all the Quarrel. The Vizor of Religion is thrown aside long
since; the Conventicle cheats the Soldier this day, and he falls upon the Rump
the next. In short, they cheat the one the other at the public charge: they
may snarle where they please, but they bite none but us, and at the worst
forgive their fellow-thieves for robbing honest men: this has been their
practice near this dozen years. Are we not yet convinced, that it is impossible
it should be otherwise, while the same people govern us with the same army, and
bound up by no other Laws then their own Will? I do not press any resistance
now, but certainly a readiness to protect honester men in case of an Attempt,
were not amiss: we see how dirtily they have used the General, and how
unworthily their Instruments have labored the Army into a direct Tumult: And
all this in order to a new violence upon the house. We see what juggling is
used in the Militia, as foysting in false Lists to cast the strength of the
Nation into the hands of mean and factious persons; what industry to hold us
still unsettled, by throwing in impertinent and dangerous scruples, to divert at
the farthest, if not disturb the long desired Peace, and Protestant Religion,
being established in the true sense of the Church of England we pray for: He
that has either honor in his blood, or honesty in heart, is reproached with a
King in his Belly: then for the Qualifications, these goodly Squires would have
thrust upon us; are they not pleasant? one man of forty shall be allowed to
vote, or sit; and the other thirty nine must call that a Free Parliament, and
swear it represents the people. We are not so blind yet, nor so forgetful, as
not to see and know some Foxes, and some Asses in the medly. All are not Saints
we call so: We do remember who they were that ruled in 48. and we are sensible
what they would do still, if they had power: we know who brought in, who: but
the Markets raised; our heads will not off now at fifty shillings a hundred, as
formerly. Lastly, let the General, the secluded Members, and the honest
Soldiers live long, happily and beloved, and let the rest take their fortune,
etc.

I write not this out of an itch of scribbling, or to support a faction: my duty
bids me write: nor do I love to spend time in Complement; The Readers wisdom,
or the Authors weakness is not the Question. The Nation is in distress by
Tyranny, and every honest Englishman must lend his hand to save it: Nay, that
must be done quickly too, and vigorously: Delay is mortal. Can any thing be
more ridiculous, then to stand formalizing in a case, where it is impossible to
be too early, or too zealous. The event of things takes up our thoughts, more
then the reason of them. What News, more then what remedy: as if it concerned
us rather to know, whose fools and slaves we shall be next, then to be such no
longer. That which compleats the wonder, and the oversight is, that the
miseries we suffer, were before hand, as easily to be foreseen and prevented,
as they are now to be felt. And we only look backward, to take a perfect
measure of the future: so obvious and formal is the method, that leads to our
Destruction, if we were not in love with beggary and bondage, and subject to
Tyrants, let us all at last bethink our selves of freedom, and from a due
enquiry into the Idea of Tyranny, (that is the rise, and growth, and present
State of our calamities) learn to be happy for the time to come. This Idea of
Tyranny, men are arrested and ruined, upon suspicion of debt: imprisoned to
death in a plea of trespass: upon suspicion of Treason, men are destroyed
without reason, and never know at whose suit they are arrested; or if they do,
they know not the Plantiffe: And for the latter, they never knew their
Accusers, nor any relief but destruction.

Others are taken upon suspicion of felony, and are starved to death in
prison; and this is the Idea of Tyranny.

Now the King will rectify the Law, banish Tyranny, and establish a good
Government, being as free from any Revenge, as the most consummate Christian
upon earth. And for his fidelity, his Word is a Law of the Medes and Persians,
whosoever shall obtain it, has an assurance irrefragable. For all the world
that have at all practiced and observed the King, know that it is a principle
radicated in him, and to have cost him sufficiently dear in he Judgment of
these severe persons, who have sometime thought, one of his most princely
Virtues a disadvantage to his proceedings. And this may assure all men, that
the harshness of the Law shall be taken off, viz. the Torturing part thereof.

King Charles will forgive his enemies, whose fortune, and whose persons will be
as secure and dear to him, as the most loyal of his Subjects: for what breaths
he after so passionately, as a perfect oblivion of what is past; and that he
may be united to his own flesh and blood in all the bonds of Charity and
princely relations, and then Cruelty, and Oprression, and Tyranny will be
banished, and Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and Peace established in his three
Kingdoms, and Dominions thereunto belonging, to the glory of God, and the
flourishing prosperity of the people.

None as yet have been so hardy as to occasion a Redress of grievances, the
poor miserable Country man he sorrows, and none assists him in his necessity.
The rich find friends, but the poor wearies his body with labor to provide for
his family, and is forced to pay Taxes, his senses being destroyed with care to
content the greedy excise man; and at last obtains beggary, when his spirits
are dulled and decayed.

We live in hopes of another Session, Writs are already issued forth, if they
leave us as free as they found us, it is well, if not, it is but to turn the
Tables, and try their manage of a loosing game.

Raphel stood up, and said, who will persuade the Phanatique party to endeavor
to keep out the King, and the Kings Son: and Ophioneus said he would, and the
Angel asked by what means, and he said, Hilel shall be a son of Belial, and
teach new Doctrines, some shall be Papists, some Independants, some
Anabaptists, Shakers, Socinians, Millinaries, Quakers, etc. and all these will
oppose the King, because he is a Protestant, and the Pope therefore has made
these Sects or Inquisitors of the order of preaching, Friars, that they may
deceive: And these would have all men to believe in the Church of Rome, which
is here in England, covered over with new Idolatry; and strange Notions of
Religion. And I fear at last that these phanatique Religions will compel all
us of the true Protestant says, to submit and adhere to the Pope.

And then it will not be lawful for any Protestant to go about to defend his
opinion with any testimonies of Scripture, of with other reasons, interrupting
him with great noise and angry cheeks (they say) that he has not to do with
Batchelours and Scholars in the chair, but with Judges in the Judgment Seat,
that there he may not strive and dispute, but must answer plainly, if he will
stand to the decree of the Church of Rome, and to revoke his opinion, if not,
Then show him Fagots and Fire, saying, that with Heretics they may not contend
with Arguments and Scripture, but with Fagots and Fire, and enforce the man not
convicted of Obstinacy, nor taught better Doctrine, to deny by oath his opinion
against his Conscience: and if he will not do it, they deliver him into the
hands of the temporal Judge to be burned: and at last for every small offense,
men shall be put to death.

To prevent all this mischief, and that will happen in London, 1663. 1664 and
1665. call home the King, and persuade the General and his Protestant Officers,
immediately to tender the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, the solemn League
and Covenant, and the new Oath of Abjuration, for the better discovery and
speedier Conviction of Jesuits, Popish Priests, Friars and Papists (consented
to by the King in the late Treaty) to all the Officers, Agitators and Soldiers
in the Army, they will presently discover an whole Conclave of Jesuits, popish
Priests, Friars, and Jesuited Papists amongst them, who have instigated them to
disobey and force both houses, imprison their Members, to impeach, try, exempt
the King, dissolve the present and future Parliament, subvert our Kingly
Government, and Constitutions of Parliament, betray Ireland to the Rebels, and
involve us in a new War and Confusion, instead of Peace and Settlement, the
Practices, Designs and Studies of none but Jesuits, and Papists which all
true Protestants cannot but abhor. If Milton beginning to write an Answer to
the late Kings Book against Monarchy, was at the second word, by the power of
God stricken blind: What shall fall upon them that endeavor to destroy his
Son; verily they that fight against him, fight against Providence. I pray God
direct us in the right way to his Glory.

From my house near Bishopsgate, London, on the Eastside Spittle Fields, next
door to the Red Lion, this 27 of May, 1660. John Heydon, A servant of God and
Secretary of Nature.

THE IDEA OF TYRANNY. OR Englands mysterious Reformation from the beginning of
the Wars to this time unridled: to the dis-abuse of this long deluded Nation.
1. DUring the Reign of the three last Monarchs of England, Rebellion seemed
here to have been established, as a Verity not to be questioned; Its Mysteries
having (as it was conceived) been by many Volumes of our learned Writers so
clearly unfolded, that it was not credible, that either the whole body of the
old, or the Caprice of any new-fargled fancy, should be able to stagger the
foundation was laid for it.

2. But a long peace accompanied with too great a felicity, bred such a
wantonness in our souls, that we could not be satisfied with that was generally
professed and practiced; forms, rites and ceremonies become nauseous to our
dainty stomachs; they rellished too much of Antiquity, Superstition and
Idolatry, and we must have some thing of Novelty to please the gusts of our
Palats: this in succession of time attained to so vast a growth, that at last
like evil weeds it choakt the Plants set by the Industry of the Gardner, and
disputed the propriety of the patron.

3. Thus armed with the strong zeal of Religion we hurry into a pernicious
War, make piety the cloak of our Iniquity, and therewith charm simple Zelots
to part with their coin and plate to advance the Justice of the cause, which
justified with happy success, we idolize and prefer before the sanctity of
Religion, esteem Loyalty but a Chimera, and trample sacred Royalty under foot,
to authorize a licentious liberty; which no sooner fixed in an uncontrollable
authority, but we give Laws to our Masters, dis-inthrone Sovereignty, and
exercise the Tyranny of power to the terror of pretended Delinquents.

4. By the severity of our procedures, we become formidable to loyal souls: by
our assidual promises of Reformation, we enslave the Wills of Idolaters, who
hood-winkt with our specious pretenses, vigorously support the weakness of our
cause, and by frequent victories we legitimate that right, which no former age
could, or ever did make claim unto.

5. Power now inconcussible in her Throne, to prevent the violence of Opposers,
we distribute the Estates of our vanquished adversaries among our own active
Pillars, corroborating the one by the debilitation of the other: general
Reformation in the interim is laid aside: particular interest must antecede:
and while we are solely bent upon this, Religion through an unbridled
libertinage becomes a Labyrinth of confusion: the head being taken away, like
so many Hidras, new ones take life, every Dreamer creating a Religion, and
thousands become his followers, as the Devil out of his malice dictates to
their weakness.

6. Dotage is better prevented then cured, but what hopes have we of the cure
of this dotage, when we are already seized upon by a most raging frenzy; the
evidence of our actions confirm the certainty of our disease: how many solemn
Vows have we made to advance the relieved truth of the Gospel, and to preserve
the known Laws of the land inviolable?

7. How often have we dispensed with those Vows, and justified those
Dispensations both with our public Actions and Writings? ^e pretended a pious
tenderness toward God and sacred things, but intended nothing less, for our
Cruelty, Tyranny and Rapine practiced toward our brethren testify we
dissembled with God, and made a stalking horse of his Divinity; our frequent
Sacriledges manifest our interior I^everence, how many glorious Temples, by
our pious Ancestors dedicated to Gods honor, have we despoiled of their
Ornaments? most profanely converted them to Courts of Guards. Stabls, and
brothel houses, and made sale of their Stones, Lead and Timber, for the use of
our Impieties: Sects we indulge, Heresies we approve, Judaisme we tolerate,
Paganism we abhor not, Turks we correspond, and commerce with, as our brethren
(as indeed they are) for their Times and Actions have no small Analogy with
ours: but our brethren and fellow Christians we pillage, persecute, and
butcher, nay, we want nothing to be the worst of men, but to become Cannibals.

8. If this be the Product of our Reformation, let us even petition to hell for
a more divine.

9. Now we are thus superlatively beatified by the Reformation of Relligion,
let us Cast an eye upon the Condition of our State: we were all glutted with
wealth, happiness and prosperity, and we must project for variety of sharp
sawces to delude our stomachs into an appetite. Our peaceful Sovereign was
held too improper to sit at the stern of this stern Nation, his clemency was
too benign, his sobriety too regular, his Justice too merciful, his
conversation too familiar, access too facile; he had not the gift of Hypocrisy
to screw himself into the credit of a Zelot, he wanted the Octavian austeritie
to check the frowardness of our insolence, he was to ill furnished with
viciousness too countenance our horid villainies, In fine he lacked
Imperiousness to curb the impudence of our Rebellion.

10. Thus the Noble faculties of his soul being incoherent with ours, his
person could not be consistent with our ambition, therefore beyond all the
examples of the most barbarous savages we adorn the Prologue of our
reformation with the Innocence of his blood; the nobles we have disenobled, the
kennelrakers we have made nobles, the rich we have beggared, the beggars we
have enriched, the Laws we have violated, Justice we have perverted, Magistracy
we have contemned, Trade we have decayed, our name with forrreigne nations we
have rendered contemptible, and in the Epilogue of this happy reformation, our
reformers are the second time hurrried away in a whirlwind, leaving a worse
stench behind them then the devil when he is constrained to quit a miserable
possessed, this poor nation in the interim abandoned to the mercy of a lawless
Army, and justly too, being we deserve no better then to become slaves to our
servants, when our pertinacy could not brook to yield loyal obedience to our
Masters.

11. But behold Providence (we say) has most miraculously restored us again to
the management of our just authority, O Infernal Impudence! to attribute our
Rebellions and usurpation to the heavenly care, making God not only accessory
to our most execrable wickedness, but the prime agent in all our impious
machinations, when we should fear rather, that the sins wherewith we have
provoked him, are not yet ripe for our severer chastisement; we have twice
already felt the vengeance of his dreadful hand, and if we persevere in our
perversity, we shall yet suffer greater testimonies of of his indignation; the
divine Justice is not to be corrupted by bribery, nor shall villainies go
unpunished, unless repentance prove their advocate.

12. How my Compatriotes have been misled, and how most egregiously abused the
sequestrations, impositions, excises, exactions, oppressions, and diverse other
exorbitant enormities (of whose smart they are most justly sensible) do
sufficiently evidence; how under color of Religion and some supposed
miscarriages of persons, who had the free care of our Sovereign, they have been
trapanned into Rebellion, is enough notorious to the world, how usurpers,
tyrants and traitors are enriched with the spoils of the innocent is evident
to too too many, who daily groan for their miseries, how all the three Nations
do generally suffer by the disreglement of our Government, it is both sensible
and visible to us all; Jayles, racks, gibbets, and scaffolds being the sole
portion of the Loyal; to repair which mischiefs, and to prevent their
perpetuity, is the most concerning interest of this most distressed nation to
effect; but hoc opus hic labor est.

13. If we struggle for the maintenance of that cause, which has already cost
us such an Ocean of blood, and such an incredible treasure, and entertain that
fruitless war against the Spaniard, it cannot be supported but by the
effusion of more, and the utter destruction of all the three nations violence,
oppression, and massacry being the undoubted concommitants of so pernicious a
resolution.

14. What is it that we pretend unto by the continuation of our present
government? a felicity, and a constant one; what certainty thereof can our weak
hopes promise us: the various mutations we have already had, are strong
arguments we are in possibility of more; yet to support this frail Idol, the
whole land must be condemned to an insupportable bondage without hope either of
release or intermission; nay admit no private discords among our selves did
generate a new mutation; admit the whole nation did unanimously espouse the
Government of a Commonwealth, and that we had an army as invincible as it has
always bin formidable for the maintenance of our cause; all this ensures not a
permanency nor extenuates the sufferings of the Subjects.

15 Armies by Sea and land cannot be entertained but with the vast consumption
of treasure, and this must be squez'd out of the livelihood of poor vassals,
the sweat of whose brows cannot earne a sufficiency for the nutriment of his
own family; yet must we have our miseries perpetuated to justify the crimes
of usurpers, and to enrich their posterity with the beggary of our own; can we
possibly be so stupid as not to be sensible of our interminable servitude? can
we be so blind as not to behold the charitable care our rulers have of the
public good, when they are so impudent as publikly to vaunt they fight for
their own lives and fortunes, not for ours, as if we were obliged both by
nature and duty to prop their greatness with our ruin.

16. Rare Patriots indeed, and right worthy Senators to be entrusted with the
conservation of their countries welfare; for the establishment of whose power,
the whole Nation must be condemned to a perpetual misery; was this the motive
to our fist at thing? has all the blood spilt been sacrificed to this intent;
have we brought an indelible stain upon the Nation by the death of the King to
justify his Judges, have we ruined thousands of families to erect fortunes for
oppressors? must the innocent be accounted criminal to avouch criminals to be
Innocent? now let us no longer be deluded with apparent fancies; if we have a
regard to our felicity, let us propose the means to attain to it; as long as
we are plun^'d in a fathomeless war, we shall not be exempted from the
inconveniences depending on it; and wars we cannot avoid, as long as we
subscribe to no other government then the present, under whose Regency our
sufferance have been as unsufferable as innumerable; nor shall we want either
revolutions at home, or invasions from abroad, as long as we are disgusted with
oppressions in the land, or have so numerous a progeny of warlike Princes to
pretend a right to these dominions, whose titles foreign Princes of the
blood, and their Allies will vigorously stickle, if not out of affection, out
of reason of state, not to countenance Rebellion against the natural Prince,
least it prove a precedent to their own subjects to practice the like to their
prejudice.

17. Our uninterruptable and probably immutable felicity must be purchased by
our humble submission to those, who (out souls convince us (...) have a just
right to that power, which we have so tyrannically usurped; but our Conscience
do incessantly alarm us, that the ugliness of our Crimes are so horrible,
that a humane Clemency cannot condescend to pardon them; Indeed in Justice and
rigor we cannot presume to obtain so undeserved a blessing; but mercy (the
highest attribute of Gods goodness) with the affluence of other singular graces
are inherent in the souls of his earthly substitutes, who will as bountifully
distribute them among his vassals, as the emergencie shall require it, his
paternall Jndulgence of his beloved people suffocates his vengeance, and
surmounts the horridness of our crimes, so rather than to heap mischief on
mischief, and to put a period to our threatening desolations, let us postrate
our selves at the feet of mercy, embracing that peace with willingness, which
otherwise will be imposed upon us by force, and let us have no other vengeance
to stand in fear of, then that of heaven (whose gracious pardon we ought not
also to despair of) disposing our souls to an unfeigned contrition, and to a
perfect humility to beg his gracious remission.

To you, O invincible Martialists, let me give a friendly admonition at
parting; your hands have been made instrumental to our mischiefs, which served
rather as Executioners of rage, then the Pillars of our cause; you had once
begun with a notable piece of Justice, perfectionate that Justice for the
happiness of your Country, and the redemption of those evils acted under the
protection of your power: Remember whose you were at your birth; forfeit not
your birthright for the compliance with avarice and ambition; a visible
vengeance may befall you, as it befell your Patrons; there is none of you but
is particularly guilty of a general injustice; the general Plea you pretend
will prove too hard for your particulars, when you are summoned to appear
before the dreadful Tribunal; not is it improbable you may feel the lash of
the like scourge wherewith you have whipped your Masters; they have felt but the
effect of your sword, but its edge is too blunt to encounter with the Celestial
weapons: Thunderbolts, Earthquakes, and Pestilence are the arms of Gods fury:
no Corner can hide you from being discovered by his wrath, to err is humane
weakness, but to continue in our errors is a diabolical malice; Repent you then
of your deviations: your subscription to Justice will redeem you of your guilt,
and reconcile you to favor: your guilt is not unpardonable, being but
hirelings, and espousing a cause: necessity not reason persuaded you to believe
it carried Justice on its front.

Casual REFLECTIONS Relating To the Antecedent Discourse of the Idea of Tyranny
upon pretended Crimes.
1. RAtional men and unconcerned in a cause will positively conclude, that a
pretended Crime is no Crime, that has not by unquestioned Laws been confirmed
to be so.

2. Laws pretended to be inviolable ought to be enacted by the power and form
accustomed to enact them, but where it is evident that right of Enaction is
usurpt upon, those Laws are no Laws, but violent impositions, and
consequently no crime to violate them.

3. If at the beginning of a War it was held no crime for Vassals to in^inge
their Laws, and deny their Allegiance to their undoubted Lord, how comes it
afterward to be a crime; when the undoubtedness of the Lord is not yet decided.

4. A whole ages possession of an usurped estate is not sufficient to confirm
the legality of its possession, though a continual claim were not made to it by
its anterior possessor: let the title first appear decided, before it be judged
a crime to dispute it.

5. It was no crime by arms to dispossess a man of his right, certainly it is
no crime by arms to endeavor the recovery of that right; it is less injustice
to struggle for ones propriety, then to have it detained from him by violence.

Liberty and Religion, the ordinary stalking horses to Rebellion, have so
dazeled the eyes of the vulgar, that they run headlong upon Precipices, whence
a wise Retreat promises them no safety; so that they will rather hazard their
ruin by an obstinate folly, then court an assured security by the
acknowledgement of their error.

Who will commiserate the misery of such stupids? their calamities are the just
rewards of their madness: too much felicity made them quarrel with the heavens,
and innocence, and it must be a superlative affliction that must restore them
to the perfection of their senses.

Gods wrath is not implacable, if it be but pacified with repentance, the
scourge, that now chasteneth us, may upon our dutiful submission be cast into
the fire as useless; our distasters are generated from our own corruption; let
us but rectify our disorders, and the confusions attending on them will cease
in their effects.

AMBITION.
AMbition to compass its design, easily leveleth all difficulties that oppose
it; it stumbleth not at iniquities, so they contribute to its progress; and
once waded in blood for the advancement of its attempts, it will rather swim in
an ocean of it, then be interrupted in its course, holding it its greater
security rather to heap Tragedy upon Tragedy, then to condescend to succession,
or to limit its violence with moderation.

Humane thoughts never want objects for their fancy, and those objects they
pursue with that vehemence, that they ordinarily ruin either themselves, or
others in the acquest; yet if any should assure them of ruin in their
attempts, such is their itch to that ayrie bubble of Glory, that death it self
will not be formidable, when the object they aim at, promises a supposed
felicity.

Men of high Talents, whose actions should be squared by the inerrable rule of
Reason, should never admit of fancy to over-master their Judgments; the
proposals of felicity, they make themselves, should be unquestionable: If it
admitted either of doubt or prejudice, whereby they might be frustrated of
their aim, a mediocrity of welfare with tranquillity, were to be elected before
a vast greatness with disturbance.

If we ambitionate things unjust intrenching upon the right of others to
perfectionate our intended felicity, our felicity is ecclipst by the vexations
and molestations we meet by the opposition of our Antagonists, by which reason
we should rather desist from our enterprises, then give augmentation to our
minds disquietness by the frequent encounters of Disasters.

Most men are erroneous in the apprehension of their Felicity, Honor, Glory
and Riches being their ordinary objects, are but smoaky substances to make it
solid and imperdible: all these are daily subject to casualties: for what with
difficulty we have acquired in a year, may by an unexpected accident of fortune
be lost in a day, and often times by the same means, we projected to mount the
throne of our felicity, we inevitably fall into the abiss of disgrace.

True felicity is not so frequently seen in the sumptuous palaces of
greatness, as in the meanest cottages of humility; the highest Oedars are
shaken with storms, when the lowest shrubs lie secure from the disturbances of
the winds: all greatness lies exposed to the malicious assaults of envy, where
humility lives secured under the protection of her meanness; why then should we
not rather satisfy our selves with that felicity which is ever fortified with
security, then to our anxieties research that greatness that is never
unaccompanied with danger.

STATE INFANCY.
HE must be no Novice in knowledge who will give growth to the puerility of a
State; he must be well studied in the constitution of the clime it lives in, to
give it nutriment digestible, that it may thereby become vigorous in its
growth; it must neither be cloyd with delicacies to make it wanton, nor yet
hunger-starved with s^ntness, whereby to engender malignity.

Dominion is much more easily acquired then maintained: an opportunity offered
may facilitate a Conquest, but discontents arising from alterations, may
frustrate the settlement: that yoke is but grudgingly born, where liberty
pretends a privilege to emancipation and subjection transmuted into a
servitude, does undoubtedly generate a most malicious repining.

No Government, how prudently soever managed, can give an early tranquillity to
a new erected State: nor can general Maxims be adapted to every shape: the
distempers of predominant Dispositions must be tempered according to the
quality of the infirmity: Magnanimity is not domitable by compulsion, though it
dissemble a necessitated commission; nor is pufillanimity fixed in its
affection, where there is intrenchment upon its interest.

Whether love or fear be the fitter Ciment in the structure of Government, is a
question much disputed among Statists, both being inexcusably necessary for its
settlement; the are consists in their dextrous application; Fear ingendreth
hatred, therefore the insinuation thereof should be with a most prudent
cautiousness; love begets unanimity, and consequently an addition of
strength in the emergency of occasions

Power and Authority, two main Pillars of a State, must be seconded by prudence
to make its basis unbeautable, the whole extent of power is not to be
adoperated until it be excited by extremity, and authority not to be exercised
but with moderation to temper the violence of its effects: for where rigor is
the executioner, hatred has its generation, and the spleen it dare not
manifest a calm, it will undaintedly proclaim in a storm.

Tranquillity being the true object of Warfare, cannot be too dearly bought, and
the more easy is the purchase, the more permanent will be its continuance:
Benefits insinuate into the very affections of our enemies, where discourtesie
convert friendship into enmity: there cannot be a stronger basis for the
foundation of a State, then the rock of popular affection: Discontents being
the sole destructor of the Fabrique.

The very sensitive Creatures apprehend both injury and kindness, and as they
find their effects, will give a testimony of their sense; yet injuries make the
deeper impression in the memory, smart being a stronger provocative to wrath,
then kindness to affection: so that displeasures are deeply engraven in the
memory to the frequent disturbance of the actor, and benefits are easily
forgotten, if they be not renewed by continuance.

The oblivion of a benefit is no absolute abolition of the benefit; a dram of
the oil of kindness, upon a fit opportunity, refreshes the memory, and tempers
to a gratitude: but the sting of discourtesie causing a continuance of pain,
inciteth the will to revenge, which growing inveterate through malice, will
dissemble the resentment of the injury, until the occasion prove opportune for
the retort.

Incroachment upon the privileges of nature, though it be with the authority
of Parents, is most repugnant to nature, how much the more, when impo^'d by the
authority of Magistracy; it is no small difficulty to domestic savage
creatures by rudeness, but much more to overmaster the indomitable heart of man
with the violence of oppression; well may he be made submissive to the
correction of the rod, but never can his will be gained to an affection of his
Scourger.

The Idea of Tyranny is a Commonwealth ruled by Anabaptists and the Phanatique
Party. The Idea of the Law is a good Government: the Idea of a good Government
is Episcopacy; the Idea of Episcopacy, is the King, and the King is the
Effigies of God.

God save the KING.
I write not against any man maliciously: I have seen some mistakes in the Law,
and Government also: the late Rulers of this Nation were cruel, God forgive
them: I pray for the King and this Parliament, and envy no man, but am glad if
in either Physic, or the Law I can serve the Commonalty in their necessity. I
pray for Peace and Prosperity: I will submit and obey to what Government God
enthrons in England.

FINIS.
Books published by John Heydon, Gent.
A new Method of Rosy Crucian, Physic. Three Books of Geomancy and Telesms,
entitled the Temple of wisdom. The wise man's Crown. The Rosy Crucian
Axiomata. The way of Bliss in four books, complete, the last of Projection. The
Familiar Spirit. The Way to converse with Angels and Genii by Astrology and
Geomancy. The Way to Health. The Way to long Life. The Way to wax young being
old. The Way to Wisdom and Virtue. A new Method of Astrology. Cabballa, or the
Art by which Moses, Joshua and Elijah did so many Miracles Telesmatically in
the sight of the people. Of Scandalous, Boooker, Sanders and Lilly, Nativities,
a Comedy. Oliver Cromwell, A Tragedy of his actions during the War. A Tragedy of
his Protectorship. A Comedy on the Phanatique Parliament, and on the Committee
of Safety: after which the Rump appears: and tragically concludes.
THe Method of this Book is my own. And for my Presidents I made use of, they
are many. But the Authors names I have purposely left out, because I am not
controversial. And it had been all one labor inserting the matter, to give you
both the Author and Place. This would only have troubled the Text, or spotted a
Margent, which I always wish may be free, for the comments of the man that
reads: Besides I do not profess my self a Scholar: and for a Gentleman I hold
it a little pedantical. The form of Government, Justice and the Law I have
charactered; and you may easily see what is just and what is unjust: And the
difference between a good Government and Tyranny. And though I have had some
Dirt cast at me for my pains, yet this is so ordinary, I mind it not, for
whilst I live here, I ride in a Highway. I cannot think him wise who resents
his Injuries, for he sets a rate upon things that are worthless, and makes use
of his spleen where his scorn becomes him. This is the entertainment I provide
for my Adversaries, and if they think it too coarse, let them judge where they
understand, and they may fare better. I hope the Learned will remit my errors,
which through have or other Infirmities were committed. I shall not plead for
the Ingenious Compositor and serious Corrector. The Industrious Printer is to
be excused by those noble Gentlemen, who have not only Judgment to discern,
but courtesy to pass over small Faults: The most remarkable are these
following.

In the Paragraphs of the Idea of the Law.
PAr. 5. l. 24. r. Jah. l 52. r. ad-modum. p. 37. l. 4. r. incurs. p. 54. l. 3.
r. Charles. p. 58. l. 11. r. square. p. 63. l. 11. r. Censorian. p. 66. l. 6.
r. they. p. 67. l. 4. r. that. p. 71. l. 2. r. crimes. p. 72. l. 10. r.
delinquent. p. 75. l. 4. r. pretense. p. 78. l. 5. r. pretermitted. p. 81. l.
5. r. prohibit. p. 95. l. 16. r. wordy. p. 101. l. 8. r. Laws. p. 115. l. 1.
r. the Law. p. 108. l. 1. r. (...) p. 121. l. 2. r. sati^ing. p. 129. l. 1. r.
there.

In the Idea of Government in the Epistle to the Reader.
Pa. 2. l. 9. r. so. p. 5. l. 23. r. slice. p. 5. l. 24. r. trice. p. 5. l. 25
r. wingy. p. 6. l. 4. r. knee. p. 6. l. 5. for now, r. And so. p. 8. l. 8. for
bring the Kingdoms also. r. And bring King, etc.

In the Proemium.
Page 10. l. 9. r. Riches. p. 21. l. 15. r. for in a happy Commonwealth under
the Government of King Charles. r. as in unity of King and Parliament.

In the Idea of the Government.
PAR. 1. l. 2. for Introduction, r. Proemium. p. 11. l. 38. r. catch. p. 11. l.
34. r. reed. p. 24. l. 7. for thus he told me, r. thus it is written. p. 38. l.
7. r. sensible. p. 54. l. 5. r. deface.

In the Title, r. Government.
In the Preface. p. 26. l. 16. r. Proemium, Government, Epilogue and
Tranquillity, etc.


