A DIURNALL OF SEA DESIGNS, which is as strange as true.

RELATING WHAT great preparations many mighty Foreign Princes have now upon
the Ocean, no man knowing for what intent or purpose.

WHEREIN IT MAY be perceived that the case is pitiful when so many dangers
are floating about our ears before we can hear of them.

WRITTEN FOR A WARNING, that though fears and jealousies be necessary; yet it
is more necessary to lay them in their right places.

Not unprinted betwixt York and Beverley, By W. H. August 30th.

LONDON, Printed for W. S. 1642.

A DIVRNALL OF SEA DESIGNS, which is as strange as true: Relalating what great
preparations many mighty Foreign Princes have now upon the Ocean, no man
knowing for what intent or purpose.
IT is not to be conceited or conceived, that there are great divisions in
England at this time, nor can it be imagined that any man that has wit or
sense, will think that there is any strife or contention amongst us, or that
there are two parties in opposition (the one well affected, and the other
malignant.) All this is not to be thought, and it were well, if it were but to
be thought. But the more is the pity, these things are certainly too apparent,
and too true, (and therefore they are past thinking) though every man that is
endued with Christianity or humanity, cannot but continually have in memory the
manifold perturbations and distractions that do molest the Kings Majesty, the
Honorable Court of both Houses of Parliament; and generally three whole
Kingdoms both in Church, State, and Commonwealth. All (or the most part) of
which troubles do proceed from fears and jealousies of which too many of them
are supposed Chimeraes, with very few (or non) realities mingled with them; so
that the maine of all our disturbances, is the want of faith and confidence
that either Subjects should have in their Sovereign, or the Sovereign in his
Subjects. And though they seem (and more than seem) to differ, yet they all
do agree in every fundamental Point for which they contest.

The King protests (and will keep his word) that He will live and dye in the
Profession of the true Protestant Religion, and for the suppression of Popish
Superstition; that all former Laws made since the time of King Edward the
sixth, and to be made against Romish Priests and Recusants, shall be in full
force executed against them: All which the Parliament agrees to with a full
consent; so all parties are agreed and yet they disagree.

The King protests to maintain the Laws, Rights and Liberties of His
Subjects, with the Privileges of Parliament. The Subjects and Parliament, and
all agree with the King in these things; yet for all this they agree not.

The King most heartily desires to Rule and Reign in Piety toward God, and
with such Love and Peace amongst His people, as may be for His Honor, and
their most security; and all this the Parliament desires, and yet they are at
distance.

The King is most unwilling to have any War with His Subjects, and He knows
that side which so ever winnes, yet He must be the loser; therefore He would
not have the bloods or lives of His people lost or hazarded in any Civil War*
All which the Parliament do most humbly pray, and lab^ur for; and yet there are
Armies raised, and mighty preparations for defense of each of them, from the
oppositions of the other.

The King would have distressed Ireland speedily relieved and Reduced, and the
Rebellious Papists conformed or confounded: All which the Parliament do in all
humility desire, and take extraordinary care and paine^ to accomplish; and yet
for all this they are at difference.

So that though they do agree in all matters, yet (upon the matter) they agree
in none. But fears and jealousies and malignant parties are of each side, who
do infuse causlesse distrusts betwixt them, to the excessive charge and
mollestation of all.

There are also weekly Diurnalls, some true, and some foysted, as some (of the
wiser sort) may take this for one; but this is all Sea-businesses which may
breed fears and jealousies and suggest dangers, if they be not rightly
understood, as first on

Monday.
THis day news was brought to the Bull at Barn^t in the County of Westmerland.
That a Troop of French Horse entered, to surprise the Isse of Wight, under the
command of Mounsire Shackatroone; but near the Islands of Garnsey, and Iarsey
they met with a Fleet of Turkish Gallyes (in number sixteen and twenty) and
(...) a sharp fight of six hours, the horses had the better of it, and drove
the Gallyes into the Island of Silly, where they were presently surprised by
the Natives; their horses were deperly shod with Cork, and as it may be
supposed landed near to the Town of Shoteham in Devonshire; what their intents
were, is not yet known; but yet (to prevent the worst) it is not amiss that
we have fears and jealousies of them.

Tuesday.
ABout three of the Clock in the afternoon, before dinner, there was a small
Brigot of 1500 Tun in Burden, laden with Letters from the Pirates of Argetere
to the Pope; it is thought that those Letters do treat of an agreement in
Religion between the Turk and his Roman Catholic holiness: And truly they
do not much differ upon the maine point, for they are both inclined to thrust
Christ out of the Church, and the one of them has entertained Mahomet, and as
for the other he has Sants and Relics enough of his own making to patch up
such a religion as neither Christ nor his Apostles ever knew of.

Wednesday.
ALl this day the wind blew hard, at Northeast and by South, and Southwest and
by North, by which means Ketches and fish eboates had almost lost their Tides,
whereby the Haven of Billingsgate was doubtful of the Arivall of the fleet,
and the whole City and suburbs in Hazard to have no Oysters, But the wind
shifted about East North-west, that by good fortune all our fears were ended
at twelve pence a peck, and so much other good meat as did serve for that day.

Thurseday.
IT is Reported that the Queen of the Sheba, was upon the Sea with six
Galloones, 12. Carrackes and many ships, Galley Asses, and Asses Galley, the
fleet being in number of great and small, threescore and thrteene. The news
was known by a strange Accident of a Tempest, that happened upon the Coast of
Ginny, where one of the ships being overladed was forced to lighten her of
her burden, by casting much goods overbord (of great value (amongst the rest
therewas a heavy trunk which sunk, and was swallowed presently by a Grampus,
(which is a young whale.) There then being in the said Trunk a Case of
Ethiopians strong waters; the case breaking in the Trunk, made the Grampus
drunk, so that he never left tumbling, reeling and rolling till he ran
himself a ground near a place called Cliffe in Kent, three miles from
Gravesend, where the huge fish was token at lowwater, and being ripped up the
Trunk was found, with the Queens great Seal in it, and some notes that there
was 200. Tons of Gold in the fleet, besides other treasure; It is not yet
known to what Coast she is bound, therefore it is wisdom to let her alone
till we know further, in the mean space the Constable and Churchwardens of
Claffe can certify the whole truth of this matter.

Friday.
THis Friday two Dunkirks ships would feign have taken six Holland ships,
but fear of being taken themselves, they retired into their own Haven (or
den of the^ves) by which means certain Barrells of Butter, some Holland
Cheeses, and and Pickled Herrings were safely brought to London.

Saturday.
NEws came of 200 sail of ships and Arguseyes, with other vessels, were
newly Rig'd, victaul'd and manned in Spain, and it is Reported that the
Spaniards are such kind people, that they with the rest of the Romish
catholics do wish England so well that they do earnestly desire to have it
All; for which purpose they have made a damnable stir in Ireland, and a mad
quoile in England of which there is great hope there will be a happy
conclusion, and for the which let us expect and humbly pray to that power of
powers, who is the one and only peacemaker.

Nor let any man make a doubt of this forementioned diurnall, for it will be
proved upon the Oaths of as honest men as either the Writer or Reader is, that
all herein is as true as some 20 of the Penny Pamphletts that are daily bought
and sold in the streets by the new Ragged Regiment of Tatterdemalian
Bookesellers.

There is news brought also, since this Diurnall was printed, that some
fishing Sailers, or Mariners, did most felloniously steal all such Ropes out
of the Kings ships as are called Sprttsaile Bolemis, to the great prejudice
of their being steared right, for many do fear that the said ships will
hardly fetch their Helmes as they should do. But the Thieves were taken, and
after great examination they were found guilty and because some of them were
married men. Batchellers, and some Appentises, they were adjudged to three
several punishments, the married men were Doomed, to be at their wives
disposing, and be allowed every meal (at home) a mess of Moundring broth
sealding hot; and they should never, have meat, drink, or clothes without
love, credit, or Ready money. The Batchellers were sensured to have each of
their heads placed between a pair of Ears, and the Apprentises were never to
be seen or look upon, but under the eyebrows.

I know it is a dangerous matter to speak wisely, and therefore, for mine own
safety, I will write this Diurnall to such as are troubld with the simples; It
is a dear year of wit: But Abuses are exceeding plentiful, as God knows.
And the King, Parliament, Church, State and poor Commons, have all joy ^^ly
and severally so much woeful experience.

The Reader may expect more news the next Dyurnall, if Letters be not
Intercepted.

FINIS.

