Repentance and Conversion, THE Fabric of Salvation: OR, The SAINTS joy in
Heaven, FOR The Sinners sorrow upon Earth.

Being the last SERMONS Preached by that Reverend and Learned JOHN HEWYT, D. D.
Late Minister of St. Gregory's by St. Paul's.

With other of his Sermons preached there.

Dedicated to all his pious Auditors, especially those of the said Parish.

Also an Advertisement concerning some Sermons lately printed, and pretended to
be the Doctors, but are disavowed By GEO. WILD. JO. BARWICK.


LONDON, Printed by J. C And are to be sold by Samuel Speed, at the sign of the
Printing Press, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

TO THE PIOUS AUDITORS OF THE LATE REVEREND AUTHOR, Especially those of St.
Gregory's Parish, in London.
IT is not the Ignis fatuus of Applause, and popular Euge's, that produced this
Publication; since it is perspicuous, no man, but he that has as great a stock
of impudence, as impiety, can lay claim to it; being the composition of your
Reverend Pastor, lately divested of Mortality.

Nor is the exposing these Sermons to public view intended to add to the mass
of any man's dolor or Internal Regret, for the violent death of the pious
Author; but to prevent the fictitious Chimaera's of many crazy brains, that
would shroud themselves under his Name, induced to it by Avarice,; whose
thoughts level at no other mark but their own sordid Lucre; and also, that so
pious a Beads-man might have somewhat engraven upon the forehead of Time, and
his name velit nolit invidia vigere. Wherefore here ye have a Volume of the
elaborate Pieces of this famous Pillar of the Church; some, as they did flow in
their native purity from his own mouth; others, penned by no meaner a Scribe
then his sacred self.

It Is but small, as to the Bulk; but vast, as to the Value; in which is such a
plerophory of significant expressions, besides the solid Divinity, that if
uprightly fathomed by the utmost extent of the sublimest thought, it will be
judged so neat and terse a Piece, that the whole World can scarce produce a
Parallel. Therefore they crowd and thrust themselves under the wings of your
Patronage, that so (being acceptable to you all his quondam-Parishioners) they
may be sheltered from the contagious emissions of that universal Basilisk,
Detraction.

That there is nothing able to preserve a man's fame entire and verdant in spite
of the Iron teeth of time, but the issue of the Brain, the Muse of Mellifluous
Naso, as ingenuously, as harmoniously, informs us, by this warbling Rithme: --
Nil non mortale te nemus
Pectoris exceptis, ingeniique bonis.
Pity it is, they should continue in the obscure darkness of Latency, and the
opack shades of silence. Therefore do they now, like Noah's dove, bear an
Olive Branch of Assurance and Consolation to all souls, that as yet remain in
the Ark of God, preserved from the deluge of sin.

They were the last that he pronounced in a Pulpit; therefore should be
entertained with more zeal, and read with more circumspection: that God may be
praised, his servant admired, your souls benefited, and our Holy Mother the
Church lamented for the death of so pious a Son of hers; whose loss no pen can
pourtray with its sable colors, nor tongue express by all its diapred variety.
But since it is the will of the Almighty to permit such things for our
correction and amendment, let us with a pious silence resign our selves up unto
God (according to the advice of this renowned Clergyman in his last words) and
pray for a more comely decorum in the Church, that so the celestial Manna of
Gods Word, may be administered to us by the truly-Orthodox; that the Queen of
Sciences, Divinity, may not be so sluttishly attired, as it appoars too often
she is, to our intolerable grief; that men may no longer shun the beauty of the
Church, but dwell in Gods Holy Temple.

One thing may not be omitted, and that is this: when the Library of this
famous Divine was surveyed, on some of his writings there was found engraven
with his own pen, these words; Luke 18.13.
God be merciful to me a sinner; and underneath, this ingenious and divine
Paraphrase: To separate God and Mercy, would be blasphemy; To separate Mercy
and Sinner, would be despair; To separate me and sinner, would be presumption:
A divine Paraphrase, worthy so rare a Divine.

To accumulate his Hearse with Encomiums, will be to little purpose, since his
works will predicate his Fame, -- A Gabibus usque
Auroram and Gangem.


This is the comfort of all true Christians; he is not amissus, but praemissus;
not lost, but sent before: let us crave therefore of the Almighty Jehovah, that
we may all meet in Heaven with him, there to sing perpetual Hallelujahs, World
without end.

An Advertisement, concerning some Notes, pretended to be Doctor HEWYT'S
Sermons.
WHereas some imperfect notes were upon a false suggestion, and by other
indirect means, entered into the Hall-book of the Company of Stationers, for the
use of Mr. Eversden at the Gray-hound, and Mr. Rook at the Lamb, both in St.
Paul's Churchyard, under the Title of Dr. HEWYT'S Sermons: These are to
signify to all whom it may concern,

1. That they are none of Dr. HEWYT'S Sermons, but only imperfect notes taken
from him as he preached, (or perhaps from some others) in short writing.

2. That they were entered without the consent or knowledge of the right
Honorable the Lady MARY HEWYT, Relict of the said Doctor; and are printed
contrary to the best endeavors her Ladyship could use by fair means to
suppress them, as is very well known to the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of
the Stationers Company.

3. That if any thing shall be printed or produced in writing, pretending the
said Ladies consent, the same has been, as is still, disavowed by her Ladyship
as none of hers: For all that she gave her hand for, or her consent unto, was
only a caveat that nothing should be printed in Doctor HEWYTS name without her
consent: and whatsoever there is more in that paper under her hand, was an
addition, (to call it no worse) of some other (whose name we conceal in mere
charity) after the paper was subscribed, as was manifested to the Company at
their Court, holden on Monday the 14. of June; and will be further justified
upon oath, by two sufficient witnesses, when occasion shall serve.

Geo. Wild. Jo. Barwick.


IN HAS Conciones Elucubratas admodum Reverendi Doctissimique Viri, JOANNIS
HEUETI, S. T. D.
ITae profanatae procul huc decedite chartae,
Praelorum pudor, and perniciosa Lues.
Hic vates Divina docet, Mundique caducas
Spernere Delicias, and meliora sequi.
Tum Peccatorem lapsos convertere gressus
Admonet and vitae poenituisse suae.
Inde Redemptoris pandit Mysteria magni
Nosque docet solam justificare Fidem.
Tum monstrat trepidis quae sit vexatio Sanctis,
Ballaque cum populis irrequieta Piis.
Scilicet in mediis posita est Ecclesia damnis,
Vt cingunt teneras torna Vepreta Rosas.
Postremo affectus sacrosque exponit amores,
Visceraque aeterni semper aperta DEI.
Sic been percurris diae Theoremata vitae,
Gloria Rostrorum, Deliciaeque Togae,
Quaeque doces, vita peragis, Fatoque potitus
Inter coelicolas stas numerande Choros.
J. W.

IN LAUDEM Perillustris Literatissimique JOANNIS HEUETI, D. D. Ad nodum
reverendi, nec non Orthodoxa, pietate, fide, and integritate spectatissimi.
ADsis Melpomene, lugubribus adsis Iambis,
Ut rores teneras Imbre cadente genas.
Ite procul nugae, fallacia numina vatum,
Fictaque de nimio monstra creata mero,
Non Phoci, aut Aganippe tuas jactate Paludes;
Dulcius ex Sacro Font bibuntur aquae.
HEWETTUM non vana juvant dum coelica pangat,
Et canat Angelicos sacra Thalia sonos.
Heu dolor! at mediis vates abscinditur annis,
Et cadit offenso victima Grata Deo.
Induitur pulla viduata Ecclesia vest
Et Pietas socio semisepulta rogo:
Dum Doctor venerande cadas flentumque veharis
Fluminibus, superis velificando plagis.
Nam Coelo adscripsit pietas, virtusque dicavit
Pectora and in tacto candidiora Nive.
Ergo quid insano juvat indulgere dolori?
Fataque flebilibus commemorare modis
Praesulis erepti terris? dum luce potiri,
Nec Fato poterat nobiliore mori.
J. G.

Repentance and Conversion, THE Fabric of Salvation.
In the Gospel according to St. Luke, Chap. 15. verse. 7. it is thus written: I
say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more then over ninety and nine just persons, that need no repentance.


NO man can be so sordidly blockish, SERMON. I.
or so wickedly profane, as to deny the necessity and benefit of Repentance:
Nor can there be any that plead a right to the title of Christians, but will
acknowledge themselves so implunged into Sin, as, without Repentance, they
deserve to be wrapped up in the embraces of eternal flames. This is the stable
foundation upon which the solid Christian builds the assured Fabric of his
future felicity. There is a procul O procul it o profane! written upon the
gates of heaven, unless Repentance procure you entrance. Since, therefore,
Beloved, it is so necessary a Christian duty, I have made choice of this Text;
wherein (not to stand upon Divisions, for we have too many of them already)
there are Two Parts present themselves to your Meditation.

1. That there is joy in heaven for the souls of the just that are already
converted; as appears by that Conjunction (...) or quam, then, that has
reference to somewhat preceding.

2. That there is far more joy in heaven for the conversion of a penitent
sinner.

This second in Order, though first placed in the Verse, shall be the subject
of our ensuing Discourse. We must therefore consider, 1. What Repentance is:
and 2. How to become true Penitents.


1. What it is: and that you shall know by this ensuing Definition: It Is a new
Creation, or sacred Metamorphosis of the soul, converting it from sin to God.
The Greek word is very emphatical, (...), which imports as much as a
recollecting of the mind, and meditating as it were upon former offenses, so
as to repent and be heartily sorry for them; not with a superficial and slight
kind of grief, but a real, cordial, and extraordinary Compunction and
Contrition for sin.

Now this Repentance presupposes some sin formerly committed, some crime
heretofore perpetrated. That we are all infected with the Leprosy of sin, no
rational Christian I presume will deny, or dare gainsay. Our first parents have
infused, or rather left a taint of their first sin upon all their posterity; so
that no man, how devout soever he be, can plead a freedom from Original
corruption: Nemo non inficitur Adami labe: All persons are infected with the
sin of our first parents; and, as through a chanel, the tincture of it has
taken its course to the whole world. You may as well separate hic homo, and hoc
individuum, as Man and Original sin. Besides this, how is our life made up of
an infinite number of offenses and trespasses! It Is but a fasciculus or forrago
peccatorum, a Bundle or Miscelany of sin: sins Original, and sins Actual; sins
of Omission, and sins of Commission; sins of ignorance, and sins of Knowledge;
sins against the Law of God, and sins against his Gospel; sins against Light,
and sins against Love. Our sinful Words are more then word can express; our
sinful Thoughts are more then thought can conceive: our sinful Deeds have been
so many in number, and so heinous in nature, that we have scarce left number
for more, or place for worse. Nay, the very Heathens, though poisoned with
Idolatry, and guided by no other light but the Rush-candle of Nature, could cry
out, Nemo sine crimine vivit: All men sin. Since therefore we are all more or
less vicious, all more or less peccato dediti; since we are all sick of this
disease of sin, all troubled with this malady; we must seek out a Physician
that may prescribe us a Medicine, a Cure for this our filthy Leprosy. The
Physician is our Savior JESUS; and so much is intimated unto us by his Name in
the Original, (...), which has its derivation from (...) to heal, and (...) to
save: first he heals, and then he saves: first he remedies the distemper of the
body, and then he saves the soul. And that you may be inexcusable if you split
the precious vessels of your souls upon the rock of Perdition; and without
defense, that you may not pretend either a sinful Bashfulness, or
Insufficiency and Unworthiness; He himself has vouchsafed to descend so far
below himself, as to give you invitation, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye
that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. (...), it is in the
Original; all ye that groan under the weight of sin, as Porters do under a
heavy burden; and I will ease you, says our Savior. So that whosoever he be
that groans under the weight of sin, and lies under the wrack of a pricking
Conscience, may come, unless he be wilfully bent upon his own ruin, and
receive help from the Prince of Physicians, and the God of them too. For he is
the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, as that pious Anagram
of his blessed Name does intimate unto us; (...): Thou art the Lamb, (...), the
irreprehensible Lamb, or Lamb without spot or blemish: but the Original
signifies somewhat more; so undefiled, and so pure, that Momus himself cannot
tell how to carp at him. Nay, the blessed Angels, Heaven it self rejoices at
the conversion of a penitent sinner; Repentance therefore is a thing necessary
and requisite to the salvation of a soul. Christ is our Physician, and
Repentance is our Physic. We may soon, with the tears of sincere Contrition,
wash our selves in the blood of Christ, from all putrefaction and filthiness
that sin has polluted us withal. Therefore we ought all of us to begin and
take a Lesson of Repentance in the School of Christ: we ought to begin ab
incunabulis, in our very youth; and not dare florem diabolo, foecem Deo; not
waste away the flower and vigor of our youthful years in the devils vassalage,
and when our heads are hoary and Periwig'd with the Snow of Age, then to
consecrate our selves to the service of God, and to offer up our selves to the
Altar of his Acceptance, and that he would for the merits of our most blessed
Savior, his most blessed Son, who suffered that cursed and ignominious death,
the death of the Cross, for our sins, have mercy upon us, and pardon all our
enormities past, present and to come. Begin in May, not in December: for assure
your selves, God will never accept of the devils leavings. You must not stream
out your Youth in Wine, and live a Lapling to the Silk and Dainties; wear all
your Manors on your back at once, and like the rich man in the Gospel, go
attired in purple, and fare deliciously every day; and then think when you are
come to the Spectacle, and bearingstaff, to turn to God, and steer the Vessel
of your soul toward heaven. Sera poenitentia raro vera: Repentance in the
declining of a man's age, when the Sun of his life is posting to the West, is
seldom true. The Thief upon the Cross, of whom we may truly say, Periisset,
nisi periisset, was saved: There was one saved, that none might despair; and
but one, that none might presume.

Use not the common Shift of the world, to say that you are not guilty of any
Crying sins; they are but petty offenses. For I must tell you, Beloved, these
are but diabolical suggestions infused into you by the spirit of Darkness: you
must first find out a small God, before you can commit a small sin. Nay, all
sins, of what sort soever they be, are great sins, sins of a high stature,
because committed against the Law of the sin-detesting God. For were it not for
the Law of God, that strictly and severely prohibits all manner of sin, and
commands uprightness, there would be no such thing in the world as Sin: for
what is sin, but the transgression of Gods Law? And therefore holy David
acknowledged his sins to be committed against God, because he had transgressed
and violated his Law and Commandment: which made him to break forth into that
penitent and holy Rapture; Against thee, against thee only have I sinned:
Psalm. 51.4. We are all naturally sinful: there is no difference by Nature,
between the Elect and Reprobate, neither in external nor internal disposition,
until it be made by Grace. St. Paul was a Persecutor of as deep a Scarlet-dye,
as ever Domitian or Julian was: Zacheus, as unconscionable and miserable a
Worldling, as the rich Glutton in the Gospel, Luke 16.19. All persons are alike
by Nature, till Grace comes in and makes a difference: for we are all by Nature
children of wrath, heirs of perdition, and in danger of damnation. It Is
Regeneration, that procures us our passage to heaven: Except a man be re-born,
(or born anew) he cannot see the kingdom of God: Joh. 3. and Luke 13.5. Except
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. So that so long as we remain in the
state of Nature, being conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, we are
still remaining in a most desperate and damnable condition.

For the poison of our Nature is as virulent in us, as in the wicked; and by
Nature we are as much addicted to all manner of sins: And though by the special
mercy of the Father of mercies, we have escaped many damnable and detestable
crimes, which we find the wicked have been often implunged into; it is not
because we are of a more pure and undefiled nature then they, (for it is the
same as theirs) but because the envenomed virulencie thereof has not as yet
manifested it self in us; which we have just cause every day to fear: for, in
truth, we have taken so much of the devils Opium, that, without Repentance, we
shall never be awakened out of the dead sleep of sin.

Therefore let us strive with a holy resolution to shake off these rags of
Natural Corruption, and clothe out selves with the precious garment of Christ
Jesus. Let us get into a state of grace, and by a real and sincere Repentance
turn over a new leaf, become converts and disciples of our Savior. Adam, you
know, did not fall as a private man, but as the Root of all Mankind; and we
all partake of that Fall, since we are the issue of his loins: and the vessels
of our bodies still keep a smack of the old relish. For, according to the Poet,
Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem,
Testa diu.


The sweetest Stream that flows, will relish of the soil that it has saluted.

Inficitur terrae sordibus unda fluens. Sheep never come near a hedge, but they
leave some Wool behind them. One man infected with the Plague, will corrupt
ten men, sooner then ten men can cure one infected person. You know what the
Satyrist says: -- Grex totus in agris,
Unius scabie cadit, and porrigine porci.
Which our English Proverb renders exactly, One scabbed sheep will spoil the
whole flock.

Well might that sweet-mouth'd Roman call this The Iron Age: for Iniquity is
an epidemical distemper, or a Chronical Disease, that admits of no Cure but
Repentance, and that sincere too. And I fear that the Poet writ in Prophetic
measures, when his Muse warbled this so suitable an expression to our Times:
Nil erit ulterius, quod nostris moribus addat
Posteritas.


Our Age is grown to such a height of Impiety, that Posterity will not be able
to add any thing to it. Pride swaggers in the streets, Luxury is housed, and
Drunkenness reels to and fro, notwithstanding the heavy Judgments of God
denounced against those that exercise such abominations: and all the Armor of
the mightiest Potentates in the world is not able to resist the Prophets of
God, when their Commission is sealed with God's Ipse dixit, cujus verbum ab
intention, quia veritas, factum a verbo, quia virtus, non differt. Gods word
is a word with a deed; and what he says, shall be done without doubt or demur:
And all good men will obey his Law and Commandment: but where are these good
men now adays? A good man is hard to be found; he is rara avis in terris,
sprung from the ashes of some dead Phoenix, whose abode is scarce known: he is
like the Berries of the Prophet Isaiah's tree, here and there one to be found:
nay, it is a thousand to one, if you find one in a thousand. The jerking
Satyrist, the Lash of his time, could say, so long since, much more then may we
now, Rari quippe boni, numero vix sunt totidem, quot
Thebarum portae vel divitis ostia Nili.


There are but seven good men, at most, says he. A small number indeed! What
the Philosopher says of Good, I Am sure is in these our Times verified of Evil:
Malum est sui diffusivum: Evil is diffusive; it is of a spreading nature; a
disease that is catching; therefore we should never go abroad without an
Antidote against it; and that is the Word of God: for, Antidotum verbi
serpentis venenum expugnat: The Word of God is a sovereign Antidote against the
poison of the Serpent. We live now in the sink of Time, wherein Virtue is
accounted a Prodigy, and Piety a Crime, or at the best a Simplicity. And our
Aarons are taken away, and put aside as useless; and the people die of the
Plague: I wonder who shall stand between the living and the dead, holding the
Censers, and making Atonement for them? They are cast aside, Beloved, and none
but a Spurious Issue admitted of, that have no Authority nor Commission.
Quicquid libet licet, nunc dierum; and yet it is strange, non licet esse bonus.
And take this by the way, That he that will be a godly Christian, must, like
the Antipodes, run a contrary course to the men of the world. It Is sin, and the
Fall of our parents, that has brought us into this condition: here we lie: but
thanks to the Almighty, here is comfort enough for the most heinous sinner, so
he have not committed the sin against the holy Ghost, if he will but repent.
Sacrae paginae scatent hujusmodi consolationibus. The Scripture abounds with
Lectures of Comfort to all penitent sinners: Isai. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake
his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and turn unto the Lord, and
he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he is ready to forgive. And so
likewise in Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. If the wicked will return from all his sins that
he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right; he shall surely live, and not die: all his transgressions that he has
committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him; but in his righteousness that
he has done, shall he live. The Scripture is an Ocean that flows with such
comfortable streams; and that both the Old and New Testament, as it appears in
1 John 1.9. If we acknowledge our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. (...), from all injustice.
And so in the 2. Chap. of the same Epistle, verse. the 1. and 2. If any man sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just. And he is the
reconciliation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of
the whole world: (...): Now what need we care what suit we commence, at the
Upper-bench in Heaven, so long as we have Christ for our Lawyer, our
Counselor? Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? if God be for us, who shall be
against us?

1 Use. This then should serve for a Use of Consolation, to stir up all persons
to a real and true repentance. Since Christ is for them; since he calls himself
their Advocate, their Pleader, their Counselor; and has promised so often
that whosoever repents shall not perish, but have everlasting life: And
though every man be an enemy to his own salvation, and the flesh resist the
same work; and the devil does endeavor by his wicked machinations to stir up
in the heart of a man an aversion to conversion; this should create in us more
firm and settled resolutions after the work, since we have the promise of our
blessed Savior for success in our undertaking; but this cannot be performed
without a holy indefatigable industry on our part; for it is called in holy
writ, a Birth, a Death, a Circumcision; and you know no Birth, no Death, no
cutting off of the flesh can be without care, pain and labor: The Embryo is
not delivered out of the womb of the mother without pain; nay, many times the
womb proves the tomb; and therefore you cannot imagine it is a thing possible,
to be delivered of sin, which is in you, was conceived with you, and which you
since your nativity, unto this moment, have cherished with such delight; and
not to have a relish or gust of pain and travail in the new birth, in your
regeneration. Assure your self that it will cost you many a salt tear, many a
bitter groan, many a heavy sigh, before you have this work of regeneration
perfectly wrought in you. Nemo repent fit optimus. No man can arrive to the
height of a virtue in a moment; and since it is res tam ardua, tantae molis
opus: so difficult, and so necessary a work; you ought all to labor more
fervently then hitherto you have done, and use all holy means that God has
constituted and appointed in sacred writ as subservient thereunto, viz. The
Word read and preached by the faithful and Orthodox Pastors of the Church; the
Sacraments reverently and duly administered in the most decent and devout
manner; Prayer and holy ejaculations that dart up the desire of the soul to
God, and meditation on the Law of God; crying unto him noctes atque dies, night
and day for his blessed assistance in a work of so great moment and consequence
as the regeneration of man: add hereunto an unfeigned repentance of all sins
committed; and let it not be a little lip-labor only, but it must proceed from
a real and contrite heart, free from hypocrisy and dissimulation.

2 Use. Secondly, this serves as Use of Terror to all careless and impenitent
sinners, that will follow the swinge of their own pleasure, and the lusts of
the flesh, though they shipwreck their souls inevitably. How should this pull
down and totally demolish the Pyramide of pride, man's heart, and divest them of
their gaudy attire, and change it for sackcloth and ashes, which is far more
suitable to their spiritual condition? Yet how do they ruffle in velvet a la
mode, and boast and vaunt in the spoils of a poor silkworm! yet in the interim
they consider not that the sores of Lazarus will make as good dust as the paint
of Jezabel; and that their poor souls languish and are very near starved for
want of heavenly Manna, Gods Sacred word, whilst they pamper their bodies, and
plump them with delicacies, which serves only to make them more fat and
gorgious nourishment for worms. Learn to wash your selves by the tears of
repentance from the filth of sin: your whole life should be a continued Lent;
the Springtime of your sanctified resolutions, and the hourglass of your
remaining days should be filled with the dust of mortified concupiscence; you
should read nothing but lectures of penitency, and so like a good and solid
Christian verify what is feigned of the Phoenix, in a bed of spices, in odors
of devotion, kindled by the beams of the true Sun of righteousness, quickening
out of the ashes an acceptable sacrifice to the Father of Lights; for he
delights not in the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from
his wickedness and live. It Is not a light sorrow, or petty sigh, or a Miserere
mei Domine at the last gasp, when the soul is going to give his ultimum vale to
the body, will serve your turn, or procure pardon of your sins from God; no,
no; you must labor to be humbled more deeply for your enormous offenses and
heinous sins, which seal the heavens with their clamor, and cry for vengeance
from the Lord of heaven; so that if we could possibly shed tears of blood for
our crimson scarlet sins, we should do it; for all come short of that grief for
sin, and real contrition of heart, that we ought to have. Could we stream out
the residue of our days that it shall please the Almighty to allow us in this
vale of misery; could we consume and wast the Taper of our life in sighs, and
heartbreaking groans; 'twere all little enough to beg and obtain pardon of God
for our sins. You must bath the Leprosy of your sin in a Jordan of tears,
before you can come to the Land of Canaan, the Zoar of salvation. Life you know
is uncertain, death certain; you had best therefore beloved take hold of
opportunity by the forelock; for, post est occasio calva: an opportunity once
slipped, is seldom recovered: whilst it is called to day, harden not your heart:
Nemo sibi crastinum promittat; Let no man assure himself of the morrow; for
death wrestleth with every man, and serius aut citius mortem properamus adunam;
sooner or later he gets a fall: he has tript up the heels of all our
Ancestors, and you know not how soon he may foyl you; Venienti occurrite morbo;
meet the distemper, and remedy it whilst it is curable. Delays in rebus sanctis
are very dangerous; repent therefore of your sins before death: that though he
be termed by the Heathen Philosophers (...), he may be to you a Messenger that
brings glad tidings: a guide to conduct you from a momentany unto eternal
life, which we shall enjoy with God in secula seculorum. I could wish cordially
that that saying of that good old man St. Cyprian were not so true as daily
experience manifests it, In aetate senescunt, in pietate juvenescunt. Most men
now adays have gray heads and green wits, capita cana, and corda vana; and
when their heads are full of silver hairs, they have not so much as sucked in
their Rudiments: they have need of milk, the food of babes and sucklings,
instead of the more solid grounds and fundamentals of Religion. Whereas ancient
Christians should be walking Laws, and talking Statutes; their dicta, edicta;
and their actiones, axiomata, as Gregory Nazianzen says. It Is a sad thing to
be near heaven, and never the near; to be at the gates of death, before they
have learnt one lesson of repentance: and if their repentance be sorrowless,
'twill prove but a sorry one: Old men should like trees of righteousness bear
fruit in their old age, when their heads are candied with hoary hair; but not
the fruits of old age, covetousness, suspicion, and the like. If the
Evangelists in their time could cry out, Repent, repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand; it must of necessity be nearer at hand now then it was then;
therefore beloved, I have the more cause to press this Doctrine of repentance
upon you: and let me tell you, that there is no music so melodious in the ears
of God, as that which resounds from a broken instrument: God loves a broken
heart, and yet he will have the whole heart or none: it is strange, and yet true,
repentance is a consumption, yet no sickness; and what man would not willingly
condescend to undergo such a consumption here, that he might not be consumed in
endless, easeless and remediless flames and torments hereafter? One thing I do
very much admire at, viz. how they can expect favor from God, that will grant
favor to none but upon the devils conditions in the 24 of St. Matthew, (...),
if falling down thou will worship. They would have others fall down and worship
them, when as they will not worship and adore God. Dejecisti eos, dum
elevarentur, says the Psalmist; a strange kind of expression, Thou have taken
them down, whilst thou liftedst them up: this seems to have an allusion to the
Eagle and other birds of prey, who having found an Oyster, that they with their
own strength cannot break, or open; they soar aloft, and spying the clift of a
rock (for they are very quick-sighted, as natural Philosophers inform us) they
let the Oyster fall perpendicularly, and so it breaking to pieces, they come to
their desired food: so God he lifts them up on high, that they may the better
get a fall.

-- Tolluntur in altum,
Ut lapsu graviore ruant --
Such haughty minds are not seasoned aright; they have no true frame of a
penitent spirit; neither will God accept of such persons: and till you be
reconciled to God through his son Jesus Christ, and are washed and cleansed
from all your iniquities by the tears of repentance, and be converted from sin
to God, your case is desperate; and it had been better for you to have been a
beast, than a man. Display your sins before God, not hypocritically, but
really; for there is no dissembling with God: and confession in your mouth, if
it be hypocritical, will be like a Shibboleth in the Hebrew; you cannot
pronounce it without lisping: your sins are heinous, confess them cordially to
be so; your sins are many in number, acknowledge them to be so; the Terra
incognita of your corruptions is far larger then the Terra cognita. But let not
the hainousness of thy sin, the number or multitude of them, deter thee from
repentance; but proceed with a holy resolution to go through all difficulties
by the help of Christ Jesus, and all objections that the world, the flesh, and
the devil can allege against you, till you have obtained pardon and remission
of your sins: never cease, till you come to a period; for he that intends to
sing Te Deum to the Almighty, must not break off till he come to the end.
Proceed, I say, beloved, ad finem usque, and rely upon the merits of our Jesus:
and be not put off by the hainousness of your sins, and the rigor of the Law
of God; for if the most holy man that ever breathed upon the face of the earth,
should be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, and no grain of favor be
allowed him, then without all doubt mean tekel might be applied to him, he
would be found too light. There will be grains of allowance to thee, without
question; therefore be converted, and turn from the broad way of sin and death,
to the narrow path of life and eternal glory; for such a soul will be
acceptable unto the Lord; the blessed Quire of Angels will rejoice at the
conversion of such a sinner; For (according to my Text) joy shall be in Heaven
over one sinner that repententh, more then over ninety and nine just persons,
that need no repentance. So much for this time.

Repentance and Conversion, THE Fabric of Salvation.
In the Gospel according to St. Luke, Chap. 15. verse. 7. it is thus written: I
say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more then over ninety and nine just persons, that need no repentance.


WE have already discoursed upon these words, SERMON. II.
and demonstrated unto you both by Scripture and other authority, the necessity
and excellency of Repentance: We have largely discoursed of the nature of
repentance, and defined it unto you. Now not to detain you with any farther
repetition, we shall immediately fall upon the second observation that we
raised from the words of the Text, and that was this, viz. How to become true
poenitents.

And really, beloved, hic labor, hoc opus est, or at least should be; this
should be the white at which every true Christian should level his thoughts;
This ought to be the Asylum unto which every godly man should have recourse,
when he is prosecuted and persecuted both by sin and Satan; This should be the
(...), or sum of every man's actions, and the chiefest and first of his
intentions, the cream and top of his holy ambition: But where shall we traffic
for true penitent souls? what climate affords them? all Nations are more or
less given to some heinous crime. To be sober among the Germans, settled among
the French, chaste among the Italians, and loyal among the English, is rare,
and worthy admiration: you need not make any strict inquisition after impiety,
there is enough daily presented upon the stage of the world; there is too too
much, God knows: Truth, the pure, innocent, undefiled Truth, like the Dove of
Noah, flies about, and scarce gets any room for her footing; she is mounted to
heaven with Astraea: but if you desire to find out a whorish Achan, a covetous
Ahab, a hard-hearted Pharaoh, a Nebuchadonozor quaffing in the bowls of the
Sanctuary, a sacrilegious fellow buying Bishops Lands, you may meet with him in
every corner, Scatent plateae hujusmodi viris nequam: for truth is expelled
nunc dierum. To be true and loyal, marches in the rank of impossibilities, as
the world is now: but let us operum dare, labor tooth and nail, as we say
proverbially, to avoid the accursed punishment of impenitent persons; seek
after the remission of sins by the bloody death and passion of our Savior; and
lay hold with the hand of faith on all Gospel-promises, applicable to a
conscience-wounded sinner; that so after we have lived a life of grace here in
this vale of misery, we may enjoy a life of glory in perpetuum hereafter.

Now the main point intended in this discourse, is to discover unto you some
ways or means how to apprehend when you are truly penitent; and that I shall
demonstrate unto you, 1. Negatively, and 2. Affirmatively.


1. Negatively: and here I will declare unto you, beloved, auspiciis Divinis,
by the help of the Deity, what it is not, viz. being true penitents, and that
in 5. particulars, 5 Discoveries of true penitency.
which shall be as so many brands on their foreheads, to inform the world of
their impenitency.

1. He is no true penitent, that is not so perplexed, as to be gnawen at the
very heart by that viper Sorrow, for his many enormous offenses, and sensible
of the need that he stands in of Gods mercy, an Ocean of mercy; nay unless he
think the burden of his sin so ponderous and weighty, so filthy and impure, as
to require every drop of the blood of our Savior to satisfy for them. King
David, (if it be not a crime to allow him his Title) having implunged himself
into a gulf and multitude of sins, begs a multitude of mercies, as it appears
in the 51. Psalm. verse. the 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy
loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
transgressions. We stand in need of a Sea of mercies for the innumerable number
of our heinous crimes, that we are guilty of: Now he that is so hardened with
the yoke of sin, that he is become brawny, and insensible of the weight and
hainousness of it, this man has no penitent frame of spirit; and we may safely
say, without any prejudice to our charity, or incurring the evil of censure,
that such a man is no true penitent.

2. They are not become true penitents, no nor in the way to repentance, that
are so far from being grieved at sin, as to make no bones of great sins; nay,
to dally and toy with sin and impiety: but it is bad handling such edged tools;
for the sword of Gods indignation will soon cut them off: swearing with such
persons, is but a grace and luster to their speech, a splendour, but I fear such
a one as will light them to hell: lying, but wit's craft, or policy;
drunkenness, jovialness, or good fellowship; whoring, a trick of youth,
covetousness, thriftiness: thus do they baptize vice by the name of virtue: see
how bestial, fowl and deformed a thing vice is, that it dare not appear in its
own native deformity and hue, but it must borrow the Mask of virtue: they think
that they can shift well enough without mercy, and imagine that three words at
the last gasp is sufficient to save their soul; but I pray God they may not
share with that Gentleman in fortune, that was very debauched, and had streamed
out his youth in wine and venery, who being desired by his Confessor to
acknowledge his misdemeanors toward God and man, and to beseech God to
vouchsafe him pardon of his sins; put him off with a pish: Three words at last
are of sufficient power to save my soul; meaning, Miserere mei Deus: but it
happened that this Gentleman not long after, as he was riding over a bridge, his
horse slipped, and down fell horse and man into the river; and in falling,
instead of Miserere mei Deus, he was heard to say, Capiat omnia Demon, The
devil take both horse and man: sad words, to be the vehiculo animae suae, to
waft his soul over into the other world; a sweet Epilogue to the Tragedy of his
life! His Catastrophe was as damnable, as his whole life abominable and odious.
This will be a caveat to all serious and solid Christians, to avoid
procrastination in repentance, and endeavor after it with all possible speed.

3. They are not true penitens that are merely earal, verbal, and worded men,
that speak more then they really intend; this is not repentance, but a little
lip-labor, a foolish weak stratagem, a mere external pomp of words, for which
the Pharisees were reprehended by our Savior, long since: It Is strange that
men should be so meanly brained, as to imagine the putting of a cheat upon God;
to what purpose should the title of (...) be conferred upon him? If you are
bent to sin, and cannot be reclaimed from your lewd courses, but must have your
swinge, and forsake your Creator in the days of your youth, and you are
resolved to run to hell in full career, and no persuasion will operate or work
upon you; then must you look to the event, and feel the smart of Gods rod, and
the weight of his indignation. And 'twere better far in my judgment, for a man
not to be born, then to be deprived and robbed of the luster of Gods
emparadising countenance; whose frown's a hell, whose smile's a heaven; for
there is hell where God is absent, and there heaven where he is present. Think
not then to deprive God of one of his most Glorious Attributes, viz.
Omniscience, by endeavoring to counterfeit a kind of repentance, when you have
no such intent, but still tread the paths of the impiously profane, and commit
sins so in private, though as damnable, as secret: I will only bestow a golden
sentence of St. Augustines on you, Quaere locum ubi te Deus non videat, and fac
quid vis: Find out a place where you may commit sin unseen, and then do what
you please: not a couch-bed-sin, but lies open to the perspicuity of Gods
all-seeing eye; it is not the slender barricado of a curtain can defend you, or
prevent his sight; nay there is a sentence of infelicity, and not prospering,
pronounced upon all secret Sinners: in the 28. of the Prove. verse. 13. He that
hides his sins shall not prosper: but he that confesses, and forsakes them,
shall have mercy. Therefore be real, and repent cordially, cheat not your
precious souls of so heavenly a viaticum; unless you intend, and are
desperately resolute, and bent to defraud your self of eternal felicity, and so
be cast into hell irrecoverably: Repent, Repent, beloved, strive and endeavor
after reconciliation with God; get the wedding garment on, that you may enter
into the Bride-chamber, and be a welcome guest to God the Father. Cease
provoking of him to wrath by your heinous sin; For it is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. And if the wrath of a King be
as the roaring of a Lion, that can only prejudice the body; how much more heavy
and weighty shall the wrath and indignation of God be, Matthew. 5.30.
who can cast both body and soul into eternal unquenchable burnings!

4. It argues a man's repentance not to be solid or laid upon a good foundation,
when they are induced to it for fear of shame and punishment; and were it not
for this, he could willingly devote his days to sin and uncleanness: though
they may be accounted true penitents, and so esteemed by the world; many
Pharisaical persons may put such a gloss upon their sins, that their Apocryphal
deeds may pass for Canonical actions; but (...), The all-seeing eye of God will
soon pierce into the inmost chambers of their hearts, and discover their
deceit, how closely and privately soever they carry it. This will cut the comb
of all hypocrites and counterfeits, that think an outward color, or
superficial show is satisfactory and acceptable to God; though like the
externally specious Apples of Sodom, they be rotten at the core: such persons
are like the Cynamon-tree, whose bark is better than the substance. The Lord is
infinitely offended at such proceedings, and testifies his dislike thereof;
This people (says he) come near me with their lips, and honor me with their
mouths, but their hearts are far from me; so the Lord tells the Jews in the
42 chapter of the prophecy of holy Jeremiah, the 20. verse; They did but dissemble
with him in their hearts, and promised to do his will, but they do nothing but
the contrary, and follow their own lusts. God abhors and detests such persons;
he will spue them out of his mouth, and never suffer them to be partakers of
his Heavenly Kingdom: Let all such hypocritical persons take notice, and
consider the judgment of God on Ananias and Sapphira, Acts the 5. who because
they would videri tantum, seem only religious, and forward to sell their Lands,
and give it to the poor, (thus covetousness cannot walk without the cloak of
religion to cover its deformity) therefore the Lord smote them both dead. And
that Christ might manifest how vile and odious hypocritical persons are in the
sight of the Lord; He tells us in the Gospel of St. Matthew, chap. 24. verse.
51. All vile sinners shall have their portion with hypocrites; because if there
be one place in hell hotter then another, that may be termed locus
hypocritarum, The seat of hypocrites. Therefore we should all endeavor to get
a sound heart, free from dissimulation and hypocrisy, which may be an
acceptable sacrifice to God, and well-pleasing, that he may smell a sweet
savor from all our pious works.

5. Fifthly and lastly, it is a sign of impenitency, when men are so impiously
bold as to stand on their own merits and desert, their own goodness and
worthiness, when they approach the presence of God; like the proud Pharisee,
Luke the 18.11, 12. I thank thee, O God, that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican; I fast twice a
week, I give tithes of all that I possess: but the Publican that only smote his
breast, and said only, God be merciful to me a sinner, went down to his house
justified, says the Text, rather then the boasting Pharisee: such tumors are
as great scars and imperfections to the soul, as a wound or wen to a rare
complexion. We should all cast away our own righteousness as a menstruous rag,
and rely wholly upon the meritorious death and passion of the immaculate Lamb
of God, his Christ, and our Savior, for the salvation of our immortal souls:
We should totally divest our selves of all worth, for we are all sinful dust
and ashes; and therefore may well make this expostulation with all men; Homo
bulla, quid superbis? O man, thou that art but an aerie bubble, Why art thou
proud? Thou that art a bubble that is made of nothing, and when made, as soon
blown to nothing; Cum sis humi limus, cur non es humillimus? Since you are
composed of the dung of the ground, of earth; why are you not according to the
matter you were created of, mean and humble? The whole world is not able to
satisfy their ambition, but the aspiring Pyramid of their thoughts mounteth
and still lesseneth by degrees, till it come to a mere punctum. Most men now
adays, like the Pellaean Hero, Alexander the Great, do Aestuare angusto limite
mundi, Sweat for want of room in the world; there is not space enough for the
flight of their soaring thoughts, that are winged with ambition: but this is
according to the Wiseman, nothing but vanity, vanitas vanitatum, omnia vanitas:
They fish after impossibilities; and grant they could subdue the whole world,
and reduce it into their own possession; 'twould not, it could not satisfy
their heart, or give them any real solid content: for the world is a Circle,
the heart of man a Triangle; now we all know that a Circle cannot fill a
Triangle. Cease then, all you that aim at the hilling up of fatal gold, and
employ your hours in a more noble traffic, in procuring the riches and
treasures of Jesus Christ, that may serve you, and be of use to you in the day
of wrath, to get your Sins pardoned, all your crimes expunged with the Sponge
of Oblivion, that the Lord may nevermore lay them to your charge; and this must
be by an unfeigned repentance, though none of the five forementioned ways. Now
that you may know how to gain the salvation of your souls, how to be eternally
blessed, and sing Hallelujahs to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, world without end; which felicity will undoubtedly be attained unto by
all true penitent souls. And that you may know affirmatively what it is to be
true penitents, take it in these following Considerations: The five steps of
ascension by Repentance.
To this felicity we must ascend by 5 degrees or steps of true and unfeigned
repentance.

1. The first step whereof that leads and conducts to heaven, is for a man to
have an internal regret for sin, to be grieved and perplexed for it, to be
wounded in conscience for it; for till a man see his Sins in the glass of
repentance, and weigh them, and meditate upon the curse of God that hangs over
his head in a judgment for them, he will never repent: This is the godly sorrow
that leads unto repentance never to be repented of. This compunction or
pricking of the heart is a clear demonstration of repentance, sincere and
sound; and is the first step to heaven, and so per consequens to the salvation
of the never dying soul.

And if it be so that this is the first step to heaven; Non progredi, est
regredi; Not to go forward, is to go backward. How many are there that never
have been humbled, never touched, never wounded in conscience for their Sins?
Wilful impenitency, or a careless neglect of Repentance, very dangerous.
O what a miserable condition, what a deplorable estate do they lie in! Now
apply this to your selves, Beloved; did the sacrificing Knife of Gods Word
never wound your conscience, nor extract one tear from your eyes for the deluge
of your Sins, that will overwhelm your soul eternally, without Gods infinite
mercy? if you have not been thus and thus grieved for your trespasses and
transgressions, you are in a desperate condition, and there is very little hope
or probability of your salvation.

indicium or sign of being in the state of grace, and that Gods spirit has met
with us, and his Word has cut the throat of Sin, which otherwise would have
ruinated you, nay aims at God himself; for peccatum, says Parisiensis, est
Deicidium, Sin is the Cutthroat of God, with holy reverence be it spoken; Sin
strives to dethrone God; therefore let us endeavor to cast Sin down the
precipice of our hearts, and nevermore afford it house-room, since it offends
so merciful, so gracious, and so kind a God as ours; for Sin is an abomination
unto the Lord, and so are all Sinners and evildoers.

2. The second sign of, or way to true penitency, is this, when a man fears to
Sin, not because of the punishment, but because he offends so great a God in so
doing: like holy Joseph, who when he was tempted by the sweet caresses of his
Mistress, cried out, How can I do this great evil, and sin against God!
Therefore from him we may learn what is most to be desired here on earth, viz.
the love and favor of God* so that if any one should put the question to you,
and demand what your desire most hunted after, and what your affections were
most fixed on? You ought to answer, The love and favor of God in Christ Jesus.
It Is not your embroidered apparel, your manners and manors, your parts and
arts, that are able to appease the trouble and perplexity of a distressed
conscience; nothing but the mercy of God in Christ Jesus will afford it: This
is the only refuge for a troubled conscience in the greatest extremity. Men
may in their extremities go to drink away sorrow, as they term it in their
profane gibbrish, and betake themselves to their merry company; but alas! this
is no comfort, this no remedy for their disease: an old sore gangrened or
putrified, if it be not very skilfully handled, will hardly admit of cure; but
if it be superficially healed at top, and not thoroughly at the bottom, as soon
as it is skinned at the top, it will break out at the bottom; so when men seek to
smother the accusation of their own consciences, and strive to blunt the edge
of it, it will rebound again, and give a deadly wound, even to desperation. Beg
of God therefore power and ability through his strengthening grace, that you may
be buoyed up thereby in the midst of an Ocean of troubles, and that the burden
of an afflicted wounded conscience may be minorated, and lessened, that so you
may not fall into despair. To prevent despair, all godly persons ought like
Heraclitus, to weep away their days; and indeed, they are a sea of tears, a
mere vapor melted into tears: his voice is painted with tears, which have such
an airy power and faculty, as that they are able to mount up to Heaven, and
there to insinuate themselves into the ear of the Almighty, begging and craving
pardon for sin, and a preservation from despair by the mighty power of God.
Lachrymae and preces are the only weapons in a Christian battle; let us so
fight with these weapons, as to get the peace of conscience and joy of the Holy
Ghost, that passes all understanding, and that speedily too: for our journey
is long, and our time short, therefore we had need to husband it well: Can
there be a longer journey then from earth to heaven? and a shorter time than a
moment? Yet such is our journey, such is our time: Repent therefore now while
it is called to day, harden not your hearts, for procrastination is dangerous:
doubt not of the power of God, for he is Omnipotent; and this attribute of his
is manifested in every petty piece of the Hexameron Fabric: There is (...),
something that may challenge our admiration, even in the borders of a gaudy
Butterfly, says Aristotle; which do afford an evident smack or view of the
Omnipotency of God. Rely upon him therefore; fear sin, and avoid it, because it
offends so gracious a God.

3. The third step to true repentance, is a constant and settled resolution,
never to sin, or displease God; to do his will, walk in the way of his
Commandments: I do not say, that a truly sanctified person never sins at all,
but he never sins with an intent and purpose to sin; he takes no delight or
complacency in sin; it is the sole object of his hatred, and resolves to please
God as far as possibly he may by the grace of God that strengthens him: When he
can say with holy David, Psalm the 18. and the 23. I have refrained my feet
from every evil way. Again, 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God sins not, i.
e. not with a full purpose of heart, or with a delight in it, or affection to
it; but they constantly strive against it, shun and avoid the occasions of sin,
suspect themselves upon every occasion, and are continually armed to give
battle to the devil and his temptations. In may things we sin all, says St.
James. But if we can but say really and experimentally that it is against our
intention, that we hate, abhor and detest sin with an unutterable hatred, and
that we condemn the very sins we commit, then we may be comforted, receive joy,
and assure our selves that we are true penitents; for this takes away the
dominion of sin in our mortal bodies: does not quite thrust it out, it does
divest it of its authority; so that it has no power to prejudice or injure us
in our salvation.

4. The fourth sign of, or way unto true repentance, is an aggravation of our
sins; when we render them heinous in the sight of God, acknowledging we have
sinned so much, that we deserve eternal damnation; we deserve that the Vials of
Gods wrath should be poured down upon our heads. You would fare the better, not
the worse, for aggravating your transgressions; For God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believed in him, might not
perish, but have everlasting life. This is a sic without sicut: Such a so, as
never man loved so; and all this for the salvation of mankind.

5. The fifth and last sign of, or step unto repentance, is a frank and free
confession of sins, not extorted and wrung out of you, but flowing from you
liberally, cheerfully and really, in hope of the pardon and remission of them.

We must so confess our sins, as to beg pardon for them, and to entreat the
Lord to have pity on us out of the bowels of his tender compassion. Do not
abscond and conceal your sins; manifest them publicly both to God and man: be
cordially penitent for them, and no doubt but the merciful God will save your
souls. Confession of sins is the forerunner of remission; and this must not be
flashy and for a time, but so long as are our years upon the earth measured
out; for he that will serve the primus motor, must not write his ne ultra, till
he come to the Terminus ad quem. He must proceed with a courage; we must
confess them openly, and not like the worldly wise, whose wisdom Lactantius
says, abscondit, non abscindit peccata; conceals, and not cuts asunder, or
separates sin. Now we must confess our sins, 1. To God, and 2. To Man.


1. To God, as holy David teaches us in his own example, Psalm the 51. verse.
4. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned: and again in the 32 Psam,
verse. the 6. I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so thou forgavest
the wickedness of my sin. It Is true, we may injure men by our sin, as David did
Uriah; but being sin, the chiefest wrong and injury falls upon God.

2. We must confess to men, and that both privately and publicly, according to
the quality of the sin; for though we condemn auricular confession, as a trick
of State Policy; yet we allow, and not only so, but exhort all Christians to a
true voluntary and sincere confession of their sins to the Bishop and
Superintendents of the Church: confession must be made to men in respect of the
Church, that the Congregation that has been offended may be satisfied, and
that others may be deterred from falling into the same sins, as it is in the 2
Epistle to St. Timothy, 4 chapter and the 26 verse. Them that sin, rebuke openly,
that the rest may fear. And last of all, in respect of the Sinner himself, that
he may be humbled for it; for were it a pecuniary mulct only, and his purse
were to do penance, he would not probably value that; but now it may bring him
to an humiliation, and a sincere repentance, accompanied with a godly life
hereafter. Now this serves to condemn all those that are so far from
acknowledging and confessing their sins, as to justify themselves in them, and
plead for them with all the Rhetoric they have; so that if any one in a
Christian way reprove them with meekness, it is verba ventis dare; to prattle to
the wind: they will probably reply with some such kind of cross answer: What
need you busy your self about the state of my soul? I shall be responsible,
not to you for it, look to your self first: if they carouse and follow strange
attire, they will say they do but as others do, it is the fashion, what care
they? and this slye trick of dissimulation we sucked from our first Parents;
Genesis the 3. and the 12. where when Adam was examined, he posted off the
matter from himself to his wife; The woman that thou gave me, she gave me of
the fruit, and I did eat. We are unwilling to confess and acknowledge our sins,
when as we have encouragement enough for it from our Text, since there is such
an excessive joy in Heaven at the conversion of one Sinner. God himself
rejoices, the blessed quire of Angels rejoice, and all the Host of Heaven. How
then should we labor after true repentance, since we have so many sacred
invitations to it in holy writ? Since God himself does vouchsafe to come and
invite us unto him, and promises us acceptance from him, he will bid us
welcome, be confident, beloved, whenever we approach his presence with a real
and a contrite heart. Overcome your selves, though it be very difficult: for
Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit Moenia.

He is the greatest Conqueror that can subdue his own passions, and keep his
body in subjection, as St. Paul did, (...), says he, I chastise my body: from
whence Friars draw their authority of chastising themselves, though without
cause; and so take the word to be such a chastisement as Schoolmasters use to
boys: We ought all of us against the grain of our flesh to mould and fashion
our selves to repentance; that so we may obtain a Trinity of Graces to save us,
Faith, Hope, and Charity; and this Trinity of Grace will deliver us from a
Trinity of Evils, Blindness, Error, and Unbelief: and if we be delivered from
these, we shall be freed from the predominancy of the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil: and if we be preserved from these, we shall undoubtedly be crowned by
the blessed Trinity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost: to
whom be Glory, Honor, and Praise, World without end. Amen.

GOD AND MAN Mutually Embracing.
In the first Epistle of St. John, the 4 Chap. and the 19 verse. it is thus
written: We love him; because he first loved us.


LOve is the punctum or center, SERMON. III.
about which the circumference of our thoughts does move; and the primus motor
that induces us to fix our spirits upon an object. Love is to our souls, as
weight is to ponderous bodies; for as the gravity of a body forces it
downward, that it may enjoy a sweet repose in its center; so Love moves our
souls to an object that promises repose and contentment; therefore from hence
it follows, that as ponderous bodies move in a straight line toward their
center: so if we will obtain a true rest, our Love must be regular, and proceed
in a direct line, by a divinely-composed motion.

This Text, Beloved, that I come from reading to you, is the Epitome of
Christian Religion; or the great Folio of Christian duty, reduced into a
Decimo-sexto, or pocket-volume.

In this Text there are two parts; and these two parts are the two pillars of
the Church, and the whole Christian World.

1. Our love toward God, in these words, We love him; (...).

2. Gods love toward us, which is but the reason, or rather efficient cause of
our love toward him; because he first loved us, (...).

Not to stand upon the nice and fine-spun distinctions that the Schoolmen make
of Love, we shall only divide it into two sorts; Divinum and Humanum amorem;
into Love Divine, and Humane: the divine is couched down by the holy Spirit of
God in the latter part of the verse, because he loved us; and the humane in the
former, We love him.

We will begin with the latter, humane love, or the love of man to God.

Spiritual, or true love, gives repose and contentment to the soul; when as
carnal or false love is an irregular agitation, and an inconsiderate motion
without a Terminus ad quem. it is ever repleat with inquietude and distraction;
and never cease or rests, till it despairs, or is quite tired out; which is
not properly a rest, but an impotency and inability of motion; and the desire
is strong when the power is weak, like a horse that tied to a manger gnaweth
his bridle asunder: such are most persons; their desires are strong, their
power but weak; they desire most what they can least perform.

The cause of this disturbance is this: Our Love selecteth out, Reasons why we
love not God perfectly.

1 Cause.


and fixes upon false objects, and such that cannot satiate the desire; for if
you survey all sublunary things that deserve the name of beautiful, you shall
find in them no true quiet or rest, but a concatenation of cares, interwoven
with perpetual trouble. The greatest delicacies are consited in bitterness. The
acquisition of honor and preferment is painful; and many break their necks in
riding upon the airy stilts of Fame. The possession of riches is uncertain, and
the loss certain; if they leave not us by some accident, Death (Natures
Bailiff) will arrest us, and force us to leave them. To aim at such things is
but ventum prosequi, To pursue the wind; an action as ridiculous as can be.

Grant they be good, yet they are uncertain; therefore we must seek after our
repose somewhere else, since the earth cannot afford it, and turn the compass
of our Love toward Heaven. For as the lower region of the Air is the habitation
of winds, tempests, and earthquakes; but that part that is near the Heaven is
serene and quiet: so our Love, so long as it adheres to sublunary objects, will
be full of trouble, but 'twill find rest and quiet, if it lift it self up to
Heaven, and lay hold of the promises of God: and then the soul, though in the
midst of the confusions and afflictions of this world, be they never so thorny,
will have the fruition of an assured tranquillity: like the Needle of the
Compass that remains firm upon one point, notwithstanding the violence of the
scolding surges of a Tempestuous Sea; and all because it is guided by the
motion of the Heavens. God is the sole object (or at least ought to be) of our
Love, and has only a power to render us amiable by loving us; He that only
can, nay that will give them felicity, and that unutterable too, that love him.
As the Apostle St. Paul writes, in the first to the Corinth. the 2 Chap. and
the 9 verse. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the
heart of man to conceive, the things that God has prepared for them that love
him. He promises also in St. John, chap. 14. verse. 23. to come unto him that
loves him, and make his abode with him. O unparallelled Love! that makes a
Palace of our souls for the King of Glory, and a Sanctuary of the Holy Ghost.

2. 2 Cause.
Philosophy it self has this down for a maxim, that Natura and Deus nihil
fecerunt frustra, that God and Nature made nothing in vain. Now that infinite
and insatiable desire or appetite that is in man, were in vain, if there were
nothing to satisfy and content it; Which since it is impossible to find out
upon this Terraqueous Globe, we must search after it in Heaven, of God that is
bonum infinitum, an infinite good.

3 Cause.
3. Besides, God created the world for the use of man, and therefore without
doubt he created man for something better then the world, viz. God himself.

4 Cause.
4. God created man inter omnia animalia, only secundum imaginem, according to
his own image, with a straight body, and an upright countenance, according to
mellifluous Naso, Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
that so he might behold him, whom he represented; and that the But, and White,
of all his actions and thoughts, might be Heaven.

5. 5 Cause.
The perfection of our spirits cannot be, but in the union of or with the first
of spirits, who communicates his bona, or good things to us his Creatures, as
the Sun darts his rays upon us; that is, he gives them so, he bestows them on
us, yet so, that they depend on him after he has disposed of them.

6. 6 Cause.
True Love is that transformeth the amantem the Lover, in amatum, into the
thing or party loved. Now if a deformed person be never so highly enamoured
with the captivitating beauty of a red and white complexion, he will never be
able by this love to correct his deformity. On the contrary, in loving God, we
become sibi similes, like unto him; and as the holy Apostle says in the second
to the Corinth. the third Chap. and the last verse, Beholding as in a glass the
glory of the Lord, with open face, are changed into the same image.

7. And lastly, Beauty, 7 Cause.
being the first incitation to Love, or the Tinder of the affections, we shall
soon be able to discern when the scales of ignorance are fallen from our eyes,
that this beauty, as we term it, that is here below, is but a superficial
color, or a cover to a bundle of filthiness: but that the Lumen, or true
Light, is the true beauty; God therefore being the true Light, and the Father
of Lights, is the chief beauty, and the object on whom we all ought to fix our
affections.

Natural Philosophy here is diametrically opposite to the Divine, and jars with
it much in this case; for Philosophy affirms that Natural motion is better then
that is against Nature. On the contrary, quoad amorem, the Word of God, that
is, our Divine Philosophy, instructs and persuades us, that Love contrary to
Nature, is better then Love natural. For since that Satan in seducing our first
Parents, has defaced the image of God in Man, our desires have had their
constant course toward the World, and, as I may say, our Love has been
precipitated from Heaven to the Earth. The affection of the flesh is enmity
against God, Romans the 8. and the 7 verse: If one love, that love flows not
from him naturally, but it is a free gift of God. And the Apostle St. Paul
drawing us out of the mud, and freeing us from the bait of all alluring
delights of this World, commands us to seek the things above, Coloss. 3. verse.
1, 2. (...), be skilful in the things above, be wise in heavenly matters; for
according to the words in my Text, We love God, because he first loved us.

Our love therefore it appears manifestly, is an effect of Gods Love to us; nor
is there any thing that we ought with more devotion or zeal to crave of God,
then Love; for it is a pledge unto the faithful of Gods Love to him. It is the
first fruit, the primitiae of Faith; it is the most exact and curious extract of
the Image of God. It is the most perspicuous mark of a child of God. Love is
the sum of Christianity.
This Love is the soul of our soul; the life of virtue; the rule by which we
square (or at least ought to do) all our actions; the summary or compendium of
the Law: It Is the pillar or sustentaculum of Martyrs; the Jacobs Ladder, by
which you may ascend the Heavens, and true peace of conscience; nay (with holy
reverence be it spoken) it is a praelibamen, or earnest-penny of that Sacred
union and communion that we expect all to enjoy with God in Heaven, world
without end. Our meditation could not pitch upon a more sublime subject; for
what is there that dare stand in competition with God, either for his
greatness, or the sweetness and candor of his Love? The profit of this Love of
God is no way inferior to the delight; for men are termed good or evil, not for
what they believe, but what they love.

Let us all therefore labor for this, and become proficients in the School of
Christ, and beseech the spirit so to mould our hearts, that they may be wrought
to a true and perfect Love of God: lest we be abused and fooled into error with
the sound of this word Love, and mistake the spiritual for a carnal love, an
importunate or fretting corrosion of the heart; an aguish alteration; the last
of vices for the first and best of virtues, a brutish malady for an Angelical
distemper.

It Is true; he that disposes and conformeth himself to the Love of God, must
expect the hatred and bespattering calumnies of the world; but God will cause
the very discommodities that the world afflicts us with, to be converted into
commodity and profit: for (says the blessed Apostle) Romans the 8. and the 28.
And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to
them who are the called, according to his purpose. Their corporeal afflictions,
are but spiritual exercises; their (...), nocumenta, documenta. The malady of
their body, is a remedy for their soul: for God alone is the true Aesculapius,
so divine a Chemist, that he will convert poisons into Antidotes for his
childrens health and security: His wounds are balm, says the Divine Harper,
Psalm 14. verse. 5. In all our sufferings for Gods sake, there is not only
matter of patience, but occasion for glory; they are scars of credit in the
forehead; conformities unto our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, and the livery of
all Christian Soldiers. And all this by the sustentation and support of this
Love, the sweetness whereof qualifies and abates the bitterness of all
sublunary crosses.

pro confesso an excellent virtue; but we must know him, before we love him;
and we cannot compass any other but a lame and decrepit insufficient notion of
him. It Is true; but notwithstanding all this, we ought still dare operam to it,
and make exact search after it; and when we have it, embrace it; for ignorance
must not be a Cloak or tegument to our negligence, since we cannot gain so
little of the true knowledge of God, but some profit will accrue to us thereby,
and that will blow up the embers of the love of God in us to an acceptable
degree of heat and pious zeal. One ray of the love of God will outbalance and
overvalue all the splendour of the Meridian Sun. A dark obscure knowledge of
God, surpasses the most acute and sharp insight into all natural things. If
one beam of the Sun chance to peep into a Dungeon, the prisoner by this,
recollects the beauty and excellency of Light; so that small and imperfect
knowledge that we obtain of God, is sufficient for a taste of the excellency of
his Love, and able to inflame us therewith; besides, it is sufficient for
salvation. We love God, because he loved us first.

We are so incapable of the Love of God, that we understand not what it is to
love him: This Tree of Knowledge grows not in our Eden; This flower springs not
up in our Garden; it is (...), a gift dropped out of Heaven, proceeding from the
Father, who is Love and Charity, as St. John says: This is a divine liquor,
the true Nectar, that God poures into our souls guttatim, drop by drop, as in
narrow-neckt vessels. Wherefore to accommodate our selves to our native
slowness, we'll endeavor to infuse into our spirits by little and little, so
by degrees to arrive at the highest degree and Apex of Love.

There are five degrees of this our Love to God.

1. The first is, to love God for the good he does us, and we expect to receive
from him still.

2. Secondly, To love him propter seipsum, or sui ipsius gratia, for his own
sake, because he is most excellent, and most amiable.

3. Thirdly, To love God above all things, nay your own selves; but to love
nothing in the World, but for his sake.

4. Fourthly, To detest and abhor himself for the Love of God.

5. Fifthly, to love him as we shall in the life to come, when we shall be in
glory; with this love the Saints are extasied, and assist at the Throne of God
in secula seculorum.

We call these Degrees of Love, and not species or kinds, because the superior
contain the inferior, as the chiefest white differs from the other parcels of
the same color that are less clear and transparent, not in specie, but in
gradu: we must remount up these degrees or stairs, and rest our selves a little
upon every one of them.

1. The first degree and lowest is, Five degrees by which we are brought to
love God.
To love God for the good he does us; upon this step of Love was King David,
when in the 116 Psalm, and in the 1 verse, I love the Lord, because he has
heard my voice, and my supplication; and so in the 18 Psalm: for God will have
respect and love from us, because he extends his bounty so liberally to us.
It Is God that created us; it is God that preserves and keeps us being created;
that nourishes our bodies, that cherishes our souls; that redeemeth us by his
Son; that governs us by his holy Spirit; that instructs us by his word, that
has vouchsafed to admit us as his servants, nay his friends and children; and
which is more, the same with himself.

Plato playing the Philosopher with the grace of God, Plato blessed God for
three things.
thanked him for three things: 1. That he was created a man, and not a beast.
2. That he was born a Grecian, and not a Barbarian; and, 3. That he was a
Philosopher.


Now we that are instructed in the School of Christ, a School of more strict
discipline, So ought we for these especially.
make another kind of distribution of the grace of God, and return him thanks
for these three things:

1. That of all Creatures, we were created men.

2. That of all men, Christians; And,

3. That among those that are Christians, he has made us in the number of the
true elect. And if you please, you may add a fourth, That he has adopted us by
his Son Jesus Christ, before the foundation of the World; having been careful
of us, not only before we had any existence, but even before the world had its
creation. Now if God did manifest his love to us before we were, how liberally
will he extend it to us, how bountifully will it flow from him when we invocate
and call upon his Sacred Name, and affect him with a filial and reverential
love? Now the smaller our number is, the larger is our privilege; the more
extensive and diffusive is his bounty and goodness to us; to endow us with
sight, among so many blind persons; as the portion of Jacob in Egypt, solely
enlightened in the midst of obscurity, Cimmerian darkness: like the fleece of
Gideon, that was only bedewed with the grace of God, when the rest of the earth
was dry, and destitute of it. God has encircled us with abundance of examples
of stupendous caecity or blindness, that he might raise our estimation of
light, and that we might make a farther progress in the way of salvation, that
so whilst it is called to day, we may steer the ship of our souls by the
Lanthorn of his Word. All these virtues, the constellation of all these graces,
depend upon one Sovereign and Prime one, viz. reconciliation with God by the
passion of our blessed Jesus. This is the Chanel through which the graces of
God stream unto us. It Is Jacobs Ladder that joins Heaven and Earth together,
that rejoyns God and Man. The Angels ascending this Ladder, represent our
prayers, that we piously dart up to Heaven: the Angels descending, signify the
blessings of God that are distilled in answer to our prayers. Jacob sleeping at
the foot of the Ladder, intimates unto us the quiet and tranquillity of
conscience, that we enjoy under the cool and comfortable shade of his
intercession. Before, man was environed with horror and astonishment; he could
not cast his eye aside, but he met with an object of fear. If he looked upon
God, he discerned a consuming fire, a supreme Justice, armed with revenge
against sinners. If he cast his eye upon the Law, he immediately perceived the
arrest of condemnation: If he viewed the Heaven, he concluded himself excluded
thence by reason of sin; If the World, he saw his irreparable loss of dominion
over the Creatures; if himself, a thousand spiritual and corporal infirmities.
At the signs of Heaven, and the Earthquake, he was ague-struck with fear.
Then Satan, Death, Hell, were his inveterate foes, that either drew him to
perdition, or did behel and wrack him with the expectation of them. But now
every person that has confidence in Christ Jesus, changes his language, and
speaks in a more pleasing dialect. If he look upon God, he will say, It Is my
Father, that has adopted me: If his thoughts pitch upon the day of Judgment,
he will bespeak himself thus, My Elder Brother sits there; and he that is my
Judge, is also my Counselor: If he think on the Angels, he cries out, They are
my guardians, Psalm the 34. If he view the Heaven, he terms it his habitation.
If he hear it thunder, he will reply, It Is the voice of my Father. If he consider
the Law, The Son of God (says he) has accomplished it for me. If he swim with
the flowing tide of prosperity, he will say, God has reserved better things for
me. If in the low ebb of adversity, Jesus Christ has endured far more for me.
God exercises, or proves, corrects or afflicts me, making me therein
conformable to his Son. If he thinks on Hell, the Devil, or Death, then he will
triumph over all with the holy Apostle; in the 1 to the Corinth. the 15 Chapter and
the 55, 56, and 57 verse. O Death, where is thy sting! O grave, where is thy
victory! The sting of Death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law: But
thanks be to God, which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Though these things buz about his ears like bees provoked or irritated, yet
they have lost their sting. If the old serpent bruise his heel, yet his head is
broken; if the Devil give us a false alarm by persecutions, yet we are
soldiers fighting under Christ's Banner, listed and registered into the Book of
Life at our Baptism: he has bought and redeemed us by his most precious blood,
and no one can ravish us from him. What soul can be so sordid as to fear the
arm of flesh, when he is guarded by the spirit of Christ, that does not only
intercede for sinners, but of sinners makes them become just: That is not only
Advocate of a bad cause, but also renders it good; That does both pray, and pay
for us; so that his pardoning of us is not only a work of his mercy, but also
an effect of his justice? Besides these obligations, we have an infinite number
of incitations to the love of Christ, if we will but recollect our selves, and
seriously consider, how often he has delivered us from imminent danger; caused
inexpected overtures of evil intended to us, that we might avoid them: for
according to the old Proverb, Praemoniti, praemuniti, forewarned, forearmed;
and afflicted us here, that he might save us hereafter. Now 'twas the wish of
that famous pillar of the Latin Church St. Augustine, Hic ure, hic tunde, hic
seca, modo in aeternum parcas: Cut, saw, burn my body here, so thou savest my
soul hereafter. Now for shame, let it not be said, that God has showred down
his blessings on the sand. Let us not be so bestial, as to drink of the stream,
and never think of the fountain; without elevating our thoughts unto God the
source of all benedictions.

But when we say God does good unto us, to the end that we may love him; not
that he stands in need of our Love, but he will have us love him, in regard
that we cannot be saved if we hate him. Nay farther, that we love him, proceeds
from him as a gift; for it is he that kindles in us his love. He does not only
bestow and confer his bona upon us, but he gives us a hand to receive them,
grace to use them, and virtue to glorify for them; so that Deus primo dat quod
jubet, and then jubet quod vult: first he gives what he commands, viz. Love,
Love is the gift of God.
and then he commands what is most agreeable to his will and pleasure.

This first degree or step of Love, though it be holy and useful, yet it is but
principium amoris divini, it is but the prologue to the Love of God; for he that
loves God only for profit, is like an infant or child that prays only for his
breakfast; and to speak properly, such persons love not God, but themselves.
Such love is but mercenary, and injurious to God, a palpable affront put upon
the Deity. Therefore he must know, that has gained this first degree, he must
proceed; for non progredi, est regredi; to be at a stand, is to be retrograde:
he must therefore, I say, ascend the second step.

The second degree of our Love toward God, is to Love him, 2 Degree.
not only for our profit, but also for himself, (i. e.) laying aside all
consideration of his benefits, that he is daily pleased to confer on us; and
though we expected no profit from him, yet to love him supra omnia. Holy David
spoke of this Love in the 69 Psalm, Let all those that love thee rejoice in thy
name. He counsels us to love God for his name, because he is the supreme, Wise
in his counsel, just in his actions, true in his promises; whose habitation is
in glory inaccessible; enjoying a Sovereign perfection. God, whose life was
without beginning, and his duration without end; his eternity without
alteration, his greatness without measure, and his power irresistible: That
created the World by his Word, governs it by his virtue, and will reduce it to
a Chaos of ruin, when it is his pleasure: Who in one sole virtue and
perfection, which is his Essence, encompasseth all other virtues that are
infused into all other creatures. All other virtues do concentre in this
punctum; and the more they deviate from him, the more eccentrique they are. God
therefore is to be loved for these preceding considerations, more then for the
good that he is pleased to confer upon us. Our Savior instructs us the same,
in that most absolute pattern, that he himself has set before us; in which he
commands to beg the sanctification of his Holy Name, and the advancement of his
Kingdom; before we put up a petition for our daily bread. We naturally are
enamoured with beauty: now Light is the first of beauties, without which there
is no distinction between beauty and deformity. God therefore being the primum
lumen, it follows necessarily that he be also the prime beauty. He is the
Father of Lights, Pater Luminum, says St. James; and holy David the Psalmist
in the 36 Psalm 9. For with thee is the Fountain of Life; in thy light shall we
see light. Wherefore in laying his hand to the stately Fabric of the World,
when he reduced the Chaos of confusion into a beautiful and harmonious order,
he began first with the light, as that by which his nature is best represented.
He is the Sun of Righteousness, a Sun that never comes to the West, never sets,
nor casts a shadow; all things are naked unto him, (...), all things are
bare-neckt unto him, it is in the Original, being a metaphor taken from the mode
in the Eastern Countries, where they go bare-neckt: such a Sun as does not only
clarify the sight, but gives it also. And judge you what a splendid,
sight-offending luster this is, that the Seraphims assisting at his Throne
cover their faces with their wings, as Isaiah says, 6 Chap. 2 verse. not being
able to endure so glorious a splendour. And if at the coming and appearance of
the humanity of Christ, the Sun shall be benegroed in darkness, as a petty
light at the coming of a greater; how, if you cast an eye upon the life of God!
The life of God.
ours is but a shadow, if compared to it, nay a nihil: for our life is a flux
or succession of parts. But God possesses and has full and entire fruition of
his eadem instanti, and all together. And his only begotten Son was willing to
lay down his life for the redemption of us miserable and wretched sinners: That
Son that Isaiah calls Chap. the 9. Father of eternity, was content to assume
this frail flesh of ours. He became Son of Man, that we might become the sons
of God. He was born in a stable, that we might be received into the Kingdom of
Heaven; born among beasts, that we might be the associates of Angels. He that
was regens sydera, became sugens ubera; (...), became (...). He that is the
bread of life was pinched with hunger, that we might be satisfied. He that is
the fountain of life, became thirsty, that we might have ours quenched. In
fine, he that is life it self, did undergo death, that he might make us heirs
of eternal life. (...), as the blessed Apostle in a holy ecstasy cried out; O
the depth of the riches of the Love of Christ! These are prosundities that
swallow up our spirits, and there is pleasure in being lost therein: for these
are the graces of God that surpass our shallow capacities, but recreate our
hearts; that afford matter of admiration, and subject of consolation.

Now to what end is all this, if not to induce us to love God, and admire the
treasures and riches of his grace? Our spirits are extasied with the rapture
and contemplation of thy bounty. Our words are a degree beneath our thoughts,
and yet our thoughts are far beneath the truth. We do but lisp forth thy
praise; our commendation and elogiums of thee, are but an undervaluing of thee;
for in so doing we do but lumen soli praeferre, or endeavor to delineate him
in his golden tresses, by the dark draught of a charcoal. Therefore we must
entreat the Lord, that is our Father, to touch our hearts with a filial
affection; that it would please him that bestows and infuseth his love into us,
to create also in us strong affections and desires after such a divine virtue;
that we may pant after, and pursue it with so much eagerness, as to encounter
with all obstructions for the obtaining of it.

All these considerations do but incite us to the love of God, not for our
selves, but for his own sake; which is perspicuous in this, that our Love
cannot be regulate, unless it be formed and fashioned on the model of his Love
that he bears to us. Now God Loves us for his own sake, according to the
Prophet Isa. Chap. 43. It Is I, it is I, that blot away thy trangressions, for
mine own sake: And it is the prayer of holy Daniel in the 9. of his prophecy,
Lord hear me, Lord pardon me; O Lord my God tarry not, for thine own sake; for
thy name has been called upon by this people. God considers that we bear his
Image on our souls; he considers that we are unworthy of his benefits; but that
it is a divine thing to do good to those that are unworthy of receiving it; and
which is more, to make them worthy in doing them good. He looks upon his Church
as a small fold that carries his name, and are baptized the people of God,
Hosea the 2. nor will he suffer it to become the prey of Satan, or the triumph
of their adversaries. Amen.

GOD AND MAN Mutually Embracing.
In the first Epistle of St. John, the 4 Chap. and the 19 verse. it is thus
written: We love God, because he first loved us.


WE have in one Sermon already discoursed of our Love of God, SERMON. IV.
and informed you of the several degrees of this Love, which were five: two
whereof we have only as yet insisted on; the other three we shall, auspice
Christo, dispatch in our subsequent love-discourse. Therefore not to detain you
with the reiteration or repetition of what you have formerly heard; we'll
proceed at present to the third degree of our Love to God, which is this, viz.

To Love God so far above all sublunary beings, as to affect nothing, 3 Degree.
to be enamoured with nothing, but only for his sake. As for instance, in the
vast circumference of the terrestrial Globe, there is variety both of persons
and things, that we cannot withdraw our affections from them, we cannot but
love them; and in reality, 'twere impiety not to Love them. A Father loves his
Children, a Wife her Husband: our Parents, our Kindred, our Neighbors, our
Friends, have all share in this amity. So a man loves his health, and labors
to preserve it: if it be any way lost, he endeavors by all possible means to
recover it. The brawny Peasant is in his element when whistling to his Teem,
and manuring of his acres. The Scholar is so ravished with his study, that his
very countenance smells of the candle, as the Poet ingeniously expresses it;
Livida nocturnam sapiebant ora lucernam. Their pale countenance did relish of
the candle; speaking of excessive students. Nay, to go to disrobe a man of this
love, would be a doctrine inhumane, and a degree below brutality. He is worse
than an Infidel, that has not a care of his family, says the blessed Apostle.
Piety does not extirpate a man's affections, but cultivates them, and makes them
colleagues with the Love and fear of God: No otherwise than Joshuah, who having
subdued the Gibeonites, would not put them to death, but compel them to service
in the House of God: For then does a father love his sons with a real paternal
affection, when he resolves to educate them so in their youth, that they may
increase in growth, and become plants that one day may fructify to the glory
of God. Then does a man love his friends as he ought, when their love to God is
the efficient cause of his love to them; and that he perceives the Image of God
shine in them. Then shall we love our health lawfully and aright, when we
desire it, not because it is more pleasant and comfortable, but because it
endowes our bodies with a vigor, and our souls with a liberty of serving God
in our vocation. The same may be said of Riches, Honor, Learning, and the
like; these are things that one may affect, but so, that their love rob us not
of our love to God; but rather stimulate us on, and provoke us to good works.
And as there is no river so small, but disembogues it self into the Sea; so
there is none of Gods benefacta, though of the lowest size, of the most
dwarfish stature, but conducts and leads our thoughts to the profound abyss of
his goodness and greatness. Then shall our affections to our friends be
regulated, and sweetly composed, when they shall be branches or arms of the Sea
of Gods immense Love, and have a reflection upon the Image or benefits of God.
Set not a price or estimation upon men for that that is about them, but for
what is in them: Love not men as you do Purses, (i. e.) for the money they
have. If you honor a person for his stately attire, you might as well salute
the Satin when entire in a whole piece: If you reverence a man for his honor,
or renown, you pin his dignity upon his sleeve, and fix his worth on an airy
title: and this is the mode now adays; this is the frame of most men's spirits
in the world, to adore the Casket, and contemn the Jewel that is cabinetted in
it; to esteem the bark, and slight the body. It was the ancient complaint of
devout St. Bernard, Color, non calor aestimatur; vestium, non virtutum cultus
insistitur: It Is the gawdiness, not the warmth of apparel, that is minded; the
trimming of garments, not the adorning of virtues, is stood upon: It Is the
lining of his pockets, not that of his brain, that is regarded. Nay Aristotle,
Natures elder son, was of opinion, that an Ass laden with Gold might have a
pass through any gate: It Is true in a natural, but not in a spiritual sense;
for he cannot pass through the straight gate of Heaven. It Is Gold, hisce
temporibus ferreis, that is omnium Regina, The Empress of the world; (...),
Fight with spears of Gold, and you will meet little or no opposition. And
pardon me if I go too high, or offend: some dunghill-souls will betray their
Royal Sovereign for reward, for a mercenary golden recompense. It Is money that
rules, and overrules the whole world. Men rise early, sit up late, and eat the
bread of carefulness; and all for adding to the mass of their treasure: all is
good that procures wealth, be it what it will, or how it will; per fas, and
nefas; by hook, or by crook, right or wrong; quo jure, quaque injuria, as the
Comedian excellently, and suitable to our present times; whether it be by
Hophnies flesh-hook, or Habakkuks net; all is good fish that comes to the net.
The holy Apostle tells us that godliness is great gain: but there are many now
living that would tell him, if he were among us, that great gain is godliness;
at least, their godliness. It Is apparel makes a man, now adays; but if once
you be disrobed of your bravery, and ad paupertatum redactus, Then, Nullus ad
amissas ibit amicus opes. Then when you are in a threadbare condition, you
shall find no friends, few or no visitations: and whereas before they did stick
to your threshold, and were unwilling to leave your society, now they will be as
niggardly of their visitations, as before they were prodigal of them. Like the
Ass that carried the Image Isis in procession, when adorned with the
ornaments; then did they bow the officious knee; but when spoiled and deprived
of them, then they come no more about her, but she must be ranked with the rest
of her dull, cold, contemptible fellow creatures. But on the contrary, when
your affections are bestowed on a man, because he fears God, he is firm and
stable in his faith, advanced in the true knowledge of God, true in his words,
just in his deeds, and charitable to the afflicted, inflamed or eaten up with
the zeal of Gods house, (not like many of the Puritanical faction, whose
preposterous zeal has put the whole Nation into a combustion) your love toward
him will continue, as long as he himself. Dispossess such a person of his
Lands, deprive him of his Titles, disrobe him of his gorgeous attire, his body
and all his ornaments will remain; and that excellency that consists in the
Image of God, and the graces of his Spirit.

I know that the secrets or intentions of men's hearts are profound; and that
oftentimes it evenes, that those persons that we make choice of, and pick out
for friends, and virtuous too, become vicious, or else demonstrate unto us they
have ever been so. In this case, he that loves God, ought to reprove his
friend, and redress him with all his power. Adulation or flattery has robbed
amity or true love of all its terms, but only a liberty of reproving. He that
reproves not his friend for fear of incurring his displeasure, it is a respect
full of cruelty; just as if when he were upon the point of drowning, you should
be afraid of lifting him up by the hair of the head, for fear of plucking off a
lock. If he mend not when you reprehend him, the love of man must give place to
the love of God; you must in this case do as holy Moses did, who made use of
his Rod, whilst it was a Rod; but did fly away from it, when 'twas
metamorphosed into a Serpent: and it is better far, to separate your self from
such a person gradatim, by degrees, and rather untwist your friendship with
him, than to tear it all to pieces.

The Love of God serves as a rule to the overcoming and subduing all the
forementioned difficulties. Pagans have amassed and picked up several precepts
out of the nature of amity, or friendship; but never discovered that secret
that regulates and orders all their precepts. viz. (...), first to love God,
and to make our love spring from the love of God. What the Brain is to the
Nerves, the Liver to the Veins, or the Heart to the Arteries, the same is the
Love of God to humane love, (i. e.) filaments, or branches, on which it
depends. Without this divine Love, friendship is not friendship, but a
conspiracy, an accord of discording with God: friendship whose tottering basis,
or shaking foundation, is placed on pleasure or profit, expires when pleasures
lose their gust or taste through age; or when the profit is diminished, begins
to moulder and crumble away; or when the distribution thereof is unequal. But
the love or friendship fixed, or rooted in the Love of God, is firm and stable;
because built upon a sure foundation: which love ought to proceed so far, that
we must power out our Love not only upon our friends, but our intestine enemies
for Gods sake; it is the will and pleasure of the Almighty, Matthew. the 5.
because that even in the midst of this enmity, the impression of the Image of
God is apparent. And these are Rods in Gods hand to jerk us for correction and
amendment; and have such a compulsive virtue, as to induce us to fear him.

4 Degree.
We are not yet come to the highest round in this Jacobs Ladder that reaches to
Heaven; for we must arrive to so high a pitch, as to hate our selves for the
Love of God. For although we concede, that self-love is the strongest and most
natural love of man; and it is this amor-sin that is the greatest Antagonist
and enemy to the Love of God; and 'twill opus magnae molis, multi sudoris, to
overcome and surmount it: What the shirt is among our clothes, the same is
self-love among our affections, viz. the last that is pulled off: it is like
the last onset or sally that Satan makes upon a soul, that is hard to be
repulsed, or made to quit the field: Yet no person can love God, ut deceat, as
it behooveth him, that detests not his own nature, that is not irritated
against his concupiscence, and wages not a perpetual war with them, with a firm
and Christian resolution, to subdue them, (Deo juvante) and to admit of no
truce, nor quarter, but to commit a total slaughter, and to destroy them all,
without compassion; thirsting after the dissolution of this body, and reigning
with God and the blessed Hierarchy of Angels, world without end: He must be
willing to exhaust and pour out every drop of blood that flows in the purple
channels of his body, for the glory of God. Being wearied out with this fleshly
tabernacle, as in a rouling prison, or an ambulatory sepulcher; just like a
captive cloystered up in a loathsome prison, that peeps at the grates, aspiring
after liberty; you must not expect to have egress, or depart by the door, but
by the ruin of the prison, (i. e.) the dissolution and destruction of the
body. He that has commenced war, and stood in defiance to his lusts with most
vigor and constancy, shall have the greatest share of peace with God. He that
has accused himself, shall be excused: he that has despised and made little
or no estimation of this life, shall be saved. Luke 9. and the 24. says the
blessed Evangelist there, For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; but
whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it.

This is the fourth degree of Love, and the cream and top of Love, whilst we
are on this side Heaven: 'Twas this degree of Love, that forced the holy
Apostle to so pious and querulous an exclamation; (...); O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? It Is this degree of Love that
forced that sweet Harper King David, though his temples at that time were
adorned with a Crown, and his hands with a Scepter, the vanquisher of his
enemies, whose name was as famous, as his possessions were vast; confess, and
acknowledge himself a stranger, and a sojourner upon the earth. Psalm 39.12. and
119.19.
It Is this degree of love that has furnished holy Martyrs with resolution and
courage, accompanied with a zeal that was hotter then the fire it self, to pass
through all torments, and smile at the faggot and sword: they fear not the
threats of the brow-bearing Judge, if furnished with this degree of love: they
are armed with the murus aheneus of Horace; for a guiltless conscience, with
the shield of his own innocence, beats off all opposition and resistance. No
man can be such an Ignaro, as to imagine his sinews to be made of wyre, or his
body to be immured with brass; nor no one can be so whimsical, as to think
them to have the Stoics a pathy: no, no; but as the violent heat of a fever
does exsiccate the exterior wounds or ulcers, and so that the less heat is
obedient to the greater; so the internal ardor of the Love of God, did
predominate over the heat of the flames, and had more power to sustain the
pain, then the grief had strength to destroy them. The virtues of the Martyrs
do check our vices; their pious embers do reinfuse heat into our cold walking
clay. Whose blood, (for as one of the Fathers says) Sanguis Martyrum semen
Ecclesiae, the bloody time of the Saints, is the Seed-time of the Church; their
blood, I say, exclaims against our slackness, who of late like a spurious issue
have degenerated from their constancy: And be sure, if we imitate them not, and
follow their example, they will be a reproach and condemnation unto us. Their
red evening was precursor to a most glorious day, and their bloody trial proved
a deliverance at last from the worlds rage and fury. Now to arrive to this
degree, requires a long and stout combat: for our flesh is mutinous and
refractory; and concupiscence is so fast rooted in us, that even (Deo judice)
it is resembled and assimilated to the cutting off of a hand, Matthew. 5.
and pulling out of an eye. And the Apostle of the Gentiles terms our lusts,
our members, (...), Coloss. 3. Yet God himself tells us, that the perfection of
his work is manifested in our infirmity; He makes us Conquerours, 2 Cor. 12.
Gal. 5.
after many defeats and failings. Men oftentimes are as in a crooked way,
between the flesh and the spirit; between mundane and divine Love, the Love of
God, and the Love of the World; and then they meet with several wicked and
abominable suggestions, and a terrible counterscustle between them and their
lusts. How often and frequently does it evene, that after the Love of God has
gained the dominion and upper-hand in the soul of man, and that he is resolved
to live well and religiously; in a small time after, do his lusts and evil
concupiscence rally up themselves, and make a fresh assault more violent than
the former? But the faithful man, when assaulted with a desire of revenge,
rapine, or adultery, will perceive and hear by the ears of faith, the Love of
God whispering these following interrogations, and catechizing him thus;
Miserable wretch that thou art, whither do thou wander? Does not God view
thee? do thou despise his menaces? do thou reject his promises? do thou
forget thy vocation? Why should you grieve the Spirit of God? Why should you
bespatter his Church with infamy, and calumny? Where are the promises you made
to God? Where is the grateful remembrance of his benefits? Is this the way to
the Kingdom of Heaven? Are you certain of arising when you fall? What, will you
disturb your peace of conscience for such bitter-sweet pleasures? (...) for the
most gilded pill of pleasure has is allowed ingredients. What, will you
hazard your primogeniture, for a mess of lentile-potage? At these spiritual
suggestions, the faithful man makes a stand; sighs and groans before God, and,
like Sampson, is resolved to break in sunder the bands of his concupiscence.
But all is not yet ended; the rebellious and contumacious, surrenders not her
self up yet; for oftentimes, after holy resolutions, at certain intervals, or
spaces of time, there will arrive some cooling kind of temper, that may induce
and persuade carnal reason to a postarize, and especially in these rebellious
times; where a man may find more matter for to compose a book of Apostates,
rather than Martyrs. Now Satan, who is a spirit, but A-bad-one, as it is in the
Revelation, watches for an opportunity to find us conversant with debauched
company, and void of employment, and to catch us discontinuing, or ceasing from
our pious ejaculations to Heaven (which with a fervent and zealous brevity are
thrown up to the Throne of Grace; and God showers down his blessings upon them,
according to their request, and suitable to their present necessities and
indigencies, if they be faithful) Satan, I say, raises an Anarchy in the soul
of man, and fosters nothing but a Chaos of confusion: then are the
concupiscence and lusts of the flesh up in arms against the desires and motions
of the spirit, and close and strangle one another; which oftentimes renders the
life of a Christian so bitter and uncomfortable, that he is often desiring an
end of this conflict or combat, that he may be dissolved and be with Christ.
It Is a hellish disposition, and suitable to the devils nature, to give a blow
to a man that is already reeling; it is his constant course, when he finds you
most afflicted with diseases, and enfeebled with age, then does he redouble his
force, and shows you your sins in multiplying glasses; that so he may, if
possible, compel you to land the vessel of your soul upon the shore of Despair.
Lust will struggle and strive for superiority, and therefore ought to be
suppressed, and held in subjection by the power of Gods Spirit, operating in,
and aiding of us. Man is his own enemy; he nourishes a bird within him, that
will pick out his own eyes. Homo, homini lupus: which made St. Augustine cry
out, A me, libera me, Domine; blessed Lord, free me, or deliver me from my
self. O the wretched nature and inclinations of men, that procure (or at least
endeavor it) their own ruin! O the fixed and fast rooted corruptions of man,
that by their mutinies will relead us, or compel us to return into Egypt! that
after our departure out of Sodom, persuade us, like Lots Wife, to look back,
and have a kind of internal regret, for the evil we have forsaken. These are
corruptions that interpose, and disturb our best actions with wicked
suggestions, and bespatter them with some evil. If we seriously meditate on
death, the flesh will suggest, and say; What needs all these melancholy dumps?
To what purpose all these sighs and erected eyes? There is time enough for that
hereafter. If we read or near Gods judgments and menaces against infamous
scarlet sinners, the flesh persuades us, that it belongs to others, not to us.
If we comtemplate the Heavens, 'twill suggest unto us immediately, that we
shall arrive there soon enough. If we go to extend our hand, and manifest our
charity out of a real Christian sympathy to a distressed member of Christ;
'twill whisper to your souls, You know not how soon you may want your selves.
If we be resolved to reprove a friend, that we may reduce him from the broad
way of sin and uncleanness, and conduct him to the narrow, though blessed path,
that leads unto salvation; then 'twill retract and withdraw, and make you
desist from your intented purpose, for fear of offending him, or incurring his
total displeasure: every good action has two ansae, by which the world and the
flesh take hold, to prevent the execution of it.

Therefore in this case, we must carefully and piously repair unto God, craving
his divine assistance; and imitate Rebecca, who had recourse unto God by
prayer, when two Embryones or infants strove in her womb; a most exact figure,
or divine Hieroglyphick of the two men that are in every believer; The old, and
the new Adam; one, our nature corrupted and cicatrized by sin; the other, our
spirit regenerated; which lust one against the other, as the blessed Apostle
St. Paul testifies, Gal. 5.17. So God answers unto Rebecca, telling her, that
the greatest should obey the least. For the old man must be brought in
subjection to the new, till he be perfectly reduced to the obedience of God; he
must be overcome totally, and his forces quite routed.

Now we are arrived to the top of the Ladder, the fifth and last degree, 5
Degree.
which is the Love whereby we shall love God in the Kingdom of Heaven, when we
shall be clothed with the Robes of Eternal Glory. For our Love proceeds from
our knowledge; and according to our knowledge, we proportion our Love: Then
shall we love God far more, because we shall know him far better. Now we see
(says the blessed Apostle) through a glass darkly, but then face to face:
(...), 1 Cor. 13.
very emphaticall, in a riddle. Our love that looks a great distance, and is
distracted by variety of objects, shall then approach, and look near, and shall
be totally fixed upon God. And as two great rivers that have forsaken their
constant chanel, and meeting together, cause a terrible inundation: so the Love
of God are two currents that shall be joined whilst on earth; but when we
shall arrive, and land on the shore of eternal felicity, they will meet in
Heaven. How unutterable will the vehemence of these affections be, when they
shall be joined and swallowed up one within the other with a mutual Love? For
then in loving God, we shall also love our selves; because that God shall dwell
in us, and because according to the holy Apostle St. John, 1 John. 3.2.
(...). We shall be like unto him, we shall resemble him. Nor must we doubt, or
imagine, that there is not an entire and real Love and mutual affection among
the blessed Angels, but it flows from the Love of God: Therefore let us love
nothing in our selves, that prepares us not for the expectation of that Love,
that is mingled with the Love of God; a rare and Sacred Dose, composed of two
incomparable Ingredients, to cure the distemper of sin-sick man.

But because that Love with which we shall love God in Paradise, has its
original from the sight and contemplation of his glorious aspect, (for (...),
Love is enflamed by sight:) Let us endeavor to find out what this sight shall
be, that is the cause of our Love. The eyes of the body behold all things, two
ways, or by two means: either by a reception of the image or species, and so we
behold and see all bodies exposed to our view; or in receiving into our eyes
the self-same thing that we see, as we see the light, which enters into our
very sight. God that is the primum lumen, or lumen luminum, will manifest
himself unto us in Heaven, this last manner: for he dwells in his Saints; he
is to them all in all. Romans 1.
But in this life we see him in his image, (i. e.) by the contemplation of his
works, whereon he has made an impression, or engraven as it were his own
portraicture, and express and significant indicia or marks of his virtue. We
shall then see God as we do the light here below; but that we do only see it
through the windows of our bodies, viz. our eyes; but then we shall receive on
every side the light of Gods countenance, that will light us every where with
the splendour of its rays, and the beams of its translucent glory: like a man
that, if it were possible, could be apple of the eye all over, composed of
nothing else, he would receive the light from all parts round about him.

This sight of God will transform us into his likeness or similitude: so says
St. John, 1 John 3.2.
We shall be like unto him; for we shall behold him, as he is; (...). For as a
looking-glass or mirror, if it be exposed to the Sun, will represent the
resemblance or image thereof; so God entertains no body with an intent to
contemplate his face, but he transforms him into his own likeness or
similitude, by the irradiation of his splendour and perfection. And if God be
Charity and Love, as the holy Apostle St. John affirms, and all Christians are
engaged to believe, in the 1. of St. John, 4 Chap. 8 verse. it follows of
necessity, that the creature being by this beatifical vision made like unto
God, should be ravished with love, and all on a flame with this spiritual fire:
Such a fire as has imposed a name on the Seraphims, to termed, because of
their ardor; which is no other thing but the Love of God, the fervor of their
zeal, and their promptitude and agility in his service.

This now should serve for a Use of exhortation to all good Christians, viz. to
labor after the love of God with all humility, pious speed, and integrity of
heart; that so they might be like unto God, (...), as the Apostle expresses
it. And unless you be drunk with momentary, and totally deprived of a sense or
imagination of the super-excellency and plerophory of joy that is in Heaven,
you cannot but strive by a holy life and conversation to attain unto the
everlasting Crown of Glory, and the seat and society of the blessed Angels in
Heaven, where you shall chant forth in aeternum Hallelujahs to God the Father,
God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; and live in felicity, and joy that is
unutterable, to the praise and glory of Gods immortal name, without care,
sorrow, grief, or distraction, world without end.

enter into the joy of the Lord, but have that terrible doleful doom and
sentence passed upon them, Go ye cursed into everlasting darkness, where there
is nothing but weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth; totally deprived of
Gods comfortable soul-vivifying presence; being entombed alive in this pit of
darkness, ubi miseriae, ubi tenebrae, ubi horror aeternus; ubi nulla spes boni,
nulla desperatio mali: where you shall be surrounded with miseries, benegroed
in more then cimmerian, and that perpetual darkness too, overwhelmed by, and
implunged into eternal horror; where there is no hope of restitution to a
blessed, or redemption from an accursed estate; but there must be tormented
world without end.

Thus have I demonstrated unto you the happiness of those that fear God; and
their unhappiness, that go a whoring after the lusts and concupiscences of the
flesh: we have shown you the five Degrees of Love toward God; and our
meditation cannot soar any higher; this is the last round of Jacobs Ladder that
conveys us to Heaven.

We all profess, I must confess, to love God; but few do it seriously and
cordially: and by this kind of external pomp and outward show of profession, we
deceive ignorant man, nay we put a fallacy upon our selves. But there is no
humane policy or sophistry that can cheat a God: wherefore it is necessary, for
the prevention and knowledge of such counterfeit, hypocritical persons, to
bring them to the touch, and try what metal they are composed of; to discern
the true, sincere, and pure Love of God, from the false and counterfeit.

And as there are five degrees of our Love to God, so there are five marks or
tokens visible enough, whereby we may discern whether or no we have the true
Love of God; 5 Marks of Gods Love.
which we shall only enumerate, and so conclude for the present.

1 Mark.
The first mark or token of our Love to God, is this, viz. It extinguisheth all
other unchaste and inordinate Love.

2 Mark.
The second mark and effect of this Love, is, the peace and tranquillity of the
soul and conscience.

The third mark, is, 3 Mark.
our Love toward our Neighbor.

The fourth mark, is, 4 Mark.
the delight and pleasure that we have and take in communing and conversing
with God.

The fifth mark is, 5 Mark.
a zeal for the glory of God, that is increased or diminished according as God
is honored or dishonored.

He, whosoever he be, that perceives these effects wrought in him, may assure
himself that he loves God with a true, real, and religious Love: and though it
may happen sometimes, that his love may be abated, the heat of his zeal be
somewhat quenched, the vigor of his affection somewhat debilitated; though this
Love be weak, yet it argues it not to be false, it is true for all that: for as
a weak faith is a good faith, so a weak love is a good love. The very Apostles
themselves were termed by our Savior men of little faith: though it be small,
so it increase indies, day by day, tending to perfection; 'twill without doubt
end in happiness and eternal joy.

Thus have I laid down these five degrees or marks of our true love to God;
which I shall desist from discoursing any farther on at present; but commit you
to God, and leave the handling of them to the next opportunity: If God permit.
Amen.

THE SAINTS COMFORT in the day of death.
In the book of Job, the 19 Chapter, and the 25 verse, it is thus written: I
know that my Redeemer lives, etc.


HE always goes stumblingly, SERMON. V.
that walks in the night, said Jesus Christ the true light of the World, Joh.
11.10. And he that walks in darkness, knows not whither he goes, said his
beloved disciple. If there be any thing wherein this may be clearly known, is
is in the mistake of judgment, which those make of themselves, who being
destitute of the celestial light of verity, suffer themselves to be led away by
their own natural darkness. For there is nothing more frequent in their mouths,
then the complaint of their misfortunes; nor nothing more rare then the
confession of their faults: they out-speak their punishments, and palliate
their crimes; they declare themselves miserable, but would not be thought
wicked: you shall often hear the Philosophers call man a dream of a shadow, a
weathercock of inconstancy, an example of weakness, a general rendezvous of
dolours and misfortunes: A Democritus laughing at his folly, an Heraclitus
bemoaning his calamities. The one terms those happy that go quickly out of the
world, and the other those more happy that never come into it. All too much
occupied in the sense of their misery, but never in searching or acknowledging
their sins: All accusing Nature as a stepdame, but no man himself as a
rebellious or disobedient child. He of all men seems to have best hit of man's
condition, who has qualified him the miserablest and proudest of creatures:
for whereas all declamations upon the pitiful estate of humane nature, ought to
be so many lively lessons of true humility; and that cloud of misfortunes that
showers on their heads, bring them down as low as the center of the earth: on
the contrary, like balloones full of wind, the more they are pressed down, the
higher they rise: and as it happens in the agitation of a violent tempest, the
same wave breaking, makes them sink into the deeps; and keeping it self whole
and swelling, carries them again up into the clouds. And their presumption,
like a kind of folly, drowning at once both memory and sense of their
misfortunes, you see them raise themselves again in their own good opinions,
and rejoice in the light of their understandings; they gaze upon themselves in
the splendour of their virtues, and lose themselves in the subtilty of their
inventions; and to make themselves happy, to depend on no other decree then
that of their own wills, to call in no other help then the strength of their
own souls. Our life (says one) we have from God; but that we live well and
holy, is to be attributed to ourselves. We must (says another) demand our
fortune of God, but we must seek for wisdom in our selves. Every one (says
another) has riches of his own acquisition: for if it were given him from God,
he should deserve no commendations. Never any of the wisemen gave thanks to
God for making him virtuous; so that by this reckoning of theirs, those people
who were lately charged with misfortunes, are now found free from faults: They
that are most miserable upon earth, think themselves most worthy of heaven:
They who cannot defend themselves from the least creatures, think they have
themselves and every thing else in their power: They who for the toothache,
made vows to Aesculapius, for the health of their cattle, and the conservation
of their corn, sacrificed to Pan and Ceres, do not hold themselves obliged to
render thanks to God, for the virtues and excellent qualities that spring and
grow in their souls.

That the Pagans (who are strangers to the Covenant, and ignorant of the way of
God, destitute of the light of his Holy Word) should be thus carried and tossed
by so contrary opinions in the judgment of their own condition; it seems
nothing strange: But that they that call themselves Christians, seeing shine in
their climate these two great lights, the Gospel and the Law, that they should
go stumbling as in the twylight, and groping like men without their eyes; and
without power either in themselves, of knowing the greatness of their miseries,
or without themselves of knowing the virtue of the grace and infinity of the
mercies of God; that they should go halting on both sides: sometime raising
themselves to heaven by their own poor merits; at another time sinking down as
low as hell in despair, even by distrust of the gift of God; and of the other
side rendering themselves alike unworthy, and throwing themselves into such a
distance of his favor: this seems openly to verify the complaint of the
Evangelist, Joh. 1.5. that light has shined in darkness, but the darkness
comprehended it not; that his light came into the world, but that the world
rather loved darkness, then light. So that it becomes no wonder, if reaping the
fruit of what they so much loved; they have also for their part error,
uncertainty, and astonishment, the ordinary companions of the night: And if
whereas the truly faithful, who by the light of the Law acknowledging their
demerits, and by the light of the Gospel embracing the merits of the Redeemer
of the World, say with Job, I know that my Redeemer lives; with the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.12. I know on whom I have believed, with the wel-beloved disciple. 1 Jo.
3.19. We know that we are of God; these men, dazzled with a vain opinion of
their own virtues, and undervaluing the redemption of the Lord Jesus, say, We
know not whither we shall go; we know not if we believe; we know not whether we
shall be saved.

But if herein they would acknowledge their blindness, there were some hope of
bringing them back to the light; but they are so far from this, that in this
uncertainty and wandering of their troubled souls, they find no infirmity; but
on the contrary, this is that which they say, We see: and to say truth, they
take a pleasure in their error, as if it were in the brightest clarity; and
upon these floting waves and uncertainties, they establish the highest
perfection of their faith: Attributing also to the fairest of all the virtues,
the three most vicious and abject passions that are to be found in all
corrupted nature, which are, Ignorance, Uncertainty, and Fear; keeping in
blindness that which should guide us through the darkness of this world, and
whose principal action is to see; for, by faith they of old have seen the
promises, and saluted them afar of, Heb. 11.13. not staggering through
unbelief, but like Abraham, that was strengthened by faith: not fearful and
trembling, but being born of God, to overcome the world, 1 John 5.4. What brave
exploits can be expected from a Champion that must fight a combat after his
eyes be put out, or his soul filled with fear and astonishment? Cursed are they
that call evil good, and good evil; bitter to be sweet, and sweet bitter;
darkness to be light, and light darkness, Isai. 5.20. To this it is that we
would now send back these Doctors of darkness, that we might once be rid of
them; and by the lively clarity of Jobs faith, make you follow and consider the
true object, where ours should rest; and there to search for her true nouriture
and advancement; if we were not for the present hindered, by that bold
sacrilege whereby they seek to make holy Scripture a party to their wicked
design, and to be the crier for their dishonest gain; making it as much as they
can, belie her own nature, which is to be the light and sure guide of souls,
to make it serve for a cloak to the night, and as a fantosm for astonishments,
wherewith they perplex consciences.

They say their doctrine is that of Ecclesiastes, Eccl. 9.1. who says, that
the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God; and yet
no man knows either love or hatred that is before them; but all things are
kept in uncertainty for the time to come. If these were the words of
Ecclesiastes, they had some appearance of reason in them: but that which makes
most express for their opinion, is not the words of the wise, but the additions
and false expositions of the vulgar Version, whereof they make use, and of
which by an unparallelled boldness they correct the Originals. For this last
clause, that all things are kept in uncertainty for the time to come, is not at
all in the Hebrew Text; and the rest is only coucht in these terms; The just,
and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God, and no man knows
either love, or hatred, that is before them. Where you see what a violence is
used to draw out of these words a certain conclusion against the certainty of
faith. For it is a thing to be observed, that in the Holy tongue many times
love and hatred are taken for the things which one loves or hates; and that
which is translated to know, signifies as often to dispose or to make use of a
thing at our pleasure: as, where it is said in Job 38.33. Do thou know the
Ordinances of the Heavens, or do thou dispose of the government of each of
them upon Earth? And in this sense they are not altogether without reason, that
turn this verse thus: But all things are so in the hand of God, that none of
men can use or dispose at his pleasure of what he either hates or loves.
Others, as Arias Montanus, think that by that which is before them, the wise
man meant those that were before them; as friends, Parents, or Domestickes, who
many times under a veil of friendship conceal their hatreds and mortal envies,
which are very hardly discovered while they can be concealed under a feigned
appearance. Others understand this uncertainty of events of our love and
hatred, which are so hidden from us, that they fall out often contrary to our
desires; and sometimes so cross, that to day we hate, what we must love
hereafter, and love that which we must ere long detest. But without straying as
much as may be from the literal sense, it is clear enough, especially if we
consider what immediately follows, which serves both as a light and
interpretation to this passage: that is, That all happens alike to all, and the
same accidents to the good and the bad: for the wiseman would have us know,
that by exterior things, by the ordinary course of the world, and the good or
evil that can be discerned by the eyes of flesh, it is very hard to distinguish
who are loved or hated of God; as it is also dangerous to go about to judge of
Gods curse or grace, by the adversity or prosperity of men. And here the
friends of Job were deceived, when upon the evils that fell upon him, they
would conclude against him both the hatred of God, and the impurity of his own
life. And here the Jews likewise abused themselves, when they said, We esteem
the proud to be blessed, and they that have tempted God were delivered. And to
this purpose the Psalmist tells us, 37.7, 9. Fret not thy self, because of him
who prospers in his way, and who brings wicked devices to pass: for evil
doers shall be cut off; but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit
the earth. Sometimes the righteous man mourns under the oppression, and he that
walks upright is subject to a thousand evils, and the wicked are terrible, and
flourishing like a green bay tree, and they have more then their heart could
wish, Psalm. 73.7. And sometimes also joy and the voice of singing and triumph
is heard in the tabernacles of the righteous, and the wicked man is ensnared
and overthrown by his own iniquities. And so it is a hard matter to judge of
this immutable will of God by accidents so diverse and changeable: But it goes
far otherwise with the inward sense of conscience; for the most righteous among
men (setting their life and works before the clearness of Gods justice) do know
well, and profess openly, that they find themselves worthy of hatred: and so
Moses said, We are consumed by thee, we are troubled by thy wrath; thou have
set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance, Psalm. 90.7, 8. For this the Psalmist cries out, Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight. And Daniel
avowing the verity and justice of Gods judgments, said, Dan. 9.7. Lord, with
thee there is justice, but shame and confusion of face unto us. So the
Centurion said, Matthew. 8.8. I am not worthy that thou should enter under my
roof; and the Apostle St. Paul esteemed himself unworthy to be an Apostle, 1
Cor. 23.9. But these men returning toward the compassions of God, and relying
upon the merits of the Redeemer of the World, have not ceased to esteem
themselves, in him, and for his sake, worthy of eternal life. And upon this
assurance David says, Psalm. 16.11. Thou shall make me to know the way of life.
Daniel besought the Eternal, that according to all his righteousness, his anger
and fury might be turned away from Jerusalem. Saint Paul assures himself, that
the Crown of Justice is reserved for him, 2 Timothy 4.8. And in the Apocalypse
it is said of those that have not defiled their garments in the corruptions of
the world, that they shall walk with the Lamb in white clothing: for they are
WORTHY, Apoc. 3.4.

And this consideration furnishes an answer to another passage, which they
allege to as little purpose, as they have maliciously falsified this, which
we have now answered. This is the saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.4. I find my
self guilty in nothing: but for this I am not justified: A passage that cuts
their throats; For without doubt, they dare not say that St. Paul was not
assured of his salvation; since to some other passages we have already
produced, that had no other subterfuge, but that he was assured of it by
particular revelation. What is it then the Apostle would say, but that this
inward conscience (whereof his conscience bears him witness) is not sufficient
to justify him before God? And of this he does not speak doubting, but as in
the Epistle to the Galatians he had said, Gal. 3.10. That all they that are of
the Law, are under malediction; and all they that seek to be justified by the
Law, are fallen from grace, Gal. 5.4. Thus he pronounces openly, and without
any sort of uncertainty, that by this he is not justified. And yet it must be
observed, that this interior sentiment of his innocence, is not extended over
all the actions of his life; for by that which follows, may easily be
comprehended, that he speaks only of the execution of his charge, wherein being
conducted by the Spirit of God, he knows he has gone right: As he said in
another place, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is now the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity and sincerity, and not in carnal wisdom, but according to the
grace of God, we have conversed with the world, and chiefly toward you. Now he
that in some one of the actions and occupations of his life, finds himself
innocent, will yet not stick to acknowledge himself, in consideration of other
things, culpable. And thus we see that David sometimes speaking of some action
and particular cause wherein he implores the justice of God against his
enemies, does yet glorify himself in his integrity to God, Psalm. 18. to have
kept the ways of the Lord, and not wickedly to have departed: but elsewhere he
confesses his faults; and in the 19 Psalm. he prays the Lord, saying, Keep back
thy servant from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me: then
shall I be upright, and innocent from the great transgression. And the Apostle
himself, who in the exercise of his Apostleship finds himself exempt of fault,
yet forgets not to sigh and demand deliverance from this law of his members,
which makes him carnal, and sold under sin, Romans 7.24. And this excellent Organ
of the Spirit of God knew very well, that to obtain justification by works, it
was necessary that works should be perfect, and innocence and sanctification
should be entire, as well in their parts, as their degrees; because that he
that fails in one point of the Law, makes himself guilty of the transgression
of all; and that no single action, though perfect in it self, can make a
perfection of justice: whereas one sin alone is able to slay the soul, to
ternish the luster, and corrupt the value of all precedent justices; and
therefore he abandons this feeble prop, whereon whosoever thinks to rely,
remains always in uncertainty: And therefore not to testify any incertitude
of his salvation, but to affirm the assurance of it upon a foundation
invariable, he reputes all things, even his own innocence, as dung; that he may
gain Christ, and be found in him, having not his own justice, which is of the
Law; but the justice of God, which is by faith in Jesus Christ.

This is then to beat the air, and fight with his own shadow, to go about to
show the weakness and infirmity of man, to sound the depth of the malice of his
heart, and to open the dark corners and retraicts of his hypocrisy: we
confess more then they can accuse us of; being only sorry that it is out of an
envy to do ill, in troubling the consciences, and not the love of the truth,
which pulls this confession from our mouth, that no man living can say, My
heart is clean, and I am pure from sin: and yet at other times, they contest
with this confession, when they fall upon the strength of their free will, and
to establish their works of supererogation: Yes, it is true, that there is no
just man on earth that does well, and sins not, Eccl. 7.21. In many things we
offend all, James 3.2. If we say we have no sin, we are liars, 1 John All the
most holy among men have confessed their sins before God, Job 15.15. and why not?
since the Heavens themselves are not pure before him; He put no trust in his
servants, and his Angels he charged with folly, Job 4.18. But so little does
this confession shake the assurance of the faith, that contrariwise it settles
it so much the more, because hereby a man is led to go forth of himself, to go
and put his whole affiance in the only mercy of God; and to withdraw all his
hopes from the merit of his own works, to rely entirely upon the infinite
merits of him, who of God is made unto us, wisdom and righteousness, and
sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Of our selves we have not so much
as a good thought, but all our sufficiency comes from God; but yet able to do
all things in him that strengthens us, Philip. 4.13. we are combated by him,
but we are in all things more then Conquerors through him that loved us, Romans
8.36. And very well said St. Bernard in the fifth Homily of the dedication of
the Temple, entering into consideration of the soul: I seem to have found two
things contrary to each other; for if I behold it such as it is in it self, and
of it self, I cannot speak better then in saying that it is reduced to nothing:
for what need is it for me to recount all her miseries, how it is charged with
sins, envelopt in darkness, environed with temptations, boiling with lusts,
subject to passions, filled with illusions, inclined to vice, full of shame and
confusions? If all the righteousness of man be before God nothing but
pollution, what shall be his unrighteousness? If there be nothing but darkness
in his light, how obscure then shall be the darkness it self? What shall I then
say? For certain man is nothing but vanity, he is reduced to nothing, man is
nothing: But how is he thus nothing, whom God so magnifies? How is he nothing,
since Godsets his heart upon him? Let us have courage: although we be nothing
in our hearts, yet we shall find in Gods heart something hidden of us. O Father
of mercies! O Father of miserable! how is it that thou setst thy heart upon us?
for thy treasure is where is thy heart: and how are we thy treasure, if we be
nothing? Certainly in the judgment of thy verity we are nothing, but not so in
the affection of thy piety and goodness.

But why, say they, if we have absolute assurance of our Salvation, are there
so many advertisements given us in holy Scripture, to take heed to our selves;
to watch, to pray, and that he that stands take heed he do not fall? and if
these be truly profitable, as it is to be presumed; then this is a testimony
that a man may fall; and consequently, that he cannot stand firm in his
assurance.

To this we answer: That the exhortations and threatenings in Scripture, which
are commonly made, ought to be applied according to the quality and necessity
of every one: The visible Church, to which the Word of God is announced, is
composed of diverse sorts of people; some have need of a bridle, others of a
spur; some to be held back by threatenings from their abandoned vices; others to
be wakened from a natural lethargy by lively exhortations: to some,
consolation; to others, correction is necessary. There are that abuse
themselves, who under pretext of exterior piety, wherein they seem very
zealous, thinking themselves to be high-flown upon the wings of a holy
devotion, while avarice and luxury, and other vanities, have tied them fast to
earth, and drag them through the dirt: To these men, the saying of the Apostle
addresses properly, 1 Cor. 10.12. that he that thinks he stands, take heed lest
he fall: and those that stand truly, ought not to slight this advice, but
rather to take it (not as a presage of their misfortune, but) as a testimony,
that although of our selves we are subject to fall, yet nevertheless God would
not have us fall, because he directs his word to us; who putting us in mind of
our condition, conducts us more and more to seek the confirmation of his grace:
And then to fall, is not to make a total loss of our salvation, but only a
stumbling or a fall in a spiritual course; a thing that may happen to the most
righteous; and yet not that they should fall from the hope of their salvation,
because they are soon again restored by repentance; For if the just man fall,
yet he can fall no farther, because the Lord holds him by the hand, Psalm.
37.24. And so these exhortations tend only to make us distrust our selves, but
not to ravish us of the confidence we ought to have in God: They fight with the
carnal security of profane ones, but not with the faith of the children of God,
to whom they rather serve as means to advance them toward that glory which
they wait for, rendering by a holy vigilance the hope of their vocation still
more firm.

Yet they will say, There is nothing so much recommended to us in Scripture, as
fear: Work out your salvation with FEAR and trembling, Philip. 2.12. Happy is
the man that FEARS always, Prove. 28.14. Be not high-minded, but FEAR, Romans
11.20. Pass the time of your sojourning here in FEAR, 1 Pet. 1.17. Certainly,
if it were necessary to oppose to these passages that recommend fear, those
that chase it from our hearts; for one, we might oppose thirty, there being
nothing more common in all the course of Scripture, then these words, which are
addressed to the faithful, Fear not: But the Word of God never belies it self,
and therefore it is necessary, that there be a fear of two sorts; one, that is
compatible with assurance, a good, a holy, a commendable fear; because it leads
us to God: the other, that extinguishes it, and makes us fly from the face of
God, as Adam did after his sin, Genesis 3.8. and this is that which the fear of
God ought to chase and banish from every faithful soul: And therefore it is no
wonder, if fear and assurance be met in one and the same subject, in diverse
respects. So when I consider the Law, with those thunders and lightnings, and
threatenings and curses, my soul is ready to vanish for fear: but when I turn my
self to the gracious promises of the Gospel, she fills her self with assurance:
when I consider my own demerit, I enter into distrust; but under the merits of
Christ, I re-assure my self again: I tremble over the pendant slippery paths of
this life; but I comfort my self, when I see the hand of God that sustains me:
And thus I serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him in trembling, Psalm.
2.11. This is that filial fear that makes Gods children prudent in their ways;
not that spirit of fear, that torments the consciences of the wicked, Romans
8.15. not that which proceeds from distrust of power, or despair of the good
will of God; but which is born out of the knowledge of dangers that environ us,
and from the sense of our own infirmity: not that which trembles for
punishment, but that which is apprehensive for the sin: not that which flies
from the face of God; but that which has recourse to his grace: And such a
one, as if there were no punishment nor recompense, no Hell nor Paradise, would
not omit her duty toward God, but would take heed to displease him: This goes
equal steps with that assurance which is reckoned among the gifts that are shed
upon the Son of God, Isai. 12.2. who was not able to enter into any distrust of
the love of his Father.

But what relation to this reverence of true children to their father, has
this trouble, and uncertain trembling fear, which the Roman Doctors cast into
men's consciences? Certainly among so diverse fluctuations, wherewith (as
impetuous winds) our souls since sin are miserably agitated; there is none more
strange, then this fear; nor among the judgments wherewith God threatens and
punishes the wicked, there is none more terrible then this cry of fear, which
he sends into their ears, Job 15.21. This trembling heart, this dimness of
eyes, this distress of soul, which makes their life so doubtful before them,
that at evening they say, Deuteronomy. 28.67. Who shall let us see the morning? and in
the morn they demand, Who shall let us see the evening? Fear, like a terrible
voice, wakens the soul by startings, and so seizes it, that it remains
insensible to every thing, except that stroke of astonishment that beats it;
and from that which is nothing, makes it feel a thousand dolorous passions: and
whereas we feel not other evils, more then they are in us, and the cause
remains there: yet fear calls back evils that are past: multiplying and
engrossing those that are present, and anticipating those that are not yet, and
perhaps that shall never be; and so forges imaginary torments, wherewith it
makes miserable souls sensible of a thousand real sorrows. The mortal enemy of
all repose, it ravages in an instant whatsoever is either pleasant or
delightful in life: and like a feverish heat, it infects and imbitters the
best prepared sweetnesses; bringing in a profound sadness into our hearts;
which so gnawes and undermines them, as the rust does steel, and makes us draw
a life after us, more miserable then death: Inconsiderate passion! which
continually represents to our eyes the image of the danger that attends us, and
is thereby so troublesome, that we can neither see, nor foresee for remedies:
neither more, nor less, then an abyss, where waters drawn out of the deep,
whirl about with so much impetuosity, giving us afar off the warning of
shipwreck, and yet draws us in by such an astonishment, that we are plunged
and swallowed up in the gulf that we would so fain escape.

Thus it awakes in our souls a vehement desire to avoid that mischief that
treads upon our heels; but it so troubles and astonishes all our senses, that
losing both our judgment and discourse, we precipitate our selves into the
danger from which our fear seems to lend us wings; and then it happens to us,
as at other times we dream, when pressed by some enemies as we think, or by some
hideous fantosm, we seek to fly away, but cannot, because our heavy bodies, or
else our trasht feet, will not follow our desire: or if a light seeming
swiftness answer our fear, and seem to skip over furlongs, yet which way so
ever we turn in the trouble of this affright, though panting for pain; this
funeral-object meets us every where, giving us the chase, and leaving us
nothing but complaint; in which we would fain cry out, but cannot, because the
apprehension stops our voice, and ties up our trembling and stammering tongue
to the roof of our mouths: So those that are seized with this passion,
apprehend every thing, and fall foul upon all: They are afraid of their dreams;
they are troubled at their fancies: They give themselves to be abused by lying
spirits; they take all that they meet with for ill presages; and sometimes come
to fall into such a confusion of spirit, that they throw themselves headlong
into despair. Histories afford us but too many examples of those who being
unable to deliver themselves from this passion, have yielded up themselves to
death, finding more sweetness in death, then in the fear of dying. Whosoever
beholds an affrighted man, may easily read in the tracts of his visage, and in
all the actions of his body, what the trouble and confusion is that agitates
his soul: for, to observe his scattered eyes, his bleak face, his pale and
shaking lips, his dry mouth, his furred tongue, his confused voice, his beating
heart, his panting flanks, his knees knocking together, his stumbling feet, and
all the movings of the body trembling and uncertain; what can be said, but that
his body is so miserably agitated, that his soul must be in great disorder? And
in this condition, it is as incapable to produce a good action, as to take good
counsel; but from thence, as from an infernal jakes, do issue the most infamous
vices and execrable actions that can be committed by men. And as in an army
after a terror taken, the battalions break their ranks in disorder; all fly,
all run, and nothing seen but blood and slaughter: so it is when fear possesses
the soul; she troubles her self; all virtues abandon her, and the vices make a
horrible wast and spoil. From hence sprung up superstition, and so many
execrable sacrifices, the very report whereof breeds horror. Cruelty claims
her for her mother; perfidiousness, treason, and dissembling, owe her their
original: She has hatched tyranny and ill counsels; and it is none but she,
that breaking the sacred bonds of nature, is capable to animate fathers and
mothers against their proper blood, and their own bowels. In a word, it is
impossible to love the thing which we fear. Behold then this monster which
these Doctors nourish in these poor souls, which God by so many promises of his
love and assistance, chases and banishes from the hearts of his children: Fear
not, little flock; for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom, Luke
12.32.

Nay but, say they, To day I am well assured, but who can continue me this
assurance till to morrow and afterward? He that perseveres to the end, shall
be saved, Matthew. 24.13. And what is there more changeable and inconstant then
man? So many assaults that Satan gives us, so many dangers that beset us, so
many infirmities that are in us, so many examples of Apostates that make
shipwreck of their faith; do they not give us cause enough to doubt? Yes
verily, and to despair absolutely, if we look no farther then to our selves:
But the power of God is perfected in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12.19. If we be weak,
he is strong; if we be changelings, he is immutable: I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, and have therefore extended my loving kindness to thee,
Jerem. 31.3. Those whom he has loved, he has loved to the end; and the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29. His foundation continues
firm, 2 Timothy 2.19. He knows who are his, and none shall ravish them out of his
hands: and it is impossible that his elect should be seduced, Matthew. 24.24.
but those whom he has foreknown, he has predestined, called, justified, and
glorified, Romans 8.29. This chain of his love is altogether inviolable; and
therefore rest thy self upon his favorable power, and upon his unchangeable
goodness, saying with David, Psalm. 138. The Lord will perfect that which
concerns me; thy mercy, O Lord, endures for ever: forsake not the works of
thine own hands: Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. This assurance is the
true humility which beats down the pride of man, that he may glorify God:
pride and presumption are to be feared when we go about to rely upon our
selves, when we sacrifice to our own nets, and exalt the merit of our virtues:
but let not that man fear to glorify himself, that seeks his glory in the
shame of the cross of Christ; that strips himself of all other ornaments, to
put on Christ; that celebrates not his own justice, but the compassions of God:
I do not glorify my self because I am just, said St. Ambrose, but because I am
redeemed: I will not glorify my self at all, because I am without sin, but
because I have obtained pardon of my sins: I will not glorify my self that I
have profited any, but because Christ is Advocate for me toward the Father, 1 John 1.2. that he has shed his blood for my sake, and for me has tasted of
death; this is not arrogance, but faith. To preach and to publish that which
thou have received, is not pride, but devotion, said St. Augustine.

And for conclusion, it is least to be feared that this doctrine should make
men negligent, or be as a pillow under their elbowes, to make their souls
sleepy in the neglect of the means of salvation. St. Paul draws a quite
contrary consequence, when he says, Philip. 2.12, 13. Work out your salvation
with fear and trembling; and adds this for a reason; for it is God that works
in you both the will and the performance, according to his good pleasure. Will
you say then, that this belief makes men sleepy, and choakes in their
consciences, both the duties of prayer, and the exercises of charity?
contrariwise, there is not a sharper spur to this acknowledgment, then the
knowledge of the Love of God, and the assurance of his grace. Who has ever
seen fear produce a good action? And what is there in the world that is either
fair or generous, which is not to be attributed to hope? It were a devilish
malice, to be wicked because God is good; to turn the back upon him, when he
turns his face upon us; to fly him, because he seek us; to change affection
toward him, because his love is for ever unchangeable toward us; and because he
will give a kingdom in heaven for us, to cast our selves into the way that
leads to infernal pains. The children of God go another way; and from the faith
and assurance, which they have of the love of their father, they inflame their
loves the more to him, and feel themselves the more obliged to his obedience.
They fear to offend so good a Father; and being purchased by so excellent a
price, they consecrate their bodies and spirits to his glory. And as the sick
man to whom Physicians have given assurance of recovery, keeps himself from
things that are contrary to his health, and takes more willingly the remedies
that are ordained him; whereas he that despaires of his health abandons himself
to his appetite: So the faithful man knowing that God will impart to him of his
glory, goes by the way of sanctity and good works, that he may attain to the
other; and having so many fair promises, cleanses himself from all pollution of
flesh and spirit, finishing the sanctification in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.
So Daniel knew, that when the 70 years of the captivity were at an end, God
should deliver his people, and therefore about that time, he put himself upon
prayer and fasting, Dan. 9.2, 3. So St. Paul, Act. 23.24, 31. had a promise for
all those that were with him in the ship, that none should be lost; but yet
when he saw the Mariners ready to withdraw themselves, he did not spare to tell
them, that if they did not tarry with us, we could not be saved. The Pagans
themselves never entered into combats with more courage, then when they had
their birds, or the entrails favorable: they never engaged into a business
with so much vigor, as when they were assured of success by the answers of
Oracles. We are called by the vocation of God, to the possession of the
heavenly Canaan: He promises us for the getting it, his conduct, favor, and
assistance; so that with Job we may very well say, I shall see God. And what
then remains, but that casting down every burden, and the sin that so easily
enlaces us, we may pursue with constancy the course set before us: and
traversing all dangers, and going under hope against hope, we may have our eyes
upon Jesus Christ the author and finisher of our faith; that so we may more and
more in his love, revive the strength of ours; and recollect in him every day
new vigor, until the time that from virtue to virtue, we may appear before his
Sacred face, where receiving the Crown and heap of his blessings, we may
glorify him for ever; as to him appertains honor and glory from this time
forth, and from generation to generation. Amen.

THE SAINTS COMFORT in the day of death.
In the book of Job, the 19 Chapter, and the 25 verse, it is thus written: As
for me, I know that my Redeemer lives, etc.


IT is impossible to please God without faith, Heb. 11.6. SERMON. VI.
for it is necessary that he that comes to God, believe not only that he is, but
that he is a rewarder of those that seek him. To God that dwells in the
Heavens, we go by faith, not by view. All the view that conducts us to eternal
salvation, is faith. And therefore as in vain the Sun sends forth his light, in
vain does it enlighten so many torches in the Heavens, and discovers upon Earth
so rich an embroidery of leaves and flowers, for those that are without eyes:
So as unprofitable are the marveiles which the wisdom of God has displayed in
all this universe, and the divine mysteries which it has discovered in the
clearness of his holy word, for those that are without faith. God complains
Esai. 65. that in vain he has stretched out his hands to a rebellious and
contradicting people: and St. Paul, Heb. 4.2. gives a reason why the word of
preaching has not profited the people of the Jews: and it is, because it was
not mingled with faith in those that heard it. Who has believed our preaching,
and to whom has the arm of the Eternal been revealed? Isai. 53.1. Light is the
first and most excellent work of God, in the elementary world; the eye is the
most admirable beauty of all the humane body: it is the joy of our life, the
address of our actions, and the cleerest window of the soul: the eye and light
of our soul is faith, without which it remains in darkness, ignorant of the
way of God, confused in all her actions, and plunged in mourning and despair:
and therefore it is also the chief gift of heavenly grace, the first tract of
the Image of God that is marked in our hearts, the first action of our spiritual
life, and the foundation and origin of all other virtues. By this light Job
acknowledges and discovers the eternal benefits which recompense his temporal
losses; he finds spiritual sweetness, which tempers the bitterness of his
corporal dolours; he sees and embraces the perdurable felicity of the second
life, which reinforces his soul against the apprehensions of death.

For this cause we have so long insisted to describe and represent to you the
nature of this faith, by winding it out of ignorance, from the confusion and
uncertainty wherein they seek to fold it up, that withdraw souls from the true
spring of life, and divert it to the cracked cisterns of superstition; to
engrave the lively tracts of it as deep in your souls, as Job desired to have
them imprinted in the hard rock, that so the deduction which we shall make you,
after him, of the mysteries of your redemption, may not be unfruitful to you,
but that being guided by this divine and heavenly torch, you may there find
that assurance, firmity and consolation, that Joy inenarrable and glorious,
which is necessary for you in the midst of so many evils and combats as the
enemies of the truth of God do deliver and prepare for his Church.

Before we come to a more particular consideration of the Redeemer, and of this
life, resurrection and glory, which he has purchased for us by the price of
his redemption; we must upon these words make some general remark, which may be
proper to confirm us as much in the verity of our faith, as they will make us
see that it is venerable for antiquity, and always veritable and constant in
her unity. We see the dolours of Job increase against all other remedies, drawn
either from hope of temporal things, or from any rules of the law; and to
acquiesce in one only Jesus Christ, seeking in the only benefit of his
redemption, his repose and hope; where he teaches us clearly, that the
principal and special object of faith has at all times been the promise of the
grace and salvation which was to be purchased by this Mediator betwixt God and
men: which holding and embracing, she finds (and not till then) her repose and
tranquillity. The whole Word of God is truly the proportioned object to
the extent of our faith; and according to the intelligence and approbation of
the understanding, she embraces it wholly, and can go no further: and in every
thing, and every where, she reputes God to be true, whether he command or
forbid; whether he promise or threaten; whether he instruct or correct: she
leads all her thoughts captive under obedience; she receives all his commands
with humility; she keeps her self to his prohibitions with fear; she embraces
his promises with affection: she fears his threatenings, she hearkens to his
instructions, and profits by his corrections; for if faith doubt and go reeling
in uncertainty of any one point of whatsoever is manifested in the Word of God,
there will afterward need no great violence to shake it in all other things,
and to throw it headlong into infidelity: And therefore when we give for the
principal object of faith, the promise of salvation and grace, we will not
subtract it to other parts of the word, as leaving it indifferent, and every
one to liberty of believing or mis-believing at his fancy; but contrariwise,
knowing that all has been brought to us not by the will of man, but by the
inspiration of the eternal spirit, which has guided the tongues and pens of
those that have announced and left written this holy word; we maintain that the
verity of it must be wholly and in every part both heard and received, with the
like reverence. But we say moreover, that as the waters of the Sea are for
diverse ends spread abroad, and go creeping through an infinity of channels, over
and under the face of the earth, yet in such sort, that at last they return all
into the bosom of the Ocean from whence they had their birth: so we say, that
in the book of Scripture, diverse matters, histories, examples, judgments,
threatenings, laws, instructions and exhortations, which like little rivers
rejoice the City of our God, and serve to diverse uses in the Church: But after
all, Jesus Christ is the mark whereat all aim, the Center whither all return,
and guide our faith in him to find and obtain rest: So Moses and the Prophets
give their testimony, Luke 24.27. and the end of the Law is Jesus Christ, Romans
10.4. and to this intent speaks St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.2. that he will know nothing
but Jesus Christ and him crucified; because that is the summary and principal
end of all the knowledge of the Scriptures; which faith not only beholds as a
thing to be consented to; but embraces it, as the only subject where to find
salvation and life. Certainly, faith believes the creation of the world, the
genealogy of the fathers, the confusion of tongues in Babel, the captivity of
Israel in Egypt, the exploits of the Judges and Kings given to the people of
God for Liberators: and from all these things there may be gathered diverse
instructions for this life: but to find in this recital the means of our
reconciliation with God, of the remission of sins, and the eternal glory, it is
not possible, because it is not in any of these properly. Where the Eternal
offers and presents the gifts of his heavenly grace, that is, a Word of God
which he pronounced to Adam with his own mouth, after he had transgrest the
commandment; Thou shall dye the death; in the sweat of thy brow shall thou eat
thy bread, Genesis 3.19. These things were conformable to the Law and Word of God:
all these fearful menaces which the friends of Job with so much preparative
denounced to the hypocrites and wicked: but these are so far from begetting or
keeping up faith, (which as it is requisite, should be accompanied with peace
and consolation) that contrariwise they put the conscience into trouble, they
fill the sinful soul with fear; and in stead of giving us access to God, go
chasing and banishing us behind his face; as we read of the people of Israel,
who not able to abide the thundering voice of the Eternal, (giving his Law upon
the mountain) stood afar off, and said to Moses, Exodus 20.19. Speak thou with
us, and we will hear thee; but let not God speak with us, for fear we dye. This
very part of the word that commands obedience, and prescribes a rule for works,
proposing blessing and life to those that accomplish it; Do this, and thou
shall live, Luke 10.28. Whosoever does these things, shall live by them, Levit.
18.5. is not that where our faith rests; because as it promises life to the
observers, so it denounces malediction against all those that do not abide in
all the words of the Law to fulfill them: And thus our conscience, guilty of
many transgressions, cannot find nor affirm her assurance, nor seek for
remission of sins, where there is nothing presented but wrath and judgment: And
therefore the Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans, and in that which he writes
to the Galatians, retires our faith from the Law, and tells us openly, that the
Law is not of faith, Gal. 3.12. that all they that are of the works of the Law,
are under the curse, Gal. 3.10, 11. that the Law was not given to quicken, but
contrary, that it is the minister of death and of condemnation; none being able
to be justified before God, by the works of the Law; declaring with David,
those to be blessed to whom God imputes justice without works, Psalm. 32.1, 2.
Nevertheless it ceases not to serve faith, because by it comes the knowledge of
sin; and that it serves as a Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ, Romans 3.23. in
whom we are freely justified by the grace of him, by the redemption which is in
Jesus Christ, whom God has proposed a mediator by faith in his blood; by whom
the remission of sin is announced, to the end, that in whatsoever we could not
be justified by the Law, whosoever believes might be justified by him, Act.
13.39. For to him all the Prophets give testimony, that whosoever shall believe
in him, shall have remission of sins by his name, Act. 10.43. Hither it is
properly that our faith is invited: Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to me
and drink, Joh. 7.37. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will refresh you, Matthew. 11.28. So that this Gospel of peace, this word of
reconciliation, ministry of spirit, and of life, power of God unto salvation to
all that believe, Romans 1.16. Which opens to us the Abysses of compassions, of
love, grace, and the good pleasure of God, which deduces to us the coming, the
incarnation, the suffrances, the justice, and the death of the Redeemer of the
world, and which represents to us the Holy Spirit, applying and sealing by the
preaching of the Gospel and the Sacraments, these divine and heavenly benefits
in our souls, and rendering us assured of our reconciliation with God, of the
abolition of our offenses, of the imputation of the justice of Christ, and of
the gift of heavenly life. The Gospel is the word of life, says St. Paul, Romans
10.8. It looks at the whole word of God, but it embraces only his good will: It
approves all his truth, but it runs only after his gratuity; and then it is best
pleased, and content, when both are met in Christ, in whom gratuity and verity
are met, justice and peace have kissed each other, Psalm. 85.11. by whom the
gratuity of God is multiplied upon us, and his truth endures for ever, Psalm.
117.2. We do not then reject any part of the word, nor we do not tear the faith
in pieces; but in this general object, we observe what is most proper, and most
particularly belongs to it, by reason of the differing parts of it. Be then the
Word of God a Paradise to the faithful soul; but so, as among so many fruits of
different taste and virtue, she may find one tree of life that may fully
satisfy the hunger of justice, that she so seeks for: let the Scripture be her
Orchard; but yet let there be one apple tree whose shadow she desires sitting
down under it, and the fruit sweet to her palate: let the truth of God be her
garden of aromatique drugs; but let there be one Rose of Sharon, whose sweet
smell may recover her fainting heart, and which she may put in her bosom, no
otherwise then a bundle of myrrh, Cant. 1.13. He knows well enough that his
Redeemer is living.

But if the Gospel be the particular object of faith, from whence shall we say
that Job learned this science, and from whence he could draw the foundations of
an assurance so firm, since this was not but many ages after his death, that
the Gospel was published to the world, or that the Savior of the world was come
to accomplish the work of our redemption? The Law and the Prophets endured till
John; but since his time, the Kingdom of God is Evangelized; Luke 16.16. Many
Kings and Prophets have desired to see the things which were seen, when Jesus
Christ converst in the world, and they have not seen them, Luke 10.24. And
therefore Jesus Christ prefers the least that were under the Gospel, before the
greatest that were under the Law: St. John pointed at him with his hand, and
showed him to the World, to be the Lamb of God that takes away the sins; for
which cause he was raised above the Prophets; and because he had not seen nor
showed the glory and virtue which followed his death and his resurrection, he
was therefore set below the Apostles: And St. Paul says, that the grace which
has been given us in Jesus Christ, from eternal times, is now manifested by
the apparition of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has destroyed death, and put
into light both life and immortality by the Gospel: It seems then that this
mystery of our redemption has been hidden from precedent ages, and that the
ancient Fathers have had nothing but shadows and figures of things that were to
come. And yet Jesus Christ himself gives this testimony to Abraham, that he
desired to see this day of his, and has seen it, and rejoiced, Joh. 8.56. and
St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.10. that the Prophets have enquired and made diligent
search, concerning the salvation of souls, the reward of faith; and by the
Prophetic spirit in them, have declared the sufferances which were to come to
Jesus Christ, and the joys which were to follow them: And for this reason it
is, that the Son of God says, He had the testimony of Moses and the Prophets,
and that the Scriptures of the old Testament bare witness of him, Joh. 5.39.

To know then how that must be understood, to resolve us in this appearance of
contrariety, and to begin our undermining at the foundation of Papistical
errors, touching the state of the souls of the Fathers deceased before the
coming of Christ; let us learn then from this confession of faith, so fair, so
firm, so clear as it can be in the noon day of the Gospel, that we have no
other faith, nor other means of salvation, then what the ancient Patriarchs had
before us; and that the ancient Covenant contracted with them, in the substance
and truth, is the same thing with the new one contracted with us, that are
fallen into these later times: all the difference which is in them, consisting
only in the order and the means of the dispensation; which according to the
diversity of times, has made it assume diverse visages: for as the Apostle,
Heb. 1.1, 2. God has heretofore many times, and after many sorts, spoken to
the fathers by the Prophets; and in these later times by his Son Jesus Christ.
Where he seems to distinguish the times by the coming of the Son of God,
betwixt the preceding ages, and those that were to come after. The first part
has had diverse seasons and diverse manners, according to which this
dispensation has been ordered: The first season is counted from the fall of
Adam unto Abraham, during which we had no declaration more express of this
eternal alliance of God with men, then that which is contained in few words,
but of an high and full signification: The seed of the woman shall bruise the
head of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. upon which promise, confirmed, declared and
entertained by the usage of sacrifices, and carried from hand to hand, and from
father to son, during all the first age of the world, this faith was sustained,
and the hope of the faithful founded. In the second season, from Abraham to
Moses, during which Job lived (a true Son of Abraham, both according to the
flesh and to the promise) this general promise was (as it were) restrained in
the family and posterity of this Holy Patriarch; when God made this alliance
with him, that he would be their God, and they his children; and discocovered
to him, that from him should go forth the Redeemer of the World, when he said,
that in his seed all the Nations of the World should be blessed, Genes. 12.
giving him beside the sacrifices, the particular seal of the circumcision, as a
sign of the justice of faith, Romans 4.11. The third was from Moses to the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ; where, in a more especial and ample manner, God was
pleased to instruct his people, exposing and confirming his Covenant unto them,
after diverse fashions; in which are remarkable two principal parts, having
reference each to other, and ordained one for the love of the other: Like the
two Cherubims, who being placed one right against the other, and extending
their wings one toward the other, did both of them look toward the
propitiatory, Exodus 25.20. the one was the Law, promising life and everlasting
benediction, under the condition of a most perfect observation of his commands:
A condition impossible to corrupted nature, whose imaginations were nothing but
evil at all times: and yet very necessary and useful, to make men know the duty
wherein they were obliged, to make them sensible of weakness, and to make them
comprehend the horror of that condemnation into which their transgressions had
precipitated them; by that means to conduct them to the second part of the
Covenant, which was all of it purely Evangelical; as that which under diverse
figures and ceremonies did represent man's reconciliation to God, and his
plenary deliverance by the ransom of that infinite merit of the sacrifice of
the death and passion of Christ. After this, in the fullness of time, came the
great Redeemer of our souls, who abolished the first means, that he might
establish the second; abolished (I say) not wholly, but in part; not in the
substance, but in the accidents: For as for the first part, he exacts no more
as it were by force of maledictions that perfect obedience of the Law; but
supplying the defects of nature by the abundant effusion of his spirit of
grace, he draws from sanctified hearts a voluntary obedience: And in the
second, he has caused the body to succeed the shadows, the truth the figures,
the thing the signs; all these things having been fulfilled in the death of
Christ.

And from hence may we easily comprehend the difference that there is betwixt
the new Covenant and the old; between the faith of the Fathers that lived under
the Law, and theirs that live under the Gospel. For it is the same thing in
substance; Having God for the Author, his grace and mercy for the cause, and
the satisfaction of Christ for the meritorious foundation; The same things
promised, grace and glory: God is to us both, a Sun and a Shield; he gives both
grace and glory; and withholds no good thing from such as wait upon him:
Distributed in general by the same means, and the preaching of the word;
Hearken, and your souls shall live, Isai. 55.3. the administration of the
Sacraments: He that shall not be circumcized, shall be cut off, Genesis 17.14. and
the inward working of the spirit of God, Isai. 59.21. My spirit that is upon
thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart from thy
mouth, nor from the mouth of thy seed, nor from the mouth of thy seeds seed,
from henceforth and for ever: Aiming at the same end, to wit, salvation and
life eternal. But as to the accidents, and in the manner of dispensation, there
is no small difference. For in the Gospel, the manifestation of doctrine is
more clear, express, and efficacious; as much more clear, as accomplishments
are before prophesies; and things present, then things which are as yet hid in
the length of ages to come: and so much the more clear, in that at this day of
exterior manifestation, has been added a greater abundance of the Spirits
interior light, according as it was prophesied, Joel 2.28. And it shall come to
pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons
and your daughters shall prophecy; your old men shall dream dreams, your young
men shall see visions: so that whereas they of old saw Jesus Christ but under
shadows and images of what was to come; we hold him as come already, and look
upon him as crucified before our eyes. To this may be added, their Covenant was
contracted by the mediation of Moses; ours, by that of Christ: The old Covenant
was confined to one corner of the world, and tied to one family; the new one
has reached to the ends of the earth, and has embraced the Nations: The old
one lasted but for a time, whereas the new one shall not terminate but by the
end of ages.

Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. This is
the Lamb slain before the foundation of the world, Revel. 13.8. It Is he that is
a light to the nations, and the salvation of God unto the ends of the earth: in
waiting for him, those of old found their consolation, as we have ours in
seeing him: and the odor of his sacrifice expanding it self as well over the
foregoing as following ages, has restored those souls who before or since
have put their whole trust in him: Wherefore although we see those of old in
rudiments which are seemingly gross, let us not the less value their faith,
who for having the less of clarity, have not the less of certainty. Certainly,
prophecy was like a candle giving light in an obscure place; the Law like the
dawning of the day, or the Star of the morning; and the Gospel like the clear
noon: But all these lights, though differing in clarity, have been enough to
make us see and follow the ways of salvation, 2 Pet. 1.19. And though it seem
to us, that we see no more promised to the people of Israel, and their
Patriarchs, then a Canaan flowing with milk and honey, and with a thousand
sweets of temporal blessings; yet let us not think that they stopped there, or
that they did not with Job raise their souls, and carry up their desires to
things spiritual, to that inward peace, and never-decaying glory, which was
represented to them under those shadows of an earthly happiness. For in
whatsoever was heretofore offered and presented to them, they still cast their
eyes on Jesus Christ the promised Messiah, in whom all Gods promises are yea
and amen, 2 Corinthians. 1.20. The consideration of whom, would by no means suffer
them to dwell upon the transitory sweetnesses of this world; his Kingdom being
represented to them by Prophesies, not as a carnal or worldly one, but as one
altogether celestial and spiritual. The Scepter (said Jacob to his sons) shall
not be taken from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from betwixt his feet, till Silo
come, Genesis 40. That is to say, The seed of the woman, the man to be born
without a Father; and to him the people shall assemble themselves: He was to
come forth of Judah, but at the time that he was to come, Judah must lose the
Scepter; not then to rule or signorize in Judah: for if he were to raise Judah
above the Nations, he should not then be the hope of his people, since his
coming was to vanquish and subjugate them: but to him all Nations were to run,
and to offer him voluntary obedience, because under his yoke they should come
to seek their liberty; because he shall reign over their souls, and conduct
them with a rod of comfort, delivering them from the bonds of sin, and the
tyranny of Satan, whose head he shall bruise, and take away his Empire. So
likewise when the Prophets speak of the deliverance of Babylon, of the peoples
return into the land of promise, and the re-establishment of the Temple;
presently you see them transported with a consideration of the Kingdom of this
great Messiah, of the deliverance of the souls of the true temple, which is the
Church: As if they would teach the people, that the possession of Canaan, and
all the contentment depending thereon, were but shadows not to be trusted to;
their felicity not consisting, to live, to govern, and reign here below, but
to serve God, to be governed by him, as that by the Scepter of his word, and
efficacy of his spirit, he might reign in us, and be fully obeyed: So says
Esai, that the branch of the Lord shall be beautiful and glorious; and the
fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of
Israel, Isai. 42.3, 4. But with what glory? It is (and he adds) that he that is
left in Zion, and he that remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy; and those
that shall be in Jerusalem shall all be written to life, when the Lord shall
have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the
blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and by
the spirit of burning: and in the 11 Chapter he shows, that the gifts he has
received from above, to communicate to the world, are all spiritual, when he
says, Isai. 11.2. The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord: He says moreover, that he will bring
his people from the North and from the South, and that the earth shall be too
narrow to contain them; that Kings and Queens shall be their nursing fathers
and nursing mothers: But this is not to promise a temporal Kingdom, but to
represent an arrival of all Nations to his Church; and of their Kings
themselves, under whose protection she should abundantly prosper. And here you
may see the difference, which is betwixt the advancements which the Eternal
promises to Kings, and he entrance which he prepares for his Son into the
world. Behold how he speaks to Cyrus, Isai. 45.12, 3. I have taken thee by thy
right band, that thou might make the Nations thy subjects; and that I might
weaken the reins of their Kings: I will break the gates of brass, and bruise
the bolts of iron, and give thee the hidden treasures. But when he speaks of
the Messiah, We have seen him grow up as a tender plant; and as a root out of a
dry ground: he has no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is
no beauty that we should desire him: He is despised and rejected of men; a man
of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, and we hid as it were our faces from
him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. And after, he shows why he was
come into this sad and abject form, because he has born our griefs, and
carried our sorrows: he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities, Isai. 53.4, 5. The price which has purchased our peace, was
put upon him; and by his murtherings, we were healed: As Daniel more openly
declares, that he should come to put an end to disloyalty, to purge iniquity,
Dan. 9.24.
and to bring justice into the world. This is that which was so clearly
represented to them by the ceremony of the sacrifices, where such things were
offered that could not have an entire and proper virtue for the washing of the
soul, but did only look after, and search their perfection in the full and
entire satisfaction which Jesus Christ has rendered to the justice of God his
Father, by the sacrifice of the Cross. And thus the faithful instructed by all
these means, have ever testified that the attendance of their souls has
carried it self higher then the outside of signs, and of the transient benefit
of these temporal promises: For Job declares it not only here in formal terms,
but likewise, as the Apostle shows, in the Epistle to the Hebr. Chap. 11.9,
10. The Patriarchs have dwelt as strangers in the Land of Promise, as if it had
not belonged to them; dwelling under Tents, and possessing nothing there but
their sepulchers: to let us see, that it was not properly that earth, which
being dead they could not enjoy, that was given for a reward of their faith;
but that they looked for a City which had a foundation, whereof God himself was
the Architect and builder: even that God that had always been their buckler,
and was also for ever, and after death it self their abundant reward: A reward
which Jacob waited for during all the course of his life; and touching it as
with his finger at the point of death, He cried out; Lord, I have waited for
thy salvation, Genesis 49.18. A reward for which the Prophet David rejoiced, Psalm.
17.15. I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I
awake with thy likeness: which goes beyond this life, as himself testifies,
when he assures that the death of the children of God is precious in his sight,
Psalm. 116.15. and has made this holy and heavenly light so resplendent and
sparkling, that even Balaam, though a wicked Prophet, stranger to the Covenant,
and enemy of Gods people, seeing afar off this Star of Jacob, and this King
that should render him blessed, cries out, Numb. 23.10. Let me dye the death of
the righteous, and let my last end be like his: which without doubt he could
never have desired, if he had not had hope of good after death; and if death,
as a Pagan says, had made an end of all things, and of it self too.

The faith then that we profess, and the profession of the hope whereto we
stick, is no new thing: It is the faith of the fathers, which beholds with
knowledge, and receives with assurance, the grace that is given to the merit of
the Lord Jesus, and the eternal benefits of the glory which is to come. Let the
Papists no more allege the Fathers to us: Job and the Patriarchs are more
ancient then all the Fathers that they can allege: let them no more produce
their enfumed titles, nor the walls of their Churches, which time has covered
with Ivy and Moss; these are but feeble arguments to combat with a faith which
has been from the beginning, and from the first ages, always the same, until
this present: we care not if our walls be new, so that our doctrine be ancient:
little does it concern us what the schoolmen ergat in their schools; the very
Horse-coursers of heavenly truth, which they have pulled out of her throne, to
make her a slave to temporal commodities, and accommodate her to the profit of
a dishonest gain; only to this end, that we may appear merchants upon the steps
of these ancient Patriarchs, who have had testimony to have pleased God; and
who following the faith of Job, of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, we may also have
place with them in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Only, my brethren, let us have a care of this, that the faith of the Ancients,
which amidst the shadows of the Law, and the dusky obscurities of these gross
rudiments, has been so lively, so firm, and so constant, pronounce not a
condemnation against our infidelity; of us (I say) on whom the later times are
fallen, to whom the saving grace has clearly appeared, to whom (the veil being
taken off) without shadow or aenigma, the mystery of the redemption is in
express terms represented; the wonders of the resurrection manifested; and the
unspeakable joy of the glory to come discovered: Those that saw these things
but obscurely, and afar off, have been nevertheless, so far touched and ravished
with so much force, by the excellency of them, that they have contemned their
country, their pleasures, the world, and their own lives, to follow them: And
we in the midst of the light of so great a knowledge, to keep our selves to the
least of these perishable goods, are but too ready to forsake those
excellencies: And where are those at this day, in this clear light of the
Gospel, that like Abraham, would suffer to see themselves exiled from their
dear Country, or severed from their friends and their parentage, and go they
know not whither, to follow the vocation of God? Heb. 11.8. Where are they that
like Moses reject the greatness of the world? refuse to be called the son of
the daughter of Pharaoh, choosing rather to be afflicted with the people of God,
then for a time to enjoy the delights of sin; esteeming the opprobry of Christ
greater riches then the treasures that were in Egypt? Or those who with David
love rather to have one favorable regard from the face of God, then the favor
of Kings, and the abundance of the goods of this world, and to be a simple
porter in the House of God, then to dwell with honor in the tabernacles of the
wicked? Or else those who with Job, after the loss of their goods, the
desolation of their families, and in the very arms of death, are ready to
glorify God, and esteem themselves blessed to possess his grace, and wait for
the certainty of his glory? Where shall we seek them in this perverse age,
where there are many that are more ready to sell their Country, their Brethren,
and Parents, for a little silver, then to forsake them for the glory of God?
Where this rage of getting goods, this infernal fury of avarice, so possesses
the greatest part of men, that are so far from quitting their riches to follow
Christ, that contrarily they do not stick to truck with Jesus Christ for
riches; and do willingly leave the certain hope of the glory of heaven, for the
uncertain promise of some honor, or some command in the world, though but for
three days; and where at last, in stead of the joy which the children of God
resent in their tribulations, and the actions of thanks which they render to
God in the midst of his corrections, we see painted upon the faces of the most
modest, a consternation and a sadness, which witnesses that we regard his
fatherly rods with a wicked eye, and that these light afflictions do send us to
deaths door, notwithstanding the Weight of Justice, which they carry, nor the
glory that follows them, can any ways awaken nor cheer up our hearts: And
what is this, but that faith goes by little and little failing and falling to
the ground? that we have no more but an appearance of piety, and a show of
godliness, but have renounced the force of it: we believe not in the promises
of God, and Atheism is but too far insinuated into the greatest part of souls
that are slaves to the perishable Mammon, that love your pleasures more then
God; unworthy to have an immortal spirit, that set your affections upon things
that have not so much honor as to be mortal. Of all that which you sow to the
flesh, what do you reap, but corruption? What can you hope for after the
contempt of the heavenly gift, whereof you have tasted? Of this power of the
world to come, which you have known; of this spirit of grace, which you have
grieved; of this blood of the Covenant, which you tread under foot? but an
horrible expectation of the judgment of God, a fervor of fire consuming his
adversaries, and a vengeance as much redoubled as the knowledge which you have
had, renders you more wicked and inexcusable?

You then (faithful souls) to whom God has given better inspirations, at this
noise and report of the faith of your forefathers, awaken earnestly this
drowziness of your own; turn away your hearts from the vanity of this flower of
the world that passes; see that your life is but a wind, and that death shall
shortly pull to ground, and reduce to nothing this terrestrial and miserable
mass: And therefore seek while you are here below, the spiritual goods of your
souls, that may follow you toward the Heavens: And forasmuch as the light of
the Gospel discovers move clearly to you, then the Fathers could see under the
shadows of the Law; Love them therefore more ardently, pursue them more
constantly: And since we are regenerate into a lively hope by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from among the dead, to obtain the incorruptible inheritance,
which cannot be contaminate nor withered, but is reserved in the Heaven for us;
Let us make lighter of the World and of her goods, of these bodies, and of
these delights; and esteem it a great gain to have lost them, that we may gain
Jesus Christ: And that being found in him, having not our own justice which is
of the Law, but his which is by faith; we may also in him, and by him, obtain
this good, which eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nor has entered into
the heart of man; and which God has prepared for those that love him, 1 Cor.
2.9. To which God the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, be honor and glory,
from henceforth and for evermore.

Amen.

ZION in Sackcloth, AND HER SAINTS in Tears.
In the 137 Psalm, the first verse, it is thus written: By the waters of
Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered thee, O Zion.


A Sad Text in a sadder time; SERMON. VII.
in which the rivers of Babylon swelled not so high with inundation of water in
the letter, as the waters in the Metaphor, outswelling and breaking down their
banks, have overflown both our Church and State. The ways of Zion mourn, and
her children are set to a task of weeping, whilst they behold the ruin of
their Mother, by the Caledonean Boars on the one side, and the mixed but wilder
Herd then those of Africa, the Foxes busily undermining the vineyard, whilst
the fowls of the air, the Atheists, as did the fowls on Abraham's divided
sacrifice, seize on the divided Church; she in the mean while, doubtful to
which, as most powerful (though alike pernicious) she should yield up her life,
Religion, for a prey.

And who is there now (if not a stranger in Israel) whose fears have not taught
his eyes acquaintance with his heart to pour out water before the Lord, with
them at Mizpeth? 1 Samuel 7.6. or whose heart has not borrowed from his eye
compassion with Jeremy? Mine eye affects my heart, because of the slain of
the daughter of my people, Lam. 3.5. and if so, how shall not our better
devotion hallow so pious an expense, by sending them both up in an humble
importunity of prayer, to work an atonement with Heaven, that we may recover
the departed glory of Israel; and the Ark of the Lord now captived by the
Philistines, may be brought back to us, though but upon the necks of the scarce
yoked beasts. Happy are those tears that are made the rich tribute of the
Churches ransom; happy those passionate groans that hasten to prevent a
Jeremies reiterated lamentation, and a Jerusalems once total final expiring:
happy those childrens prevailing prayers, that make their mother a debtor for
that life she gave their offerers; who as they live at her breasts, so how
shall they not expire in her blood, if either tainted by corruption, or let out
by cruelty? It is, it is true, our unfortunate and deplorable condition, to see
these sad times of distraction and persecution, which as they are for the trial
of our patience, who are called to suffering, and for the exercise of their
wisdom, to be honored with public counsel; so they are for the actuating of
all our devotions; whose hearts would faint, did not our eyes wait, and our
hands knock for a speedy composure, and expected deliverance, from the gates of
Heaven. And those that feel not great strivings of heart for the division of
Ruben; those, whose bowels are restrained, whose souls bleed not within
themselves by compassion, do with the actor of a mischief contract a guilt, and
by their own neutrality appropriate to themselves a curse; Curse ye Merosh, yea
curse, yea bitterly, because they came not forth to help the Lord, to help the
Lord against the mighty, Judges 5.13. a Text however sacrilegiously inverted by
irreligious religious interpreters, yet God does expect our help; and we help
him in his Church: Zion does desire our help, and we help her in our prayers.
Heaven and your piety divert the curse; and so it shall, from the blessed
offspring of faithful Abraham, whom (me thinks) I may conclude blessed in
misery, at home and in captivity, at Jerusalem in Babylon, since by those waters
remembering dearest Zion. And let not us be less affected to ours, then they
were to theirs: our freedom is as straight as was their captivity; our (once)
purer waters of the Sanctuary, are as pudled as were they the waters of
Babylon; whilst our Jerusalem, once at unity in it self, is now as the City of
Babylon, a land of confusion. And if any thing be wanting to make up the
parallel of the history, yet let that of the duty be found complete: By the
waters of Babylon sit we down and weep, when we remember thee, O Zion.

Which words admit of a double sense: 1. Historical and literal. 2. Allegorical
and moral. If we consider them in the history and letter, then the whole Psalm
is a Prophecy of that destruction of Jerusalem, which was acted by
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and lamented by the Prophet Jeremy. Which
sense, Hugo Cardinalis seems to observe; nor does St. Hillary deny it made more
probable from the title of the Psalm, which runs thus; A Psalm of David for
Jerusalem. And though the inscription he suspects of forgery from the tradition
of the Ancient Hebrews, yet not the application of it to their foreseen
captivity in Babylon; so Junius. Well then, the parts are these.

The place of their captivity, [Babylon.]

The place of their sitting [by the

[we sat down.]

[and wept.]

[when we remembered thee, O Zion.]

Each word bears a full sense of sorrow; but of each of them in their order:
and,

First, the place of their captivity [Babylon.]

Babylon was a City situate in the field of Shinar in Chaldea, North from the
Land of Judea; which as it was the Imperial Seat of Nebuchadnezzar (whose
victorious army was by Gods avenging justice stretched many Kingdoms besides
Judea,) so for its magnificence was it styled the glory of Nations, the beauty
and pride of the Chaldeans, Esai. 13.19.

God sometimes prospers the wicked, whilst he suffers his own people to lie
under oppression: these have the glory of their houses increased, and have
riches in possession, whilst the other are evil entreated of Tyrants; and they
that hate them are Lords over them. Babylon sits as a Queen, and sees no
sorrow, whilst Judea is gone into captivity, and her beauty into the enemies
hand. But whilst correction reclaimes the erring Saint, the prosperity of the
wicked destroys the sinner. Gods outward favors (though they be silken cords)
seldom draw the wicked to goodness. Babylon is beautiful, rich, and prosperous,
yet Babylon is still a City of confusion; and so, not more for the confusion of
tongues there, Genesis 11.4, 7. then for their confusion both in Religion and
Government.

For the former, the Sacred Story tells us, a general deluge of water had
overflown the whole earth: the remembrance of the former inundation, imprinted
in men a fear of a future: and though God had past an Act of Grace for
security, and placed his bow in the clouds, to be a Sacrament to the world,
that he would never destroy it so again; yet their jealousies and fears
prompted them to new inventions of their own, for their own security: a
building of their own device shall be more trusted in, then the word, promise,
and ordinance of God. But how justly did divine vengeance confound their
tongues and hands to a division among themselves, whose impious attempts had
made a division betwixt themselves and Heaven? When the wickedness of men
opposes it self to Heaven, Gods judgments upon their wickedness sends amongst
them divisions and confusions. If man be confederate against his God, God (as
in the confusion of Babel) sends a division not so much among the tongues, as
the hearts of men. No peace with home-born subjects, either by the free
obligation of love, or by the strict tie of allegiance, so strong; no union
with our Neighbors so firm, which upon our common breach of faith with Heaven,
God suffers not, either for the weakening of a State, or the disturbance of a
Church, to conclude in a dangerous rupture, an unnatural disaffection. Our
peace with man, is grounded upon our peace with God. If God be with us, who can
be against us? was both an Apostles triumph, and an Emperors motto. But if we
be not with God, God will not be with us; and if God be against us, he will (as
by sad experience we have found it true) send amongst us division and confusion.

Secondly, [Babylon] a City of confusion, for their confusion both in Religion
and Government. It is the observation of Antiquity, that (after the Languages
confusion) through the neglect of words, the ignorance of God got strength, and
sent forth a fruitful progeny of false Gods, to the number of their
worshippers. Succoth Benoth was the Idol-god chosen and worshipped by the
Babylonians, 2 Kings 17.36. But though they had forsaken the Lord, and served
Idols, they staid not here; they will have their glorious reformation; a
monstrous golden image is set up, and every one (without liberty of conscience
to any) must fall down before it, when the music gives them warning, Dan. 3.15.

It was the fault of the Jews, that they desired to be like the Nations. And
Christians (I fear) have learned too much of Heathenish Idolaters, to alter,
not their form of worship only, but their very Creed too.

It is observed in Disputes, that one absurdity granted, a thousand follow. Men
run to error without end, when they have once departed from the truth; and
that mischief which (at first) they could not think on without horror, they
can (at last) commit without remorse.

Yet one step further; even Machiavel himself could say, that the giving God
his due, is the cause of the greatness of any State: and that there is a God,
is the unanimous language of the whole world, even since the confusion of
tongues: yet upon this principle have been built more Babels of errors, then
there have been Nations derived from the languages confusion. For though Nature
has enstamped upon the soul of man the certainty of a Deity; yet the designs
of policy have so misrepresented him to men's conceits, as it is hard to say
whether they were more happy in a dark ignorance, or miserable in a doubtful
knowledge. How often have men (for the furtherance of their designs) as if
they came into the world, not to receive rules of faith, but to prescribe them,
undertaken to be Monarchs in the Art of Faith, and to trick up anew (each men
after his fancy) that great work of Religion, which derives its accomplishment
from God alone?

Babylon then (the place of their captivity) must needs add to the misery of
the captives, if we look no further then the beauty, pride, riches and glory of
Babylon; yet to be captive amidst all this, were but to starve in the midst of
plenty, to be naked in a rich wardrop, to be bound in fetters of gold, and to
kneel in the dust before a throne of glory: Fetters of gold are but fetters;
and the Peasant that from his loamy cottage is carried prisoner to a stately
Castle, though for his homely stall, he has the exchange of a Princely
building; yet he changes his golden liberty for iron shackles.

These Jews whom the Kings of Babylon honored most, were at the best but
captive Governors. When the King of France was here in England, King Edward
who had taken him captive, honored him with all Princely entertainments; yet
still was he pensive: and being desired to be merry, answered, How shall I sing
songs in a strange land? To be encircled with ten thousand bared heads, and to
be served on the bended knees of the mighty men, and to want no ceremonies
befitting Majesty; yet to be a captive, a prisoner; this clouds the brightness
of the Sun, and shuts it up again in darkness. All honor, beauty, riches, and
what else desirable, without liberty, are but glorious Pageants: it is liberty
that gives life and vigor, and sets a price upon all things else: this is the
true Elixir, that turns all things into gold; and gold it self, without it,
resolves to vilest earth. Had they been but Tributaries to that uncircumcised
power, their necks might with some ease have born that yoke of subjection;
whilst they had this happiness left, their liberty to repair to the Sanctuary,
and to visit Gods Holy Temple; but now Ichabod, their glory is departed; their
land enjoyes her Sabbaths, but they may enjoy neither it nor them: By the
waters of [Babylon] they sat down, etc.

But that is not all; for secondly, they are constrained to dwell in Mesech, and
to have their habitation in the Tents of Kedar; they are captives in [Babylon;]
where, as almost every day brings forth a new Deity and Religion: so all
occasions are sought for their destruction. New decrees and ordinances lay as
close siege to their souls, as formerly did their conquering forces to their
fortified walls; that their souls and consciences might be alike captivated as
their bodies: So as in Babylon they are still but as in a larger prison, or a
beleaguered City; and so much the more dangerous, as the assaults to the soul
are more dreadful then all violence to the body.

But they were open enemies that did them this dishonor; and professed
adversaries, that magnifying themselves against them, led them into captivity;
and therefore the more tolerable, from whom they could expect no better; but
that thou my companion, and mine own familiar friend, with whom I took sweet
counsel, and walked together in the house of God as friends, should do me this
mischief; this was a temptation strong enough to have provoked the spirit of
David, to have wished passionately what he spoke Prophetically; Let death come
hastily upon them, and let them go down quick into hell; for wickedness is in
their dwellings and among them. Whilst these, like melancholy men, betake
themselves to the rivers side, whose soft murmurs bear consort with their sad
tempers; by the waters of Babylon sit we down, and weep, when we remember thee,
O Zion. And so I have done with the first thing, the place of their captivity
[Babylon] and proceed to.

The second thing, the place of their sitting [by the waters] of Babylon.

Hydrographers tell us, that the waters of Babylon flew out of Paradise.

First, Sin can turn the happy streams of Paradise into the waters of Babylon;
this turns the silver into tin, the wine into water, the faithful City it makes
an harlot; and the seats of judgment and justice, it fills with murderers,
Esai. 1.21, 22. And when Bethel the house of bread, shall become Bethaven a den
of thieves, how shall not Jerusalem become Jerusckecah, an homely and
unpleasant place?

Secondly, Those gracious streams of the Waters of Life, that fertilize some
souls into the happiness of a Paradise, wash others with their heavenly
current; yet still they remain a Babylon. Those silver drops of Heaven, that
falling on a good soil, fill the fields with fruitfulness; lighting upon a
clayish ground, it proves wet as well as cold, but barren still. Some say the
reason is, that the same Sun of Grace, which is (as it were) in the Meridian to
some souls, is but (as it were) in the setting to the other: but those say
better, that the same fire that mollifies the wax, hardens the clay; not
through want of efficacy in the one, but through the ill disposition of the
other. Christ stands at our doors and knocks, and offers to us the waters of
life without money, or without price: our rejecting so great salvation, proves,
that of our selves is our own destruction: I would have healed Babylon, and she
would not be healed.

Thirdly, [by the waters] of Babylon. Afflictions have been baptized by the
name of [waters.] When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee,
(says the Lord by his Prophet.) Here therefore they sat, that by what they
saw, they might, by reflecting on themselves, be induced to meditate on what
they suffered. Yet it is observable, that they sat but [by,] not [in] the
waters; that as none could say with the justifying Hypocrite, This punishment
is greater then we have deserved; neither might any say with despairing Cain,
This punishment is greater then we can suffer.

God is just is punishing; yet in punishing is he merciful: though we have
deserved more then he inflicts, yet he inflicts less then we have deserved. He
might make the deep waters go even over our souls, as sometimes they did cover
the face of the new created earth; yet, as then his spirit moved upon the
waters, (though as yet there was darkness upon the face of the deep) and anon
did gather them into an heap, so as the dry ground appeared: so, though the
inundations of our afflictions be deep and broad, and a thick darkness of
Heavens displeasure do cover us; yet even here does his goodness move, and
rests not, but makes the ground of some sparing mercy appear, from which our
faith (as Noah's dove) may gather an Olive Branch of comfort, to keep us up, so
as these deep waters drown us not, though they rage so horribly and so long, as
by these waters of Babylon we sit down and weep. And so I have done with the
second thing, the place of their sitting, [by the waters] of Babylon; and
proceed to

3. The third thing, their posture in that place: [we sat down.]

Sitting is a posture that implies a stay; yet was it neither desire of ease,
nor any content in the delightfulness of the place, that moved them to sit.
Things in nature do not more hasten to their center in which they rest, then
did they long after Zion, after which their souls did breath: but a miserable
necessity under which they were bound, and that divine will to which they must
subscribe, had determined on them their seventy years captivity, till the time
of their return, Jerem. 25.12. and till then, though they might with tears have
prevented that captivity; yet though they should now, as Esau for his blessing,
beg deliverance carefully with tears, they shall nevertheless till then weep
for that misery, which (till they felt) they would not believe. That penitent
sorrow which would prevent the decree of vengeance before it brings forth, is
often too late to reverse it, when it is put in execution. Those daily tears
which (had they been shed at home) might have expiated their offenses, and been
in mercy accepted for their Countries ruin, are now condemned to wash a
profane land, where (hopeless Exiles) they are faster bound by the decree of
Heaven, then by all the power of their enemies. Their lusts had led them
willing captives under the Law of sin, and their enemies led them into an
unwilling captivity under the power of sinners; and as they had a long time
sinned without repentance, so shall they be a long time punished without
remission. The gliding streams with happy freedom wash the several banks they
pass by, and at length repose themselves in the desired common bosom of
waters: but perpetuity gives perfection to these captives misery; from day to
day, from morning to evening, they [sit down] in sorrow, and tire their weary
souls in a longing expectation of long delayed felicity. The days of our age
are but threescore years and ten; and though some be so strong as to live
fourscore years, yet then is their strength (naturally) but labor and sorrow,
(says Moses) so soon passes it away, and we are gone, Psalm 90.10. yet lo,
seventy years, threescore years and ten, is the time for their captivity.

Sin hastens on, and lengthens to us the miseries of our life. When God sets
our misdeeds before him, and our secret sins in the sight of his countenance,
our days we pass in his anger, and our years in troubles; we consume away in
displeasure, and tremble at his wrathful indignation: we are killed from day to
day; every days fear ushers in a new trouble, and every days trouble brings
forth a further fear: wave after wave, and billow after billow, come tumbling
to our shores, whilst we by these waters of Babylon sit down and weep.

Again, secondly, if we refer their posture to their affection, [we sat down
and wept;] those postures of the body are to be used most, which suit best with
the occasion, and move, or (at least) express the inward affection. Isaac
walked and meditated; old Jacob leaned upon his staff, and worshipped: Abraham
bowed his face to the ground, and did reverence: Solomon stood and prayed:
Daniel kneeled upon his knees, to deprecate the captivity of his people: which
here the people did bewail but sitting. Standing suits not with a dejected
condition; kneeling, not with a simple bewailing of our condition to our
selves, but to God. Job indeed in his affliction arose and fell down, but
because he worshipped. Nehemiah, when he heard of the afflictions of Jerusalem,
sat down and wept: Hagar, when in the bitterness of her soul she bewailed the
death of her son, sat down, Genesis 21.16. and the Jews when in the like sorrow
of heart, for the Temple, their own captivity, and the distresses of Zion, as
if they would dwell and feed upon sorrow, [sate down:] we sat down and wept.

Long afflictions require alike length of sorrow to repentance. They are
grievous sins, that have provoked the God of mercy to lengthen the smart of his
judgments: gravia peccata, gravia desiderant lamenta, (says Isidore) grievous
sins require the greatness of our sorrow, both for intention and duration. But
to be plagued for sin, and yet to be senceless of the judgment, is the worst
of judgments. No greater Symptom of death, then when the sick man grows
senceless, and knows not that he is sick at all. And I would to God such a
Crisis could not be made of us; else, why such weariness and neglect of our
humiliation, whilst the judgment is continued? Nay, (as if our sores were the
more festered for their lancing) why such exemplary profaneness, as former ages
have been piously ignorant of, and future (I hope) will detest to imitate? Why
such notorious sins, such noonday evils, to which each man's eye and ear bears
witness, perhaps some with tingling, others with tears? Why such debauchedness
of life, which when it has unsouled the man, buries the beast in excess and
riot? Why such execrable oaths and blasphemies, which pass so frequently
through those common shores, the fatal ports of our mouths, which are seldom
open, but to transport such carrion and filth? Why those unworthy actions of
luxury, that mark of reprobation; as one which engulphs the soul in such base
pleasures, and makes it like the worst of Devils, that are more gross, (as the
Caldean and Egyptian) that which has gluttony for the fuel, pride for the
flame, unclean words for the sparkles, infamy for smoke, ordure for ashes, and
a hell for Center? O deceive not your selves! all our longing expectation of
the removal of these judgments, will be unsatisfied, till we heartily sorrow,
and earnestly repent of those our misdoings, whereby we have provoked Gods
wrath and indignation against us; there is no hope of our returning to the fair
hill of Zion, the beauty of holiness, and the beauty of order, till in sorrow
for our transgressions, that have made a separation betwixt God and us, by
these waters of Babylon we sit down and weep. And so I have done with the third
thing, and come to

The fourth thing, their affection in that posture, We sat down [and wept].

As all rivers, so those of Babylon, run into the sea; and as others, so they,
receive addition of waters as they run. The heads of the drooping captives were
as waters, and their eyes as fountains of tears that streamed into the rivers
current: as they sat down by them [and wept:] their whole composition was but
like engendered clouds, exhaled vapors drawn up by the heat of Gods anger, and
now distill and melt themselves into continual showers of tears. So as if
Babylons rivers, as once Hagars bottle, should chance to fail; as she set her
dying child, so have they their expiring mother before their eyes, which will
force a new supply to fill them up again. And should I say the waters tides
were caused by the ebbes and floods of the captives tears, it would be but an
Hyperbole that would express the victors cruelty, and the captives griefs. Nay
their grief knows no ebb; their Moon (and so their sorrow calls for a Change at
last) is at her Full of sorrow: each pensive enslaved Jew pays to the waters
of Babylon their tears for tribute, to the memory of Zion. And (as if what they
shed for her sake, they would commit to the waters of faithfulness to carry
them) they sit by the rivers side [and weep,] that their floating tears might
at last greet their Country from her weeping worshippers, whilst they (mean
while) weep again in remembrance of thee, O Zion.

Etiam atque etiam flevimus, (say Junius and Tremellius) they wept, and they
wept again. 1. As Patientes, Sufferers, they wept for themselves, and for their
children: Weep not for me, O ye daughters of Jerusalem; but weep for your
selves, and for your children: for your houses shall be left unto you desolate,
Luke 23.28. No affliction is joyous, but grievous. The presence of dolorous and
dreadful objects, even in minds most perfect, may as clouds overcast all
sensible joy, and dissolve into showers of tears. 2. As Compatientes,
fellow-feeling members of others miseries, [we wept again,] for thee, O Zion!
Mine eye runs with rivers of waters, for the destruction of the daughter of
my people: mine eye trickleth down, and cease not, without intermission, Lam.
3.48. When Christ wept for Lazarus, behold how he loved him (said the Jews:)
these were tears, as of love of her good, so of compassion of her misery.

How shall that heart refrain from tears, with whom love within, and misery
without, shall plead for pity? no expression so emphatical, as that of weeping.
Tears speak that grief, which no tongue is able to express: no language so
sincere as this, nor yet so passionate. Alas, my brother, was the Elegy of that
lying Prophet: his words might belly his dissembled mourning; but tears are the
Rhetoric of grief, that speak the affections of a true hyperbole. And let who
will, divide passions from the soul; let who will, say, fear becomes not a
stout heart: it is a senceless heart that is not affected; and a stony heart
that does not weep. Nor is it any shame to confess that grief we cannot
conceal. Shall the hunted stagge pay a Funeral-Obsequie to his own fleeting
life, which now sits upon his utmost lips, with a frequent distilling tear? And
shall not we, who are pursued with such a pack of evils, weep for this, That he
that is the soul of our soul, the breath of our nostrils, the life of our Zion,
the glory of our God, is at a distance from us? The Heavens weep dew at the
going down of the Sun: our Sun (I am afraid) is a setting at noonday; our glory
is departing; and shall not we weep? David the father, could weep like a child,
at the loss of a child; O Absalom, Absalom, my son Absalom! would God I had
died for thee; O Absalom, my son, my son: And shall not thy children, O Zion,
weep for the destruction of thee their mother, the Church? O daughter of
Jerusalem, what shall I liken unto thee? O Virgin Zion, wherewith shall I
compare thee? our eye, our eye, runs down with tears; we can as well dye for
thee, as in this deny thee: By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept,
when we remembered thee, O Zion. And so I have done with the fourth thing, their
affection in that posture, We sat down [and wept;] and proceed to

The last thing, the motive of that their affection: when we remembered thee, O
Zion.

Dura satis miseris memoratio prisca bonorum: the memory of a lost felicity,
makes misery it self more miserable. There is more ease in sense of torment,
then in loss of happiness. To be in any captivity, is a calamity; but to be
captive to the tyranny of an uncircumcised people, whose sportive pastime was
in their gauling taunts of the afflicted, must needs heighten the affliction.
David's sufferings made him complain; but the bitter reproaches he had from his
foes, opened a spring of grief in him, which fed his tears day and night: yet
the remembrance of his former (now lost) happiness in communion with God in his
house, made yet deeper impressions in his soul, Psalm 42.4. former favors and
happiness, make the soul more sensible of all impressions to the contrary: we
wept, [when we remembered thee, O Zion.]

But what was Zion, that whilst they remembered it, they could not forget to
weep? Take it barely for their native country, (for so the word means in the
latitude) and even so, Patriae fumus igne alieno luculentior: there is more
pleasant warmth in the smoke of our own, then in the fire of a strange country:
and then their loss of happiness, and access of misery, must needs be the
more great, the one being a land of promise, the other of captivity; the one an
effect of Gods favor, the other of his vengeance. But this is not all; the
hill of Zion is a fair place; and the joy of the whole earth, Psalm. 48.2.
Strictly taken, it was a fort in Jerusalem, on the top whereof was a Tower,
called the City of David; and so by a Synechdoche, Zion is put for the Kingdom
of Judea. Let us then remember what it was in its glory, and consider what it
is in its captivity, and refrain from weeping if we can.

First, Very excellent things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God. The Kings
of the earth marvelled to see such things: shall we (as David bids) go round
about Zion; and tell the Towers thereof, and mark well her Bulwarks?

First, There is the Throne of David: but (woe unto us that we have sinned) the
Casket is without its Jewel; David is not there on his Throne.

Secondly, Tell the Towers thereof: The Towers were those many Princely and
Noble Families; and the lesser Pinacles, the Heroic Gentry, who as they added
a glory and ornament, so they were the strength and defense of the King and his
Throne.

But all these Towers are either levelled with the dust, or led into captivity,
or have by an unworthy compliance basely prostituted themselves to the power of
the Conqueror.

Thirdly, Mark well her Bulwarks. The Bulwarks were the numerous commonalty,
whose affections and loyal obedience were such strong fortifications to the
Throne of Majesty, as the Kings of the earth have been afraid to assault them.
But now all these strong holds are broken down, the right hand of the enemy is
set up, and all the adversaries rejoice: Zions Crown is cast down to the
ground, and her honor laid in the dust, so as she is become a scorn to her
enemies; and they that hate her, shake their heads against her.

Fourthly, Thither the tribes go up; but now they are taken captive.

Fifthly, There is the seat of judgment; but now the chair of tyranny and
oppression.

But secondly, Zion was called the Mount of the Lord, and the Holy Mount; and
so it includes in it the Temple, the Church too; and of this God himself did
say, This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell: yet, O God, the Heathen are
come into thine inheritance, thy Holy Temple have they defiled; that beauty of
holiness is ravished with Babylonish fire: That excellent work at whose rearing
no noise of iron was heard, is broken down with axes and hammers: that Heavenly
Order and Music, wherein God himself has seemed to tread the measures, (for
it is well seen, O God, how thou go, how thou go, how thou my God and King
go in the Sanctuary: the singers go before, the minstrels follow after; in
the midst are the Damsels playing with their timbrels:) yet all this is hudled
up in confusion. That house of holy pleasure wherein King David had rather be a
doorkeeper, then dwell in the glorious tents of ungodliness, is sacked and
spoiled; and the many thousand vessels of gold and silver, and the rich and
hallowed vestments of the house of God, are sacrilegiously carried away, and
profaned with revelling. When we think upon these things, we pour out our
souls within us; for we were wont to go with the multitude into the house of
joy, and praise; but now by these waters of Babylon we sit down, etc.

But they were Babylonians that did this; Heathens, that had no knowledge of
Gods Laws: but when men do Gentes agere sub nomine Christi, mask Gentilisme
with the titles of Christianity, acting works of darkness under vizards of
children of light; not carrying the children of Zion captive into Babylon, but
turning Zion it self into Babylon: this is enough to make us by these waters of
Babylon sit down and weep, when we remember thee, O Zion.

Ezekiel took up a lamentation for wicked Tire, Ezekiel. 27.2. Isaiah bewailed
with the weeping of Jaazar the vine of Sibmah: I will water thee with my tears,
O Heshbon, Esai. 16.9. and how shall not we take up a lamentation, and a bitter
mourning, when we remember thee, O Zion? How does the City sit almost solitary,
that was full of people? she that was Princess among the Provinces, how is she
become tributary? Lam. 1.1. How is the gold become dim? how is the fine gold
changed? the children that did feed delicately, are almost desolate in the
streets; and they that were brought up in scarlet, are ready to embrace
dunghils, Lam. 4.5. hinc illae lachrymae: hence, hence are these rivers of
tears which gush out of our eyes, whilst by the waters of Babylon we sit down,
and remember thee, O Zion.

I have now done with the parts of my Text, and you may expect I should apply
them; but I forbear: only from what has been spoken, let us gather two things,
as a double Corollary: one from them, as they were patientes, sufferers; the
other, as they were compatientes, fellow-feeling members of other sufferings.

1. As they were Patientes, sufferers. A Church may be brought into extreme
calamity: [By the waters of Babylon we sat down.]

2. As Compatientes, as they were fellow-feeling members of others sufferings.
We must be affected with the calamities of the Church: we wept, when we
remembered thee, O Zion.

1. Of the first. A Church may be brought into deep misery: by the waters of
Babylon we sat down. This Church of the Jews (for I desire not to lead your
thoughts into a further pilgrimage) though it had such a magazine of blessings
as no Nation or Church under Heaven was owner of; yet was it not exempt from
this humane, nay Christian lot of misery: in its very infancy (for in the
Egyptian bondage it was but an embryo not yet formed) but no sooner did it take
but its name, but it was christened with the cross: in Samuels days, God
suffered himself (be it spoken with holy reverence) to be taken captive of the
uncircumcised Philistines; for the Ark, in which was his immediate presence,
was surprised and taken from the Israelites, when the Church, no less then
Phinehas son, first got the name of Ichabod, where is the glory? 1 Samuel 4.19.
In the days of Zedekiah, when she was now in her perfect age and beauty,
Jerusalem was destroyed by fire, and her children led captives into Babylon:
which sad story that sorrowful Prophet has expressed in his pathetical
Lamentations, and our Psalmist David here prophesied of. In her decrepit age,
after the coming of Christ, Jerusalem was sacked by Vespasian, and made quite
desolate; of which Daniel prophesied, Dan. 9. verse. last. And our Savior
himself foretold, there shall not one stone be left upon another, Matthew. 24.2.
Nothing is left of it, but a name, and ruins that bear the impress of Gods
vengeance and justice. Where now are those lying words wherein you trusted? the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; this is the Temple of the Lord,
Jer. 7.4. The Ark may be taken, the Temple may be destroyed, and ye may be
carried captives into Babylon, where by the waters of Babylon ye may sit down,
etc.

And was God so severe to the natural branches, Appl.
which were disobedient, and will he spare the wild olive branch that is
grafted in? Behold, I bring evil upon the City that is called by my name; and
shall you go unpunished? Jer. 25.9. What is become of those renowned Churches
of the East, mentioned in the Revelations, are they not quite destroyed? What
is done to our neighboring Churches in Germany, are they not miserably
defaced? Has not God been working this strange work of justice also even upon
us these many years, here in these three Nations, which though divided from the
rest of the world by Seas of waters, yet are conjoined in the same lot of
calamity? What will be the end, who can divine? but without speedy and serious
repentance, and amendment of life, may we not fear the like destruction in
which others have perished? Therefore what was the Angels advise to the Church
of Ephesus, it will be happy for us if we can make use of it: Remember from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, or else I will come
quickly, and remove the candlestick out of its place, except thou repent, Rev.
2.5. And thus considering them as Patientes, sufferers, you see that a Church
may be brought into deep calamity: by the waters of Babylon we sat down.

Secondly; As Compatientes, fellow-feeling members of others sufferings: we
must be affected with the miseries of the Church: we wept when we remembered
thee, O Zion. Compassion is an act of humanity to any in distress. Did I not
weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for the poor? says
Job 3.25. but to the Church in evil times, compassion is a duty of piety: If I
forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning: if I remember
thee not, O Zion, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. It is a sin
that prophaneth the affections of nature it self, to hide thy face from them of
thine own flesh; how much, that crosses the divinity of grace, to hide thy
face from them of the same spirit? Our Savior wept over languishing Jerusalem:
Daniel set his face to seek God in the captivity, by prayers and supplications,
and fasting, and sackcloth and ashes: Nehemiah, when he heard of the
afflictions of the people, sat down and wept, and mourned, and fasted, and
prayed before the God of Heaven: and these devout Jews here, whom it pitied to
see the glory of Zion laid in the dust, wept when they remembered it.

Appl.
What shall we say then of those, who now in the time of our Church and Kingdoms
calamity, when God seems to call to us as sometimes Jehu did, Who is on my
side, who? When the Church cries to us, as sometimes she did, Is it nothing to
you, all ye that pass by the way? have ye no regard? behold and see, if ever
sorrow were like my sorrow: yet neither in heed to his voice, nor in pity to
her complaints, will they humble themselves by fasting and prayer, to cry to
Heaven for mercy upon her; but rather when God calls to mourning, they are a
revelling: they drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with precious
ointments, but remember not the afflictions of Joseph: wherefore I have sworn
by my self (says the Lord God of hosts) I abhor the excellency of Jacob, Amos
6.6, 8. And let such read the 22 Chapter of Isaiah, verse. 12, 13, 14. and
tremble at the close of it: Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you,
till you dye. Ye would take it in foul disgrace, to be called hard-hearted
Jews; yet these were more compassionate of the Churches miseries, then are many
of you: these wept when they remembered Zion: How then shall not our hearts
agonize under Gods displeasure, and our bedewed cheeks trickle down with tears,
for the miseries of our Church and State; seeing the Heavens themselves have
with waterish eyes long wept for our calamities, not with dews, but showers of
compassion, all the summer long; and still (now in winter) keep their gloomy
face, to reproove the hardness of our obdurate hearts, that can neither weep
for our own, nor pity the miseries of others. O insensate hearts! Is it nothing
to you, that you all pass by Zions sorrow wherewith the Lord has afflicted
her in the day of his fierce anger? The senceless creatures groan and travel,
in a fellow-feeling pain; but you, when your own members suffer and perish, O
where are the sounding of your bowels? are they quite restrained? The earth
trembles at the voice of God, the Sea saw him, and was afraid; and the rocks
cleft at our Saviors passion: and shall men be so obdurate, as not to be
moved, nor split asunder at a Church and a Kingdoms passion? If rocks be more
affected then we, O God, take away from us these obdurate hearts of flesh, and
give us hearts of stone, that seeing we cannot with innocent, yet we may with
hearts broken by repentance for all these sins that have pulled down those
judgments upon our heads, by these waters of Babylon sit down and weep, when we
remember thee, O Zion.

And so I have done with the words in their literal sense, and proceed now to
them,

Secondly, in their moral sense: of which briefly.

In this sense, St. Hilary, St. Augustine, Hugo de Sancto Victore, Hugo
Cardinalis, with many others, have taken these words: nor in this do we offer
any violence to the truth of the history, but only digest gesta in exemplum,
and scripta in doctrina (as says St. Hilary) the passages into example, and
Scripture into doctrine:

The soul (we all know) has four several states: 1. Of innocence. 2. Of a
lapsed condition. 3. Of renovation by grace. 4. Of expectation of glory.


And going along with her from her first instant of creation, to the last of
eternity, we shall find all of them in the Text.

1. That of innocence, but implied; so as that captivity supposes a foregoing
freedom: this freedom was that of our created holiness, which we enjoyed in
Paradise; that new Jerusalem, that vision of peace: but (God knows) we stayed
not long there, before we were carried captive by the devil into Babylon, from
Paradise into the world; from our country into exile, from liberty into
servitude, from glory into disgrace, from pleasure into grief, from happiness
into misery, from integrity into corruption, from life into death; and
therefore Merito illic sedemus, merito flemus: there we deservedly sit and weep
(as Hugo Victorinus concludes: and that is the second state.

2. The souls lapsed condition figured in [ Babylon, and the waters of
Babylon.] That Babylon properly signifies a City of confusion; and that
mystically here is meant this sinful world, is agreed on by a general suffrage
of Fathers; and therefore consonantly they make [the waters of Babylon] to be
bona temporalia, (so Hugo Cardinalis) temporal things; which as the rivers,
stay not, but pass from one elbow of earth unto another; the world passes
away, and the lusts thereof, 1 John 2.17. or (as Victorinus calls them)
decursiones nostrae corruptiones, the decursions of our corruption and
mortality, which (as Solomon speaks) tend to the grave, as the rivers into the
Sea: or (as says St. Augustine) flumina Babyloniae sunt omnia quae hic amantur
and transeunt: the rivers of Babylon, are all transitory things whereon we set
our hearts: (and so St. Hilarie) omnia saeculi and corporalium opera; all
secular and corporal travels, which like rivers are transient, without the
least station: for what bodily pleasure is it, but when once it is past, by that
time becomes none? What earthly joy, that dies not in the sense, and perishes
not in the enjoying? yet are these those rivers on which the heart of man sets
and fastens his delight, and engulphs his care, till at last they drown his
soul, and sink it as low as that pit which knows no bottom.

3. But not so the Saints, whose spiritualized souls are lifted up to a third
state of graces renovation; who though they do with patience, wait their
desired change in this flesh of sin, as well as of mortality: and so may be
said to [sit by the waters of Babylon] which they account no better then the
place of their short captivity; yet humiliatione humiliati, (says St.
Augustine) they sit in humiliation, (so Victorinus;) not erect by pride, nor
cast down by despair, but humbly set (so Hugo Cardinalis) because they attend
that misery in which they are, that happiness from which they are distant. Or,
there they sit, but it is (supra flumina) above the waters, (so the old Latin
word reads it.) The Citizens of Babylon so drench themselves into the delights
of the sinful world, as they drown themselves in their pleasing, but deadly
waters: whereas the Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem sit higher, sit [above,]
not so low, as to fear drowning; nor so high, as not to need to [weep:] and
[weep] they do too, as well as sit: if sitting be a posture that pleases the
body; [weeping] I am sure is an evacuation that eases the soul. O quam fic
flere juvat! (says St. Hierome,) O what sweets are there in hallowed tears!
how the soul delights to melt it self into such blessed showers; because when
she goes into the lowest pitch of mourning, she is then lifted up into the
highest rapture of joy. You have heard of them that have wept for joy, but not
so often of them that have rejoiced for weeping; yet of all the passions the soul
is owner of, she is a debtor to none more for her joy then this; this is her
rich treasure, in which she traffiques with Heaven; this the rarest dissolved
pearl, with which she defrayes all the passages of her captivity through the
valley of tears. Feel'st thou sin? sit down and weep: there is no innocence so
clear among mortal men, as that which is drencht in tears. Fear thou hell?
sit down and weep: flames cannot burn, where these drops do fall. O happy
weeping, that redeems from eternal weeping.

4. But look thou up to Heaven, that last state of thy souls glory, her
Country, her Kingdom, her Security? sit down and weep, that thy Pilgrimage is
prolonged, that mortality is not swallowed up of life, that thou art yet a
stranger, and a sojourner, nor art thou yet joined with those innumerable
companies of Angels, and the first born that are written in Heaven. O when
shall that time be, when our souls being delivered from the Babylon of this
world, from the prison of this flesh, from the bondage of this corruption,
shall be delivered into the glorious liberty of the sons of God? How long Lord,
till these souls of ours, which like streams (here) wander from the fountain of
bliss, be again readmitted into that glorious source of immortality? For this
we breathe, for this we groan, for this each devout heart weeps, when he
recounts the miseries of this present exile; but the happiness of Zion which we
expect, where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes; where is no death, nor
sorrow, nor lamentation any more, but all joys, tranquillity and peace, even
for ever and ever.

To which the God of mercy, for his Sons sake, who is gone before us thither,
in his due time bring us: to whom, with the holy and ever-blessed Trinity,
three Persons, and one God, be all honor and glory, world without end.

Amen.

FINIS.

