November the 5 1605. THE QVINTESSENCE OF CRVELTY, OR, MASTER-PEICE OF
TREACHERY, THE POPISH POUDER-PLOT, Invented by Hellish-Malice, Prevented by
Heavenly-mercy. Truly related, and from the Latin of the Learned, Religious,
and Reverend Dr. HERRING, translated and very much dilated. By JOHN VICARS.

Son of man, write the name of the day, even of this same day, wherein the
King of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem; This same Day. EZEKIEL. 24. 2.
LONDON, Printed by G. M for R. Harford at the sign of the guilt Bible in
Queens-head-ally in Paternoster Row. 1641.



SEe, here, the Popish Pouder-plots fair thriving;
Fauks and his Father-Satan fit contriving
The fatall-Instruments, to puff and blow
Hell out of Earth, a State to overthrow,
At Once, for All: But, here, behold likewise,
Heavens All-seeing-Eye, which deepest-pits espies:
This desperate Work of Darkness sees most clear,
And, timely, makes the mischief All appear:
To Isreal's blessed Shepherds endless glory,
As is full-shown in this succeeding Story.
To all loyall-hearted English Protestants which sincerely relish the power and
purity of CHRIST'S GOSPEL, and zealously detest the damnable doctrines of
Antichrist; J. V. wishes the blessings of GODS right hand, and of his left*
the blessings of this life and of the life to come.
THe richest rarest mercies, daily sent
(Right Christian brethren) to us of this land,
From Gods ore-flowing grace, al-filling hand
May be compared to th'Sun in firmament.
Whose glorious rays all creatures hearts revive,
Whose light enlightens all the world throughout,
Whose heat does cherish plants that spring and sprout,
Whose shine to want does us of joy deprive.
Yet since, so daily, man does it enjoy,
Who is it (almost) that valews it aright?
Who yields due praise to heaven for heavens sweet light?
O few or none. Abundance does us cloy.
From whence, we (therefore) justly may conclude,
That Gods rich mercies, which we often possess,
Wherewith he daily, hourly does us bless,
We all receive with great ingratitude.
I need not stand t'exemplifie the same,
It is a fault too frequent, too rank grown,
And yet to God, more odious, there is not one,
And which to Christians brings more smart and shame.
Of spirituall-blessings, our thrice blessed Salvation
Wrought by our Savior, bought with his precious-blood,
Was most divine, gave man his chiefest good,
Was more admired than was the worlds Creation.
But, of all temp'rall-blessings we enjoyed
Since God did form the Earth and heavenly frame
To our deliverance, never greater came,
When Rome by powder, would have us destroyed.
How thankful for the first, to God we are
I Will tax nones conscience, but examine mine:
But for the second, how we do decline
From giving thanks to God, I may not spare,
To tell you all (my Christian brethren dear)
That, which if I should silence, senseless stones,
(It Is to be fe^r'd) would sound with mournful groans;
Englands ingratitude is too-too clear.
For why? not only Popish Jebusites,
Already do begin (as plain appears)
To buze, with brazen brows, into the ears
And minds of their seduced proselytes.
Yea and persuade too-many Protestants
That there was never any pouder-plot,
But, that (we falsely) stain them with that spot
The Cath'likes to disgrace with c^uslesse taunts.
For this cause, therefore* I have taken in hand,
Again to sing (to Gods due praise and glory
In this revived and most faithful Story)
How powerfully God to our Church did stand.
Which, now, at last (though, with much struggling) I,
(By Gods aid, in our pious Parliament)
Have brought to public view, thus to prevent
Our times dough- Hos. 7. 4, 6, 7. D. Baker a late most impudent Apostate, who
would not license this my History, because, as he said, we were not so angry
with the Papists now a days (though we never had greater cause than in these
our days) as they were 20. or 30. years ago, and one Mr. Crosfield a Senior
fellow of Queens College in Oxford, could not (as he endeavored) get it
licensed for the Press there. Nor could Mr. Daniell* Cambridge Printer (who
would have printed it there) get it licensed at Cambridge, Dr. Brumrick being
then Vicechan. O tempora! O mores!
Bakers base malignity:
Who, heated had their Oven, extremely* hot,
To burn-up in Oblivions smoakey-flame,
The memory (to our eternal shame)
Of this nefarious Popish Pouder-Plot.
And against which, though some temporizing-minde
May scoff and scorn, in this my good intention,
Though from Romes favorites, naught but reprehension
And taunting terms I shall (uniustly) find,
Though Rome does curse me with bell, book and candle
And like a gal'd-backt-iade does kick and winch;
Yet I their sores have labored so to pinch,
As in their nature, justly, them to handle.
But, if to you (my brethren dear) I may
For my poor labor kindly be respected,
And from calumniators fangs protected
I shall acknowledge this a rich repay.
If I (hereby) may move and stimulate,
Your Christian hearts to zealous detestation
Of Romes most impious foul abomination,
And heavens rich mercies often to ruminate,
Chiefly, the great miraculous defense
From this nefarious pouder-plot of Rome,
Wherein our King and Kingdoms they did doom
To dire destruction, fatal violence.
Then, happy I (maugre Romes worst despite)
That God, hereby, may have due thanks and praise,
That this occasion may men's hearts incite
This fact, with fame to memorize always;
Read then (kind Reader) what is amiss amend,
And kindly take the good will of thy friend,
JOHN VICARS.

To his very good Cousin M. JOHN VICARS, on his decasyllables a Decastich.
THree mercies great proper to this our State
My tongue, with praise to God shall still relate;
In the time of King Hen. 8th.
Salvation from Romes tyranny and band,
In the time of Q. Elizabeth.
Safeguard from Spaniards proud insulting hand,
In the time of K. James.
Saf'ty from Popish-pouder-plots and trains:
O! this deserves (if any) heavenly strains.
Such strains are thine, thus streaming from thy quill,
Which fain applaud I would, but want the skill.
But what I want in skill to praise thy parts
Shall be supplied by all true English hearts.
THOMAS VICARS, olim Reginensis Oxon.

The same hand (upon second thoughts) writes his symphony, with the pious
Author of this perpetual monument of Gods mercy in our manifold and miraculous
Deliverances from Popish machinations.
To the READERS.
What mischiefs to this Church and state
The Pope and Popelings wrought,
In former times and later days,
Our men to light have brought,
How GOD defeated all their plots
And counsels vain detected,
Here in this lasting-Monument
Of praise to GOD erected
You have to th'life, in brief, set-down,
The just and true relation,
And then to lay it to our hearts,
Some moral observation.
What fears within, what foes without,
What death, what danger fell
Did ever vexus, but it came
By Rome and Spain from Hell?
Rome, thou art drunk with blood, in vain,
Thou Serpent-like do rage
Against the holy-Seed, which stand
Most firm in every age.
Thy water-forces, in the Fleet,
Thy pouder-plot in fire,
Whereby thou ment'st, in pride, on us
To teem-out all thine ire:
The Lord from Heaven scattered to smoke
And did thy deeds deride,
And made the actours mocking stocks,
Throughout the world so wide.
Thus we through fire and water went,
For GOD was with us still,
He fought our battles, saved our lives,
And did our hopes fulfill.
The Lord of Hoasts of Israel,
For ever more does reign;
From time to time, from tide to tide,
His praise shall aye remain.
Sic concinit T. V. S. T. B.

A Friend at a stand at his Friends Work.
Who reads this work, aread my wonder; tell
What skill to verse a fact so ill, so well.
Alias. The placet of his friends Essay.
OThers, thy Zeal and Vows, I praise thy skill;
So well to lay the plot, Rome laid so ill:
Another. Arts pyramides, from Treasons Pouder-fire.
What al fire has, has thine, black smoke, bright flame,
The flame, thy Verse; the smoke, the Traitors name.
Who can, decide; in which most time to spend;
Or damn their smoke, or thy bright flame commend.
Himself not yet determined. T. S. S. T. B.

To my good friend M. JOHN VICARS.
THy love to Truth I love, thy hate of errors,
Thine honesty, thine industry, thy Zeal
For God, the king, the Church and commonweal,
Against the rage of Romes intended terrors.
I like thy loathing of those Treason-stirrers,
That for Apollyon, in these plots do deal
With ghastly, ghostly fathers that conceal,
Or rather counsel, so inhumane horrors.
I praise thine Authors and thine own desire
To have recorded unto all posterity,
The Ignatian-furies ignominious fire
Flaming from hell against Christ's heavenly verity.
In Fauks, Grants, Garnets, Winters, Catesbies, Percies,
Let others praise thy Vows, I praise thy Verses.
JOSUAH SYLVESTER.

In Viri, mihi fratris vice, JOHANNIS VICARSI dignissimos labores, (...).
MIttor Apollineos ego parvulus inter alumnos
Vt tibi pro libro laurea serta feram.
Ne metuas Romae Iesuitas
larvas, lemuresve sequaces,
Nec criticos, critica qui gravitate valent.
Est liber ille tuus scelerato nomine liber,
Perge igitur, libro praela subire tuo.
Idem ad eundem.
THou carping Momus, poison of good wits,
I call not thee to give the Author praise;
Silence, I tell thee, better thee befits,
Because, detraction is thy common-phrase:
Thou can not come and mend, yet must commend
This work so neatly, by the Author penned.
THOMAS BRACKLEY, M. A.

To his most affectionate kind Friend M. JOHN VICARS.
THy Muse Romes hellish traitors so displaies,
That they deserve the halter, she the bays.
View her, all English hearts, with care; and than,
Love Romes faith (black High Treason) if you can.
WILLIAM PRINNE. Gent.

To my loving friend Mr. John Vicars, in praise of his praiseworthy work;
encouraging him to discourage our enemies.
I Saw thy work, should not I land the same,
With Traitor thou may justly brand my name.
I saw thy work, and from my soul I vow,
I think none honest will it disallow.
I saw't, or Who else sees't, without commend,
He is a Traitor or a Traitors friend.
I saw and praise thy work, in spite of Rome,
Hell and the Pope; I say it is sweetly done.
I saw thy work, though thee I do not know,
But, figs (I knew) on thistles could not grow.
Courage (brave Spirit) thou have done so well,
Thou needst not fear Romes candle, book or bell.
Thou have a Master, in whom's all our hopes,
That will protect thee against a thousand Popes.
Show it thy Master, then his censure past,
Let others blow, regard not thou their blast*
But, tell them, yea, and tell them to their face,
That they are Traitors, which do treason grace.
Your Friend unknown NATHANIEL CHAMBER of Grayes-Inne Gent.

In Authorem.
LEt Rome with bell, book, candle, curse thy name,
Thy hand, thy pen, the broachers of her shame;
Pass not if good accept, though bad refuse,
Religious hearts bid welcome to thy muse.
It may be, some condemn thee; what is the reason?
They hate thy work, because they loved the Treason.
W. C. M. A.

The names of the chief Traitors that plotted and endeavored this
Pouder-Treason.
Jesuit Priests. Henry Garnet John Gerrard Osw. Tesmond Edward Hall. Hammon
Wm. Baldwin. S Evera. Digby Rob. Winter. Tho. Winter. Guido Fauks. John Grant.
Amb. Rookwood. Robert Keys. Thomas Bates. Henry Morgan. Tho. Abington. S. Edm.
Bainham. S. Wm. Stanley. Hugh Owen.
Catesby, Thom* Percy, John Wright and Christo. Wright were slain in rebellious
fight; the former two with a gun, the other two with Halberts. Francis Tresham
murdered himself in prison.

To Momus or the carping-Catholike.
LEt Zoylus bark and Momus carp,
Let Mass Priests mumble and mutter,
Let Romish-Jesuites rail and rage
And all their venom utter:
Yea, though they should with envy swell,
And toad-like burst in sunder,
Yet truth will shine and error pine,
To Babels woe and wonder.
J. V.

An Advertisement to the READER.
Courteous READER,
LEt me entreat thee to take notice, that whereas in this History thou shall
meet with a most material passage, which intimates the Papists most hellish
purpose to have translated this plot from themselves on those whom the world
impiously and injuriously terms Puritans; It has pleased the Lord to give me
this notable testimony of the truth thereof from two of my most loving Christian
Friends, who, on my certain knowledge, were both so truly pious, as that they
feared (as it is, Revel. 22.) to tell a lie, much more, to make a lie; the one
being departed this life, the other yet surviving, both of them eminent
Christians and Citizens of London. And this it is.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Richard Gurney, Lord Major of London, the right
Worshipful S. Christopher Clethrow Knight, President of Christ's Hospital, Sr.
William Acton Knight and Baronet, Sr. Paul Pindar Knight, Alderman Goare,
Alderman Atkins, Alderman Pennington, Alderman Wollaston, Alderman Adams,
Alderman Warner, and the right worshipful Alderman Garret one of the Shrieves
of London; All of them most worthy Governors of Christs-Hospitall* as also the
worshipful Mr. John Babington Treasurer of the said Hospital, Mr. Roger
Drake. Sub-Treasu^er, M. Richard Aldworth; and to the rest of the most worthy
Governors thereof: John Vicars wishes the kingdom of Grace here, and the
Kingdom of Glory hereafter.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
YOur constant Favors which I always find,
Do me in all my best endeavors bind,
Upon all fair occasions, to express
My due and deeply bounden thankfulness,
As Well for past as present sweet-Supplies,
Which from your blessed-House of Charities
Poor Orphant-cheering-brests, my- Self have found,
With Thousands-more, whom (else) distress had drowned
In over flowing floods of Poverty,
Our Parents poor being forced from us to fly,
And leave us hopeless Imps, in helpless age
To all Earths woes, fully, on us to rage.
These, these (I say) indissoluble Ties
Of ancient and of modern Courtesies,
Which to Heavens glory, here, memorate,
Do me (blessed Patrons) stir and stimulate,
To dedicate and consecrate to You
What ere I am or can, as Tribute, due
To your full-Sea, from my small-Rivolet,
Thus to repay some part of my great debt:
And since I owe more then I know to pay,
My humble-All rests to my dying-day
Your Honors and Worships Sincerely to be commanded, JOHN VICARS.

A Table of the Heads of the most material passages in this History.
A
ABsolution given to the Traitors in rebellion by Haman a Jesuit, page 63.
Achabs sickness for Naboths vineyard alluded to, 77. Allusion to the plot
intended now in our days, which has been discovered by this Parliament,
1641. 80. Aggravations of this plot, 42, 43, 44. An Angel to Lord Morley, 37.
Apprehension of Faux at the cellar, 41. Armado in 88. 87. The Attempt of Grant
a Traitor, 63.
B
BArons wars, 87. Bloody-builders of a bloody Church, 11.
C
CAtesby and others sit to plot a Treason, 10. Catesby the inventer of this
powder Plot, 12. Catesbies project approved by all, 14. Catesby advises with
Garnet, 16. Catesby and Percy bring news to the other Traitors of the plots
discovery, 58. Catesby, Percy and Winter fight all 3 together, 72. Catesbies
and Percies heads set on the Parliament house 74. A Cellar hired. 23. City of
Coventry, 65. Consultation about the Kings Children, 24. A Countryman suspects
the Traitors in their hunting, 55. Coventry comforts the young Lady Elizabeth,
66. Court-traitors most dangerous, 81.
D
DEes five, 98. Description of the plots effects had it taken, 26 Discovery of
the powder, 41. The Devils speech to the Traitors in Hell, 80. Description of
the Hunt, 54. Diverse treasons projected, 12. Dun-church-Heath, 53.
E
ENcouragements to Papists to the Treason, 11. Sr. Everard Digbies bounty
toward the work of this Treason, 23. Sr. Everard Digby a chief hunter, 57.
Empedocles described and alluded to, 77. England the Landmark of Gods mercies,
86. England like Canaan, 88. Equivocation, 100. Exhortation to give all praise
to God alone, 92.
F
FAmine, 88. Faux the chief actor of this Treason, 5. Faux sent to the Pope,
21. Faux returns home, 22. Faux is imprisoned, 46. Faux sent to the Tower, 47.
Faux frighted with the rack, 47. A Fore-running judgment, 69. A Fight
pell-mell, 71. Sr. Fulk Grevill, 64.
G
GArnet and Gerard two Priests, 14. Garnets answer to Catesby, 18. Garnets
simile, 19. Garnets Doctrine compared with Christ's, 20. Garnets opinion
confirms the plot, 21. Garnets opinion of themselves, 60. God speaks to his
Angel, 31. Greenwell the Priests resolution, 60. Gun-pouder, 13.
H
HAll a Jesuit startled, 60. Halls divellish change and judgment on the fact.
62. Lord Harrington, 65. A holy Hunt, 54.
I
Jesuits impudency, 61. Impossibility to escape the blow, 45. Impudency of
Faux, 42. Impudency of Faux at the Court being examined, 46. Ingratitude of
England, 90. Introduction to the plots discovery, 31. Justice, 89.
K
KIng James succeeds Qu. Elizabeth in peace, 9. King James interprets the
Letters oenigma, 38, 39 Sr. Thomas Knevet sent to search, 39. The Kings-evill,
101.
L
LOndons misery, 30. The Letter, 34. Littletons house the Traitors refuge, 67.
A Lie, 61.
M
Martyrs of Rome, 63. Manna, 89. Motives four to plot a treason, 10. Lord
Mounteagle, 33. Mounteagle goes to Court with the Letter, 37. Mounteagles
serving-man, 34.
N
NEroes wish, 29. Nocents and Innocents, 17. November the 5t. 25.
O
OAth for secrecy and constancy in the plot, 15. Oration of Percy to his fellow
Traitors, 59. Observation remarkable, 78.
P
Parliament House, 13. Parliament House undermined, 22. Parliament House, 33.
Percy and Catesby stayed about Westminster to hear the event of things, 53.
Percy and Catesby slain, 72. Perillus the Engineer, 71. Pestilence, 1628. 88.
Pope and Devil Treasons Parents, 5. Provision of powder and fatal
instruments, 25. Prayer for the King and State, 84. Puritans falsely to be
accused as the traitors, 50, 51, 52
Q
QVeene ELIZABETH'S death, 8.
R
REbellion attempted by the traitors, 60. Recapitulation of Romes
abominations, 85. Report of the treason is spread abroad, 46. Return of thanks
to God our sole deliverer, 82. Remorse seeming in the traitors, 70. Rookwood
and Winter are shot, 71.
S
SAcrament taken by the conspirators, 15. Search made, 39. Simile, 28. Simile,
72. Simile, 83. Spanish king plotted withal in this Treason, 9. Spanish king
refuses to aid the traitors, 9. A Stone-wall hinders the traitors work, 22.
Supposition of the deed done, 30. Suspicion of the Hunters by a friend, 56. A
Smith smites Winter the Traitor, 64. The Steed being stolen shut the
stable-doore, 63.
T
TReason was the Popes firstborn Son, 2. Tressams perjury, 49. The Traitors
hunt Religion, 57. The Traitors amazed to hear the Plot was discovered, 58. A
Tray of powder fired among the Traitors, 69. The Traitors grow desperate, 71
The Traitors apprehended, 73. The Traitors convayed to London, 73. The Traitors
arraigned, 73. Treason against Queen Elizabeth, 87.
V
Sr. Rich: Verney high-Shrieve, 64.
W
Sir* Rich: Walsh besieges the traitors, 68. Winter sent into Spain to plot
treason against Qu. Elizabeth, 7. Winter and Faux talk in the Tower, 48.
Winters dream, 69 Wrights both are slain, 71. Winter wounded in the belly, 73.
FINIS.
To my worthy Friend Mr. JOHN VICARS.
SIR,
I Have here sent you a true relation most faithfully delivered as I received
it from our dear deceased friend M. Clement Cotton, the Author and Composer
of the Concordance of the Bible, which is this. Lewis Pickering Esquier of
Tits-marsh-grove in the County of North-hampton, a Gentleman of an ancient and
most noble Family, as being alied to Queen ELIZABETH by her mothers side, and
was the secondman, that brought news to King JAMES into Scotland of Queen
ELIZABETH'S death, and was afterward sworn his Servant. This Gentleman had a
Sister that was married to Keys one of the Popish Conspiratours, whereby there
could not choose, but be much familiarity between them; By which Keys most
divellish contrivement, that hellish plot (had it taken effect) should have
been translated from the Papists to the Puritans (as I had the Relation from
the mouth of M. Clement Cotton, who also received it from the said M. Pickering
himself in his life time) after this manner. This worthy religious Gentleman
M. Pickering, being in great esteem with King JAMES, with whom he often times
rod a hunting, and as they rode, had frequent private conference, and informed
the King above six months before that treason brake out, that the Papists had
some notable villainy in hand, but what it was he could by no means learn. Now
this said M. Pickering had a horse of special note, and well known among the
Courtiers, on which he used to hunt with the King, a little before the blow was
to be given, which his brother M. Keys desired to borrow of him for some
present special use, which he said he had for him, and it was somewhat
probable to be for their pretended hunting on Dunsmow-heath, where many of the
conspiratours contrived a hunting match for diverse days together a little
before the blow was to be given, that so they might be near to come where the
Lady ELIZABETH lay: But what ever Keys pretense was, the horse so borrowed was
conveyed to London, and there kept for another purpose, which thus was plotted.
Faux on the day of the fatal Blow was appointed to retire himself into St.
Georges field, where this said horse was to attend him, to make his escape so
soon as the Parliament House was blown up: It was likewise contrived that the
said M. Pickering was that very morning to be murdered in his bed, and
secretly conveyed away; as also that Faux himself should have bin murdered in
St. Georges field, and there so mangled and cut in pieces as that it might not
be discovered who he was; whereupon it was to be bruited abroad, that the
Puritans had blown up the Parliament House, and the better to make the world
believe so, there was M. Pickering with his horse ready to make an escape, but
that God stirred up some, seeing the heinousness of the fact, and he ready to
escape by flight, in detestation of so horrible a deed fell upon him and killed
him, and so had hackt him in pieces. And yet to make it more apparent to be so
indeed, there was his horse found also, which was of special speed and
swiftness to convay him away; and upon this rumor, a massacre should have
gone through the whole kingdom upon the Puritans. But when this Plot thus
contrived was confessed by some of the conspiratours; and Fauxs in the Tower was
made acquainted with it, who had been born in hand to be bountifully rewarded
for that his Service in the Catholic cause, when he saw how his ruin was
contrived, he also thereupon confessed freely all that he knew touching that
horrid and hideous conspiracy, which (before) all the torture of the rack
could not force him to, etc. Thus I kindly rest,

Your loving Friend W. PERKINS.

The Cloud of Ignorance and Error.
Curses and Excomunications The Armado in 88. Daggors Dogs Poison kill all.
Blasphemies and Lies. Envy and malice. Recusancy and Rebellion. Opposing the
Thruth. Falsification of Scriptures


FRVSTRA.


Enclosed with Clouds of Ignorance and Error,
Rome, Hell and Spain do threaten Englands terror;
The Card'nall Legate, Jesuit, impious Friars,
Homebred Recusant, Brittanes bane desires:
Each puffs and snuffs with Envy ( All in Vain)
At Christ's pure Gospel, which shall still remain.
THE QVINTESSENCE OF CRVELTY. AND MASTERPIECE OF TREACHERY. THE POPISH
POUDER-PLOT.
PRoud Pluto, King of darkness, Prince of the air,
Became enamoured of Romes Strumpet fair;
His lustful pleasure on her to effect,
From Hell to Rome, he forthwith does direct
A speedy Post, to bring her out of hand,
Over Styxes flood, where his black-court did stand;
And Charon, hels fierce ferry-man ^^d charge
To row her over Avernus in his bar^e.
To hell She (thus) had quick and kind access,
Where mutuall-love their liking did express.
Strait, they enjoyed infernal copulation,
Whose foul effects had present procreation.
A base-borne brat, Romes whore, soon bred brought out*
An impious imp, most monstrous, proud and stout,
A more than Centaure strange, strong, fierce and fell,
A most misshapen cursed feind of hell,
A brazen-fac't, a marble-hearted frame,
A divellish genius, Treason called by name.
To Lerna's poole this purple-Strumpets doom,
Was to return; where with the milk of Rome,
Infectious milk, I say, of doctrines base,
It fearfully was nursed, grew strong a pace.
There, there, I say, did this fierce Hydra live,
There, to this Monster, she did vigor give.
No sooner was this Offspring of the Devil
Fraught with Thessalian-spels, pride, mischief, evil,
With Serpentine-deceit prompt to beguile,
Yea, every-way an impious viper vile;
But that his damned The Pope.
Dam observes it well,
What a sweet son she had begot from hell,
How full of wit and Acherontine-art,
Of unheard impudence to act the part
Of any most transcendent treachery*
Of any most nefarious villainy;
Him, therefore strait, she does most kindly greet,
With often and soft embraces, The Whore of Rome makes her complaint to her first
born Son Treason.
kisses sweet,
And hony-words, calling him by his name,
Her mischief-thirsting thoughts she does proclaim;
Wrath boyls within, revenge and furies fire,
And, thus to him unfolds her foul desire.
Fair first-born-Son, whom art and heart have made
The basis, bulwark, whence our hopes are staid,
Are firmliest founded and erected high,
Without whose skill and will, we faint and die;
Long have we in our sacred Cath'like chair,
Even we thy holy-Mother, full of care,
Sat mourning and bewailing (but in vain)
The matchless loss which Rome does (still) sustain,
And long, yea, too-too-long has felt and found,
And therewith taken a desperate, deadly wound:
I mean by Englands foul Apostasy,
From Peter's chair to Luthers heresy;
For, since that time, no land in Europe fair,
Has labored, more, our welfare to impair,
Has born more open and intestine hate
To our Apostolic, imperiall-State,
Than those damned heretics of Britans nation,
Endeavoring daily our dire extirpation.
Alas (dear Son) it is woeful to declare,
Yea, the mere thought does me even kill with care,
To think how many mischiefs, by their fall,
Like corrasives, our heart do grind and gal;
Yea, how they daily strive to work our woe,
Hoping to effect our final overthrow.
Their Scripture-goads our sides so deeply gore,
Their textuall-tortures wound our heart so sore,
That if we, timely, do them not prevent,
Romes last, least-drop of hearts-blood will be spent*
Ay me, I grieve to think on our great loss,
What Sums we did into our coffers toss.
Whiles they were ours, what rents we did possess,
What Zeal they did to Peter's chair express,
What gain, by them, we found, strange to be spoke,
How bounteously they made our chimnies smoke!
What swarms of Friars and Nuns, even numberless
By them were fost'red, love to us to express,
What stately Monastries with turrets high,
What Temples fair, whose steepls touched the sky!
Did they then spare most sumptuously to build,
With relics richly garnished and filled,
For holy Votaries and Virgins chaste,
Whom we with Saints and Angels blessed have placed.
Whose deep devotion was (sweet Son) so great,
As it had bin our second-Sons, Spains Seat.
By them our holy-Masse, great Pluto's lore,
Was gorgeously bedeckt, him to adore.
In every city each fair wealthy seat,
Has bin possessed by our champions great;
In every country, each most fertile soil,
On them conferred without cost or coyl.
I tell thee (Son) this only Albions-Isle
Through daily discord, variance, fraud and guile,
Which, twixt them raised, for bribes, we quickly ceast,
Has Romes revenues mightily increast.
Not specious France, nor spacious Germany
Came near to this, for our utility.
And think thou, than, I can with patience brook,
So rich a prey to be, thus, from me took?
And only by damned Luthers haeresie,
That turn-coat caiti^s matchles villainy?
Shall I put-up these heavy losses so,
And open a gate to greater overthrow?
No, no, irrevocable is my doom,
I Will be revenged, not cease, til they consume,
But, least too-long, with tedious ambages,
I tire thine ears, thy thoughts too-long disease,
It now behooves us forthwith to be wise,
And how to cross and curb them to devise.
Yea, now, I see that our declining hope
Bids us not linger, nor give longer scope:
Bids us advised be and counsel take,
Intricate snares, with unheard craft to make,
On Pluto's anvil strange wiles, now to frame,
And subtle Stratagems, to work their shame,
All practices to prove, no shifts to shun,
Whereby our glorious welfare may be won.
Wherefore (sweet Nursling) ease us of this moan,
For all our hopes consist in thee alone.
In thee alone (I say) our great intent
Expects to find a fortunate event.
So expert art thou Treason to contrive,
So apt whole Kingdoms vitals to deprive,
So exactly practiced in thy The Devil.
Fathers skill,
So well acquainted with thy The Pope.
Mothers will.
Nimble thou art without or stop or study
To plot a mischief be it ere so bloody,
Horrid or hateful; yea a King or Nation
To ruinate with matchless devastation;
To swear, forswear, cousen and equivocate,
By mine instructions rarely literate.
Then, have with speed ( Alecto be thy guide)
To Britane, big with insolence and pride;
Be it just or unjust, leave no means unwrought,
That to our ancient yoke they may be brought.
Then Romes officious, most pernicious son,
Replies but this; dear Mother count it done.
Then, like swift Tyber, without least delay,
With vultures appetite he takes his way,
To England, where to fit his enterprise,
A Priest-like habit shapes his best disguise,
A gown all guarded with religious lace,
The Cath'like-cause is vizard for his face.
And marvel not, for, thus the Devil does use,
Like Angel-bright Gods children to abuse.
And thus, within Fauks is not here first mentioned, as the prime Author; but
because he was so inhumane as to be the fatal actor of this intended Tragedy,
for Catesby (as is afterward shown) was the first author of this
Pouder-treason.
Guy Fauks his faithless breast,
He harbor finds, and is a welcome guest;
A man to mischief prompt, incarnate Devil,
Swift to shed blood, active to any evil.
With envy stuffed and puffed, sly, malecontent,
Dissembling Sinon, double-diligent:
Whose name he ever changed with his place
Of residence, like Proteus various face,
Foster, sometimes, Johnson and Brown, he will be,
To pass unknown, suspicion (thus) to flee;
His name, not nature; habit, not his heart;
He takes, forsakes, as best befits his part.
Here (now) Romes base-born brat makes no delay,
But, farther flings, works others to his bay;
Whose hearts already hankered very sore,
(Like muttering Israel) after Babels whore,
For Egypts fleshpots, and with factious thirst,
To quaffe Romes poison, till their bellies burst.
These does he stir with spur of innovation,
And charms them (thus) with hellish incantation,
With high-built hopes (thus) labors to persuade the^,
And with these sly delusions does invade the^.
The day so long desired, your foes to foil,
To plunge them deep in matchless, helples toil,
Is, now, comn-on, wherein base Calvin's rout,
And Luthers vassals you may clean root-out
Romes walls to rear and ruins to repair,
To make her splendor shine, her beauty fair,
Her enemies triumphantly to bane,
Romes rare Religion strongly to maintain.
Straight, they, to Sinons sugared words do vow,
Theirs and themselves unto his beck and bow.
This good success adds fuel to the fire,
To Court he (therefore) comes with foul desire,
His Doctors hellish Documents to broach,
And into favor, hopes, there to encroach.
There this bilingued-Sinon ramps about,
Most sedulous and serious to finde-out
The man he longed to see; whom straight he found,
A wished companion, Traitor most profound.
Percy, infected, yea of treason confected,
And even by nature thereunto addicted.
A graceless guardian to his gracious King,
A fiery forge to frame each traitorous thing;
A most bold bond-slave to his holy Pope,
A strong supporter of Romes hellish hope.
To whom Fauks opens each material thing,
Assures good-luck, the work to pass to bring:
Who, man and message, presently, imbraceth,
And, in his love, much confidence, soon places.
Then, each to other, they themselves fast ty,
What, neither had, faith and fidelity,
They mutually do promise to fulfill,
Like Pilate and proud Herod, Christ to kill.
Then, as their pledges, each gave hand to others,
And here, were made treasons chief sworn-brothers.
Perfidious Percy, and false Fauks made one,
Fauks must (forsooth) be Percies servant known,
His name being chang^d; thus, Mr, and the man
Their projects, thoroughly, do discuss and scan.
And thus, disguised, in this sly unknown hew,
Securely they their rancorous poison spew,
And now with Fauks and Percy, Catesby met,
An ancient Traitor soon on mischief set;
Whose heads, hearts, hands and all, plod and contrive
Some horrid treason how to make to thrive;
Some strange, domestick-deluge to ordain,
Since (now) their hopes were frustrated in Spain.
For why, long since, in sweet Eliza's days,
That Paragon of time; times peerlesse praise;
They had sent Thomas Winter was sent into Spain in Qu. Eliz. days by Catesby
an arch-traitor.
Winter to the King of Spain,
To crave his aid their mischiefs to maintain,
Our Kingdom to invade and to possess,
Romes power (here) to re-plant, their wrongs redress;
Assuring him that in his puissant aid
The English-Cath'liks would be parties made;
The King (that time) promised with them to join
And that he would furnish them with store of Coin,
An hundred thousand crowns he would bestow,
And being Victor, them all favor show.
And, this desired; that if the Queen did dye,
He might have knowledge of it instantly,
For, thereupon, he would his power advance,
And speedily prevent sinister chance.
This was on both-sides promised and concluded,
But, Heaven, in mercy, all their hopes deluded.
Then, then (I say) did Spain intend our doom,
Together with the proud High Priest of Rome,
When as, Q. Elizabeth.
That miserable-Woman died,
For, thus, the Pope had termed her in his pride;
But, O nefarious liar, how could She
Unhappy or so miserable be?
Whom, neither the arrow, which by day did fly,
Nor Pestilence, by night, to wit, Romes sly
And secret practiced treasons, ere, could quail,
Nor yet th'Armado, mighty Spanish-sayl.
Who in her self and subjects was most blessed,
Whose kingdom, while she lived, enjoyed sweet rest,
Full peace and plenty, princely-royalty
With peoples love and cordial-loyalty.
Thus Rome and Spain lay gaping, but in vain,
To see fair Englands luster in the wain.
But, now, behold, a wonder you shall hear,
That glorious- Sol occubuit, nox nulla secuta est.
Sun did set in this our sphere,
And yet although our Sun did so go-down,
No night ensued, no cloud did on us frown,
No loss appeared, only a change we had,
Which many (then) neer-dying-hearts made glad.
For why, in our horizon did arise
Another K. James
Jubar-bright to cheer our eyes,
King James succeeded as a glorious-Sun,
In whom his subjects joy, a fresh begun;
Their happy days, again, did sprout and flourish,
And, with the milk of peace their hearts did nourish.
But, malecontent, malignant Catesbies heart,
Together with his mates hereat did smart,
With galling-grief, to see their hopes so thwarted.
These accidents they (therefore) soon imparted
Unto the King of Spain, They send again to the King of Spain.
as was agreed,
Requesting (now) his promised aid with speed,
Protesting that their hearts were all on fire
Firmly to effect both his and their desire,
To serve him in this great negotiation,
If he would second them with supportation.
For why, they said, they (now) began to doubt
That things were like aversly to break-out,
And that the English-Cath'liks cause was worse,
Because king James held-on the late Queens course.
But, Spain, grown (now) more politic than so,
And well perceiving how the cards would go,
(A cunning-gamester) bent himself for peace,
With England, The King of Spain refuses to aid them.
wishing them their suit to cease.
Whose unexpected answer did them trouble,
Yet did their malice and their rancour double,
With most Infernal rage their hearts did burn,
What course to take, which way themselves to turn.
And when they saw al foreign hopes forsook them
Unto this powder treason they betook them.
And now that furious fierce triplicity, The traitors sit in counsel to plot a
treason.

Those impious brethren in iniquity,
Catesby and Percy, Fauks, together met,
Their hellish hearts for mischief (now) to whet.
Then Catesby, special Author of this ill,
Their thoughts with traitorous poison (thus) did fill*
Right trusty friends, Catesby begins.
since now we private are,
My mind to you I freely will declare.
My swelling-tympany of hate is such,
My discontent and grief of heart so much,
To see our Holy Father so neglected,
And how small hope to have him ere respected,
Within this Kingdom (for I plainly see
The late Queens courses will maintained be.
I see (I say) and to our grief we find
King James is like to prove to us unkind.)
That therefore it is high time to take advice,
(And herein we must not be fondly nice,
Nor with faint-hearted fear must we proceed)
To pluck-up and supplant this growing weed,
For when a wound is grown much putrifi'd,
The sharper medicines must thereto be pli'd.
Four strong inducements hereunto have we, 4 Motives to the plot

In whose firm truth we all instructed be.

Vile Heretics, fit (therefore) for the snare.

Them excommunicate, accursed does doom.

Is, that no Heretic ought, king to reign.

Yea, a most holy act and meritorious,
To extirpate, destroy and quite root-out
This King and his heretical base rout.
O then, dear friends, why stand we to demur?
Let this, to us, be a sharp goad and spur,
Why fear we? faint we? Doubt we to go-on?
Let this incite our resolution,
Namely, Encouragements to treason.
that we in Romes rare rubricks shall
Our name eternize and our fame enstall;
That Rome (I say) will ever us account,
The Wings, whereon, her glory did re-mount;
Re-edifiers of Saint Peter's rites,
This hope, this hap, our valiant hearts incites;
To be such Fosterers and such fautours strong,
Thus to redeem our selves, our Saints from wrong.
See, here (good Reader) see what course they take,
The Pope, their Romish-Idoll, great to make;
To set-up irreligious adoration, Coacta fides vix vera fides.

To work truths shipwreck and dire extirpation.
O must our blood be spilt, our King be slain?
And many death-door-knocking Souls complain?
O divellish-doctrin, whence such fruits do flow!
O miserable souls seduced so!
David a good man to Gods own heart made,
To God to build a Temple was gainsaid,
And all because his hands were full of blood,
Yea, though his battles were both just and good:
And yet must Romes base bondslaves under-take
With blood, Bloody builders of a bloody Church
yea must they their oblations make
With blood of Gods anointed Saints elect,
Not Gods, but Belials Temple to erect?
Romes faithless Synagogue to re-advance,
Full stuffed with pride, error and ignorance?
Then cursed Cain might also think it good,
To please the Lord with Abels guiltless blood.
And Jeroboam might have hope to please,
And with his Idols Gods wrath to appease.
But far be this from each true Christians thought,
For woe be to the work which blood has wrought.
Woe unto those which Sions groundwork lay
With crying blood; Psa. 83.
thus does king David say.
But yet, these Romish -- Absaloms, past grace,
Would seem than God more wise, like Atheists base,
Or else, with David's fool, do say in heart,
There is no God to pay them their desert.
For, instantly, at Catesbies cursed oration,
They vow revenge with ardent protestation.
And thereupon, being filled with hellish craft,
They counsel take, each shoots his deadly shaft.
Some, this way would their will effect; some, that,
But dire destruction each-one aimed at.
Ones vile opinion was, Diverse treasons projected
with sword or knife,
The guiltless king to rob of his sweet life.
Another would perfidiously him slay
With powerful poison. Then a third did say
When he by hunting, tired, to sleep did lay-him,
Pretending friendly-harbour, he would slay-him.
Medusas Catesby.
son sat silent, all this while,
His heart being hatching a transcendent wile;
Hears their opinions, counts them all but shallow.
He had a gulf found out a Realm to swallow.
I mean that caitiff Catesby, who at last,
From's poisonous stomach (thus) this vomit cast.
True zealous Cath'liks, Catesby strikes the stroke.
Romes approved friends,
My heart your fervor worthily commends,
Your love you show, but yet, believe me this,
Me thinks, you all do point the way amiss.
For that which you advise does doubtless bend
And more to our than their destruction tend.
So small attempts bring danger, we will contrive
To leave nor boughs, nor branch, nor root alive.
For, what though we the King-alone destroy,
Leaves he not after him, a Prince to enjoy
His Crown* and Scepter? a most hopefell heir,
To take revenge, as we may justly fear;
A Prince, I say, of pregnant, sprouting hope:
Then, let us not give vengeance so great scope,
Great flames have grown and burnt-down cities fair,
Even by small sparks, left kindling without care.
This young Prince Henry to my mind does call
Revolting Henry the eighth, that chief of all
Did work our holy-Fathers downfall first,
A deed most heinous, hateful and accursed.
Whose odious name may ere be execrable,
And t'all good Catholics abominable.
Wherefore, this is my mind and constant doom,
To extirpate and utterly consume
This Seed heretical, which bears such hate
To royal Romes imperial fair estate.
Now, that this stratagem may prosperous be,
With patience tend and lend your ears to me. The Parliament House.

An ancient house there is near situate
To Percies house, whither in princely state,
To parle about the Kingdoms great affairs,
Englands chief Peers and counsel grave repairs,
The Nobles, Bishops, Knights and Burgesses,
In Parliament to give their suffrages;
Thither also (as custom does maintain)
The King, Queen, Prince and all their princely train,
The first day of the Parliament do go,
Most sumptuously, making a glorious show,
In scarlet robes, glistering with pearl* and gold,
Great multitudes assemble it to behold.
Under this house we closely may prepare
An undermined vault, and fill that snare
With plenteous store of gun-pouder most fierce,
Which, Gun-pouder.
like a mighty whirlwind, quick may pierce
And pull in pieces and blow-up to th'skies
The cursed corpse of those our enemies,
Of King and Counselors of Prince and Peer;
Your liking and consent (now) let me hear.
With joint consent and great content they all, Catesbies opinion approved by
them all.

Laud and applaud this Diabolical,
This horrid, hateful, hideous, foul invention;
Yea traitorous Fauks with nimble apprehension,
Finding the drift thereof. Fauks.
O thus (says he)
The House which Rome has spoild, shall spoiled be*
Thus we (says he) for our dear Cath'like truth,
Shall fill our foes with horror, woe and ruth.
Thus we shall canonized be and much renowned*
Whiles we our foes supplant and quite confound;
Thus, those (I say) which against us made sharp laws,
Shall griped be within fierce vengeance paws;
Thus, those which quondam used to prosecute
And Romes pure-Priests and Saints did persecute*
These, these (I say) made proud by our rich spoils*
Shall tumble headlong in our nets and toyls.
Now heerupon, Garnet and Gerrard, Priests.
more Copesmates they invite,
Amongst the rest Gerrard a Jesuit;
Chiefly to Garnet they this plot impart,
An expert Doctor in the Jesuits art.
Gray Headed, but green-hearted traitor right,
Superior of the Priests, whose very sight,
Was a strong warrant to confirm and prove
This enterprise: so did they prize his love!
Whom, as a Demi-god, they all respected,
Without whose counsel, nothing was effected;
And, whose advice confirmed all they did,
Did what he would; left, what he should forbid.
O most satanicall, nefarious Doctors!
Antichrists chaplains, Lucifers arch-proctours!
Can ye for shame, assume the sacred name
Of Jesus Christ, and yet his grace disclaim?
Can ye with titles, seem so holy, pure,
And yet your lives so stain and so inure
Your selves and followers how to kill and slay
All such as do your Jesabell gainsay?
Can they (said I?) yes that they can. Nay, more,
They Will brag and boast therein, yea aid implore
Of God above from whom none ill proceeds,
To prop and patronage accursed deeds.
These, even these holy Fathers of that Sect,
Confirm the plot, advise, instruct, direct.
From sacrilegious Gerrards hand they took,
For Secrecy, this-Oath, upon a book.
The Oath.
YOu shall swear by the blessed-Trinity, They swear secrecy and constancy in
the business.
and by the Sacrament you now purpose to receive; never to disclose directly or
indirectly, by word or circumstance, the matter, which shall be proposed to you
to keep secret, nor desist from the execution thereof, until the rest shall
give you leave.

This Oath did Catesby, Percie, Thomas Wright,
And Kit Wright take, at once, to th'Jesuite.
Bates, Catesbies-man, and all the rest beside,
From Greenwell, They receive the Sacrament for more full assurance.
Priest, took it, another-tyde.
Then, for a yet more firm ratification,
(Right Judas-like) they took their own domnation.
For, every-one, to knit the faster band,
Received the Sacrament from those Priests hand.
O Heavens! o Earth! o impious age and times!
Were ever known like blasphemous foul crimes?
O graceless, godless, more than divellish fact!
So damnably to abuse that sacred act!
Of man's terrestrial comfort, confirmation
Of faith, of grace, and of man's blessed salvation!
Nay, will you (yet) hear more impiety,
Equal (almost) to deepest villainy?
Inhumane Catesby, each-way to prevent
(As fondly he supposed) all discontent,
Which might in his or any's heart arise,
About full-warrant of this enterprise;
To give the action, yet, more strong protection,
Casts in his thoughts to answer each objection.
For why, he now considered in his mind,
That he could not a way contrive or find,
But that in this great slaughter they should make,
Their friends must equally with foes partake.
The lawfullnesse heerof since some might doubt,
And so perchance stagger or else stand-out:
Therefore he hasts to his Achitophel,
That outside Angel, inside Devil of hell,
Grand-Jesuite Garnet, his advice to have,
To whom in all doubts, they most credit gave;
Whose answer, if it to his mind did hit,
He knew all was cock-sure and firmly fit.
Then, Catesby to Garnet.
in this sort, to Garnet he began,
O holy Sir, whose discreet counsel can
Resolve all doubts, dissolve heart-daunting fears
By wisdom, learning, gravity and years,
In whom Romes sanctimonious oracles
Are powerful in effecting miracles.
Vice- Vicar to our Deified Father,
High Priest of England, thither sent, to gather,
To reunite and to Romes fould reduce
The wandering flock withheld (thence) by abuse
Of cursed Calvin's, Beza's, Luthers sect,
Whose damned Doctrines do their souls infect;
O thou, I say, vicegerent to our Pope,
Whose holy-counsell in an anxious hope,
I much desire, gladly would impetrate,
In a great action, which to perpetrate,
Many of Us devoted Catholics
Have joined and sworn our selves against heretics.
Romes sacred Zeal has so enflamed our hearts,
To vulnerate with penetrating darts,
The souls of those who heretofore have long
Done unto Rome intolerable wrong.
Which we considering, seriously in mind,
And that it is like, we worse and worse shall find,
We vow to work our freedom from this woe,
To give our foes one fatal, final blow;
Wherewith their souls and bodies shall be sent,
By sulphur fierce, to Pluto's regiment.
But heerin, holy-Sir, the doubt remains,
That time and place this action, so constrains,
That all at once must perish in one fire:
Heerin (therefore) your counsel we desire,
To clear this doubt, which heerin does arise,
Whither our friends may dye with enemies? Nocents and innocents.

Whither: with nocents, innocents may die,
(For, in that place are both promiscuously)
We cannot possibly cast or contrive
The one from the other how to save alive;
Yet on this facts effecting does depend,
Of Romes great wrongs, the happy, hopeful end.
This Pseud-Apostle full of Romes affection,
Traveling with iniquities conception,
Brought forth the imp of mischief; thus does heal
Base Catesbies sore, with diabolike zeal.
Hear, o ye heavens, hearken both God and man,
How holily this Baals-Priest began.
First, with accurst-salutes, they often embrace,
And then with poisonous heart and brazen-face,
( Hyena with the crafty Crocodile)
He utters words most impious, false and vile;
With green-device, not gracious grave advice,
Thus spoke this hell-hound, Garnet to Catesby.
Romish Cockatrice.
O thou dear darling to the Church of Rome,
Which so high honor do to thee assume,
As by a fact, so meritorious, rare,
To be protector of Saint Peters-chair!
Thou Atlas of our (now) succeeding joys,
Herculean-chaser of our sharp annoyes!
Matchless Mecaenas of Romes doctrines rare,
Perillus, the engineer cannot compare
With cunning Catesby, arts-master of treason,
For stratagems past humane reach and reason.
I cannot choose but like and love thee dearly,
And yet much marvel thou could not see clearly
Of so rare enterprise, so blessed intents,
(O apt proficient in Romes documents)
The strong inducements to perseverance,
Not to desist for some ill-petty-chance.
I see thou art not (yet) so inly seen
Into the Jesuits doctrines: raw and green
Thy knowledge is; not regulated right,
That make a monster of a little mite.
That in smooth-bulrushes do seek a knot,
Like questionists who ask they know not what.
The case is most apparent, clear and plain,
That, since occasion, time and place constrain,
Such expedition to so high-desire,
And such advantage Rome shall (thence) acquire,
You may most justly by the rules of Rome,
Some innocents with nocents vile consume.
And, heerin thee more strongly to instruct,
That, none against this assertion may reluct,
And to repel all objects in this kind,
That in thy Creed it may more credit find;
Mark this comparison which thou shall hear,
Whereby this truth will clear as Sun appear. Garnets simile.

As in a town, beseiged by fierce foes
Which does some friends (inhabitants) enclose,
To whom, the General, in love was bound;
Yet, how to help them no means could be found,
Delays would danger breed inevitable,
And so the town might prove unconquerable.
Should he not (then) from due discretion swerve?
Whiles in fond pity, few friends to preserve,
He a whole town (to him most turbulent)
Should, thus, let-go, some few friends to content.
Would not his foes within, him, dastard deem?
Yea, all, them sots, not soldiers stout esteem?
If (then) heerby, our Church much good may gain,
Some friends with foes may fearlesly be slain.
And as for me, the best that I can do,
Which is my prayers and Orisons for you,
And your so high design; I most devout,
Will duly, truly, to the heavens poure-out,
And all our Saints and meritorious Martyrs
Implore, to aid you and your zealous partners.
O most pernicious Priest! O Scythian sect!
Do you with blood your followers, thus infect?
Is this the charity you all profess?
Your false conceived wrongs (thus) to redress?
Now how this Jesuits judgment does agree
With Jesus doctrine, Garnets doctrine compared with Christ's doctrine.
you shall briefly see.
When God with sinfull-man vouchsafed to talk,
Told he not Abraham, that if ten just folk
In Sodom could be found; his wrath he would stay,
And would not all, in his just vengeance, slay:
But, for those righteous sakes would mercy show.
But ghostly Garnet was more wise than so.
Did not the heavenly husbandman declare
His sacred mind, touching the wheat and tare?
Since, both grew-up, to let them both alone:
But of this husbandry, Garnet will none.
Does not St. Paul, does not all Scripture show,
No evil ought be done that good may grow?
Was it not Mercies majesty and joy,
That none of his he brought unto annoy?
Not one was lost: saying he came to save,
Not to destroy, whom God unto him gave.
But yet, Loiola's Priests more wise do grow,
They hold it lawful to kill friend or foe.
Though Peter may not strike in Christ's defense,
Yet Popish-Priests may use all violence.
Catesby was heerwith (now) full satisfied;
And glad that all things to his thoughts compli'd,
For, now he judgd himself most strongly able
To settle his man Bates his mind unstable.
For Catesby noted, how he, jealously
Observed each-passage, with anxiety;
And saw how Rookwood was amazed in mind,
And touched in conscience that he had combinde
To ta^e away and let-out so much blood;
And that they- both, much wavering, thereon stood;
He therefore told them that most certainly,
He was resolved by good authority,
No less than Garnets, their chief Jesuit,
That with good-conscience, void of least affright,
They might destroy nocents and innocents, Garnets opinion confirms all.

Rather than leave-off their so high intents.
With which assurance they were satisfi'de,
And so resolved all hazards to abide.
Now, then to Rome is Fauks sent, privily,
Unto the Pope, Fauks is sent to the Pope.
their plot to signify,
To make-known to his holiness with speed,
From first to last, how all things did proceed.
His holiness his traitorous Son commended,
Persuades to persevere till all were ended;
Assures success and fortunate conclusion;
And so dismissed this Master of Confusion,
With benediction and a bounteous gift.
Then, rapid Tibris-like, he flies full swift,
Visits his ancient friends and old acquaintance,
In The Duke of Austria's Court, with welcome entrance:
Whereas he meets with many fugitives,
Questioning how each thing in England thrives.
And banished Shavelings of our English nation,
Greedy to hear of change and alteration;
With sanguinary Nero, who desire
Their countries grace extinct with sword and fire.
Monsters of men, like those who love to angle
In troubled-waters, discord, strife and wrangle.
These, these (I say) pricked forward him that ran,
And contribute to help what he began,
Furnishing him with counsel as with coin;
Brothers in mischief, heads and hearts do join:
His head they fill with cunning, craft and guile,
His heart, to hatch, his tongue to ly, they file;
They teach him, how, with Demonologie,
To hide the platform of this ^reachery.
Like furious hagg, Fauks returns home.
he home returns most bold,
And to his master Percy does unfold
His good success, and prays they might proceed
With expedition to this hellish deed;
For he was stuffed with all the arts and arms
That Rome could yield, or Acherontine charms.
They, having (now) with blasphemous intent,
(As is fore-shown) received the Sacrament,
And, bound themselves by oath, to act their parts,
To hear Plutonick-Masse, their murtherous hearts
They, them prepare; which done, they all desire,
Now, to proceed to build this furious fire.
And hereupon, some choice-men they select,
Whose charge should be, with diligent respect,
The Parliament to dig and undermine, They begin to undermine the Parliament.

Who furnished were with bakd-meats, beer and wine,
That so they might not (often) go in or out,
Fauks, at the door stood Sentinel or scout,
Who still discovered all that passed by,
And marked occurrents with a watchfull-eye;
And warning gave, as he occasions spide,
Sometimes to work, sometimes to lay aside.
Thus, to the work, themselves they closely gave,
And by their sides, their pieces charged they have:
Resolving there to dye, if so it hapt,
That by discovery they should be intrapt.
These pioners through Percies chamber brought
The exhausted Earth, to digg a hollow-vault,
Conveying-out great baskets full of clay,
And of the house, the groundwork took away.
But lo, at last, an obstacle they found,
A thick stone-wall they met-with in the ground, They find a thick stone-wal

Full 3 yards thick, which with much industry
Though with great doubt and deep anxiety,
They having half-wrought-through, they easily heard
A rushing noise of Charcoal, which them feared,
That they discovered were; strait Fauks was sent
To see what all that noise and rushing meant,
Who finding that the coals were selling-out
And that the cellar might (past fear and doubt)
Be hired by them, as a place most fit
For their design: He Percy told of it,
Who, seeing its most pat-conveniency,
And under the upper-house, A Cellar hired.
immediately
He hired the Cellar for a yearly rent,
And with a traitorous heart and foul intent
Feined to fil't with charcoal, wood and beer,
From all suspect themselves to cloak and clear.
Here now they did consider Catesby charge,
Upon whom (hitherto) with love too-large,
The cost of all this coil had chiefly ly'n,
Wherefore, to forward this their deep design,
Sr. Everard Digbies bounty did abound, S. Everard Digby.

Who to it, promised fifteen hundred pound.
Then traitorous Tressam his great zeal to express,
Two-thousand pounds would have in readiness,
To be employed in each necessity,
To prop this work of Popish-piety.
Percy to pierce the eye of Church and State,
Did also promise he would associate
And bear a part in this so rare collection;
Four thousand pounds at least, with pure affection,
He from Northumberlands great rents would get,
And all things orderly dispose and set.
Others, both horse and armor would provide,
Others procure an Army against the tide;
Wherewith they might destroy and quite deprive,
With fury great, the rest that did survive,
Of life and liberty and their best treasure,
Even Christ's pure-Gospell, their souls precious pleasure.
Such was the hatred of this holy-brood,
Such the effects of their nefarious mood!
Among them (then) was this objection made
That since the Prince (as could not be gainsaid)
Would be in Parliament: A consultation among the Traitors touching the Kings
children.
How best might be,
The next-heire to surprise? But, Percy, he
Soon freed them of this care, and under-took
With his bold mates to ceaze upon the Duke.
For, this they had resolved, with firm decree,
That the Kings issue-male destroyed should be.
Next how to get into their custody,
(O hellish guardians of such royalty!)
The precious Princess, fair Elizabeth,
Then, with Lord Harrington by Dunchurch-heath;
Together with the Princess Mary fair,
And having got this royal female-pair,
Elizabeth they would their Queen proclaim,
And on her person sequel projects frame.
At Dunchurch (therefore) they would a hunt pretend,
And friends (there) meeting, might that business end.
Lastly, they all consult and take advice,
What foreign Prince, they heerto might entice?
What English Lords and Noblemen to save,
Who of this Kingdom, should possession have?
Of these, and all these circumstances, they
Firmly resolved against the pointed-day.
Each thing, thus, happening to them, passing-well;
To Fauks (whom, we, not man, but hagg of hell
May justly term, a title best befitted)
The final, fatall-blow was (then) committed,
This ghastly, ghostlike-monster, night by night,
To the Cellar went, all things to order right.
Which Cellar (now) they filled had, The provision of Gun-pouder and
instruments of destruction.
complete,
With firkins, barrels and with hoggs-heads great.
Thirty and six with gun-pouder all stuffed,
Which should earths intrals to the skies have puffed.
Lord, what a puff, what a combustious flame,
What motion, what commotion by the same,
Had from the Earth, into the air bin raised,
Hels stoutest furies to have made amazed?
And yet to make the blow more strangely fierce,
More desp'rately the corpse to pash and pierce;
Upon the barrels they had laid also,
Great crows of iron to increase the blow,
And massie-stones and logs had placed thereon,
Right underneath the Kings and Princes throne.
And to prevent the danger of suspect,
That none those Stygian engines might detect,
These traitorous hell hounds with Medaea's guile,
Great store of billets thereupon did pile,
And fagots; so the gun-pouder to hide,
That it could not without great search be spide.
Thus having framed this Chaos of confusion,
This sevenfold heated furnace: For conclusion
Of Englands fatall-doome, they (now expect
The long-wisht day, their purpose to effect;
The happy, The 5th of November
hoped-day, Novembers-fift,
To drive all headlong with a horrid drift.
Thus Fauks that ravening-Wolf with hungry-jaws
Greedily gaped to gripe us in his paws.
Thus, thus, he stood prepared to perpetrate
With more than barbarous, most inhumane hate)
A treason passing Catelines compact,
Against old Rome with hot Cethegus backed.
Ambitious Hamans arrogant proud thought,
Against the Jews could no such ruth have wrought.
Inferior far to this transcendent treason
Was Paris massacre with most just reason.
And that Sicilian woeful Even-song
Came far behind this project. And among
The best Chronographers thou can not find
A fact so foul, so cruel and unkind,
Not barbarous Scythia, nor Tartaria wild
Did ever hear or see a plot so vilde,
Much less ere dream the like to enterprise;
Than which, a worse, Pluto could not devise,
Nor such a palpable Aegyptian-fogg
Have raised to rear Romes faithless Synagogue.
Wherein they hopt a kingdom to devour, A brief description of the most
lamentable effects of the plot had it taken effect.

At once, with one blow, in less than one hour,
Like unresistible, remorslesse waves,
To make the open-ayre the tombs and graves
Of our dread King, the Queen, the Prince our joy,
Of Englands peerlesse Peers, with dire annoy,
Of all our choice and chief Nobility,
Of Levies-Sons, props of the Prelacy,
Lycurgus-Sons, our Justices and Judges,
To whom their Romish foes bare secret grudges,
The flower of gentry, cream of Commonweal,
Her skillful Surgeons, countries sores to heal.
Her most accomplished Knights, the bravest part
And prudent Burgesses had felt that smart;
Most of the soundest Lawyers of the Land
Had altogether perished out of hand.
All These (I say) thus marked-out to die,
(Had not heavens foresight given their wrath the lie
Smothered in smoke and dust, to th'Ayr blown-up,
Had drunk full-drafts of deaths most direful cup.
Their bodies batterd, shatterd, torn and rent,
Arms, heads and legs, flying in the firmament,
Dismembered bodies all besmeard with gore;
A sight, which very Scythians might deplore,
Yea roar to see, and seeing, curse the hearts
Of all such barbarous Actors of such parts.
Thus, thus, I say, those pious Patriots had
Been All ingulft in death and dolor sad,
By this most woeful, fearful Stygean Act,
Likest it-selfe, paralel'd by no fact.
O mischief, murder, massacre most strange!
New snare, base ware brought forth from hels exchange.
O Popish cruell-crue, inhumane quite!
Monsters in Gods, monsters in all men's sight.
O wretched work, to which all woes are due,
Great wrack, more great than may beheld for true,
Who, present, saw All, noted All he saw,
To trust All seen, his Own-eyes scarce could draw.
With such fierce flames of quick Sulphurious scath,
Does Rome promove, approve her Catholic Faith*
Nay, not these reasonable-souls, alone,
Had in that roaring-thunder up bin blown.
Without distinction or least difference,
Of mean or mighty, people or of Prince,
Of Majesty or honor, sex or age,
(Such was the horror of Romes wrath and rage)
But many senslesse-creatures they had meant,
To make partakers of that hideous rent.
Both those most ancient famous houses fair
Of Parliament, the springs of laws most rare,
Westminster Hall, fair Englands judgment seat,
Yea doubtless, White Hall had to dust bin beat;
The Church, wherein Kings had their coronation,
All turned to ashes, by that conflagration.
That Church, I say, wherein the tombs most rare
Of former famous Kings and Princes are,
With precious, curious cost and care erected,
From age to age most gorgeously protected,
As endless trophies of triumphant reign,
All these had fallen, dashed into dust again.
Yea all the marks of Britanes royall-Grace,
The Crown of England, Scepter, Sword and Mace,
Records and Charters, which appropriate
To all, their portion, honor, right and state.
O woeful, ruthful! these had bin Romes prey
In this sulphurious-furious dark doomes-day.
So horrid and exorbitant a plot,
So foul a stain, so black an ugly-spot,
Doubtless man's tongue (before) did never tell,
His eyes behold, or in his heart could dwell.
Nay, all the furies of th'infernall-pit
Could never (surely) such foul poison spit.
So rare a King, so rare a Queen to kill,
So rare a Prince, so rare a Race to ill,
So rare a State to stab with cruelty,
So rare a Realm to bring to misery!
Whom, all the world admired, beloved of all,
Whom, none but Pope and Papists wished to fall.
If, a mean-man to slay be detestable,
Then, how much more had this bin execrable?
If, to shed-bloud, be called a crying-sin,
How much more monstrous had this murder bin?
This mo^^ than crying, yea, this roaring-crime,
Unparalleled, unpattern'd, by all time.
For, these destroyed, what were a Realm, but dead?
A most dismembered corpse without a head.
And as a silly Hare (fear laid aside)
Securely thinks within his form to 'bide, Simile.

Whom, when the Countryman asleep does find,
With his plow-staffe, he kills with eager mind:
Even so Romes cruel bloody-dragon had
Obliterated Englands fame, and clad
Her glorious beauty, glist'ring name and nation
In sable mourning, woe and lamentation.
So huge a throat had this wild wolf of Rome,
Christ's stock (at once) to swollow and consume.
Who, thus, at one, indeed deep Cath'like blow,
(Had not, heaven-only, thereunto said no)
Had Nero's most inhumane wish effected, Nero's wish.

Namely, all Englands heads to be erected,
And placed upon one-body, with one-stroke,
To smite them off; not needing to invoke
A years, months, weeks or days-space, but one-hour,
To strike-off all those heads, with Romish power.
Yea, as it were, with one loud thunderclap,
As with a pettard, instantly, to snap
And break our peaceful Janus-gate wide-ope,
Of all our halcyon-dayes to quench the hope.
With more than Canibals blood-thirsty mood,
Deeming, than Mans-flesh, nothing sweeter food.
O, who is able to articulate,
Or, who can liv^ly paint and personate
The several sorrows of that dismall-day,
Those vile Nerorians, vaunting in their prey?
Triumphing in the trophies, pitteous spoil,
Of their destroyed Kingdom, native-soyle?
No, though I had an hundredth tongues and hearts,
Both hearts and toungs would fail to do their parts,
T'indite and write the extent of their intention;
In sense and science of so strange invention.
Yea, learned Homer, doubtless would refuse
A task so great, so grievous for to choose.
Yet, that I may but give a short survey,
A glimmering-view of that intended-day,
We'll here suppose (and blessed be heavens great name, Suppose the deed done.

That we can thereof but conjecture frame)
We'll (here) suppose (I say) the fact effected,
The traitors bloody-banners (now) erected;
By Hercules his foot, the Lions paw,
The wise may see the wideness of Romes maw.
For here (me thinks) had (then) a fresh bin shown
London, great-Britanes fairest princely throne,
Like conquered Troy in furious flames a burning, Londons misery.

Spoiled and abused, replete with moan and mourning;
The happiest City Europe ere enjoyed,
With Aetnaean-fire and smoke, confum'd, destroyed.
Her walls with Canon-ruptures rent and torn,
Her stately turrets batter'd-down, forlorn.
Rubbish-heaps made of her Pyramides,
Her streets with soldiers filled; none them to appease.
Then Mars usurping mild Astraea's room,
Their swords, not words, must give the fatall-doom.
In streets, great streams of blood like rivers run,
Loud screeks and cries, help, help, we are undone;
But none to help, except to help them die,
Or add more grief to groaning misery,
In houses and in sanctified places
Women with blubbering tears bedrensh their faces,
Wringing their hands and running up and down,
Fearfully frighted with foes rage and frown;
Children in Parents arms trembling and quaking,
Mothers into their lapps their infants taking
With gushing tears, kissing their tender-cheeks,
Chambers even ring with Damsels woeful fcreeks:
Aged-men murdered, Young Men butchered,
Wives widows made, chaste Virgins ravished.
This corollary let me also add,
Which would have made the mischief far more bad,
It was confessed to be their hellish drift
(The King and State confounded) they would shift
The blame and shame on those whom most they hate,
Their own foul guilt (thereby) to paliate;
A villain, falsely, should proclaim as truth,
That Puritans were Authors of this ruth.
So that in every country, town, and city
All that were godly-given, without all pity,
(O most unsampled, o most wicked wile,)
Had been destroyed, as malefactors vile.
But how this hellish plot contrived should be,
In its more proper place, you, plain shall see.
Now then return we whence we have digrest; An introduction to the discovery of
the plot.

Hels Romish-agents, thus, most ready pressed,
As was fore-shown, each thing in readiness,
To bring their country into deep distress.
Our great Jehovah, God omnipotent,
Who sits in Heaven, above the firmament,
His Isreal's careful keeper, shepherd great,
Who man's affairs views from his mercy-seat,
And knows the closest and most secret deed,
Whose sight does fained Lynxes far exceed,
He, he, I say, in mercy did behold
The miseries and mischiefs manifold,
Wherewith those Romish-bears, their King did threat,
Whereby they gapt to make Saints-flesh their meat. GOD speaks to his Angel.

Thus to his glorious Angel with sweet voice,
His will unfolds, which they to do rejoice.
You, says Jehovah, now shall understand,
How Satan that sly-hunter takes in hand
With Cholcos spells and spite by agents proud,
Great Britanes soil to spoil: yea and has vowed
To root-out of the Earth the English-nation,
Who to our name perform pure adoration.
Which if they should accordingly atchieve,
Rome.
Babell would her dead hopes again revive;
The monstrous The Pope.
Beast would salve her deadly sore
And re-erect a Stews for her great Whore.
Then Rome, the mistress of enormity
Would bask her self in sins deformity;
Then also would the Prophesies of old,
Seem (and that justly) all in vain foretold;
All those praedictions clean annihilated,
Which said the Beast should (sure) be captivated,
That Babylon should fall and ruined be,
And that the Kings on Earth her fall should see.
All these (I say) might (hereby) frustrate seem.
And thus my people, Me forgetful deem.
Wherefore I purpose with all expedition,
To interrupt and thwart this their ambition,
This hasty, hateful enterprise to stop,
Of this rank-rising-weed the flowers to crop.
And, although Englands sins my wrath deserve,
Yet, for my names-sake, I will them preserve,
Although (I say) Englands ingratitude
Justly deserves judgments amaritude,
Because it does my mercies much abuse,
Yet will I not permit this Beast to use
Mysword of power, nor give those Traitors
Imps my right,
But, speedily in wrath their sins I Will smite.
This God of mercy, just-mans consolation,
With most ineffable commiseration,
To show to us his love and bounty large,
A heavenly Angel forthwith gives in charge
To Albions kingdom with swift course to fly,
And in his sleep the king to certify,
How many dangers he was wrapped into,
Which him and's peaceful kingdom would undo;
How many stinging-Snakes in Court did lurk,
For him and his, strange snares and gins to work.
Wish him be circumspect, the The Parliament house.
place refrain
Where Julius Caesar treacherously was slain:
Their impious plotted Protasis does frown,
Like Sampsons-house, intending to pull-down
His kingdom all at once about his ears,
And their Epitasis portends great fears;
But both of these, he joyfully shall see
Transacted to a blessed Catastrophe. Lord Mounteagle

Then, to the Lord MOUNTEAGLE have with speed,
To whom the traitors closely have decreed
To send a Letter, A Letter.
this harm to prevent,
That from the Senate he himself absent.
For why? say they, both God and man decree,
By a fierce blast Romes foes down-cast to see,
And that he should into the country fly,
And there in saf'ty and security
A woeful sudden spectacle expect;
And that this Caution might breed no suspect,
They wished him (having read) the Letter burn,
That so no danger might upon him turn.
Him thou shall warn his duty to perform,
And of this peril, his dread Prince t'enform,
The Kingdoms and his Countries weal to further,
And so prevent this direful dreadful murder,
Which that same Letter mystically meant,
Without a name, but not a blessed event.
Then from great Jove does winged Minerva fly,
And ere bright Titan from the spangled-sky
Had banished Cynthia, dancing on Spains flood,
This blessed Messenger with message good
Ariv'd upon the coasts of Britane fair,
His charge to discharge duly does prepare.
Who noble Morley's heart does first inspire
With honest care and diligent desire
Of his dear King and Countries happy state;
And then the Kings breast does illuminate
With judgment most profound the knot t'unty
(Like Oedipus) of that oenigma high.
For, thus, the Lord, in his all-guiding grace,
Ordained, that one of that most traitorous race
Did meet the Lord Mounteagles serving-man,
Ten days before the Parliament began;
Who, The Lord Mounteagles serving-man.
about seven a clock at night was sent
Upon some errand: And as thus he went,
Crossing the street, a fellow to him came,
A man to him unknown, by face or name,
Of personage tall, making a sudden stand,
Strait put the Letter in the Servants hand,
Earnestly prayed him, with all special heed,
To give it into his Lords hands with speed.
The footman home unto his Lord did hie,
And gave the Letter to him, instantly,
And told him how it was unto him brought;
Which, soon, he opened, found the hand but naught
No name thereto subscribed, without a date;
To read it, therefore he did properate,
But, hardly could, wherefore, a gentleman
He called to help him read, which (thus) began.
THE LETTER.
MY Lord, out of the love I bear to some of your Friends, I have care of your
preservation. Therefore I would advise you as you tender your life to devise
some excuse to shift-off your attendance at this Parliament. For, God and man
have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time; and think not slightly
of this advertisement, but retire your self into your country, where you may
expect the event in safety. For, though there be no appearance of any stir,
yet, I say, they shall receive a terrible blow, this Parliament, and yet they
shall not see who hurts them. This counsel is not to be contemned, because it
may do you good, and can do you no harm; for the danger is past, so soon as
you have burnt the LETTER. And I hope GOD will give you the grace to make use
of it; to whose holy Protection I leave you.


These strange contents his mind did discontent,
In's heart a thousand thoughts both came and went;
What fact, what friend, what this oenigma told,
What mystick-danger these words might infold?
Or whither 'twere some addle, idle-brain,
That this had writ to cause him thence refrain?
If it should prove a fond fantastick-thing,
To stir therein, disgrace to him would bring:
But if it should include some dire event,
Unto his Person or the Parliament;
To keep it close, might make him prove disloyal:
He Is loath and yet desires to ma^e a trial,
Wherefore, at last, as was fore-specifi'de,
Gods sacred Angel to him swiftly hi'de,
And in his anxious thoughts infused sweet grace,
Willing him this occasion to embrace;
And kindled in his heart a zealous flame,
Not to conceal, but to reveal the same.
THe gallant EAGLE soaring-up on high,
Bears in his beak Treasons discovery:
MOUNT noble EAGLE, with thy happy Prey,
And thy rich Prize unto thy Prince convey.


THrice noble Morley (says this Angel bright)
Who art so honored in thy makers sight, The Angel to Lo. Morley.

That thou must be the man shall first disclose
The Kings and countries bitter threatened woes,
By that usurping whorish Beast of Rome,
Who Albions I stand hopes (now) to consume;
O stand not doubting, pond'ring in thy thought,
Whither this be a truth or thing of naught;
A truth, a happy- truth it does import,
Of woe and wrack to Country and to Court.
If thou it hide a world of woes ensue,
If thou reveal it honor be thy due.
And though this Letter seems most obscure
Like a darke-riddle, yet will I procure
A Joseph's or a Daniels ingeny,
T'untwine the twist of its obscurity.
Since in thy hands (then) lies both weal and woe,
Haste, haste with speed, in Court thy Letter show.
This happy motion makes all doubt depart
From this right noble Lord Mounteagles heart,
Who (now) resolves the business to display,
To search the truth, to Court to haste away;
And, though it were both dirty, dark and late,
Yet, he the time will not procrastinate.
But, like a noble-Eagle with a prey,
A princely prey (indeed) he sears away,
He is not quiet with this prize (thus) caught,
Until he have his high-affairs dispatched.
Heavens aid imploring for a blissful end,
To this most anxious act he did intend: The Lord Mounteagle goes to Court with
the Letter.

And, thus, with loyall-heart away he goes
To Court, this weighty business to disclose,
Resolved thereto, what ever should betide,
And, to the Earl of Salsb'ries lodging hi'de,
To this Ulysses, he the LETTER shows,
He the other counsel; hence thick doubting grows
Among them all, they in most doubtful wise
Possess the King therewith, and so advise:
Each-one propounds his judgment severally
As in a case of great anxiety,
One thinks it was some idle vain conceit, The Lords

Others do judge it did some danger threat;
Another is quite of another-mind,
None could the right-way of this Lab'rinth find.
Not one of them could dive into its ground,
None could this mystick-riddle right expound.
At last our prudent-King, K. James.
Apollo's son,
Fair Englands Joseph, thus to them begun;
(Weighing each circumstance with deep discretion)
Well, sirs, our judgments must take more impression,
This is no trivial work or fantasy.
But must be sifted with great scrutiny,
I well remember, and you all do know,
That little-smoke being (at first) kept low,
Does mighty flames (though hid) most fiercely work:
And in this grass some Serpent foul does lurk,
Or else I am deceived; for to my mind
Now comes that Magna licet nunquam nocuit cautela monarchi^.
old-rule touching Romists blind,
Whose genius guided by Erynnis vile,
Never pull-down the Flag of wrath and guile,
But, what with threats, poisons, deceit, contentions,
They practice still to effect their foul inventions,
Plodding and plotting as a most just thing,
By Jesuites-principles to kill their King.
No doubt but here is some danger fabricated,
Some second Troian-horse is machinated,
Some bloody Jesuit, with some traitorous train,
Who would his hands in our dear heart-blood stain,
Some monstrous machination (credit me)
Is in this LETTER couched privily.
It Is not the froth of any brittle-brain,
But, doubtless, does some treachery contain;
In that his friend he counsels to forbear
From coming thither, so to void the fear:
Yea, farther, he great danger menaceth,
A sudden, terrible, fierce stroke of death.
Which with great wonder like a thunderclap,
Should, on their foes, precipitately hap;
Unless by Gun-pouder this thing must be, The letter expounded by the King.

Naught else, so likely thereto, I can see.
And it may be that they will abuse that-art,
To our great ruin and ensuing-smart.
Therefore most loyal Sirs, I much desire
That speedy course be taken to enquire
What neighbors and what houses near do stand
To our great Capitol, what Cellars, and
What arched-vaults there are under the ground;
Let secret search be made, the truth out-found.
Then strait, Lord Chamberlain, with others more, A search.

Made careful inquisition for to know
What houses who them held, and of each thing,
In all particulars inform the King;
Percy (says he) dwells there and has a vault,
With wood and charcoale plentifully fraught.
Hence, instantly, greater suspect did rise, Sr Thomas Knevet sent to search.

And thereupon S. THOMAS KNEVET wise
Was ordered to search-out what he might;
Who on the 4th- day of Novembers-night,
Perlustrated each doubted part and place,
And did each thing uncover and uncase.
And least suspicion might their search betray,
They feigned to seek the Queens-roabs stolen away.
Infernal Fauks with Daemoniack heart,
Being ready, now, to act his hellish part;
Booted and spurred with Lantern in his hand,
And match in's Pocket at the door does stand:
But wise Lord KNEVET by Divine Direction,
Him apprehends and finds the Plots detection.


ANd first, Fauks is apprehended at the Cellar door.
S. Thomas, Guido Fauks did find,
(Devil of that den) ord'ring things to his mind,
Booted and spurred, then standing at the door,
Having dispatch his task, but late before.
Having (then) set (I say) in order fit,
His all-disordering fuming Aetna's-pit,
Which should have made his country quite forlorn,
And all her stately towers have rent and torn.
He apprehends him, grasps and clasps his hands
With hempen-cords; and then no longer stands,
But quickly enters that infernall-cell,
Where, entered, he observes and views all well.
And trustily puls-down the piles of wood,
And as his servants tumbling all things, stood,
A sudden fright this knight and them amazed,
Which, among them all an exclamation raised;
See, see (say they) this wood does powder hide,
For, we two barrels full have here espi'de,
Let us search farther, we shall more descry
Hid (doubtless) amongst these billets privily.
O treason, treason, here we more do find,
O treason, past the reach of mortal mind!
Then more and more, they instantly found-out,
And thereby, The powder is discovered.
cleared the truth of former doubt.
Full thirty barrels more with powder fraught,
Two hogs-heads great they found as thus they sought.
All which did Fauks his heart with rancor wou^d,
Who^ straight they searched and soon about him found
A crucifix, which from his neck they snatch,
A shirt of hair he wore his skin to scratch.
From forth his pocket (then) that match they took
(Maugre his traitorous rage and hellish-look)
Which should have brought Vulcan from hels black station
To work in Aetna doleful desolation.
Wherewith he vowed to burn-up and destroy
Albions illustrious luster fame and joy,
The peace and plenty, strength and valor stout
Of England, famous all the world throughout.
This glorious Realm in twinkling of an eye
He would have robbed of all her royalty.
Yea, with such unheard cruelty and guile
They woven had this webb most foul and vile,
And every thread so slily did contrive,
That but poor twelve- hours England should survive
Heaven having (thus) hels foul intentions stopped,
The project crossed, their flower of hope (thus) cropped;
The traitor straight the fact confessed, but said
He grieved most to see his purpose staid,
And that, Fauks his impudency.
but this, naught should have held his hand
From turning all into a smoky-brand.
The standers-by in wonder, thus, burst out,
Hear o ye heavens, tremble all earth through-out
Was ever heard or seen so bold a foe,
A heart so hard, prodigious? Nay, we know
That scarce the heart of Turkey, Barbary,
Like plotted-mischiefe ever did descry.
To which the bloody-butchery in France
Is unequivalent, gives but a glance,
(Respecting this) of Romes rebellious stock,
In these vile Edomites, on us Christ's flock.
Whose memory much dims each former slaughter,
Disgrace of this, Six observations or aggravations.
and of all ages after.
The unheard horror whereof may appear
In these six circumstances following here.
First, if they had adjudged us, by hand
Of reasonable-creatures, to deaths band,
If men by men should have bin deaths fierce fuel, 1. Men.

The fact had bin more humane, far less cruel;
For then, there had bin hope by force or fence;
By tears or treats to swage their violence.
As to Heavens glory our blessed King did find
In Gowries treason, cruel and unkind.
Or if by other brutish-animals,
Inexorable at our woeful calls, 2. Beasts.

And being, than most-men, more pitiless,
Would us confound, with beast-like greediness;
This kind of death (indeed) had bin more fierce,
Yet here were hope deaths sentence to reverse:
For why? by force or pleasurable-cause,
Some men have escaped Lions fangs and claws,
Daniel in the Den, the Roman in the Cave,
David, King Richard, over them, conquest have.
Again, which is most cruel of the three,
By things-insensible destroyed to be, 3. Insensible things.

To which, all groans, all moanes must needs be vain
Being senseless of themselves, most of our pain;
By these, I say, to perish and decay,
No hope, no help, naught can their fury stay.
Besides, observe, of any senseles-thing,
These elements, 4. Fire and water.
Water and Fire do bring
Most damage, most devouring fierce confusion,
By restless, by redreslesse strong intrusion;
Whose inundations, all-confounding flames
Orewhelms whole realms, makes dust of rarest frames.
Add, yet, this fifth material observation,
Which, 5. Fire.
to this purpose brings great aggravation;
Of these two all-devouring elements,
By fire we have most grievous detriments.
For, though the waters hugely overflow,
Drown man and beast, bring all to deadly woe,
Yet, when into their bounds they have recourse,
All things remain, in substance, little worse:
But when or whersoever fires fierce rage,
Burns Shepheards-cottage or rich-heritage,
Takes hold on houses, palaces or places,
Of gold or treasure, all it quite out-races,
Cattle and corn are altogether thrust,
Are all consumed, naught left but dross and dust.
Therefore that we should be consumed with fire,
And of all fires, 6. Gun-pouder.
that of most furious ire,
By puffing Gun-pouder, the most out-ragious,
A death most desperate, cruel and contagious;
O speak (alas) what hope was of relief,
From this so mortal, mischievous great grief?
No strength, no power was able to assail,
No tears, no treats could, here, a jot prevail.
For why? O woe, no time for tears was given,
With such strange violence had all bin driven!
No mortall-might might stay this mortall-blow,
No power protect us from that deadly woe.
No means (I say) less than a miracle,
Such as is mentioned in the Oracle
Of sacred Scriptures, when Heaven did command
(Even as it were by his immediate hand)
That Babylonian fiery-fornace power,
That it could not once touch, much less devour
That rare pair-royall of true piety, The three children in the fiery furnace.

True worshippers of Heavens great Deity,
Sweet Shadrack, Mesheck and Abednego,
In whom the Lord did such a wonder show.
And, certainly such was to us Gods grace,
And we well-nigh, in as like dangerous case.
But, blessed, o thrice-blessed trine-one Lord,
Thine endlesse-praise, we (ever) shall record,
Our powerful and most pitiful protector,
O our most holy, glorious, just directour!
The gracious smiles of thy preventing pity
Made blessed Ho sanna be our joyful Ditty, Another observation of the
impossibility to escape the blow.

Here we may not omit this observation,
The impossibility of preservation,
Or hope, this treason (ever) to discry,
By all the reach of humane policy;
And therefore, that God-only did us save,
And heerunto five reasons more we have.
First to keep secret and perform the fact,
They bound themselves by Oath and firm compact.
Then heerupon, received the Sacrament,
To tie themselves with stronger ligament.
Thirdly, were tutour'd by their Jesuits
To use all couzening-tricks, deluding sleights,
Namely, to answer by equivocation,
To any Magistrates examination;
Their senses thus to circumvent and flout,
That none the truth might from them (ere) get-out.
Moreover, though, that Letter we confess,
Was the first-instrument the plot to express;
Yet, certainly, for all that mystick-Letter,
Our case had still bin very little-better,
If God had not another-way wrought peace,
Necessitating them that work to cease
Of undermining that great Capitol,
By reason of the thick and stony-wall,
Which so did cross what they did first desi^^
As that they must the pouder-cellar hire,
Wherinto they their hellish-stuff did lay,
Our King and State by flames to make away;
Which, had it bin of those things void and free,
Where might it have bin thought, that stuff to be?
How could the vault in time, have bin detected,
Which all the while was never (once) suspected?
Nor, till the Traitours-selves confessed, was sought,
For, no man, thereof ever dreamed or thought.
last, not least note, in this horrid act,
Is, that God moved the King still to protract
And to rejourn the time of Parliament,
Which, fitted (still) the Traitors ill-intent,
But, chiefly, unto us it fell-out best,
As by those notes before has bin expressed.
The Treason (thus) most happily displayed,
The Traitor Fauks to prison was convay'd. Fauks is imprisoned.

Then, through both Court and Country speedily,
Through all the Kingdom did the rumor fly,
Through Town and City, street and every place,
Of this deliverance, The report of the treason spread abroad.
Gods preventing-grace;
Annoy is turned to joy and sweet content,
Men's hands and hearts and knees to praises bent:
Making great bonfires, feasting, ringing bells,
Each-one h^s neighbor this Gods goodness tells.
And, now, return we, where we new-now left
Incarcerate Fauks, whose heart was clean bereft
Of piety and grace, incarnate Devil,
Most strangely hardened with infernal evil. Fauks his most impudent
behavior at the Court.

For, being brought before the Council grave,
He did himself so sturdily behave,
And put-on such a Romish Resolution,
A vouching his intended-execution,
Wit^ ^uch a settled and immarbled face,
As that a Mutius Scaevola most base,
He lively represented to them all,
Full of remorslesse rancour, rage and gall.
For why? he durst most shamelesly proclaim
This hateful fact, a deed of holy fame,
And that the Zeal of Romish Faith indeed,
Enflamed his heart so boldly to proceed;
And, that he grieved for nothing more then this,
That, of the works-conclusion he did miss.
Adding, more-over, with a heart of stone,
That, if he had but of their coming known,
And if he had bin in the Cellar taken,
He would have set on fire the pouder-train,
And, both himself and those that had him caught
Would (there) have blown-up and of life dispatched.
Yea, when before the King and Council grave,
That night, he questioned was, he did behave
Himself with right- Ravilack scorn and pride,
And oftentimes would seem even to deride
What was demanded; so small grace he had,
So hard a heart, his conscience was so bad.
And the next day being in safe custody,
And by some Lords questioned, most seriously,
Touching his accomplices in this design,
He stubbornly, would such demands decline,
And all that while, naught could be from him got,
Which he conceived might disclose the plot;
But on himself-alone laid all the blame,
Protesting that he undertook the same
Merely for conscience and religions sake,
Avouching, that the King he did not take
To be his lawful Sovereign, Gods anointed,
But, as an Haeretick, from Rome disjoynted*
But, Fauks sent to the Tower.
the next morn, being to the Tower sent,
And, there, some two or three days being spent,
In strict examination, twice or thrice,
And, he rejecting all their grave advice;
The Council (thereon) profering him the rack, Frighted with the rack.

The sight thereof did all his courage crack;
And all his former Romish valor stout,
Unmask, and made his guilt of heart break-out.
So that he (then) began for to confess
The truth of all the intended-wickednesse.
Then there they left him in his divellish heart,
To bide the Sentence of his just desert;
To taste the bitter cup to traitors due,
Which yet did nothing cause his soul to rue,
But desperately his heart more hard than stone,
With divellish impudence was overgrown.
For in the time of his imprisonment,
Some other traitors to the Tower being sent,
There were, that did avouch that they did hear
Vile Robert Winter, Winter void of fear;
In whom (also) was graces Autumn shown,
And fruitlesse-Winter of all goodness known,
Who being in the Tower, a time did find
To speak to Fauks, Conference in the Towr twixt Winter and Fauks.
and (thus) to break his mind.
Thou know (friend) Fauks, my old and trusty mate)
That boys may, once, grow-up to man's estate,
And Catesby and my self have children left,
Then are we not of comfort, quite, bereft.
For why? I hope they will revenge Romes wrong,
And, for our sakes, her foes (once) lay along.
Yea, though we had no children of our own,
Yet God is able from the sterile-stone
To Abraham of Rome, children to raise;
And I much marvel, no man in our praise
For this our Catholic constant zeal does write,
And Panegyricks unto us indite.
How-ever, yet, let us vow and protest
To maintain our just-cause and manifest,
Our ardent zeal for Romes supremacy,
When we before the people are to die.
Content (quoth Fauks) for, surely, I suppose
The Devil not God, did this our sact disclose,
O monstrous men, o hard hearts, brazen faces!
To offer God and man these foul disgraces,
Past grace, past goodness, void of fear or shame,
Our good Heavens God, thus falsely to defame,
Far worse than Julian, that Apostata,
Or Ecebolius, worse than these, I say,
For Julian did (at last) confess and cry,
Thou Galilaean have the victory.
And the other with remorse confessed his fault,
Crying-out, O tread on me unsavoury-salt.
But this remorslesse, graceless, godless brood,
Of ramish-Romists, with most impious mood,
Are not ashamed (like most unsavoury-salt)
Not only, not to grieve for this great fault,
But most impenitent, avouch and joy,
Their hellish-plot, their country to destroy.
To this unpattern'd impudence, I may
The traitor Tressams perjury display;
As most apparent marks to testify
This Beast of Babell and her blasphemy.
And let no Romish- Rabsheca be moved,
And say it is false; for both were justly proved.
This Tressam to the Council had confessed, Tressams perjury.

That he and Garnet had their minds expressed,
And oftentimes had serious conference
About this treason and intelligence
Of that invasion by the King of Spain,
Which greedily they gapd-for, but in vain.
This also, being proved to Garnets face,
Yet Tressam, ere he died (quite void of grace)
Did on his souls-salvation take his oath,
Vilely recant, falsely forswear them-both;
And said, that sixteen years, at least were past,
Since he did see or talk-with Garnet last.
O what a wretched-state live these men in,
Who hold it but a trivial, veniall-sin,
To wrest and jest with oaths and Sacraments,
And have indulgence for such damned attempts!
But, desperate Judas-like Tressam did dye,
Murdering himself in prison wickedly.
O who, so Stoick-like, so senseless Stock
Cannot be moved to see these wretches mock,
And gull their souls with Romish incantation!
Nay, who are so bewitch (past admiration)
With the bedawb'd face of that rotten-Whore
In The Revelations spoken of long before.
But, to omit digression and proceed,
And briefly to relate each scelerous deed
Which did and should succeed that fatall-houre,
Let Us here leave Fauks fast locked in Londons towr,
(A lodging fit for such a traitorous guest)
Where now he might take time, without molest,
His corrupt-conscience seriously to sift,
To cry for grace, to Christ his thoughts to lift.
Until the day, of execution due
To him, and those of his accursed crew,
Was brought about in its appointed time
To pay the wages of his cursed crime.
In which discourse each godly-wise shall see
By truth and reason all confirmed to be.
First, here behold there more than marble faces
T'invert the odium, and the foul disgraces
Of this black-deed, had it so taken effect,
On Innocents, who did it least suspect.
There lived at that time in Northampton-shier,
A worthy Gentleman, allied near
To Robert Keys, whose Sister Keys did wed,
Whereby acquaintance was between them bred,
This pious Gentleman well known at Court,
And in his Country of most rare report,
For Grace and Goodness and true Piety,
Had a swift running- Nag, and Keys must be
The man must borrow it for some choice use,
A staulking-horse, indeed, to this abuse.
This Horse thus borrowed (as the plot was laid)
Must unto London forthwith be convay'd,
And there to stay till Fauks had given the blow,
Which should have wrought his countries bleeding woe.
Which given, the horse was ordered to attend
Fauks in St. Georges-field away to wend,
And make escape by speedy flight from thence.
They likewise had, with hellish impudence,
Contrived about that time to have murdered
This pious Gentleman at night in his bed,
And's murdered Corpse to have conveyed away
To London, whereabout his horse did stay.
And in this interim, even Fauks himself
That furious firebrand, Alecto's elf,
Should also have by Villains murdered been,
And be so hackt that it should not be seen
Or known what one he was; thus, it was dec^reed,
To pay him home with his deserved meed.
He hopd for honor they would pay't with horror,
His dignity should be his death and dolor,
He gap't for gold, they would it turn to gall,
Now when he hoped to rise he down should fall.
Thus Fauks so mangled, as not to be known,
A rumor suddenly must forth be blown,
That Puritans were authors of the fact,
And more to clear their project and compact,
And make the world beleeve't was so indeed
There Mr. Pickering lay in Fauks his stead,
Who was the kindler of that furious flame,
And as prime Author must bear all the blame.
(The traitor Fauks his corpse being suddenly
Convayd away that none could him descry.)
There also M. Pickerings horse did stay,
Ready with speed to hasten him away;
But heavens all-seeing-eye, revengefull hand,
His hoped escape did timely countermand,
And stirred up some in odious detestation
Of that so foul sulphurous perpetration,
To fall upon him, and with wrath most due
Him in that manner there to hack and hew,
To clear all which, hard by him smeard in blood,
His wel-known horse bridled and sadled stood.
On which suspicion, strengthened in that sort
Straight must break forth (I say) that false report
That Puritans were authors of this ill,
And thereupon a Massacre must fill
The kingdom with the blood of righteous men,
All that were pious known, and godly, then,
By Romish rash and wrongful accusations
Must have bin forced to bloody devastations.
Hence, hence, I say, had rufully bin raised
Clamours of men, outcries of hearts amazed,
Death threatening tortures in all parts to rear,
On all that godly, gracious Christians were.
And was not this a craft raked out of Hell
By divellish furies? falsely to repel
From guilty on the guiltless, all their blame,
And then like Devils incarnate void of shame,
With perjured stony-hearts and brazen faces
Upon Gods Saints to dash their own disgraces.
He that the nimble drops can number all,
Which from the Pleiades and moist Orion fall,
Or Bees of thousand swarms which suck May-flowers,
Might (then) have told poor Britans brinish shewers,
Might, the^, have nu^bred Engla^ds heart-fetcht-groa^s
Might, then, have counted all her matchles moans.
O English Protestants, why stand you still,
As if afraid to curb Romes cursed will?
Why seem ye (yet) to hault twixt two opinions,
Pretending truth, fostring these Romish Minions?
O cast out these accursed Canaanites,
These subtle foxes, bloody Jesuits,
Which lie but lurking for a watched prey,
Whom naught can satiate but your dire decay!
Impunity does naught but cause them 'bide
Sharp thorns to our eyes and goads unto our side.
But now to pass to that which does remain,
Farther to view this traitorous hateful train,
Here, then what Satan's pseud-Apostles did,
Shall be declared after all was unhid.
And, here you must observe and notice take
That Percy, Catesby, all things sure to make,
'Bout Westminster and Lambeth stayed still, Percy and Catesby staid about
Westminster to see the issue.

The issue to observe or good or ill,
Sure news thereof unto their mates to carry,
Who, for their coming did 'bout Dunchurch tarry.
This impious Dog-couple of traitors base;
These bold copartners in shames deep disgrace,
Perceiving that by Heavens most blessed decree,
Their treason was made known, make haste to flee,
Their prey (now) lost, they both like Bears, in chase
Finding themselves (now) in a desperate case,
Their hearts began to ache and quake with fear,
Like Dogs, indeed, they grin, rage, sweat and swear
To horse they haste and swiftly post away
To Dunchurch, Dunchurch heath.
where (I say) their mates did stay.
Which place they had their rendevous assigned,
Their after-game to play (there) to their mind.
There, falsely, did Sr. Everard Digby fain
His holy-hunt, Venatio Catholica A holy Hunt.
a fat-buck to be slain.
A hunt, indeed, like that of Nimrod proud,
Their farther mischiefs cunningly to shroud,
A holy-hunt for hell hounds only fit,
To hunt Christ's lambs into Romes wolvish-pit.
And, as in word, so to avoid suspicion,
Of all things, for a hunt, they made provision.
Their toils and nets they place, with joyful cheer,
Their hounds with yelping noise to chase the deer, A description of their
pretended hunt.

The sturdy stag, the tripping, skipping hare,
Their horns they blow, which pierce the ecchoing air,
Making their choice of a large champion-ground,
A fitter for their turn could not be found,
With shrubs and bushes set commodiously,
And here and there, oaks planted, broad and high,
Convenient places horse-carriers to see,
And nothing wanting that desired could be;
Yea, 'twas a plain so spacious, that they might,
An army place in battle-ray to fight.
In this great heath proud Digby and his train
With traitorous Tressam rod about a main,
And after them a mighty thrust and throng
Of Catholics and others past along,
Inhabiting the villages about,
Admiring much the cause of that huge rout.
Then forthwith, all the gallants and best choice
Of Gentlemen and Youth, with hollowing-voice,
Do ride and run, and to this sport allure
All that were fit that pleasing sport to endure;
And most of all the villages, thereby,
Do thither flock, together hastily.
The woods about with snares and hayes they fill,
Some blow their bugle-horns both loud and shrill,
Some, with their swords cut boughs, some, nets do lay,
Yea, all prepare them to their sport and play,
And from their hounds the collers do unty,
Who to their game do run most eagerly.
At whose loud opening and huge yelping-noise,
The Deer, now, suddenly, to all their joys,
Out of the thickets, amongst them nimbly rushes,
Which, fearfully, lay hid among the bushes,
And from them all does swiftly run and scud,
Whom Men and Dogs pursue, as they were wood.
But in the midst of this their hasty pace,
At heels of one of that most traitorous race, A pretty note by the way of a
Country-mans suspicion of these hunters.

An honest-Country-man, by chance did keep,
And, as he leaped ore a ditch most deep,
A clattring armor perfectly did hear,
Which under's clothes that traitor, then, did wear;
And that which in him more suspicion bred,
The wind, as then, blew much and blustered,
And, up and down his coat (often) hovered, so,
That, he an harness, clear, might see and know.
The sight whereof amazed him, wondrously,
And, thus, he whisp'red to one standing by.
Good neighbor tell me what you think of this,
I know not, but me thinks it is much amiss,
That in these parts, so great a company,
Are thus assembled and yet unknown, why.
God grant that all be well. This hunt, I fear,
Is not against Foxes (only) Hares and Deer;
No, no, I fear, they gape for greater things,
These subtle Serpents (doubtless) hide their stings.
Themselves being fiercest wolvs, though sheep-like clad,
This hunt, I fear, is not for bruit-beasts had,
Worse mischief (surely) in their bosom lies,
Not Beasts to kill, but men's lives to surprise.
Lord keep the King and royal Progeny
From being caught and trapt in treachery
By these audacious subtill-hunters snare,
Who, to these ends, no cost nor labor spare.
My mind presageth some great villainy,
But, heaven, I pray, my fear may falsify.
Yet, otherwise, why should they armor wear?
Under their clothes? Besides all of them are
Vassals to the Pope of Rome, who (often) did spit
With rancour sore, fetched from th'infernall-pit)
His envious poison against ELIZABETH,
Whose fame, as in her life, lives after death.
They are (I say) the friends and fautours all
Of the great Beast, that strumpets champions tall,
Who sends her bellowing-bulswith ba^ning stings,
Realms to dispose, to depose lawful Kings,
Which, she composeth of false couched treason,
Beyond the bounds of piety and reason.
Doubtless, this most seditious generation,
Disloyal brood, thirsting for innovation.
Both ever was, and so continue still,
The cunning craft-masters of fraud and ill,
The foes to our felicity and peace;
But here is more need of swords than words. I Will cease,
I Will for my self provide the best I may;
And from this dangerous crew will haste away;
And with these words his staff on's neck he threw,
And without answer, thence, himself withdrew.
By chance, Another suspicion.
also, as they, thus hunting were,
A friend of traitorous Winter, this did fear,
And therefore he thus unto Winter said,
I prithee tell me ( Winter) what has made
This great assembly? what may be the reason
Of all this-concourse, at this unfit season?
What wind has blown our Catholics together,
I prithee tell me wherefore come they hither?
To whom, thus, Winter, in his ear repli'de,
Deer Sr. the truth from you I will not hide,
This hunt of beasts is but a thing pretended,
We have a holy-hunt forthwith intended. Venamur religionem

We hope to hunt the wolves heretical
From our too-long enjoyed possessions all.
And in these few hours this will be effected,
Then let not these my speeches be rejected,
But take advice, remember what say,
Hold on our side, it is the wisest way.
But, now the night draws-on, our sport must end,
And with those words he parted from his friend.
The hunts-men, then, their horns aloud did blow,
Both hounds and hunters to their homes do go,
Making their retrograde, home they repair,
And by the way their passed sports declare.
When, being housed, their host had set on board,
Such viands as the time would best afford.
Great fires were made themselves to warm and heat,
Their tables spread with linen cloths most neat,
A Parlour fair, to sup in ready dressed,
And gold and silver goblets of the best.
Then Digby, who was chiefest of them all,
Puts-off his arms, Sr. Ever. Digby.
and for his gown does call,
Wherein he walks and staulks with princely gate,
Amidst his cursed-consorts, in great state,
Prescribes them statutes, asks, replies again,
His breast no triviall-trifles does contain.
His heart and head negotiate great affairs,
He unto each his place of honor shares.
So insolent and confident is he,
That all things shall, to them, most prosperous be,
That he even loades his mates with dignity,
This done, to supper they go instantly,
Where was no want of mirth and dainty cheer,
As in their quaft-carouses did appear,
In drinking healths and wishing good success,
To their companions whom with eagerness
From London they expected, where they staid,
Thinking each hour was ten, till they were made
Partakers of their tidings. But, meanwhile,
With mirth and music, they, the time beguile.
But, as they sat, as'twere ore-whelm'd in pleasure,
Glutting themselves with dainties in deep measure,
In jesting-scoffs and flouts taking delight,
Against those whom they term pure in scorn and spite,
On whom they breaking jests in high disdain,
Would hoote and hollow, laughing-out amain.
As, thus, I say, they jeering, jesting, sat,
Drowned in delight, glutted with merry-chat,
News was brought in that Percy and Catesby
Were at the door; Catesby and Percy came to the traitors with the news of the
discovery of their treason.
to whom most earnestly,
They, starting-up, made haste to meet, salute,
Hoping the message to their mind did suit.
Whom Digby, first, with speedy pace did meet,
And 'bout their middle does them kindly greet,
Often demanding, what good news, they brought,
Who with dejected face, abjected thought,
As brief, as full of grief, did thus reply,
All is stark-nought. Which dampt them instantly.
Strange alteration, like to Ghosts they stand,
As if not able to stir foot or hand, The traitors are amazed.

Such numbnesse, dumbness seemed in them to be,
A chilling-cold all-ore them you might see,
Their bodies quake, their bones began to tremble,
Their face could not their foul disgrace dissemble,
Their countenance cast-down, they stare and gaze,
Their fainting-hearts half-dead at that amaze.
And thus, o thus, the Lord converts the joy
Of unjust men, into most sharp annoy,
Their pleasure into pain and penury;
All (thus) quite dashed, in twinkling of an eye:
A while they flourish like a pleasant-bay,
But suddenly, they fade, like withered-hay.
Percy, at length, all fear does from him cast,
And seeing how his friends stood all aghast,
Thus, dissolutely, resolute, began
To utter words befitting such a man.
Take courage (friends) do not all hope neglect, Percies oration.

The first-attempts do seldom take effect,
Had it bin (thus) with Caesar in the field,
Pompey had victour bin, made Caesar yield,
(When they at Thessalie the battle fought)
And Caesar had bin slain, past fear or doubt,
And with his life, his Empire he had lost,
Each enterprise (at first) great pains does cost.
Yea, commonly great obstacles with-stand
The noblest actions that we take in hand.
Life is resembled to a chance at Dice,
Where (often) more's wone at once, than lost at thrice.
Though for the time, the gamester suffers loss;
At last much coin, into his purse he will toss.
Believe me (noble Sirs) Virtue best shines
In troublesome and intricate designs;
The time requires bold-spirits; plasters strong
Must cure the sore which cowardice did wrong.
Fortune's a friend to the courageous wight,
Dastardly fear declares a pesant right.
What? are we not all of us Catholics?
Does not our High Priest curse those Heretics,
And pray for us? is not our cause most right,
Religious, just? valiantly, then, let us fight.
This Pluto's Orator scarce made an end,
When all to arms themselves do fiercely bend;
Then forthwith, They put themselves into open rebellion.
Catesby and his traitorous mates
Consult together. Catesby sends Bates
To Garnet with a letter, which should show
What ill-successe did on their projects flow.
Garnet at Coughton was in Warwickshire,
And all Recusants rendevous was there;
And in that letter Catesby him desired
(For so their ominous-estate required)
With all convenient expedition,
To stir-up Wales into rebellion,
And els-where, as he could all Papists stout
To stimulate and move to fight it out.
Now Garnet (who with Greenwell was that time)
Seeing, Garnets opinion.
they Jesuits were deep in the crime,
And fully certifi'd that all was known,
Began their ill-successe much to bemoan,
And seemed to prophecy their Sects decay;
O that we (once) could see that happy day! Greenwels resolution

But hot-spur'd Greenwell, being more resolute,
More firy-spirited and dissolute,
Boldly resolved (thence) away to post,
To raise rebellion all about that coast;
And instigates Recusants unto arms,
With all his utmost Jesuitick-charms.
Then at the house of Abbington, he meets
With Hall a Jesuit, Hall a Jesuit.
and him kindly greets.
And after greetings, does him then advise
To work as many as he could to rise.
But Hall (as in a dump) a while did stay,
Much doubting what therein to do or say.
To whom so doubting Greenwell, thus, began,
Why how now (brother Hall) what frights thee man?
The difference, twixt a phlegmatic faint heart,
I plainly understand (such as thou art)
And me, Horrible impudence in holy Jesuits.
who am more choleric and hot,
Why* man it moves not; fears not me a jot.
And will thou (now) a milk-sop dastard be?
And hide thy head, when there is most need of thee?
Fie, fie for shame, take heart, be not afraid,
And help me stir-up friends our foes t'invade,
With martiall-might these heretics to slay,
Nor must we now, to pause, the time delay.
And, thus, away he flies, like northern-winde,
And, as he past, he published with false mind,
A monstrous-lye through every town and city, A monstrous lie.

That Catholics that night without all pity,
By Protestants should all have murdered bin,
Hoping hereby rebellion to begin;
Wishing them all take heed not to prolong
To save themselves, but make resistance strong,
If they desired in saf'ty to abide,
And for their wives and children to provide,
And if they would their lives and lands possess,
And free themselves from imminent distress.
Then Hall the Jesuit, meeting (after this)
With Littleton, who finding all amiss,
Did urge the Priest therewith exceeding much,
Told him it did his conscience nearly touch,
And that he thought the Lord was much offended
With such a course as so much blood intended.
But Hall, as whiteliver'd, as late, he seemed,
As harmless holy-lambes as they are esteeem'd,
As simple Doves as Jesuits would appear,
Now, doffs the mask which he (before) did wear.
The violent and virulent hearts-gall,
He, now, declares even of the Jesuits all.
For why? instead of meek acknowledgement
Of true contrition, heart right-penitent,
Of late dissembled grief for this foul fault,
When Greenwell him to stir-up rebels wrought.
He divellishly began to justify
Their most atrocious, Hall the Priest his divellish change and judgment on the
fact
vicious villainy.
And thus to Littletons great doubt repli'de,
Good Sir, you shoot your censure very wide.
And much transgress against charities right laws,
If by the ill- success you judge a cause.
For why? th'eleven tribes, which two battles bent
Against Benjamin, at Gods commandment,
In both the conflicts those tribes had the worst,
Shall we (therefore) account their cause accursed?
So, when as Lewis, King of France did fight
Against the Turks, was by them put to flight,
And, he himself (then) of the plague did dye.
The Christians, eke, defending valiantly
Their town of Rhods, against Pagans, lost the same;
Must we the cause (then) by the event (here) blame?
No, good Sir, no; our cause was just and right,
How ere the event has proved amiss in sight.
What better, greater cause to spend our bloods,
Than for Religion to spend life and goods?
Thus, thus, this bloody Jehuite did persuade
That Papist, who was heerwith well apaid.
Doubtless, great Lucifer could never find,
More expert instruments to please his mind,
Among his hellish-hags, more flinty-hearts,
To act his most infernal tragick-parts;
Than these inhumane Jesuits, Satan's sect,
These most pernicious props, Hamon the Jesuit gives the traitors absolutio^.
which Rome protect.
To Robert Winters house the rebels came,
Where, that rank Jesuit of no little fame,
Old faithless father Haman did reside,
Whose heart with Romish zeal being fired and fried,
When he, together did the traitors see,
He gave them all his absolution free;
Even, then, when they were in rebellion hot,
And after the discovery of the plot.
This holy father of that hell-spawn'd Sect,
Told them their High Priest highly did respect
Their zeal and would them Saints and Martyrs make, Romish Martyrs.

Therefore he bad them all bold courage take.
These pious words Ignatians-imp did utter,
And, showed them the Popes When the Steed is stolen, shut the Stable door.
pardon sealed with butter.
Hell being, thus, broke-loose, though but a while,
Se^ds-forth more hell-hou^ds, blood-hou^ds fierce and vile.
Grant, whose foul hopes, Heaven also foolifi'd,
To whom, none (yet) had these things certifi'd,
(For why? he kept his house and stirred not out,
Till he supposed all (now) past fear or doubt,
But thinking now the plot was fully ended,
And that good-hap their hopes had well befriended)
Now like a Tygre-fierce abroad does fling,
Armed all-over with foul-mischiefs sting.
But, He which makes his reckoning and his prize,
Without his host, must make his reckoning twice.
And as the 40. Jews with divellish will,
Swore, in an ambush, they St. Paul would kill:
So Grant what he had sworn-to, Grants attempt.
long before,
Now, hopes to execute, with rancour sore.
And with his rabble of Recusants stout,
Perfidious Papists, now, he issueth-out.
And thus, by night, to Warwick-castle came,
Where diverse Nobles of great note and name,
In time of peace, wars danger to prevent
Fed and bred-up great horses for content.
Those Grant did steal and to his camp convay,
Their owners to confront; assault and slay.
This most audacious fact, this strange ambition,
This robbery-bold, quickly, bred much suspicion,
In Sr. Fulk Grevill, the elder, who was then,
Lieutenant of that Shire: Sr. Fulke Grevill.
And bands of men
Caused him like a faithful worthy Knight
To muster-up in readiness for fight;
And with all speed, to fortify those parts,
And unto his assistance, wins the hearts
Of all the chiefest Gentlemen there dwelling,
Fearing (as 'twas indeed) some strange-rebelling;
And wise directions he sent up and down,
Into each village, place and neighbouring-town.
So that as up and down the traitors went, A Smith smites Winter.

A Smith to Winter such a sound-blow lent,
As had not he bin rescued, by the rout,
He then had bin laid-hold-on, past all doubt.
But, at that time, the townsmen sixteen took,
The rest, in haste their captived mates forsook.
Now, as they fled (I mean, Grant and his mates)
At length, he there himself associates
With Catesby, Percy, and with all the rest,
To whom then Catesby their estate expressed,
Told Grant their enterprise was all descri'd,
And that they must all hazards now abide.
Thus as they altogether troop'd in haste,
Sr. Richard Verney from his confines chased
These roaming-rebels, S Richard Verney.
who to Worster-shire,
Betook themselves, as full of guilt as fear;
Yet hoping (still) their numbers to augment,
But, our good God their hopes did still prevent.
Meanwhile that they thus roam'd tumultuously, The Lord Harringto^.

The honored Lord Harrington thereby,
Who to his fame and praise, in princely state,
With loyalty and love did educate
The eldest Daughter of our Sovereign King,
The Lady Elizabeth that princely thing.
Whose fear and fright him greatly pitied,
Hearing how things were much disordered.
He (therefore) careful of his royall-gemm,
This princely- branch, sprung from a Regall-stemm,
Whom he more nearly, dearly tendered,
Than his own-life; to him assembled
And called about him all his faithful friends,
Whom all his gates to lock he forthwith sends,
And with a double-watch he strongly pent
(All traitorous intentions to prevent)
And fortified his house against ingruent fear:
And yet his heart doubted her safety there,
For in his private-house he thought not good
Her long to keep, and thus in doubt he stood.
But taking counsel, he most prudently,
Resolved with all true fidelity
To Coventry, the Princess to convay,
Which from his house was distant no great way. The city of Coventry.

Whose dutious Citizens good government
Had made that city famous, eminent,
Being also fenc't with walls and bulwarks strong,
Thither this Peer the Princess led along.
Whose Citizens with joy assembled are
With joint consent themselves all to prepare,
This princely-Lady, there to entertain,
In glist'ring arms her safety to maintain.
The City Major and all his brethren grave,
Decking themselves in gowns and garments brave,
With kindest salutations did her meet,
And with most cordial wellcomes did her greet,
And finding fear oppressed her tender mind,
All grief they banished, The Citizens comfort the Lady.
with these words most kind;
Be comforted (sweet Princess) we you pray,
Let all sad thoughts and fears be cast away.
For we with all our Citizens are pressed,
In your defense to show and manifest
Our love and loyalty, to do you good,
To spend our strength, our state, yea dearest blood,
Our gold, our goods, our love and labors all,
Yea, whatsoere is ours, you yours may call;
We naught will spare (sweet Princess) you to pleasure,
Even to the utmost of our lives and treasure.
These words the tender Ladies heart rejoice,
Whom, to the City they, with cheerful voice,
Conduct unto a fair house well prepared,
Befitting her estate and high regard,
Most sumptuously set-out and richly dight,
Where a strong guard was kept both day and night,
And watch and ward the City round about,
And careful search who-ere went in or out.
Now, all this while that band of bandogs rage,
Sweating, entreating aid and equipage,
For their affairs, but nothing did take place,
As they did rove and rave, like Bears in chase;
All was in vain, for none how bad soever,
Would with them join, but from them part and sever,
Nay, scarce, in one of all their own profession,
Could all their plaints procure the least impression.
Such was the hatred of their hellish deed,
Such love of quietness sweet peace did breed!
And when they had got all they could persuade,
Some fourescore-persons their most number made.
Yea, when they had don all they could; threat, pray,
Even their own-servants gladly shrunk away,
Fearful of ill-successe and conscience-prick,
Knowing against thorns it was in vain to kick.
But these out-ragious Romists did conceit
And fondly dream, in this their furious heat,
That they were of small snow-bals nature, right,
Which rolled to and fro, grow to great hight,
And hugely are increast; these traitors, so,
Thought rebels would like rivers to them flow;
And sure supposed that what they had begun,
In this one-part of England would be done
By all the Catholics in other parts,
And spur them on, with like rebellious hearts,
To symbolize with them and arms to take,
To join their might and power, strong head to make,
Which, also, though their lying-Jesuites sought,
Yet, heaven, their helish hopes did bring to naught.
Wherefore, like vagrants, straggling to and fro,
Through all those parts they hopelesly did go,
Of comfort, aid or counsel, quite bereft,
And, as they past, the people never left
To prosecute with bitter execrations,
The divellish agents of such conjurations.
These miserable miscreants (then) did enter
Into a mighty wood; and thence did venture
To Holbeach, where, with desperate mood they came
Into the house of Littleton by name.
A spacious-house and able to contain
These Romish rebels and their traitorous train. Littletons house is their
Sconce.

Here, then they pitched their most nefarious tent,
Drowned in despair, drencht in disparagement.
Which whiles they were here lodged, as in their ca^p,
Struck to their hearts much madness, wrath and damp.
Like angry Bears who when their whelps are slain,
Run up and down, ramp, rage and roar amain.
The gates and doors, some lock-up and fast bar,
Some whet their swords and fit themselves for war.
Some do their Pieces charge with powder and shot,
Others their armor scour from stain or spot,
Their vain and hair-braind-labour was but lost,
And must them all their dearest heart-blood cost. Sir Rich. Walsh besieges
them.

For now Sr. Richard Walsh the high-Shrive came,
Besieged the house with soldiers, did proclaim
Favor to those that yielded, stood not out,
But utmost wrath to th'obstinate and stout,
Fairly entreats them, then, not to resist,
But peaceably from farther harm desist,
To yield unto the mercy of their Prince,
Or else he must their stubborn hearts evince.
The Sumner in his masters name, thus, said.
But they like madd-men, him this answer made,
Go tell thy Master we do scorn his threats,
And hold as empty-ayre his wea^ entreats.
If he by dint of sword will force us yield,
He must bring greater forces to the field.
Wish him (therefore) break-off his female-fight,
With silly-syllables our hearts to fright,
That he must not contend with us in words;
We'll fight it out and trust unto our swords.
Thus when this valiant Gentleman did see
Him and his counsel scorned, to arms flies he.
Whiles things, thus, past, a most strange accident,
A sore forerunner of due punishment,
A tang and touch to meet their treason right
Happened within; which did the traitors fright.
Namely, A fore-running judgment.
that by a fire of wood did lie
A bagg of Gun-pouder to be made dry,
Not far from which, nearer the fire of wood
A tray of powder (there) uncovered stood: A tray of powder set on fire.

Into which tray a crackling spark did glide,
And, instantly, the tray and bagg beside
It fired, insomuch that furiously,
It with fierce flames and smoke flew up on high, In quo peccavimus, in eodem
plectimur.

And with resistlesse rage (to amaze and wonder)
The houses roof it reft and cleft asunder,
And on the face of traitorous Catesby came,
To his and all those Traitors stinging shame.
Grants face it scorcht, and Rookwoods face also,
Did not in this great judgment untoucht go,
But like the foul stigmatick- slaves most base
Of Dionysius branded in their face,
They marked were, their hearts and sense seemed dead,
Their souls seemed in their bodies buried,
All stood astonished, pale-faced, faint, affright,
Their hair did stare with horror, Winters dream.
bolt up right.
Yea, Robert Winter, but the day before,
This fearful chance (to make his horror more)
Dreamt, that he Churches saw, and as it were,
Steeples to stand awry, and with much fear,
That in those Churches he strange faces saw;
This sad event, these to his thoughts did draw,
And caused him, that, his dream to mind to call,
And thereof, thus, made him resolve withal,
That sure those faces which did there appear,
Were right like these that now before him were;
And did unto him rightly show the frame,
And shapes of these whom thus the pouder-flame
Had scorcht and burnt. This him amazed much,
And did his traitorous heart most deeply touch.
And, then, with guilty-consciences they eye,
Their Epidemick purposed treachery,
Confessing Christ to be th'avenger just,
Who turns the glory of the proud to dust.
Then, they, their Countries causlesse woe do mind,
The fires they should have kindled most unkind.
Yea, then they seem to see the bloodshed great,
Which to their harmless brethren they did threat.
Which on the ground like rivers should have run, Seeming remorse in the
traitors.

And on their bended-knees, they (now) begun,
To wring their hands with tears their faults confessing
Beating their breasts, their groans, their griefs expressing,
And now, too-late they do lament their folly,
Acknowledging the Lord to be most holy,
And this great judgment on them to be just,
Cursing the time they did such counsel trust.
Read, o ye Atheists, read and mark this well,
Who are persuaded there is no heaven nor hell;
Yea, read, o ye blind Romish Jebusites,
Who think the Lord sees not your jugling-slights,
Who think God marks not nor regards your deeds,
Or else, who count hels horror, crackling reeds.
Saying, with Davids-fool, God sees us not,
The Almighty slumbers or has us forgot.
O, if ye have not brows more hard than brass,
Or if one spark of grace may from you pass,
Then, think, nay be assured the Lord does fight
For his afflicted flock, their wrongs to right.
Yea, know that Gods invincible strong arm,
The righteons and religious saves from harm.
And that he (sure) can catch at unawares,
Malicious proud men in their nets and snares.
And pouder-plotters burn in such like flame,
As they for others impiously did frame.
And like Perillus, Perillus.
that rare engin-maker,
Of others peril they are prime-partaker.
O let this (therefore) tell all traitors hearts,
That heaven will (surely) pay them their deserts.
But, to proceed. The hooded hypocrite,
A while may cousen and cog and cheat men's sight,
But long it shall not last, heaven will detrude
Their impious vizards, wherewith they delude
The eyes of mortal men, and this abuse
The Lord will to their sorrow (soon) reduce.
For presently, their temporizing tears
Were dried up, no shame in them appears.
All former seeming sorrows quite forsaken,
And their new virtue proves old-vice mistaken.
A sudden madness did all grace push-out,
Opening the gates they armed all rush-out,
And like mad-dogs or Gaderens divellish hogs, The traitors grow desperate.

Despairing with their conscience heavy-clogs,
They headlong run among their enemies,
Smiting on all-sides in most desperate wise.
Vowing and swearing, since, such was their fate,
To sell their hateful blood at a dear rate.
The valiant high-Shrieve, seeing 'twas in vain,
(As was declared) by love them to constrain,
To due submission; with true martial heat,
Resolves them thereunto with blows to beat. They now fight pell mell Rookwood
and Winter are shot, and both the Wrights are slain.

Stoutly they fight on both sides; these for fame,
The others fight with desperate fear and shame,
Then Thomas Winter vaunting in the Court,
And traitorous Rookwood one of this consort,
The one shot in's shoulder, lost the use of's arm,
The Other with shot had also no small harm.
Then, both the Wrights with halberts (there) were slain,
Which, much discouraged their perfidious train.
With cursed Catesby, Catesby, Percy and Winter fight all three together.
Percy pestilent
Does join himself, and to them Winter went.
And, thus, this knot of knaves fought back to back,
And Winter at their sides does hold them tack,
Placing themselves in manner like a wedge,
And, thus, they boldly fought with eager edge.
The traitors smite about with furious blows,
These to defend, Simile.
those to offend their foes.
And like the fight of Bulls (as Stories say)
By sturdy Dogs assaulted on the way,
And sorely set upon; they, tail to tail,
With their strong horns the furious dogs assail:
But, as Alcides, though most stout and strong,
Or Theseus brave could not continue long
Against many foes, maugre their courage bold,
No more could these their enemies long hold.
For at them, presently, a piece was shot,
Whose bullet both those traitors deadly smot. Percy and Catesby are slain.

Through Percies and through Catesbies cursed heart
The bullet pierced to their deadly smart;
When with a deep life-yeelding hollow groan,
Unable to subsist, they both fell prone
Upon the Earth, struggling with pangs of death,
And quickly gasp'd their last accursed breath.
And like two mighty Oaks whose branches high
Did seem (just now) to touch the lofty-sky, Simile.

But by a rapid whirlwind in the air
Are blown and over-thrown; whose branches are
Laid low upon the ground, the boughs made meat
For cattle in the field to brouse and eat.
Thus, to those graceless Champions of the Pope
(Who had already) swallowed up in hope,
Englands fair Realm and seat-Imperiall,
It did directly happen, justly fall.
Who thus, I say, in hellish fond conceit
Had clim'd the top of high promotions seat,
But see (I say) their huge Pyramides
Of hateful pride (for so it heaven did please)
With shame was shattered into pieces small,
Their flesh made food for birds and worms that crawl.
But, Rookwood, Winter, Grant, alive were taken,
And all the rest of comfort (soon) forsaken. The traitors apprehended.

Here Robert Winter having stoutly fought,
But, now, unable, longer to hold-out,
His Cateline and hot Cethegus slain,
By his fierce foes, alive, was quickly taken.
But with a Pike in's belly (first) received
A dangerous wound, Winter wounded in the belly.
yet, not of life bereaved.
Now, all the rest being taken and disarmed,
(By prick of conscience, than deaths fear more harmd)
Were thus subjected unto justice stroke,
Their fainting hearts confounded, wounded, broke.
And as the custom is, with hempen bands
They were fast bound, behind their backs their hands.
And so to London, The traitors are conveyed to London.
fast on hors-back tide,
They were convayd: whom people as they 'spide,
Did all the way they went, still flock to meet,
And them with execrable curses greet.
And so to London being brought, at last,
In pris'n with fetters they were locked fast.
And not long after was the 'pointed day
For their arraignment. When in grave array,
Nobles and Judges, Their arraignment.
as the cause required,
Unto their Judgment came; where with admired
And learned eloquence, deliberately,
The Kings Attorney (then) did signify
And recapitulate from first to last
Each most material action which had past.
And found them guilty of that damned intention,
Crossed (thus) in the act, by heavens, alone, prevention.
The Judges (then pronounced their sentence due;
And, on the traitors all in open view,
Was execution done in diverse places,
To the most just confusion of their faces.
On the upper-house of Parliament, most high,
(A just reward of horrid treachery)
Catesbies and Percies heads were fixed fast, Catesbies and Percies heads are
set on the Parliament house.

(To use the Prophets words) like a ship-mast,
That passers-by might to each other tell,
The just deserved issue that befell
Unto those roving, robbing Pirates vile,
Who hoped to rife by treason, theft and guile;
Who by ambitious and pernicious ways,
The golden-fleece did hope to them to raise,
Not by stout Jasons valor and brave grace,
But by Medaea's sorceries most base,
They gaped (I say) a golden-fleece to gain,
A glorious-realm to swallow; but in vain.
Wasps (thus) we see, make combs as well as Bees,
But, for sweet honey, work-out pouder-lees.
Their hearts contained naught but sulphurious wind,
And foul effects of a most treacherous mind.
PErfidious Fauks, whose hopes were lately high
By Treason to be raised to Dignity;
By Justice, finds Treason retaliated,
His Head upon a Pole high elevated:
That All may see Gods vengeance prosecuting,
The proudest Traitors, treason executing.


The wanderfull deliverance -- 1605
OUr great Jehovah having brought to light
This deep- Design full fraught with Romish-spight;
The fame thereof through all the Realm being blazed,
The Peoples hands and hearts to Heaven are raised:
They prayers and praises send to Isreal's King,
They bounteous-Bonfires make, their Bells they ring:
Tryumphing in their Streets with fireworks rare,
Rockets, Fire-wheeles, Fire-drakes flying in the Air,
Fierce-mounting Fire-bals blazing in the Skies,
Quick cracking Squibs to please beholders eyes:
And, All heart-cheering signs of Joy express,
Being, thus, redeemed from Death and dire distress.


THen see you pole-shorn Papists what is the end
Which al your traitorous projects does attend.
See you Achitophels, you Jesuits all,
What prize does to your Absolons befall. Malum confilium consultori pessimum.

Bad counsel, still, to Authors fals-out worst,
An impious-project gains an end-accurst.
For, these, who, like great Consuls would have reigned,
As false conspirators were, Empedocles.
now, arraigned.
And like as fond Empedocles did cast
Himself int' Aetna's fire, hoping to have past
Unspide of any in the furious flame,
And so beheld a god with endless fame:
But, when the flame his slippers did retort,
His hair-braind-folly was the peoples sport:
So, these, which hoped, which fondly hoped to have got
Saints names (at least) by this their Aetnean plot,
God (who in mercy did their mischief see,
And such strange folly in their hearts to be)
The slippers of discovery did cause
To foolifie their deifide applause.
And by this blessed Catastrophe, to call
(Instead of that usurped name they all
Hop'd-for, to wit, Romes meritorious-Martyrs)
And justly term them, most notorious traitors.
And cursed be they which call such evil good,
Accursed Romes doctrins grounded (thus) on blood.
Most deadly-sicke was Catesby and his train,
Of Achabs sickness, Achabs.
none could ease his pain,
His stomach was with Naboths ground so cloyed;
Till bloody Jesabell her skill employed
To give him physic with poor Naboths blood.
But these, vile Achabs case far worser stood,
For; why? although their greedy appetite
Old Achabs did exceed, with gaping spite,
And that this upstart Jesabell of Rome
Did us to death with greater mischief doom;
Yet, since they could not kill nor yet possess,
They were in far more desperate wretchedness,
In silence, here, I cannot pretermit,
How that these traitors past all grace or wit, Note this remarkable
observation.

In conscience touched did at their death profess,
That, what they did, was for Romes holiness;
That, for advancement of the Cath'lick-cause,
They, thus, had plunged themselves into hels jaws.
And that they had for their more firm direction,
The precepts of Romes faith and full protection,
The Zeal whereof did strongly them incite
To execute what-ere, with all their might:
Which precepts are, by force, fraud or deceit,
To cog, collogue, to threat, entreat and cheat,
By just or unjust means, by bulls or bans
Hugonets, Calvinists and Lutherans,
To prosecute, to cut off, and to kill
All that oppose their holy Popes great will.
For all is most true, they teach, which Rome does say?
Or charge her children; for she cannot stray.
Hence we may note that Romes rebellious feed,
All other malefactors far exceed;
For, though it cannot be gainsaid, withstood,
But some in all professions are not good;
But do offend by treason, murder, theft,
For which, they justly are of life bereft,
Yet when they are to dye, they nere accuse
The Doctrine or Religion which they use, Note this.

To be the cause that they did so transgress,
Or stain themselves with such soul-guiltines.
But that their natural bad inclination,
And want of grace brought them to desolation;
But these besotted eat-gods, void of shame,
Do not their nature, but religion blame;
These foule-birds, thus, their own nests do beray,
And, if in ought, heerin, the truth they say.
But, o, o misery, beyond compare,
That with such baseness they contented are!
O, if the understandings-eye be blind,
How hard it is truths perfect paths to find!
If once the Lord unto our selves us leave,
How hard, the truth from error to perceive.
O woe to those which lock-up heavens blessed gates
Both from themselves and their seduced mates.
O strong delusions, as St. Paul does call them,
How can it choose but danger must befall them!
O poysonous-cup of Romish fornication,
To be bewitched by such strange incantation!
O, if the blind do lead the blind, both stumble!
Nay, both do headlong into mischief tumble.
O, what true Christian, Protestant, is he
That does not from truths-fountain clearly see
That God in vengeance, and in judgment just,
Such Doctors and such Doctrins, sure, will thrust
To hells deep-pit (at last) whence first they rose,
Which do Christ's wholsome-doctrins so oppose.
For, what says Christ, the spring of verity,
To all his Saints, for all posterity?
My dear Disciples go and teach each Nation,
Baptizing all men to regeneration.
Clean contrary, this base- child of perdition,
The Pope of Rome, with hellish admonition,
His blinde-disciples, thus, most blindly teaches,
To his proud-Proselites this Doctrine preaches.
Go extirpate, kill and confound each nation,
Which does refuse our yoke and usurpation.
O are not these foul broods of vipers vile,
And Pluto's Locusts full of fraud and guile?
Yea, are they not the very spawn of Hell,
The furies of Avernus fierce and fell?
Satan their fathers footsteps imitating,
By sword and fire fair virtue ruinating,
From whose most damned counsel and consent,
They, spider-like this Stygian-poyson vent,
Which treacherous Faux, that vessel full of vice,
To us, to minister, they did entice.
Doubtless the Devil was not a little glad,
That he that Popish-prey and purchase had;
For, to those Romish friends might Pluto say,
As they, The Devil to the traitors in hell.
with him, in Tartars flashings lay,
You see brave friends the effect of our intentions,
Hels secrets, hidden counsels, strange inventions,
Which, though they have not wrought as we intended,
Yet are they not, with this plot wholly ended.
Indeed I must confess we did expect
A greater harvest, Mark this.
and more full effect
Of our designs: But this shall now suffice,
^ntill we can procure a This has bin most fully confirmed by Satan and his
Agents, our Church and State projectors, in this lately discovered plot, by our
blessed Parliament, 1641. which would have far transcended this of the
Pouder-plot had it taken effect. O the desperate inve^tio^s of man's more than
divelish heart!
richer prize.
For yet, we hope fortune, hereafter, may
Grant us a time more mischief to display,
And to the full our counsels to contrive,
To make our stratagems more fairly thrive,
Nor shall this fact our counsels quite deny
Our future hopes. Hell is not, yet, drawn-dry,
Our coffers are not empty (yet, indeed,
This last did all our others, far exceed)
Which, aftertimes may taste-of to their pain,
As fast as we can grace and favor gain,
With our choice Hos o rex magne caveto.
friends in Court Romes champions bold,
For, these are they which all our hopes uphold.
This said, fly Satan, those his agents all,
Leaves to themselves in sense of endless thrall.
The customary practice of the Devil,
Who, when he has suggested men to evil,
First, makes them sin, and when they are to die,
Comfortless leaves them in their misery,
Void of all help, full of disconsolation,
Headlong to tumble into dire damnation.
Mark this, o ye, whose hearts with deep devotion,
Are so bewitched with Circes poisonous potion,
With love of Romes great whore, recall, recall,
Your understanding from her divellish thrall;
Abjure that Doctrine, cease to call them blessed,
In whom such maps of mischief are expressed,
Learn with relenting tears, repenting heart,
From Romes false juggling Jebusites to part.
Those subtle Sirens from you to repel,
Those impious Amorites, Magogs of hell.
O take unto you Christ's collyrium sweet,
And you shall see how they from truth do fleet,
Yea, you shall, then, perspicuously perceive,
How, they sound faith do hate and wholly leave:
How they true saving knowledge paths pervert,
How they Gods Saints with malice do begirt,
Assaulting them with mischief and despite;
Yet shall the just prevail and stand upright.
For why? both Christ and all the heavenly host
Do fight for them whereof they well may boast.
Yea from the stars, according to their kind,
They day and night, do sweet protection find
O, why does man, then, Christ's true Church disturb,
Since heaven resists him and his wrath does curb?
O thou great guider of the heavens high, A grateful return to the Lord our
sole deliverer.

Who by thy thunder do All terrify,
Almighty ruler of the earth below,
In promise just, to anger very slow!
O, how can we sufficiently recount
Thy condign-praise, which does the heavens surmount,
Thou did us save from slaughtring sword and fire,
From those which against thy laws our lives conspire.
From miserable massacre and death,
Thou only Sions-Saviour gav'st us breath.
And as from teeth of greedy savage Bears
Did us recover and redeem from fears.
Thou, only-thou, by power of thy right hand,
Did for us most unworthy wretches stand,
And our poor silly sinful souls preserve,
Even, then, when we from thee, by sin did swerve,
We though thy foes, yet did thy mercy find,
Thou wast most courteous, when we were unkind.
Though we, alas, daily delight in sin,
Endangering heavens loss, our lusts to win,
Quenching thy Spirit in us, fostring the flesh,
Like dogs to vomit, sinning still a fresh,
Contemning thy behests and holy name,
Using thy Saints with scornful scoffs and shame.
Choosing the wrong, forsaking the right way,
Blindly persisting, when we go astray;
Laboring to please our selves, though displease thee,
Thinking to live as Saints, yet goodness flee,
Neglecting thee and thine, preferring more
Our profit, pleasure, thy sweet grace before.
O let thy grace our graceless hearts revive,
O let us not still live, as dead alive;
Sleeping in sin, fearlesse of sins great fears;
O turn our eyes into a spring of tears,
O give us grace the old man to forsake,
And with true-faith, fast-hold on Christ to take.
Illuminate the blindness of our heart,
And grant (dear father) though not for desert,
That we may see the ill that we have done,
With tears, it seen, we may desire to shun.
And with incessant sighs and groaning grief,
Give grace to wail our wants and find relief.
Yea, feed us, Lord, with heavenly manna sweet,
Thy sacred word, o guide our wandering feet
To tread the paths which lead to lasting pleasure,
To which, all other best terrestrial treasure
Is but dry moss and dross, foul dirt and clay,
Vain butter-flies for fools or childrens play.
O lift our souls, our heaven-born souls more high,
To seek their riches in Heavens- treasury.
That as Christ's name with tongue we do profess,
So by our works we may our faith express.
The year preceding this was fatal found,
When a great-plagne infectiously did wound,
Full many a thousand of our brethren dear,
And next this pouder-plot we escaped most near.
For, thy strong-hand, o Lord, the slaughtering blade
Did back retort, and those our foes dismayed.
These things, good God, do plainly testify
That we have much provoked thy clemency.
That our great sins have highly thee displeased,
And yet how quickly is thy wrath appeased.
Thou show thy rod, and mildly do it shake,
That we might see thy grace and sin forsake.
And as a mother chastizing her child,
Deals with it in affection sweet and mild,
Lothly lifts up her hand, Simile.
soon lets it fall,
And presently her anger does recall:
Even so, o Lord, most like a Parent kind,
Do we thy love and tender mercies find.
But if nor words nor warnings will reclaim us,
Thy punishment, great God, will justly tame us.
And, doubtless, though the Lord to wrath be slow,
Yet, if, too-far provoked, he down will throw
The viols of his wrath, his ire will burn,
Against the wicked which will not return,
From vanity; like stubble in the field,
They shall consume and to his judgments yield,
Then, let us, o let us with special care,
Learn both to love and fear God and declare
The Gospels fruits in our lives reformation,
And by the Lords so frequent exhortation,
T'abhominate proud Babell, just men's foe,
That Seat of Antichrist, where sin does flow,
The very basis of impiety,
The cage of unclean-birds of villainy.
Of which, I may affirm and justly hold
That though thou had Alcides courage bold,
Thou could not cleanse Romes sin-polluted-hals
More foul, by far, than foul Augea's stalls.
That so, that ancient Prophets true prediction,
Of Babels bane, of Roms proud Whores conviction,
This age (in Gods due time) to pass may bring;
This conquest great, Lord, grant unto our King,
Whose life, A prayer for the King and State.
as it is most precious in thy sight,
So let thy glory shine in his great might,
To propagate and farther to extend
The Gospels glorious Sunshine, and to bend
His utmost wisdom to discern and hate
The fly and secret foes of Church and State,
To love the good, the haughty to suppress,
To maintain virtue, beat-down wickedness.
That Justice like a river with swift source
May flow with streams of uncorrupted course,
Through all the kingdom, that in peace he may
This noble Realm with grace and glory sway.
That all the Nobles and right noble-Peers,
Whose hearts this thy great love and mercy cheers,
The most illustrious Senate of this Land
May fear thy name and Gospels foes withstand.
And, for so great, so good deserts, so free,
So blessed deliverance, life and liberty,
Grant from that sacred-house, such laws divine
May be established and performed, in fine,
As may redoun'd to the honor, joy and health
Of King and subjects, Church and Commonwealth,
That these most cruel cursed Canaanites, A recapitulation of Romes
abominations.

These sons of Edom, Churches Ismaelites,
The props and pillars of that shamelesse-whore
Who even as sheep to die, had marked us over,
May be cut off from among us, which so long
Have wrought and sought our peace to break and wrong.
Which like inhumane barbarous Paracides,
Like cursed Canibals, vile homicides,
Would cut their Parents throat, their Country dear,
With one-fierce blow, to make their passage clear.
Who plot and practice guiltlesse-blood to spill,
Teaching as most true doctrine, Kings to kill,
Delighting most in rapine, theft and lies,
Forbidding marriage, not adulteries;
Yea incest and such other sins of shame,
They slight esteem, which Christians should not name.
Whose Pope and holy Priesthood, for their gain,
Their odious Stews in public do maintain,
Most impudently counting it no shame
A yearly tribute for such cause to claim.
Whose practice is to cousen and dissemble,
Whose blasphemies do make the godly tremble.
Who do by grounds of their Religion hold
(That which nor Turks, nor Jews, nor Pagans bold,
Nor any other Heretics what-ere,
Nor those of Calycut, which serve and fear
The Devil) to kill their King (o most notorious)
For conscience sake, and say it is meritorious;
Who mingle with Gods word, yea, do prefer
Their own traditions, causing men to err;
Using, abusing Scripture as they lust,
And do esteem the same a thing most just,
Teaching for truths the dreams of filthy Friars,
Slandring Gods word like most nefarious liars.
Who, both the laws of God and man abuse,
(The Turks, I say, more vileness, scarce, can use)
Breaking the bands of blessed humanity,
Of serious vows and hospitality.
Savage Assyria, surely, never saw
The impieties which Rome maintains by law.
O why, then, favor we these poisonous snakes,
With whom what Realm or people long partakes,
In which Romes furious fangs are not discride,
Who are not curbed and crushed by Romish-pride?
O, if we will persist them (still) to spare,
Let Us blame our-selves, if we fall in their snare.
Thee, England the Landmarke of all Gods mercies.
thee (o England) I may happy call
Thou little-isle, whom father Neptunes wall,
And mighty arms embrace; I past all doubt,
May term thee happiest, all the world throughout;
If thou did truly know thy blessed estate,
Or heavens rich mercies would commemorate.
If in the tables of a thankful heart,
Thou would imprint Gods love; to all impart
By registers of never-ending days
The endless, matchless, due deserved praise
Of thy ay-living, all-good-giving King,
Who still does fill thy heart with each good thing.
O, say, how often and from what great assaults
Which were brought on thee for thy grievous faults,
Has heavens free grace, most safely thee protected;
God in his mercy having thee respected.
And when thou wast in dangers almost drowned,
Thy proud prefumptuous foes he did confound. The Armado in 88.

Witness that grand-assault in eighty-eight,
When faithless Spain with impious pride and hate
Insulting and consulting, vaunting loud,
Thy fearful, final, fatal woe had vowed.
And his great madness to that pass had brought,
That English-seas with Spanish-ships were fraught.
But how did God (maugre their might and spite)
Make winds and Seas and all for thee to fight.
Wracking their Ships, chaining their Princes great,
Swallowing the rest in Seas for fishes meat?
How has the Lord other great mercies shown,
Calming uncivill-civill discords grown
In this thy Realm, The Barons wars.
in former days of old,
Which often were raised by thy Barons bold?
How did the Lord in blessed Eliza's days,
To his eternal glory and just praise,
(Beside that eighty-eights great victory)
Redeem thy crown and state from jeopardy
Of many private Popish-treacheries, Treasons against Q. Elizabeth.

Which by their agents Rome did still devise,
Against the Person of that Peerlesse-Queen,
Whose equal, hardly, all the world has seen,
How did thy God watch over her for good,
And nip those traitors hopes, even in the bud?
Lopping their sprigs, cropping them in the flower,
That they could nere take root nor raging-power.
How often has the Lord from thee withheld, The pestilence in Ao. 1628.

His all-devouring plagues which would have quel'd
And quenched the glory of abused-peace,
When God had filled thy heart with joys increase?
And though thy sins and gross ingratitude
Did make thee taste the sharp amaritude
Of a late furious raging pestilence,
Which, with most deplorable vehemence
Devoured rich and poor, made desolate,
Thy houses, Churches, streets, in woeful state,
Without respect of simple or of sage,
Of Cottage or of Palace, sex or age:
Yet, o yet with what wondrous admiration
Did thy great Lord, on thy humiliation,
Most strangely and most suddenly command
His Angel to withdraw his wounding-hand,
And in a moment (as it were) to cease
Thy weekly thousands to a clear decrease.
How often, Fear of famine.
I say, has thy Almighty God
Withheld the fangs of famines pinching-rod,
By parching drought, or by immoderate rain,
To break thy staff of bread in corn and grain?
Instead whereof, how does thy land, still, flow,
With milk and honey? How fair does it show,
With peace and plenties blessed harmony,
With every mercies sweet variety?
Like fertile Canaan, England like unto Canaan.
no land ere did find
Dame Natures bounty in like copious kind.
Thus, thou o England justly seem to be
A pleasant Paradise, wherin's the Tree
Of knowledge, wherewith thou art most indu'd;
Another world, all things (a fresh) renewed.
A Land (I say) which does all nations pass,
As far as crystal does thick-spotted-glasse.
And yet to make thy glory more complete,
The Lord has given thee Manna, Manna.
angels meat,
The glorious Sunshine of his word divine,
Thy bliss and blessedness more clear to shine;
The everlasting Gospel, spring of grace,
The precious pearl which wisdom does purchase.
Thus is thy Land the Land of Goshen right,
Both for the Gospels power and pureness bright.
Do but compare this thy felicity
With other Nations foggy misery,
Who stifled are, as twere, in piteous case
With cloudy ignorance and error base:
Living, alas, in beast-like wretchedness,
As in the shade of death most comfortless.
Without the knowledge of or Christ or God,
Without whose knowledge, all is a dirty-clod.
Worshipping for the glorious Lord most high,
(Unto their souls eternal misery)
Dumb-idols, rotten-timber, metals vile,
Far fitter under-foot to tread and spoil.
Again, to make thee yet and yet more blessed,
To make thy luster shine past all the rest,
Has not the Lord in thee most richly placed
The light of justice, Justice.
wherewith thou art graced.
Whereby thy peoples houses, Castles are,
Themselves, their states freed from offensive care,
Of wrong or robb'ry: Thus thy beauty shines,
Whiles all-men sit in peace under their vines.
But of all temp'rall blessings under heaven,
Which ever were to any Nation given,
The power and praise of God most to advance,
All come most short of this Deliverance.
This monstrous, The Popish pouder-plot.
matchless, Popish pouder-treason
Beyond the power of former reach or reason,
This Quintessence of barbarous treachery
Transcendeth all of past antiquity. England too justly taxed with ingratitude

And cannot these sweet mercies manifold
Thy heart with cords of gratitude withold
From sinning against thy God, him to provoke
To smite thee deeplier with some heavier stroke?
Yea, can thou (England) can thou possibly
Be so orewhelmed in stupidity?
So sottish, senseless, impiously ingrate,
As to forget, or to obliterate
Out of thy thankefull-heart, the odious smell
Of this projected pouder-smoake of hell,
So long as ever thou a Kingdom art?
O do it not, least heaven does make thee smart,
By some as strange a plague (if it may be)
When he such gross ingratitude shall see.
But rather, all thy power and parts employ,
To evidence thy hearts triumphing joy,
To bless thy God for this thy new-Salvation,
To keep That-day with endless recordation,
Christ freed thy soul from hellfire; and this fire
Than any other flame to hels came nigher.
That-day, which they Britans black-day would see,
Novembers 5. Britans bright-day shall be.
The day was Tewsday, but by Popish-spight
Papists Ashwednesday, it had bin more right.
For ever, then, fell Popelings, howl, lament,
Your Romish Pouder-pieties intent,
For all the Oceans-floods will nere make clean,
(Perfidious Rome) thy knavish-sincke obscene,
Englands Transalpinated Papistry
Has (often) wrought blood-smearing cruelty,
Bred our Transmarine-Travellers light mind,
Then let them be (by law) to our homes confined.
For, as was said, This detestable fact
Was counseled, courag'd by the Popes compact.
For He that bids do, what is so ill-done, He
Must stay the work, or else Its author be.
Had he not cast Paternall-care from's heart,
He Would nere have played such a Step-fathers part.
Who from his Bubble-bellowing Bulls belcht-out
All Is Caco-curses, hellish-broyles about.
Saying, thus, let one-day all great Britane make
One-grave, whose name in future days shall slake,
Vices Viceroy, or vice it self is He,
Who Peters-chaire soyls with such villainy.
Forget not (then, I say) but ever hate
Romes Pope and Papists, foes to Church and State:
Who in their calmest-case do but couch-low
To watch advantage for a deadlier blow.
Hugg not such vipers in your bosoms then;
Foster not festring Snakes in shapes of men,
Within your houses, much less in your hearts
By loving, liking, pleading on their parts.
Least, thus, you more than seem most graceless sots,
Hankering after Aegypts foul fleshpots,
By temporizing tricks, backsliding ways,
Till Gods fierce wrath you thus against us raise.
Let us take heed we surfeit not in store,
And turning grace to wantonness grow poor,
Poor in our souls, barren in piety,
And so be made the maps of misery.
Be not more blind than Earth-devouring Moles,
Who love to grovell underground in holes:
Or so unthankful as the sottish Swine,
Who eat up Acorns, but never cast their ey'ne,
Up to the Oak from whence they to him fell,
Who thus their Swinish-nature plainly tell:
So do not thou thy brutish-heart declare,
Receive not blessings, but with grateful care
To retribute unto thy God above,
According to his great redundant love.
Shake-off, shake-off, and shun such brutishness,
With thankful heart acknowledge and confess
The most admired, least deserved favor
Of thy so gracious God, so sweet a Savior.
Who plenteously replenisheth and fills
Thy soul with blessings, Nectar-drops distills
Of favors of his left and his right hand
On soul and body, and does guardian stand,
Still to refell, repel the dangers great,
Which thy worst foes could menace, work or threat.
Snatching the prey out of their hungry jaws,
Recovering it from their most bloody claws.
Thrusting them headlong into their own pit,
Breaking their teeth, wherewith they would have bit,
Nay utterly have swallowed at one meal,
Our Kingdom, King, Peers, Prophets, Commonweal.
Which thee with amiable-peace has blessed,
Such as our Predecessors nere possessed,
And such (I fear) as our Posterity
Are never like to see and taste and try. Deus nobis haec otia fecit.

Yea, God alone has given us this great rest,
His liberall-love these mercies has expressed,
That God (I say) whose majesty and might,
Whose greatness, goodness, justice, most upright,
The heavens, An exhortation to give all the praise to God alone
the earth, deep seas and works of wonder,
Rain, hail, frost, snow, loud winds, lightning and thunder,
Do mightily shew-forth, tell and declare;
What Heathen-god with thy God can compare?
He is thy Savior, Sun and Shield most strong
To whom does all true praise and laud belong,
Both for thy being and thy best-estate,
Whose tender mercies most compassionate,
Whose patience, power and pity infinite,
All people shall to future times recite.
O let us (then) o let us never cease
On trumpets loud to make his praise increase;
In heart and voice his mercies to record,
By Hymns and Psalms to laud the living Lord.
To sound his fame unto the Indian-coasts,
To those whose clime continuall-Sommer rosts.
Let Phoebus first leave-off his annual race,
Let Phoebe want her monthly-borrowed grace;
Let Neptune stop the Oceans billowing source,
Let nature want (in all things) wonted course;
Yea, Lord, then, let us cease to be, I pray,
When in oblivion we this mercy lay.
But doubtless, if this duty we neglect,
The Lord most justly will this sin correct,
And on our heads his heavy hand will fall,
And turn our honey into bitterest gall.
Nothing the Lord can worse endure or hate,
Than thanklesse persons and a mind ingrate.
The husbandman that sows most plenteously,
The greater Harvest hopes in equity.
The land which naught but thorns and thistles yields
Though well manured, no man regards such fields.
Since God has given, he looks to receive,
O let us take heed how we our duty leave.
Did God with grievous punishments afflict
His holy-off-spring, when they did addict
And give themselves to vanity and lust,
And him that fed them, so forget, distrust.
Abusing his most gracious clemency,
His patience, love and longanimity;
If he did his peculiar-people 'stroy,
Who, first, his laws and worship did enjoy,
If, thus, for their ingratitude it fared,
If they were smitten and might not be spared,
Alas, what madness should us Gentiles move,
To think that God of us will more approve?
And since he has cut-down his choisest-vine,
Because it would not to his word incline,
Think thou the fruitless wilde-Olive shall stand,
Unprofitably comb'ring his good land?
O, no; he will make it wither (soon) and dye,
Like to our Saviors barren Fig Tree dry.
And thou whom God has, thus, with mercies blessed,
If thanklesse, shall with dangers be distressed.
Yea multitudes of mischiefs will thee follow,
And thee in treasons greedy-jawes will swollow.
Yea, troops of traitors (then) shall daily strive,
Of life and liberty thee to deprive.
Wherefore that thou, o England, still may have
Gods friendly favor, thee from foes to save,
Preach and proclaim with heart and hearty cheer,
With thanks and praise, each hour and month and year.
This matchlesse-mercy of thy loving Lord,
And it on marble-pillars, aye, record.
Yea, teach thy childrens children to rejoice,
To sing Gods-prayses with shrill-sounding voice.
And every way his name and fame to rear
For this so great Deliverance. And to bear
A zealous hatred, deadly detestation
To Romes false doctrines, base abomination.
Thou, then, the God of our inheritance,
Thy Sions Savior, strong deliverance,
Our part, our portion, buckler, staff and stay,
Under thy wings, preserve us (still) we pray.
Make void and frustrate Romes most hateful pride.
The cause is thine (o Lord) stand on our side.
Resist their rage; for against thy Church they rave,
And let thy people thy protection have.
Revenge the blood of thy distressed Saints,
And when they grieve, relieve their sad complaints.
O Lord, we pray thee bless and dress thy Vine,
Thy Love, thy Dove, this little-flock of thine.
Yea, Lord at all times, in extremest straits,
Thy sacred arms upon our armies waits,
Thy help is present and thy presence sweet,
To foil our foes and cast them at our feet.
Thou, Lord, do cause the fell Monocerate,
To bear on's brow a soveraign-Antidote.
Wherefore, this wondrous work of thine, o Lord,
Our voice, our verse, for ever, shall record.
Our hearts we will incline thy praise to sing,
Even thy great name; o our celestial King.
In every house, Shire, City, Street and Temple,
And teach our children this by our ensample.
Throughout the Kingdom, we thy fame will raise,
While vitall-breath from death prolongs our days.
And tell this thy great work to every Nation,
While Sun and Moon shine in their cloudy-station.
Our singers shall sing Psalms to thee on high,
O blessed, blessed, blessed-Trinity.
FINIS.
An Epigram to Jesuits, the Principal Disturbers of Peace and Unity; the
Authors and Firebrands of Sedition and Treachery throughout the
Christian-world. OR, The ROMISH WHITE-DIVELL.
Qui cum Jesus itis, non
itis cum Iesuitis.

THe Fatall-Sisters, Latine-Poets call
Parcae; though, parcunt nulli; they kill all.
And Latinists, the thick-wood, Lucus, write*
Ceu nunquam lucens; wherein comes no light.
And by the same Antiphrasis of late,
The Jesuits to themselves appropriate
The sacred name of Jesus, though their works
Declare their lives to be far worse than Turks.
Heavens lightness, brightness differs not so great
From ponderous, drossie Earth: Nor Southern heat
To Northern chilling, killing frosts so far
Differ: Nor th'Artick from th'Antartick star
Is more remote; than this rank of makes-shifts
(Whose hateful lives, crafts, couzenage, subtle drifts
To all good-men apparent) are unlike
To Christ or Jesus Doctrine, if you strike
Their name out (only) and their works behold,
Their best-part (then) will prove but dross to gold.
Do thorns bear grapes? do figs on thistles grow?
Or the tall-palme, yield pleasant fruit? o no.
The tree by's fruit may manifested be;
On good-trees, good; on ill, bad fruit we see.
The Jesuites-Doctrine who to know does list,
It does of 5. dees, Five dees.
properly, consist:
In Daunting subjects; in Dissimulation;
To Depose, Dispose, Kings, Realms, Devastation.
Whither the Jesuits come more near to those
Which bear the arms of Christ or Mars, with blows,
It is a question* but, with ease decided.
As thus. Christ's soldiers, ever, are provided
Of these blessed weapons; tears, prayers, patience;
These foyl and spoil their foes with heavenly fence;
But daggers, dags, keen-swords, poisons, deceit,
Close-fawning treasons, wiles to cousen and cheat;
These are the Jesuites-arms, and with these arts,
Their Pope to deifie, they play their parts,
Nor faith, nor piety their followers have;
For, divellishly, against truth, they rage and rave.
How fit those arms Loiola's-brats beseem,
Britane can witness, and the whole-world deem.
I Will passe-by other-slights, all, in this one,
In this foul pouder-plot, they all are shown.
Blush, blush (o Jesuits) England knows too well,
Your counsel furthered, most, this work of Hell.
Yea, impious Garnet for the traitors prayed,
Pricked and pusht-forward those he might have staid,
Being accessory to this damned intent,
Which, with one-word this Jesuit might prevent.
Such barbarous traitors and strange treachery
To hide and silence is gross villainy: Gentem auferte perfidam etc.

But, o, with orisons God to implore,
To grant success, o speak, was ere, before,
In all the world like wickedness ere known,
In any age, such monsters seen or shown?
Which, with religious shows, shelter foule-crimes
With virtues cloak hiding them, often, oft-times.
And, then, o then, I tremble to declare,
Calling the Lord of Heaven with them to share
In this foule-fact; nor yet heerwith content
To offer heaven this high disparagement,
But that they will act more gross impiety,
If any can be worse t'heavens Deity.
These sacrilegious traitors falsely think,
No surer bands themselves to tie and link,
To secrecy and resolution strong,
Than, thereunto blasphemously to wrong
Our Saviors glorious body and blood also,
To their eternal and infernal woe.
And who so impious, so audacious bold?
In's wretched hands the Eucharist to hold?
Who was so godless, who so graceless, trow?
So rich a pearl unto such swines to throw?
Who but a Priest of this Society;
Would know his name? it was Gerrard certainly.
Persuade your selves, ye holy fathers all,
This is a truth, which you a lie will call;
For naught is said against you, but most right;
Then blush for shame and hide your selves from sight.
O heavens! o earth! o treachers times and season!
Degenerous minds and hard-hearts void of reason!
Truly it is doubtful, difficult to tell,
Whether of these two mischiefs did excel;
At one-blow, bloodily, so, to confound
A King and Queen, three Kingdoms, so renownd,
Nobles and Senate, thus, to strike and stroy,
By powder them to spoil with great annoy;
Or that Christ's glorious, sacred body and blood,
His holy, yea most holy Supper should
By such damned unbidden guests be 'taminated
So base a band to be conglutinated,
And linked, thereby, with such vile vehemence,
To perpetrate that Stygian foul offense.
The Pristine Poets used in verse to sing,
The noble Gests of every Prince and King;
But, now, it is needful, in this weedfull age,
Wherein impiety and vice do rage,
Yea and all too-too little to declare
The hateful times and crimes which most rife are;
Whose monstrousnes to paint to public sight,
The true relation would pass credit, quite.
For to these stains, worthy eternal shame,
Add this, a piece of these sweet fathers frame;
I mean Equivocation, Equivocation.
which they use,
Men's understanding, neatly, to abuse.
It Is, doubtless, Gyges-ring, for, hereby, they
Though captivated, can themselves convay;
And with a trick, which Jesuits use to try,
They can delude and few can them descry.
They Will smooth and sooth, and one thing to you say,
And yet their heart goes clean another way.
This ambiguity was Apollo's art,
Under whose name the Devil played his part.
Even Tully may these Priests well reprehend,
By whom, such lamb-skind wolvs are often condemnd
Who, if he (now) lived, o how is eloquence
Would thunder-out Loiola's impudence!
Satan, that subtle Serpent did them teach,
This lying-art; they n'ere heard Christ so preach.
Are not these, the^, Roms white-divels? fie for shame.
Naught, but bare outsides; their best-part, their name?
Believe me, for, Christ's sacred-writ most true,
(If, truth it be, as it is.) This truth does show;
Their practice smells of a fugitive,
Or Devil; or (surely) I am not alive.
What was the Devil? a liar, homicide;
What Is he? a sly-dissembler, regicide
And with just reason, The kings Evil.
may this Jesuite-divell,
Most properly be called the Kings-evill.
If, then, affinity of manners vile,
If just proportion of like fraud and guile,
If deeds so consonant and disposition,
To practice 'greeable, may with permission,
Avail to prove a truth, then, Magog, know,
These do a great part of thy warrfare show,
And palpably declare to the truly-wise,
This offspring did from thee, their Father, rise.
Avaunt you locusts; hence you spawn of hell,
From whose black-smoake, you are descended well.
If still you will the name of Jesus take,
Let all men know you do it only make
A cloak to hide your knavery; for, you are
But gray-wolves, bearing in your front a star.
And since you plead ^ntiquity, with flights,
We'll justly call you juggling Gibeonites.
Instead of Jesus, Gibeonites.
take you Judas name,
Your hatefull-lives will best befit the same.
For by your works we perfectly do find,
No part, with Christ, is unto you assigned.
FINIS.
An oenigmaticall-Riddle to Romes Jesuitical black-Crows, who pretend
themselves to be religions white-Swans.
A Bird of late,
When birds could prate,
Said, black's the Crow.
The Crow repli'de,
Told him he ly'd,
And 'twas not so.
Mine eyes, quoth he
Shall witness be
That I am fair;
The Swan so white,
And Snow most bright,
Foul to me are.
The bird again,
Laughing amain,
Said, strange it is not,
For ones own-eye
Cannot espy
The stain or spot,
Which its-own face
Does much disgrace,
And vilify.
This matter, straight,
To arbitrate,
The Eagle high,
Their King, they move;
Who (soon) does prove
This folly great.
A mirror fair
Bids them prepare
Both large and neat.
The Crow it took,
Therein to look,
Whereon he gazed
On's shape most true
And proper-hew
Which he so praised.
Then with great shame
He much did blame
His own blear-eyes;
And all there by,
Did laugh full high,
And's pride despise.
FINIS.
A Paraphrasticall Psalm of thanksgiving for Englands most happy-deliverance
from the most horrible intended Gun-pouder Treason, practiced by the Synagogue
of Satan, the Romish Babylonians; and fitted to one of the familiar Tunes of
David's Psalms, to be sung November the 5th.
Psalm 124. King DAVID against the Philistims. King JAMES against the
Antichristians.

IF great JEHOVAH had not stood assistant on our side,
May England say, most thankfully and bin our guard and guide:
If heavens Almighty Lord himself had not our cause maintained
When men, yea, most blood-thirsty men our downfall had ordained.
Then had their Antichristian rage and hellish policy
Devoured us with greedy-jaws, and swallowed suddenly:
Then like huge overflowing floods, which proudly swel and roar,
They all our souls orewhelmed had and spoiled in flames and gore.
Our royal King, the Queen and Prince, and princely Progeny,
Our prudent Counselors of State, and prime Nobility:
Our learned Judges, Prelates all, best Commons of the Land,
In Parliament by powder fierce had perished out of hand.
Romes raging streams with roaring noise and Popish cruelty
Had all at once ingulft our souls in matchless misery.
They dig'd a mine and delved deep, in hope to hurt their brother,
But they did fall into the pit that they had made for other.
For, as a bird out of a snare by furious Fowlers made,
Does safely escape; even so our souls securely did evade.
Their net was broke, themselves were caught, our God that nere does sleep
In heaven did sit and see and smile, and us in saf'ty keep.
This was the Lords most worthy work, this was the Lords own fact
And it is most wondrous to behold this great and glorious act.
This is the joyful day indeed, which God for us has wrought,
Let us be glad and joy therein, in word, in deed, in thought.
O let us never make an end to magnify Gods name,
To bless the Lord our staff and stay, to sound abroad his fame:
To tell to all posterity, what wonders God has wrought,
To save us from the woes which Rome and Spain against us sought.
All glory (then) to God on high, let men and Angels sing,
Let heaven and earth and all therein give glory to heavens king:
And sing and say with heart and voice all honor, laud and praise,
To God who makes us thus rejoice. So be it, Lord, always.
Omnis gloria solius est Domini.
FINIS.

