A LETTER FROM COLONEL HEWSON From Finagh in IRELAND, of the 14 of March, 1650.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Parliament of England:
With Articles of the Surrender of Finagh Castle, And other Strong Holds. And a
List of the Prisoners taken.

Die Martis, 25 Martii, 1651.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Letter and Articles, With a List of the
Prisoners taken, be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric Parliamenti. London, Printed by John Field, Printer to
the Parliament of England. 1651.

Mr. Speaker,
THe mighty Hand of the great God has been stretched out against your Enemies,
and defending you and your Forces, whilst you have been prosecuting the
Peoples Liberty, Public Good and Interest of his People; amongst whom he
has, he does, he will manifest his Presence: And as all your Forces has
abundance of Experience therein, so those in Ireland wants not large and
comfortable Testimonies thereof. The several Accounts you have received, gives
your Servants cause of Rejoicing in, and depending upon our Lord for his
Mercies exercised with and amongst them: And as in other Appearances of our
God, this day, and his Presence with the present motion of your Servants here,
does abundantly proclaim his Goodness. The Counties of Westmeath, Cavan and
Longford persisting in Rebellion, and the Enemy raising Forces in those parts,
and endeavoring to form a considerable Army there; for the preventing thereof,
and to reduce the said Counties, I marched from Dublin, and the parts adjacent,
with 1600 Foot and 700 Horse the 24 of February last: when I was about
Tecroghan, I had notice the Enemy in the Kings County, with Three thousand
Horse and Foot, was distressing one of the Garrisons, I marched immediately to
Terrels Pass for its Relief; but Commissary General Reynolds had removed that
Enemy with a party from about Kilkenny. I upon notice thereof marched toward
Mullingar, where we found resistance by a Castle called Kilbridge, which was
presently reduced; wherein Two hundred Barrels of Corn was found, and kept for
your Service. When I came to Mullingar, the Enemy did quite desert and leave
Erlestown, and burned the former, both of which I have now Garrisoned for you,
as also Mullingar. Whilst I was there, I heard from Commissary General
Reynolds, who had taken by Storm Donmore in Westmeath, wherein was near One
thousand Barrels of Corn: I presently rid over unto him, where we both advised
to Fortify and Garrison Ballemore, a very considerable place, which the Enemy
had slighted. I sent thither Colonel Fouck with his Regiment, and Commissary
General came thither with his Foot, and they have made up the Works, and made
it tenable, and secured it for you. I marched unto Sir Thomas Nugents House,
which was kept against you, and reduced it; and then to Ballinalack, and
reduced it, a considerable Pass out of Westmeath unto Longford. The Commissary
General and I agreed to march to Finagh, where we heard was great store of
Forces to entertain us. I came with my Party last night unto a Castle upon the
Tower, and I saw a considerable Enemy march upon the other side of the Water
toward us from the County of Cavan, who coming to the other side of the Pass
at the Lougher, where we did Camp twice, Musket shot one from another, but the
Castle was upon the Pass between us: that night Commissary General Reynolds
quartered within three Miles of us; I raised a Battery, and planted the Guns
that night, and this morning betimes began to play; the third shot that we
made, the Enemy did quit the Castle, and run away unto the Bog: we pursued
them, took some, drowned others, and some few escaped. I drew down the Horse
and Foot presently over the River up to Finagh, where we beheld the Enemy that
came toward us yesterday, march faster back from us. We found a Pass about
Musket shot of the Castle, over which I sent Sir Theophilus Jones with 400
Horse, and my Regiment of Foot, to pursue the Enemy, and with the rest of the
Foot stormed Finagh, but could not enter. I presently did summon it, they
desired to treat, but in the time of Parley Commissary General coming up, we
did jointly treat with them; and as we were treating, Sir Theophilus Jones came
back, who had overtaken the Enemy, killed about four hundred on the place, and
brought with him the prisoners in the enclosed List mentioned. The Soldiers in
the Castle finding all hopes failing, yielded the Castle upon the Articles
herewith tendered unto you. The taking of this place is of great advantage unto
you, and gives you the possession of Longford and Cavan; and this days
successes does in good measure prevent the forming of such great Armies as they
intended. Whilst you pursue those Interest God will own, you will find his
hand against your Enemies, his power with your forces, and success in your
great undertakings, the hands of your faithful servants strengthened, and all
good people comforted, and the Government you have established, secured: Which
that the Lord of Hosts may still preserve uncorrupted, shall be the prayers of

Your faithful Servant J. HEWSON.
Finagh, 14 March. 1650.
Articles agreed upon between Commissary General Reynolds, Colonel Hewson, and
Christopher Nugent, on the behalf of Major Dardise, and the rest of the
Officers and Soldiers, upon the Surrender of Finagh this 14 March. 1650.
Imprimis.
THat the Garrison of Finagh be immediately surrendered within half an hour unto
Captain Hoar who is appointed to receive the same.

II. That all the Ammunitions, Stores, and Provisions that are in the said
Garrison, be delivered to the said Captain, the said Stores being in no ways
imbezzled, or wasted.

III. That the Governor of the said Garrison, Major Dardise, shall be a prisoner
of War, and have his Parole for Fourteen days after the date hereof.

IV. That all the rest of the Officers and Soldiers that are in the said
Garrison, shall march forth with their Arms for one Mile, at which place they
are to deliver their Arms to those that shall be appointed to receive them,
where they shall have a safe conduct toward Ardagh in the County of Longford.

V. That the said Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrison are permitted and
suffered to march to their own Garrisons for three days, during which time no
Hostility is to be acted against them, they acting nothing prejudicial to the
State of England.

VI. And that Captain Nugent and Captain Cruse remain Hostages for the
performance of the aforementioned Articles. Dated this 14 March. 1650.

Christopher Nugent. J. Reynolds. J. Hewson.


A List of the Prisoners taken by Commissary General Reynolds, mentioned in
this LETTER.
COlonel Alexander mac Donnel Lieut. Col. John mac Donnel Major Surly mac
Donnel
Captains.
Donnel mac Kay, Patrick mac Cormuck Hector mac Neal Tirlagh O Quin Cochel O
Quin Patrick O Melan Arth. mac Donnel Dan O Neal Miles Reyly Daniel Brady Farel
Magauly Shane O Kernan.
Lieutenants.
Tirlagh Reyly Archbold mac Donnel Bryan mac Donnel Donnel Reyly Owen Rely John
Brady Thomas Brady Thomas Fitzpatrick Brady Tirlagh Brady Owen mac Kerny Phelim
mac Donnelly Phel. mac Mulwy
Ensigns.
Tirlagh Rely Hugh Reyly James Brady Bryan mac Kern Donnel mac Kern Hugh Brady
Sirlagh mac Keaghan Edmond mac Melchal Philip mac Kedan Donnel mac Elaspick
Chelim mac O Codan Daniel O Neale Daniel mac Giee Cormuch Cavenagh Hugh mac
Clemen. James O Hoar, Quarter Master.
Private Soldiers, and Non Commission Officers 376.

FINIS.

