The Queens Majesty's LETTER To the Parliament of ENGLAND, CONCERNING Her Dread
Sovereign Lord the KING, and Her Proposals and Desires, touching His Royal
Person. With the Resolution of the Parlilment concerning the said Letter.

Also, a Letter from Holland, concerning the King, Parliament, and Army;
showing what will befall this Nation, if His Majesty be deposed, and a new King
and Government erected and established.

Likewise, the several Reasons of the Peers of England, concerning their
dissenting from the Commission for trial of the King; and the Resolution of
the House of Commons, to proceed of themselves by way of Charge.

M R
portrait of Queen Mary

Printed for L. White, and are to be sold in the Old-Bayley.

THE DECLARATION OF THE Presbyterians Concerning the Kings Majesty, and their
Desires touching the preservation of his Royal person, in relation to his
coming to trial.
AFter mature deliberation upon the proceedings of the Lord General Fairfax,
and the General council of Officers, in relation to the establishing of a firm
and lasting peace within this bleeding, to^ne, and tottering kingdom, and the
erecting of a pure and sound Government according to the Law of Nature, and the
fundamental laws of this Realm, and after several conferences and disputations
in order thereunto, diverse of the Presbyterian party frequented to Westminster,
and other places, where they had several disputations and conferences with the
Officers, and other members of the Army; and after some debate upon the
Foundation, of the grounds and principles of the Agreement of the People, the
Presbyterians declared a great dislike thereof, remonstrating, That it was not
founded upon a firm Rock; to which objections, several answers were made, for
clearing such scruples and cautions, as seemed difficult to many; And as for
the person of the King, they further declared that notwithstanding the present
Ordnance of Attainder against his Maj. yet they conceived it requisite and
lawful, that the prayers of the Ministry be still continued in every
Congregation throughout his Maj. Realms and Dominions; desiring, that he may
have a legal trial, and that He may not be degraded of his Titles and
Honors: Concerning which, be pleased to peruse this ensuing Letter from
Holland, touching the degrading of his Majesty.

Sir; We are here in a kind of amazement, to hear that your King should be
designed for the grave before his time: Believe it, there is nothing more
characterizes men wise in the opinion of the wisest mere man, then that they
see a far off, not the plague of the body only, though that, but judgments
sometimes for evildoing, sometimes for acting indiscreetly in matters that may be
done. That which may lawfully be done, it may be absurd to do at some time:
The taking away life, which is that prized above all, by him that all account
wise, is not just (say some) at any time, unless there be a law that makes the
thing done death, and death to him that does it: The supreme power of England
that forbids any to judge of treason in a constructive way, but themselves have
retaind in themselves a power to judge such and such practices and endeavors to
amount to treason or death. In particular, supose there were law, or it were in
the power of the Lords and Commons to take awoy the life of the present King,
yet if England, Scotland, and Ireland shall be made more miserable thereby in
reason, and the waas renewed, to the probable ruin of the Nations, and chiefly
to those who pretend most to piety and justice therein, it were better not.
That it is dangerous this may be said: If you cut off, you must set up,
vacuities of that nature suddenly introduce confusion: If you set up, it must
either be a new King, or a new Government; if a new King, then the next of
kin, and if him, then let his compliance be what it will, his Fathers death
cannot be forgot; no, the danger of his mothers influence, who will remain in
banishment, be easily got over, refuse he to come in, as it is most like, he
has the aforementioned written upon his breast, besides his hereditary claim, his
marriage, which no m^n that has a purse, but will endowry with a daughter,
raise an army of 20000 to restore a son in law, and make his daughter Queen of
3 kingdoms, which by reason of situation, and inherent accommodations may
(well managed) be the ballancing power of Christendom. If any other, or a new
Government, the objections are the same, and all the line and that successively
are made enemies to boot; besides has the Parl. or army yet got so much love?
are they so deep in the hearts of the people, that they can assure themselves
the newtrals, or those who have gone far with them will quiesce? But the
answer is ready, we have an Army that cann^t be overcome, neither by what can
rise here, or come from abroad. So had Alexander, but Alexander was poisoned,
and what then became of his Army? ruin approached. Some w^^ boast they fear no
colors, nor danger, for they have the swiftest horse in the Kingdom; but what
if that horse stumble, and throw his Rider: where is the man, the horse
wandering up and down, as the fed Hauk for food, comes to the hand of a child?

Amsterdam 1 Jan. 1648.

Englands Admiration concerning the King.
HIs Excellency, and the General Council of the Army have fully resolved upon
their debates, touching the trial of the King, and are resolved to bring him to
a present trial, the manner of it is as follows, viz. 6 Lords, forty Commons,
and ten Colonels, Lieutenant colonels, and Majors, who are to receive
Instructions (as Commissioners) Ior managing and prosecuting of the Bills of
Attainder and Impeachment against the person of the King; and are resolved to
establish and confirm a true and lasting Government within this Kingdom, and
that the best they can imagine for a Commonwealth, which contains these
particulars, viz.

1 The Magistrate to have power in things civil and natural. 2 The Subject to
be free, submitting to the Civil Laws. 3 No toleration for Popery nor
Prelacy. 4 None to be forced to fight in War against their will, etc.

And the General Council have further resolved and declared, That the
Parliament shall not proceed against any persons to give Judgment, but
according to what is Law, Rason, and Equity.

And for the better facilitating and establishing of a true and lasting peace
within this Nation, the General Council of the Army have passed the remaining
part of the Articles for an Agreement of the People, and are determined
speedily to consider of a form of conclusion and subscription to this
Agreement as to the Officers of the Army.

Summons are also sent to the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of York, to require
their present appearance, and to desist from their Engagement, in acting
against this Kingdom, and involving their place of Nativity in another bloody
and intestine War, and a day is prefixed, for their return, that in case they
refuse to yield obedience to the said Summons, then to be declared against as
Enemies to the peace of this Kingdom, and to be degraded of all Titles and
Honors, belonging to either of them.

Yet notwithstanding, we have one precious Flower and Blossom to fix our eyes
upon, viz. the Duke of Gloucester, (the Kings youngest Son) who in all
probability, will speedily be advanced to great Honors and Dignities, to the
great admiration of the whole Kingdom.

Yesterday the Committee reported the Ordinance of Attainder against Charles
Stuart, and the names of such Commissioners as should try him, which are, the
Earl of Denbigh, Earl of Pembroke, E. of Kent, E of Mulgrave, E. of Nottingham,
and Lord Gray of Wark.

Of the House of Commons, the Lord Munson, L. Lisle, L. Gray of Groby, Lieu.
Genesis Crumwell, M. G. Skippon, Com. Gen: Ireton, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir John
Danvers, Col. Walton, Col: Moor, Col: Boswell, Col: Rossiter, Col: Ven, Col:
Thorney, Col: Lassels, and about 30 Members more.

Of the Army that are not members of the House of Commons, the L. Genesis Pairfax,
Col: Whalley, Col: Rich, Col: Waller, Col: Tomlinson, col: Scroop, Col:
Sanders, Col: Pride, col: Twisleton Col: Huson, Col: Barkstead, Col: Horton,
Col: Desborough, Col: Dean, and Col: Okey.

Of the City of London, Alderman Pennington, Alderman VVoollaston, Ald: Fooks,
Ald: Gibbs, and Alderman Andrews.

The Judges are, the Lord chief Justice Rolls, chief Justice of England,
Justice St. John, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Lord chief Baron
VVild. And two out of all the 40 Counties throughout the Kingdom, all which
commissioners, who are to sit as a Jury, are to consist of 150, and any 20 of
them are to be a Committee for trial of the King, and to give sentence against
him. By this Ordinance the Commissioners are limited to a months time, to make
a final determination of the business, the place of trial is said to be at
Westminster.

VVestmin. 3 instant, Here arrived a messenger from the Queen of England, with
a Letter to the Parl. purporting her desires, for a speedy restoration of her
dread Sovereign Lord the King, and that He may be admitted to his Throne; and
to enjoy his just Rights, Privileges, and Dignities: But the House not liking
the Title of the said Letter, resolved to lay it aside. Letters from Windsor
say, that the King discourses much upon subjects, purporting a life of many
days there, and doubts not but within 6 months to see peace in England, and in
case of non-restoring, to be righted from Denmark, France, Scotland, and
Ireland: He talks much of Lieu G. Crumwell, and says, That he hops to see
good things wrought by them.

The Ordinance for trial of the King, was transmitted from the Lords to the
Commons, for their concurrence who had in consideration, first, whether a
house, in a Parliamentary way, 2 wnether being so few, they should take into
consideration so great a business. 3 As to matter of treason, some thought
that the King could not commit treason against the Parl. At last they agreed as
to a present answer to the Commons, that they would send it by messengers of
their own, and laying the business aside, adjorn'd to the 11 instant.

Whereupon, the Commons understanding how unanimously the Lords had gone
against the Commission for trial of the King, agreed to proceed of themselves,
and for that end have committed the same for alteration.

FINIS.

