The Flock that was wont to be shorn by the Herd,
Now polleth the Shepherd in spite of his Beard


HERACLITVS Dream.
WHen powerful sleep had in his numming span,
Seized the Watchmen of the Isle of man,
Sick with beholding the worlds vanity,
Hoping in sleep to find some sanity;
Morpheus presents my fancy with a Theme.
To work on, which may prove only a Dream,
Methought I walked in a goodly Plain,
Like to Thessalian Tempe, where amain
The Flocks were wont to feed, the jolly Herd
To pipe, the while neither of ought afeard.
Here did I see a very uncouth sight,
Which did my 'mazed mind somewhat affright, A

Upon a hill there sat a Shepherd Swain;
His hands fast bound, and from his eyn did rain
A shower of tears, to see his silly Sheep
So mad to wrong him, who themselves did keep;
For they did poll his head, and clipped his chin,
Because 'twas long since he had polled bin:
They being shorn once a year, could find no reason
But he might be poll'd too in a hot Season.
'Twas a mad Flock methought; they had surely eat
Melampod, Wolfe-bane, or such poisonous meat,
Which made them rave: If he but stirred to rise,
Both Ram, and Lamb, and Ewe used batteries, B

To keep him down: Melampus runs away: C

The Bell-Wether's tied up; he would spoil the play. D

His Crook is broke, his Anchor-mark thrown by, E

All hold, all hope of them they now deny.
His Tarre-box has no use, they will not be smeared F

Nor Tarr'd, nor told, for they be not afeard
Of Flies, or Maggots, they can cure themselves;
Who would have thought Sheep were such peevish elves?
The Shepherd may go whistle with his fist,
And Pipe; but they will ramble as they list:
The whisking Sling with which he wont to scare
With humming stones, the Lion and the Bear,
The Leopard, Fox, Wolf, and all Beasts of prey,
Ere they came near his Flock, now stands in stay;
But for a Scarecrow, and himself may starve,
If Bag and Bottle cannot his turn serve.
The watled Folds broke down, that Whilom kept
The couching Sheep in safety while they slept:
And all this stir was for a lock of Wool,
Which Shepherds yearly from their coats do pull.
O silly Sheep, and Flock perverse! said I,
Who to save Fleece, will in the Shambles die:
For if the Shepherd will you not defend,
The Butcher, or wild Beast will be your end. G

I looked for some to help, but there was none:
I saw a Shepherd who did sigh and groan, H

With wondering, weeping looks; two Satyrs jeer; I

Two Shepherds (which did ill become them) fleer; K

Some Sheep did graze, and some did gaze whilers L

At this sad sight. Those Shepherds I accoast,
Who pensive seemed, as if a friend were lost,
And them saluted thus, Hail Shepherd Swains,
That seed your Flocks upon these verdant Plains:
Why help you not you woeful wight distressed,
And made the scorn of every simple beast?
Friend, quoth the one, that others wrongs do moan,
If thou a Shepherd be, look to thine own;
For Sheep grown mannish, maddish by a weed,
Sown by you Shepherds amongst their wholesome feed,
Who laugh to see the work which they have wrought,
Bring Shepherds and their Flocks and all to naught.
But what care they if the mad Sheep rebel
Against their Shepherds, so themselves fare well;
For they can Fleece them more then once a year,
And often with Muttons make themselves good cheer;
Feeding their Flocks still with the ranker grass,
Which rots them, though a while it makes them pass
For goodly great ones; yet grow worse and worse,
And never will be cured by Shepherds purse,
Though some do hold so, nor by Shepherds pains,
Except great Pan with herb Grace cure their brains:
We gladly would assay to set him free,
But that for evil eyes which we do see
Set on our Flocks, to drive them quite away,
Or to make them and us a common prey
To Sylvans, Satyrs, wild beasts of the Wood, M

Or to some Shepherds that never watched for good;
But how to set dissension 'twixt the Flock,
Or to rob Shepherds of Pans down and stock.
For what has your Herd done to be abused,
Except's for doing what good Shepherds used?
What did his yearly polling you displease,
What he clips off, if on, 'twould breed disease?
Or else you would hang your locks on every bush;
Some clip you closer, whom you never push;
Or is it because his Crook did seldom fail
To catch and pull the Brambles from your tail?
Or are you angry at his Anchor mark,
Which gave him hope to find you, save in the dark?
Or at his Tarre-box does your passion rise,
Because it cured your Fly-blown maladies?
Or did he pipe plain Song, without Division,
Good sober Music, causing no derision?
Or did his rapid Sling offend your ears,
Though whirling stones delivered you from fears?
If these were all his faults, forbear for shame,
Unbinde your Shepherd, and redeem your fame;
Lest Pan, the Shepherds god, who loves no fray,
Leave you to those that watch but for a prey.
With that it thundered, and a voice I knew,
Said, If you will smite these, I Will scatter you.
Which words (I waking) wished to those that hate
The Churches Peace, and Weal of ENGLANDS State.
London, Printed for John Spencer. 164^.

The AUTHOR's Intent and Meaning by this DREAM; So called, because it took him
in Bed, meditating on ZACH. 13. 12.
HE calls it HERACLITUS Dream, because it came in doleful Meditations.
Heraclitus used to weep much. The Shepherd polled, signifies Ministers clipped
of their good Name, Fame, and Means by rude people, without Authority, Law, or
Reason; and therefore are thought to be stirred up by no good Spirit. The Ram,
Ewe, and Lamb butting him, show that some of all sorts, men, women, and
children, are ready to abuse Ministers. The Instruments Pastoral lying broken
and scattered, shows, his Ministry rejected. The Bell-Wether tied up, shows
that exemplary men do suspend their good examples. Melampod, Wolfbane, are two
poisonous herbs, signifying bad doctrine. Shepherd purse, a good Herb, and
signifies good Doctrine, which yet without Gods grace can do no good. The
Butcher and wild Beasts, show destruction waits upon disorder. The laughing
Satyrs show that Heathens and Heretics are glad of the Churches distractions.
The sad Shepherds show that some Divines lay troubles to heart. The laughing
Shepherds show that others are glad of them. The Flock grazing, show some
people are secure. The Flock gazing, show how others are amazed. The Fold
broken shows the rude abuse of Churches. Melampus running away, shows that
M^ttion hides it self.


