HERBERTS Belief and Confession OF FAITH: MADE In CLX Articles.

FOR The Instruction of His Wife and Children.

LONDON, Printed by JO. DEVER and ROBERT IBBITSON, MDCXLVI.

Premonition.
THe Proverb is true and common: That, which is meat for one, may be poison
for another: for without doubt, all things are not fit for all men; and
therefore it concerns them much, to know their particular inclination, and
follow it, if just and orderly, in their attire, diet, exercices and worldly
Vocations. But in matters of salvation, and in respect of that knowledge,
faith, love and works, which are required of a Christian in years of
discretion: then certainly, what is meat for one must be meat for all; fith the
same things are necessary to all men, by which one must be saved. Let then
every man look on this Confession, as on a thing as fit for him, as for my
Wife and two Children. If this has a fair and public regard, my Catechism
and other books shall (by Gods help) shortly follow. This as the lest and
nimblest, goes out first, to see, whether the way be clear and smooth.

I Have perused this Belief and Confession of Faith, written by a private
Christian, which I judge according to truth, and that he may be a Pattern to
others, to lay aside the study of vain janglings, by which they are perverted
to Fables, and attend with greater diligence to fundamentalls. I approve it to
be Printed,

Ja. Cranford.
Aug. 24, 1646.
To my most Dear AND Newborn Babe Benjamin Herbert.
Sweet Child,
THou have (by the Lords Grace) this day received the first visible Sign and
Seal of his Covenant with us: thou have even now been Baptized with Water,
and (as I may comfortably conceive) with the Spirit of God, who (if thou can
attain the years of discretion) will ( I hope and pray) assist thee with his
effectual grace, to cast off the old man, Adam, with his sinful affections
and actions; and put on the new, Christ Jesus, with his whole Righteousness:
renewing thy heart by degrees, and sanctifying thy person; thus begetting thee
to himself, by the outward seed of his Word, and his inward lights and
motives. This is my hope and prayer for thee. But because this converting Word
is not often preached so fully and diligently, as I wish; our old men being
commonly in many places of this Land, babes in knowledge, and Children in
Christian wisdom: lest thou should want that necessary food, for thy
souls everlasting life; here is, my Love, here is a help, to know that God, to
whom this day, thou have vowed Faith and Obedience. Here is a Confession, made
for thee in the Womb, and now presented thee, for thy future instruction,
consolation and salvation. Receive it courteously, Dear Babe; cast on it thy
mild looks; take it with thy little fingers; kiss it with thy soft, sweet,
sucking lips; and hereafter esteem it above all riches, and keep it as thy
life. It Is thine, and made for thee, although I say, it is likewise made for
others, thy virtuous and beauteous Mother, thy witty and pretty Sister. Thou
may hereafter understand, Knowledge is like the Sun, which casts his beams
abroad, and yet looses no light: Or like a Torch, at which millions may be
lighted, without prejudice to any, or to it self: for, light and heat are
common unto all bodies, and given all to all. In giving Instructions, that,
which I give, remains with me; and although all the world divide my gift, yet
each man may receive it whole. Think not therefore this Book less thine;
because composed for others: but rather endeavor, to make it truly thine, by
diligently learning it, and heartily believing, boldly professing, faithfully
practicing that sound Faith, and those pious Works, I have taught thee in it
and in my Catechism, dedicated to thy fair and loving Sister, which I give
thee likewise. And when thus thou have made them thine, hide not thy light, my
Dear; bury not thy talent: but as a Sun, impart thy light and heat to thy
friends, neighbors, yea all men, with whom thou shall converse. Let it be thy
daily study and holy ambition, to do well to all men; so behaving thy self,
that by thy virtuous examples, Christian instructions, and friendly
admonitions, no man go from thee without gain. Convert sinners from their ill
ways: comfort the penitent and afflicted, in their sorrow and griefs: releeve
the poor, in their hunger, nakedness, miseries: instruct the ignorant, in
honesty and religion: and as Peter, confirm thy brethren the faithful, in
Christian verities and religious duties. Do this, my sweet Infant, do this
diligently, having no other intention, then to please, serve, obey that God,
who shall (I hope) give thee both the will and the deed, both the desire and
power to do such noble things. And as that gracious God has made me a good
help, for thy greater and speedier ability, to advance his glory; study my
Love, study by thy dutiful observance, to answer (if I live) the great
affection, care and pains of me.

Thy then happy Father W. HERBERT.
Pointington. 2. of March, and the 13. day of thy Life. 1644.
The Preface.
Since the Just shall live by his Faith, I hope, no man can justly condemn me,
for the present Declaration of mine. He may rather greatly praise me, who
knows, that the just man must wisely examine his Heart, to see, what Faith he
has, what he Believes to Righteousness; and then boldly open his Mouth, to
Confess it to Salvation, if it be such, as may work both, a true, livelie,
strong Faith; by which he wholly relies on Gods free mercy, through the only
merits of Christ, for his Justification and Glorification. Fearing therefore no
condemnation of the wise, yet not challenging their commendation, my pen has
writ in this paper what Gods finger has graven in my Heart, and shall (I hope)
bring thence into my Mouth, when his glory shall require it, to the loss of
my goods, reputation, liberty, life. How soon this may be, I know not: but I
see, this is a fit time, to try each man's Faith and courage: for now Divisions
reign amongst us, yea over us, and are so strong, sharp, hot; that they like
mighty Rocks, suppress all rights; like two-edged Swords, cut asunder those
bonds, God and nature have made to unite men; and like a raging Fire, burn and
consume this once rich and glorious Country. Least then by the fury of these
unhappie Divisions, and most incivill civil Wars, that Faith be changed,
that Religion exiled, which (by the Lords grace) I Profess: I have thought
expedient, to leave my Belief in writing, for help to my Posterity; that so
my Wife and Children may find here what a Kingdom may loose, and is worth more
then all the World. If it be said, that there are other Confessions, to direct
my Children in the right paths of Faith: I will answer, that such indeed lead
into paths of Faith; but that these paths being in my conceit too strait, I
have made them here a hie Way, and a broad Road, which being well followed,
shall doubtless lead them to Heaven. For although perhaps I differ from other
Protestant Beleefes: yet my Confession being built on a sure foundation, the
written Word of God, it may be a safe guide. But that diversity of opinions
should breed no doubts in Religion, it is my hearty wish and prayer, that we
be all of one mind in the Lord. Yet because this is difficult, I will here
add, that my difference from other Protestants consisting in omissions,
oppositions, or additions; my Children must well examine these three points in
particular. And to help them in their judicious discussion, I tell them now
generally; that if they find, I omit or oppose what in other men's Confessions
wants good authority, being not grounded on Gods Word, they shall do well,
both to approve my omissions, and stand with me, in such oppositions.
Concerning additions, these consisting either of matters or Articles; if the
first are godly, yea necessary to be known, let my wise Issue esteem them,
above all increase of treasure: and if (as it is likewise) in the second;
concerning their number, which exceedes all other Beleefes; then let them
think, I have made so many, that for their brevitie, they be learnt with
facility: for being short, they may like fine morsels, easily be chewed, eat,
digested; the shortest containing some point, and many of them more. And as
eating a bit, provokes often the appetite for more: So that who has learned
one Article of my Belief, may have a desire to learn more, I have linkt them
all together, often grounding the following, on the body or matter of the
preceding. And if this, with their great number of hundred and three score,
shall notwithstanding the brevitie of each, make them seem long and tedious,
yet hard to be learnt without book, by my Children, who shall perhaps have but
ordinary wits: my answer is; that if we had in writing all the Songs, Tales,
Ridles, countrey-wenches can sing and tell, although they cannot read, and
abound not in wit; it might appear, this Confession is not too long, for the
memory of al those, who instead of such vanities, apply their minds to
Religious studies, and to whom it is freely given, to know the mysteries, or
secret things of Gods Kingdom. One thing more I suspect, may be objected
against me; that being but a private man, it is presumption in me, to make a
public Confession: and to such I answer, that though I have no office in the
Church or State; yet as I am a Husband and Father, I am a public man, and so
have just authority, to publish and declare my will to those, who are subject
to it, and to them manifest my Faith, to whom I owe oeconomique, politic and
Religious instructions. Besides, this objection might be as good, against the
first framers of those Beleefes and Confessions of Faith, the French, Germans
and English have: for, I suppose, they were contrived by some particular
persons, who though Bishops or Ministers, had yet no more authority, then I,
to impose them upon the Church of God. But as those were received by general
consent, so mine may be, and from private become public, and from proper,
common, at least to my Wife and Posterity, who in it and my Catechism shall
(I hope) find all knowledges necessary to their eternal Salvation. Intending
to leave them both Catechism and Confession, and this being made last, I have
either omitted, or lightly handled many points, which are full in my
Catechism. Let then one book help the other, and both show my Wife and
Children all necessary truths, for their perfection and felicity. Yet least
my books should not be sufficient, to make them perfect in the Lord; let them
frequently read, diligently study, and seriously meditate the Scriptures,
which are able, to make them wise to Salvation.

HERBERTS Belief and Confession of FAITH.
Lord, I Believe: But that my Heart Believe always to Righteousness, and that
my Verbal Confession be made to Salvation:

Help thou my Unbelief. I. I Believe and Confess one only God, who is an
eternal, infinite, omniscient and omnipotent Spirit: a Nature most holy, just
and gracious: an Essence most perfect, simple, incorporall, jndivisible and
incomprehensible; and this God I adore.

II. I Believe, that in this Essence, substance, or Nature, there are three
distinct Persons, complete and rational, each subsisting and living of it
self, having indivisibly the whole divine substance: all equal in eternity,
infinity, wisdom, power, justice, will, etc. Yet distinguished among
themselves, by their order, names, internal actions, and manner of working
externally.

III. I Believe, that God the Father is the first Person of the three, not in
time, dignity, power, or the like: for in the three Persons, there is no
prioritie of time, no distinction of power, no difference of will, no
diversity of wisdom, justice, mercy, goodness, etc. but because his being and
beginning are of himself; and that the Father is in order before the Son, to
whom he communicates his whole divin Essence, by an eternal and
incomprehensible Generation; and with him to the holy Ghost, by a Spiration or
Breathing, which is likewise eternal and incomprehensible: so that the Father
is the eternal beginning and fountain of the Trinity, and likewise of all
external actions, as Election, Reprobation and Creation; working in these,
which regard the Creatures, by the Son and the holy Ghost.

IV. I Believe, that the Word is the second Person, the only natural Son of
the Father, the brightness of his glory, and the expres Image of his Person,
eternally engendered by him, and so having the whole divin Essence of the
Father, with whom eternally he produces the holy Spirit, by whom he works
externally from the Father.

V. I Believe, that the holy Ghost is the third Person of the Deity,
eternally and equally proceeding from the Father and Son, yet not as from two
beginnings, but as from one only, being in two Persons: and so having the
whole divin Essence, by an eternal spiration from both, from whom he works
externally.

VI. I Confess, that when I speak of beginning in the Persons of the Godhead
I speak after the manner of men, and according to our capacity: for, I
Believe, that being eternal, they can have no beginning, as we conceive a
beginning, in respect of time, days hours, minutes, moments.

VII. And although this Eternity and many other things in God, as the
Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Essence, the Generation of the Word,
Spiration of the holy Ghost, and Divin Proprieties or Attributes, as
Infinity, Omniscience, Omnipotence, Mercy, Justice; be much above reason and
all human apprehension: yet I Doubt not of the truth thereof; but with an
humble and strong Faith, say to that Eternal, Infinite, All knowing, Almighty
and Incomprehensible Spirit: thou art my God, because I cannot conceive thee.

VIII. I Believe, that there is no Division of the Essence, nor confusion of
the Persons: for the Essence or Being, Nature, Substance is so whole in all the
Persons; that they are all but one and the same substance, and so but one
indivisible God: and the Persons are so distinct in their Order, Names and
incommunicable Proprieties, as these are particular and Personal: that the
first cannot be the second; nor the Son, the Father; nor the holy Ghost,
either of these, begetting or being begotten: and therefore.

IX. I Believe, that the Father and first Person of the Deity has Being of
himself: neither made, nor created, nor begotten, nor proceeding; but
begetting his Son, and with him producing or sending forth the holy Ghost.

X. I Believe, that the Son and second Person is neither made, nor created, nor
proceeding: but begotten eternally by the Father, with whom he sends forth the
holy Ghost

XI. I Believe, that the holy Ghost and third Person is neither made, nor
created, nor begotten, but eternally proceeding from the Father and Son.

XII. I Believe, that though the three Persons be distinguished among themselves
and known to us, by the names of Father or first, Son or second, Holy Ghost
or Third: yet the names, which belong to the Divin Essence, as Jehova, Lord,
God and the like, are common to the three Persons: so that I call the Father,
God; the Son, God, and the holy Spirit, God: and say also, that God is the
Father; and God, the Son; and God the holy Ghost: yet acknowledge, admire and
adore but one God, one in Nature, three in Persons, who differ really each from
other, in their particular and Personal Proprieties but from the Essence,
only formally, by diverse manners or fashions of subsisting.

XIII. So that in th'Unitie of the Godhead, I Believe a Plurality, not
Essential, nor Accidental; but only Personal. Not Essential, because the
Deity is a most simple Essence: nor Accidental, for, God admits no accidents
nor composition, being a most pure act: neither are the Persons compounded, as
if they were a thing and another thing, or part of the Godhead: but they are
the Divine substance, and three subsistences or manners of being.

XIV. I Believe, that whatsoever is in God, is God, because there is nothing in
God, which be not properly the Essence or Persons. Therefore, all Gods
Attributes or Proprieties belong to the Essence, without division; and to each
person, with the limitation or distinction of personal propriety. I say
therefore, that Wisdom is Essential to the Deity, yea Deity it self; and
that it is in the Father, Wisdom begetting; in the Son, Wisdom begotten; in
the holy Ghost, Wisdom proceeding: and upon this ground.

XV. I Believe, that the Essence being most simple, and which admits no
division; the essential proprieties of God differ not truly from the Essence,
nor from themselves, but only in our conception, which being weak, and our
understanding finit, borrows the assistance of many distinct acts, thoughts,
sights, to know in part the incomprehensible God.

XVI. To speak then properly, I Believe and Confess, that there are not in God
many Attributes (except the Personal proprieties of begetting, etc.) but one
only, which is th'Essence it self; by which God is Eternal, Great, Wise,
Just, etc. and so Eternity it self, Power, Wisdom, Justice, etc. yet so that
I conceive not, that his Mercy and Justice, Love and Hatred, etc. differ in
themselves, and from God: for, they are but one thing in God, or rather they
are God himself: for,

XVII. I Believe, that Gods Essential proprieties are in him, neither
quantities, nor qualities of the divine Essence, nor accidents in that Essence,
but his whole and only Essence: for, God admits no quantity, by which he may
be said to be so much and so much; nor quality, by which he be said such and
such: but whatsoever God is, he is such only by Essence; great, without
quantity; good, without quality.

XVIII. I Believe, that according to our apprehension and to the truth it
self, we may call the Father Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, Merciful, Just,
Wise, and the like; and so likewise the Son and holy Ghost: yet we must not,
and I do not believe three Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, Immutable, True,
Wise Gods or Essences: but one only Eternal, Infinite, Omnipotent, Holy God
or Essence.

XIX. I Believe, God has communicated and still co^municates some of his
Proprieties, both to Angels and Men, as justice, holiness, wisdom, power, and
the like, in a wise proportion to their capacity, and regard of his own
glory: but there are some so essential and proper to the Deity; that he will
not, and so cannot communicate them to the creature: as Eternity, Simplicity,
Infinity, Omniscience, Omnipotence: for thus he should destroy the nature of
the creature, and make her a God, by the communication of the incommunicable
divine Essence, in whieh, or rather which those Proprieties are.

XX. By Gods Eternity, I conceive in part, and Believe wholly and perfectly
that Being, he has of himself, free from mutation and passion, without
beginning and end of time, and without succession of first and last, past and
future: in whom all other Beings do begin: who gives to all life and breath
and all things: in whom we live and move: of whom, through whom, and for whom
are all things.

XXI. By Gods Simplicity, I conceive and Believe likewise his pure Essence,
void of composition, division, multiplication: for, God is not compounded of
matter and form, nor of gender and difference, nor of substance and accidents,
nor of any parts or things, sensible, or intelligible: but whatsoever God is,
he is the same essentially, all things being but one in him, which in creatures
are diverse. And the Trinity of Persons hinders not this Simplicity: for, God
is three, by coexistence of Persons, not by composition of parts.

XXII. By Gods Infinity, I conceive the immensitie of Gods Essence, void of
measures, limits or bounds, being all in himself, all in all things, all in
every thing, and all without all things: filling and containing all things,
yet being contained by none: moving the world, and yet being without motion:
for, what is infinite has no motion nor mutation. And this Infinity is that,
we call Omnipresence and Ubiquity, by which the Deity is every where.

XXIII. By Gods Omniscience, I understand that one eternal, infinite, simple
and perfect act or sight, by which God comprehends himself, as an infinite
object, and by himself knows all things, past, present, future; past and future
to us, but all ever present to him.

XXIV. By Gods Omnipotence, I conceive that most simple and perfect act, by
which he is in himself able to do whatsoever he will; so that no Creature can
resist his Power, which has no limits but his Will.

XXV. Gods Essence being simple and true, can admit no contrariety, or
falsitie: and therefore I Believe, that God will not, and so cannot do things
contradictorie, as to make a man unreasonable, or a body without its length,
breadth, depth: for, this should be body and no body; and the other, man and
no man.

XXVI. I Believe and Confess, that God can (if he will) do many things more,
then he has done: as, to Create new Worlds, and likewise destroy his own
works: yet from his infinite power, nothing must be affirmed, as done, or to be
done, unles his Will be proved.

XXVII. By Gods Will, I Conceive that most simple, infinite, perfect act, by
which he eternally Will himself, and all things for himself: so that God has
not two, nor contrary Wills; but one only, constant and immutable: yet to
help our weakness, in the imperfect conception of the incomprehensible God, we
have many nominall, but not real distinctions of Gods Will, and chiefly
sour: the Will of Good Pleasure and of Sign, Absolut and Conditional.

XXVIII. By the Will of Sign, I understand those means, by which God
manifests what is pleasant or displeasant to him, as his injunctions and
prohibitions, promises and threatenings. And so I call both Testaments, the
Will of Sign, or the Revealed Will: because we see in them what is secret
and hid in God.

XXIX. By the Will of Pleasure, I Conceive Gods only Will, by which he most
freely and for himself, eternally decrees what must be done. I say eternally:
for, Gods Will has no first nor last: yet in respect of things decreed, God
is said, to have decreed, that they should come to pass, in that order and
succession, we see.

XXX. I Believe Gods Will Absolute, because it is grounded on his sole good
Pleasure, and depends in no-wise upon things made or done in time: but is the
Cause of whats'ever is made or done, of beings and actions, yet not of the
malice of the actions.

XXXI. And I call it Conditional, because Gods commandments and prohibitions,
promises and threatenings have a condition of obedience or disobedience joined
with them.

XXXII. I Believe, that God is so absolut Lord and Master of the whole world,
that nothing is, nor can be done against his free and only will of
Good-Pleasure. For although many things be done against the Will of Sign;
yet they are not, nor can be done, against the Will of Good pleasure: but all
creatures are governed, and all things do happen, by and according to the
eternal will or Providence of God, which consisting not only in knowledge,
but also in government, those very things, which in respect of second causes,
we call Contingent, or of Chance, are most necessary, and so necessarily
happen, in regard of Gods absolute and immutable Will: yet not by a necessity
of compulsion, chiefly in the rational creatures, but of immutabilitie.

XXXIII. As I Believe, there is a God, such as I have described, yea, far
above all my apprehension: So, I Believe in him, Father, Son, Holy Ghost, in
the unity of Essence, putting my whole confidence in his Name, for whatsoever
concerns me, in goods, friends, reputation, body and soul.

XXXIV. I believe, that the Name of God is admirable and reverent: but by this
word, I understand not only those Names, Jehova, God, Lord, Father, Christ,
Savior, Jesus, Comforter, etc. but the Divine Essence represented me by those
Names. I therefore tremble not, nor bow at the sound, or sight of those Names:
but I fear and adore the Majesty of God, his power, wisdom, justice, love
and the rest, which I conceive, in hearing or seeing those Names.

XXXV. I believe, that God being incomprehensible to us, because he is infinite,
and we finit; and there is no proportion of a finit to an infinite thing: he has
yet in some sort revealed himself to man, in the Creatures and Scripture: for,
both in part declare his eternity, wisdom, power, goodness and perfection. Then
concerning the Creatures.

XXXVI. I believe and Confess, that God, to communicate his goodness, and for
his will and good pleasure, made immediately by himself, all things invisible
and visible: some of nothing, and others of a matter already created by him,
but naturally unapt to produce the thing made thereof, first separating that
matter, then giving it a better form, more perfection, and greater Ornament.

XXXVII. I Believe, that God, although wanting nothing, as being a complete
essence; which can receive no perfection by the creature, did yet for his
glory and praise, make all things for himself, and for the good, help and
felicity of the rational creature, to which all other things, yea it self
manifest the excellence of the maker.

XXXVIII. God being the soverain good I believe, that all his creatures were
good and perfect in their kind. I make not therefore two principles or
beginnings of things good and ill: for, these ill things were not so in
themselves, but very good, for the use and end, they were made.

XXXIX. I Believe, that the Trinity did concur in the Creation; the Father
as the first cause of all things, making the World by the Son, who is his Word
and Wisdom, and by the holy Ghost, his power and virtue. And all these three
Persons in one Essence, I love, serve and adore, with equal affection,
fidelity, respect and fear.

XL. I Believe, that though the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the
whole world be a fair glass, to behold therein his greatness, wisdom, goodness,
etc. Yet Angels and Men only were made in Gods Image; and hereupon.

XLI. I Conceive and Believe, that this Image was not in the shape of man's
body: for, Angels are but Spirits, and God himself has no body: though the
Scripture for our capacity speaks of Gods eyes, ears, hands, to show, he
knows all, can do all. Seeking then that Image of God in man, I find it
chiefly in the Souls invisible and immortal substance, having a wise
understanding, and this with the will and memory, yea with the whole body,
just and upright; besides that Majesty and power over all these inferior
creatures, by which he was Gods lieutenant on earth, and so represented him in
some sort, above all the rest.

XLII. I Believe, that Angels being all made in Gods Image, which consisted in
their invisibilitie, immortality and uprightnes, some fell voluntarily from
God, and others did remain in their integrity, assisted, and confirmed in it
by Gods grace in Christ, who is their Head, if not by redemption, yet by
creation and Adoption, or gracious union with God: for, he is the Image of the
invisible God, and the first borne of every creature, by whom and for whom
were created all things, in Heaven and Earth, visible and invisible; and
therefore without whom Angels nor Men, could be neither created in the Image of
God, nor adopted for Sons.

XLIII. Angels being thus confirmed in Gods grace and eternal felicity, I
Believe them glorious, diligent, faithful Ministers of Gods will, for his
glory and the good of his Church, and fair miroirs of the riches of his
mercy: whereas others, who fell, being confirmed and hardened in malice, do
what they can against that Church, being in their most wretched state of
everlasting damnation, woeful spectacles of Gods justice and anger toward sin.

XLIV. I Believe, that Adam having a will free and indifferent both to good and
evil, did willingly reject the first, and embrace the second: and so forsaking
God, and transgressing his law, which then he might have kept, if he had been
willing; he lost that integrity and wisdom, he was created in, and that
absolute yet gentle power, he had over these inferior creatures; yea that
immortality both of body and soul, by which the body should never have been
forsaken by the soul, nor this deprived of Gods grace, which is her only
Life.

XLV. I Believe, that as we were all in Adam, and he did then represent us; so
he lost for us all what he lost for himself. Therefore all his children (none
excepted but Christ) are cursed and dead in him, being all guilty of the sins,
he committed, in eating of the fruit prohibited by God, and subject to his
punishment. I say sins in plural: for, pride, incredulity, murder,
intemperance and theft, did all concur with his disobedience.

XLVI. I Believe, that those sins having infected the first man's person, and
his person corrupted his nature; this spreads her killing infection into all
the persons, which naturally descend from Adam and by him, that is, by natural
generation: so that all such persons are shapen in iniquity, conceived in
sin, and thus defiled and cursed, both in soul and body.

XLVII. I call this sin Original, believing it, a natural and strong aversion
from good, and propension to ill, an inbred lust, desire, concupiscence, by
which we will, act, or not act, in opposition to Gods Laws, and the rules of
reason: and so is the corrupt fountain of all our Actual transgressions of the
Lords Laws, in thoughts, affections, words, actions; yea, of our omissions of
all holy duties.

XLVIII. I Believe that this sin has so corrupt our whole nature, that of our
selves, or without the special grace of God, we can not think, desire, love,
fear, work, or speak any thing, which be pleasant to him.

XLIX. This sin being the cause of all our miseries; the breeder of our fears,
cares, pains; the murderer of our souls and bodies: as I know, all men die
bodily for it; so I judge them all damned, considering them all in Adam,
guilty of his dis-obedience: for, the wages of sin is dead, both corporal and
spiritual: all sins being of such killing nature, so mortal in themselves,
that the lest deserves many deaths.

L. Yet I Believe, and to the glory of my Gods Mercy Confess, that both
Original and Actual sins are not imputed to all men, but by his most free
gift pardoned to many, who by this grace of Remission of sin, are delivered
from that spiritual and perpetual death, by which the rest of mankind is
swallowed.

LI. Those blessed men, who obtain this gratuit pardon, I call Elect, and those
wretched persons, who miss it, Reprobat: the first being taken out of the
general and sinful lump of natural corruption in Adam, by Gods eternal
Election; and the second left in the same, by his eternal Reprobation,

LII. Considering with fear and pity, the miserable state of these, and
seeking earnestly the Cause of their Reprobation, I find it in Gods will. I
Believe then, and to the glory of my Gods Justice, Confess, that he decreed
eternally, to Reprobat, reject, disallow, or pass by some of mankind, which
should voluntarily fall into sin, and so damn them, to declare his Justice.

LIII. Thus I think not, that their Infidelity or sin foreseen be the cause of
their Reprobation: for thus we should all be Reprobat: but I believe and say
again, that God was moved, to decree it, by his free and just Will, being
resolved of the same lump, to make some vessels to honor, and others unto
dishonor; and so as a great Lord, to furnish his great house, with vessels of
all sorts.

LIVE. Yet I say not, that God made some men to be damned, although he did
reprobat them: for, none is damned, as he is man, created in great purity; but
as he is deformed and marred by his voluntary folly and guilt: neither is
dammation the proper end of his Reprobation, or an effect of it; but is a
mean, to manifest the glory of the Lords Justice and his hate toward sin, in
the severe and everlasting punishments, he inflicts on sinners.

LV. These punishments being the fit wages of sin, and this sin most voluntary
in the Reprobat, consid'red in themselves, who daily and wilfully sin, and in
Adam, whose fall was free: they have no just ground to complain of God, as if
he were the cause or author of their sin, which I Believe, he is not, but rather
hates and forbids it. For though they cannot forbear sin, but much delight in
it, and commit it with greedines: yet

LVI. I Believe, that sin is not prompted to them, nor forced on them by God,
but by the suggestions of the Devil, and corruptions of their nature: and God
is not obliged to strengthen them against those tentations and depravation; but
may justly deny to them, or withdraw his graces from, them, and give them up
to their hearts lusts, and Satan's power: neither likewise was he obliged, to
hinder Adams fall; but might, and did most justly permit and decree it; not as
a sin, but as a mean to manifest his mercy and justice: mercy to few, and
justice to many.

LVII. If my blind reason shall dictat, that thus the Lord is hard, injust,
partial; I Will reprove it by this my firm Belief: that God owing nothing to
man, no not the coursest bread, he eats, must not, cannot be accused of
severitie, injustice or partiality: for, no man can plead against God, nor
the thing formed, say to him, who formed it; why have thou made me thus? We
were all in Gods power, as the clay in the Potters hands, fit to be made
vessels to such uses and services, as our Lord and maker thought best, for the
revelation of his wisdom, power, mercy, justice.

LVIII. If then God loved Jacob, and hated Esau, before they were borne, and
had done either good or ill; it is enough for me to know, 'twas his will, to
do so; and who can resist or alter it, being almighty and immutable. And who
dares censure it, being most just, yea the rule of justice? I dare not, will
not, cannot find fault with the just and hie God, who has mercy on whom he
will, and hardens whom he will.

LIX. Although this word Harden seems hard, yet I Believe, that there is no
unrighteousnes with God: for, he hardens but those, who have hardened
themselves, by their wilful abuse of good motions, predications, admonitions
and corrections: and he hardens them not, by infusing any malice into their
hearts; but only by a just denial, or subtraction of the graces, he owes them
not, and so by suffering them to follow their lewd inclinations, and Satan's
wicked tentations. And this they do so wilfully, eagerly, constantly; that as
their Reprobation is sure and immutable, in respect of Gods will, which can
admit no change: so they make their damnation most certain, by their
infidelity and wickedness.

LX. These Reprobat, infidel and wicked persons being as lims and children of
Satan, are called the world, of which the devil is the Prince, being indeed
their King and God, not by creation (for, he can create nothing) but by their
free subjection to his laws, those wicked thoughts, lewd affections, injust
actions, blasphemous words, wherewith they are clothed and sealed, as by the
infamous liverie and mark of the Prince of darkness; under whose black
colors, they fight against the Church of God, the blessed company of his Elect.

LXI. Yet I believe, and much rejoice, that their endeavors are in vain,
unles it be to try the patience, and purge the virtue of Gods Saints, as gold
is tried and refined in a furnace: for as the Reprobate can never do good
works, as they are pleasant unto God, and may have his gracious regard and
eternal reward; 'cause they want Faith, the root of all good works, and do
not aim at Gods glory, which should be their chief end: So

LXII. I Believe, that the Elect cannot commit such sins, as make them loose
finally the infinite and immutable love of God: for though thy sin often, yea
grievously, and are not sometimes called, till the last hour of the day of
their life; yet many waters cannot extinguish that love: but Gods foundation
remaining sure, and his choice of them being eternal, he loves them to the
end, and so gives them remission of their sins; and freely and thoroughly
Justifies, Sanctifies, Glorifies those, he has in mercy Called and
Predestined.

LXIII. This Predestination being eternal, and (as the Word it self does
show) a fore appointment of men to life everlasting, before they had any
being, is (I believe) gratuit, grounded on the free grace and mere good will
of God, and not on our faith or good works foreseen: for, these are not
properly ours, but proceed from the Lord, who does therefore give them to us,
because he has Elected us: So that they are effects or fruits of his eternal
Election; and not causes or roots thereof.

LXIV. I therefore Believe and Confess, that it is not in him, who will; nor
in him, who runs; but in God, who shows mercy. Not our good affections, nor
our holy actions, but Gods mercy is the cause of our Election. And as God in
mercy elects us unto Salvation, so by the same he Predestinates us to the
means thereof, a right Belief and holy Life.

LXV. The life of a Christian consisting in these two, and Faith coming by
hearing of Gods Word, those men only are Called, whom he has Predestined:
and their Calling is outward and inward, both effectual. I mean not then that
Vocation, which is, or may be common to all men; that general invitation to
grace and Salvation, which many hear, and few regard; that outward Preaching
of Gods Word, which few truly beeleve, and faithfully Obey, but sounding in the
ears of Reprobate persons, either inlightens and moves not their hardened
hearts, or inlightens and moves them so lightly, that it neither begets true
Faith, nor works real alteration or conversion in them: but by this Vocation
only proper to the Elect,

LXVI. I Understand a clear manifestation of Gods truth, to which The Elect are
both outwardly and inwardly drawn effectually, from the general corruption of
infidelity and sin, to serve him in Faith and good Works, in a sure hope of
Salvation, their minds being enlightened by God, and their hearts mollify'd.

LXVII. The outward Preaching of Gods Word, and inward persuasions and motions
of his Spirit being necessary to this effectual Vocation, I Believe it a
grace of God, who Calls us in mercy, and draws us pow'rfully; yet by such
gentle means, and such fair lights, that we willingly follow him: and upon
the same ground, I conceive it above the strength of our nature, whose
corruption being well known to me.

LXVIII. I Believe and Confess, that we have no preparation nor inclination to
this merciful and effectual Vocation; and that our moral Honesty, or
natural goodness, strength, Wisdom or Knowledge contribut nothing to our
Vocation, nor cannot work our Conversion, which properly is either Vocation it
self, or an effect of it: for when the Lord does pow'rfully call us, we must
without opposition or resistance turn back, from our ill ways, and willingly
follow those paths, through which he leads us to Heaven.

LXIX. These paths being hard and stony, most unpleasant to our corrupt
nature, as mortifying it, and subduing it to the Spirit, which is revived, are
made easy, by the assistance of Gods Spirit, who freely does in part deliver
his Elect from their natural corruption, and renewing in them Gods Image, does
strengthen them to do good works, to the glory of their Maker, who thus
Sanctifies those, whom he has Justified.

LXX. I Believe, that God Justifies, both by pardoning sin, and imputing
righteousness; and acknowledge this Remission and Jmputation an eternal and
free action of God, who for Christ's full satisfaction is pleas^d to remit sin,
and impute unto the Sinner his perfect righteousness, thus to make him just
before him, and give him everlasting life, for certainly, God glorifies all
those, whom he has Justified: and as he Justifies freely, without respect of
works; so in mercy he Glorifies.

LXXI. I Believe then, that being Justified freely by the mercy of God,
through the merits of Christ, which our faith as a hand seizes, thus making his
righteousness ours; we are by the same mercy and merits Glorified, yea so
freely, that God in his eternal will has Predestined us to glory, to
manif^st the riches of his mercy, in our perpetual happiness.

LXXII. I Confess then, that by grace we are saved, through faith apprehending
that grace, God offers us in Christ: and not by works, least any man should
glory in himself, if his good deeds could purchase him that excellent
felicity, God has prepared for the Faithful.

LXXIII. I therefore Expect the glory of the children of God, from his mercy
and love to me in Christ, in whom we are his Adopted children, and so Coheires
of his Kingdom: and not by virtue of my wor^es, be they never so good: for
though they be commanded me, to testify my obedience, love, gratitude to God,
to advance his glory, and make my Vocation and Election certain, by showing,
that my faith is not dead in my heart, but is a fruitful tree: and though
again I be created in Jesus Christ unto good works, and so resolve fully to
walk in them, by the assistance of Gods Spirit, as being the known way to
everlast^ng happiness: yet

LXXIV. I Believe, they cannot be a me^^^rious cause of those infinite joys,
which neither our wisest hearts can conceive, nor our best works equal; as
there being no proportion of a finit and temporary action to that infinite and
everlasting Life, which again I expect from the grace and mercy of God, both
in soul and body: for though this shall die and corrupt; yet remembering
Christ's promises, to raise all men at the last day, and considering, that it is
fit, the whole man receive for ever the reward of his wickedness, or feel
the effects of Gods bounty,

LXXV I Believe, that my flesh, my very flesh shall by the power of Christ be
then reunited unto my Soul, never to be separated, but to enjoy both together
the fruits of Christ's merits, a perpetual fulness of joy, which surpasses all
conception and expression of man; my whole person being made so glorious, that
neither spirit nor flesh shall want any thing requisite to their full perfection.

LXXVI. This glorious Resurrection being proper to the Elect, is a free gift of
God to the secret members of Christ's body, which is known by the name of
Church. I Believe then, that God has here a Church, or assembly of men,
called by his Spirit and Word unto the State of Grace; and that this Assembly
is Christ's spiritual and mystical Body.

LXXVII. I Call it Spiritual: for as Adam is the Head of the company of
carnal men, who, live after the flesh, as being his Children, engendered in his
corruption: so those, who live after the Spirit, are the blessed body of
Christ, who is their Head by Adopotion, Redemption, Sanctification or
Renovation.

LXXVIII. I call it likewise Mystical or hid; because Gods Election and our
Regeneration are not things subject to the eye: and so the Church is invisible,
her members being not seen, as they are Elect, though they be visible, as men
professing the true Religion, and by their holiness manifesting their faith, an
effect of their Election. I say their Holiness; 'cause.

LXXIX. I Believe, that Gods Church is Holy, all fair and without spot, yet
not properly in her self: for, being compounded of men, of whom the best is a
Sinner, this Holiness of the body is as his Righteousness, Imputative, God
imputing unto the Church the holiness of Christ, which covers her impurities:
and as Gods gifts are without repentance; so

LXXX. I Believe this holiness so inherent unto the Church, that she cannot err
finally in those points of faith and manners, which work her damnation: for
though she admits some errors, and commits grievous sins; yet she is recalled
and reformed by her Lover and Lord, so that her fall is not final, nor her
sickness to death.

LXXXI. Her members then (by which I understand only The Elect) either never
loosing, or certainly recovering their donative integrity in faith and all
good works, and Christ having promised her a subsistence or being, till the
end of the World, I call her Infallible.

LXXXII. And in this respect of continuation from the Worlds beginning, unto
its end, and because she is not tied to places and persons, but is, or may be
spread through all nations, and consists of all sorts or degrees of persons; I
Believe her Catholic or Universal; although sometimes she be contained in a
little compass, confined to a kingdom or Town, there being sometimes but few
outward professors of the truth, and among them but few, whose faith and life
be right: for though many be called, yet few are chos'n, and those many, who
are thus called and not chosen, are often but a small number, compard unto the
rest, who never hear Gods voice, and know not his judgments.

LXXXIII. Which being true, and so considering the Church as Visible and
Invisible, a Politic and mystical Body; I allow her two Heads, Believing
her, as a Civil Body, subject to Kings and States, under whom she subsists,
and so obliged to all their Laws if just, that she sins against Christ her
Invisible Head, to deny them her Obedience.

LXXXIIII. The Church, which is likewise a Spiritual body, the Assembly of
those faithful persons, who live and walk after the Spirit, must be subject
unto Christ in all things: for, all his Laws are just, and there is no
authority, which on any pretext may exempt her, from her due Obedience to
Christ her Husband, Head and Sun.

LXXXV. Considering Christ as a Husband, and the Church as a Wife, I Believe
her subject to him, obliged to obey all his Laws, acknowledge him for her
only Husband and Lord, adhere to him, depend on him, forsake all false
lovers, and seek to please him in all things.

LXXXVI. Considering Christ as a Head, and the Church as a Body, I Believe,
there must be an union of the members with the head, and amongst themselves: so
that they all receive life from the head, and live among themselves in a holy
union, which is called Communion of Saints, having Being, Life, Affections,
Actions, Food, Faith, and Hope common, for certainly,

LXXXVII. I Conceive and Believe, that all the members of Christ's Church make
but one mystical Body; Quickened by him; Aiming as one man unto his glory and
the preservation and good of the Body; Agreeing in the performance of the
Heads commandments; Breaking one bread, and feeding on his flesh, the merits
of his life and death, and the graces of his Spirit; Yielding faith to his
Word, believing his promises; and Expecting his merciful Rewards.

LXXXVIII. This one Body of Christ having many Members most fitly joined
together, to grow up into him, he has for the edification of his Body, for
the collection and perfection of all his Saints, and for the work of the
Ministry, given Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, and so
sent many laborers into his field and Vineyard. I then Believe, that the
Ministers of the Church must have from God their Commission, either
Extraordinary, or Ordinary.

LXXXIX. The Apostles, Prophets, Evanglists, being Extraordinary Ministers,
had (I Believe) an Extraordinary Vocation, sealed by Gods spirit, both
inwardly and outwardly: inwardly, by a great knowledge of his mysteries, and
strong motifs to advance his glory: and outwardly, by a good life, and by the
gifts of tongues, miracles, prophesies.

XC. The Leviticall Law being abolisht, the Gospel, Preached and writ, and
believed by many nations, those holy men did die, and those gifts ceased: and
then succeeded and succeed Ministers called ordinarily, examined by the
Church, concerning faith, knowledge, good life; then elected and confirmed, for
the right administration of the Sacraments, and predication of Gods Word, to
give their flocks what they owe them, full instructions in faith and good
manners, dissvasions from all sins, exhortations to piety and all Christian
virtues, means of reconciliation with God and men, visits and comforts in
their miseries, captivity, diseases, death.

XCI. These Ministers being Shepherds to feed the Church, must discharge
their duty, both in public and in private, both by examples and counsels,
leading their flocks to green pastures and still waters, and taking care of a
weak sheep, which cannot well follow the rest; and of that too, which goes
astray.

XCII. These Ministers being likewise as dogs, must watch over the flock, least
grievous wolves enter the fold; yea least some of the Church arise, speaking
perverse things, teaching false doctrines, breaking the Communion of Saints.
For though the members of the Church cannot say one to another, I have no need
of you: since even the feeble members are necessary, and that in love and
policy those members are adorned, which are less comely: Yet

XCIII. I Believe, the Church must not admit, and may expel all those, who
err obstinatly in points foundamentall, shaking the foundation of necessary
saving truths; or who live so lewdly, that they might infect the faithful,
with their vicious customs; and be a scandal to the Church, by their wicked
conversation: for, the Elect being children of light, and the Church compared
to the Moon, it becomes them to walk by light.

XCIV. Conceiving Christ a Sun, I call the Church a Moon. I believe then,
that she must borrow all her light from him. Although therefore the Church has
power in things indifferent, as concerning the time and place of Gods worship,
fasts, feasts, postures and other things, which in themselves are neither good
nor bad, but left to each man's discretion: yet she must not presume to alter or
infringe the laws of Chirst, add to them, or detract from them; or to impose
upon his children and members, that is, upon her self, aniething repugnant to
the revealed will of her Husband and Head: but in all her decrees, concerning
faith, discipline, good manners, and any great controversy, the Church,
whether particular, provincial, national or universal, must in all her
consultations, and decisions receive her light only from Christ her Sun.

XCV. This Sun shining in the holy Scripture, as in his glorious firmament,
I cast my eyes on him, there to behold and admire his beauty. As then I
Believe, that there is a God, and Believe or Trust in that God: so I Believe to
him, giving assent unto his Word, and being fully persuaded of its infallible
truth in all things; and namely,

XCVI. In the declration of Gods nature, power, wisdom, mercy, justice and
will: in the manifestation of his Son in the flesh: in the gift of his holy
Spirit: in the Creation and Rule of the World: description of man's State, both
in Adam and Christ: doctrines of faith and works: confutation of falsehood and
errors: condemnation and correction of sinful affections and all vicious
actions: narration of things past: prophesies of future: consolations in
miseries: threatenings of destruction and damnation for sin: promises of
preservation and Salvation through Christ, whom with the arms of faith and
love I do embrace.

XCVII. All these excellent things being containd in the Scripture, I Believe
it the chief book of all, made by divine inspiration, or special assistance
of God, for the study and use of the faithful, who may, yea must either read
it, or hear it read and endeavor to understand and believe it.

XCVIII. For though it be obscure, in respect of its prophesies and some deep
mysteries: yet in respect of necessary truths concerning faith, and works, it
is most clear to them, who with an humble heart, fervent prayers, frequent
reading, serious meditation, religious intention seek the meaning of it,
making that holy book the sure and only foundation of their whole faith,
principles of their religion, rule of wisdom, justice and all virtues; and so
preferring it to all writings, books, traditions, Canons or Constitutions, of
Church or State, that it be the touch stone, to try the truth and goodness of
others.

XCIX. By the name of Scripture, I Understand only those Books which are
called Canonique, and as such, received and believed by the Protestant or
reformed true Church, who knows them to be the right Word of God, by the
effectual persuasion of the holy Ghost: by their own excellence above the
light of our nature: by their great power, to inlighten, move, comfort,
terrify the diverse hearts of men: by the Satisfaction, they give faithful
readers, both in faith and manners: by the accomplishment of what is prophesi'd
in them: by the conformity of their writers, when they handle the same
matters: by the consent of the Jewish and Christian Churches: and so being
assured, that they are such, does show, commend and command them to all
Christians, in the name of her Lord and Head.

C. I say, she commands them in the name of her Lord: for though the Church
show me these Books, yet their authority is not from the Church, but from God,
whose written Word and will they are, so sufficient and full, that they are
able, to make the man of God wise unto salvation, through faith in Christ
Jesus, perfect in all good works.

CI. The Scripture containing Gods Covenant of favor and blessings, both
corporal and spiritual, temporal and eternal, to his faithful and obedient
people: I Believe, he was pleased, to confirm and seal his gracious promises;
least any man, whom they concern, should mistrust or forget them. The
confirmation was by an Oath, God swearing by himself, to bless in Christ (the
seed of Abraham) all nations of the earth. The Seals were and are Sacraments,
which represented to the Fathers and do still assure us of Salvation through
Christ: for though their matter did differ from ours, yet their signification
was the same, even Christ the Lamb slain, from the worlds beginning to its
consummation.

CII. These Sacraments being holy signs of Christ, must have from him
institution, promise of grace, matter and form, with the analogy or
correspondence between the element or sign, and the thing signified in some
propriety. I Believe then, that Christ ordained the Sacraments, our holy
Church has now, appointing their matter and form, by which matter he
represents the inward effects of his grace, promised to those, who shall
receive the sign, in faith, love, pur^^^.

CIII. Christ being the substance, or inward matter of the Sacraments, is
likewise the inward Minister, giving or doing to the faithful souls what the
signs do to the bodies: for unto such the signs are not naked; but with the
signs they receive Christ, with all his benefits, the merits of his life and
death: whereas the Reprobat, infidel, or wicked persons being not of Gods
election, and so wanting the good disposition, which is required in all worthy
Communicants, or partakers of Christ's merits, receive the signs to their
condemnation, missing the grace, which is not tied unto the signs, nor shut in
them. For though the signs be common to all the visible members of the Church:
yet the grace signified is proper to the sole Elect; to whom only the
Sacraments are most true Seals, assurance, means of Gods love toward them,
in their Election, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification and Glorification.

CIV. Considering them in this respect of Seals, assurance, means, not as
Causes of Salvation, I esteem them greatly, yet never adore them: and albeit
the neglect of them be dangerous, yea damnable, because ordained and commanded
by Christ: yet I believe, that God being not tied to the means and second
causes, many men may be, and are saved, without the Sacraments or signs; for
Christ being the inward matter and Minister of them, may supply the want of
outward matter and Ministers.

CV. Whom I Believe to be only the Stewards of Gods mysteries, those men, who
are lawfully called, for the dispensation of their Lords Word and Sacraments:
yet I dive not into their intentions, nor consider their worthiness, for the
efficacy of the Sacraments: but observing Christ's Jnstitution, in their words
and actions, I rely on his promises, for my present consolation, and future
Salvation.

CVI. The outward matter of the Sacraments being Water, and Bread and Wine
are sanctified by prayers and the Word of God, chiefly such words as contain
the Institution of the Sacraments: and this Sanctification does not consist in
an alteration of the substance or qualities of the elements, but in a change of
their common use into a holy signification: for being thus Sanctified, or set
a part, the water sprinkled, the bread broken, and the wine powered, both given,
taken, eat, and drunk, (which actions with the words of Christ's Ordinance and
promises, are the forms of the Sacraments) they represent spiritual things
under corporal shapes: the Water in Baptism signifying the washing of my
soul, from all her filth and sins, by the blood of Jesus; and the mollifying
of my hard heart, by the powerful graces of his spirit: and the Bread and Wine
in the Lords Supper representing my Spiritual nourishment, by the flesh and
blood of Jesus, the merits of his life and death.

CVII. And as this nourishment could not be represented by the signs, if their
substance should not remain; I Believe and Profess, that the bread and wine
in the Lords Supper retain their whole substance, as well as the water in
Baptism: and that it is against Scripture, reason and the nature of
Sacraments, to imagine any substantial alteration or annihilation of the
signs, in either of the Sacraments. Then to fancy in them a corporal
presence of Christ, as is believed by many men, is likewise against Scripture,
reason and the nature of all bodies, although glorious: for notwithstanding
their agilitie, impassibilitie and glory, they are and must be finit, and
have their natural length, breadth and depth.

CVIII. These two, Baptism and the Lords Supper, already named twice, are the
only Sacraments, which I believe, Christ left unto his Church, to represent
her spiritual generation and refection: for, the faithful find truly in their
reception what the signs signify, their new birth unto Christ, and
nourishment by him. Besides these two, I Acknowledge and receive no other.

CIX. Baptism being the first, not by its dignity: (for, they are both alike
holy and excellent:) but by reason of its institution and signification, I
Define it to be, a Sacrament, which by its matter applied with the form
represents and seals unto us the remission of sins, mortification of the
flesh, renovation of the Spirit, and adoption in Christ: who infusing his grace
into our hearts, changes our carnal affections into spiritual, softens our
stony hearts, purifies our corrupt nature.

CX. Yet I say not, that these things be always done in Baptism: for
considering, that Abraham was justified and in Gods covenant, before he had
received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith,
which he had, being yet uncircumsised: I Believe, that our Regeneration may be,
and is, wrought sometimes before Baptism, in men of discretion, who have the
right knowledge of God, and faith in him, and love to him; and sometimes long
after Baptism: for, God begets us when he will, by the outward seed of his
Word, and the inward notions and motions of his Spirit, and by degrees
Sanctifies us.

CXI. As this Sacrament is the first visible seal of Gods covenant it must not
be denied them, who desire it, if their knowledge, faith, repentance, and good
life declare them fit, to be received into Christ's flock. And since it is
certain, that Gods promises made to us, belong likewise to our children, whose
God he promises to be, whom Christ embraced and blessed, testifying, that they
have right in the Kingdom of heaven: and since again, the Circumcision of the
Jews (which our Baptism succeeds) was ordained by God, even for babes of eight
days old.

CXII. I Believe, all the children of them, who are probably thought to be in
the alliance of God, may well receive the sign and seal of that covenant, in
which likewise they are; and the earnest of that kingdom, which by the grace
of God, and by virtue of his free promises, does belong unto them.

CXIII. In the reception of this Sacrament, we give our names to Christ, and
become his Soldiers, to fight under his white Banners of love, humility,
sincerity, truth, chastity and all virtues; against malice, hatred, pride,
falsehood, lust and the foul troop of all vices, which war against us, under
the black Standards of the Devil, the World and Flesh. Albeit then I confess,
we deserve death, to forsake Christ's colors, and turn to his and our enemies:
yet being graciously recalled by him, if we return to him, and by faith accept
the pardon, he offers to sinners,

CXIV. I Believe, that after Baptism, we may Repent often, and be received
into favor by him, who knows what is in man, and how the wisest erres, the
strongest falls, the holiest sins: and therefore assists his Elect, with such
effectual grace, that they cannot have mortal falls, not commit the sin unto
death, that impudent, wilful and constant opposition or denial of the Lords
truth, known by the testimony of the holy Ghost, convincing man's rebellious
heart.

CXV. Allowing Repentance, and knowing it necessary, before the reception of
either Sacrament, in men of discretion; I conceive it to be, a true sorrow for
all our sins, begot in our hearts by Gods Spirit and the filial consideration
of the infinite Majesty of our gracious God and loving Father offended by our
sins, which we truly detest, resolving seriously never to displease our God
willingly, but to serve him faithfully in all things, vowing to keep his holy
laws, and make to our neighbors all possible and due satisfaction or
restitution of name, goods, losses, and to give them an information of the
truth, if we have misled them; and withal begging Gods pardon, which we
believe, he will grant for Christ's sake, and for him freely granting ours to
those, who have offended us, although they do not desire it.

CXVI. Who by Gods special grace has this true Repentance, with a solid
Knowledge of him, and a right Faith of him, to him, in him; Believing what he
is, has revealed and promised, yea applying unto himself his gracious
promises, and wholly relying on them, may most comfortably receive both
Sacraments* or having once received the first, be often admitted unto the
participation of the second; concerning which this is my Faith, that it is

CXVII. A Sacrament, in which by Bread and Wine God represents to us our
spiritual and perfect nourishment and preservation to eternal life, by
Christ's Body and Blood; and seals unto our souls his free and frequent
promises of remission of sin, of everlasting life, and of his love and
protection, by the merits of his sons obedience: for certainly, this Sacrament
is a noble Token of Gods constant love toward us, a sure Earnest of his
glory, a known Seal of his promises, and a fair Remembrance of the
disgraces, pains, torments, Christ endured in his life and death.

CXVIII. I say disgraces, pains, torments: for, I Believe, that this Sacrament
is a Memorial of the humiliation, not of the glorification of Christ, whom
then we consider enduring, not reigning; in pains, not in pleasures, in
infamy, not in glory: So that the breaking of the bread, and pouring of the
wine represent us the torments of Christ's flesh, and the effusion of his blood;
the first tortured, the second shed, for the food of our souls.

CXIX. And thus are they made our Souls food. As we take bread and wine, and
our outward senses see, feel, smell and taste but the signs, our souls behold
the thing signified by them, the very flesh and blood of Christ, which then we
eat and drink, believing sincerely, that by his pains, ignominies and
righteousness, both in his life and death; yea in his Sepulture, he made
satisfaction to Gods justice for us, delivering us from everlasting death, and
purchasing eternal life for us: and in that faith, our souls live here, fat
(as it were) by Christ's merits, and strong with hope, to enjoy, his glory.

CXX. It Is then only by Faith, not by the mouth of the body, that the Elect
eat and drink the flesh and blood of Jesus: for, his glorious body being in
the highest Heaven, is not fit meat for our stomach: neither can it be present
in, with, or under the signs, but by a Sacramental signification. I Believe
then, that Christ's Body is present but Sacramentally, by signification or
representation of Christ's effects, and of the merits of his whole humanity,
which then I see, take, eat by faith, the eye, hand and mouth of the Christian
Soul, applying that to me, which Christ acted and endured for me. For though
Christ be not in the bread and wine, else Reprobat and Dogs might then eat him:
yet

CXXI. I Believe, he is present in the Sacrament by his Divinity, and there I
adore him. He Is there, by communication and a free grant of his merits; and by
faith I do embrace them. He is there, giving grace, and promising glory; and
I receive him believing. And since this Sacrament was ordained by him, under
both kinds of bread and wine;

CXXII. I Believe, it must be administered and received in both kinds, as well to
signify our perfect nourishment; as to refresh in our memories the torments of
Christ's flesh, and the effusion of his blood. I Esteem then the denial of the
Cup, a Sacrilegious mutilation of the Sacrament, and a dangerous diminution of
its signification. And since the matter of the Sacraments is appointed by
Christ, and that they are intended to signify our Spiritual generation and
Refection, and to be likewise Remembrances of Christ's life and passion;

CXXIII. I esteem them greatly abused, if mixed with any other matter, or
administered and received, to any other ends. The mixture then, or addition of
oil and salt, with, or to the water in Baptism: the Baptism of Bells: the
celebration and reception of the Lords Supper, in the honor of Saints, and upon
their Relics; or for confirmation of leagues, treaties, bargains; for the
proof of denied rights, or of suspected innocence; cure of diseases; happy
succes, or the like ends: and the keeping or carrying of the consecrated bread,
for devotion or adoration, are most superstitious and idolatrous profanations
of the Sacraments, and so heinous sins against God;

CXXIV. Who being the Lord of all things, and having vouchsafed to manifest to
men, in what fashion he will be served by them; it is (I Believe) an intolerable
presumption, to alter or break willingly the lest of all his Laws: and it is
also a great blindness, to think to please him in that way, which he does not
approve.

CXXV. To receive then his Sacraments otherwise, then he does appoint, and to
serve him in Images, statues, superstitious ceremonies, idolatrous and
will worship, pilgrimages, vows, prayers and confessions made unto Angels and
dead Saints, feasts and fasts kept for them, and oaths taken by them, cannot
have his gracious regard, as things pleasant to him; but justly draw his curse,
as abominable folies. Yea,

CXXVI. I Believe, that Vows and Praires made unto God alone, and Oaths taken
by him, if they be such, as he does not require, nor in that fashion, he
approves; such as prayers in unknown tongues, and concluded by the name,
merits, mediation of any other, then of Christ, are abominations before him.

CXXVII. And such I do Esteem all light, false, injust vows, prayers and
oaths: and amongst them, those foolish, rash and impossible vows of poverty,
chastity, obedience, which are held by many persons, such hie actions of
religion, that those have got the special name of religious, who make such
vows to God, the Virgin Marie, and some chief Friar.

CXXVIII. And as the making of such vows, and taking of such oaths do
doubtless greatly offend God: so I Believe; he is highly displeased, at the
breach of all vows, promises, oaths, which in themselves are just and rightly
made, either to him or any man: for, he hates both the commission of ill, and
the omission of holy duties, and all just promises: yea any thing whatsoever
against his holy Law, whether it be in thoughts or affections, wo^ds or
actions, great or little, is odious to that pure and righteous Spirit, whose
Law being spiritual and general, the whole man is subject to it, and judged
by it.

CXXIX. By Gods Law, I conceive the declaration of his Will, in the holy
Scripture, wherein he has been pleased to manifest fully what he loves and
abhorres; and so to command us the first, and forbid the second.

CXXX. I Believe then, that all Injunctions and Prohibitions, which concern men
in general, about faith and good works, must be diligently both believed and
observed. Yet since the Lord himself has for our ease made a compendium of
his moral Law in ten precepts, and Christ has reduced faith or knowledge to
two heads, of God and of himself; having declared my faith, concerning God,
Father, Son, holy Ghost and many other things, and intending to set it down
fully concerning Christ, I will now speak only of those ten Commandments, and
briefly thus.

CXXXI. I Believe them the just and perfect rule of moral honesty, finely and
fully, although succinctly, expressing our duties to God and man, and
forbidding what may offend either. I say fully for in their brevitie, we must
wisely understand the whole, by a part; the general, by the special;
prohibitions, by injounctions; inward duties, by the outward: and on the
contrary, outward duties, by the inward; injounctions, by prohibitions; the
special, by the general; and a part, by the whole.

CXXXII. All these ten Commandments containing each special matters, may be
yet reduced to two Heads, the Love of God, and Love of the Nighbour.

CXXXIII. Who then Loves God, with all his heart, soul, strength; as a good
child loves his Father; regarding him above all things; rejoicing in his
perfections; magnifying his name and works; inviting all men to his love, all
creatures to his praise; fearing to displease him, and seeking to please and
serve him, in that way, he prescribes; adoring him alone; having no faith, no
hope, but in his wisdom, power, goodness, for what concerns the soul; seeking
health, ease, honors, riches, but from him and by lawful means; enduring
patiently his corrections; being thankful for his blessings, and in all things
submitting his will unto his, does (I Believe) fulfill the Commandments of the
first Table, which concern God and his service.

CXXXIV. And who in and for God loves his Neighbor as himself, doing what he
can lawfully, to instruct him, in the right and full knowledge of the Lord, to
divert him from sin, exhort him to virtue, help him to lead a holy and sweet
life, wishing, praying for him what is necessary for his present and future
happiness; and freely, heartily and fully pardoning him all faults, does
likewise fulfill the commandments of the second Table, concerning his
Neighbor.

CXXXV. But because this love toward God and man cannot be so pure and
perfect, in the state of our corruption, but that we sin daily against both,
and so transgress the law of God; and by our transgression loose the blessing
of everlasting life promised unto its observers, and do daily incur the
curse threatened unto its transgressors, I Believe and confess, that though the
Law be just and perfect in it self: yet by reason of our weakness, since the
fall of Adam, it is not sufficient to Salvation.

CXXXVI. Since then my works are imperfect, I Believe, my faith must supply
their want. And since the Law cannot save me, but rather condemns me; I borrow
the help of my faith, believing God, for my righteousness or justification. And
because it is not enough, to believe in God without Christ, this is my Hearty
Faith in him, and Verbal confession of him, besides those points, I have
already touched concerning him

CXXXVII. That God, Father, Son, holy Ghost having in mercy Elected some men,
it pleased that only wise and gracious Spirit, to give them Christ, as the
effectual mean of their Election, and sole cause of their Salvation. 'Twas
then decreed, that the second Person of the incomprehensible Trinity should
assume man's nature, thus to be made to Gods Elect, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption.

CXXXVIII. And least our Nature should be corrupt, sinful in Christ, if as man
he had descended from Adam, by natural generation; it was likewise decreed,
that a pure and perfect body should be formed by the power of God, of the
purified substance of a faithful Virgin, without the help or seed of man.

CXXXIX. And as this was eternally decreed, so I Believe, it was performed in
the appointed time: for, the blessed Virgin Marie believing Gods message, and
consenting to be made a Mother, without any carnal knowledge of man, did by
the power of the holy Ghost conceive that wondrous Child, who by an eternal
Generation is the Son of God, without Mother; and by temporal conception, the
Son of Man, without Father.

CXL. Man's nature in Christ ^ubsisting not in it self, but in the Person of
the Wo^d, I Believe, that in one instant, Christ's whole humanity body and
soul was formed, created and assumed, or taken up by the second Person of the
Divinity, in such a strait and perpetual union, that it did never subsist
without the Word, who assumed the nature, not the person of man: so that in
Christ there is but one divine, eternal and indivisible person, in, to, by
which, our whole nature soul and body has its subsistence, abiding or
standing; yet adds nothing unto the Deity: for, God being perfect, simple and
eternal, he can receive no addition, composition, alteration, passion.

CXLI. The Union being Personal, of two natures in one Person; I Believe, that
as the Person of Christ can not be divided, so his Natures are not, can not be
confounded, but still retain their essential proprieties; the divine being
eternal, infinite, omnipotent, omniscient; and the human, temporal, finit and
once passible, having a beginning of time, and limits for knowledge, power and
place. For though Christ's human power, knowledge, wisdom were great and
excellent: yet

CXLII. I believe, they were finit, so that all things were not possible and
known unto him, as man, although as God, he knew, could do all things, which
are not contradictorie. I say therefore, that although Christ's Person, (to whom
the proprieties of both natures are common) knew all things in the womb; yet
it was not by his human nature, by which he being born, increased in wisdom,
learning new things by daily experience. And thus I Believe, he was born.

CXLIII. Although his body was by the power of God formed in an instant to the
requisite growth, for the reception of the soul, yet he was in the Virgins
womb, and grew in it to greater strength, till the days were accomplished,
that she should be deliv'red.

CXLIV. And then the blessed Maid brought forth in Beth-lehem, and in a stable,
the Maker of heaven and earth, who then appeared to the world, in the shape of
a poor Servant, in the form of a weak Infant, whom beholding with the strong
eyes of faith, I most humbly adore: for,

CXLV. I Believe, that that Infant is God and Man: Man, to do and endure for
me, that is, in my steed and for my good, what I could not, yet ought both to
do and suffer: and God, to give infinite price, efficacy or force unto the
actions and passions of the Humanity, and apply them to me.

CXLVI. I Rely then wholly on the merits of Christ's obedience to Gods Law, and
of his sufferings for my sins; Believing, he exactly observed the Law for me,
and fully satisfied his offended justice; and so by his pains and righteousness
both original and actual, redeemed me from sin, death, hell; and purchased me
grace, life, Heaven.

CXLVII. Christ then is all my hope, my only Mediator of redemption and
intercession, through whom I live on earth in grace, and shall in heaven in
glory. To procure me both these, and also to show me examples of humility,
meeknes, patience and all virtues, my Savior was borne amongst beasts; subject
to my passions and infirmities, yet without sin or disorder; circumcised the
eighth day; carried into Egypt; Persecuted through all his Life, which having
led most holily, humbly, painefully, patiently and miraculously, chiefly the
three last years; in which by his mighty wonders and divine instructions he
manifested his Deity, he ended it, by an ignominious and cruel death,
drinking at last the full and bitter cup of Gods indignation against sin and
sinners, treading alone the Winepresse of Gods wrath, and shedding all that
precious blood, which is our bath and only purgation.

CXLVIII. I Believe then, that as he did represent us, he was in his human
nature exposed unto the wrath of God, which his innocent Soul so lively
apprehended, that she was heavy unto death, then enduring for his Elect (by
the help of the Deity supporting the Humanity) the eternal pains due to
their sins, and so making to God satisfaction in that nature, yea in both parts
of that nature, which had offended him.

CXLIX. For, unto this fearful apprehension and spiritual sense of Gods
indignation, which (I Believe) he had often, were added most grievous torments,
his pure body endured, from his birthday, to the last moment of his life: so
that he was both in soul and body, and in his life and death, wounded for our
iniquities, bruised for our transgressions, cursed for our sake, and killed to
give us life; as those being the end of his Incarnation.

CL. And thus was the Lamb of God slain, for the sins of all the faithful,
from the foundation of the world unto its destruction. After many indignities,
blows, pains, he was nailed to a cross, and hanged betwixt two thieves, as
the greatest malefactor: and so indeed was he, as he did then represent
thousands of sinners, for whose ransom he truly and willingly died, offering to
God his pains and death, his passions and actions, for redemption and
salvation of his Elect, whom he did s^nctifie through the offering of his
Body, once for all; so that they need no other oblation for sin, then that,
which Christ offered, and cannot be renewed, because he dies no more: nor other
satisfaction, then that he made for them, all other being both impossible and
needles.

CLI. Christ our life being dead, I Believe, that his Body was buried, to
testify the realitie of his death, and how our sins were then buried with him,
which without his humble passion had cast us down into hellfire. But as
Christ died without the lest offense to God or man; so the grave could not hold
him long, but the third day of his Burial

CLII. I Believe, that Christ's glorious soul was reunited to his Body, by the
power of his Divinity, which never forsook them, but kept them still, one in
heaven, and the other in earth, in that wonderful and incomprehensible
personal union. And this reunion being made of the two parts of his humanity,
Christ rose out of his grave, as well to assure me of my spiritual and
corporal resurrection, from sin and death; as to receive the reward of his
obedience unto the Law of God, and unto death for me: for,

CLIII. I Believe, that Christ having well performed his office, in the state
of his humiliation, in planting, teaching, governing and redeeming his Church,
for which he did humble himself, and become obedient to the death of the
cross; it pleased the Father, to exalt him, manifesting his Deity, through
which the whole Humanity was made most free from natural infirmities, and
invested with such agilitie, impassibilitie, glory and felicity; that it
surmounts the excellence of the very Angels, having the full measure of
perfection both in soul and body, of which they are capable without
destruction. I confess then, they are as glorious as may be: yet

CLIV. I Believe, that glory is finit, and much inferior to the essential and
incommunicable perfection of the most glorious Trinity. Albeit therefore
Christ's person be as glorious, as the Fathers and holy Ghosts: yet his
Humanity being not capable of that infinite perfection, it can not have that
omniscience, omnipotence, Ubiquitie, Majesty and felicity, which are proper
to the Divinity. The knowledge then, power, glory and joy of Christ's soul is
finit, although most rare and excellent: and his glorious, immortal and agile
body is likewise and must be finit, solid, visible and palpable, having his
just measure in length, breadth, depth, and being contained in that place, which
he is pleased to fill for the present.

CLV. Heaven being the proper seat of all blessed souls after death, I Believe
and confess, that Christ Jesus, to give me assurance of my future
glorification and ascension thither, first in the soul, immediately after my
death; then in Soul and Body, at the Resurrection; did forty days, after
his rising from the dead, ascend triumphantly and visibly into the heaven of
heavens, that highest Orb, which the great King of Kings has made, as a fit
place, for the full manifestation of the riches of his glory, the greatness of
his power, the excellence of his wisdom, and the exces of his bounty.

CLVI. And Jesus being Ascended thither, by the Almighty power of his
Divinity, I Believe, he is there, sitting at the right hand of God, that is,
having in his Humanity, glory, wisdom, power and strength next to Gods;
governing heaven, earth and hell, but chiefly ruling and teaching his Church,
by his omnipresent spirit and all-filling Divinity, by which he is with her,
till the end of the world; interceding for her and showing his Father the
wounds, he suffered for her sake: and so by his merits and praires sanctifying
and blessing her, and by his power protecting her, from the devil and his
members;

CLVII. For whose general overthrow and final subjection, and to manifest
Gods mercy and justice toward men: I Believe, that the Lord Jesus (whom the
heavens contain till the end of the world, as he is man, although as God he be
every where) shall then appear in Majesty and great glory, and that by his
Almighty power, which at first made things of nothing, and Adams body of the
dust; all the dead shall then rise, and the living be changed, and all appear
before the glorious throne of Christ, there to be judged according to their
works, yea many for their Works: for certainly

CLVIII. The reprobat shall then perceive, that their infidelity and wickedness
are the causes of their everlasting damnation in hell, where they shall feel
such desperate and perpetual griefs of the mind, and torments of the flesh, as
shall make them hate and curse God, and see (although too late) how miserable
that reasonable Creature is, who willingly rebels from God, and persists in
its rebellion.

CLIX. But those blessed persons, who by Gods grace believed in him, loved,
feared, served him, shall then be Judged, according to their Works, yet not
Saved for, or by those works, but by the mere mercy, of God, in and by
Christ their gracious Judge: who in his just anger having sentenced and sent
the wicked into Hell, with the approbation and praise of the Elect.

CLX. Shall (I Believe) in his tender love toward these, invite and convey
them with him into Heaven there to enjoy an incomprehensible, everlasting,
gratuit and full Felicity, in the vision of Christ, and fruition of God, who
being the beginning and end of all things, the first and last, I end this my
Belief and Confession in him:

Beseeching that eternal Spirit, by whose most special assistance I have both
began and finished, and unto whom therefore I yield most hearty thanks; to
make me immutable in this Belief, bold in this confession, careful in the
aversion of all sins, and diligent in the practice of all Christian virtues,
and religious duties.

Do so I pray thee, gracious God; Yet, if my Belief is not right; O Lord,
rectify it, and teach me the true faith And if it be not full enough, not
sufficient to Salvation; Lord, increase it. But if it is such, as it must be;
pray O Christ, that my faith fail not but confirm it, and make me steadfast in
good works, to the glory of thy mercy, in the Salvation of thy poor servant,
and of al those, who by my good counsels and virtuous examples, shall find the
true knowledge of thee, and the right means, to love, serve, please and enjoy
thee. AMEN.

A BRIEF. INDEX OF THE CHIEF POINTS.
A.
ADams creation, 35. to 42. Free will and fall, 44. to 47. Sins, 45. and 46.
Angels, 40. to 44.
B.
Baptism. See Sacraments.
C.
Christ the head of Angels and men, 42. Husband, head and Sun of the Church,
84. 85. 94. Inward matter and minister of Sacraments, 103. What we ought to
believe of him, 136. to 160. Christians life, 65. Hope, 145, and 146. Church,
76. to 95. Creation, 35. to 40.
E.
Elect and Election, 50. 51. 62. to 65. and 160. How judged and saved, 159. and
160.
F.
Faith triple, 116.
G.
Glorification, 74. and 75. God, and what we must believe of him, concerning
the essence, persons, proprieties, will and works, 1. to 40. Has no eyes,
ears, etc. 41. Must be served, as he does require, 124. 125. and 126.
H.
Humanity of Christ, 141. 142. 154.
I.
Image of God in Angels and in Man, 40. to 43. Judgment general, 157. to 160.
Justification, 70. and 71.
L.
Law of God, 128. to 137.
M.
Man's creation. See Adam. Fall, Ibid. Rising, 50. and 51. Insufficiency, 48.
64. 68. Men, all damned in Adam, 40. Some saved by Christ, 72. Ministers of the
Church, 88. to 93.
P.
Predestination, 63. and 64. Preparations to the Sacraments. See Sacraments.
R.
Repentance, 114. and 115. Reprobat and reprobation, 51. to 62. Why damned, 54.
and 158. Resurrection general, 157. To life everlasting, 74. 75. and 76.
S
Sacraments, 101. to 109 and 125. Of Baptism, 109 to 114. The Lords Supper,
117. to 116. Preparations to them, 102. 111. and 116. Abuses of them, 123.
Salvation by grace and through faith, 72. and 136. Sanctification, 69. Satan,
how the prince of the world, 60. Scripture, 95. to 102. Sin original, 47. to
50. Actual, 47. Against the holy Ghost, 114. Is not the cause of reprobation.
53^ But of damnation, 54. and 158. Son of God, how assumed our nature, 137. to
145. Supper of the Lord. See Sacraments.
V.
Vocation, 65. to 69. Vows, prayers and oaths. 126. 127. and 128.
W.
Works, good, why commanded, 73. Are not the cause of election, 63. 64. 72 to
75. 159 and 160.
Many matters are included in these, a full Index of which might be bigger
then the whole Book.

Interpretation of hard words.
A.
Ability, ablenes. Assume, to take. Aversion, loathing, shunning.
B.
Brevitie, shortness.
C.
Capacity, ablenes. Carnal, fleshly. Collection, gathering. Communicate, to
give, impart. Compendium, abridgement. Compulsion, force. Conception, conceit.
Corporal, bodily.
D.
Decisions, determinations. Describe, to set forth. Dictat, to tell, suggest.
Difficult, hard. Discussion, inquiry. Donative, given,
E.
Effusion, shedding. Engendered, begot. External, outward.
F.
Facility, easines.
G.
Gratuit, freely given, done or made.
I.
Immutable, unchangeable. Inbred, natural. Infallible, which cannot err, nor
fail, Inherent, cleaving. Incorporall, without body. Indivisible, which
cannot be divided. Injounctions, commandments. Internal, inward. Invested,
clothed, indu'd. Judicious, grave, wise.
L.
Limits, bounds.
M.
Mollify, to soften. Morsel, a bit. Mortal, deadly. Mutation, change.
O.
Oeconomique, belonging to household affairs. Omnipotent, Almighty.
Omnipresent, present in all places. Omniscient, knowing all things.
P.
Palpable, which can be felt. Plurality, a being of more then one. Politic,
belonging to public affairs. Preceding, fore going Prejudice, hurt, loss.
Prioritie, a being first. Produce, to send forth. Prohibit, to forbid.
Proportion, measure or equality. Purify, to make pure.
R.
Reduced, brought to. Refection, repast, nourishment. Reunited, joined again.
S.
Subtraction, withdrawing. Succinctly, briefly. Suggest, to put in mind.
Suppress, to put down.
T.
Testify, to bear witness.
V.
Verity, truth. Unapt, unfit.
In the end of the Epistle read 1645. for 1644.


