THE PROTESTATION OF HER ROYAL MAJESTY, Given at Her departure from
Scheveling, Feb. 25. 1643. Old style.
Against the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the United PROVINCES
of the LOW COUNTRIES.
THE Queen of Great Britain (through the intention that She has had to
preserve the amity between the King and the Lords States) having omitted to
take notice of many indignities by which She has here been provoked, She does
find her self at present so highly offended, that she cannot any longer (with
the honor of the King) abstain from making this Complaint, which she does make
to the Lords the States, upon the Order which has been given to search and
arrest a Vessel which she has fraighted and laden with diverse goods belonging
to her, for which the Lords States have granted her a Pasport; The Queen does
make no difficulty to avouch the transporting of Ammunition, as far as it is
absolutely necessary for her safeguard; She has chosen to furnish her self
this way, rather then by that of asking a license, because of an Order made by
the States to hinder the transporting of Arms and Ammunition for the King, or
for the Parliament; which Order the King has had great reason to think very
partial for the Parliament, paralelling them with him; but the not observing
of this Order has been more offensive to him, especially since the abovesaid
Parliament have caused much Ammunition to be transported over, and have bought
Vessels, to employ them against the King. If the Queen has not demanded a
license for the things that she had need of, it was not to put the States to so
much trouble, nor to deviate from their Order, nor justly to offend the King,
but rather that all the endeavoures of the Queen, and the precautions to
preserve the good correspondence between the King and the Lords States (which
is established by so many Treaties) has produced nothing but a Continuation of
affronts and prejudice to the Kings service, she is bound to make this
Declaration:

THat she does receive this Order given for the arresting of her Ship as a
notable injustice and indignity, which she is obliged to be sensible of in a
high degree, WHerefore she does believe that the Lords States having better
considered on it, will connive for the departure of her Vessel, with all that
it does carry for her Service, without which the Queen is bound to demonstrate
to the Lords States, that this injustice and affront, which she shall receive
by the arrest of this Vessel, cannot pass for less then a violating of the
league betwixt the King and the States; the consequences whereof will be very
dangerous, wherefore she hopes that they will give such a just cause to the
King and her of such a displeasure:

Done at Scheveling the 25. Feb. 1643. By the express command of her Majesty;
Subscribed, William Bosswell Agent.

Printed at London for John Hancocke, in Burchen Lane, March 9. 1643.


