To the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The
Humble Petition of Anne Henshaw Widow, late Wife and Executrix of Benjamin
Henshaw Esquire deceased, on the behalf of her self and her seven children.
In most humble manner shows,
THat your Petitioner was left the distressed Widow of her said husband, having
the sole care of 8 children left to her to be provided for, out of certain
debts due to her said husband; the chief of which was owing by the late Earl of
Carlisle, which she could no way get assured, unless she could procure 4000l.
more, which she did raise, by getting together her childrens portions secured
in the Chamber of London, and by the credit of her friends, and engaging of her
whole estate, by which means the debt was made 12000l. And an assignment
legally passed to your Petitioner from the said Earl of 2000l. per an: (til the
said debt of 12000l. should be fully satisfied) out of an Annuity of 3000l. per
an: granted upon valuable considerations to the said Earl by the late King, out
of the old and other Customs; The which Annuity was received until 4000l. of
the said 12000l. was paid and no more: And then in the year 1641. the House of
Commons alone took all the said Customs into their own disposal, and ever
since that time have employed them wholly for supply of the public
necessities, though the Order it self exempts the old Custome^, out of which
your Petitioner was to be paid, and which were legally vested in the Crown, and
by due course of Law passed and confirmed to your Petitioner; And by reason of
which diversion and occasion of the late troubles, she has lost above 20000l.
in good debts, which are now desperate and irrecoverable, whereby she and her
children are reduced to a very mean condition.

The Petitioner therefore most humbly prays, that the said debt of 8000l.
which is JUSTLY DUE unto her, and interest for the same, ever since the year
1641. may be allowed for the relief of her and her children; And that your
Honors will be pleased to give Order that she may receive the same out of the
said old Customs, according to the former assignment made to her, and which
are chargeable therewith by LAW, being continued by the Book of Rates agreed by
the Commons in Parliament, Anno Dom. 1642. otherwise your Petitioner and her
children who have never been Delinquents in the least degree, must inevitably
be ruined, unless it shall please the Lord to stir up your hearts to
commiserate the sad condition of her and her 7 children.

And they shall pray, etc.

