THE LAW OF CONVEYANCES, SHOWING The Natures, Kinds, and Effects, of all manner
of Assurances, with the manner of their several executions and operations.

ALSO Directions to Sue out and Prosecute all manner of Writs, of Extent,
Elegit, and Judicial Writs upon Statutes, Recognizances, Judgments, etc.

A Warrant to Summon a Court of Survey: And the Articles to be given in Charge,
and Inquired of in that Court.

With an Exposition of diverse obscure Words and Terms of Law, used in Ancient
Records, etc.

AND ALSO Plain Decimall Tables, whereby may be found the true Values of
Lands, Leases, and Estates, in Possession, or Reversion. With a Concordance of
Years, etc.

By JOHN HERNE Gent.

LONDON; Printed by T. R. for Hen. Twyford, and Tho. Dring, and are to be sold
at their Shops, in Vine Court Middle Temple, and at the George in Fleetstreet
near Cliffords Inn, 1656.

TO THE READER:
Courteous Reader,
THIS Tract, for the drawing and right managing of all the Essential and
Accidental parts of the Laws touching Conveyances and Assurances (which before
lay diffusedly in the Books of Law in large Volumes) are here now methodically
handled, being Composed by a very eminent Lawyer and Great Conveyancer in the
City of London (lately deceased) which coming into my hands, and being by men
of good judgment held to be of excellent use, I was persuaded to make the same
public for the General good, which I have done accordingly. And for the
further advantage of those that desire knowledge in Records, and in Buying and
Selling Land, etc. I have added an Exposition of many obscure and abstruce
words used in the Book of Doomsday, and in other ancient Records, Charters, and
Writings: And likewise very exact Decimall Tables, whereby the value of Lands
sold or let in Possession or Reversion may easily be known: And also a
Concordance of years from King William the Conqueror to this present time, in
which the year of our Lord, and the year of the Reign of each King are
plainly set down. I doubt not but this piece will be of much use and little
Charge, which is the only desire and end of

J. H.

THE LAW OF CONVEIANCES OR, A perfect explanation of all the essential and
accedentall parts of all sorts of instruments, for the conveying of all things,
whether corporal or incorporall, and what words, actions, and circumstances
are required by Law thereunto.
THe Office of the Premises of the Deed is to express the Grantor, Grantee,
Premises.
and the thing to be granted.

The Office of the Habendum is to limit the Estate and to explane the Premises.
Habendum
And his Office is to give, to enlarge and to be persuing to the Estate
contained in the Premises of the Deed, but his Office is not to be repugnant,
contrary, lesser, nor to exclude any of the interest before given in the
Premises, for if it so does the estate precedent given shall stand, and the
habendum shall be void.

As if a Feoffment be made to one and his heirs by the Premises of the deed,
Habendum to him and his heirs during the life of I. S. Or if a Feoffment be
made to one and his heirs by the Premises of the Deed, Habendum to the lessee
for term of his life, those words of limitation during the life of I. S. or
during the life of Tenant for life, are void words, for that the Habendum is
repugnant to the Premises, vide Lo. Cokes, 2. Reports, Baldwins Case Fol.
twenty three, touching repugnancy between the Premises and the habendum.

Sometimes the habendum does control and qualify the general implication of
the estate, which passes by construction of Law, by the Premises of the Deed,
as for example.

A Lease to two, habendum to one for life, the remainder to the other for life,
this limitation does alter the general implication of the joyntenancy which
would have been without the habendum, and therefore the habendum void, in that
the Premises does make them joynttenants, and the habendum would sever the
joynter, and make the one to have the whole during his life, and the other the
whole after him, Plowden fo. 133. vide Sir Ed. Coke, 2. Par. fo. 55. Buchlers
case, such a remainder is good.

And if two acres be given to two habendum, the one acre to one, and the other
to the other, that is a void habendum, because it excludes the interest of
the one in the one acre, and of the other in the other acre, where the Premises
of the deed has made them joynt-tenants of every parcel.

Remainders
Every remainder ought to have these several properties and things following,
as Notes and Rules to discern and know when remainders are good.

But note that where a remainder is once well raised by the Livery and Seisin,
though the particular estate be afterward avoided by condition in Law, as by a
recovery in wast, or if a Feme Tenant for life disagree to the Livery after the
death of her husband etc. Yet he to whom the remainder is limited shall be
Tenant in tail in remainder, vi. 1. part. Shellies case, fol. 101. good cases
upon this.
An estate precedent made at the same time the remainder does commence.

As if the lessor confirm the estate of his Lessee for years, the remainder
in Fee, this remainder is void, because the estate for years was made before
the remainder, and not at the time of the remainder.

If the lessor disseise his Tenant for life, and then makes a new Lease to him
for life, the remainder in in Fee, that remainder is void, because the Tenant
for life is remitted to the estate which was made long time before the
remainder appointed, so the estate precedent was not made at the same time of
the remainder, and therefore the remainder void.

So if the heir endow his mother, the remainder in Fee, this remainder is void
though Livery and Sesin be made to the mother, because the dowre has relation
to the death of her husband, and so for that the estate precedent was not made
when the remainder was appointed, the remainder is void.

The particular estate must continue when the remainder shall vest, and the
remainder must commence in possession at the very time the particular estate
ends as well in Wills as in the grants, for there may not a mean time
between them.

As if one make a Lease for life, and that a day after the death of Tenant for
life it shall remain over, this remainder is void, because the first estate is
determined before the appointment of the remainder.

So if one make a Leese for life upon condition, that if he does not such an
Act, that his estate shall cease, and that then it remain over in Fee, this
remainder is void, because it does not vest during the estate precedent.

The remainder must be out of the lessor, executed or executory at the time of
the Livery and seasin made, and at the time of the possession taken by the
particular Tenant.

If a man has issue a Son of nine years, and makes a Lease till his son shall
come to his full age, and then the remainder to another in Fee, nothing vesteth
forthwith to him in remainder, and the remainder is utterly void, and yet it
may take effect, because the remainder ought to pass out of the lessor,
forthwith executed or executory, either to him in remainder, or to be in
abeyance or custody of the Law, and a franktenement in such case cannot be an
abeyance, and therefore the remainder void.

Lease for years, the remainder over in Fee, if the tenant enter before
livery, his term is good, but the remainder is void, because the remainder was
not out of the lessor at the time of the possession taken by the particular
tenant, but if I appoint the Lease to commence at Michaelmas next, the
remainder over in Fee, there although the lessor make Livery to the Lessee, yet
the Livery and Seisin and the remainder shall be void; because there was no
estate present, whereunto the Livery may be annexed, and whereunto it might
unite in the mean time.

HE to whom the remainder is appointed, must at that very time be a person
able and of capacity to take the remainder, or else the remainder shall be
void; and it is a principle in Law, that in all gifts, be they by devise, or
otherwise, it behooveth to have a Donee in esse, which has power and capacity
to take the thing given, at the very time when it ought to vest, for if there
be not any such in rerum natura when the thing ought to vest, There is a
diversity between a remainder limited by a particular name, for a remainder
limited by a general name, may be good, though the person be not in esse at the
time of the remainder limited, as in this case next following. This remainder
to I S may be good, and yet he has no heir at the time of the remainder
limited, and so of a remainder limited Primogenito filio. But a remainder
limited in particular by name of Baptism and Surname, is not good if the
party be not in esse, Coke 2. part. Fo. 51. Sir Hugh Cholmleis case.
the gift shall be void, Plowden Fol. 345.

And therefore if a Lease be made to one for life, the remainder to the Mayor
and Commonalty of Cirencester, which then have not capacity to purchase Lands,
and after they have gained a capacity to purchase, and then the tenant for life
dies, the Mayor and commonalty shall not take the remainder; because he was
not a person able at the time of the remainder appointed, to take it: so if the
remainder were appointed to him whom tenant for life shall name.

If a Lease be made to one for life, the remainder to I. S. in Fee, who is a
monk professed, and afterward is derained, and then the Tenant for life
dies, I. S. shall not have the remainder, because he was not a person able to
take it at the time of the remainder appointed.

But if Land be given to one Et filio suo primogenito, and he has no issue at
the time of the gift, and afterward he has a son, that Son shall have the
Land by way of remainder, and yet the remainder was not out of the lessor,
neither did it vest at the time of the Livery, but the law shall conster the
Livery and limitation most strong against the lessor. Plowden, 296.

Lessee for years, the remainder to the right heirs of I. S. this remainder
is utterly void, and the Livery thereupon is void, because there is no person
capable to take the Frank tenement at the time, and Livery and Seisin may not
be in suspense, where the frank-tenement may not be in obeisance, but Affees
may, where the franck-Tenement is well disposed, and where there is a Tenant
thereof to the Precipe.

THe thing whereof a Remainder shall be created, must be in esse before, and at
the time of the appointment and creation thereof, or else the remainder is
void.

For if I grant a rent out of my Land, Vide fo. 38.
the remainder in Fee, this remainder is void, because the rent was not in esse
before. But at the beginning of a grant, a man may grant a rent in such manner
as pleases him. And a man may grant a rent newly created to begin after the
death of I. S. But when a rent is in esse, or a reversion, remainder, or other
thing, a man may not make it to be in esse for a time, and to cease for another
time, as to grant it to one after the death of another, or from a day to come,
reserving to him an estate in the mean time.

NO remainder may commence upon any repugnancie or impossibility precedent, nor
upon any condition that goes to the destruction of the particular estate, for
conditions always inure in a privity, so that none shall take advantage of
conditions, but those which are privies, for none shall enter for a condition
broken, but only the Feoffor, donor, and Lessor and their heirs. And as none
shall avoid an estate formerly made by the breach of a condition, but only
the privies, see none shall take a new estate by the performance of a
condition, but only the privies.

If a Lease be made to two, the remainder over in Fee, after the death of the
first of them, this remainder is void, because the Servivor shall hold place
after the death of the first, and therefore repugnant and void.

If a Lease be made for life, the remainder for life, and if the first tenant
for life die, then the remainder over to a stranger over in Fee, this remainder
depends on a repugnancy precedent, and therefore void.

If a Lease be made for years rendant rent, and upon condition of none
payment; the remainder to a stranger, and Livery is made accordingly, that is a
void remainder which does commence upon a repugnancy precedent, and which
depends upon a condition which goes to the destruction of the particular
estate, and especially where such a remainder is created by livery and sesin.

But by a limitation of a devise, or by limitation of use, such remainder is
good, as a Feoffment to the use of I. S. for years and upon payment by him of
twenty pounds, the remainder to I. D. for life, this is a good remainder. So it
is where the remainder is created by the limitation of a last will, as if a man
devise his Lands to his wife etc.

If a man make a Lease for life rendant rent, and upon condition that if the
rent be behind, then the remainder to a stranger in Fee, after the first estate
ended, that remainder is void because conditions inure always in a privity etc,

Lessee for life upon condition that if I.S. pay the lessor twenty pounds, that
then the lessor shall enter upon Tenant for life, and then the remainder over
to another, that remainder is void, because by the entry the first livery is
made void, and there is no particular estate continuing whereof a remainer may
depend.

If a man devise his Lands to his wife for her life, upon condition that if she
marry, that then the Land shall remain to F. M. in tail, this is a good
remainder, for the construction of this demise is to make the same condition to
be a limitation, and not a condition, and upon a limitation or determination of
a particular estate which is taken and not uncertain, a remainder clearly may
well depend.

As if a Lease be made for life upon condition, that if the Lessee die, the
remainder to a stranger, that is a good remainder, because it commenceth upon
the determination of an estate which is certain and not uncertain; for every
man must die, and every term must end, and therefore it is no condition but a
limitation, or appointment when the term shall commence.

If I make a Lease for life upon condition, that if the Lessee does such an
act, he shall have fee, and he does it accordingly, there he shall have Fee,
because he is privy to the condition, and therefore shall take the benefit
thereof.

A Lease made for years (if the Lessee shall so long live) which is a word
conditional, and does precede the remainder, therefore the remainder which
does commence upon a condition is void, Plowden fo. 25.

But if I make a Lease for life upon condition, that if the Lessee does such an
act, that then he shall have Fee, and he does it accordingly, there he shall
have fee, because he is privy to the condition.

Lessee for five years upon condition, that if he pay me twenty pounds within
two years he shall have fee, the Fee passes forth of the lessor forthwith.

Lessee for years upon condition, that if I. S. marry my daughter, during the
estate for life, that then it shall remain unto him, this is a good remainder,
and yet it does commence upon condition, for there is an estate whereupon a
remainder may be founded, and the condition does not tr^nch to the destruction
of the particular estate.

If I make a lease for years, the remainder for life, upon condition that if
he in remainder does not such an act, that the remainder shall be void: Now
before the condition is broken, the remainder is good, and in him to whom it is
appointed, but if the condition be broken then the remainder is out of him, and
in the person of lessor again.

Lessee for life, the remainder to A his wife for her life (if she live so long
sole and unmarried) the remainder to D. their Son for his life, the remainder
to D. is good, though it commence upon a condition, because the particular
estate continues, and the condition goes not to the destruction of the
particular estate, and the first remainder does vest during the particular
estate, which makes the latter to be good, though it commence upon the
condition. But quaere whether the 2. remainder shall begin upon her marriage or
death.

WHen a particular estate which does support a remainder, may determine before
the remainder may commence, there the remainder does not vest forthwith but
depends in contingency.

Contingent Remainders. Vid. fol. 29.
As if one make a Lease to I S. for life, and after the death of I D. the
remainder to another in Fee, this remainder depends in contingency, for if I
S die before I D. the particular estate is determined before the remainder can
commence. So if a Lease be made to A for life, and if B die before A, that then
it shall remain to C for life, this is a good remainder upon contingent (if A
survive B) A Lease is made to one for life, the remainder to the right heirs
of I S. this remainder is good upon contingent, that is if lessee for life
survive I. S. or else not.

A lease to A. for life, the remainder to B for life, and if B. die before A.
the remainder to C for life, this is a good remainder on contigent (if A
survive B) Plowden Colethirst and Beiushin.

H. leased to I. for the life of I. and after the death of H. to I and his
heirs, this is a good remainder upon contingent, for if H. die living I. then
the remainder is good, but if H. survive I. then the remainder is void.

WHen a remainder is limited to take effect by doing of an act, which act shall
be the determination of the particular estate, yet if the act depend upon a
casualty and mere incertainty whether it shall happen or not, there the
remainder vesteth not forthwith, but depends in contingency, Vide fo. 51. a
good note.
and if a man make a Feoffment to the use of B until C. shall come from Rome
into England, and after from such coming, to remain over in fee, this remainder
depends in contingency, for it is uncertain whether I. will ever come into
England or not, and a remainder ought to commence in possession when the
particular estate ends, as well in Wills as in grants, for there may not be a
mean time between them.

And every remainder contingent ought to vest either during the particular
estate, or eo instante, Contingent remainder.
that it determines, for if the particular estate be ended or determined in
deed or in Law before the contingency happen, then the remainder is void.

As for example Fr. Archarde was seized of lands in fee holden in Socage, and
by his will in writing devised the Land to To. Archarde the father for his
life, and after to the next heir male of Robert, and to the heirs males of
the body of such next heir male, To. has issue Jo. Fr. dies, To. enffeoffeth
Ren. with warranty, upon whom J. enters, and Ren, reenters, and then To.
dies, the right heir male of Robort may not enter for the forfeiture in the
life of Robert, for he may not be heir as long as Robert lives: Note that.

By the Feoffment of tenent for life, the remainder is destroyed, for by the
Feofment of To. his estate for life was determined by condition in law thereunto
annexed, and that may not be revived, afterward by any possibility, and
therefore the contingent remainder destroyed.

So if Tenant for life, the remainder to the right heirs of I S be disseised,
and the disseisor levies a fine at the common Law, the right heir of I S shall
be bound.

But in the former case if the tenant for life had been disseised, and died,
yet the remainder is good, for the particular estate remains in right, and
might have been revested, but not in this case Archers case prima pars Lo. Coke.

Remanere definitio.
Remanere dicitur quasi terra remanens. A remainder is that which passes forth
of the Lessor at the time of the particular estate made.

Reversionis definitio.
A reversion is that which is left in him that made the particular estate,
reversion is derived of this word revertor, so that reversio terrae is the
returning of the Land, which is as much in sense as my Lord Dyer defines it,
as the Land returning, so that reversio terrae is terra revertens which is the
Land in a certain degree, that is to say, when it is discharged of the
particular estate, and possession thereof is come thither where the revertion
was, Plowden, 160, 196.

Creation of Estates.
The Creation of all manner of Estates by the Habendum of the Deed.
TO have and to hold to the said William Hum her his Executors Administrators
and Assigns, from the ensealing and delivery of these presents unto the end
and term, Habendum
and for, and during the whole time and term of a hundred years from
henceforth then next and immediately ensuing, and fully to be completed and
ended; (if the said William Humber so long shall live) and if it shall happen
the said William to decease, before the end and determination of that said
Term (living the said Margaret) then to have and to hold the same message
etc. from and immediately after the decease of the said William, unto the said
Margaret, for and during the whole Term of 100. years, from thenceforth then
next, and immediately ensuing and fully to be completed and ended: (if the
said Margaret so long shall live, and keep her self sole and unmarried) and if
it shall happen the said Margaret to decease before the end and determination
of the said term, or not to keep her self sole and unmarried during the said
term, then to have and to hold the said Premises unto Henry Humber.

Habendum
To have and to hold to the said Edmund Clark and his Assigns, immediately
from and after the death and decease of the said Maud Symmes unto the end and
term, and for and during the whole time and term of 100 years, from
thenceforth next, and immediately following fully to be completed and ended,
(if the said E C. so long live) and to have and to hold the said Message etc.
to the said Jane C. and her Assigns immediately, from and after the decease of
them the said M. S. and E. C. unto the end and term of 100 years from
thenceforth etc, Note that in such a Lease all those that shall take in
remainder, Note.
must be made parties to the Lease.

To have and to hold to the said R. I. and his Assigns from the feast of St.
John Baptist last past before the date hereof etc, from hence forth from the
ensealing and delivery of these presents unto the end and term, and for and
during the whole term of his natural life; and from and immediately after the
death of him the said R. I. the said Message or Tenement, and all other the
Premises with all and singular their and every of their appurtenances to
remain, and be unto the said I. I. and her assigns for and during the term
of her natural life. And after the death of the said R. and I. etc.

To have and to hold, unto the said R. I. his Executors and Assigns, for the
time and term of 99 years from henceforth next ensuing fully to be completed
and ended, (if G.I. R. I. and M. I. the sons and daughters of the said R. I.
party to these presents by Joane his now wife, or if any of them the said G.
R. and M. children of him the said R. I. party to these presents as aforesaid,
shall so long live.)

To have and to hold, to the Lessee and his heirs during the lives of A. B. C.
and the longest liver of them, To prevent an Occupant.
this limitation shall prevent the occupant, and yet the Lessee may assign it
to whom he will, or if he has already an estate for another man's life, it were
good to assign his estate to diverse men, and their heirs during the life of
ceste que vie. For

If A. has Land conveyed to him for the life of B, and A. dies without
making any estate of it, whosoever first enters into the Lands after the death
of A, shall have the Land during the life of B. For to the heir of A. it
cannot go, because it is no inheritance, nor to his Executors, because it is
not a testimentary estate that should go to the Executors, as goods and
Chattels.

Limitations which do determine an estate without entry or claim. vide plus.
fo. 17.
To have and to hold to the Lessee, quousque (viz.) until I. S. come from
Rome. A Lessee to a woman, quam diu casta vixerit, or to a Widow for her life,
si tam diu in pura viduitate vixerit, or to another, dummodo solverit talem
redditum, or quamdiu, as the Lessee shall be dwelling on the Manor, or quamdiu
the Lessee se benegesserit donee: us quead: quousque tam diu, to have to the
Lessee for 100. years, (if the Lessee so long live) all these are limitations
which do determine the estate without any entry or claim.

A Lease is made to A. and his assigns, habendum to A. during his and the
lives of B. and C. this is a good Lease for these three lives, and the longest
liver of them. Lo. Coke. 5. part. fo. 13.

A Lease to A. and B. for their lives, A. dies B. shall have it during his
life, it is an interest. But if a Lease be made to I. S. during the life of A.
and B. there if one of them die the estate is utterly determined, for that is a
limitation.

Habendum and reddendum.
To have and to hold unto the said I. W. his Executors and Administrators, from
and immediately after the time, that the estate term and interest which the
said I G now has, of, in, or to the Premises, shall happen to be ended, by the
death, forfeiture, surrender, or other expiration of the estate and term of
the said I G. formerly granted by copy of Court-Roll, by Sir S. P. Knight
deceased, to the said I G. and I W. and to one Do. White deceased for the
term of their lives, and the longest liver of them successively, at the will
of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor of R. aforesaid; which said
Copy of Court-roll bears Date the fifth day of April, in the ninth year of
the reign of our Lady Q. E. for and during the term of 99. years, from
henceforth then next and immediately ensuing, and fully to be completed and
ended: Reddendum.
(if the said I. W. A. W. and B. W. or either of them so long shall live)
yiedling and paying therefore yearly unto the said H. P. his Heirs and
Assigns during the said respective term hereby limited, at the Manor house
of the said Sir H. P. at Saparton aforesaid, the sum of thirteen shillings four
pence of current english money, at the feasts of St. Michaell the Arch-angell,
and the Anuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary, by equal portions, the first
payment thereof to begin and to be made in manner aforesaid, at such of the
said feast days which shall next ensue the expiration, forfeiture, or
surrender of the said estate and term formerly granted by the said Sir I.P.
to the said I G. as aforesaid. And also yiedling and paying to the said Sir
Henry P. his Heirs or Assigns at and upon the death and decease of every
person dying tenant in possession of the Premises by virtue of this demise, and
grant, his, her, and their best beast, for and in the name of a Herriot, or
three shillings of current etc. at the only choice and election of the said H
P. his Heirs and Assigns.

And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of etc. Contingat.
to be behind unpaid in part or in all by the space of etc. after any the said
Feasts or days of payment whereat or wherein the said ought to be paid, or the
said Herriots or Herriots money, not to be paid in form aforesaid when the same
shall be due or ought to be paid, that then etc.

Habendum to one for life, and three years over to his heir, he is tenant for
life, Habendum for life and 3. years over etc. Habendum for life, the
remainder for years.
and this term for years is a Chattel in the Lessee, which his heir shall
not have but the Executor.

Habendum to I S. for life, the remainder for ten years and does not speak to
what person, that is a term for 10. years in the Lessee created by the Livery
and Seisin, for the term for years may be in the person of him that has the
frank-tenement, dependant after the estate for life, but not before or
precedent to the state for life in the same person, because a term may not
divest or suspend a frank-tenement.

A Lease to one for life, and for 2. years over to his Executors or Assigns,
or to his Heirs, all is in the Lessee because all is coupled and conjoined in
one gift. But otherwise it is where a Lease is made to one for life, the
remainder to his Executor for 2. years or the remainder to his heir for 2.
years, this remainder is in obeyance, until after the death of the Lessee,
and then it shall vest in the Executor or heir as a chattell by them purchased,
for heir, or executor is a good name of purchase of it, and tenant for life may
not give forfeit, or devise the same term.

The same Law is where a Feoffment is made to the use of I N. for life and
after to the use of his assign for twenty years, the lessor may nominate an
assignee that shall have it, and it shall vest in him as a Chattle by him
purchased, for he shall be said assignee in sense of an assignee to take it,
and in the mean time it shall be in Abeyance, and note that assignee is 2.
ways, the one is the grantee of the estate which was in the grantor before,
and the other is a person nominated or appointed to take any thing.

Lessee for life, the remainder to him for 21, years, he has both estates in
him so distinctly, as he may grant away either of them, for a greater estate
may uphold a lesser, but not e converso, for if a man make a Lease to one for
21. years, the remainder to him for term of his life, the lease for years is
drowned.

Lessee for life, the remainder to his Executors for 21 years, the term for
years shall vest in him, if an estate be made to A for life, the remainder to
B in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of A, the Fee vesteth in A. as if
it had been limited to him and his heirs.

Exclusive and inclusive. vi. fo. plus. 48. 23.
If a Lease be made by indenture dated the 26. of May to have and to hold from
the Date, or from the day of the Date from the day of the making, or from the
day of the sealing and delivery, the Lease shall begin upon the twenty seventh
day of May, for these words are exclusive, and do exclude the day of the date,
and makes it to be no part of the demise.

Inclusive.
But if the Lease bear date the twenty sixth of May, to have and to hold from
the making, from henceforth, or from the ensealing and delivery hereof, then it
shall begin on the day it was delivery, for the words of the Indenture are not
of any effect till the delivery, for these words are inclusive, and make the
day to be parcel of the Term.

Where the words of the statute of 27. H. S. Cap. 16. Inrolements. 27 H. 8.
of Inrolements are (within six Months, after the date of the same writings
indented) that if such writings have a Date, that the six months shall be
accounted from the Date, and not from the delivery, but if it want date then
from the delivery, Di^r. 5. Eliz. 218.

An Indenture of Bargain and sale, bare date 4. vi. fo. 23
October 4. and 5. B. and M. and was inrold, 21. Martii prox. sequen. which was
the last day of the six months accounting the day of the date exclusive, this
Deed was well inroled within the said act, for the whole day of 4. Octo. shall
be accounted in Law the date of the Indenture, unde sequitur, that from the
Date and from the day of the date, are all of one sense, insomuch as in
judgment of Law, the Date includes all the day of the Date.

If the habendum be for the term of 21. years without mentioning when it
shall begin, it shall begin from the delivery, for there the words take effect
as aforesaid.

If an Indenture of Lease bear date, which is void or impossible, as the
thirtieth day of February, or the fortieth day of March; if in this case the
term be limited to begin from the date, it shall begin from the delivery, as
if there had been no date at all.

And so it is if a man by Indenture of Lease either write a Lease which is not,
or is void, or misrecite a Lease in point material which is in esse. To have
and to hold from the ending of the former lease, this lease shall begin in
course of time from the delivery thereof, Coke. Lib. 5. fo. 1. 12. Eliz. Dier.
218.

Habendum to I. and to the heirs of his body lawfully begotten. Tail general.


Habendum, to I. and A. his wife and to the heirs of their two bodies. Tail
special.


Habendum, to I. and A. his wife and to the heirs males of their two bodies.

Habendum, to I. and to the heirs males of his body, or heirs female.

Habendum to I. and A. uxor ejus and to the heirs of I. which he shall beget
of the body of A. his wife.

Tail special in the husband and the wife for life only.
Habendum to I and A his wife and to the heirs of the body of I. engendered.

* Habendum to I. and A. his wife, and to the heirs of A. of her body by I. to
be begotten.

Tail general in the husband and the wife for life only.
Habendum to I. and A. his wife and to the heirs which I. shall beget upon the
body of A. his wife, both have estate tail, because these words (heirs) is
not limited more to one then to the other.

The wife has tail general and the husband frank tenement. Both have estate
tail. Tail special in both.
Habendum to I. and A. his wife, and to the heirs of their two bodies, this is
tail special as well in the husband as in the wife. But if I. give Lands to
I. and A and to his heirs which he shall beget of A. his wife, here A. has
but estate for life, and I. has estate in tail special, but in this case if
he had said to the heirs, and not to his heirs, then either of them should
have had an estate in tail special, because these words (heirs) is referred
as well to the one as to the other.

If Tenant in tail special, has issue and die, the issue is forthwith
remitted to the tail general, and such issue and all his issue shall stand so
seized for evermore.

Uses 27. H. 8. cap. 10.
Creation of estates tail raised by way of limitation of uses.
The expression of diverse and sundry uses.
TO have to the said Feoffees, their heirs and assigns for ever, by the
several uses, intents, and purposes, and under and upon the conditions,
provisoes and limitations hereafter, in and by these presents limited and
declared, and to no other use, intent or purpose, that is to say, the aforesaid
Manors of Compton, etc. withal and singular their and every of their rights,
members and appurtenances whatsoever, to the use and behoof of the said H. P.
for the term of his life without impeachment of etc. For sale of Lands to pay
debts and Legacies.
and after his decease to the use and behoof of the abovenamed Feoffees and
their heirs in trust and confidence, and to the intent and purpose that they
the said Feoffees and the survivors or Survivor of them, shall and will by sale
of such parts and parcels of the Premises, as they or the survivors or survivor
of them or their heirs shall think fit to be sold, and by the issues and
profits of the residue pay and discharge all the Debts, Legacies, and Funeral
expenses of the said Sr. H. P. and after payment and discharge of the same
debts, Legacies, and expenses, shall and will conveigh and assure all the
residue of the Premises limited to their use, For intailing of Lands to the
tenth generation.
and remaining unsold unto the said H. P. Esquire son of the said Sir H P. and
the heirs of his body issuing, and for default of such heirs to the use of
the said La. F. P. La. S. and I. F. and the heirs of their several bodies
issuing, and for default of such issue to the use of the right heirs of the
said Sir H. Poole for ever. To the use of the first son of the body of the said
K. P. lawfully to be begotten, and of the heirs males of the body of such
first son issuing. Entaile first to the issue male, and then to the issue
female, when they shall come to the age of (...).


And the said Manors of S. P. C. etc. and all other the Premises, whereof and
wherein there is not any use in and by these presents already specially lymited
and declared, to the use and behoof of the said Sir H. P. Knight, for the
term of his life without impeachment etc. And from and after his decease to
the use and behoof of the said H P. son of the said Sir H P. for the term of
the life of the said H P. the son without impeachment etc and from and after
his decease, to the use of the first son to be begotten of the said H. P. son
of the said Sir H. P. and of the heirs males of the body of the said first son
issuing, and so on to the tenth son, and for default of such heirs to the use
of every other the sons to be begotten by the said H. son of the said Sir H P.
as they shall be in seniority or age, and of the heirs males of the several
bodies issuing, that is to say, as for and concerning the Manors of etc. with
their and every of their several rights members, and appurtenances to the use
of him the said H. P. for and during the term of his natural life without
etc. and from and after his decease to the use of the first son of the body of
the said H P lawfully to be begotten, A Fine was levied to the A. uses of and
the heries males of his body until he, or the heirs males of his body. have
done such an act, and after such a thing or act done, to the use of another in
tail, and died without issue without anything done, and it was adjudged that
the remainder was in contingency, and shall never fall Coke, 10. a part. fo.
85. Uses. Jointer for the Wife. Tail special.
and of the heirs males of the body of such first son issuing, and so to the
tenth son. And for default of such issue, then to the use of every other the
sons etc. and for default of such, issue to the use of B P. the now first
begotten daughter of him the said H P. from and after such time as the shall
accomplish the age of sixteen years, for and during the term of her life, and
after her decease to the use of the first Son of her body which shall be
begotten, by such her husband which shall be of the surname and blood of the
Pooles, and of the heirs males of the body of such her first son issuing, and
so to the tenth son. Then entaile the lands in form aforesaid to the first, 2.
3. 4. 5. and tenth daughter, and this limitation following, and to the use of
the Executors of him the said H P. for and until such time as the several
daughters which shall take any benefit, by virtue of these presents, shall
accomplish their several ages of 16. years respectively, and after the death
of the said H P. without issue male or female qualified as aforesaid.

Then to the use of Dame F P wife of one Sir N P Knight, sister of the said H P
for and during the term of her natural life, and after her decease to the use
of H P. Esquire the first son of the said sir N. P. and Dame F and of the heirs
males of the body of the said H issuing, and so to the tenth son. And for
default of such issue, then to the use of the right heirs of the said H P
party to these presents, for ever.

And as for and concerning the Manors of C and S to the use of the said H P
for the term of his life, without etc. and from and after his decease to the
use and behoof of B. P. his wife for and during the term of her life for her
joynter. And from and after the several deceases of them the said H and B P.
then to the use of the heirs males of the body of the said H P lawfully to be
begotten. And for default of such issue then to the use of Dame F. P. for and
during the term of her life, until such time as she the said Dame F. or any
other by her allowance shall by any public act by him or them done or suffered
to be done, seek, endeavor, To the use limited for life, until she shall
practice to do an act.
or put in practice for to avoid or question the joynter, of the said B P
either in part or in all, or any other estate, grant, Lease, or use whatsoever
now made or at any time hereafter to be made and limited by the said H P of any
part or parcel of the said Manors, Lands, and other the Premises, and
immediately from and after such public act as aforesaid, or after the decease
of the same Dame F then to the use of H P Esquire son of the said etc. until
etc.

And for and concerning the enclosed ground and Park, to the use and behoof of
the said H P for his life, To the use of a woman for part of her Joynter.
Joynter by way of the lymitation of a yearly anuity.
and after his decease to the use of the said Dame G. for term of her life for
part of her Jointure.

And after her decease to the use, intent, and purpose, that such other wife as
the said H P. shall have at his decease (other then the said Dame G) shall and
may receive, and take out of the said Park ground, and other the last
mentioned Premises one yearly rent of 200 pounds of lawful money of England,
for the term of the life of such wife for her joynter, the said rent to be
paid at the feast of St Michael the Arch-angell, and the anuntiation of our
Lady, by equal portions.

And after etc. to such uses, intents, and purposes, Uses limited to ones last
will and testament, and for want of such will to any other uses etc. vide plus,
18. 2. 8, Uses first of all raised for diverse men's lives.
as the said H P by his last will and Testament in writing, or by any writing,
or by any writing to be made by him, sealed and subscribed, shall limit and
declare, and for default of such limitation or declaration, to the use and
behoof of the said H P. and his heirs for ever.

That is to say, to the use and behoof of the said F M and of his Assigns,
for, and during the joint lives of him the said F M. and the said E M his son
without impeachment etc. and from and after the decease of the said F in case
the said F shall fortune to depart this present life during the life of the
said E M. his son, then as for and concerning the manor and Lordship of T.
with all his rights, members, and appurtenances, to the use and behoof of the
said A. now wife of the said F F.M. and of her assigns for and during the
term of her natural life (if the said E. M. the son shall happen so long to
live) and from and after the decease of the said E. M. Uses raised for
satisfaction of Joynter and dower.
then as for and concerning the Site or chief Mansion house etc. to the only
use and behoof of the said B. for term of her natural life, for and in full
satisfaction and recompense of all such Joynter and Dower, as to the same B.
shall or of right ought to belong or appertain, by, from, and after the
decease of the said E. M her husband. And as for and concerning the residue of
the said Manor of etc. to the only use and behoof of the said A. and of her
assigns, absolutely for term of her life in full satisfaction of the Joynter
of the said A.

And then after the lives ended, the use of the reversion expectant on those
lives is settled.
And as for and concerning the reversion and reversions, remainder or remainders
of the said Manors etc. as the said uses, estates, and interest thereof, herein
before lymited or expressed, shall be fully ended and determined, and for and
concerning the said Manor of etc. as the estates and interests thereof before
limited or expressed in these present Indentures, shall fully end and
determine. Then to the use and behoof of the said F. M. for term of his
natural life without etc. and from and after his decease, then to the use and
behoof of E. M. for term of his life, without etc. and from and after his
decease to the use and behoof of the first son to be begotten by the body of
the said E. M. and of the heirs males of the same first son lawfully begotten,
To the use of every other the sons as they shall be in seniority or age. Lands
conveyed to uses for the raising of portions for daughters.
and so to the second son unto the tenth son.

And for default of such issue then to the use and behoof of every other the
sons to be begotten by the body of the said E. M. successively as they shall be
in seniority or age, and of the heirs males of their several bodies lawfully
begotten.

And for default of such issue then to the use and behoof of all, and every
the daughters which the said E. M. shall have begotten on the body of the said
B. at the time of his decease being then unmarried, and of their assigns, from
and after such time as each of them shall have accomplished their several ages
of 18 years, or be married, to and until such time as every of the same
daughters, successively one after another as they shall be in seniority or age,
shall or may levy, receive, and take to every of their own propper uses and
behoofes of the rents, profits, and issues of the Premises; the several sums
of 300. pounds a piece, of current money of England, or otherwise shall be
fully satisfied, contented, or paid of the said several sums, by such person
or persons to whom the next immediate reversion or remainder of the premises
shall then by the intent and meaning of these presents of right belong and
appertain. And from and after such time as the said several sums, of 300.
pounds shall be fully levied, received, or paid, as is aforesaid etc. and for
default of such daughters, whichsoever of them shall first happen. Then to the
use of T. M. second son of the said F. M. for term of his life, and so on
with an intaile as before; and for default of such issue, then to the use and
behoof of the said E. M. and of his heirs for ever.

And as for and concerning the said Manor of etc. Uses raised for payment of
debts and performance of his last Will.
to the use of F. M. for life, and then to daughters for portions, in such
manner as is next before limited. And from and after such time as the said
several sums of etc. shall, or may be had, levied, or taken; then to the use
and behoof of the Executors and Administrators of the said F. M. for, and
during the term of ten years then next following, for, and toward the
payment of the debts of the said F. M. the father, and for, and toward the
performance of his last Will and Testament, and from and after the end of the
said term of 10. years, then to the use and behoof of the said E. M. for his
life, without etc. and so on with an intaile, et supra.

Reddendo and reservando. A rent must be reserved out of Lands or tenements,
whereunto the Lessor may have resort or recourse to distrain, and therefore a
rent cannot be reserved by a common person out of any incorporeall inheritance,
as advowsons, commons, Offices, corody, multure of a Mill.
Reservations of Rent, with all incidents belonging thereunto, and how tenant in
tail must reserve the rent upon his Lease.
A Man makes a Lease the first of October for ten years from the feast of St.
Michael then last past, yiedling to him and his heirs 20. pounds at Michaelmas
or within one month after in this, case if the lesser die between the feast of
St. Mic. and the end of the month, the heir shall have the rent as incident to
the reversion, and not the executors as rent behind, because it was not due
till the end of the Month. And so if the Lessor between the said two days had
granted the reversion over, and the Tenant attorne the Grantee shall have the
rent as incident to the reversion

Tithes, Faires, Markets, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, and the like: But
if the lease be made of them for years, by deed it may be good by way of
contract, to have an action of debts, but distrain the lessors cannot, neither
shall it pass with the grant of the reversion, for that it is no rent incident
to the reversion, but if any grant be reserved in such case upon a lease for
life, it is utterly void because in that case no action of debt lies. But if a
man devises the vesture or herbage of his land, he may reserve a rent, for
that the thing is maynorable, and the lessor may distraine the cattle upon the
land, a reversion or remainder of Lands or Tenants may he granted, reserving a
rent for the apparent possibility, that it may come in possession, and they are
tenements within the words of Litleton Vide fo. 44.
A man makes a Lease for years yiedling a yearly rent at the feast of Pasch. or
a month after, with condition of re-entry, and the Lessee tenders the rent at
the last instant of the day of the feast of Pasch. The Lessor in the case may
not re-enter upon demand made the last instant of the month, because the Lessee
has liberty to pay it then, and the diversity was taken between the
disjunctive reservation, and when the reservation is at a certain feast, and a
condition is added, that if it be behind by the space of a month after the
feast, that then the Lessor shall re-enter, there the lessee for the salvation
of his Lease may not tender it at the last instant of the Feast day, because he
has not such liberty and election as in the other case, and it was resolved by
all the Justices that in the said case of the disjunctive reservation, if the
lessor die between the said two days the heir shall have the rent, and not the
Executor.

A man leased certain lands for years yiedling yearly a rent of thirty pounds
at Michaelmas, and the Anuntiation, or within 12. days after every of the said
feasts, payable at the Fontstone in the Temple Church London, upon condition
that if the said rent of 30 l. or any part thereof be behind and unpaid by the
aforesaid space of twelve days next after any of the aforesaid Feasts or days
of payment thereof, as is aforesaid, thereof as is aforeraid that then the said
Lease shall be void, and it was adjudged that the lessee in safeguard of his
Lease shall have 12. days, after the 12. days to pay the rent, for when the
rent is not paid at the first day, it is as much as if it had been reserved
upon the twelfth day after.

And where it is said per perdictum spacium 12, dierum post etc. by good
construction all the words ought to take effect, (viz.) post aliquod festorum
praedict. seu dierum solutionis inde, and dies solutionis is the 12. day after
the feast, and therefore the Lessee shall have 12. days, after the twelfth day
which is, dies solutionis post festum etc. and that for the most a veil of the
Lessee, for whose benefit over time was given, and those words praedictum
spatium 12. dierum, stands well in good sense (viz.) post praedictum spacium
12. dierum post praedictos 12. dies, for that is praedictum spacium, though it
has not the same commencement a the other has. And so the quere in 3. and 4.
P. M. fo. 142. well resolved. Dier.

A Parson of a rectory made a lease for years, rendant rent at Michaelmas or
within a month after. The Lessor died ten days after Michaelmas, and was
barred by judgment of the Court because the lessor died before the rent was
due.

Dame Eliz. Pawlet seized of the Manor of Wade, for her life by Deed indented,
demised the Manor to William Pawlet for 99. years (if she the said Dame Eliz.
did so long live) yiedling the rent of 100. pounds, at Michaelmas and Pasch. or
within 40. days after either of the said feasts, W. Pawlet made Dulcibel his
wife Executrix and died, Dulcibel took to husband John More Esquire Dame El. Pawlet
made Edward Walgrove her Executor and died the thirteenth day after Michaelmas,
her Executor brought an Action of Debt for the half years rent ended at the
Feast before the death of the said Eliz. and tota Cu^ia contra quaerentem.

Yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said term unto the said etc.
the yearly rent or sum, of a 100. pounds, Rent reserved to be paid of the
thing demised and without any demand of the rents; so note, that by special
consent of the parties a reentry may be for default of payment of rent without
demand thereof. Nomine penae forfeited for non-payment of rent without any
demand made.
at two terms or Feasts in the year most usual by equal portions, the
first payment thereof to begin at the Feast etc. next ensuing the date hereof,
the same payments to be made yearly, at or in the Manor house etc. And if it
shall happen the said yearly rent of 100. pounds, or any part or parcel thereof
to be behind, unpaid, in part, or in all, by the space of 40. days over or
after any the said Feasts or days of payment thereof before mentioned, at or
on which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, that then and so often without
any demand to be made at the said Manors or either of them or other the
Premises, or to the person of the said H. P. his Executors and Assigns, the
said H. P. his Executors Administrators and Assigns shall forfeit, loose and
pay for and in the name of a pain, or nomina paenae, the sum of 5. pounds of
etc. and then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said A. B. C. D. their Executors Administrators and Assigns, or any or either
of them, into the said Manors, Lands, Hereditaments and Premises with the
appurtenances to enter and distraine, as well for the said rent of 100. pounds,
or any part or parcel thereof so behind and unpaid, and the arrearages thereof
(if any b^) as also for the said sum of 5. pounds nomine paenae, so to be lost
as aforesaid, and the distress and distresses so there taken and had, lawfully
to lead, drive, take, and carry away, imparke and impound, and in pound to
detain and keep until they shall be thereof lawfully satisfied and paid.

And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of etc. A re-entry for non
payment of rent though no demand be made of the rent. vide plus fo. 13.
or any part or parcel thereof, to be behind and unpaid in part, or in all by
the space of 40. days, over or after any or either the said Feasts or days of
payments thereof before mentioned, at or which the same ought to be paid as
aforesaid, that then and so often and without any demand thereof as aforesaid,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. C. D. their or either of
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns into the said Manors and Premises
with the appurtenances, to re-enter and the same to have again, retain,
repossesse and enjoy, as in their first and former estate, any thing herein to
the contrary contained in any wise notwithstanding.

Note, when any sum, nomine paenae shall be forfeited, demand must be made
precisely at the day, a convenient time before sun setting. In the one case in
respect of the condition, and in the other in respect of the penalty, unless
it be made without any demand, as it is in this last case before, Coke. 7.
part. fo. 28. Maundes case.

Demand of Rent, and how it ought to be made to take benefit of a re-entry. How
to make a perfect demand to re-enter for non-payment of rent.

ANd if it happen the said rent to be behind and upaid by the space of ten
days, after any the said Feasts etc.

The last instant of the last ten days is only of effect, as well for the
Lessee to be ready to pay it, as for the lessor to demand it, and to demand it
the last instant of the tenth day, is sufficient for him without any demand at
the first day, or Feast when it was first due. Howbeit the Lessor must make
demand the last instant of the tenth day before the sun setting, or else he may
not re-enter, and if the lessor do not come upon the land the last instant of
the last day for to demand the rent, nor the Lessee is there to pay it, the
Lessor shall never enter, because he ought to do the first act, (viz.) to
demand it, and such demand shall not be until the other be holden to pay it,
and that is not till the last instant of the last day, which time is only
material for them both. Plowden. fo. 173.

If a man make a Lease for life or years, rendant rent at such a Feast, and if
it be behind, that he shall enter, there the Lessor ought to come to the Land
and demand the rent, otherwise he shall never enter, for there the rent is
only payable upon the land, and the land is his Debtor, and therefore though
the Lessee be absent yet the lessor ought to demand the rent of the Land as of
the principal Debtor, and as that which may yield a distress, if the rent be
not ready thereupon, for if he does not make a demand he shall never enter for
default of payment, although the lessee be absent, for the lessors being upon
the land at the extreme time of payment of the rent, and to testify to the
jury that he was there ad petendum redditum, and not prove quod petebat
redditum, his being there before sun set, and staying there after sunset does
nothing avail, Plowden Kedwelley verse. Brande.

If a Lease be made rendant rent, with re-entry for default of payment, if the
rent be behind and title of entry given, and then the lessor distraineth for
the rent, he shall never enter afterward for that rent then behind, because
that by the distress he affirms the term to have continuance, Plowden fo.
133.

If the lessor made an acquittance to the Lessee for rent behind after the time
in which the condition is supposed to be broken, he shall never re-enter
afterward,

If one Lease two Acres for life, rendant to him and his heirs for the one 12.
pence, and rendant to him 12. pence for the other, his heir shall not have the
12. pence last reserved, because it was not reserved to him and his heirs, and
yet if he had reserved the rent without saying any more, the law would have
said, that he and his heirs should have had it, but when he says, reserving
to him, the law will not help any further then his own words extend, Plowden,
fo. 171.

Yiedling and paying to the Lessor, How tenant in tail ought to reserve the
rent reserved on his lease.
and to every person to whom the inheritance or the reversion of the Premises
shall appertain during the term, this is a good reservation, for the law will
distribute it to whom any limitation of use shall be made; but it was agreed
that the clearest and surest way was to reserve the rent yearly during the
term, and leave the law to make distribution, without any express
reservation to any person, but it was resolved that all the said three several
ways were good and effectual, Coke. 8. part. fo. 69. Whitlocks case.

Queen Eliz. made a lease for years rendant rent, Demand where it must be made.
payable at her receipt of her Exchequer at Westminster, or to the hands of her
Bayliffe, or Receavor etc. with the usual condition, to be void for non for
non payment of the rent, afterward the Q. granted over the reversion to
another and to his heirs; now where the patentee should demand the rent, was
the question. And in this case it was adjudged, the demand ought to be made
upon the Land, Coke. 4. part. fo. 72.

When Qu. Eliz. made a Lease for years rendant rent, which condition ut supra,
the Qu. shall take advantage of the condition without any demand; but when she
grants the reversion over, her grantee shall not take advantage of the
condition without demand.

If the King make a Lease for years rendant rent, without limiting any place,
or to whose hands it shall be paid, the Lessee may by the law pay it either at
the receipt of the Exchequer or to the hands of the Kings Bailiffs or Recevors.

Excellent matter touching demands, and where the demand ought to be made.
If a man by Deed indented enfeoff another in fee-simple, rererving to him and
his heirs a certain rent payable at one Feast or diverse Feasts, upon
condition that if the rent be behind then a re-entry, in this case, though the
rent be behind and not paid, yet if the Feoffor does not demand the same etc.
he shall never re-enter because the land is the principal debtor, for the
rent issues out of the Land.

The demand must be made upon the land, because the Land is the Debtor, and
that is the place of demand appointed by the law, Coke. Liber 4. fo. 72. 73.
Borowes Case.

If the rent be reserved to be paid at any place from the Land, yet it is in
Law a rent, and the Feoffor must demand it at the place appointed, by the
parties, observing that which shall be said hereafter concerning the most
notorious place, Coke. liber. 4. 73. Plowden fo. 70.

If there be a house upon the Land, he must demand the rent at the house, and
he may not demand it at the back-doore, of the house, (but at the fore-doore)
because the demand must ever be made at the most notorious place, and it is
not material whether any person be there or no; albeit the Feoffee be in the
hall or other part of the house, yet the Feoffor need not but to come to the
fore-doore for that is the place appointed by the Law, though the door be
open, 15 Eliz. Dier. fo. 329.

If the Feoffment were made of a wood only, the demand must be made at the
gate of the Wood, or at such highway leading through the Wood, or other most
notorious place, and if one place be as notorious as another, the Feoffor has
election to demand it at which he will, and although the Feoffee be in some
other place of the Wood ready to pay the rent, yet that shall not avail him.
15. Eliz. Dier. fo. 329

And if the Feoffor demand it on the ground at a place which is not most
notorious, as at the back-doore, of a house etc. and in pleading, the Feoffor
allege a demand of the rent generally at the house, the Feoffee may verse the
demand, and upon the Evidence it shall be found for him, for that is a void
demand.

And all this is to be understood, when the Feoffee is absent, for if the
Feoffee comes to the Feoffor at any place, upon any part of the ground, at
the day of payment, and offer his Rent, albeit they be not at the most
notorious place, nor at the last instant of the day, the Feoffor is bound to
receive it, or else he shall not take any advantage of any demand of the Rent
for that day.

Therefore the place of demand being now known, it is further to be known what
time the Law has appointed for the same; this partly appears by that which
has been last said; for albeit the last time of demand of the rent is such a
convenient time before sun setting of the last day of payment, as the money may
be numbered and received, notwithstanding if the tender be made to him that is
to receive it, upon any part of the Land, at any time of the last day of
payment, and he refuses, the condition is saved for that time, for by the
express reservation, the money is to be paid on the day indefinitely, and
convenient time before, the last instant is the uttermost time appointed by the
law, to the intent that then both parties should meet together, the one to
demand and receive, and the other to pay it, so as the one should not prevent
the other, but if the parties meet upon any part of the Land whatsoever on the
same day, the tender shall save the condition for ever for that time.

And if the reservation of the Rent be at certain Feasts, with condition that
if it happen the Rent to be behind by the space of a week, after any day of
payment etc. In this case the Feoffor needs not demand it on the Feast day,
but the uttermost time for the demand is a convenient time before the last day
of the week, unless before that the Feoffee meet the Feoffor upon the Land and
tender the rent as is aforesaid. Plowden. fo. 167. 172. 20 H. 6. 30. 31, 6 H.
7. 3.

If a rent be granted payable at a certain day, and if it be behind and
demanded, that the grantor shall distraine for it, in this case the Grantor
need not demand it at the day, but if he demand it at any time after he shall
distraine for it, for the Grantor has election in this case to demand it when
he will, How tender and payment of money upon a bond must be made. Rent payable
at a day the party has all the day till night to pay it, but if it be a great
sum, and as a 1000 l. he must be ready as long before sun set as the money may
be told, for the other is not bound to tell it in the night. L. Mariae 172. b.
Finch. fo. 38. vide. fo. 63. plus de hoc.
to enable him to distraine, Coke Littleton fo. 201. 202. 203 Cokes report, li.
7. fo. 28. Maundes case.

If a man make a Lease for years, reserving a rent, with condition that if the
rent be behind, that the Lessor shall re-enter and take the profits until
thereof he be satisfied, there the profits shall be accounted as parcel of the
satisfaction, and during the time that he so takes the profits, he shall not
have an action of debt for the rent, for the satisfaction whereof he takes the
profits, but if the condition be, that he shall take the profits until the
Feoffor be satisfied and paid of the rent, without saying thereof, or to the
like effect, there the profits shall be accounted no part of the satisfaction,
but to hasten the Lessee to pay it, Cokes Littleton, fo. 203. 3 E. 3. 7. 27 H.
8. 4. 43 E. 3. 21.

Although that the last time of payment of money by force of the condition is
convenient time in which the money may be numbered before sun setting, yet if
tender be made to him that ought to receive it at the place specified in the
condition at any time of the day, and he refuse it, the condition is saved for
ever, and the mortgagor or obligor needs not to tender it again before the
last instant, for by the express letter of the condition the money is to be
paid upon the day indefinitly, and convenient time before the last instant, is
the extreme time appointed by the law, to the end the one should not prevent
the other, the one being sometimes there, and the other not, and therefore the
law appoints the extreme time in the day, to the intent both parties may
certainly meet together. But if both parties meet at any time of the same day,
and the Mortgagor or Obligor make tender in the place to the Mortgagee or
Obligee, and he refuse, the penalty is saved for ever, and needs not make any
other tender, Wades case 5. part. fo. 1141.

If a condition be broken for non payment of rent, Condition broken. Assise
brought. Distress. Acceptance. Bar of entry.
yet if the Feoffer bring an Assise for the rent due at that time, he shall
never enter for the condition broken, because he affirms the rent to have
continuance, and thereby waiveth the condition, and so it is, if the rent had
had a clause of distress annexed unto it, if the Feoffer had distrained for
the rent for non payment, whereof the condition was broken, but he may receive
that rent and acquit the same, and yet enter for the condition broken, but if
he accept a rent due at another day after, he shall not enter for the conditon
broken, because he thereby affirms the Lease to have continuance.

All grantees of reversions may enter upon Farmors, If a lessor bargain and
sell the reversion by Deed, Indented and inroled, or or if the lessor make a
Feoffment in fee, and the Lessee re-enter, the grantor or feoffe shall not take
any advantage of any condition, without making notice to the Lessee.
for any forfeiture or condition, and have like advantages against them (by
action only) for any other covenants, condition, or agreement contained in the
Indenture of their lease, as the Lessors, their heirs or successors might; and
the like for the Lessees against the Grantees of the reversion, recovery in
value only excepted, 32. H. 8. cap. 34.

If a man make a gift in tail, or a lease for life, And albeit the whole words
of the statute of 32. H. S. be for non-payment of the rent or for doing of
wast, or other forfeiture, yet the entry or claim must be made upon a
condition broken.
upon condition, that if the Denee or Lessee go not to Rome before such a day,
the Lease shall cease or be void, the Grantee of the reversion shall never take
advantage of this condition, because the estate cannot cease before an entry,
but if the lease had been for years, there the Grantee should have taken
advantage of the condition, because the lease for years, ipso facto, by the
breach of the condition without any entry was void, for a lease for years may
begin without ceremony, and so may end without ceremony, but an estate of
freehold cannot begin nor end without ceremony, and therefore not to be
avoided without an entry, which entry descends to the heir, and not to any
stranger.

Grantees or Assigns shall not take benefit of every forfeiture by force of a
condition, but only of such conditions as either are incident to the reversion
or rent, or the benefit of the estate, as for not doing of waste, for keeping
the houses in reparations, for making of Fences, scowring of ditches, for
preserving of Wood, and such like, and not for payment of any sum in gross,
delivery of Corn, Wood, or the like.
And therefore regularly when any man will take advantage of a condition, if he
may enter he must enter, and when he cannot enter, he must make a claim, and
the reason is, for that a freehold and an inheritance shall not cease without
entry or claim, and also the Feoffor or Grantor may waive the condition

For if a man grant an Advowson to a man and his heirs, upon condition, that
if the Grantor, etc. pay 20. pounds on such a day etc. the estate of the
grantee shall cease or be utterly void, the Grantor pays the money, yet the
estate is not revested in the Grantor before a claim, and that claim must be
made at the Church. And so it is of a reversion or a remainder of a Rent,
common, or the like, there must be a claim before the estate be revested in
the Grantor by force of the condition, and that claim must be made upon the
Land.

If a man bargain and sell Land by Deed indented and enrolled, with a Proviso,
that if the bargenor pay etc. that then the estate shall cease and be void, he
pays the money, yet the estate is not revested in the Bargenor before
re-entry, and so it is if a bargain and sale be made of a reversion,
remainder, advowson, rent, common. etc.

If a Lessor bargain and sell the reversion by Deed Indented and Inroled, or
if the Lessor make a Feofment in Fee, and the Lessee re-enter, the Grantee or
Feoffee shall not take advantage of any condition without making notice to the
Lessee.

When a man by Deed indented, If a man make a lease for life or years, and
after levy a fine to A. to the use of B. and his heirs, B. shall distraine
and have an Action of Waste, although the conusee had never any Attornment,
because the reversion is vested in him by force of the statute, and has no
remedy to compel the Lessee to Attorn, New Litttleton fo. 32.
does bargain and sell lands, and before the inrolement, levieth a fine
thereof, and after the deed is enrolled the conusee shall be in by the fine and
not by the indenture enrolled and therefore the conusee in this case cannot
take advantage of a condition before Attornment.

Where conusee by fine of a Revertion before Attornment, does bargain and sell
the revertion to another by Deed Indented and Enrolled, But if conusee of a
(...) before any attornment by Deed indented and enrolled bargaineth and
sells the Seignory to another, the bargainee shall not distraine, because the
bargenor could not distraine.
the Bargain shall not distraine for the Rent reserved upon the Lease, but if
the conuse has had express attornement, then the Bargain shall distraine
without any Atornement.

If the Lessor bargain and sell his revesion by Deed indented and enrolled,
But if a fine had been levied to a stranger to the use of a second party, then
the second person had been in by the statute, and so Attornement needles, quod
nota.
the bargainee (although he needs not any Attornement) shall never take benefit
of a condition upon a demand of rent without giving notice to the Lessee of the
bargain and sale, and therefore notice in this case is requisite.

Note that a fine levied before the Inrolement of the bargain and sale, makes
the conusee, to be in by the fine and not by the bargain and sale.

And the bargain of a reversion shall never take advantage of a condition
before notice given.

Edward Fox for the consideration of 5 pound demysed and granted certain
Tenements to have from the day of the date of the Indenture for ninety nine
years; (A Lease of the Premises formerly made) being then in being. It was
adjudged that this Demise and Grant upon consideration of fifty pounds, did
amount to a Bargain and Sale for the said years, whereupon there needs no
Attornment.

In this case of a Lease for term of years, which is a Chattell, there needs
no Inrolement, for being but a term of years, and no Estate of Frank-tenement,
there needs no Attornment, because it is Executed by the Statute of 27 H. 8
S. Coke 8. pars fol. 94.

Livery and Seisin in toto, vide fol. 35.

Note, An actual delivery of a writing sealed to the party, without any words,
is a good delivery. And therefore if A. make a writing to B. and seals and
delivers it to B. as a Scrow, to take effect as his Deed, when certain
conditions are performed, that is his Deed forthwith; for the Law respects
the delivery to the party himself, and rejects the words which shall make the
express delivery to the party upon the matter no delivery: So that the Deed is
effectual, though the conditions he never performed: And there is a diversity
when it is delivered to the pary himself, and when to a stranger. If a Writing
be sealed and then it lies in a Window, or on a Table, and the Obligor says
to the Obligee: See there the writing, take it as my Deed, and he take it
accordingly, this is a good delivery in Law, Coke 9. pars. fol. 137.


A Livery in Deed may be done two manner of ways, by a solemn Act, and words,
as by delivery of the Ring, or Hasp of the Door, by a branch or twig of a
Tree, or by a Turff of the Land. And with these or the like words the Feoffor
and the Feoffee both holding the Deed of Feoffment, and the Ring of the door,
Hasp, Branch, Twig, or Turff, and the Feoffor saying, Here I deliver you seisin
and possession of this house, in the name of all the Lands and Tenements
contained in this Deed, according to the form and effect of this Deed.

Or by words without any Ceremony or Act: As the Feoffor being at the house
door, or within the house, says, Here I deliver you seisin and possession of
this house, in the name of seisin and possession of all the Lands and Tenements
contained in this Deed; Or enter into the house or land, and God give you joy.
Or,

I am content you shall enjoy this Land according to the Deed. But if a man
deliver the Deed of Feoffment upon the Land, this amounts to no livery of the
Land, for it has another operation to take effect as a Deed: But if he deliver
the Deed upon the Land in name of seisin of all the Lands contained in the
Deed, this is a good Livery.

If diverse parcels be contained in a Deed, and the Feoffor delivers seizure of
one parcel according to the Deed, all the parcels do pass, albeit he says
not, in name of all, because the Deed contains all. And if there be diverse
Feoffees, and he makes livery to one according to the Deed, the Land passes
to all the Feoffees. And yet the plainer way is to say, in the name of the
whole, or all the Feoffees.

If a man make a Charter in Fee, and deliver Seisin for life, secundum formam
Charte, the whole Feesimple shall pass, for it shall be taken most strong
against the Feoffor.

If a man make a Lease for years by Deed, and deliver seisin according to the
form and effect of the Deed, yet he has but an Estate for years, and the
Livery is void.

A man makes a Lease for years, But if Lessee for years make a Lease for a
certain term of any parcel, and so divide the possession of that from the
residue, if of such parcel so severed Livery he made, the possession in the
residue by the first Lessee is not any impediment to the Livery for this
parcel, Coke 2. pars. Betsworths case.
and after makes a Deed of Feoffment, and delivers seisin, the Lessee being in
possession, and not assenting to the Feoffment, this Livery is void, for albeit
the Feoffor has the Freehold and the Inheritance in him, yet that is not
sufficient, for a Livery must be given of the possession also. But if the
Lessee be absent, and has neither Wife nor Servants (though he has Cattle
upon the ground) the Livery and Seisin shall be good.

If a man be seized of a house, and of diverse several Closes in one County in
Fee, and makes a Lease thereof for years, and afterward makes a Feoffment in
Fee of the same, and makes Livery and Seisin in the Closes (the Lessee or his
Wife, or Servants then being in the house) the Livery is void for the whole,
The delivery of a piece of Gold, or any other thing upon the land in name of
seisin is sufficient, Thorowgoods case, Coke 9. pars. fol. 136
for the Lessee cannot be upon every parcel of the Land to him demised, for
the preservation and continuance of his possession therein. And therefore his
being in the house, or upon any parcel of the Land to him demised, is
sufficient to preserve and continue his possession in the whole from being
outed or dispossessed. New Littleton, fol. 4. 8. a. b.

A man makes a Lease to A. the remainder to B. in fee and makes Livery to A.
within the view, this Livery is void, for no man can take by force of a Livery
within the view, but he that takes the Freehold himself.

If Lessee for life make a Deed of Feoffment, and a Letter of Attorney to the
Lessor to make Livery, and he makes Livery accordingly, notwithstanding he
shall enter for the forfeiture.

But if the Lessee for years make a Feoffment in fee, and a Letter of Attorney
to the Lessor to make Livery and he makes Livery accordingly, this Livery shall
bind the Lessor, and shall not be avoided by him, for the Lessor cannot make
Livery as Attorney to the Lessee, because he had no Freehold whereof to make
Livery, but the Freehold was in the Lessor.

If the Lessor make a Deed of Feoffment and a Letter of Attorney to the Lessee
for years to make Livery, and he does it accordingly, this shall not drown or
extinguish his term, because he did it as a Minister to another and in another
right, and is accounted in Judgment of Law the act of the other, and the
Feoffee claims nothing by him, Trin. 7 Eliz. in com. Banco.

If Tenant for life or years (the reversion or remainder being in the King)
make a Feoffment in fee, Forfeiture. Tenant for life, the remainder to the King
for life, the remainder to another in fee, if the first Tenant for life make a
Feoffment, that is a forfeiture, and yet nothing passes but his own estate:
But making a Livery in fee, it is a forfeiture, though none of the remainders
be divested, Coke 2. pars. fol. 76. b. Bredons case, vide plus fol. 50.
this is a forfeiture, and yet no reversion or remainder is divested out of the
King. A particular Estate of any thing that lies in Grant cannot be forfeited
by any grant in Fee by Deed: As if Tenant for life or years of an Advowson,
Rent, Common, or of a reversion, or remainder of Land by Deed, grant the same
in fee, this is no forfeiture. But if such a Tenant levy a Fine, etc, then it
is a forfeiture.

Note, The diversi^y between Livery and Se^sin of Land, and the delivery of a
deed and what is a good delivery of a deed in Law.
there is a diversity between Livery and Seisin of Land, and the delivery of a
Deed, for if a man deliver a Deed without saying of any thing, it is a good
delivery, but to a Livery of Seisin of Lands words are necessary, as taking in
his hands the Deed, and the ring of the door (if it be of a house) or a turff,
or twig (if it be of Land) and using the words aforesaid. And a Deed may be
delivered to the party without words, without any act of delivery: As if the
Writing sealed lies upon the Table, and the Feoffor or Obligor says to the
Feoffee or Obligee, Go and take up the said Writing, it is sufficient for you,
or it will serve the turn, or take it as my Deed, or the like words, it is a
sufficient delivery. Cokes, Littleton, title Dower, fol. 36. a. 29 H. 8. Dyer,
fol. 95 43 Eliz. inter Hawsly and Lacker, in Banco Rs. Hillary 12 Jac. Rs. in
Com. Banco.

The Grant of a Seignory, Rentcharge, Rent-seck, Attornment in toto withal
incidents thereunto.
as also the Remainder or reversion of any of these, or the remainder or
reversion of the Land it self, is nothing worth without Attornment (viz.) the
agreement of the Tenant, that must be presently charged.

As Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Lord grants his Seignory, the Mesne must
attorne and not the Tenant prevail, for the Mesne is Tenant to the Lord; Lord
and Tenant, the Tenant lets the Land for life, or gives in tail saving the
reversion to himself; Now if the Lord grant his Seignory, he in the reversion
must attorne to the Grantee, and not the Tenant for life, or Tenant in tail,
for he in the reversion is Tenant to the Lord, and not the other: But if the
Tenant had let his Land to one for life, the remainder in fee, thereupon a
grant of the Seignory the Tenant for life must attorne, for he is Tenant to the
Lord, so is not he in the remainder so long as Tenant for life lives. If Lands
be let for years, or given in tail, saving the reversion upon a Grant of the
reversion, the Tenant of the Land must attorne: And an Attornment may either be
by word, as to say, I agree, or am content with the Grant. Or, I attorne to you
and become your Tenant, by force of the Grant, or else by the delivery of a
penny, and to the Grantee, etc. in name of Attornment, or by any other matter
implying an agreement, as by a surrender to the Grantee of the reversion,
praying in aid of him, etc. and if such an Attornment be not to the Grantee in
the life of the Grantor, then the Grant is void.

In the Grant of a Reversion depending on a Freehold, the attornment of the
Freeholder is sufficient, though he be not the Tenant that must presently be
charged. As if Lands be let to a man for years, the remainder to another for
life, and he in reversion grant the reversion to another, the attornment of
him in the remainder is sufficient, 1 Littleton, fol. 1^

(...) the (...)nly, and where not.
If a man bind himself and his Heirs in an Obligation, or (...) covenant by
writing for him and his (...) or (...) grant an Annuity for him and his ^res:
in all these cases the Law charge the Heir after the death of the Ancestor,
with this Obligation, Covenant, Annuity, Warranty, yet with these three
cautions, that the party must by special name bind himself and his Heirs, for
if the party in the bond, Covenant, Annuity, or Warranty, does not bind himself
as well as his Heirs, in such case the Heir shall never be bound. 2. Some
Action must be brought against the Heir whilst the Land or other Inheritance
rests in him unalienated away. For if the Ancestor dye, and the Heir before
an Action be brought against him upon those Bonds, Covenants or Warranties, do
alien away the Land, then the Heir is cleaned discharged of the burden. 3. No
Heir is further to be charged then the value of the Land descends to him
from that Ancestor that made the charge, and that not to be sold outright, but
to be kept in extent and at a yearly value, until the Debt or damage be run
out. Nevertheless if an Heir that is sued upon such a Debt of his Ancestor
does not deal clearly with the Court when he is sued, that is, if he come not
immediately by way of confession, and set down the true quantity of his
Inheritance descended, and so submit himself as the Law requires, then that
Heir shall be charged of his own other Lands, Goods, and money for this Deed
of his Ancestor. As if a man bind himself and his Heirs in an Obligation of a
hundred pounds, and dies, leaving but ten acres of Lands to his Heir, if his
Heir be sued upon the Bond, and comes in and denies that he has any by
descent, and it is found against him by verdict that he has ten acres, this
Heir shall be now charged by his false plea, of his own Lands, Goods, and
body, to pay the hundred pounds, though the Land be not worth ten pounds.

All words which do prove by specialty, Words only which do show a man to be a
Debtor to another, is a good Obligation without binding the Executor.
that the maker of the Writing is a Debtor to another, that is a sufficient
Obligation, and though the Executor or Administrator are not expressed, yet the
Law will charge them, because they represent the Estate of the Testator, but
the Heir shall never be charged without express mention of the Heir, Dyer,
fol, 2, 3.

Acquittance for one Rent is a discharge of all former Rents. Those cannot be
heirs
If a Rent be behind for twenty years, and the Lord make an Acquittance for the
last that is due, all the rest are presumed to be paid, and the Law will admit
no proof against this presumption, Cokes Littleton, fol. 373.

A Bastard can be no Heir, nor have any, unless it be his own Child. A man
attainted of Treason or Felony can be no Heir, nor have an Heir, though it be
his own Child.

Attainders which give Escheat.
Attainder by Verdict, Confession, Outlawry, Abjuration, but upon either of them
judgment must be given.

Forfeiture of Goods and Chattels.
Going beyond the Sea without license: Exigent awarded in Felony, though he
yield his body thereupon. Clergy in Felony, standing mute in Felony. Felo de
se. Flying for Felony, though he return and be tried, and found not guilty:
These bring a forfeiture of all a man's Goods and Chattels as well real as
personal.

Attainder to what time it shall relate for the forfeiture of Lands and Goods.
Forfeiture.
He that is attainted of Felony by Verdict, Confession, or Outlawry, does
forfeit all the Lands he had at the time of the offense committed, so that he
can do no Act afterward to encumber the Land.

If Tenant in tail be attainted of high Treason, he shall forfeit for no
longer time then for his own life.

If a man have an Estate for life of himself, or of another, do commit Treason
or Felony, the whole Estate is forfeited to the King, but no escheat to the
Lord.

But a Copyhold of Fees as for life is forfeited to the Lord, and not to the
Crown, and if it be entailed, Forfeiture by a Copyholder.
the Lord is to have it during the life of the Offender, and then his Heir is
to have it.

A man attainted may purchase, Pardon. Corruption of blood.
but it shall be to the Kings use, until the party be pardoned, yet the pardon
gives not back their Lands or Goods without a special Patent of Restitution,
which cannot restore the blood without an Act of Parliament. So if a man has a
Son, and then is attainted of Felony, and pardoned, and then purchases Land,
and then has issue another Son, and dies, the Son he had before the pardon,
though he be his eldest Son, and the Patent have words of restitution to his
Lands, yet he shall not inherit them, but the second Son shall inherit them,
because the blood is corrupted by the Attainder, and cannot be restored by
Patent alone, but by Act of Parliament.

And if a man has two Sons, Where a man shall be said to dye without Heir,
although he have one.
and the eldest is attainted in the life of his Father, and dies without issue
(living the Father) the second Son shall inherit the Fathers Lands, but if the
eldest Son have any Issue, though he dye in the life of his Father, then
neither the second Son, nor the Issue of the eldest shall inherit the Fathers
Land, but the Father shall be there accounted to dye without Heir, and the
Land shall escheat, whether the eldest Son has issue or not, though he be
pardoned after the death of his Father.

Note, that the Heirs procreate after the Attainder shall not inherit the
Lands of his Father nor of his Mother.

But the Heirs begotten before the Attainder shall inherit the Lands of that
Father and of that Mother which was not attainted, but the Lands of his Father
attainted, or of his Mother which is attainted, he shall not inherit, although
the King has pardoned the Attainder.

The operation and effect of a pardon.
For a pardon does but only clear the corruption of the blood of these
children, which be borne after the pardon, and so to make them capeable to
inherit such lands, which their Ancestor shall purchase at the time of the
pardon or any time after, but not to inherit such lands as the Ancestor was
seized of before, nor to purge the blood of those children begotten before the
pardon, as to make them inheritable to any Ancestor.

Alien and Denizen.
A man seized of lands in Fee, has issue an Alien borne out of the Kings
Leigeance, he cannot be heir, Propter, defectum subjectionis, though he be
born within lawful marriage, if made Denizen by the Kings Letters patents, yet
cannot he inherit to his father or any other, but otherwise it is if he be
naturalized by act of Parliament, for then he is not accounted in law,
Alienigena, but Indigena, but after one is made Denizen, the issue that he
has afterward shall be heir to him, but no issue that he had before.

If an Alien come into England, and has issue two sons, these two sons
Indigenae subjects borne, because borne within the Realm, and yet if one of
them purchase land in Fee, and dies without issue, his brother shall not be
his heir, for there was never any inheritable blood between the Father and
them: and where the sons by no possibility can be heir to the Father, the one
of them shall not be heir to the other.

An Alien that is naturalized by Act of Parliament, is to all intents and
purposes as a natural born subject, and differs much from denization by
Letters patents, for if he had issue in England before his denization that
issue is not inheritable to his father but if his father be naturalized by
Parliament, such issue shall inherit, so if an issue of an English man be born
beyond Sea, if the issue be naturalized by act of Parliament he shall inherit
his fathers land, but if he be made denizen by Letters Patents he shall not,
and many other differences there are between them.

An Alien borne out of the Kings leigeance his ancestors not being of the faith
and leigeance of England, is neither heir to inherit nor to purchase within
this realm, yet the Lord shall not have the escheate, because he died without
heir, but the King which is the supreme head and the supreme person shall
have this Land by the common Law.

But an Alien borne out of the Realm and within the Legiance of the King, his
Father and Mother, being then and all their live, of the legiance of the King,
shall inherit by the common Law; Infants borne out of the Kings legiance, the
father and mother at the time of the birth being leigemen of England, shall
inherit by the Statute of 25 E. 3. so that the mothers of the children pass the
Sea with the husbands leave and consent; this statute extends all to children
whose fathers and mothers were dwelling in England.

If an Alien marry here an english woman and has issue, this issue shall
inherit to the wife, the same law where the husband, an Englishman, marry a
woman that is an Alien and has issue, he shall inherit his father.

All which said trusts every one of them the said A. B. C. D. for himself
severally and respectively, Covenant several and no joint covenant,
and for his several and respective heir, Executors, and Administrators, for
as much as shall concern him or them, and his or their said heirs, Executors,
or Administrators etc. does covenant, etc.

And the said A. B. C. D. do severally and respectively (that is to say) either
of them for himself and by himself, his several heirs, Executor, When
Covenants are, several they are as several Deeds written in one Parchment,
Coke. 5. part. fo. 23.
and Administrator, and for so much only as concerns or may concern his
own act, and not one for another act, does severally and respectively and not
jointly covenant, promise and agree to and with the said E. F. etc.

And the said A. B. C. D. do severally, covenant, etc. to and with the said E.
this is a several covenant without further words Coke. 5 part. fo. 2. 3.

And the said A. B. C. D. each of them severally for himself, his several
heirs, Executors, and Administrators does severally and not jointly covenant
etc.

Proviso and conditions and the apt words to make them Vide. plus. fo. 186. 19.
a Vid. Coke 2. pars. fo. 71. 72. 73. good matter touching Provisoes and
conditions.
No condition may be made (to be properly said a condition) but by him which
departs with the estate, and by his own words, and the words conditional
must be restraining, and must compel the person to do, or not to do a thing
upon pain of forfeiture of the thing given, and no words make a condition
unless it be uncertain, and may be broken or kept, and every condition must
either go to the enlarging of the estate, or utter destruction thereof, and
these are the apt words to make a condition.

Illa quod, if the Lessee does such an act, Si contingat proviso semper sub
condition, for these are words conditional. pro in case of a grant executory
makes a condition, as a grant of Annuity, Pro concilio impendendo, but those
words ad effectum, ea intention ad solvendum, or such like make no conditions.

If a man by Deed make a Lease for years wherein is this clause, and the said
Lessee shall continually dwell upon the Lands leased, upon pain of forfeiture,
of the said term, the words amount to a condition.

Quod non licebit to the Lessee to give, grant, or Alien his estate upon pain
of forfeiiure, this will make the Lease defesible, and this reason was given by
the Court in the common Pleas, tempore Reginae Elizabethae, that a Lease for
years was but a contract which may begin by word, and by word may be
dissolved. But such words in a Lease for life make no condition, in that a
Franke-tenement cannot be avoided by word, without conditional words that will
give an entry, tamen quere.

The apt words of lymitation are, quam diu, dum, Words of limitation which
determine an estate without entry or claim. Vide plus fo. 5. When this word
proviso shall make an estate or interest conditional, three things are to be
observed (viz.) that the proviso dot not depend upon another sentence, nor
participate thereof, that the proviso be the word of the Bargenor, Feoffor,
Donor Lessor etc.

That it be compulsary to enforce the Barginee, Feoffee, etc. to do an act,
Coke. 2. pars. fo. 71. 72, 73.


quousque, durante, as a grant out of the Manor of Dale, quam diu the Grantee
shall dwell there, a Lease of Land dummodo the Less shall pay 20. pounds, a
lease to a Feme, dum sola vixerit, a Feoffment in Fee, tanque the Feoffor has
paid him certain, tanque he be promoted to a benefice, tanque the Lessee has
levied a 100 pounds. If a man make a Lease quousque I. S. come from Rome, a
Lease for life to a Widow (si tam diu in pura viduitate viveret) A Lease for a
hundred years (if the Lessee live so long) dummodo solvat to the Grantor for
his life 10 pounds, all these are words of lymitation, which determine the
estate without entry or claim, and if no livery be made then those Lessees
have estate but at will.

A man seized of Lands in Fee, having issue diverse sons, by deed indented,
covenanted in consideration of fatherly love, and for the advancement of his
blood, or any other good considerations, to stand seized of three Acrees of
land to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of Thomas his eldest
son in tail, and for default of such issue to the issue of the second son in
tail, with diverse remainders over with proviso, that it shall be lawful for
the covenantor at any time during his life to revoke any of the said uses etc.
This proviso being coupled with a use is allowed to be good, and not repugnant
to the former states, but in case of a Feoffement or other conveyance whereby
the Feoffee or Grantee etc. is in by the common Law, such a proviso were
merely repugnant and void.

If a man has power of revocation and after to the intent to defraud a
purchasor, does Levy a fine, or make a Feoffment, or other conveyance to a
stranger, whereby he extinguisheth his power, and after bargains and sells the
land to another, for valuable consideration, the bargainee shall enjoy the
Land, for as to him, the Fine, Feoffement, or other conveiance, whereby the
condition was extinct, was void by the statute of 13. Eliz cap. 5. and so the
first clause whereby all fraudulent and covenous conveyances are made void, as
to the purchasor, extend to the last clause of the act (viz.) when he that
makes the bargain and sale had power of revocations, and it was said, that the
Statute of 27. Eliz. has made voluntary estates made with power of revocation,
as to purchasors, with equal degree with conveiances made by fraud and covin
to defraud purchasors, and such volunteary conveyances which are originally
subject to power of revocation, be it in presenti or in futuro, shall not stand
against a purchasor, bona fide for valuable consideration 3. part. Lo. Co. fo.
80. Twines case, vide Twines case 3. part. fo 83.
And first in the case aforesaid, if the covenant or who had an estate for life,
does revoke the uses according to his power, he is seized again in Fee,
without entry or claim.

Secondly, he may revoke part at one time and part at another.

Thirdly, if he make a Feoffement in Fee, or levy a fine etc. of any part, this
does extinguish his power, but for that part whereas in that case the whole
condition is extinct, but if it be made of the whole, all the power is
extinguished, so as to some purpose it is of the nature of a condition and to
another in nature of a limitation.

Fourthly, if he that has such power of revocation has no private interest in
the Land, nor by the Cessor of the estate shall have nothing, then his
Feoffement or fine etc. of the land is no extinguishment of his power, because
it is mere collateral to the land.

Fifthly, by the same conveiance that the old uses be revoked, by the same may
new be created or limited, if the revocation does so mention

Sixthly, that these revocations are favorably interpreted, because many men's
inheritances depend on the same.

Note.
That every use ought to be raised either by covenant out of the estate of the
covenantor, or by Feoffment, Fine, Recovery, etc. by transmutation of the
possession out of the estate of the Feoffees, conusees, etc. Coke. 6. part. fo.
27.

Twines case, fo. 83. Lo. Coke. 3 pars.
IF a man make an estate for life, Conditions.

Vide plus. fo. 17. 6. fo. 35.


the remainder in tail, the remainder over in Fee, upon condition that any of
them in remainder shall do a certain act, then if he does not do it, the
Feoffer and his heirs may enter without any words of re-entry in the proviso,
and thereby shall defeat the estate in possession, and all the remainders, for
he that enters for a condition broken, and a condition in Deed, is in of such
estate he had before the condition made; but otherwise it is where an entry is
made upon a condition in law, Coke. 8. pars Whittinghams case. Vide. fo. 50. b.


For if Lessee for life or years grant a Rent charge out of the lands, or make
a Lease of some part of the term, or does acknowledge a Statute or
Recognizance, and then afterward does make a Feoffment in Fee, or commit any
acts which are forfeitures in Law, or does surrender his estate to his Lessor,
yet the Lessor shall hold the Land charged.

And note that a condition in law, which by force of a Statute gives a
recovery, is stronger then a condition in Law which gives an entry without a
recovery.

For if Lessee for life make a Lease for years, and then enters into the land
and does Waste, and the Lessor recover in an action of Waste against the Lessee
for life, he shall avoid the Lease made before the Waste committed.

But if the Less for life make a Lease for years, and then enters, and makes
a Feoffement in Fee, the Lessor shall not avoid the Lease for years.

So if the Tenant make a Lease for years, and then is attained of Felony, or
dies without heir, although the Lord recover by Writ or escheat, yet he shall
not avoid the term 8. pars. fo. 44. Whittinghams case.

Remainder.
If I make a lease for life, upon condition that if the Lessee does such an Act
he shall have Fee, and he does it accordingly there he shall have Fee, because
he is privy to the condition, and therefore shall take the benefit thereof.

Remainder.
Lessee for 5 years, upon condition that if he pay me 20 pound within two
years, that then he shall have Fee, the Fee passes out of the lessor
forthwith.

Remainedr.
So where a Lease is made for life upon condition that if I. S. marry my
daughter during the Estate for life, that then it shall remain unto him, this
is a good remainder, and yet it does commence upon condition, for there is an
estate whereupon a remainder may be founded, and the condition goes not to
the destruction of the particular estate.

If I make a Lease for years, the remainder for life, upon condition that if
he in remainder, does such an act, that the remainder shall be void, now before
the condition broken the remainder is good, and in him to whom it is appointed.
But if the condition be broken, then the remainder is out of him, and in the
person of the Lessor again.

Lessee for life, the remainder to A. his wife for her life (if she live so
long sole and unmarried) the remainder to D. their son for his life, the
remainder to D. is good, though it commence upon a conditon, because the
particular estate continues, and the condition goes not to the destruction of
the particular estate, and the first remainder does vest during the particular
estate, which makes the latter to be good, though it does commence upon the
condition, but quaere whether the second remainder shall begin either upon her
marriage, or her death.

If a man for him and his Heirs warrant lands to one and his Heirs, that is a
general Warranty, Warranty, and what words make a general Warranty.
for that it is not restrained against any person in certain, Coke 1. pars.
fol. 2.

This word, give, in a Feoffment, imports a general VVarranty against all
men during the life of the Feoffor. And this word, Grant, in a Chattel-real,
does import a VVarranty in it self alone, without any clause of VVarranty, so
as there be in the Deed no special matter to qualify the VVarranty by some
special Covenant; But this word Concessi, or Demisi, in case of Frank-tenement
or Inheritance, does import not VVarranty, Coke 5. pars fol 18.

The clause of, without impeachment of waste, Waste in toto, and the full
definition of the word, without impeachment of Waste, and what is Waste.
gives power to the lessee which shall produce an interest unto him if he does
execute his power during the privity of his Estate, and therefore to examine it
in reason these words, Absque impetitione vasti, are in effect as without
demand for waste, for Impetitio is derived of In and peto, and petere is to
demand, and petio is a demand, and sine impetitione is without any manner of
demand or impeachment: Then this word, Demand, is of a large extent, for if a
man disseise me of my land, or take my Goods, if I release unto him all
Actions, yet I may enter into the land or seize my goods, for by the release of
the Action the right or interest is not released; but if in such case I release
all Demands, that shall exclude me not only of my Action but also of my entry
and sciser, and of the right of my land and property in my Chattels. But if the
words had been Absque impetitione vasti per aliquod breve de vasto, then the
Action only shall be discharged and not the property in the Trees, but the
Lessor after the cutting of them may seize them, and the diversity appears in
30 E. 3. 44. in Walter Idles case, where a Lease was made without being
impeached or impleaded for waste, whereupon it was gathered that these words,
Without being impeached for waste, were not sufficient to bar the Lessor of
his property: And that if the Lessor had granted that the Lessee might do
waste, he by that has power not only to do waste, but also to convert it to
his own use. And the opinion of Wray chief Justice, and Manhood cited in
Herlakendens case, was not judicial but prima facie upon Arbitrament without
any argument, Coke 11. pars. fol. 82.

When Tenant in fees grants all his estate to another, the Grantee shall have
no Fee-simple for want of these words (Heirs) but estate for life, but his
estate in such case shall be without impeachment of waste, as the estate of the
Grantee of Tenant in tail shall be, and the Feesimple shall be in Nubibus
there, as well as it shall be of an estate tail; and there if he does commit
Treason, and dies, the Fee-simple shall escheat to the Common Lord of whom the
land is holden, for that the blood is corrupt between him and his Heirs, so
that his Heir may not have it by descent, and the King shall not have it,
because he that did the Treason, had not the Fee at the time of the Treason, or
afterward, Plowden 562. 556.

If a man do lease or assure his land to another, and all the Mines and Pits
thein, for life or years, the lessee may open and dig the ground for Coal,
Mortar, Stone, etc. and take and carry away the same, although there were not
any Mine open at the time of the lease, for by this assurance it appears that
the lessor was contented that waste should be made in any part of the ground
leased by myning or digging. And in this case the lessee may sell and dispose
the same Coal, Stone, Marle, Mortar, etc. at his pleasure, for it is as much
as if the lease had been made without impeachment of any manner of waste to be
committed by Mine, Pits, or digging.

Lessee for life, the Remainder for life, the Remainder in Fee, the first does
waste, that is not punishable by him which has the Fee, by reason of the mean
Remainder, otherwise it is if the mean estate be for years.

If Lessee for life be, the Remainder for life, and the Lessee for life does
Waste, this Waste is dispunishable at this time, for the advantage of him in
Remainder for life: And where a Lease for life is granted, and then the
Reversion is granted for life, and the Tenant attorneth, an Action of Waste
lies not, yet vide the Register 75. that Waste lies where there is a mean
estate for life in Remainder: And though the Waste be unpunishable in the first
case, yet it seems the Chancery may enjoyne him upon complaint against the
first Lessee, that he shall not do Waste, for that he ought not to do Waste by
the Law, although no Action lies.

The Process in Waste is Summons, Attachment, and Distress, and if he appear
not at the Distress, then a Writ to the Sheriff to enquire of the Waste by the
Oath of twelve men.

There are two kinds of Waste (viz.) Voluntary or permissive: Waste in houses.
Waste may be done in houses by pulling them down, or by suffering them to be
uncovered, whereby the Spars or Rafters, Planchers, or other Timber of the
house are rotten: But if the house be uncovered when the Tenant comes in, it
is no Waste in the Tenant to suffer the same to fall down. But though the
house be ruinous at the Tenants income, yet if he pull it down it is Waste,
unless he reedifie it again; if Glasse-Windowes (though glazed by the Tenant
himself) be broken down or carried away, it is Waste, for the Glass is part
of the house. And so it is of Wainscot, Benches, Doors, Windows, Furnaces and
the like, annexed or fixed to the house, either by him in Reversion, or the
Tenant.

Though there be no Timber growing upon the ground, yet the Tenant at his
peril must keep the house from wasting.

If the Tenant do Waste or suffer Waste to be done in houses, yet if he repair
them before an Action brought, there lies no Action of Waste against him, but
he cannot plead Quod non fecit vastum, but the special matter.

Waste in Gardens and Orchards.
If the Tenant cut down or destroy any Fruit Trees growing in the Garden or
Orchard, it is Waste, but if they grow upon any of the ground which the Tenant
holds out of the Garden or Orchard, it is no Waste.

Lopping of Trees by a Copyholder is not a forfeiture, but a Copyholder may not
lop and burn them in another house of the Land or Manor, nor sell the Lops
unless by the Custom he may do waste Kitchen forfeiture 125.

Waste in building of a new house.
If the Tenant build a new house it is Waste, and if he suffer it to be wasted,
it is a new Wast; if the house fall down by tempest, or be burned by the
lightning, or prostrated by enemies, or the like, without a default of the
Tenant, or was ruinous at his coming in, and fall down, the Tenant may build
the same again with such matterials as remain, and with other Timber which he
may take growing on the ground for his habitation, but he must not make the
house larger then it was: if the house be uncovered by tempest, the Tenant must
in convenient time repair it.

Waste in Dove-houses, Parks, Ponds, etc. Waste in Timber Trees.
If the Tenant of a Dove-house, Warren, Park, Ponds, or the like, do take so
many as such sufficient store be not left as he found when he came in, this is
Waste.

Waste properly is in houses, Gardens, Timber Trees, (viz.) Oak, Ash, and Elm,
and these be Timber Trees in all places, either by cutting them down, topping
them, or doing any act whereby the timber may decay. Also in Countries where
timber is scant, and Beeches, or the like are converted to building for the
habitation of man, or the like, they are also accounted timber, that is, if the
Tenant cut down timber trees, or such as are accounted timber, as is
aforesaid, this is Waste. And if he suffer the young Gerignes to be destroyed,
Wast in cutting Beeches, etc.
this is destruction.

Cutting down of Beech, Willowes, Birch, Aspe, Maple, or the like, standing in
the defense and safeguard of the house, is destruction, if there be a Quick-set
fence of Whit-thorne, if the Tenant stub it up, or suffer it to be destroyed,
this is destruction, and for all these and the like destructions an Action of
Waste lies: turning of Trees to Coals for Fuel, when there is sufficient
dead Wood, is waste.

If the Tenant suffer the houses to be wasted, Waste, digging for Gravel,
Cole, etc.
and then fell down timber to repair the same, this is a double waste;
digging for Gravel, Lyme, Clay, Brick, Earth, Stone, or the like, or for Mines
of Metal, Coal, or the like, hid in the Earth, and were not open when the
Tenant came in, is waste, but the Tenant may dig for Gravel, or Clay for
reparations of the house, as well as he may take convenient Timber Trees.

If the Tenant convert arrable land into Wood, Wastin converting arrable into
wood, or Meadow into arrable.
or wood into arrable, or Meadow into arrable, it is waste.

The Tenant may take sufficient wood to repair the Walls, Pales, Fences,
Hedges, and Ditches as he found them, but he can take no new, and he may also
take sufficient Plow-bote, Fire-bote, and other House-bote.

The Tenant cutteth down Trees for reparations, and sells them, and after
buyeth them again, and imployes them about necessary reparations, yet it is
waste for the Sale, he cannot sell Trees, and with the money cover the house,
burning of the house by negligence or mischances waste.

An Occupant shall be punished for waste, and so if an estate be made to A. and
his Heirs during the life of B. A. dies, the Heir of A. shall be punished in
an action of waste.

If a Lease be made to A. for life, the Remainder to B. for life, the Remainder
to C. in Fee, in this case where it is said in the Register, and in Fitz. R. B.
that an Action of waste does lie, it is to be understood after the death or
surrender of B. in the mean Remainder, for during his life no action of waste
does lie: But if a Lease for life be made, the Remainder for years, the
remainder in fee, an action does lie presently during the term in Remainder,
for the mean term for years is no impediment.

If waste be done Sparsim here and there in Woods, the whole Woods shall be
recovered, or so much wherein the waste Sparsim is done. And so in houses so
many rooms shall be recovered wherein there is waste done: But if waste be
done Sparsim throughout, all shall be recovered; it has been said, that if the
Hall be wasted, the whole house shall be recovered, because the whole house is
denominated of the Hall, but latter authority is to the contrary.

In many cases a Tenant for life or years may fell down timber to make
reparations, albeit he be not compellable thereunto, and shall not be punished
for the same in any action of waste: As if a house be ruinous at the time of
the Lease made, if the Lessee suffer the house to fall down, he is not
punishable, for he is not bound by the Law to repair the house in that case;
and yet if he cut down Timber upon the ground so letten, and repair it, he may
well justify it, the reason is for that the Law does favor the supportation
and maintenance of houses of habitation for mankind.

If the Lessor by his Covenant undertake to repair the houses, yet the Lessee
(if the Lessor does it not) may with the timber growing upon the ground repair
it, though he be not compellable thereunto.

A man has Land wherein there is a Mine of Coals, or the like, and makes a
Lease of the Land (without mentioning any Mines) for life, or years, the Lessee
for such Mines as were open at the time of the Lease made, may dig and take the
profit thereof; but he cannot dig any new Mine that was not open at the time of
the Lease made, for that should be adjudged waste: And if there be open Mines,
and the Owner make a Lease of the land with the Mines therein, this shall
extend to the open Mines only, and not to any hidden Mine, but if there be not
open Mines, and the Lease is made of the land, together with all the Mines
therein, there the Lessee may dig for Mines and enjoy the benefit thereof,
otherwise these words should be void.

A. enfeoffeth B. to the use of A. himself for life, Uses and remainders of
Uses, vide plus fo. 18.

Touching revocations, see 6, pars. fol. 32. 28. 63. 10. pars. fo. 78. 143. 1.
pars. fol. 111. 173. 175. 3. pars. fol. 5. 82. 83. Plowden Com. fol. 102. 5.
pars fol. 90.


and then to the use of B. in tail, and then to the use of C. in fee, with
Proviso and liberty to revoke the uses, and to limit new Uses (if A. survive
B.) and after A. makes a Feoffment, and B. dies, whether A. may limit new Uses
against his own Feoffment is the question: He cannot, because a livery is of
such force, that it gives and excludes the Feoffor not only of all present
Rights, but of all future Rights and Titles: Admit the Proviso had been only
that if A. survived B. that then he might revoke the first uses; in this case
it were very clear that after the said Feoffment he might not revoke, for then
he should have the land again against his own Feoffment, which were against
reason: In this case the Proviso goes further (viz.) And that he may alter,
change, etc. admit then that he should have power to revoke the ancient uses,
and power to limit new Uses to a stranger, how should this stranger have this
new use, why surely by force of the first First Feoffment made by A for out of
that all the present and future uses do grow: And the stranger should have this
use in manner by the said A. against his last Feoffment, and own livery which
may not be.

So if a man covenant to do a collateral act in this case, before the breach
thereof a release of all Actions, Suits, and Quarrels does not avail, for
before the breach thereof, there is not any duty or cause of Action, but the
breach ought to precede, and so it was adjudged, but in the same case a release
of all Covenants shall be a bar to the Covenant; But if the power of Revocation
had been present, as the usual Provisoes of Revocations are, then it may be
extinct by a Release made by him which has such power to any that has estate
of Frank-tenement in the land in possession, remainder, or reversion, and
therefore the estates, which before were defeisible by the Proviso, are by such
release made absolute, Albaines case, 1. pars. fol. 3.

There is a diversity between a Condition that is compulsary, and a power of
revocation which is voluntary, for a man that has power of revocation may by
his own act extinguish his power of revocation in part, as by levying a Fine of
a part, or making of a Feoffment of a part, and yet the power shall remain for
the residue, because it is in nature of a Limitation, and nor of a Condition,
and so it was resolved in the Earl of Shrewsburies case in the Court of Wards,
Pasch. 39 Eliz. and Mich. 40. and 41 Eliz. but destroy a Condition in part, and
it is destroyed in the whole, for a Condition cannot be apportioned.
He that has power by Proviso to alter uses in land, may revoke and alter part
at one time, and part at another, and so to the residue, till he has revoked
all: But he may revoke but one self part at one time, unless he has new power
of Revocation to the Uses newly limited.

Where a Revocation is to be made by Deed indented to be enrolled, that is as
much to say, as by Deed indented and enrolled, for no Revocation shall be in
that case, until the Deed of Revocation be enrolled: And therefore a Fine
levied by him that has such power of revocation before the Deed of Revocation
be enrolled, does extinguish the power of Revocation.

But if a Feoffment be made by A. to diverse uses, with Proviso that if B. shall
revoke, that the Uses shall cease, then B. may not release this power, and a
Fine levied, and a Feoffment by him shall not extinguish it for the power of B.
is merely collateral, See many good causes more to this purpose, fo. 51.
and the land does move from him, nor the party shall not be by him, nor under
him. But a Fine, Feoffment, or Release by A. if the power had been reserved to
him shall extinguish it, 1. pars. Diggs case, fol. 173.

Where Uses are raised by way of Covenant, that Covenantor may not make leases
by any Proviso. But he may make void the Indenture of Covenant, and all the
Uses in the same Indenture, if he has such a Proviso.

Nicholas Scroope seized in Fee of diverse Manors, Uses and powers in
Contingency and possibility may be (by mutual assent of the parties) revoked
and determined, for as they may be raised by Indenture, so by Proviso or
Limitation annexed to them in the same Indentures they may be extinguished and
destroyed either before or after their essence, Co. 10. pars fol. 68. A Fine
shall be paid to the King for the execution of an Use upon a Covenant, though
no Fine be levied by force of the Proviso in the Statute of 27 H. 8. which
otherwise should not have been, 6. pars. Coke fol. 28.
having issue Anne his Daughter, by Indenture dated 26. Junii, 23 Eliz. for the
preferment of Wynifride his Wife, and Anne their Daughter, covenanted with
diverse to stand seized of the said Manors to the use of the said Nicholas,
Wynifride, and Anne for their lives, and after to the said Anne, and of the
Heirs of her body, with other Remainders over, with a Proviso, that if the
said Nicholas during his life, and after the debts paid, mentioned in the
Schedule annexed to the Indenture, should be disposed or determined to
disanull, change, alter, enlarge, diminish, or make void the Uses or Estates,
or any of them of the Premises, that then it shall be lawful to and for the
said Nicholas at all times at his will and pleasure, by his writing indented,
under his hand and Seal, subscribed in the presence of thirteen Witnesses, to
determine disanull, etc. And also by the same writing at his will and pleasure,
or any other writing, whatsoever signed and subscribed as aforesaid, to limit,
declare, and appoint the Uses of the same to the persons abovesaid, or to any
other person or persons, etc. Wynifride dies, and then Nicholas espouseth
Elizabeth Morris, and by Indenture ultimo November. 33 Eliz. subscribed in the
presence of three witnesses, in consideration of a Jointure to be made to the
said Elizabeth, covenanted with W. and W. to stand seized of the said Manors,
to the use of the said Nich. and Eliz. for their lives, and then to the use of
the right Heirs of the said Nicholas for ever.

The Covenant in this case to stand seized to the use of himself and of his
wife Elizabeth, and after to his right Heirs, is a good revocation in Law of
the former Uses, and the last Uses are well raised, though he never made any
express signification to determine or disanull the same: But it was resolved,
that all incident circumstances prescribed by the Proviso (viz.) As to the
subscription, witnesses, and other circumstances, ought to be observed in the
second Indenture.

Note, that in the case of Cheny in Cur. Wardor. 27 Eliz. it was resolved that
where he in reversion enfeoffed his Lessee for years, to the use of others,
that although the Lease should be surrendered and extinguished by the Common
Law, yet by the saving of the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Uses, the term of the
Feoffee was saved.

Also in the same Court 28 Eliz. in the case of one Ised, it was resolved, that
where the Lord enfeoffed the Copyholder to the use of others, that the Copyhold
estate by the saving of the said Act was preserved.

Where any be seized to the use of a Trustee of another, Ceste que use, or
Trustee shall have the possession in such quality, manner, and condition as he
had the Use or Trust. So when any be seized to the use or intent that another
shall have a yearly rent out of the said lands, Ceste que use of the rent shall
be deemed in the possession thereof of like estate as he had that use, 27 H. 8.
cap, 10.

Uses created by Bargain and Sale, and by way of Covenant.
Bargain and Sale, and Covenants, vide fol. 7.
A Deed was made Habendum eis and heredibus eorum imperpet* ad propriu^ opus and
usu^ of the Feoffees, imperpetuum, and not heredum suorum cum clausula
warranti, heredibus and assign, suis in forma praedicta, whereby it was doubted
that the Feoffees had not fee, because it was to them without Heirs, but if
those words had failed, it had been clear, that the consideration of seven
hundred pounds had given fee, for the Law intends sufficient consideration by
reason of the said sum: but when the Use is otherwise expressed by the party
himself, otherwise it is Dier, 169.

If a man sell his land by Deed indented and enrolled to I. S. and his Assigns,
the Barginee has but estate for life, for the word Assigns contained in the
Deed interrupt the operation and construction of the Law and makes exposition
that it was not the intent of the parties to have a Fee-simple transferred.

A man sells land to another and executes an estate to the Vendee, Habendum
sibi imperpetuum without the words, heirs, where the intent of the Barginor is
to sell the Feesimple, and the vendor upon request refuses to make other
assurance, the vendee shall have a subpoena, liber fundment. legum Angl.

A man in consideration of 100 pounds, and of marriage, covenanteth from
thenceforth to be seized of certain land to the use of himself for life, and
after to the use of his son in tail, and the Deed is not enrolled according to
the statute of 27 H. 8, yet the use and possession is charged, because the said
statute speaks of Bargain and sale only, and the use is not because of
bargain and sale only, but also for marriage, Plowden. fo. 4. Manxils case.

A consideration not expressed in the Indenture may be averred, though that
otherwise is contained in the said Indenture, besides that which is averrable
as for marriage and money, and of marriage nothing is spoken.

It seems that any consideration which is good and reasonable, and where
there is a quid pro quo, Bargains and Sales to raise an use of inheritance, or
freehold, must be by Deed indented and enrolled within six months, in a court
of Record at Westminster, or in the county where the Land lies, 27 H 8. cap.
10.
is sufficient to alter an use at this day and the statute transferreth the
possession to the use, except only in case of Bargain and sale, which is
excepted by the statute of uses, Plowden fo. 301.

A consideration expressed in the Indenture is not examinable, be it true or
false, Dier. fo. 169.

A man by Indenture does covenant (in consideration that it shall reign before
Easter next and grant to be seized to the use of another in Fee, this alters
the use, although the cosideration does not avail, for the consideration is
not examinable, where it is by Indenture, and much more an use alters where
an Indenture is made for diverse good causes and considerations, that he
covenanteth and grants to be seized to his use in Fee, although no
consideration be expressly shown, because the Indenture is an Estopell to say
it was not a good consideration, and it seems the Court may not examine the
consideration, and there is a diversity where the Grant is by Indenture and
where by word only.

Nota.
If a man has power to make Leases for three lives he may not make a Lease for
99. years determinable upon three lives.

But if a man has power by proviso to make any lease or Grant, provided that
such lease or Grant exceed not the number of three lives or 21. years, there
he may make a lease for ninety nine years, (if three lives so long live) for
that does not exceed the number of three lives, but that in truth is lesser,
for every term for years which is but a Chattle, is lesser in estimation of
the law then estate for life, which is Frank-tenement.

If A. be Tenant for life, the remainder in tail, and A. has power to make
leases for twenty one years, rendant the ancient rent, he may not make a lease
by Warrant of Attorney by force of his power, because he has but particular
power which is personal unto him.

Lands may be conveyed 6. manner of ways.
First by Feoffment executed from one man to another man, and his heirs by
solemn livery and Seisin, By Feoffement.

By Fine. By recovereys Bargain and Sale. By use. By Covenant. By Will.


if a lesser Estate be given then Fee-simple, is it not cal^ed a Feoffement
unless the Fee-simple be conveyed.

A man in consideration of 100. l and of marriage covenanteth from thenceforth
to be seized of certain land, to the use of himself for life, and afterward
to the use of his son in tail, and the deed is not enrolled, according to 27
H. 8. the use and profits is charged, because the statute speaks of bargain
and sale only, and the use is not because of Bargain and sale only, but also
for marriage. Ploudens case Manxell, fo. 4.

A Fine is a real agreement made upon record in the Kings Court of Common
Pleas at Westminster upon Fines, What a Fine is, and how lands may be converred
thereby. Tenant for life, the remainder to A. in tail, the remainder to B. in
tail etc. with diverse remainders over, and tenant for life suffers a common
recovery, wherein he voucheth A. and he the common vouchee, that shall bind
all the otheir remainders, for no Covin or collusion may be supposed, when the
next in remainder in tail, which has the immediate inheritance, is vouched.
Coke. 10 pars fo. 48.
a rent may be reserved, but no condition or Covenant, this fine is a record of
great credit and upon this Fine are made four proclamations made openly in the
common Pleas in every Term, and for four terms together, and if any man
having right to the same make not his claim within 5. years after the
proclamations ended, he loses his right for ever (an Infant, a Feme covert,
a Madman, or one beyond the Seas only excepted) whose rights are saved, so that
he claim within 5 years after full age, death of her husband, recovery of the
Wits, or return beyond the Seas, it barreth the heirs in tail presently
whether the heir does claim within 5. years or not, if he claim by him that
levied the fine.

A recovery barreth entailes, and all remainders, and reversions that should
take place after the entailes, saving where the King is giver of the entaile,
and keeps the reversion to himself, then neither the heir nor reversion is
barred by the recovery. And now by use recoveries are become common assurances
against entailes, remainders, and reversions, and the greatest security
purchasers have for their money, for a Fine will bar the heir in tail, but
not the remainders, nor reversions, Why recoveries do bar remainders and
reversions.
but a common recovery will bar them all; and the reason why the heirs,
remainders and reversions are thus barred is, because in strict law the
recompense adjudged against the cryor that was vouchee is to go in succession
of estate, as the Land should have done, and then it was not reason to allow
the heir the liberty to keep the land it self, and also to have recompense,
and therefore he loses the Land and is to trust to the recompense.

Upon Feoffements and recoveries the estate does settle, Upon Fines,
Feoffements and recoveries, the estate does settle according to the intent of
the parties.
as the use and intent of the parties is declared by word or writing before the
act was done, as for example, if they make a writing that any of them shall
levy a Fine, make a Feoffement or suffer a common recovery to the other, but
the use and intent is, that one shall have it for his life and after his
decease a stranger to have it in tail, and then a third in Fee-simple, in this
case the Law sets an estate according to the use and intent declared. And
that by reason of the statute of 27 H. 8. of uses concerning the land in
possession to him that has interest in the use or intent of the fine,
Feoffement or recovery according to the use and intent of the parties.

The Statute of 27 H. 8. does not pass land upon the payment of money without
a Deed indented and enrolled.
Upon this Statute is likewise grounded the fourth and the fifth of the sixth
conveyances (viz.) Bargains and Sales, and Covenants to stand seized to uses
for this statute wheresoever it finds an use, conjoyneth the possession to
it, and turns it into like quality of state, condition, rent, and the like as
the use has.

But the Parliament that made the statute did foresee that it would be
mischievous that men's lands should suddenly upon the payment of a little money
be taken from them, peradventure in an Alehouse or a Tavern upon straineable
advantages, did therefore gravely provide another Act in the same Parliament,
that the Land upon payment of this money should not pass away, unless there
were a writing, indented made between the said 2. parties, and the said
wrighting also within six months enrolled at some of the Courts of Westminster,
or in the Sessions Rolls in the Sheir where the land lies.

The first conveyance by covenant is a conveyance to stand seized to uses, it
is in this sort; A Covenant to stand seized to a use, needs no Inrolement as
a Bargain and Sale to an use does, so as it be to the use of Wife, Child, or
Cousin, or one he means to marry.
a man that has a wife and children, brethen and kinsfolk, may by writing
under his hand and Seal agree, that for him they or any of their heirs he will
stand seized of his lands to their uses, either for life in tail or in Fee, so
as he shall see cause, upon which agreement in writing there arises an equity
or honesty that the land should go according to those agreements, nature and
reason allowing those provisions, which equity and honesty is the use, and the
use being created in this sort the statute of 27 H. 8. contains the estates
of the Land, as the use is appointed; and so this covenant to stand seized to
uses is at this day a conveyance of land, and with this difference from a
bargain and sale, in that this needs no inrolement, nor needs not to be a
writing indented as a bargain and sale must, and if the party to whose use he
agrees to stand seized of the land, be not wife or Child, Cousin, or one that
he means to marry, then will no use arise and so no conveyance, Upon a fine
Feoffement or recovery, a man may limit the use to whom he will without
consideration of blood or money, otherwise in a bargain and sale, or Covenant.
for although the law allows such weighty considerations of marriage and
blood to raise uses, yet does it not admit so trifling considerations as of
acquaintance, Schooling, service, or the like, but where a man makes an estate
of his land to others by Fine, Feoffment, or Recovery, he may then appoint the
use to whom he lists, without respect of marriage, kindred, money, or other
thing, it is not so when he makes an Estate, but agrees to stand seized, nor
when he has taken any thing, as in the cases of Bargain and Sale, and
Covenant to stand seized to Uses.

The last of the six conveyances is a Will in writing; which course of
conveyance was first ordained by the statute of 32 H. 8. before which statute
no man might give land by will, except it were in a Burrowgh-Towne where there
was a special custom, that men might give their lands by Will, as in Land.
and many other places.

In what manner the statute of 32. H. 8. gives power to dispose of lands by
Will.
By the Statute of 32 H 8. a man may give lands by will in this sort, first it
must be by Will in writing. Secondly he must be seized of an estate in
Fee-simple, for tenant for another man's life, or tenant in tail cannot give
lands by Will by that statute.

If a man be seized of Capite Lands and Socage, he cannot devise but two parts
of the whole.
Thirdly, he must be solely seized and not jointly with another, and then being
thus seized for all the Land he holds in socage being tenure, he may give it
by the Will, except he holds any piece of Land in capite by Knights service
of the King, and laying all his lands together he can give but two parts by
will, for the third part of the whole as well in socage as in capite must
descend to the heir to answer Wardship, Livery, and Primmer seisin to the
Crown.

And so if he hold Lands by Knights service of a subject, he can devise but two
parts of his Lands, and the Lord by Wardship, and the heir by descent is to
hold.

A conveyance by devise of Capite Lands to the wife for her Joyner, or to his
Children for their good, or to pay debt, is void for a third part by 32 H. 8.
And if a man that has three Acres of Land holden in capite by Knights service,
do make a Jointure to his wise of one, and convey another to any of his
children, or to friends to take the profits to pay his debts or Legacies, or
daughters portions, then the third Acre or any part thereof he cannot give by
Will, but must suffer it to descend to the heir, and that must satisfy
Wardship.

Yet a man having three acres as before, may convey all to his wife and
children by conveyance in his life time, as by Feoffment, Fine, Recovery,
Bargain, and Sale, or Covenant to stand seized to Uses, and to disinherit the
Heir, but if the Heir be within age when the Father dies, the King or other
Lord shall have that Heir in Ward, and shall have one of the three acres
during the Wardship to sue Livery and primer Seisin. But at full age the Heir
shall have no part of it, but it shall go according to the conveyance made by
the Father.

It has been debated how the Thirds shall be set forth, for it is the use, The
King nor Lord can intermeddle, if a full third part be left to descend to the
heir. Entailed lands part of the Thirds.
that all lands which the Father leaves to descend to the Heir, being
Fee-simples, or in tail, must be part of the Thirds, and if it be a full
Third, then the King, nor Heir, nor Land can intermeddle with the rest, if it
be not a full Third, yet they must take it so much as it is, and have a supply
out of the rest.

This supply is thus to be taken, if it be the Kings Ward, then by a
Commission out of the Court of Wards, whereupon a Jury upon Oath may set down
so much as shall make up the Thirds, except the Officers of the Court of Wards
can otherwise agree with the parties, if there be no Wardship due to the King,
then the other Lord is to have a supply by a Commission out of the Chancery,
and a Jury thereupon.

But in all the Cases these Statutes do give power to him that makes the
Will, The Statute gives power to the Testator to set out the Thirds himself,
and if it be not a third part, yet the King or Lord must take that in part, and
have a supply out of the rest.
to set forth and appoint of himself which lands shall go for the Thirds, and
neither King nor Lord can refuse it; and if it be not enough, yet they must
take that in part, and only have a supply in manner as before is mentioned out
of the rest.

A Feoffment made to the use of ones Will, if his Will be declared before, or
at the time of his Feoffment, it cannot be altered, because it is executed,
otherwise it is if his Will be declared afterward, 20 H. 7. 11. vide fol. 27.
b.

What persons may make Leases at this day.
There be three kinds of persons at this day which may make Leases for three
lives, etc. in such sort as hereafter is expressed, which could not so do when
Littleton wrote.

Any person seized of an Estate in Fee-simple in the right of his Church, and
any person seized of an Estate in Fee-taile in his own right.

Any Husband and Wife seized of any Estate of Inheritance in Fee, or in
Fee-taile, in the right of his wife, or jointly with his wife before the
Coverture or after (viz.) The Tenant in tail by Deed to bind his Issues in
tail but not the Reversion or Remainder.

The Bishop by Deed without the Deane and Chapter to bind his Successors, the
husband and wife by Deed to bind the wife, and her and their Heirs, and these
are made good by the Statute of 32 H. 8. which enableth them thereunto, but to
the making good of such Leases by the said Statute, there are nine things
necessary to be observed belonging to them all, and some other to some of them
in particular.

1. The Lease must be made by Deed indented.

2. He must be made to begin from the day of the making, or from the making
thereof.

3. If there be an old Lease in being it must be surrendered, or expired, or
ended within a year of the making of the Lease, and the surrender must be
absolute, and not conditional.

4. There must not be a double Lease in being at one time; As if a Lease for
years be made according to the Statute, he in the Reversion cannot expulse the
Lessee, and make a Lease for life or lives according to the Statute, nor e
converso, for the words of the Statute be to make a Lease for three lives, or
one and twenty years, so as the one or the other may be made, and not both.

5. It must not exceed three lives, or one and twenty years from the making of
it, but it may be for a Lesser term, or fewer lives.

6. It must be of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments maynorable, or corporeal,
which are necessary to be letten, and whereunto a Rent by Law may be reserved,
and not of things that lie in Grant, as Advowsons, Faires, Markets, Franchises,
and the like, out whereof a Rent cannot be reserved.

7. It must be of Lands or Tenements which have been most commonly letten by
the space of twenty years next before the Lease made, so as if it be letten for
eleven years at one, or several times within those twenty years, it is
sufficient. A Grant by Copy of Court Roll in fee, for life or years, is a good
letting to farm within this Statute, for he is but Tenant at will, Secund.
Cons. Manerii: And so it is of a Lease at will by the Common Law; But those
lettings to Farm must be made by some seized of an Estate of inheritance, and
not by a Guardian in Chivalry, Tenant by Gurtesie, Tenant in Dower, or the like.

8. That upon every such Lease there be reserved yearly during the said Lease
due and payable to the Lessors, their Heirs and Successors etc. so much yearly
Farm or Rent as has been most accustomably yielded and paid for the Land
within twenty years before such Lease made.

Hereby first it appears that nothing can be demised by authority of this
Act, but that whereon a Rent may be lawfully reserved.

Secondly, that where not only a yearly Rent was formerly reserved, but things
not annual, as Herriots, or any Fine, or other profit, at or upon the death of
the farmor, yet if the yearly rent be reserved upon a Lease made by force of
this Statute, it suffices by the express words of the Act: And if twenty
acres of land have been accustomably letten, and a Lease is made of these
twenty, and one acre which was not accustomably letten, reserving the
customably yearly rent, and so much more as exceeds the value of the other
acre, this Lease is not warrantably letten, and the rent issues out of the
whole.

If Tenant in tail let part of the land accustomably letten, and reserve a
rent pro rat, or more, this is good, for that is in substance the accustomable
Rent.

If two Coparceners be Tenant in tail of 20. acres, every one of equal value,
and usually letten, and they make partition, so as each have ten acres, they
may make Leases of their several parts, each of them reserving the half of
the accustomable rent.

If the usual Rent had been payable at four days or Feasts of the year, yet
if it be reserved yearly payable at one Feast, it is sufficient, for the words
of the Statute be [reserved yearly.]

Ninthly, nor to any Lease to be made without impeachment of Waste, therefore
if a Lease be made for life, the Remainder for life etc. this is not Warranted
by the Statute because it is dispunishable for Waste, but if a Lease be made
to one during three lives, this is good for the Occupant, if any happen, shall
be punished for Waste, the words of the Statute be, seized in the right of his
Church, yet if a Bishop that is seized in jure Episcopatus: A Deane of his sole
possessions in jure Decanatus; An Archdeacon in jure Archidiaconatus. A
Prebendary and the life are within the Statute, for every of them is generally
seized in jure Ecclesiae.

All Grants, Feoffments, Leases, and other Conveyances or Estates to any
Master, or Fellows of a College, Deane and Chapter, Master, or Guardian of
an Hospital, Parson, Vicar, etc. other then for one and twenty years, or
three lives, from the time of such Lease or Grant, reserving the accustomable
yearly rent yearly payable, shall be merely void. 18 Eliz. cap. 11. All Leases
made by such persons (as 13 Eliz. cap. 10. before) where another Lease for
years is in being, not to be expired, surrendered, or ended within three years
next after the making of such new Lease, shall be void: All Bonds, and
Covenants for renewing or making of any Lease contrary hereunto, or to 13 Eliz.
cap. 10. before, shall be void.

But a Parson and Vicar are excepted out of the Statute of 32 H. 8. and
therefore if either of them make a Lease for three lives, etc. of lands usually
letten, reserving the usual rent, it must be also confirmed by the Patron and
Ordinary, because it is excepted out of 32 H. 8. and not restrained by the
Statute of 1. or 13 Eliz. and what has been said concerning a Lease for three
lives does hold for a Lease of one and twenty years.

Now to speak somewhat of the disabling Statutes of 1. and 13 Eliz. the words
of the exception out of the restraint and disability of 1 Eliz. are, Notes of
things well and duty to be observed.
other then for the term of one and twenty years, or three lives, from such
time as any Grant or assurance shall be given, whereupon the old and accustomed
yearly rent or more shall be reserved. And to that effect is the exception in
the Statute of 13 Eliz. First, it is to be understood, that neither of these
nor any other do in any* sort alter or change the enabling Statute of 32 H. 8^
but leaves it for a pattern in many things for Lease to be made for others.

Secondly, it is to be known that no lease made according to exceptation of 1
Eliz, and 13. Eliz. and not warranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8. if it be made
by a Bishop, or any sole Corporation, but it must be confirmed by the Deanes
and Chapiters, or others that have interest, as has been said in the case of
the Parson and Vicar, but examples do illustrate. If a Bishop make a Lease for
one and twenty years, and all these years being spent, saving three, or more,
yet may the Bishop make a new Lease to another for one and twenty years, to
begin from the making, according to the exception of the Statute, but not a
Lease for life or lives as has been said: But this concurrent Lease has been
resolved to be good as well upon the exception of 1 Eliz. in the case of
Bishops as upon 13 Eliz. which extend to Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Corporations aggregate of many, as Deanes and Chapiters, etc. which 32 H. 8.
for the Leases for years to be made according to the exceptions of the Statute
of 1. and 13 Eliz. must begin from the making and not from the day of the
making, but by force of 32 H. 8. from the day of the making: And though the
Statutes of 1. and 13 Eliz. do not appoint the Lease to be made by writing, yet
must it therein and in the other 8. properties or qualities before mentioned,
and required by 32 H. 8. follow the pattern thereof, the concurrent Lease
only excepted. And though the exception in 1. and 13 Eliz. concerning the
accustomed rent is more general then that of 32 H. 8. and there is not any
provision made for Leases made dispunishable of waste, etc. yet must the
pattern of 32 H. 8. be followed for Leases made without impeachment of waste
by such Spiritual and Ecclesiastical persons, are unreasonable, and are
causes of disputations: And albeit it be proved by the said Acts, that all
Grants, etc. Leases, etc. other then Leases for three lives, or one and twenty
years, according to these Acts, should be utterly void and of none effect to
all intents. Yet Grants or Leases, etc. nor warranted by these Acts, are not
void but good against the Lessor, (if it be a sole Corporation) or so long as
the Deane or other head of the Corporation remain, if it be a Corporation
aggregate of many, for the Statute was made in benefit of the Successor, 3.
pars. Coke fol. 50. 60. pars. 39. Eliz. inter Hunt and Singleton.

How to make a perfect Jointure within the Statute of 27 H. 8. wherein six
things are to be well observed.
Jointure to bar Dower.
FIrst, her Jointure by the first Limitation is to take effect for her life in
possessions or profit presently after the death of her Husband.

Secondly, that it be made for the term of her own life.

Thirdly, it must be made to her self, and none other for her.

Fourthly, it must be made in satisfaction of her whole Dower, and not in part
of her Dower.

Fifthly, it must either be expressed or averred to be in satisfaction of her
Dower.

Sixthly, it may be made either before or after marriage.

Concerning the first, if a man make a Feoffment in fee of Lands or Tenements
either before or after marriage, to the use of the husband for life, and after
to the use of A. for life, and then to the use of the wife for life in
satisfaction of her Dower, this is no Jointure within the Statute, because by
the first limitation it was not to take effect in possessions or profit
presently after the death of her husband; and although in that case A. should
dye, living the husband, and after the death of the husband the wife enters,
yet this is no Bar of Dower, but she shall have her Dower also, because it is
not within the said Statute, and by the Common Law it was no Bar of Dower.

Secondly, it must be either in Fee-taile, or for term of her own life, for
an Estate for life or lives, of one or many others, or to her for a hundred
years (if she live so long) or without such limitation is no Bar of Dower,
albeit it be made expressly in satisfaction of her Dower.

Thirdly, if an Estate be made to others in Fee-simple, or for life upon trust,
so as the Estate remain in them, albeit it be for her benefit, and by her
assent, and by express words to be in full satisfaction of her Dower, yet is
this no Bar of her Dower.

The fourth is so plain, as it needs not any example.

Fifthly a Devise by will cannot be averred to be in satisfaction of her Dower,
unless it be so expressed in the Will.

Sixthly, if the Jointure be made before marriage the wife cannot waive it and
claim her Dower at the Common Law, but if it be made after marriage, then she
may waive the same, and claim her Dower, Vernons case, 4. pars. Co. fol 4.

If a Jointure be made to the wife of Lands before the Coverture, and after the
Baron and Feme alien by Fine, those lands so conveyed for her Jointure, she
shall not be endowed of any other of her husbands lands: But if the Jointure
had been made after marriage, notwithstanding the alienation by the husband and
wife thereof by Fine, yet seeing her Estate was originally waivable, and the
time of her election came not till after the death of her husband, she may
claim her Dower in the residue of his lands.

Note, that by force of the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2. and 5 Ed 6. cap. 11. a
wife shall not lease any Title of Dower which to her was accrued by the
Attainder of her husband, for any manner of Murder or other Felony whatsoever:
But if the husband be attainted of high Treason, or petite Treason she shall be
barred of her Dower at this day.

Feoffment to the use of a man's last Will and Testament.
When a Feoffment is made to a future use, as to the performance of his last
Will, the Feoffees shall be seized to the use of the Feoffor and his Heirs in
the mean time, 35 H. 6. 22. 15 H. 7. 12. H. 36. 11. H. 4. 521. 7 H. 4. 2. 2. 1
Mariae III. Dyer vide fol. 25. a.

Surrenders.
Surrender in Law.
A Surrender in Law is in some cases of greater force then a Surrender in Deed,
as if a man make a Lease for years to begin at Michaelmas next, this future
interest cannot be surrendered, because there is no reversion wherein it may be
drown- But by a Surrender in Law it may be drowned: As if the Lessee before
Michaelmas take a new Lease for years, either to begin presently, or at a day
to come, this is a Surrender in Law of the former Lease.

Lessee for years grants a Rentcharge, and surrenders, yet the Rent shall be
paid during the years. So if he in Reversion grant a Rentcharge during the
term, and then the Lessee does surrender unto him, he shall pay the Rent
during the term, for a stranger that is a Grantee of the Rent shall say for
his benefit that the term continues, and that it is not determined.

If a man make a Lease for forty years, Surrender by acceptance of a new
Lease. By Surrender one of Court, the Copyhold estate passes to the Lord under
a secret condition that it be presented at the next court, according to the
custom of the Manor: And therefore if after such a Surrender and before the
next court he that made the Surrender dies, yet the Surrender stands good,
and if it be presented at the next court Ceaque use shall be admitted
thereunto. But if it be not presented at the next court according to the
custom, then the surrender becomes void, and so it was clearly holden, Pasch.
14 Eliz. in the court of common Pleas.
the Lessee afterward* takes a Lease for twenty years, upon condition, that
if he does such an act, then the Lease for twenty years shall be void, and
after the Lessee breaks the Condition by force, whereof the second Lease is
void, yet the Lease for forty years is surrendered, for the Condition was
annexed to the Lease for twenty years, but the Surrender was absolute. So if a
man make a Lease for forty years, and the Lessor grants the Reversion to the
Lessee upon Condition, and after the Condition is broken, the term was
absolutely surrendered. And the diversity is when the Lessor grants the
Reversion, and when the Lessee grants or surrenders his Estates to the Lessor,
for a Condition to a Surrender may revest the particular Estate, because the
Surrender is conditional. But when the Lessor grants the Reversion to the
Lessee upon Condition, there the Condition is annexed to the Reversion, and the
Surrender absolute.

If Lessee for years accept a new Lease of his Lessor to begin presently or at
a day to come, that is a present surrender of the first Lease.

And if Lessee for forty years take a new Lease to him and his Son by Deed
indented for twenty years, by which. Deed the Lessor covenanteth, that if the
Son dye within the term, that then the first Lease shall stand in his force,
the same Lease, or any other thing notwithstanding, although the Son dye within
the said twenty years, yet this Covenant shall not revive the first Lease.

And if a Lease be made for twenty years, to begin at Michaelmas, and after
before Michaelmas the Lessee excepteth a new Lease of his Lessor, of the same
land by Deed indented for sixteen years, the Lessee upon his entry at
Michaelmas is but Termor for sixteen years, and that is by reason of the Deed
indented, and the agreement which amounts to a Grant of the first Lease, etc.
for an interest of a term may not be surrendered before that it be in
possession, nor the Lessee shall not have Ejectione firmae, nor Action of
Trespass before he be in possession: But he may forfeit or grant such interest
of a term, yet some hold that such interest may by acceptance of a new Lease
be surrendered very well. And they take a diversity where the second Lease may
determine before the beginning of the first, then the acceptance of that is no
Surrender, otherwise it is if it contain a day after the beginning of the
other, then they say that it is a Surrender.

But it is a Principle that it behooves that he that surrendreth be seized or
possessed of the Estate and of the thing surrendered at the time of the
surrender made, for a surrender made by Tenant for life disseised is void, for
that he has but a right at the time of the surrender, the same Law of a
surrender made by a Foam which has title to Dower, is void. Also a man may not
surrender a right to a term, and a man may not surrender that which he has
not as a term, which is to begin at a day to come, nor a term before that the
Lessor which surrenders has entered lawfully by force of his Lease, for a
Release made to such Lessee by the Lessor before the beginning, and before the
possession had of his Lease is void. Also the Lessor remains possessed of the
Demesne, and has not any reversion before that.

And in every surrender these four things are to be considered and observed
(viz.) Four things to be observed in every surrender.


1. It behooves him that surrendreth to have in him the thing surrendered at the
time.

2. The surrender ought to be made of the thing leased, for this word,
Surrender, is of such effect to give again, and nothing may be given again
but that which was created before.

3. It behooves always that there be a privity between him that surrendreth,
and him to whom the surrender is made, which privity is defeated and destroyed
by granting over of their Estates.

4. And it behooves also that he to whom the Surrender is made, has in him and
in his right the immediate Reversion or Remainder of the thing at the time of
the Surrender made, and of such Estate, so that the thing surrendered may draw
therein, for surrender made to him which has but a right of Reversion as to
the Disseisee or to Tenant in Law, as to the Heir or to the Lord by Escheat,
before that they have entered, or have seisin or possession in Deed, or to the
Discontinuee, of Tenant in tail, etc. is a void surrender.

And note, that there is a Surrender in Deed, and a Surrender in Law of a term
for years, Surrender in deed, and Surrender in Law.
and therefore if Tenant for years, and the Lessor make a Feoffment or Lease
for life, that shall be taken the Livery of the Lessor, and the surrender of
the Lessee, for the term thereby is extinct, and yet there is not any word of
surrender, but it shall be so taken by the Judgment of Law, which always
incline the words of the parties to the minds of the parties: But if Tenant for
life and his Lessor make a Feoffment in fee by Deed, that is the Feoffment of
Tenant for life, and the Confirmation of the Lessor, although there be not any
word of Confirmation in the Deed, and that shall not be taken to be a Surrender
in Law. But if Tenant for life speaks that he agrees or shows his
contentment to enable him in the Reversion only to make a Feoffment, and
Livery and Seisin to a stranger, that is a Surrender in fait.

But if he surrender by word in another County, that is not a Surrender until
he to whom it is made has entered. And it is to be thought that if Tenant for
life take a new Estate of his Lessor for twenty years, that this is a
surrender in Law of the Lease for life, for otherwise the second Lease was made
to him, when he was seized or possessed of the first Lease.

Surrender by express words.
Note, that a Surrender by express words is where the Lessee says to the
Lessor, that his will is, that he shall have again the land, or that he will
no longer occupy the same, if the Lessor thereunto agree and enter, that is a
Surrender, and else not: But if Tenant for life waive the possession, and the
Lessor enter, that is no Surrender.

In Chenies case it was resolved in Curia Hardorum, 27 Eliz. that where he in
Reversion enfeoffed his Lessee for years to the use of others, that although
the Lease be surrendered and extinguished by the Common Law, yet by the saving
of the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Uses, the term of the Feoffee was saved.

Also in the same Court, Anno 28 Eliz. in the case of Ized, it was resolved,
that where the Lord enfeoffed the Copyholder to the use of others, that the
Copyhold Estate by the saving of the said Act was preserved.

Devises.
IT is a principle in Law, A Lease to A. for life the remainder to the right
heirs of B. B. having a daughter dies, his wife privily with child of a Son,
in this case the daughter claims by purchase, and therefore the son borne
after shall never divest it, Coke. 1. pars, fo 95.
that in all gifts be they by devise or otherwise, it behooveth to have a donee
in esse, which has power and capacity to take the thing given at the very time
when it ought to vest, for if there be not any such in rerum natura when the
thing ought to vest, then the gift shall be void. Plow. fo. 345.

For if a man devise a Lease or goods to I. S. which dies, and then the
devisor dies, the Executor of I. S. shall not have them. And if a man seized
of lands in Fee devisable, make his will and thereby devise his lands to I. S.
and his heirs, and then I. S. dies and afterward the devisor dies I. S. and
his heirs nor any of them shall take nothing by this devise, and here the
thing ought not to vest in the devisee until the death of the devisor, at
which time the devisee was dead, and so was not in rerum natura. And as to that
heirs are named in the gift, that is to say, it is given to the devisee and to
his heirs, for which cause they shall be contemned and concluded in the
intent, that is not so, for heirs are not there taken to be immediately
takers, but only to express the quantity of the estate that the devisee
should have, for without expressing heirs, the Devisor might not properly make
an estate in Feesimple in the devisee and none other. But if a man devise Lands
to one and his heirs and the devisor dies in the life of the devisee, and
then the devisee, dies, now the heir shall take by the devise Coke, prima
pars fo. 95

If a man lease lands to a man for life, Contingent remainder.
and if the Lessor die without heir of his body, that then the Lessee shall
have the land to him and his heirs; in this case if the Lessee for life dies,
and then the lessor dies without heirs of his body, the heir of the lessee
shall not have the land, and so clearly holden, Plowden, com. fo. 483.

Quere de hoc.
It was agreed for good law, that the occupation of a Chattel may be devised by
way of remainder, but if the thing it self were devised to use, the remainder
were void, for the gift or devise of a Chattel for an hour is pro imperpetuum,
and the donee or devisee may give it, sell it, and dispose it, and the
remainder thereupon is void, Brook. devise fo. 13.

The occupation of a Chattel personal may be devised by way of remainder.
A Lease devised 20. years to one for the first ten years, the remainder to
another, or devised to one for so many years as he shall live, the remainder
to another, a delivery to the first devisee serves for him in the remainder
also. So though it be but the occupation of a term which is so devised, for
the occupation and profits of the Land is all one with land it self, but if
the occupation of a Book, glass, or other Chattel personal be devised to one
for life, and after his death to another in like sort, there a delivery to the
first is no delivery to the other, for their occupations are several, and in
such Chattles personal the occupation is distinct from the property, 7 H. 6.
30. Plowden, fo. 522.

A devise to one and his heirs Males, is an estate tail, but a devise to I.
S. in Fee upon condition, that if he pay not I. D, 10 l. then I. D. to have it
in Fee, is a void condition and remainder, for it is contrary to the law. 27 H.
8. 27. 29 H. 8. Dier. 33.

But a devise of the fee-simple to Alice S. and after her death to B. is only
an estate for life, the remainder for life to B. the remainder to Alice in Fee,
so as the husband of Alice, In a devise by what words Fee-simple passes.
(if she die in the life of B.) cannot be Tenant by courtesy, 19 Eliz. Dier.
357.

If a man devise lands to a man for ever, or to give and to sell, or in
fee-simple, or to him and his Assigns for ever, Fee-simple passes, but if the
devise be to a man and his Assigns without saying for ever, the Devisee has
but an estate for life, if a man Devise lands to one and sanguini suo, that is
Fee-simple, but if it be semini suo it is estate tail.

If a man Devise Lands upon condition, A devise, upon a condition repugnant is
void.
that the Devisee shall not Alien, this condition is void, and so it is of a
Grant, Release, Confirmation, or other conveyance whereby a Fee-simple does
pass. And so it is, if a man be possessed of a Lease for years, or of a Horse,
or of any other Chattel, real or personal, and give it or set it upon any
such condition.

When a man devises that the Executors shall set the Land, A devise that the
Executors shall sell the Land.
there the Land descends in the mean time to the heir, and until the Sale
be made, the heir may enter and take the profits.

But when the land is devised, to his Executor to be sold, there the devise
takes away the descent, A device of Land to the Executors to be by them sold.
and vesteth the state of the land in the Executors, and they may enter and
take the profits, and make sale according to the Devise, and here it appears,
that when a man devises his Tenements to be sold by his Executors, is all one
as if he had devised his Tenements to his Executors to be sold. And the reason
is, because he devises the Tenements whereby he makes the descent.

Although that the last Will shall avoid the former Will, yet if a man be
seized of lands in Fee, No alteration of such a Will.
and thereof enfeoffe a stranger, and declare his Will upon the Livery of Seisin
made to the stranger, that is, that the Feoffee shall be seized to the use of
the Feoffor for term of his life, the remainder to I. S. in Fee, now he may
not alter this Will by a latter Will in prejudice of ceste que use in
remainder, because the use is in him in remainder forthwith, so that he may set
it, but if in the same case the remainder of the use had been to the right
heirs of the Feoffor, then the Feoffor might alter this use by his last Will,
and if the Feoffor had declared his Will upon the Livery of Seisin, that the
Feoffee should be seized to the use of I. F. for life, the remainder to the use
of the Feoffor, or in tail, the remainder to the use of a stranger in Fee, in
this case the Feoffor may not alter this Will by his last Will, Perkins
Testaments, fo. 93. and 92.

Such a Will may be altered.
If a man seized of Lands in Fee, thereof enfeoffe a stranger, to the intent to
perform his Will, and after the Feoffor makes his Will and devises the same
Land to a stranger in Fee, in this case the Devisor may alter this Will by a
latter Will, because in this case the Devisee shall not have this Land but by
force of the Testatment, and that may not take effect till after the death of
the Devisor. And the same law it is of Lands, Tenements, Rents, or Common, etc.
devisable by the custom used in any place etc. And also the same law is it of
all Chattels real and personal devised, Perkins Testaments, fo. 93.

A Feoffment to perform a Will.
When a Feoffement is made to a future use, as to the performance of his last
Will, the Feoffees shall be seized to the use of the Feoffor and his heirs in
the mean time, 35 H. 6. 22. 15 H. 7. 12. 37 H 6. 36. 11. H. 4. 52. 7 H. 4. 22.
1 Mariae. 111. Dier.

Of such Will. there is no alteration.
A Feoffment made to the use of ones Will, if his Will be declared before, or at
the time of his Feoffment, it cannot be altered because it is executed,
otherwise it is if his Will be declared afterward, 20 ^. 7. 11.

If a man devise his land to W. N. solvendum 10 l. to his Executors and die, A
man devises lands to his wife so long as she should continue sole, and if she
marry, the remainder in tail, the remainder to his right heir, so that the
marriage is the limitation which determines the estate, and so the remainder
begins upon the estate ended there. Coke. 10. pars. fo. 41.
the Devisee has Feesimple by reason of the payment without words to his
heirs, for ever. And that shall be intended the intent of the Devisor: so if
a man sell land to W. N for 20 l. that shall be intended a Sale in Fee-simple
without words, heirs, for conscience, etc. Brook estates fo. 78.

Termor devises to his wife the Land for so many years as she should live,
and afterward the term to his son, and made his wife. Executrix and died, the
wife prooved the Testament and entered and agreed to the devise, and afterward
she aliened the term and died, the son or his Administrator may enter.

A man devises his Land to I. S. that shall be taken but for term for life,
but if he says paying 100 l. to W. N. that shall be intended Fee-simple, and
if he does not pay it in his life time, yet if his heir or Executor pay it,
it suffices Quaere of his Assignee, Brook, Testament, 18.

A Devise to a man and his heirs, he has issue a daughter and dies, his
wife privily with Child of a Son, the daughter enters, she shall retain the
land for ever, and yet the son is heir, but not to toll the land before vested
in the daughter.

If Lessee for years devise his term or other his goods or Chattels by
Testament to one for term of his life, the remainder over to another and
dies, and the Devisee enters and does not Alien the term, nor give, nor sell
the Chattel, and die there, he in remainder shall have it, but if the first
devisee had aliened given or sold it, he in remainder had been remediless,
Brook Chattel 23. And so B. thinks it if it be forfeited in his life, he in
remainder is without remedy.

If a term be devised to one and his heirs males of his body, his heir shall
not have it, but his executor, for a term which is but a Chattel may not be
entailed, and such Devisee may well Alien the term to whom please him Coke.
10. pars. fo. 22.

If a man devise Lands to one to have to him and his heirs after the death of
the Devisors wife, the wife although she were not named before the Habendum
shall have an estate for life by this Devise.

The husband possessed of a term in jure uxoris suae makes a Lease of parcel
rendant rent, the wife shall have the residue of the term but not the rent, 9.
Eliz. Dier. fo. 246.

If a man devise his land to his wife for her life, upon condition that if she
marry, that then the land shall remain to I. S. in tail, this is a good
remainder, for the construction of this devise is to make the same condition,
to be a lymitation and not any condition, and upon a lymitation or
determination of a particular estate which is certain and not uncertain a
remainder clearly may well depend.

A man possessed of a term of years in the right of his wife, cannot devise
it to another by his Will, for she has an estate in it before and at the time
of his death, which preventeth the Devisee, nor can he grant charge out of it,
for she surviving is remitted to the term, and therefore shall avoid the
charge. But by by an express Act he might in his life time have given it away,
but if a woman having Chattels personal take a husband, the law devesteth the
property out of her and vesteth it in her husband only.

What Deeds of Gifts shall be counted fraudulent.
Fraud.
IF a man make a general Deed of Gift of all his goods, this is suspicious to
be done upon fraud to deceive the Creditors.

And if a man which is in debt make a Deed of gift of all his goods, to
protract the taking of them in execution for his debt, this deed of gift is
void, as against those to whom he stood indebted: But as against himself his
own Executor or Administrator or any man to whom afterward he shall sell them
or convey them, it is good.

What is sale bona fide, and what not.
By sale any man may convey his own goods to another, and although he may fear
Execution for debts, he may sell them outright for money at any time before
the Execution served, so that there be no reservation of trust between them,
that providing the money he shall have the goods again, for that trust in such
case does prove plainly a fraud to prevent the Creditors from taking the goods
in execution.

A Deed of gift of goods to defraud Creditors is void against them, but is
good against him his Executors or ministrators.

Where Sale in a Market Overt shall Bar the owner, and where not.
IF a man steal my Goods or Cartel, Market Overt.
or take them from me in jest, or borrow them of me, and carry them to the
market or fair, and there sells them, this sale does bar me of the property
of my goods, saving that if it be a horse he must be ridden two hours in the
Market or Fair between ten and five of the Clock, and Tolled for in the
Tolle-Booke, and the seller must bring one to avouch this Sale known to the
Tolle-book-keeper, or else the Sale binds not, and for any other goods, where
the Sale in a Market or Fair shall bar the owner, not being the seller, of his
property, it must be sale in a Market or Fair where usually things of that
nature are sold. As if a man steal a horse and sell him in Smithfield, the
true owner is not barred by this Sale, but if he sell, the Horse in
Cheap Side, Newgate, or Westminster Market, the true owner is not barred by
this Sale because these Markets are usual, for Flesh, Fish, etc. and not for
horses.

So as where by Custom of London, every shop there is a Market all the days
of the week, saving Sun-daies and Holly-daies, yet if a piece of Plate or a
Jewel that is lost, or a chain of Gold, or Pearl, that is stolen or
borrowed, be sold in a Draper or Scrivenors Shop, or any other but a
Goldsmiths, the sale barreth not the true owner and sic in similibus.

The owner may seize his goods after they are stolen, wheresoever he finds
them except they were sold in a Fair or Market, and that bona fide without
fraud.

But if the Thief be condemned of the Felony, or outlawed for the same, or
outlawed in any personal Action, or have counted a forfeiture of goods to the
Crown, then the true owner is without remedy, and yet if after the goods were
stolen, the true owner makes fresh pursuit after the thief and takes the
goods with the thief, he may take them again, and if he make no fresh
persuit, yet if he prosecute the Felon so far as Justice requires, as to have
him arraigned, indicted, and found guilty, (though he be not hanged nor have
judgment of death) in all these cases he shall have the goods again by a writ
of a restitution to the party in whose hands they are.

No Sale on a Sunday or Holiday shall be said a sale in Market Overt to alter
the property.

Waive.
A Theife having stolen goods being pursued flies away, and leaves the goods,
this leaving is called a waving, and the property is to the King or to the Lord
of the Manor, where it was wayved. But if the Felon be Indicted, Adjudged,
found guilty, or unlawed at the suite of the owner of these goods, he shall
have restitution of them as before.

Stray.
Property in live Chattel is thus gotten, when they come into other men's
grounds, then the party or Lord into whose grounds or Mannours they come,
causes them to be seized, and with a With put about their necks, and to be
cried in three Markets adjoining, showing the Marks of the Cattle, which done,
if the true owner claim them not within a year and a day, then the property
of them is in the Lord, and if the stray remain with the Lord eight or ten
Months, and then strayeth away to another Lordship and is seized by a second
Lord, the first Lord has no remedy to have it again.

Wrecke.
Where a man, Dog, or Cat escape alive out of Ships, it shall be no wreck, but
the things shall be prized by the Sheriff or Coroner, and delivered to those
of the Town where they be found, to answer them. So as if any within the year
and day prove that the goods be his, they shall be restored to him.
Westminster, cap. 4.

Treasure hid in the earth (not upon the earth nor in the Sea) and Coin though
not hidden being found, Treasure Trove.
is the Kings, Stanford, 410. 10 Eliz. Plowden fo. 322.

If a man be outlawed, Indicted of Felony or Treason, Forfeitures.
or confess it, or be found guilty of it, or refuse to be tried by Peers, or
Jury, or be attainted by Jury, or fly for Felony, though he be not guilty, or
suffer the Exigent to be awarded against him, although he be not outlawed, or
go over the Seas without License, all the goods he had at the judgment, he
forfeiteth to the Crown, except some Lord by Charter can claim them, for in
those cases prescription will not serve, except it be so ancient that it has
had allowance before the Justices in Eire in their circuites, Execution sued in
personal Actions.
or in the Kings Bench in ancient time.

Recoveries in personal Actions are of two sorts, either to have execution of
the profits of the land and Chattels, or a capias ad satisfaciendum.

In those of the first sort execution shall be of any land which the party had
the day of the judgment given, but for Chattels, though it be Leases for
years only, those which he had the day of the execution sued. So as if he sell
his goods bona fide after judgment and before execution sued forth, those goods
are not liable to the Execution. Or if a Writ of Execution be sued forth and
never returned, and after the Defendant Alien his goods, and the Plantiffe
purchase another Writ which is returned, yet the Execution shall not be of
these goods, for Writs which never are returned, are not of record nor of any
force at all, but an alienation made after the test of that second Writ, had
been nothing worth, Old Na. Br. 165. 42. E. 3. 11. 2. H. 4. 141.

Executors, with all things incident to that Office.
Executors.
BY Executor-ship goods are gotten, when a man is possessed of goods makes his
last Will and Testament in writing, or by word, and makes one or more
Executors thereof, these Executors have by the Will and death of the parties
all the property of their goods, Chattels, Leases for years, Wardships, and
extents, and all right concerning those things.

Those Executors may meddle with the goods and dispose them before they prove
the Will, but they cannot bring an Action for any debt or duty, before they
have proved the Will.

The proving of the Will is thus, they are to exhibit the Will into the Bishops
Court, and then they are to be sworn, and the Bishops Officers are to keep the
Will Original, and certify the Copy thereof in Parchment under the Bishops
scale of Office, which Parchment so sealed is called the Will proved.

Administration and Executors.
By letters of Administration property in goods is thus gotten, when a man
possessed of goods dies without any Will, there such things as the Executors
should have had, if he had made a Will, were by ancient law to have come to the
Bishop of the Diocese to dispose for the good of his soul that died, he first
paying his funeral and debts, and giving the rest, ad pios usus.

This is now altered by the Statute Law, so as the Bishops are to grant Letters
of Administration of the goods at this day to the Wife, if she require it, or
children, or next of kin, if they refuse it (as often they do) because the
debts are greater then the estate will bear, then some Creditors or some other
will take it, as the Bishops Officers shall think meet. It grows often in
question what Bishop shall have the right of proving Wills, and granting
Administration of Goods.

In which Controversy the rule is thus, That if the party dead, had at the
time of his death Bona notabilia in diverse Diocesses of some reasonable value,
the Archbishop of the Province where he died is to have the approbation of his
Will, and grant the Administration of his Goods, as the case falls out,
otherwise the Bishop of the Diocese is to do it.

If there be but one Executor made, yet he may refuse the Executorship coming
before the Bishop, so that he has not intermeddled with any of the Goods
before, or with receiving Debts or paying Legacies.

And if there be more Executors then one, so many as list may refuse, and if
any one take it upon him, the rest that did once refuse may when they will take
it upon them, and no executor shall be further charged with Debts or legacies,
then the value of the goods come to his hands. So that he foresee that he pay
Debts upon Record, Debts to the King. Then upon Judgments, Statutes,
Recognizances, then Debts by Bond and Bill sealed, Rent unpaid, Servants Wages,
payment to head-workmen; and lastly Shop-books, and Contracts by word, for if
an Executor or Administrator pay Debts to others before to the King, or Debts
due by Bond before those due by Record, or Debts by Shop-book, and Contracts
before those by Bond, Arrearages of rent, and Servants Wages, he shall pay the
same over again to these others in the said degrees.

But yet the law gives them choice, that where diverse have debts due in equal
degree of record or specialty, he may pay which of them he will before any Suit
be brought against him, but if Suit be brought he must first pay them that get
Judgment against him.

Any one Executor may convey the Goods, or release Debts without his Companion,
and any one by himself may do as much as all together: But one man's releasing
of Debts, or selling of Goods shall not charge the other to pay so much of the
Goods, if there be not enough to pay debts, but it shall charge the party
himself that did so release or convey.

But it is not so with Administrators, for they have but one Authority given
them by the Bishop over the Goods, which Authority being given to many, is to
be executed by all of them joined together.

And if an Executor dye making an Executor, the second Executor is Executor to
the first Testator.

But if an Administrator die intestate, then his Administrator shall not be
Executor to the first: But in that case the Bishop whom we call the Ordinary
is to commit the Administration of the first Testators Goods to his Wife, or
next of kin, as if he had died intestate; Always provided, that that which the
Executor did in his life time is to be allowed for good. And so if an
Administrator die and make his Executor, the Executor of the Administrator
shall not be Executor to the first Intestate, but the Ordinary must new commit
the Administration of the Goods of the first Intestate.

Again, if the Exetutor or Administrator pay Debts or Funerals, or Legacies of
his own money, he may retain so much of the Goods in kind of the Testator or
Intestate, and shall have property of it in kind.

Legacy.
PRoperty by legacy is where a man makes a Will, and Executors, and gives
legacies, he or they to whom the Legacies are given, must have the assent of
the Executors, or of one of them to have his Legacy; and the property of that
Lease or other Goods bequeathed unto him is said to be in him, but he may not
enter nor take his legacy without the assent of the Executors, or of one of
them, because the Executors are charged to pay debts before legacies; And if
one of them assent to pay legacies, he shall pay the value thereof of his own
purse.

But this is to be understood by debts of Record to the King, or by Bill and
Bond sealed, or Arrearages of Rent, or Servants, or Work-mens Wages, and not
debts of Shop-books, or Bills unsealed, or Contract by word, for before them
legacies are to be paid.

And if the Executors doubt that they shall not have enough to pay every
legacy, they may pay which they please first, but they may not sell any
special legacy which they will to pay debts, or a lease of goods to pay a
money legacy: But they may sell any legacy which they will to pay debts, if
they have not enough besides.

If a man make a Will, and make no Executor, or if the Executors refuse, the
Ordinary is to commit Administration cum Testamento annexo, and take Bonds of
the Administrators to perform the Will, and he is to do it in such sort as the
Executor should have done if he had been named.

A Lease was made to one William Cecill for the term of one and forty years
(if he so long live) and if he dye within the term aforesaid, Remainder void,
fol. 56.
then E. the wife of the said W. should have and hold all the said Premises
for the residue of the said term (if she so long live) and if she die within
the same term, then W. Cecill Son of the said W. Cecill should have and hold
all the Premises for the residue of the term aforesaid unexpired: By Catelin
and Dier, the Remainders are all void, because that the term is determinable
on the life of W. Cecill, so the residue of the said term may not remain,
Dyer, fol. 253.

Releases.
AS a Release of Suits is more large and beneficial then a Release of
Querela's, or of Actions, so a Release of demands is more large and beneficial
then any of them, for thereby is released all that which are released by the
others, and more. By a release of all Demands, all Free-holds, and Inheritances
Executory are released, as Rents, and the like; by a Release of all Demands,
all Executions are released by a Release of all Demands to the Disseisor, the
right of entry to the land, and all which is contained within it is released.
So it is resolved in Chamies case, 34 H. 8 titulo Release, that he which
releaseth all Demands excludes himself of all Actions, Entries, and Seisures.
Littleton holds, cap. Garranties 80. 170. That if Tenant in tail enfeoff his
Uncle who enfeoffs another in fee with Warranty, if after the Feoffee by his
Deed release to his Uncle all manner of Warranties, or all manner of Covenants
real, or all manner of Demands by such Release, the Warranty (which is a
Covenant real and executory) is extinct. And the reason of all that was,
because that by a Release of Demands, all the means and remedies, and the
causes of them which any has to Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels, etc. are
extinct, and by consequence the right and interest to the thing it self.

But note although that a Release of all Demands be of so great extent, yet
that extends not to such Writs by which nothing is demanded neither in fact
nor in Law, by doing only to relieve the Plaintiff by way of discharge, and
not by way of demand. A Release of all Demands is not a bar in a Writ of Error
to reverse an Outlawry.

By a release of all demands, Rent-seck, all Actions mixed. Warranty which is a
Covenant real, and all other Covenants real and personal, Estovers, all
manner of Commons, Profits apprender, Conditions before they be broken or
performed, or afterward Annuities, Recognizances, Statutes, Obligations, and
Contracts, etc. are released and discharged.

If a man by Dead covenant to make a house, or to make an Estate, and before
the Covenant broken, the Covenantee release to him all Actions, Suits, and
Quarrels, that is no discharge of the Covenant, because that at the time of the
Release nothing was due, nor was it any debt or duty, or any cause of Action in
esse, but in this case of all Covenants is a good discharge of the Covenant
before it be broken.

A Release of all duties extends to all things due which is certain, and
therefore discharges Judgments in personal Actions and Executions also. If
the Plaintiff after Judgments release all Demands, the execution is discharged.
By a Release of all Quarrels, all Causes of Actions are released, although no
Action be then depending. Coke 10. pars. fol. 51. 38 H. 8 Release. 6 H. 7. 15.
19 H 6. 3. 4. 40 E. 3. 22. 5 Eliz. Dyer 217.

By a Release of all Suites the execution is released.

If a man be in Execution, If a man make a Lease for ten years, the remainder
for twenty years, he in remainder releaseth all his right to the Lessee, he
shall have an estate for thirty years, for one Chattell cannot drown in
another, and years cannot be consumed in years. Cokes Littleton, 260. b. Co.
6. pars fo. 47.
a Release of all Debts or Duties, he is to be discharged of the Execution,
because the Debt or Duty is discharged.

If Judgment be given in an Action of Debt, and the body of the Defendant is
taken in execution by Capias ad satisfaciendum, and afterward the Plaintiff
releaseth the Judgment, by that the body shall be discharged of the execution.

In an Action of Debt brought by Hoe in the Kings Bench, If a rent be behind
for twenty years, and the Lord do make an Acquittance for the last that is due,
all the rest are presumed to be paid. And the Law will admit no proof against
this presumption, Cokes Littleton, fol. 373.
Phelix Marshall was bail for the Defendant, and afterward before any
Judgment given the Plaintiff released to Pehlix all Actions, Duties, and
Demands, and after Judgment was given against the Defendant, and upon a default
of the Defendant, Scire facias went out against Phelix Marshall, who pleaded
the said general Release, upon which plea the Plaintiff demurred: And it was
adjudged that this Release shall not bar the Plaintiff, for the words of the
bail are conditional (viz.) Si contigeret predictum defendentem debit. and
dam. ill. prefat quer. minime solvere aut se prisonae Mareshalss. ea occasion
non reddere, etc. So that it may not be by the said Bail any certain duty
until Judgment be given, for before that none may know to what sum the Debt
and Damages will amount to: he which is bail for the Defendant is not bound in
any certain sum at the first; but his Recognizance being general, shall be
reduced to a certainty by the Judgment and not before.

The effect of a special bail given in the Kings Bench.
The Condition, etc. That where the above named H. C. and one R. H. in their
proper persons have undertaken, so the above bounden C, F. by a Recognizance or
Mainprise taken and knowledged before the Justices of the Kings Bench at
Westminster, that if it happen the said C. F. to be condemned in any Action at
the suit of T. B. Esquire, that then the said R. H. and H. D. did grant all
Costs and Damages, and Executions which should be judged to the said T. B. in
that behalf, should be levied to the use of the said T. B. of the Lands and
Chattels of the said R. H. and H. C. if so it be that the said C. F. do not pay
the same Damages himself to the said T. B. or restore and yield himself again
by means thereof to the Prison of the Marshall of the Marshalsey, if the said
C. F. his Heirs, etc. and every of them, at all times hereafter, from time to
time, do well and truly acquit, discharge, or save harmless the said H. C. and
R. H. their Heirs, etc. and every of them against the said T. B. his, etc of
and for the breach and forfeiture of the said Recognizance and Mainprise, and
of and for the execution of the said Action, whereupon the same Recognizance
and Mainprise was so taken and knowledged, and also of for, and upon all other
Bonds, Obligations, and Recognizances, wherein the said H. C. stands bound to
any other person or persons, for and in the behalf of the said C. F. that then,
etc.

Cases in Law of diverse and sundry manners and matters.
I. A. by Indenture, bearing date the third of May, Livery and seisin void, but
if in this case Livery be made by the Lessor himself at the day that this Lease
in futuro is to commence, then the Lease is good, but if by Attorney then void,
vide plus de hoc fol. 50. fol. 51.
leaseth a Message to B. to have to the said B. from the Feast of the
Annunciation of our Lady then next coming, for the term of his life, and
Livery is executed the tenth of March following, the Livery in this case is
void, because every Livery ought to vest the Freehold in him to whom the
Livery is made at the time of the Livery, and this Grant did not commence
until the Annunciation following, so that the livery could not bring a
possession before the term was to begin, and where there is no Estate present
whereunto the livery may be annexed, nor whereunto it may unite, in the mean
time then such livery is void. Plowden fol. 156.

An estate of Frank-tenement at the Common Law may not commence in futuro, A
Frank-tenement be it in possession, reversion, or remainder may not be limited
to commence at a day to come.
but ought to take effect forthwith in possession, reversion, or remainder, as
if a man make a lease for life to begin at Mich. next, that is void, so if a
man make a lease for life, to have from the date of the Indenture, or from the
day of the date, or from the day of the making, or from the day of the sealing
and delivery, such leases are merely void, for the date is excluded, and the
lessee may not enter until the morrow, for when a man makes a lease for life
to commence at a day to come, he may not make present livery to a future
estate, and therefore in such case nothing passes, and Livery or Attornment
afterward will never make a void Grant to be good, Coke 5. pars. fol. 94. 2.
pars. fol. 55.

If a Lease be made for years, or at Will by Deed, and Livery and Seisin be
made to the Lessee, yet he is but Tenant for years, or Tenant at Will,
according to the limitation of the Deed, and not Tenant for life by force of
the livery. But if a lease be made for years, the Remainder to a stranger for
life, and livery is made to the Lessee who enters, this livery shall vest the
Remainder in the stranger, and if the Lessee enter by force of his lease,
before livery be made unto him, then the Remainder is void.

Condition, where an en^ry is reserved to a stranger, vide casus tertium prox.
sequent.
A man enfeoffeth one upon condition that he shall pay ten pounds to B. and upon
default that B. shall enter, now if the rent be not paid the Feoffee may enter
in Law, and Conscience, and not B. for he is a stranger to the Condition, and
B. has no remedy in Conscience to have the land. And when the Feoffment is
made upon Condition, although it does not speak that for default of payment he
may re-enter, yet that is implied in the word, Condition, and as to the words,
that B. shall enter by default of payment, they are void words, Doctor and
Student, fol. 93.

Condition for non-payment of rent, and then an Assise is brought or a Distress
taken.
If a Condition be broken for non-payment of rent, yet if the Feoffor bring an
Assise for rent due at that time, he shall never enter for the Condition
broken, because he affirms the rent to have continuance, and whereby waiveth
the condition, and so it is if the rent had had a clause of Distress annexed
unto it, if the Feoffor had distrained for the rent for non-payment, whereof
the condition was broken, he should never enter for the condition broken; but
he may receive that rent, and acquit the same, and yet enter for the condition
broken: Acceptance of rent barreth a re-entry.
But if he accept a rent due at another day after, he shall not enter for the
condition broken, because he thereby affirms the lease to have continuance,
Coke Lit. fol. 211. b.

If a man enfeoff one by Indenture, by which it is covenanted and agreed that
the Feoffee shall pay to a stranger, and his Heirs ten pounds per annum at a
certain day, and if he fail, that the stranger and his Heirs may enter; in
that case if the Feoffee does not pay it, the stranger shall have use of the
land in conscience, and not by the common law, and shall have a Subpaena to
constrain the Feoffee to make an estate unto him. But in the said case if it
had been upon condition that a stranger may enter for non-payment of the rent,
there the Feoffor himself shall enter, and not the stranger, for none may enter
for a condition annexed to Fee, but for lives, and when the Feoffor has entered
he is not holden to convey the land to a stranger that ought to have the Rent.
Doctor and Student 100. 101.

In Mary Portingtons case, Coke 10. pars. fol. 39. Incidents to an estate tail.
It was observed and agreed for Law, that to an Estate-taile there are three
manner of incidents, some by the common Law, some by Act of Parliament, and
some by custom; by the common law, they are such which are not restrained by
the Statute, and may not be restrained by any condition, 22 E. 3. 17. as Dower,
and Tenant by the courtesy after issue are incident to an Estate tail, and may
not be restrained by any condition. An Estate tail cannot be restrained by any
condition, or limitation, vide Coke 9. pars. fol. 128. and 6. pars. Sir Anth.
Mildmaies case. Recovery fraudulent
Also the Estate of him and Tenant in tail after possibility are dispunishable
for Waste; And collateral Warranty is a bar to the Estate-taile, and so is a
common recovery also, and none of these may be restrained by any condition or
limitation, by the Statute law, as to make leases by the Statute of 32 H. 8.
cap. 36. and to levy a Fine by the Statute 4 H. 7 cap. 24. and 33 H. 8. cap.
36. to bar Issues, and none of those which are incidents to that Statute by act
of Parliament may be restrained by condition, for when a man makes a Gift in
tail, he tacire does give these incidents thereunto: And therefore to
restrain them by condition or limitation shall be repugnant.

And as to the case upon the Statute of 11 H. 7. it was answered that when the
husband for advancement of the wife, with competent Jointure and preferment of
their Heirs of their two bodies engendered, has caused an estate to be made to
himself and to his wife in tail, and after the deaths of the husband, the wives
to disinherit the issues of their former husbands suffer recoveries, and convey
the land to strangers of the blood of the husband, such recovery was worthy by
the Parliament to be noted with the mark to be suffered by Covin. And the act
of the wife either when she is sole, or with her and her second husband is so
odious, that a recovery had upon a good title against them by Covin is made
void by the said Act.

Fraud.
So in the said Acts of 32. H 8. and 14. Eliz. when a common recovery was had
against Tenant for life to the prejudice of those who had the inheritance, that
may be well termed covenous and by collusion, and yet in the same case, when
tenant for life, the remainder to A. in tail, the remainder to B. in tail
etc. with diverse remainders over, and Tenant for life suffers a common
recovery wherein he voucheth A. and he the common vouchee that shall bind all
the other remainders, for no Covin or collusion may be supposed when the next
in remainder in tail, which has the immediate inheritance, is vouchee, as it
was adjudged in Jennings case.

Fraudulent conveyances to defraud purchasors, Vide plus de hoc fo. 18.
27 E. cap. 4. every Conveyance, Grant, Charge, Lease, Estate, encumbrance and
limitation of use of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments made since the
beginning of her Majesty's Reign, or hereafter to be made for the defrauding
of Purchasors of the Land it self, or any part or profit out of it, shall be
void against the person so purchasing, for money or other good consideration,
and against all claiming under him with penalty in the Statute of 27. Eliz.
Cap. 1.

This does not extend to the avoiding of any grant, etc. upon good
consideration, and bona fide, if any such conveiance be made with clause of
revocation or alteration at his pleasure by writing, and after he shall
bargain, demise, sell, grant, convey, or charge the same Lands, etc. for money
or other good consideration, the conveyance not revoked or altered, then the
conveyance etc. shall be void against the Barganees etc. and all claiming under
them (lawful Mortages only excepted.)

A Lease was made of a Message and Lands for years, A grant of land Habendum
the reversion.
(if the Lessee so long should live) and afterward the Lessor by his Deed
indented, granted the Message and Land to another, to have and to hold the
reversion to the grantee for life, cum per mortem sursum redditionem vel
forisfacturam of the Lessee, aut aliter acciderit, reddendo inde annuitie to
the Grantor and his heirs, when the said reversion shall happen nine shillings
and four pence per Annum. The Lessee dies, the Grantor of the reversion
distraineth for the arrearages of the rent as well before the death of the
Lessee, as afterward, whereupon four points were clearly resolved upon by the
Court.

That by the Demise of a Message and Land for life, the reversion thereof does
pass, but by the Grant of a reversion land in possession does not pass,
Lofields case 10. pars fo. 107. Plowden. 197. A grant of the reversion Habendum
the land.


By the Grant of a Message and Land Habendum revertionem etc. or life after
the death of the Lessee etc. that the Habendum is good, for in judgment of
law, nothing but the reversion is granted by the Premises and as in
Throchmertons case Plowden Coment. fo, 147. when the reversion is granted
habendum the land, the habendum is adjudged good, so when the land is granted
habendum the reversion, and after the death of the Lessee etc. is in
consideration as much to say as to take effect, in possession after the death
etc. Also the habendum had been good, although no mention had been made either
of the Land or of the reversion in the habendum, for the Office of the habendum
is to limit the estate of the land contained in the Premises.

It was resolved that by the said reservation the rent shall not commence
before the reversion fall in possession, and these words cum revertio predict.
acciderit shall be expounded according to the intention of the parties, which
was not that the Grantee for life, should pay the rent before, that he may take
the profits to make the rent of them.

That the distress was well taken for the Arrerages after the death of the
Lessee, and not for the arearages incurred before.

Statute released by matter in Law.
A statute was acknowledged the 26. of May, the Cognusee by his release Dated
the 25. May, before released to the Cognusor all demands from the beginning of
the world until the making thereof, and sealed and delivered the release as his
Deed the 27. May following, the statute is freely discharged, for the day of
the delivery is dies confectionis, but if the words had been, until the date
or day of the Date of these presents then otherwise it had been, See. Dier. fo.
307.

Defeasance of a statute mis-recited, the statute becomes single.
If a Defeasance be made of a statute which is recited to be made the tenth day
of May, where indeed it bears Date the first day of May, the Defeasance is
void for the Mis-prision of time, for the Law says that in so much as it may
be that there were two statutes, the one dated the first day and the other the
tenth day, the time of the date is material, Plowden fo. 393.

Attornement needless.
A reversion granted for years, for consideration of money, does pass without
Attornement, Coke. 8 pars. fo. 941. for let the case be that there is Lessee
for term of years or life rendant-rent, Afterward the lessor by Indenture
for the consideration of 50 l. demiseth and grants the Premises to another
for 90. years rendant 40 pounds per annum, although the first Lessee does
never Attorne, yet the second demise shall be good and shall pass as a
Bargain executed by the statute of 27 H. 8. whereunto there needs no
Attornemnt or Inrolement of the Deed, because it is not but a term for years,
and no Frank-tenement. And note that if a man for money do enffeoffe, Alien and
grant Land to one and his heirs or in tail or for life by deed indented and
enrolled, that does amount to a bargain and sale, and the land shall pass
without livery and Seisin.

Attornement needless.
A grant of a reversion of Land, habendum the land from the end and expiration
of a former Lease in being, is a good lease and needs no attornement.

A demise of the reversion of Land, Attornement needles.
habendum the reversion of the land from the end and determination of a former
lease in being, is a good Lease and needs no attornement.

If a man make a gift in tail or a Lease for life, Remainder void.
the remainder to his own right heirs, this remainder is void, and he has
the reversion in him, for the Ancestor during his life bears in his body (in
the judgment of the law) all his heirs, and this appears in a common case,
that if Land be given to a man and his heirs, all his heirs are so total in
him that he may give the land to whom he will.

So it is, if a man be seized of Lands in Fee by Indenture, make a Lease for
life, Remainder void
the remainder to the heirs males of his own body, this is a void remainder,
for the donor cannot make his own right heir a purchasor of an estate tail
without departing of the whole fee-simple out of him, as if a man make a
Feoffement in Fee to the use of himself for life, and then to the use of the
heirs males of his body, this is a good estate tail executed in himself, and
the limitation is good by way of use, because it is raised out of the estate of
the Feoffees, which the Feoffor departed with, for a limitation of a use to
himself had been good without question Cokes Littleton, fo. 22. b.

The King may make a Lease for years rendant rent to a stranger, and that is a
good reservation, Conditions, Entries, and re-entries, may not be given or
reserved to strangers.
and the stranger may distraine for it, or have an Action of Debt after the
lease determined, and that is by reason of his prerogative which he has above
all persons, for he is not bound so strictly by the laws as others are, but in
the case of a common person otherwise it is, because that no rent which is
properly said to be a rent, may in any wise be reserved to a stranger which is
not privy to the Lease or Deed. Also nothing which goes in privity as
conditions, entries, or re-entries, for conditions or such like which are given
by the law to privies only may not be limited or granted to others, which are
strangers by the common Law, and therefore if a Lease be made for years
rendant rent, and upon condition of non payment that it shall remain to a
stranger, and livery, and seisin is made accordingly, that is a void a
remainder which commenceth upon a repugnancy precedent, and which depends
upon a condition which goes in destruction of the particular estate, and
especially where such a remainder is created by lease or grant.

Upon and by the limitation of a devise or limitation of an use, a remainder
may commence upon a condition that goes to the destruction of the particular
estate.
But by limitation of a devise or limitation of use, such a remainder is good,
as a Feoffement made to the use of I. S. for years, and upon non payment by
him of such a sum that it shall remain to I. D. for life etc. this is a good
remainder, so it is where the remainder is created by the limitation of a last
Will. As if a man devise his land to his wife for her life, upon condition,
that if she marry that the Land shall remain to F. M. in tail, that is a good
remainder, for the construction of this devise is to make the same condition to
be a limitation and not any condition. And upon a limitation or determination
of a particular estate which is certain or not uncertain, a remainder
clearly may well depend. As if a Lease be made for life upon condition that if
the Lessee die it shall remain to a stranger, that is a good remainder. A
remain^ by a limitation of an use may commence or depend upon any condition and
one feesimple may depend upon another by way of use,
Where one has an Office of charge as to be Steward, Officers, Stewards,
Bailiffs etc.
Bayliffe, Parker, etc. the grantor may out them and pay their Fee, if the Fee
be only certain but not where they have profits of Court, 34 H. 8. titulo.
243 Kitchen fo. 143 a.

Stewardship, Parker.
It was agreed that the Owner of Park may dispark the Park, notwithstanding a
grant of the said Office, the Office of Steward was granted to one for life
with a Fee of forty shillings, for the execution thereof, if the Lord discharge
him, yet he shall have the Fee. But if the grant be to him to be taken out of
the issues and profits of the Court, the Lord may not discharge him 1 S. E. 4.
8. And if a Parker for life which has a Fee, for the exercising of the Office
is discharged of his Office, yet he shall have the Fee, for it is but an Office
of charge, but if the Parker has the Office for life and has Windfalls,
Deer-skins, and such like, he may not be expulsed from his Office, and of such
Office he may have an Affize Brook 134. 38 H. 8. whereby I conceive that where
the Steward has a cetaine Fee, for execution of his Office, yet if he has
other profit incident to his Office, as Fees for entries of Plaints, making of
grants by Copy, taking of surrenders and admittances of Copy tenants and such
like, the Lord cannot remove the Steward.

Officers that have no other profits, but a Collateral certain fee, there the
grantor may discharge him. As to be a Bayliffe, Receivor, Surveior, Auditor or
the like, the exercise whereof is but labor and charge to him, but he must
have his Fee for the maine rule of the Law is, that no man can frustrate or
derogate from his own grant to the prejuice of the Grantee. And where albeit
the Grantee has no other profit but his Fee, yet that fee is to be taken out
of the profits appertaining to the Lord within his Office for there the grantor
cannot discharge him of his service or attendance, for that may turn to the
prejudice of the grantee, if the Grantor will not grant the Office at all but
in all cases where the Officer relinquisheth his Office and refuses to attend,
he loses his Office, Fee, profits and all.

There are three causes of the forfeiture of an Office, as the Office of a
Steward, Parker, Wood-ward, and such like (viz.) Abuser, non-user, and refuser,
vide Coke. 8 pars. the County of Rutlands Case. fo. 55. 9 pars, County of
Salops Case fo. 49. for in all cases when an Officer upon request does refuse
to execute his Office, that is a forfeiture as if the Steward of a Manor upon
the Lords request to hold a Court, refuse to do it this is a forfeiture.

There is another diversity where the Grantee besides his certain Fee, has
profits and availes besides his Office, there the Grantor cannot discharge him
of his service or attendance, as if a man does grant to another the Office of
the steward-ship of his Court, or of his Manors with a certain fee, the
Grantor cannot discharge him of his Office, service or attendance because he
has other profits and fees belonging to his Office.

Parker.
If a Parker kill any dear without warrant, or cut any Trees, Woods, or
Underwoods, and convert them to his own use, it is a forfeitute of his Office.

Parker for life may not assign his Office to another, because it is an Office
of trust, but otherwise it is if he be Parker in Fee, Plow. fo. 379. and so
for a Steward as I conceive without words in the Patent to make a deputy.

There is a condition in Law annexed to every Office of trust, as to the Office
of Steward or Parker, and such like (viz.) that the Parker shall keep well the
game and shall do all things pertaining to the Office of Parker and so for
steward etc.

A parker kept not his Park such a day by reason whereof the Dear were killed
by unknown persons, this is a forfeiture of his Office.

A Parker is not holden to keep his Park in Festival days, for he ought to
be at divine service, nor in the night, nor to keep the Park with 6 or 8. men
vide 2 H. 7. 8. that in Assize of Office it was said by the reporter and not
denied, that if the Office of Parker be granted, if he does not keep the Park,
or if he destroy the Deer, that is a forfeiture of his Office, if a Forrester
or Parker cut or fall Woods, unless it be for necessary bruise for the Dear,
this is a forfeiture of their Offices for the destruction of vert is the
destruction of venison.

If a man has a lease for years, Grants in toto.
and grants to another all his term that shall be to come at the time of his
death, that grant is void, because he would retain the term, during his life,
If a rent be granted to one for life by deed, and wills that the Grantee and
his heirs distraine in the Lands charged for the same rent, the grantee has
in this case fee-simple in the rent, and not estate for life, for the distress
is the creation of the rentcharge, and therefore the limitation and creation
of the rentcharge shall enure according to the effect and limitation of the
distress.
for therein he retains it for a term, which is as long as he has in the
Land, and therefore has not any certainty that term will ever commence, and
therefore the grant void.

And where Lessee for years without any habendum grants to another all his
term, which shall be to come at the time of his death, shall be all void.

A Termor reciting by Indenture his term, and lease, granted all his term
estate and interest to another, habendum sibi and assign, suis immediate post
mortem ipsius, the Grantor and the case was ruled and adjudged that the
habendum was void, and the premises of the grant good to make the whole term
to pass forthwith, Dier fo. 272.

If I have a rent in Fee, if I grant it to another and stay there, this is a
grant for life, but if I go further and say habendum after the death of I. S.
there all shall be void, vide. fo. 2.

If tenant for years of land grant out of that a rentcharge to another for
the life of the Grantee, the grantee shall not have a state of Frank-tenement,
because he cannot have a stare of Frank-tenement derived out of a Chattel
real, but he shall have the rent during all the years if the Grantee so long
shall live, Plowden, fo. 525.

If I have a rent in fee and grant it to another post mortem I. S. this grant
is void, for the nature of a grant is that the thing ought to pass forthwith.

If a man make a lease for years, and afterward the lessor grants a rent
charge out of the Land, that grant shall charge the reversion. And this proves
that the Land and the reversion are nor two distinct things, but that in the
reversion the Land is contained, Plowden fo. 173.

The Abbot leased land for life, and afterward leased the reversion, to have
the Land from Michaelmas next after the first Lease ended by death, surrender
or forfeiture for 21. years, this is a good Lease, Plowden, fo. 146.

A grant of a reversion Habendum, the said reversion after the end and
expiration of the Tenant for life, Attornement needdes.
for sixty years, this is a good grant without Attornement.

If I make a Lease to one for life, and afterward I grant the reversion to
another habendum, from the Feast of St. Michael next ensuing, to him, and his
heirs, this grant is void, because that no franke-tenement be it in
possession, reversion, or remainder, may be limited to commence at a day to
come.

If I have a rent in Fee, I may not grant it to commence in futuro or at a day
to come; but if I have land I may grant a new rent out of it to commence at a
day to come, for there I shall not have any particular estate in the mean, for
it was not in esse before, but does commence of new, and therefore I may
appoint it to commence when I will.

Pertinentiis.
A man makes a Feoffement of a house, cum pertinent. nothing passes by these
words, cum pertinentiis, but the Garden, Curtilage and close adjoining to the
house, and whereupon the house is built and no other Land, though other Lands
have been occupied with the house.

A man leased a house cum pertin. no land passes by these word, but otherwise
it is where a man leaseth a house, cum omnibus terris eidem partin., there the
lands therewithal used do pass.

If a man makes a Feoffement of a house, ac omnes terras, tenementa and
heriditamenta eidem messuagio pertin. aut cum eodem occupata, locata aut
dimissa existent. hereby the land used with the house does pass.

Tenant in tail and the Lessee, shall acknowledge the Tenements to be the
right of one A stranger, Lease by fine to bind Tenant in Tail and his issue.
and that A. shall grant and render by the same fine to the Lessee for 60.
years, the remainder to the Lessor and his heirs, and it was with
proclamations which shall bind the tail after proclamation made.

If Tenant in tail make a Feoffement and a common recovery is had against the
Feoffee, Recovery the best to bar estates tail and remainders
who voucheth tenant for tail, who voucheth over etc. there the tail shall be
barred, because that he when he comes in as vouchee, shall be in the degree
of tenent in tail, and the recompense in value which he has or may have shall
go in tail, and therefore such manner of recovery is best, and the surest way
to bar the tail, and all the remainders, and the reversion also.

If A. be tenant in tail, the remainder to B. in tail, the remainder to C. in
tail, the remainder to B. in Fee. A makes a Feoffement, the Feoffees suffer a
common recovery wherein B. is vouched, and he over the common vouchee. In this
case A. is not bound, but B. and all the remainders over are barred. For
although that by the Feoffment of A. all the remainders were discontinued, and
the estates that B.C.D. had converted into mere rights, and though the
remainders may never be remitted before the estate tail in possession be
recontinued, yet in case of a common recovery which is the common assurance of
the Land, he that comes in as vouchee shall be in judgment of Law in
privity of estate which he over had, though the precedent estate whereupon the
state of the vouchee depends be divested, or discontinued. Coke. 3 pars. fo.
60.

Tenement is a large word, Tenement and Hereditament.
to pass not only lands and other inheritances which are holden, but also
Officers, Rents, Commons, Profits, apprender our of lands, and the like wherein
a man has any Frankenement and whereof he is seized ut de libero tenemento,
but an Hereditament is the largest word of all in that kind, for whatsoever may
be inherited is an hereditant, be it corporeal or incorporeall, real or
personal or mixed.

Vesturam terrae.
If a man has twenty Acres of Lands and by Deed grants to another and his
heirs, Vesturam terrae, and makes Livery secundum formam chartae, the Land it
self shall not pass, because he has a particular right in the land, for
thereby he shall not have the houses, timber, trees, and other real things,
parcel of the inheritance, but he shall have the vesture of the Land, that is
the Corn, Grass, and Underwood, Sweepage, and the like, and shall have
trespass, quare clausam fregit.

Herbagium terrae.
If a man grant herbagium terrae, he has a like particular right in the Land,
and shall have quare clausuam fregit, but by grant thereof and Livery made, the
soil shall not pass as is abovesaid.

Herbagium Boscorum.
If a man let to B. the Herbage of his Woods and after grant all his lands in
tenure possession, or occupation of B. the Woods shall pass, for B. has a
particular possession and occupation which is sufficient in this case and so it
was resolved.

Seperal. Pischar.
So if a man seized of a River, and by Deed do grant Seperal. pischar. in the
same and makes Livery and Seisin secundum for* chartae, neither the soil nor
water does pass, for the grantor may take water there, and if the River become
dry, he may take the benefit of the soil, for there passes to the Grantee
but a particular right, and the Livery being made secundum formam chartae
cannot enlarge the grant.

Aquam suaem.
If a man grant aquam suam the soil passes not, but the fishing within the
water passes.

Profits of Land.
But if a man seized of Lands in fee by his deed grants to another the profits
of his Lands Habendum to him and his heirs, and makes Livery secundum form.
chartae, the whole land it self does pass, for what is the Land but the
profits thereof, for thereby Vesture, Herbage, Trees, Mines, and all whatsoever
parcel of that land does pass.

If the Lessor by his Deed license the Lessee for life or years (which is
restrained by Condition not to alien without license) to alien, License to
alien may not be countermanded.
and the Lessor dies before the Lessee does alien, yet is his death no
Countermand of the license, but that he may alien, for the License exempteth
the Lessee out of the penalty of the Condition, and it was executed on the part
of the Lessor as much as might he. And so it was resolved Mich. 3 Jacobi in
Communi Banco. Q?


If a man make a Lease to another for two and twenty years (if the Lessee so
long live) and the Lessor and Lessee join in Grant by Deed of the term to
another, and after the Lessee dies within the term, the Grantee shall enjoy
the land during the residue of the term absolutely.

A man leased a house by Indenture for years, Covenants.
the Lessee for him, and his Executors did covenant and grant with the Lessor
to repair the house at all times necessary: The Lessee assigned it over to
Hide, who suffered it to decay, the Lessor brought an Action of Covenant
against the Assignee, and it was adjudged by all the Court that the Action of
Covenant lies, although the Lessor has not covenanted for his Assigns, for
such covenant that extends to the supportation of the thing demised, is,
Quodam modo appurtenant thereunto: And in respect that the Lessee has taken
upon him to bear the charges of reparations, the yearly rent was the lesser
which trencheth to the Assignee Et qui sentit commodum, sentire debet and onus,
if the Lessee covenant to discharge the Lessor, De omnibus onerious ordinariis
and extraordinariis, and to repair the houses, an Action lies against the
Assignee, Coke 5. pars. fol. 27.

S. did covenant for him, his Executors, and Administrators, with the Lessor,
that he, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, would build a Brick-wall
upon parcel of the land demised. S. assigned over his Term to I. and for the
not making of the Brick-wall, the Lessor brought an Action of Covenant against
the Assignee. And thus it was agreed per totam Curiam.

1. When the Covenant extends to a thing in esse, parcel of the Demise, the
thing to be done by force of the Covenant, is quodammodo annexed and appendant
to the thing demised, and shall remain with the Land, and shall bind the
Assignee, although he be not bound by express words.

But when the Covenant extends to a thing which has no essence at the time
of the Demise made, that may not be appurtenant nor annexed to the thing which
has not essence. As if Lessee covenant to repair the houses to him demised,
during the term, that is parcel of the Contract, and extends to the
supportation of the thing demised, and therefore is quodammodo annexed and
appurtenant to the house, and shall bind the Assignee although he be not bound
expressly by the Covenant. But in the case at the Bar, the Covenant concerned a
thing which was not in esse at the time of the Demise made, but to be newly
made afterward, and therefore shall bind the Covenantor, his Executors or
Administrators, and not the Assignee, for the Law will not annex the Covenant
to a thing which has not essence.

2. It was resolved that in this case, that if the Lessee had covenanted for
him and his Assigns that they should make a new Wall upon any part of the
thing demised, that that shall bind the Assignee, for although the Covenant
extend to a thing to be newly made, yet that is to be done upon the thing
demised, and the Assignee is to take the benefit thereof, and therefore shall
bind the Assignee by express words. But although the Covenant be for him and
his assigns, yet if the thing to be made or done be merely collateral to the
land, and does not touch or concern the thing demised, in any sort the assignee
shall not be charged, as if the Lessee covenant for him and his assigns to
build a house upon the land of the Lessor, which is not any parcel of the
Demise, or to pay any collateral sum to the Lessor, or to a stranger that
shall not bind the assignee because it is mere collateral, and no manner
touches or concerns the thing which was demised, or which is assigned over,
and therefore in such case the assignee of the thing demised may not be charged
with that more then any stranger.

3. It was resolved that if a man demise Sheep or there stock of Cattle, or any
other Goods personal for any time, and the Lessee covenant for him and his
Assigns at the end of the time, to deliver such Cattle or Goods as good as
the things demised were, or such price for them: And the Lessee assign the
Sheep over, this Covenant shall not bind the Assignee, for that is not but a
personal contract, and wants such privity as is between the Lessor and the
Lessee, and his Assigns of the Land in respect of the reversion: But in case
of a Lease of Goods personal, there is not any privity nor any reversion, but
merely a thing in action in the personalty, which may not bind any but the
Covenantor, his Executors or Administrators which represent him: the same Law
if a man devise a Mease and Land for years, with a stock or sum of money
rendant rent, and the Lessee does covenant for him, his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, to deliver the stock or sum of money at the end
of the term, yet the Assignee shall not be charged with this Covenant, for
although the rent reserved was increased in respect of the stock, or the sum,
yet the rent does not issue out of the stock or sum, but out of the land
only, and therefore as to the stock or sum the Covenant is personal, and
shall bind the Covenantor, his Executors and Administrators, and not his
Assignee, for it may be wasted or otherwise consumed or perished by the Lessee,
and therefore the Law cannot determine at the time of the Lease made, that such
Covenant shall bind the Assignee.

If a man demise or grant land to a woman for years and the Lessor covenanteth
with the Lessee to repair the houses during the term, the wife takes a
husband and dies, the husband shall have an action of Covenant, as well upon
the Covenant in Law upon these words, Demise, or Grant, as upon the express
Covenant: But it was resolved by Wray chief Justice and all the Court, that
this word Concessi, or Demisi, in case of Frank-tenement, or inheritance does
not import any Warranty, see the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 24. what act was
resolved to extend to Covenants which touch or concern the thing demised, and
not to collateral Covenants.

Demise, Grant. Dier.
Upon these words, Demise, grant, in Leases for years or lives, 9 Eliz. 257. the
Lessee and his Assigns shall have a Writ of Covenant, always provided there
be no special Covenant following after in such Leases, for then this general
Covenant is qualified, and the former word, Demise, Grant, shall loose his
operation, Coke 4 pars. Nokes case.

And if a man be bound in an Obligation to perform all Covenants, Grants,
Articles, and agreements, etc. in such Indenture, now the Lessee or his
Assigns upon eviction may bring an Action upon the Obligation, by reason of
the Covenant in Law which is broken, viz. Demise, Grant, Co. 4. pars.

Assignment of Estate.
If Lessee assign over his term, the Lessor may charge the Lessee or his
Assignee at his election, but if the Lessor accepts rent of the Assignee, he
has determined his election, and shall not have an action against the Lessee
afterward for rent due after the assignment, no more then if the Lord once
accept the rent of the Feoffee, he shall not avow upon the Feoffor, Co. 3.
pars. Walkers case.

Proviso, that the Lessee or his Assigns shall not alien to any person without
license of the Lessor, afterward the Lessor gives license to alien or demise
the land, or any part thereof, the Lessor does alien accordingly, this one
license has determined the Condition, so that no alienation to be made
afterward can break the Proviso, be it done by the Lessee himself, or his
Assigns, so that a dispensation with one alienation is a dispensation of all
other, 4 pars. ^ol. 119.

A Lease was made to three, upon Condition that they or any of them should not
alter without the assent of the Lessor, after one aliened with his assent, then
the other two aliened without license, the Condition being determined to one by
license of the Lessor, was determined in all and so adjudged: And the case in
Dyer fol. 334. was denied for Law, 4. pars. fol. 119.

Note that a Condition may not be apportioned or divided by the acts of the
parties, 4 pars. fol. 119. Recovery,


Recovery against Baron and Feme by Writ of entry in the Post, where the wife
is Tenant in tail, and they vouch over, and so the demandant recovereth
against Baron and Feme, and they over in value, that shall bind the Tail and
the Heir of the Wife. This assurance was made by the advice of Brudnell and
other Justices, Quere de hoc.

Where a Writ of entry in the Post is brought against Tenant for life to bind
the Feoffees, he ought to pray aid of him in reversion, and then they to vouch
upon the joynder, etc. and such a recovery with voucher is used to dock the
tail in ancient Demaine upon a Writ of Right, and Voucher ever.

If an Obligation of 100 l. be made with condition for payment of 50 l. at a
day, Tender.
and at the day the Obligor tenders the money, and the Obligee refuses the
same yet upon an action of debt upon the Obligation, if the Defendant plead the
tender and refusal, he must also plead that he is yet ready to pay the money
and tender the same in Court, but if the Plaintiff will not then receive it,
but take issue upon the tender, and the same be found against him, he has lost
the money for ever.

If a man be bound in two hundred quarters for delivery of a hundred quarters,
if the Obligor tender at the day the hundred quarters, he shall not plead
Uncorprist. because albeit it be parcel of the Condition, yet they be bona
peritura, and it is a charge for the Obligor to keep them, and the reason
wherefore in the case of the Obligation the sum mentioned in the Condition,
is not lost by the tender and refusal, is not only for that it is a duty and
parcel of the Obligation, and therefore is not lost by the tender and
refusal, but also for that the Obligee has remedy by Law for the same.

But if a man make a single Bond, or knowledge a Statute, or Recognizance, and
afterward make a Defeasance for the payment of a lesser sum at the day, and
the Obligee or Cognisee refuse it, he shall never have any remedy by Law to
recover it, because it is not parcel of the sum contained in the Obligation,
Statute, or Recognizance. And in this case in pleading of the tender and
refusal, the party shall not be driven to plead uncorprist, or to tender it in
Court. Neither has the Obligee or Cognusee any remedy by Law to recover the
same sum contained in the Defeazance. And so it is if a man make an
Obligation of a hundred pounds, with condition for delivery of Corn or Timber,
etc. or for the performance of an Arbitrament, or the doing of an act that is
collateral to the Obligation, that is to say, is not parcel of it, and
therefore a tender and refusal is a perpetual Bar.

Tender upon a Mortgage.
If the Condition upon a Mortgage be to pay to the Mortgagee or his Heirs the
money, etc and before the day of payment the Mortgagee dye, the Feoffor may not
pay the money to the Executors of the Mortgagee, for in this case the money
ought to be paid to the Heir, Et in hoc casu designatio unius personae est
exclusio alterius, and expressum facit cessare tacitum. And the Law will never
seek out a person when the parties themselves have appointed one, vide Coke 5.
pars. 96. Goodales case, Dye^ 2 Eliz. fol. 181. But if the Condition be to pay
the money to the Feoffor, his Heirs or Executors, then the Feoffee has
election to pay it either to the Heir or Executors

Payment on a Mortgage
If a man make a Feoffment in Fee, upon Condition that the Feoffee shall pay to
the Feoffor his Heirs or Assigns twenty pounds at such a day, and before the
day the Feoffor make his Executors and dies, the Feoffee may pay the same to
the Heir or to the Executors, for they are his Assigns in Law to this intent.

But if a man make a Feoffment in fee, upon Condition that if the Feoffor pay
to the Feoffee, Morgage.
his Heirs or Assigns twenty pounds before such a Feast, and before the Feast
the Feoffee make his Executors and dies, the Feoffor ought to pay the money to
the Heir and not to the Executors, for the Executors in this case are no
Assigns in Law, and the reason of this diversity is this, for that in the
first case the Law must of necessity find out Assigns, because there cannot be
any Assigns in Deed, for the Feoffor has but a bare Condition, and no Estate
in the land which he can assign over. But in the other case the Feoffee has
an estate in the land which he may assign over, and where there be Assigns in
Deed, the Law shall never seek out or appoint any Assigns in Law: And albeit
the Feoffee make no assignment of the state yet the Executors cannot be
Assigns, because Assignees were only intended by the Condition to be Assigns
of the Estate.

But if the Condition be to pay money to the Feoffee, his Heirs or Assigns,
Morgage. Vide Lord Coke, 2. pars. fol. 79. 80. many excellent matters touching
Conditions.
and the Feoffee make a Feoffment over, it is in the election of the Feoffor to
pay the money to the first Feoffee, or to the second Feoffee, and so if the
first Feoffee dies, the Feoffor may either pay the money to the Heir of the
first Feoffee, or to the second Feoffee, for the Law will not enforce the
Feoffor to take notice of the second Feoffment, nor of the validity thereof but
at his pleasure, and the first Feoffee and his Heirs are expressly named in the
Condition, Plow. Com. 186. 288. 2 Eliz. Dyer 181. Co. 5. parse fo. 96, 97.
Goodales case.

If a man be bound in an Obligation with Condition, Conditions impossible. The
Obligation or Feoffment good, and the Condition void, but estates shall not be
enlarged by a Condition impossible.
that if the Obligor do go from the Church of Saint Peter in Westminster, to
the Church of Saint Peter in Rome in three hours, that then the Obligation
shall be void, the Condition is void and impossible, and the Obligation
stands good: And so it is if a Feoffment be made upon such or the like
condition, the estate of the Feoffee is absolute, and the condition impossible
and void.

If a man make a Lease for life, upon condition that if the Lessee go to Rome,
as is aforesaid, that then he shall have Fee, the condition precedent is
impossible and void, and therefore no Feesimple can grow to the Lessee.

If a man make a Feoffment in Fee, upon condition that the Feoffee shall
reinfeoffe him before such a day, and before the day the Feoffor desseise the
Feoffee and hold him out by force until the day be past, the state of the
Feoffee is absolute, for the Feoffor is the cause whereof the condition is
impossible to be performed, and therefore shall never take advantage for
nonperformance thereof, and so it is if A. be bound to B. that I. S. shall
marry I. N. before such a day, and before the day B. marries with Jane N. he
shall never take advantage of the Bond, for that he himself is the mean that
the condition could not be performed, and so thereby become impossible.

Paris.
A man makes a Feoffment in Fee upon condition that the Feoffor shall within one
year go to Paris about the affairs of the Feoffee, and presently after the
Feoffee dies, so that the condition is become impossible by the act of God,
yet the estate of the Feoffee is become absolute, for though the condition be
subsequent to the estate, yet there is a precedencie before the re-entry,
(viz.) the performance of the condition. And so it is, if the Feoffor shall
appear in such a Court the next Term, and before the day the Feoffor dies,
or Cognisor, or Obligor dies, the Recognizance or Obligation is saved. And if
a condition of a Bond etc. be impossible at the time of the making of the
condition the Obligation is single. And so it is, in case of a Feoffment in Fee
with condition subsequent which is impossible, the state of the Feoffee is
absolute, but if the condition precedent be impossible no estate or interest
shall grow thereupon.

Conditions against the Law.
But it is commonly holden that if the condition of a Bond etc. be against the
Law, that the Bond it self is void.

But herein the Law distinguishes between a condition against the Law for
doing of any act that is malum in se, and a condition against law that
concerns not any thing that that is malum in se, but therefore is against law
because it is either repugnant to the estate, or against some maxim or rule in
Law, and therefore the common opinion is to be understood against Law for the
doing of some Act that is malum in se; and yet therein also the Law
distinguishes: As if a man be bound upon condition that he shall kill I. S.
the Bond is void, but if a man make a feoffement upon condition that the
Feoffee shall kill I. S. the estate is absolute, and the condition void

In conditions against the Law the estates be good and the conditions void
unless the estate commence by the condition, and then both are void, nor shall
estates be enlarged by any such condition, and if an obligation be endorsed
expressly with a condition which is against the law, then the obligation and
condition are both void.

But if a man be bound upon condition wherein other conditions are tacit
implied, and not plainly expressed in the condition, then the obligation is
good and the condition void, because such things are not expressly rehearsed in
the condition, and so it cannot be expressly said that the will of the Obligee
was that the Obligor should keep him without damages, for such Acts to be done
against the law. As if a man be bound to keep the Obligee without damages, and
shows not in what thing, for he may have damage for treason or other Felony
which is implied and not expressed, and so the condition void.

If a man make a Feoffment in Fee upon condition, Conditions repugnant, the
condition is void, and the Bond or estate good
that he shall not Alien, this condition is repugnant and against law, and the
estate of the Feoffee is absolute, but if the Feoffee be bound in a Bond that
the Feoffee or his heirs shall not Alien, this is good, for he may Alien if he
will forfeit his Bond.

So it is if a man make a Feoffment in Fee, upon condition that the Feoffee
shall not take the profits of the Lands, this condition is repugnant and
against law, and the estate is absolute. But a Bond with condition that the
Feoffee shall not take the profits is good. If a man be bound with a condition
to enfeoffe his wife, the condition is repugnant void and against law, because
it is against a Maxim in Law, and yet the Bond is good.

Deeds suspicions to be forged.
Yet before anno 13 H. 8. the Deed do style the King Defender of the Faith, or
Supreme head before the 20. H. 8. such a Deed is a forged Deed.

King H. 8. used not the style of Supreme head in his Charters till 22. of his
Reign, nor King of Ireland before 33. of his Reign, New Littleton fo. 7.

Age to bind man or woman.
21. years is the full age for man or woman to make good any act they do, 14.
their age of discretion, and therefore that is the competent age to bind a man
in matter of marriage, 12. to bind a woman, and 9. to deserve her Dower.

Remainder.
No remainder may commence upon any repugnancy or impossibility precedent, nor
upon any condition that goes to the destruction of the particular estate, for
conditions always enure in a privity, so that none shall take advantage of
conditions, but those which are privies, for none shall enter for a condition
broken but only the Feoffor, Donor, Lessor, or their heirs, and as none shall
avoid an estate formerly made by the Breach of a condition but only the
privies, so none shall take a new estate by performance of a condition but
only the privies.

General Livery, and special Livery, the difference.
A general Livery, has two properties, first it is full of charge to the
heir, for he must find an Office in every County where he has Land, or else
he cannot sue a general Livery, and he must sue out his Writ of aetate
probanda.

The second property is, it is full of danger; first it concludes the heir for
ever after to deny any tenure found in the Office. Secondly, if Livery be not
sued of all and of every parcel which the King ought to have, whether it be
found in the Office or not found, the Livery is void and the King may reseise
the Land, and be answered of the mean profits, so it is, if the Office be
insufficient, or the process whereof the Livery was made, be insufficient or the
like, the King shall re-seise.

Therefore for the ease of the heir and for avoiding such danger, the heir
for the most part sueth out a special Livery which contains a beneficial
pardon, and saves the said charges and preventeth the said conclusion and
other dangers, which being of grace and not of right (as the general Livery
is) the King may justly take more for a special Livery then for a general,
but ever with such moderation as the heir may ever go cheerfully through
with it, 23 Eliz. 77.28 H. 8.

One Mr. Shotbolt was bound in an obligation to one Hickman, and in the
Obligation he was named John Shotbolt which was mistaken, but Mr. Shotbolt well
perceiving his misnaming, sealed and delivered the Obligation as his Deed, and
in Debt brought upon this Obligation against him by the name of William
Shotbolt, alias dictus Johannes Shotbolt, he pleaded non est factum, and this
special matter was found by verdict at Guild Hall London, and whether he
should be charged by this Obligation, and plea, that was the doubt, and the
Postea was special ut supra, and by the opinion of the Justices of the Bench,
the plantiff shall not recover upon this Verdict, but it had been better for
him to have brought the Action by the name of John Shotbolt, as he is named in
the Obligation, and then if he appeared thereunto and pleaded ut supra, non est
sactum, he should have been concluded by the Obligation v^ 3 H. 6. 34 H. 6. 5
E. 4. this matter well debated; similis casus inter Turpin and Jaxon (viz) Ann
for Agraes, and she sued by her right name, nuper dicta Anna. Hillar. 18.
Rotulo. 738. Dier. fo. 279.

An obligation made beyond the Seas may be sued here in England, in what place
the party will, what if it bear date Bourdeaux in France where shall it be
sued and answer was made, that it may be alleged in quodam loco vocat.
Bourdiaux in France, in ^slington in the County of Midd. and there it shall be
tried, for whether there be such a place in Islington in the County of Midd. or
not, is not traversable in that case, and so the varieties of opinions in our
Books well reconciled, New Littleton, 361. b. 6. pars. fo. 47. Dondales case,
32 H. 6. 25. 48. E. 3. 3. 11 H. 6. 16.

Mise.
Mise is a word of Act appropriated only to a Writ of right, so called,
because both parties have put themselves upon the mere right to be tried by
grand Assize or by Battle, so as that which in all other actions are called an
issue, in a Writ of right in that Case is called a Mise.

A year, how and into how many parts it is divided.
A quarter of a year is 91 days, half a year is 182 days, a year is 365
days, and to the 6. hours the Law has no regard, Diers Abridgement, fo. 89.
this is according to the computation in the Calendar.

And when a Patron is to present, he has six months to present according to
the computation of the Calendar, which is 182. days before any Lapse shall
accrue. But a Month according to the computation of the Law for reservation of
rents and re-entries, for non payment of Rent etc. does account 28. days to
the Month and no more.

Kings-Silver.
Note that the fine pro licencia concordandi is that which is called the
Kings-Silver, or post fine.

And if the Fine in the Hamper, which is commonly endorsed upon the writ of
Covenant be 26. shillings 8. pence, then always the Kings-Silver, or post-fine
is half as much more as the Fine in the Hamper.

Suspension.
If a Lease be made of 10. Acres of Land for years, reserving rent, and after
the Lessor enters in 2. Acres, the entire rent is thereby suspended, for a
contract which is entire may not be apportioned, but being suspended in part it
is suspended in all, and being destroyed in part is destroyed in the whole, and
especially as to the Act of the Lessor, which does suspend or extinguish it.

Suspension.
A man gives Land in tail or leaseth it for life or years, rendant rent, with
condition for default of payment to re-enter, there if the Lessee lease part of
the Land to the Donor or Lessor; or if the Donor or Lessor enter in part of the
land, he may not re-enter for rent behind after, for the condition is suspended
in all, and a condition may not be apportioned nor divided, B. extinguishment,
49. conditions 193. Suspension.


If a Lease be made for years rendantrent upon condition of non payment, by
such entry of the lessor into parcel of the land leased, the condition is
suspended in all. And if the Lessor after such entry make an alienation of this
parcel to a stranger, the condition is thereby destroyed and extinct in all;
for the condition which is a thing entire may not be apportioned by the act of
him which is to take a veil thereof. But by the act of the Law or by the Act
of him which is charged with the condition, the condition may in some special
cases be apportioned.

An Obligation is made, solvendum numquam this solvendum is void, and the thing
presently due, 21 E. 4. 36. Obligation.


A. is bound to B. solvendum eidem A. this is a good obligation and the
solvendum is void, for the plaintiff may declare upon a solvendum to himself,
4 E 4. 29.

An annuity granted pro concilio impendendo, or a Feoffment, ad erudiendum
filium, or ad solvendum ten shillings, is a condition without words
conditional, Condition.
otherwise the party has no remedy.

If the Lessor enter upon his Lessee for term of years, and make a Feoffment
in Fee with Livery, the rent is suspended for ever, Suspention of rent.
Re-entry upon such as fail to pay their Rent at the day.
although the Lessee re-enter, for it is a tortious entry.

And if it happen, etc. That then and from thenceforth this present Demise and
grant (only in respect and having regard to the state and interest demised or
granted, or hereby mentioned or intended to be demised or granted to the said
A.B. C. and D. and every of them which shall make default of payment of the
said yearly rent, in such manner and form as is aforesaid aforesaid to be
utterly void and of none effect, and that then and from thenceforth at all
times, then after it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Lessor, his
heirs and Assigns into the said Messuages or tenement, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and Premises, with their and every of their appertenances, only
in respect and having regard to the estate and interest demised and granted, or
hereby mentioned etc. to such of the said A. B. C. D. as shall make default of
payment of the said rent aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid wholly to
re-enter, and the same to have again and repossesse as in his or their former
estate, and every such of the said A. B. C. D. as shall make default of payment
of the yearly rent aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid utterly to expel,
a move and put out, any thing in these present Indentures to the contrary
thereof contained, in any wise notwithstanding.

Tithes.
To the Parson belongs of common right, the tenths of all manner of yearly
increase which we call Dismes or Tithes, and therefore by a Lease of Rectoria,
the Lessee shall have the Dismes and Offerings of the same Church, for they are
incident unto it, 15 H. 7. 8 Fitz. Na. Br. 175.

And if a Parson demise his Gleeb to any man, he shall pay tithe because they
are of common right.

Heir
This word (Heirs) in the plural number is worthy observation, for if a man
give Lands to one and to his heir in the singular number, he has but an
estate for life, for his heir cannot take a Fee-simple by descent, because he
is but one, and therefore in that case his heir shall take nothing, and
observeable is this conjunctive (Et.) for if a man give lands to one to have to
him or his heirs, he has but an estate for life, for the incertainty (ses
suis) If a man give Lands to two, to have and to hold to them, and heredibus,
omitting suis, they have but an estate for life for the incertainty. But it is
said if land be given to a man and heredibus omitting suis a Fee-simple
passes. But follow Littleton. Cokes Litt. fo. 8. b.

Such unity which is within the Branch of the said Act, ought to have four
qualities, Tithes. What unity is sufficient within the Statute of 31 H. 8. to
discharge the Land of Tithe.
first the unity ought to Iusta, and rightful, and not by wrong; secondly it
ought to be equal, that is in Fee, one with the other, for if the Abbots,
Priors, etc. have holden by Lease, time out of memory, that is no unity within
the statute; thirdly it ought to be perpetual, time out of memory etc. and
fourthly it ought to be free from payment of any tithes, for if their Farmours
at will for years etc. have paid tithes unto them, the unity perpetual shall
not serve, Coke. 11. pars. fol. 9. Pruddy and Nappars Case.

An Abbot is Parson imparsonee, and has Lands within the same Pasonage, and
all comes to the King by suppression, and the King grants the personage to
one, and the land to another, this was argued upon demurrer in the Kings Bench,
and the opinion of the Justices there was, that Tithes should not be paid more
now then the Abbey paid before the suppression.

The King shall not pay Tithes for Lands which are in his hands, although the
Leviticall Law says, that every one shall pay Tithes, ut dicitur.

No Tithes shall be paid for Sea-coles which a man finds and diggeth in his
Land for, it is not yearly profit, ut accidit in W. C. and Master Leech, Fitz.
Na. Br. 53. and Register 54.

Note that by the Statute of 27. Eliz. cap. 1. it is ordained vacua.

Henry the second granted unto the Abbot of York the tenth of all his Venison
in York shire by his Charter. By this it appears that for Wild Beasts there
was no Tithe due, for then might not the King have granted another man's Tithe
etc. Itner. Pickering, fo. 170. b.

The Prior of Lancaster did claim the Tithe of Venison, and the Tithe of
pawnage (viz.) decimam bestiam in carne and corio, per manus ministrorum de
sorresta, and the tenth penny of the pawnage, when the pawnage of the Forest
was collected, and he made his by virtue of a grant made by the Lord of the
Forest unto one of his Predecessors, and his claim was allowed of for good.
Itin. Lanc. anno. 10. Ed. 3. fo. 64. b. c.

No prohibition lies where a Parson demands Tithes of Horne-beam, Sallows,
Hasells, Maples, and such like, although they be of the Age of 40. years, for
they will not serve to build, otherwise it is of Oaks, Ashes, Elmes, and such
like, and also of their bows which are above the age of twenty years, Coment.
Plowden. fo. 470.

It was never seen that any Tithes should be paid of great trees, because they
are parcel of the inheritance, and this is proved by the Statute of 45. E 3.
Cap. 3. in that such case a prohibition lies.

If Timber Trees have been usually lopt, Tithes shall not be paid for them, for
as the Law priviledgeth the body of the Tree being parcel of the inheritance,
so does it privilege the Branches also, so if a man cut his timber trees,
Tithes shall not be paid for the boughs or sprouts which are going out of the
roots or stowles, in respect that the root is parcel of the inheritance, so if
a timber tree become arda, sicca, and non portans folia, nec fructus in
aestate, nec existens macorin. and the owner cut him, no Tithes shall be paid
thereof in respect of the inheritance which was once in him, so for the bark of
Oaks being timber, no tithes shall be paid, but for Acornes tithe shall be
paid because that grows yearly.

Inheritance does pass without livery and seisin by a grant.
If I grant all my Trees within the Manor of G. to one and his heirs, the
Grantee shall have inheritance in them without any Livery and Seisin, Coke
Barringtons case S. pars fo. 137. And so if I grant to you my Trees in my Wood,
you may come with Waines or Carts over my Land to carry them, Coke 11. pars.
fo. 53.

Vsery.
Clayton requested Reynolds to lend him 30. l. and upon communication between
them, Reynolds lent Claton 30. pound the sixth day of December, 34 Eliz. unto
the second of June next following, to pay unto him for the principal and Lone
thereof 33 l. upon the said second of June, if the son of Reynolds were then
alive, and if he died before the day, that then he should pay unto him twenty
seven pounds which was 3 l. under the principals this is by the resolution of
the whole Court, was usery within the letter of the Statute. Coke. 5. pars fo.
70.

It was agreed between T. W. and A. G that A. Boortons case Coke. 5. pars. fo.
69.
should lend to T. W. 100 l. and that the said T. W. should grant to the said
A. and his heirs a rent, which was in esse of 20 l. upon a condition, that the
said A. should lend to the said T. W. 100 l. as aforesaid. And that the said T.
should grant to the said A. and his heirs the rent of 20 l. upon this
condition, that if the said T. should pay to the said A. 100 l s. the 17. of
July 1580. (which was a full year before the contract made) that then the rent
should cease, and hereupon the money was received, and the rent granted
accordingly. This was not within the statute of usury, because nothing was to
be paid by T. W. the Grantor within a year and a quarter after the Grant made,
for within the 17. day of July 1579. and Christmas 1580. (at which time a
distres was taken for the rent) no rent was limited to be paid, and if the
Grantor had paid the 100 l. the 17. of July 1580. the rent had ceased without
paying any thing for the same 100 l. So the whole Court adjudged that it was a
plain bargain, and conditional purchase of such a rent, and no usery. But it
was resolved by the Court that if it had been agreed between the Grantor and
the Grantee, that notwithstanding such power of redemption that the 100 pounds
should not have been paid at the day, and that the clause of redemption was
inserted to make an evasion out of the Statute, then it had been an usurious
bargain and contract within the Statute. Coke 3. pars fo. 69.

Where a man for 100 l. sells his land, upon condition, that if the Vendor or
his heir repay the sum citra festum Pasch. or such like, then next coming,
that then he may re-enter, that is not usury, for he may repay it the morrow
after, or at any time before Pasc^. And therefore he has not any gain
certain to receive any profit of the land. And likewise where any Defeasance
or Statute is made for the repayment citra tale festum. But it is otherwise, if
the condition be, that if the said Vendor repay such a day, such a year, or
two years after, this is usury, for he is sure to have the Land and the rents,
land or profits that year or these two years. And so when a Defeasance or
Statute is made for the repayment at such a feast which is a year or two years
after, B. Usury 1.

If a man morgage his Land upon Defeasance of repayment to re-enter, by which
Indenture the Vendee leaseth the same land to the Vendor for years rendant
rent there, if there be a condition in the Lease, that if the Vendor repay the
same before such a day that then the lease shall be void, that is not usury.
But otherwise it is, if he be to pay it such a day certain or such a year or
more after, B. usury, 2. 32 H. 8.

Inheritances lineall and collateral.
Lands purchased may go to the heirs both of the part of the father and mother
of the Purchasor, unless it be once attached in the heir of the part of the
Father, for the heir of the part of the Mother shall never have it, because
they are not of blood to him that was last seized.

But Lands descended goes only to the heir of that part from whence it
discends, as if from the Father who did purchase it, then it may go to the
heirs of the part of the mother of the same father, but not to the heirs of the
part of the sons mother, for though they be of blood to the son that was last
seized, yet they are not of blood to the father which was the first purchasor.

And if a man Purchase Lands in Fee-simple, and die without issue, he which is
next Cousin collateral of the whole blood, how far soever he be from him in
degree may inherit and have the Land as heir to him.

These words do intend that where a man does purchase lands and dies without
issue, and having neither brother nor sister, then his next Cousin collateral
shall inherit. So as there is implied a division of Heirs (viz) lineall (who
shall ever first inherit, and collateral who are to inherit in default of
lineal) for in descent it is a Maxim in Law, Quod linea recta semper
praefertur transversali Lineall descent is conveyed downward in a right line,
as from the Grandfather to the Father, from the Father to the Son, and so
downward, collateral descent is derived from the side of the lineall, as
Granfathers Brother, Fathers Brother, etc.

Upon this word (Next) I put this case, One has issue two Sons, A. and B. and
dies, B. has two Sons C. and D. and dies, C. the eldest Son has issue, and
dies. A. purchases lands in Fee-simple, and dies without issue, D. is his
next Cousin, and yet shall not inherit, but the issue of C. for he that is
inheritable is accounted in Law next of blood. And therefore here is understood
a division of next (viz.) next jure representationis, and next jure
propinquitatis, that is by right of representation, and by right of
propinquity. And Littleton means of the right of representation, for legally
in course of descent he is next of blood inheritable: And the issue of C. does
represent the person of C. and if C. had lived, he had been legally next of
blood. And whenever the Father if he had lived should have inherited, his
lineall heir by right of representation, shall inherit before any other,
though a Mother be jure propinquitati^, nearer of blood.

But if there be Father and Son, and the Father has a brother that is Uncle to
the Son, and the Son purchase lands in fee, and die without issue, living the
Father, the Uncle shall have the lands as heir to the Son, and not the Father,
yet the Father is nearer of blood; because it is a Maxim in Law, that
inheritance may lineally descend, but not ascend, yet if the Son in this case
die without issue, and the Uncle enter into the land as heir to the Son, and
after the Uncle dies without issue (living the Father) the Father shall have
the land as heir to the Uncle, and not as heir to his Son, for that he comes
to the land by collateral descent, and not by lineall ascent, and his Uncle
enter into the land: for if the Uncle in this case does not enter into the
land, then cannot the Father inherit the land; for there is another Maxim in
Law herein implied, That a man that claims as heir in Fee-simple to any man
by descent, must make himself heir to him that was last seized of the actual
Freehold and inheritance. And if the Uncle in this case does not enter, then
had he but a Freehold in Law, and no actual Freehold, but the last that was
seized of the actual Freehold, was the Son to whom the Father cannot make
himself heir. And therefore Littleton says, And his Uncle enter into the land
(as he ought) by the Law to make the Father to inherit as heir to the Uncle.

Note, that true it is, that the Uncle in this case is heir but not absolutely
heir, for if after the descent to him the Father has issue a Son or a
Daughter, that issue shall enter upon the Uncle. And so it is if a man has
issue a Son and a Daughter, the Son purchases land in fee, and dies without
issue, the Daughter shall inherit the land, but if the Father has afterward
issue a Son, this Son shall enter into the land as heir to his brother, and if
he has issue a Daughter and no Son, she shall be Co-partner with her Sister.

As he ought by the Law. These words as a Key do open the secrets of the Law;
for hereupon it is concluded, that where the Uncle cannot get an actual
possession, by entry or otherwise there the Father in this case cannot inherit.
And therefore if an Advowson be granted to the Son and his Heirs, and the Son
die, and this descend to the Uncle, and he die before he does or can present to
the Church, the Father shall not inherit, because he should make himself heir
to the Son, which he cannot do. And so of a rent and the like: But if the Uncle
had presented to the Church, or had Seisin of the rent, there the Father should
have inherited. For Littleton puts his case of an entry into land: But for
an example, if the Son make a Lease for life and die without issue, and the
Reversion descend to the Uncle, and he die, the Reversion shall not descend to
the Father, because in that case he must make himself heir to the Son.

If the Father make a Lease for years, and the Lessee enters, and the Father
dies, the eldest Son dies before entry, or receipt of the rent, the younger
Son of the half blood shall not inherit, but the Sister, because the possession
of the Lessee for years is the possession of the eldest Son, so as he is
actually seized of the Frank-tenement and the Inheritance, and consequently the
Sister of the whole blood is to be heir. And so if lands be holden by Knights
service, and the eldest Son is within age, and the Guardian enters into the
lands. An so likewise if Guardian in Socage enters.

But in the case aforesaid, if the Father make a lease for life, or a gift in
tail, and dies, and the eldest Son dies in the life of Tenant for life, etc.
the younger brother of the half blood shall inherit, because the Tenant for
life or Tenant in tail is seized of the Freehold, and the eldest Son had
nothing but a Reversion expectant upon the Freehold, and therefore the youngest
Son shall inherit the land as Heir to his Father, who was last seized of the
actual Freehold. And albeit a rent had been reserved on the estate for life,
and the eldest Son had received the rent, and died, yet it is holden by that
the younger brother shall inherit, because the seisin of the rent is no actual
seisin of the Freehold of the land: but Liber Ass. part. 2. seems to the
contrary. Ideo quaere.

He that claims Lands, Tenements, Maxim upon collateral descent.
or Hereditaments, as collateral heir to any one, must claim from such an one
that had an actual possessession, and died actually seized of the
Frank-tenement, and the inheritance in Fee-simple of those lands which he so
claims by descent, and not from such a one who had but a possession in Law,
or a reversion in Fees. expectant on a Frank-tenement discendible unto him. But
to the lineall heir it suffices that the Ancestor should have been heir if
he had lived: But if such a collateral heir claim from a collateral
Ancestor that had a possession in Law by his own purchase or reversion in
Fee-simple expectant on a Frank-tenement by his own purchase, it is sufficient.

Actual possession.
Note, that an actual possession must be gained either by a man's own act, or by
the actual possession of another, but if neither by his own act, nor by the
possession of another, he does gain no more then discendeth unto him, then the
brother of the half blood shall inherit.

Possessio quid.
And this word, Possessio is no other but pedis positio, and extends only to
things whereof a man by his entry or other act may gain an actual possession,
for when the eldest Son has not an actual possession, or if it be such
inheritance whereof any possession may not be gained per pedis positionem, or
by any other act, then the inheritance by the Law shall descend to the brother
of the half blood. As for example.

The King by his Letters Patents creates a Baron, and gives the Dignity to
him and his Heirs, and he has issue a Son and a Daughter by one venture, and a
Son by another venture, and dies, the eldest Son dies without issue: To whom
shall the dignity descend? To the younger Son, for it may not be said that the
elder son was in possession of the dignity, no more then of his blood, for the
dignity is inherent to his blood, and neither by his own act, nor by the act of
another has he gained more actual possession then by the Law descended to
him, Coke 3. pars. fol. 42.

Actual possession, quid. Possession in Law, quid. Here Is jure proprietatis and
here is jure representationis
An actual possession is when a man enters in Deed into lands to him descended.

A possession in Law, is when lands be descended to a man, and he has not yet
really entered into them, nor has seisin of the rents reserved upon any estate
made for life, by him from whom he claims.

Every one that is heir unto another, is as the eldest Son shall inherit only
before all his brothers, Aut here is jure representationis, as where the eldest
Son dies in the life of his Father, his issue shall inherit before the
youngest Son; for although the youngest Son be magis propinquus, yet jure
representationis, the issue of the eldest Son shall inherit, for he does
represent the person of his Father.

And even as none may be procreate but of one Father and one Mother, and ought
to have in him two bloods (viz.) the blood of his Father, and the blood of his
Mother, those two bloods commix in him by lawful marriage, does constitute and
make him heir. So none may be heir to any one, unless he has in him both the
bloods of him to whom he shall make himself heir: And therefore the heir of
the half blood shall not inherit, because he wants one of the bloods that
should make him inheritable, for as in this case the blood of the Father and
the blood of the Mother make but one blood inheritable, and both are necessary
to the procreation of an heir, therefore desiciente uno, non potest esse
haeres: And this is the reason of the Maxim of Possessio fratris de feodi
simplex, facis sororem esse haeredem, Co. 3. pars. Ratcliffs case, fo. 37.

If a man be attainted of felony by judgment, the heirs begotten after the
attainder are foreclosed from all manner of hereditary Succession, as well on
the part of the Mother, as on the part of the Father. And Britton gave this
reason, because the Son procreate after the judgment, had not two bloods
inheritable in him, for at the time of his birth, the blood of his Father was
corrupt, for ex leproso parente leprosus generatur filius. And when the Father
is attainted of felony, the blood in respect of what it shall be inheritable,
being corrupt, the Son (as like to it) has not but half blood, (viz.) the
blood of the Mother in him without corruption: And therefore he holds that
such a Son shall not inherit his Mother.

And with him Bracton accords, for says he, Non valebit felonis generatio,
nec ad hereditatem paternam vel maternam, si autem ante feloniam generationem
fecerit, talis generatio succedit in hereditatem patris, a quo non fuit felonia
perpetrata. Because that at the time of his birth, he had two lawful bloods
commixt in him, which may not be corrupt by attainder subsequent, but only as
to that Father, or that Mother, by whom the Felony was done and committed.

Assise.
To arraigne an Assise is to cause the Demandant to be called to make the
plaint, and to set the cause in such order as the Tenant may be enforced to
answer thereunto, and is derived of the French word Arrayner, to order, or set
in right place, and the Assise is Arrained in French, and entered in Latin.

Executed, and things executory, a difference.
There is a diversity between Inheritances executed and Inheritances executory.
As Lands executed by Livery, etc. cannot by Indentures of Defeasance be
defeated afterward.

And so if a Disseisee release to a Disseisor, it cannot be defeated by
Indenturs of Defeasance made afterward, but at the time of the Release or
Feoffment, etc. the same may be defeated by Indentures of Defeasance, for it is
a Maxim in Law, Quae in continenti fiunt in esse videntur. But Rents,
Annuities, Conditions, Warranties, and such like, that be inheritances
executory may be defeated by Defeasance made either at that time, or at any
time after: And so the Law is of Statutes, Recognizances, Obligations, and
other things executory.

Distress for a mercement.
He that distraineth for an Amercement, and such like, must be sure to distraine
the Goods and Chattels of him that is amerced, because he may not distraine
another man's beasts for this amercement. But for rent or services it is
otherwise; for the party may distraine the beasts found in the land that are
levant and couchant there, N. B. fol. 100. B.

Distress, Damage-feasant.
And if a man take beasts for Damage-feasant, and the other offer sufficient
amends, and he refuse, etc. Now if he sue a Replevin, etc. for the beasts, he
shall recover Damages only for the Detinue of them, and not for the taking,
for that was lawful, F.N.B. 69.

The Lord may seize a Herriot service as well as a Herriot custom, Herriot
service and Herriot custom may be seized. Ward.
and so it was then adjudged by the whole Court, Plow. fo. 96. Replevin.
Woodland versus Mantle.

It was resolved that when the King makes an heir apparent which in age of a
Tenent by Knights service a Knight in the life of his ancestor, and after the
ancestor dies the said heir within age, in this case he shall be out of ward
and shall pay no value of his marriage, nor the Lord shall have the custody of
the Land, for in such ease by the making of him Knight in the life of his
Ancestor, he is made as of full age, so that when his Ancestor dies, no
interest either in the body or in the land ever vesteth in the Lord.

It was also resolved that when the heir within age is made Knight after tender
made to him, although that he within age marry else where, yet he shall not pay
the forfeiture of marriage Cok. 6. pars. fo. 73. Sir Drue Druries case.

If an infant in the life of his father be made Knight, and his Father die he
shall be in Ward, but otherwise it is where an infant in Ward is made Knight,
there he shall be out of Ward, 2. E 6. tit. Guard 42. Magna Char. Cap. 3.

Touching the time of the beginnning of a Lease for years it is to be
observed, Commencement of a lease Inclusive and exclusive.
that if a Lease be made by indenture bearing Date the 26. of May etc. to have
and to hold for 21. years from the Date or from the day of the Date, it shall
begin the 27. day of May.

If a Lease bear Date the 26. of May. etc. to have and to hold from the making
hereof or from henceforth or from the sealing and delivery hereof, it shall
begin on the day in which it is delivered, for the words of the indenture are
not of any effect till the delivery, and thereby from the making or from
henceforth take their effect.

But if it be a die confectionis, or a die datus, or a datu, then it shall
begin the next day after the delivery,

If the habendum be for the term of twenty one years, without mentioning
when it shall begin, it shall begin from the delivery, for there the words take
effect as is aforesaid.

If an Indenture of Lease bear Date which is void, or impossible, as the 30.
day of February, or the 40. of March, if in this case the term be limited to
begin from the date, it shall begin from the delivery as if there had been no
date at all.

And so it is, if a man by his indenture of lease either recite a Lease which
is not, or is void, or recite a Lease amiss in point material which is in
esse, to have from the ending of the former Lease, this Lease shall begin in
course of time from the delivery thereof, Coke. 5. pars. fo. 1 12. Eliz. Dier.
fo. 286. 14. El. Dier. 307. 5. Eliz. Dier fo. 218.

Re-enter and take the profits until etc.
If a man make a lease for years, reserving a rent, with condition that if the
rent be behind, that the Lessor shall re-enter, and take the profits until
thereof he be satisfied, there the profits thereof shall be accounted as parcel
of the satisfaction, and during the time that he so takes the profits he shall
not have an action of debt for the rent, for the satisfaction whereof he takes
the profits, but if the condition be that he shall take the profits until the
Feoffor be satisfied or paid off the rent, without saying (thereof, or to the
like effect) there the profits shall not be accounted in part of the
satisfaction, but to hasten the Lessee to pay it, New Littleton fo. 203. 30 E.
3. 7. 27 H. 8. 4. 43 E. 3. 21.

Livery and Seisin Tantamount.
Of free hold, and inheritances, some be corporeal, as Houses, Lands, etc.
these are to pass by Livery and Seisin, by Deed, or without Deed; some be
incorporeall, as Advowsons, Rents, Commons, Estovers, etc. these cannot pass
without Deed, but yet without any Livery. And the Law has provided the Deed
instead of a Livery, and so it is if a man make a Lease, and by Deed grant the
reversion in Fee, here the Freehold with the Attornment of the Lessee by the
Deed does pass which is in lieu of the Livery.

To say that money is fallen, Actions on the case.
that he has gone about to get poison to kill the child that such a woman
goes with, that a man did lie in wait to rob one, or procured another, or
agreed with another to murder him, or sought his life for his land, to call a
Merchant bankerupt, (but not to call a Gent. etc. bankerupt is not actionable)
to call an Attorney Ambidexter or or to say that he deals corruptly. But
words of choler and heat, as to call one cousiner, crafty-knave, common
Extortioner, Drunker, Witch, Rogue, Pillory-Knave, Villain, (unless he say
Villain to such a man, or regardant to such a Manor) are not actionable.

But if the speaker be able to justify the words, for then it is not falsely.
As to call a man perjured, by reason of a perjury committed in the Star Chamber,
Murderer, Thief, or such like, upon a conviction too, but to call one Theife
or Murderer, upon an indictment or common fame is actionable.

If one having another man's goods, convert them to his own use, if a Smith
cloy my horse, these are actionable, but not if he take him to cure, (without
warranting of him) and doing all he can, yet the Horse impair.

If being committed to the Goal, the Jailer of malice put upon me two many
Irons, or otherwise use me so hardly that I become lame thereby, this is
actionable, Sir Hen. Finch fo. 186.

A grant by an Infant under the age of twenty one years, A grant.
one out of his right mind whom we call non sanae memoriae, or non compos
mentis, or one compelled to do an act, either by duress of imprisonment, or
fear of some bodily hurt threatened to himself (but not to his Father, mother,
Brother, etc) as loss of life and member, or though it be but of imprisonment,
for imprisonment is a corporeal pain, and one may be imprisoned that he die
of it, otherwise of menace to break or burn down ones house, for that is but
the loss of ones goods, is avoidable and may be avoided at any time by entry,
action etc. if they deliver it with their hand as in a grant of a rent,
advowson etc, or a Feoffment by letters of Attorney, it is merely void and
nothing at all passes.

So if a grant made by one which has no understanding, as if he be borne
Dumb, Deaf, and blind, but one Dumb may make a good grant, or borne dumb and
deaf, for diverse may have understanding by their sight only though dumb and
deaf.

If an infant bargain for his necessary meat, drink and apparel etc. it shall
bind him.

Other Grants of his where himself has likewise benefit, we call it quid pro
quo, are only voydable and not void, as if he let lands for years reserving a
rent Sir H. Finch fo. 102.

Pretended right.
None shall buy, sell, or get, or take promise, or grant to have any pretended
rights or titles to lands etc. except the seller, or these (by whom he
claims) were in possession, or took the profits by the space of a year next
before upon pain that the sellor etc. shall forfeit the value of the land, and
likewise the buyer knowing the same, provided he that is in lawful possession
by taking the yearly profits may buy etc. another pretended right, 32 H. 8.
ca. 9.

Tole in market.
The seller shall not pay Toll, but the buyer, neither shall a man pay Toll for
the things he brings to the Fair, but for the things he sells, but by the
custom he may for every thing brought to the fair, and for his standing also,
Finch fo. 166.

If the Parson of a Church purchase a Manor within his Parrish, now by this
purchase and unity of possession, the Manor which was titheable before is now
made non decimabilis, because he cannot pay tithes to himself, but if the
Parson make a Lease of his Parsonage, and Rectory to a stranger, now the Parson
himself shall pay Tithes of his Manor to the Lessee of the Rectory, and if the
parson make a Feoffment of the Manor, the Feoffee shall pay Tithes to the
Feoffor Parson, because that Tithes may not be extinct by any unity of
possession, as rentcharge may which is issuing out of Lands, but tithes are
due by the Law of God, ex debito, by the manurance and tillage of the occupier
in whose hands soever the land comes, if it be not in the hands of the Parson
himself. And all this matter was agreed by the Justices and Sergeants, but
they were in several opinions, if the Parson Lease parcel of Gleeb Lands for
years or life reserving a rent, whether the Lessee shall pay tithes or not,
Quere, Dier fo. 44.

If a man levy a fine of land in ancient demaine at the common law to another,
Ancient demain deceit.
now the Lord of ancient demaine shall have a writ of deceit against him that
levied the fine, and him that is tenant, and thereby he shall reverse the Fine,
and there he which has given the Land shall be restored to his possessions and
title which he had given by the Fine, because that the Fine and gift thereby is
utterly defeated. But if he that levied the Fine had after the Fine released to
him which had the possession by the Fine by his deed, or confirmed his estate
by his deed in the land, then it seems that he to whom such release or
confirmation is made, shall retain and have the Land, notwithstanding the Fine
be reversed, because that this release or confirmation made to him being in
possession makes his estate firm, and rightful against him and his heirs
which released or confirmed, Na. Bre. fo. 98. A. Pace regis and reginae fo. 68.

Terminus, Terminus annorum and tempus annorum.
in the understanding of the Law does not only signify the limits and
limitation of time, but also the estate and interest that passes for that
time, as if a man make a lease for twenty one years, and after make a lease to
begin a fine, and expiratione predicti termini 21. annor. dinnisor. and after
the first Lease is surrendered the second lease shall commence presently, but if
it had been to begin post finem and expirationem predict. 21. annorum, in that
case although the first term had been surrendered, yet the second lease shall
not begin till after the 21. years be ended, by effluction of time; And so
note, that diversity between the term of 21. years, and 21. years Coke. 1 a
pars fo. 154.

If A. make a lease to B. for ten years, and covenant that if B. pay 100 l. to
A. infra dictos december annos, that B. shall have Fee, if B. surrender his term
to A. and after pay the 100 l. within the 10 years, he shall have Fee, but
otherwise it is where it is covenanted, that if he pay a 100 l. infra terminum
praedictorum december annorum, folio eodem.

Tripartite Indentures.
In witness whereof etc. the parties above named to these present Indentures
Tripartite, interchangeably have set their hands and seals, dated the day and
year above written.

In Witness whereof all the said parties have to every part of these presents
set their Hands and Seals the day and year first above written.

IN witness whereof to the first part of these Indentures remaining with the
said Sir Jo. Tracy, Sir Will. Coke, and Sir Thomas Eastcourt, the said Sir H.
Poole has set his Seal.

1. Sir H. Poole. 2. Sir Jo. Tracy. Sir Will. Cook. Sir Thomas Eastcourte.
And to the second part of the said Indentures, remaining with the said William
Guies, John Bridgman, and Fr. Marsh, the said Sir H Poole, Sir Jo. Tracy, Sir
Will. Cook, and Sir Thomas Eastcourt, have set their Seals.

3. Will. Guies. Io. Bridgeman. Fra. Marsh.
And to the third part of these indentures, remaining with the said, Sir. H.
Poole, the said Sir Jo. Tracy, Sir Will. Cook, Sir Thomas Eastcourt, Will. Guies,
John Bridgeman and Fra. Marsh have set their seals, even the day and year
first above written.

To the first part of these Indentures remaining with the said H. Poole, the
said William Bridges, Tho. Nichoas, William Freame, Giles Bridges and Jeffrey
Bath have set their Seals.

1. Henry Poole. 2. Will. Bridges. Tho. Nicholas. Will. Freame.
To the second part of these presents remaining with the said Will. Bridges,
Tho. Nicholas, and Will. Freame the said Hen. Poole, Gi. Bridges, and Jeff.
Bathe, have set their Seals.

3. Gi. Bridges. Jeffery Bathe.
And to the third part of these presents remaining with the said G. Bridges.
and Jeffery Bath. the said Hen. Poole, W. Bridges Thomas Nicholas and Will.
Freame, have set their Seals.

TO one part of this Indenture remaining with the said Sir Hen. Poole the said
Dorothy Vnton, and Geo. Shierley, have set their Seals.

1. Dorothy Vnton. 2. George Shierly. 3. Sir Hen. Poole.
To another part remaining with the said Geo. Shirley the said Dorothy Vnton
and sir H. Poole, have set their Seals.

To another part remaining with the said Dorothy Unton the said Sir Hen. Poole
and Geo. Shierley have set their Seals.

TO one part of these Indentures remaining with the said Geo. Raleigh, the said
Gab. Pountney and Edw. Raleigh, Tho. Spencer, and Edward Essex, have set their
Seals.

And to one other part remainder with the said Gab. Pountney, and Edward
Raleigh, the said Geo. Raleigh, Thomas Spencer, and Edward Essex, have set
their Seals.

And to one other part remainder with the said Tho. Spencer, and Edward Essex,
the said Geo. Raleigh, Gab. Pountney, and Edw. Raleigh have set their Seals.

1. Geo. Raleigh. 2. Gab. Pountney. Edward Raleigh. 3. Tho. Spencer. Edward
Essex.
TO the first part remaining with the said Fran. Shirley, the said Jo. Shirley
and Jane, Ralph Shirley, Robert Brooksbey, Jo. Brook, William Underhill have
set their Seals.

To the second part remaining with John Shirley and Jane, the said Fra. Ralph.
Jo. Brook, Robert, and Will. Underhill have set their Seals.

1. Fran. Shierly. Ralph Shierley. 2. Jo. Shirley. Jane Shirley. 3. Rob.
Brookesby. John Brook. Will. Underhill
To the third part remainder with Rob. Brookesby, Jo. Brook and William
Underhill, the said Fra. Jo. Jane and Ralph, have set their Seals.

Livery void.
Tenant for term of life makes a Lease for years, and then granted tenemenia
predicta to C. to have from Michaelmas next ensuing for life, after the said
feast of Michaelmas, tenant for years attorned, this grant to C. is void, for
a grant of a Frank-tenement may not commence in futuro, and the grant being
void at the beginning, the attornment after shall not make the Frank-tenement
to pass, for every frank-tenement ought forthwith either to commence in
possession, reversion or remainder. And when a man makes a Lease for life to
commence at a day to come, he may not make present Livery to a future estate,
ideo nothing passes, secunda pars, L. Coke fo. 35.

But if a man make an estate for life to commence at Michaelmas next, and then
the Lessor himself after Michaelmas execute livery to the Lessee, the estate
is made good only by the Livery, but if the Livery be so made by warrant of
Attorney of the Lessor, then the livery, and the Lease are both void.

If Tenant at will sow the Crop, set Roots, Emblements who shall have them.
sow Hemp or Flax, or any other annual profit, if after the same be planted,
the Lessor out the Lessee, or if the Lessee dies, yet he or his executors
shall have the years Crop, and this rule holds to every particular tenant
that has an estate in certain, for if tenant for life sows the ground, and
dies, his executors shall have the corn sown, for that his estate was
uncertain, and determined by the act of God. And the same law is of Lessee for
years of tenant for life; if a man be seized of land in the right of his wife,
and sewe the ground, he dies, his executors shall have the corn, for that his
estate was uncertain, and if his wife die before him, he shall have the corn.
If a man seized of lands in Fee, has issue a daughter and dies, his wife with
child of a son, the daughter sows the ground, the son is borne, yet the
daughter shall have the corn, because her estate was lawful and defeated by
the Act of God, and it is good for the Commonwealth that the ground be sown.

But if the Lessee at will sow ground with corn etc. and after he himself
determines his will, and refuses to occupy the ground, in that case the
Lessor shall have the corn, because he loses his rent, and if a woman that
holds land durante viduitate sows the ground and takes a husband, the
lessor shall have the Emblements, because the determination of her own estate
grew by her own act. But where the estate of the Lessee being uncertain is
defeasible by a right Paramou^t, or if the Lease determine by the act of the
lessee, as by forfeiture, condition etc. there he that has the right
Paramount, or that enters for any forfeiture etc. shall have the corn, New
Lit. fo 55. titulo tenant at will.

Olands case 5. pars Coke. fo. 116. vel. 126
If a feme seized of land durante viduitate make a Lease for years and the
Lessee sow the lands, and after the wife that made the lease take a husband,
the Lessee shall not have the Emblements, for though his estate determine by the
act of a stranger, yet he shall not be as to the first lessor in better estate
then his lessor was.

Uses Uses. Note That it is not good to make such a limitation generally
without any restraint because it makes all estates with the remainders over to
be in contingency.
To the use of Leonard Lovey for life, and after his decease to the use of such
farmors or tenants to whom he shall demise any part of the premises for or
during life, or lives, and for any term of years as in any such demise or
demises shall be limited and appointed, and then to the use and performance of
the last Will and Testament of the said L. Lovey and to the use of such person
and persons severally to whom the said L. Lovey by his last Will shall devise
any estate or estates, of or in the said Manors lastly mentioned or of any
part of them according to the true intent and meaning of his said last Will.

And after the performance of his said last Will to the use of etc. and for
some other Manors he devised them to Tho. Lovey his son and to the heirs
males of his body lawfully begotten from and after the decease of the said L.
Lovey the father for 500. years then next ensuing fully to be completed and
ended, upon condition that his said son shall allow of all such estates
grants and conveyances thereof already made, or at any time to be made by the
said L. Lovey of and in the said Manors, Messuages etc. and other the premises
by him, by that his last Will given, granted and bequeathed, according to the
purport, true meaning and effect of the said Lease, and Leases so made or to be
made, with power of revocation.

It was resolved that all the remainders were in possibility and contingency,
but yet that the uses and powers in contingency may by mutual assent of the
parties be revoked and determined, for as they may be raised by Indenturer so
by Proviso or limitation annexed to them in the same Indenture they may be
destroyed either before or after their essence.

And where it is incertaine and doubtful whether the use or estate limited in
futuro shall ever vest in estate or interest or not, If a man give lands to a
man such a woman as shall be his wife, the man takes the entire. But if a man
make a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself and his wife which shall he, and
he after takes a Wife, his wife shall take jointly with him Coke 1. pars. fo.
101.
there the use or estate is in contingency. But yet these contingent estates
(where power of revocation is) may be revoked 10. pars fo. 78 Leonard Loveyes
case.

If a man at this day make a Feoffment in fee to the use of A. for years and
after to the use of the right heirs of B. or to the use of the wife of B.
which shall be, this limitation to the right heirs of B. or to the wife of B.
which shall be is void, because it had been void, if it had been limited in
possession.

Francis Earl of Bedford made a feoffment in Fee of diverse Manors to the use
of himself for years, and then to the use of Jo. L. Russell his son and
heir, and to the heirs Males of his body engendered, and for default of such
issue to the use of the right heirs of the said Earl, and after the said Jo.
L. Russell died without issue male in the life of the said Earl, and it was
resolved that the use and estate limited by way of remainder to the right
heirs of the Earl were void, for it had been void if it had been limited by
estate, executed at the common law, for the remainder ought to vest during the
particular estate, prima pars fo. 130. Chudleis case.

A Fine was levied to the use of A. and the heirs males of his body, until he
or the heirs males of his body has done such a thing, and after such a thing
done to the use of another in tail, and dies without issue, without any thing
done, and it was adjudged the remainder was in contingency, and ne unques
eschie.

Note, that every use in esse, that is to say in possession, reversion or
remainder is executed by the Statute, and that no contingent use or right of a
use shall be executed within this Statute of 27 H. 8. until they come in esse,
1. a pars. fo. 126. Chudleis case.

Disjunctive and copulative.
A Lease for years, yiedling yearly to the Lessor or his heirs forty
shillings, this reservation in the disjunctive is good. See the book at large,
the reason. Mallories Case 5. pars. fo.

And there: If a feoffment be made to A. to have to him or his heirs, there he
has but an estate for life, for there want words precedent to direct the words
in the disjunctive, and these words (Heirs) are of the essence of the estate,
and without them no estate of inheritance shall pass.

And so by the same reason, if a reversion upon a Feoffement in Fee be made to
one or his heirs, such reservation is good no longer, but during the life of
the Feoffor.

A. covenants to make a lease to B. and his assigns for 21. years, the sense
of these words shall be taken that he shall make the Lease to B. or his
Assigns for 21. years, Plow. Com. fo. 289.

The defendant bound himself by Indenture to pay to the Plantiff a certain
sum, if so be that the Defendant did not enfeoffee the plantiffe nor his heirs
of certain Land when he came to his aunt, and the Plantiffe declared that the
Defendant came to his aunt, and the Plantiffe required him to enfeoffee him and
he did not enfeoffee him per quod actio. accrevit, and exception was taken to
this declaration because the condition was in a disjunctive, that is to say,
that the Plantiff should have the sum if the Defendant did not enfeoffee him
nor his heirs, and he has said that he did not enfeoffe him, not speaking of
the Feoffment to his heirs, and if he had performed any of the parts' of the
disjunctive, the Plantiffe might not have the debt, but the Count was holden
very good, notwithstanding that exception for the plantiff might not have an
heir, during his life, so that although the condition in words be disjunctive,
yet forasmuch as the Plantiffe was alive, in sense it was not disjunctive, for
he might not have an heir being alive, and the sense of the words are to be
taken to enfeoffee the Plantiffe if he be alive, and if he were dead then to
enfeoffee his heirs, and as the Plantiffe may not have an heir during his
life, so here in the case above B. may not have an executor during his life;
and as the condition there in the disjunctive to enfeoffee at a time to come
him or his heirs was taken to enfeoffe him at the time limited if he were
alive, and if he were dead at the time then to his heirs, so here the Covenant
to make a lease at a time to come to him and his assigns copulatively shall be
taken disjunctively in sense, that is to say to him if he be alive, and to his
assigns if he be dead, Plow. com. fo. 289. Of uses in esse and in futuro.


A. makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use of D. for life, and after to the use of
him which shall be his first son in tail, and for default of such issue to the
use of B. in tail, and for default of such issue to the use of C. in fee. In
this case forthwith by the Feoffment D. has estate for life, the remainder to
B. in tail, the remainder to C. in Fee, and no estate is put in abeyance, or
left in the Feoffees, but if after A. has issue a son, then the possibility
which the Feoffee had, becomes to an estate in Law, and forthwith the statute
of 27. H 8. cap. 10. executes the possession according to the limitation of
the use.

But if Tenant for life be disseised before the birth of the son, and after he
has issue a son, now nothing vesteth in the son, because there ought to be a
use in esse before that the Statute can execute the possession. But who shall
enter to remoove the impediment and to restore the privity of the estates?
Surely if the tenant for life shall re-enter, he shall revive all the former
estates, which the statute of 27 H. 8. has executed to the former uses in
tail, and for that also the statute transferreth the estate of the Land to the
son in tail, for that is the privity which the Statute requires, (scil.)
privity of estates which the same statute has executed upon the lymitation of
the uses in the same conveyance before, and after the death of tenant for life
the Feoffees may enter and revive the use, and as lessee for years or for life
upon condition to have fee may not have increase and enlargement of his estate,
but upon the privity of the estate of the Lessee, so no remainder of a future
use may be transferred in estate by force of the Act before the particular
estates executed by the statue upon lymitation of uses in the same conveyances
be recontinued, but if Tenant for life make a Feoffment in fee, or die before
the birth of the son his remainder is destroyed, as if a Lease be made for life
the remainder to the right heirs of I. S if lessee for life make a Feoffement
or die, during the life of I. S. the remainder to the right heirs is
destroyed, and that is the best construction of the statute of 27 H. 8.

The chief Baron said that Scintilla juris which is mentioned in 17 Eliz. is
like to Sir Tho. Mores Eutopia, and they said that after this Statute no trust
or confidence was reposed in the Feoffees, for now as Walinslow said, the
Feoffees non possunt agere aut permittere aliquid in prejudice of ceste qu^
use, before the Statute the office of the Feoffe was to execute the estate
according to the use, but now the statute has taken all and Walinslow said
even as a fountain gives to every one that comes in their time unto it their
just measure of water, so likewise the first estate and seisin in fee given by
the first Feoffment to the feoffees is sufficient to all persons to whom any
use present or future is limited a competent measure of estate in their time
proportionable to their estate which they shall have in the use, so that the
first seisin by force of the Feoffment, whereby the fee-simple is given to the
Feoffees, shall be sufficient to serve all their particular uses, as well
future as present in their several times, and nothing shall remain in the
Feoffees, but Walinslow said, that all the estate shall be first vested in
those which are in rerum natura, and the possession shall be vested in him
which has the future use when that comes in esse by force of the first
livery, and shall divide the estates which were conjoined before.

If a feoffment in fee be made to the use of one for life and after to the use
of the right heirs of I. S. the fee simple of the land shall be in abeyance,
and before the Statute, if a man had made a feoffment to the use of one for
years, and after to the use of the right heirs of I. S. the Fee-simple of the
land shall be in abeyance. And before the Statute, if a man had made a
Feoffement to the use of one for years, and after to the use of the right
heirs of I. S. this limitation had been good, for the Feoffees shall remain
tenants of the Frank-tenement, but such limitation after the Statute is void,
for then the Frank-tenement shall be in suspense, for nothing may remain in
the Feoffees. But he said that those remainders in futuro were divested and
destroyed by the Feoffment of Tenant for life, and although the remainders are
in custody of the Law, yet they ought to be subject to the rules of the law,
for the law will never preserve any thing against the rule of the Law, and
because that the rule of the law is, that he in remainder ought to take the
Land when the particular estate determines, or otherwise the remainder shall
be void, and in this case for so much as by the feoffment of tenant for life
their estate was determined and title of entry given for the forfeiture and
then those in the future remainder were not in esse to take it, for this cause
these remainders in futuro, by this matter ex post facto were all utterly
destroyed and made void. And no diversity when the estate of tenant for life
determines by the death of tenant of life, and when it determines in right by
his forfeiture, for in both cases entry is given to him in the next remainder,
and then if he may not take the Land when the particular estate determines,
the remainders void.

A gift in tail was made to A. C. the remainder to the right heirs of A. S.
the Donee made a Feoffment to B. in fee, and after A. S. dies, his right heir
shall never have the remainder nor any Charter that concerns it, for the
estate of the Land was by the feoffment of S. in tail divested and
discontinued, and all estates vested in the Feoffee, and there was not any
particular estate either in esse nor in right, to support the remainder when
that shall fall, for by the Feoffment of S. in tail, his right heir was
utterly gone.

But if tenant in tail were deceased and dies, that shall not toll the
remainder, for there is a right of particular estate to support the right of
the remainder, but when tenant in tail made a feoffment, no right remained in
him, and so note that there ought to be a person in esse of both parties (viz.)
that shall be seized to use, and that shall take the use, so that there needs
not only to have a use limited, but a person capable of the use when this
Statute transferreth the possession thereunto, and therefore if a person
wants, it is impossible to have the possession executed by this Statute to
one which is not in rerum natura, for the Statute says etc.

If by a Feoffment to uses the estate shall be utterly out of the Feoffees, and
all vest in them which have the present uses, then the future use shall never
rise, for it is impossible that it should be raised out of the possession of
ceste que use, for a use may not be raised out of a use, for if A. enfeoffe B.
in fee, to the use of C, and his heirs, with proviso that if D. pay to C. 100
l. that C. and his heirs shall stand seized to the use of D. and his heirs,
that is utterly void, for the future use ought to be raised out of the estate
of the Feoffee, and not out of the estate of ceste que use.

And it was holden that the Feoffees after the Statute had possibility to serve
the future use when it comes in esse, and that in the mean time all the uses
in esse shall be vested, and when the future use comes in esse, then the
Feoffees (if the possession be not disturbed by disseisin or other means)
shall have sufficient estate and seisin to serve the future use when that shall
come in esse to be executed by force of the Statute, and that seisin and
execution ought to concur and meet together at one self same time, and in
such case when the future use comes in esse, the Feoffees shall have by force
of the act, a qualified estate sufficient to serve the future use.

All the Justices and Barons of the Chequer, but Periam, Walmsley, Gaudy,
concluded etc. that forasmuch as the Statute of 27. H. 8. does not extend but
to uses in esse and to persons in esse, and not to any uses that depend in
possibility only, for this cause these contingent uses in the case at bar
remain so long as they depend in possibility only at the common Law, and by
consequence they may be destroyed or discontinued before they come in esse, and
by all such means as Uses might have been discontinued or destroyed by the
common law.

And all the Justices and Barons of the Chequer agreed with the chief Baron
and VValmsley in this point, that these remainders limited in use in the case
at the bar, shall follow the rule and reason of estates executed in possession
by the common law, and therefore they al only agreed that if the estate for
life in the case at the bar, had been determined by the death of the Feoffees
before the birth of the eldest son, that the said remainders in futuro were
void and never shall take effect, although that the son were borne afterward,
for a remainder in use ought to vest either during the particular estate, or eo
instante when the particular estate ends, as well as estates in possession.

All these cases last before touching contingent uses, see Coke prima pars fo.
120. Chudleis case unto the end of the said case.

If a future use come not in esse during the particular estate, then it shall
never take effect, because it is in nature of a remainder, which ought to take
effect and vest during the particular estate, and no use shall be executed by
27 H. 8. which are limited against the rule of the common law. A use is in
nature of a remainder, and therefore in the raising of uses, the order and rule
of the common law touching remainders in all things must be observed, but upon
and by the limitation of a devise or limitation of a use, a remainder may
commence upon a condition, which goes to the destruction of the particular
estate, and one fee-simple may depend upon another.


If a man at this day make a feoffement in Fee to the use of A. for years, and
after to the use of the wife of B. which shall be, this limitation to the right
heirs, and to the wife is void, because if it had been void it had been limited
in possession. So in the same case if the use be limited to A. for life and
after to the use of the right heirs of B. or to the wife of B. which shall be,
if A. dies and then B. dies, or takes a wife, this remainder limited to the
right heirs or to the wife of B. is void for it were void, if it had been
limited in possession. And 72 H. 8. intended to restore the good and the
ancient common law, and not to give more privilege to the Execution of uses
then to estates which are executed by the ancient common law, vide fo. 51.

In proof whereof it was resolved by all the Justices of England, Pasch, 35.
Eliz. in the Earl of Bedfords case, which was such, Francis Earl of Bedford
made a Feoffment in fee of diverse Manors, to the use of himself for years,
and after to the use of Jo. L. Russel, his son and heir apparent, and the
heirs males of his body begotten, and for default of such issue to the right
heirs of the said Earl, and afterward the said Jo. L Russel died without
issue male in the life of the said Earl, and it was resolved that the use and
the estate limited by way of remainder ought to vest during the particular
estate, prima pars Co. fo. 129. 130.

If a man make a feoffment in fee to the use of himself for life and after to
the use of his first Son to be begotten in tail, and tenant for life dies, or
makes a feoffment in fee before the birth of his son, the remainder is
destroyed for ever, and so in this case, if tenant for life die, his wife
privily with child, and then a son is borne, that issue shall not have the use
ut opinor.

A Lease to A. for life, the remainder to the right heirs of B. B. having a
daughter dies, his wife being privily enceint with a Son, the daughter
claims that by purchase, and therefore the son born afterward shall never
divest it, Coke. 1. pars. fo. 95. Shellies case.

Forfeiture, De pace regis and regni tit. forfeiture fo. 222.
THe King shall have all the goods of Felons which be condemned, What goods of
Felons the King shall have.
and which be fugitive (viz.) all their goods moveable and unmovable, for the
King shall have the corn growing upon the land of the felon attainted, and the
issues and profits of the Land which he has in his own right, or in the right
of his wife during the time of his life, Forfeiture^ upon flying
or until he does purchase his pardon. But touching the profits of fugitives
lands there is a difference between a flying presented before a Coroner, and a
flying found by verdict upon an acquittall, for upon a flying presented before
the Coroner, he shall forfeit the profits of his lands until his death, or
until he be acquit, or until he has purchased the Kings pardon. But upon a
flying found by verdict upon acquittall he shall forfeit no issues of his
Lands, for by his acquittal the Land is discharged, and consequently the issues
thereof.

The law has restrained offenders in treason and Felony to certain times to
make alienation of their Lands and goods, and has prefixed limits, From what
time forfeiture of lands shall have relation.
whereunto the forfeiture of their said lands and goods shall have relation,
and yet with this difference, that as soon as any treason or Felony is
committed, the offender therein is restrained to make any alienation of his
lands, for then it is not his land, but by the committing of the treason or
felony, he has forfeited all the estate he had therein, and therefore if between
the time of the committing of the treason or felony, and of the offenders
attainder thereof, the offender does make an alienation or assurance of his
land after the time that the offender shall be attainted of the same treason or
Felony, the said assurance shall be void whether the same attainder be by
verdict, confession, or utlary, for the forfeiture of the land shall have
relation from the time of the offense committed.

From what time the forfeiture of goods shall have relation.
The forfeiture of Goods and Chattels shall not look back so far as forfeiture
of lands, nor shall have relation from the time of the treason or felony
committed, but from the time of the attainder of the treason or Felony, and
therefore if one do commit treason or felony, and in the mean time between the
treason or felony committed and the offenders attainder thereof, the offender
does give away his goods, this is a good gift, for as yet they be not forfeit
but be his own to maintain himself and his family, until he be attainted,
and by the law adjudged unworthy to possess or enjoy goods or to have
sustenance, and therefore if upon a fugam fecit presented before the Coroner,
one does forfeit his goods, he shall not forfeit those goods he had at the time
of the felony committed, but shall only forfeit those goods which he had at
that day, when the fugam fecit was presented against him: and in like sort, if
one that is indicted of Felony be acquitted thereof by verdict, and in their
verdict the Jury find that the Prisoner fled for the felony, in this case the
Prisoner shall forfeit those goods which he had the day of the verdict given,
and not any goods which he had before. And so it is, if one be convict by
verdict, the goods shall be forfeited, which the offender had the day of the
verdict given and not those he had before: and he that is outlawed of treason
or felony shall forfeit those goods which he has at the time of the Exigent
awarded, and not those which he had before and has aliened. But if a man
commit treason or felony and is arrested thereof, and as he is carrying to a
Justice to be examined, or to the Goal by the Constables or others, do break
away, or in making of rescous or resistance is slain by those which do so
carry him, because he will not yield, and be justified by the law, in this case
those goods shall be forfeited which he had at the time of the felony
committed: and so it is, if one commit a felony, and when the Sheriff, Coroner,
Constable, or others, do attempt to apprehend him, he is slain because he does
resist and will not yield to be arrested, the goods shall be forfeited which he
has at the time of the felony committed.

Note, this difference is to be observed in the seizing of a Felons goods; for
where the goods be forfeited before the felony tried (as where one is found
guilty before the Coroner of the death of another, or where it is found before
the Coroner that one did fly for a felony) in such case the goods shall be
presently seized upon the forfeiture of them, though there be no conviction of
the felon, and upon such forfeiture the goods be presently the Kings, and the
felon is to have no maintenance out of them. Daltons office of Sheriffs, tit.
forfeiture fo. 32.

And yet lest the goods should be disorderly wasted imbesseled or sold away,
the Sheriff etc. before the attainder of the felon may take surety that the
goods be not imbesseled etc. (ss.) may cause the owner or some of his friends
to find surety, and for want of sureties, the Sheriff etc. may seize them and
deliver them to the town (ss.) to some of the neighbors of the town where
the goods were, by them safely to be kept, and by the opinion of M. Brook tit.
forfeiture 44. this order ought to be observed concerning the goods of every
one which commits felony, until he be attainted, but yet the felon must
have reasonable maintenance out of them for himself and his family in the
mean time, Plowden 68.

Sur Statute Merchant of the body, Lands and Goods. Statute Staple. of the
body, Lands and Goods. Recognizance Elegit. Of the moietie of the Lands and all the goods. Executions.
Of the moiety of the Lands and of all the Goods of the Debtor.

Capias ad satisfact. Of the body only. Fieri facias. Of the goods only. Levare
Facias. Of the profits of the Lands and Goods.


Statute Merchant.
AN execution final is, when the Defendants lands are extended or his goods
sold and delivered to the Plantiff, who accepting this in satisfaction ends the
suit.

Execution final and quousque.
An execution with a quousque and not final is in the case of a Capias ad
satisfaciendum where the body is taken to the intent to satisfy the Plantiffe,
but is no satisfaction but a pledge for the debt.

Note, that the statute Merchant is a bond or obligation of record acknowledged
before the Major of London, York, Bristoll, or of other City, or before the
Bayliffe of any Borough, or Town, or before other persons there to that
purpose appointed, and it is sealed with the seal of the Debtor and of the
King, the form whereof, see Wests pre. 106.

If a Statute Merchant be not sealed by the party non valet, 6 R. 2. Fitz.
Execution 131.

If a man be bound in a Statute Merchant, and do not pay the debt at the day,
execution shall be done thereof in this manner. How the Statute Merchant shall
be executed, the money being unpaid at the day.
First the Connusee may come to the Major or other Officer before whom the
Statute was acknowledged, and pray him to certify the same into the Chancery,
under his seal etc. and if he will not certify it, then a Writ of Certiorare
must be sued forth of the Chancery, directed to the said Officer of the place
where the Statute was knowledged to certify the acknowledgement of the same
Statute into the petty-bag Office in the Chancery, Executions shall be of body.
and upon the certification a Writ of Execution (ss.) a capias shall go out
against the body only of the Cognisor (si laicus sit) to take his body, and
command the Sheriff to keep him safely in Prison until he has agreed for, or
fully satisfied the debt. But the debtor after he is taken has liberty given
him within a quarter of a year to sell his lands and goods to discharge his
debts, and if he do not agree for his said debt within the next quarter, Lands
and Goods.
then all his lands and goods shall be delivered (by the Sheriff) to the
Creditors upon a reasonable extent to hold until the debt be paid, and yet
nevertheless the body of the debtor shall remain in Prison until the debt be
paid.

And this Writ may be returnable into the Court of Common Pleas or into the
Kings Bench.

But upon the return by the Sheriff of that Shire to whom the capias was
directed quod laicus est, and non est inventus in Bal. sua, then shall go out
an extent against all the Connusors lands and goods, and against his body, see
the Register 247.

And upon such an extent come to the Sheriffs hands, the Sheriff shall or may
presently cause the moveable goods of the debtor to be prized and sold, as far
as the debt does amount, and the debt without delay to be paid, Stat. Acton
Burnell, 13 E. 1.

Note, that if the Sheriff can find no buyer, he shall cause the same goods to
be delivered to the Creditor at a reasonable price, as much as does amou^t to
the debt, and if the Prizers of the goods do set an over high price to the
damage of the Creditor, then shall the things so prized be delivered to the
prizors at the same price, and they shall be forthwith answerable to the
Creditor for his debt. But the Sheriff must sell the goods to them which offer
most for them. And yet if the Sheriff shall sell them at an underprice, it
seems the Debtor has no remedy, Fitz. Extent 7. see the Statute of Acton
Burnell.

If the Debtor have no movables, whereupon the debt may be levied then shall
his body be taken and kept in prison until he has made agreement, 13 E. 1.

If the Sheriff do not return the Capias, or do return that the Writ came too
late, or that he directed it to the Bayliffe of some Franchise, he shall be
punished and yield damages to the party grieved according to the Statute of
Westminster, 2. cap. 39.

If the Sheriff return that the Debtor is a Clark, then shall there go out an
extent against his lands and goods only, to be delivered upon a reasonable
extent as aforesaid, but his body shall not be taken.

If the Debtor found sureties (which acknowledged themselves to be principal
debitors after the day passed) they shall be ordered in all things as the
principal debitors (scil.) for their bodies and delivery of lands and goods,
Stat de mercator.

But so long as the debt may be fully levied of the goods of the Debtor, the
sureties shall receive no loss, Stat. de Acton Burnell.

And if any of these Debitors (being in prison) shall happen to escape, the
Sheriff or Jailer must answer the body or the debt, and therefore it behooveth
the Sheriff and Goler, that the prisoners be safely kept, Statute de mercator.

Note, that when any Statute Merchant is certified into the Chancery, and
thereupon a Writ awarded to the Sheriff, and returned into the Common place,
and the Statute there once showed, that howsoever the process after the same
showing be discontinued, that at what time the party sueth to have the process
recontinued, and to have execution of the same Statute, that the Justices of
the Bench where the Statute was once showed, may upon the same Record make and
award full Execution of the Statute Merchant aforesaid, without having the
sight thereof another time, 5 H 4. cap. 12.

And the Dier fo. 180. Terminum Pasche anno 2. Eliz. where the Connusee of a
Statute Merchant having the same certificate into the Chancery, upon a
certiorari directed to the Major, thereupon sued a Capias against the Connusor
returnable into the Bench, at which day the Sheriff returned, non est
inventus, and the connusee there showed the Statute (as he ought) and had
another Capias before the return whereof the Connusee died, and it was doubted
whether his Executors should have a scire facias against the Connusor, or that
they should begin of new (ss.) to sue a new special Writ out of the Chancery
to the Major to make Certificate (notwithstanding the first Certificate) and to
have out of the Chancery a new Capias or no, or whether (at the suite of the
Executors) the Justices of the Bench might have awarded an alias Capias or a
Writ of extent upon the first proceeding or not. But it was agreed by the Court
that no Scire facias did lie in this case, but upon oath made by the Executors
in the Chancery, that the debt is not satisfied, they shall have a new
Certiorari to the Major etc. to make a new Certificate of the Statute, and so
to begin all anew again, Dier 180.

Satute Staple.
THe Statute Staple is of two sorts, or in two manners, the one by force of the
Statute 27 E. 3. cap. 9. the other by force of the Statute 23 H. 8. cap. 6.

The first is an obligation of Record acknowledged before the Major of the
Staple in presence of one of the Constables of the same Staple, and is sealed
with the seal of the Staple and Seal of the party, but such Statute Staple
shall not be taken but only amongst Merchants of the same Staple, and for
Marchandizes of the same Staple, 23 H. 8. ca. 6.

The other is an obligation also of Record and of the same nature and force as
the first is, as to the execution thereof. But it is acknowledged before the
one of the chief Justices, and in their absence (out of Term) before the Major
of the Staple at Westminster, and the Recorder of London, and is sealed with
their Seals (viz.) with the Seal of the Connusor, of the King, and of one of
the said Justices, or of the Major and Recorder, 23 H. 8. cap. 6.

The forms of these Statutes Staple vide, West. 108. 109. Note, that all
Statutes Merchant and Staple shall be brought to the Clarke of the
Recognizances within 4 Months and enrolled, within six months, or else such
Statute shall be void against Purchasors etc. 27. Eliz. cap. 4.

A Statute Staple must be certified into the Chancery in the like manner as a
Statute Merchant, and upon that Certificate a Writ of execution shall go
presently forth both against the body (si laicus sit) and against the lands and
goods of the Connusor returneable in the Chancery in the petty-bagg Office
there (and not into the Court of common Pleas or Kings Bench as the Writs of
Execution upon a Statute Merchant shall, and upon the Writ of execution, the
Sheriff shall take the body of the Connusor, and shall also per sacramentum
proborum and legalium hominum and juxta verum valorem, Fitz. 131 d. presently
extend and price, and shall seize into the Kings hands, his Lands, his Goods
and Chattels, and that extent and prizement or valuation of the Lands and goods
shall return and certify into the Chancery as aforeraid, and thereupon the
Reconusee shall have another Writ called a liberate to the Sheriff out of the
Chancery, to deliver to the Conusee those lands and goods to the value of his
debt, and upon that liberate delivered to the Sheriff, then such lands and
goods as are taken in execution shall be delivered to the Connusee, by the
Sheriff and not before. And this execution shall be made in manner as is before
declared upon a Statute Merchant 27 E 3. cap. 9. Plow. 62. b.

And so note, that upon a statute Merchant the connusor shall be imprisoned
for half a year, and if he does not sell his lands within the same time for
to pay his debts, then his lands shall be delivered to the obligee until his
debt be satisfied. And upon statute staple the Debtor or connusor after that
he is taken shall not have liberty to sell his lands and goods within the
half year, as he shall have upon Statute Merchant; But by force of this
statute Staple, if the money be not paid at the day forthwith after certificate
thereof in the chancery, the creditor may have Execution of the body, Lands and
goods of the Debtor, (ss.) the connusor shall be imprisoned, and all his lands
and goods shall be extended instantly, 27 E. 3 cap. 9,

Also note, that upon Statute staple the extent shall be first made and
returned, and aftet a Writ of liberate shall be awarded, but delivery shall not
be made at the beginning until the thing appears certainly by the return of
the Sheriff, Plow. 62. b.

All obligations and specialties made to the King or to his use for any cause,
shall be of the same force as Statute Staple is, 33 H. 8. cap 59. and so for
obligations made by parsons for their first fruits 26 H. 8. cap. 39.

The lands of many Accomptants to the King shall be liable and put in execution,
as if they had been bound in Statute Staple 13. Eliz. Cap. 4.

The heir that claims by the gift of his Ancestor, shall be bound to pay the
Kings debt, 33 H. 8. cap. 39.

The heir in tail by the same Statute shall be liable to pay the Kings debt
due by his Ancestor Plow. 240. b. 249, b. 554. b. Fitz. 217. c.

But if tenant in tail become in debt to the King by receipt of the Kings
moneys or otherwise, unless that it be by judgment, recognisance, obligation
or other specialty, and dies, the land in the seisin of the issue in tail by
force of the said act of 33 H. 8. shall not be extended for such debt of the
King. For the Statute of 33 H. 8. extends only to the said 4. cases, and all
other debts of the King remain at the common law.

Execution upon Statute.
IF Tenant in Tail become in debt to the King by one of the said 4. ways
(scil.) by judgment, recognisance, obligation or other specialty, and dies,
and before any prosces, or extent, the issue in tail (bona fide) alien or
Lease the Land intailed, now this Land shall not be extended by force of the
said Act of 33 H. 8. C. 7. 22.

So where debt was originally due to a subject, and after comes or accrues to
the King by reason of attainder, Out-lawry, Forfeiture, gift of the party, or
by any other way or mean, such debt is not within the said Statute of 33 H. 8.
to charge lands intailed in the possession of the heir in tail, Co. 7. 22.

But lands in fee-simple were extendable at the common law, for debt of the
King, into whose hands soever they should come, and therefore as to them the
said Statute of 33 H. 8. was not but a declaration of the ancient law, Co. 7.
21.

Two Joyntenants in fee the one of them being a debtor of the King dies, the
other shall hold discharged Fitz. Execut. 113.

The heir shall be chargeable to pay debt of the King, although he be not
named, or that this word Heir be not comprised within the recognizance,
obligation or specialty, 33 H. 8. cap, 39.

The King shall be preferred in his suit and execution before common persons by
the Statute, 9 H. 3. cap. 18. and 33. H. 8. cap. 39.

Debtor of the King possessed of a Lease sells it bona fide. This binds
the King, for it is but a Chattel, Co. 8. 172.

Note, that the King shall levy the sum for which any is chargeable unto him
not only against the party himself (scil.) of his body, his lands and goods in
his own hands, but in the hands of his Heirs, Assigns, Executors or
Administrators, and if he has no Executors or Administrators, then in the
hands of the possessors of the goods of the dead.

What Lands and goods shall be extended or taken by the Sheriff in Execution
upon Statute etc. in case of a common person.
NOte, that upon Statute Merchant, or Staple, all the Fee-simple Lands which
the said Connusor had at the time of the said Statute acknowledged, or at any
time after, shall be liable to the said Statute into whose hands they shall ever
come afterward by alienation, Feoffement, or otherwise, Stat. de mercator 13
E. 1. 27 E. 3. cap. 9. 23 H. 8. Co. 3. 12.

But if the Debtor die, the body of his heir shall not be taken, but his Fee
simple lands which descends to him from the Connusor shall be taken (in form
aforesaid) if he be of full age, or when he comes to full age, until the
debt be levied, Statut. de mercator.

And so was the common Law before, that in debt against the heir, the Plaintiff
shall have all the Land which discendeth to the heir in execution, and yet he
shall not have then execution of any part of the land against the father
himself.

Note, that it has been holden that the heir shall not be charged where the
Executors have assets, Fitz. Executors, 25. Br. Debt. 237. 17 E. 4. 13. Plow.
439. 440.

But at this day the law seems otherwise (scil.) that it is at the election
of the Creditor to sue the heir or Executors, when both have assets, 4 E. 4.
25. 22 H. 6. 4. 10 H. 7. 8. Doct. and Stud. 153. Dier. 204. Plowden. 439. 440.

Also it seems that if the heir does not confess the action, and show the
certainty of the assets which he has by descent, but plead nothing by descent,
or is condemned by default, that there the Plaintiff shall have execution of
his other lands, or of his goods, or of his body, by cap. ad satisfac. Plow.
440.

Note, that Fee-simple lands of the heir which he has by descent, the day of
the Writ purchased or after, shall be liable, but otherwise if he has aliened
before the Writ purchased, unless it be by covin. Co. 5. 60.

Possession in law discendeth upon the heir shall charge him. So where he
enters upon a condition, Br. assetts, 8.

Reversion upon an estate for life discends upon the heir that shall charge
him, Br. Assets. 12. 19.

A reversion shall be put in execution, and the judgment shall be cum
acciderit, and in the mean time of the rent, Di. 373. Fitz. Assetts. 237.

Note, in debt a man shall have execution of no land but of that which the
Defendant has the day of the judgment given, 2. H. 4. Fitz. Executors, 24.

If a man sue a Statute Merchant of parcel of the Lands, in name of all the
Lands, he shall not have other execution afterward, Fitz. Execution. 13. 4.

If I have but one Acre by descent, I shall be charged with 1000 l. by
obligation made by my father, by Belk. 40 E. 15. Fitz. Execution 32, vide and
quaere. For it seems that the heir may confess what he has by dscent and
demand judgment whether of more then of the value thereof he ought to be
charged.

Lands intailed are liable but during the life of the Connusor, as if tenant in
tail be bound in a Satute, or Recognizance, the land tail shall be bound
during his life, but it is not bound against the issue in tail Br. Recog. 7.
yet if the issue in tail enfeoffe a stranger, now execution shall be against
the Feoffee 19 E. 3. Fitz receipt. 112.

But if Tenant in tail acknowledge a Statute or Recognizance, and after alien,
the lands in the hands of the Feoffee, or alienee, shall be subvert to this
Statute or Recognizance, Co. 1. 62. and 2. 52. 8 H. 7. 89.

Copy hold Lands are not liable, nor shall be extended upon a Statute or
Recognizance, Lease or Term for life shall be extended.

Lease for term of years and all other goods and Chattels of the Connusor,
or Debtor, are liable and shall be extended (ss.) such which the Connusor etc.
has in his own possession and to his own use at the time of the execution
sued or awarded. But sale of Chattels (bona-fide) after judgment, and before
execution awarded is good, but not after execution awarded, as appears in 2
H. 4. fo. 14. per curiam.

Yet by Babington 7 H. 6. Br. execution 116. if a man be condemned in debt or
bound in a Statute, the goods which he has, the day of the judgment or
knowledge of the Recognisance shall be bound to the execution, in whose hands
soever they shall come, quod non fuit negatum and Co. 7. 39. a every execution
in judgment of law has relation and retrospect to the judgment. But a
fraudulent conveyance or gift of Lands or goods shall not advoid any execution,
vide le statutes 50 E. 3. ca. 6. 1 R. 2. ca. 9. 2 R. 2. Stat. 2. ca. 3. 3 H. 7.
ca. 4. 13 Eliz. ca. 5. and. 7 and les livers. 43 E. 3. fol. 3. Dier 295. and
Co. 3. 81. 82. 83.

Lands in ancient demesne are liable to the Statute, vide Fitz. Execution 118.
and return 109. contra.

Lands or goods holden jointly by the Connusor with a stranger, and the
connusor is condemned in damages and dies before execution, those lands or
goods coming to the stranger by survivor are not extendable, Br. execution
126. 148. 13 H. 7. 22. a.

Lands of a wife are extendable during the coverture by debt of the husband, 15
H. 7. fo. 14.

Rent may be delivered in execution Fitz. avowry 237 Exec. 63.

Rent extent by release of the party may be extended, Co. 7. ^8. 39. As if a
man has judgment to recover debt or damages by that the rent which he has of
any estate of Frank-tenement is liable to it, and therefore although that after
judgment that be released, yet that may be extended. But a man shall never have
a thing extended upon an execution; except that he may grant and assign the
same thing by Shelly, 28 H. 8. fo. 7.

So the profits of an Office or other thing which may not be granted or
assigned over shall not be extended, Dier fo. 7.

Goods demised, pawned, or pledged, may not be taken in execution, for his
debt, that demised or pawned them during or term that they are s^ demised or
pawned 22 E. 4. fo. 10. 34 H. 8 Br. pledges 28. As as if a man bona fide lease
his Sheep or Oxen for years, or if he deliver his goods in pledge and after
shall be condemned in personal actions, there such Sheep or goods shall not be
taken and put in execution until the lease be determined, or the money paid
for the pledge, Br. distress 75.

So it seems of Goods which are distrained for just cause, as for rent,
amercement, damage feasant, and such like, and are impounded, they are now in
custodialegis, as long as they are so, they may not be taken in execution Br.
pledges 28.

If the Connusor enfeoffe the King, that land is discharged from execution,
Fitz. 266. so all other lands of the King are exempted from distresses and
executions, Plowden. 242. b.

If many men be severally seized of lands, and they all severally join in one
recognizance, Satute Merchant or Statute staple, in this case the connusee may
not extend the land of any of the Connusors only, but all the Connusors ought
equally to be charged, and the one of them alone shall not bear all the
burden, because they are all in equal degree, and in executions which
concern the realty and charge of the land, the Sheriff may not do execution
of the Land of the one alone, Co. 3. 13. a 14.

When the Connusor has aliened part of his land yet the Connusor himself at
the Will of the Connusee may be solely charged, because he himself is the
person which was the debtor and which was bound, and therefore he and his lands
may be solely charged, Co. 3. 14. Br. suite. 10 12.

And as to a purchasor of lands, although their said Lands after the judgment,
recognisance, or Statute be subject to the execution, yet such purchasors have
greater privileges given to them by the law, then the Connusor himself or his
heirs have. So that if land of a purchasor be only extended for the entire
debt, such purchasor shall have contribution against all the others of the
purchasors, and against the connusor, or his heir, but note, that by this word,
contribution, it is not to be understood that the others shall give or allow to
him any thing by way of contribution, but ought to be intended, that the
purchasor or party which has his lands only extended for all, may by Audita
querela or scire facias (as the case requires) defeat the execution, and
thereby shall be restored to all the mean profits, and drive the Connusee to
sue execution of all the land, so that in this manner every one shall be
contributory, that is, the land of every tertenant shall be equally extended,
co. 3. 14.

But if the Connusor enfeoffee the connuse of parcel of the land, and a
stranger of another parcel, and reserve parcel in his hands, now the connusee
shall not have execution against the stranger (or any other Feoffee, for all
shall be extinct against the Feoffees) but yet against the connusor the
connusee shall have execution of parcel which remains in his hands.

If connusor of Statute Merchant or statute Staple be taken, and die in
Execution, yet the connusee shall have execution of his lands and goods co. 5.
86. 87. Fitz. 246. b.

If the connusor upon a Statute etc. be taken in execution and escape, yet his
goods and lands upon the same statute may be extended for the escape, and the
action which the Plantiff had against the Sheriff for the escape is not
satisfaction for the debts co. 5. 86.

By the statute of 3. Jacobi. cap. 8. no execution shall be stayed or delayed
by Writ of Error, or superseded for reversing of any judgment in any action of
Debt, except the party which sued such Writ of error with two sufficient
sureties be first bound to the party for whom such judgment is given, to
prosecute the said Writ of error with effect, and to pay all the debt, damages
and costs etc. if the judgment be affirmed, and also costs and damages for
such delay.

And therefore if a man be condemned in any court, and his body put in
execution, and after he procures a Writ of corpus cum causa, or certiorari to
be directed to the Sheriff to remove his body, there the Sheriff upon the said
Writ ought to return the truth, (scil) that his prisoner is condemned by
judgment given against him, upon which the Prisoner shall be forthwith
remanded to prison, there to remain until he has satisfied the Plantiff, 2
H. 5. cap. 2. Fitz. 151. e.

If a statute be acknowledged to 2. and the one of them after purchase lands of
the connusor, then it seems that the said statute has lost his force against
both, see the Register. 147.

If execution be sued of the body, and of the land, and after the connusor
enfeoffeth the connusee of the Land, or surrender parcel descended to him, in
all these cases, the body shall be discharged, for by discharge of part of the
thing in Execution, all is discharged: Plow. 72. b*

When the extent upon a Statute is satisfied and ran out by efluxion of time,
the Connusor may enter again. Co. 4. 67.

But when the extent is satisfied by casual profit the Connusor must have a
Scire facias, ibid.

Defeasance to a Statue made after execution is good, and defeateth as well the
Statute as the execution thereupon, Co. 6. 13.

But note, where the Statute of Actor Burnell is, that if the Prisors of the
goods of the Connusor prize them too high (in favor of the Debtor and to the
damage of the Creditor) the things so prized shall be delivered to the Prisors
by the same price, and they to yield the Credtior his debt: these Statutes are
penal and extend not to any other Writs of execution, but upon the Statute
Merchant or Staple, or recognizance, and therefore upon a Writ of Elegit or
other Writ of execution upon judgment, if the extenders or prisors praise the
lands or goods, too high, the Plantiff (scil.) the Creditor has no remedy.
Benl. 4. P. and M.

Note, that when the lands or goods are delivered to the extenders, they
forthwith shall answer to the Creditor his debt by the words of the Statute,
and yet they shall not pay the money until the days assessed and limited in
the extent. Plow. 205. b.

If the Debtor complain that his goods or lands were sold or delivered to the
Connusee at too low a rate, yet he has no remedy. (Stat of Actor Bur.) for in
such cases the Debtor may pay the money and recover his lands and good. 15 H.
7. 15.

The creditor may well refuse to accept, because the Sheriff will not deliver
but parcel of the lands of the Connusor, for if he accept it he shall be
concluded to demand all afterward, Fitz h. execution. 84. 88.

Execution upon a Recognizance.
REcognizance is an obligation of record acknowledged in any Court of Record,
or before any Judge or other Officer having authority to take it, as before the
Judges of the Kings Bench, or of commons Pleas, the Barons of the exchequer,
the masters of Chancery, the Justices of Peace etc. and those which are mere
Recognizances are not sealed but are enrolled. And sometimes are sealed with
the seal of the party, and may be with condition annexed, or may be single
and then to have indentures of defeasance.

Also the King may by his commission give authority to any man to receive
connusance of another man, and to return it in Chancery, and by virtue of such
commission, if the man knowledge it before a commission any debt to another to
be paid to him at a certain day, and that certifieth into the Chancery with the
commission etc. Now upon certificate made of this connusance, if he does not
pay the debt at the day, he shall have an elegit upon this recognizance so
taken as well as if it were taken in the Chancery.

Upon a Recognizance there shall not go a Capias but a Scire facias returnable
in Chancery, and upon the return thereof, they use to award a Capias, a fieri
facicias or an Elegit at the election of the Connusee, 48 E. 3. fo. 14.

Upon a Recognisance the connusee may not have an action of debt against the
heir, for the recognizance is quod tunc vult and concedit, quod dictae
pecuniae summa de bonis and catall. terr. and tenementis etc. levetur so that
the charge is imposed upon his Goods and Lands, so that debt lies not thereupon
against the heir, co. 3. 15.

Yet upon a recognizance acknowledged to the use of the King, although the
words of the recognizance are de bon. and catt. terr. and tenemenntis etc.
levetur, the King shall have liable to his execution as well the body as the
lands and goods of his Debtor, see co. 3. 12. b and. 11 93. a.

Execution by force of a Recognizance (in case of a common person) shall be of
all the Goods and Chattels of the Connusor (except his Plowcattle and
implements of husbandry) and of the moietie of his lands, west. 103.

Note, that this word Recognizance, extends oftentimes in our Books to
Statute Merchant and Statute staple.

Execution by Elegit.
AN Elegit is a Writ judicial and lies for him that has recovered debt, or
damages in the Kings Court, and must be sued within the year, Terms de ley.

By force of an Elegit the Sheriff may take in Execution, and deliver unto the
party (scil.) unto the cerditor, the one half of the lands of the Connusor,
and all his good and chattels (praeter Boves and affros de carvia sua) saving
only his Oxen and beasts of his plow, until the debt be levied upon a
reasonable price or extent. And this is by force of the Statute of Westminster,
2. cap. 18. which is the first statute that did subject land to be taken in
execution or upon a recognizance, which is in the nature of a judgment, 13 E.
1 ca. 18. co. 3. 12.

This Statute of Westminster 2. which gives the Elegit, provideth quod
Vicecomes liberet ei omnia cattalla etc. and medietatem terrae suae quousque
debitum fuerit levat. per rationabile praetium, and extentum. which last word
praetium is to be referred to Chattels, and extentum to be referred unto lands
and rationabile praetium and extentum ought to be sound by inquisition and
verdict (scil.) the apprizing of the goods and the extent or valuation of the
Lands ought to be per sacram. 12. probor. and legalium hominum etc. for the
Sheriff himself cannot appraise the goods, nor value nor extend the lands upon
an elegit, neither can the Sheriff upon an elegit deliver any goods in
Execution, or extend any lands but only such as are appraised, and valued by
the Jurors of the inquisition, Co. 4. 74. otherwise it seems of all other
sorts of Executions.

The words of this Statute of Westminster, 2, ca. 18. are thus, liberent ei
medietaeem terrae debiteris, which by construction of Law is the moietie of all
that he has at the time of the judgment given or at any time after Co. 7. 19.
and by the equity of that Statute, the Sheriff may deliver to the Creditor or
Connusee the moietie of the Rents, Br. Parliament 10^. Plow. 178.

Also these words in the said statute, quousque debitum fuerit levatum, shall
be intended, be or might be levied, for if the Conusee or tenant by elegit, or
tenant by statute Merchant or Staple neglect to take the profits, yet when the
connusee might have been satisfied of his debt according to the extent, the
connusor shall have again his land, but it seems he may not enter in such
case, but is put to his scire facias, Co. 4. 82.

If Tenant by elegit be outed by a stranger, there the time shall on, and he is
put to his remedy against the trespasser. ibm.

If the Connusee be outed by wrong by the connusor, or by any other claiming
under him for life or years etc. the connusee shall hold over, co. 4, 66.

If the lands delivered in execution be lawfully recovered, taken, or evicted,
from the possession of the connusee before his debt be satisfied, he shall have
a scire facias, and upon that a new writ of Execution. Statute, 32 H. 8. ca. 5.
co. 3. 87.

This Statute of Westminster 2. cap 18. that gives the elegit, does not extend
to Copyhold Lands, for it should be prejudicial to the Lord, and against the
custom of the Manor, that a stranger should have interest in the land holden
by copy, where by the custom it may not be transferred to any without etc. co.
3. 9.

Term for years may not be extended by the Sheriff upon elegit, without
finding the beginning and certainty of the term by inquisition, for execution
by elegit ought to be by inquisition, and if it be found by the inquisition
that the debtor was possessed of certain land, per terminum quorandum annorum
ad tunc ventur. This inquisition is insufficient, for they ought to find the
certainty, and the reason is, because that after the debt satisfied the party
is to have again his term, if any part thereof remain, which certainty of
term ought to appear upon the return of the Sheriff, as it seems Cok. 4. 74.

But upon a Fieri facias the Sheriff may sell the lease or term without
reciting any certainty (scil) the Sheriff may recite that the Debtor has a
term of such a thing pro terminis diversis annorum ad nunc ventur. and that he
sold that by force of a fieri facias to I. S. and that is good, so if the
Sheriff sell all the interest that the Debtor has in the Land, that is good,
notwith^standing misreticall, for by the common intendment the Sheriff may not
have precise connuzance of the certainty of the commencement, and certainty of
the end of the term, but if he take upon him to recite the term and mistake
it, reciting it falsely, and sell the same term, this sale is void, because
there is not any such lease or term, yet false recital notwithstanding, if
the Sheriff sell also all the interest that the Debtor has in the said land,
that sale is good.

Also the Sherriff need not to mention any certainty of a term in his return
of Fieri facias, but generally quod fieri fecit de bon. and catall. etc.

Note, that it is at the election of the Sheriff to extend or to sell a lease
or term as long as it remains in the hands of the Debtor (scil.) the
Sheriff at his election may sell that quite, or he may extend and deliver it to
the Connusee at a certain yearly value (as of Frank-tenement) and there the
Connusee to whom the term is delivered has a property which is uncertain, and
the Lessee or connusor himself has another propetty, so that upon the payment
of the debt or upon the debt received of the revenew of that by the connusee,
the connusor shall have his term, Plow 5. 24 Co. 8. 171.

Note, there a diversity between the sale (by the Sheriff) of a term, and an
extent of a term, and that upon sale of a term by the Sheriff, the party
has no remedy to have his term again (if any remain) after the debt
satisfied as it seems.

Execution upon Capias ad satisfaciendum.
NOte, upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, although the Defendant be not found,
the Plantiff may not have another execution, 20. E. 2. and this capias ad
satisfaciendum, is only against the body, which the Sheriff must be sure to
keep safe, or else perhaps pay the debt himself, and therefore if the Sheriff
shall take a upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum to him directed, or shall have any
prisoner to him committed for debt upon any execution, and he after shall let
the Prisoner go at liberty before the debt be satisfied, the Creditor may
either have his action of debt against the Sheriff and shall recover his debt,
or the Creditor may have his action of the case against the Sheriff, 22 H. 7.
23 Fitz. 93. a. c.

And if the Prisoner do escape of his own wrong against the Will of the
Officer, although he escape and get out of sight or into another County, where
the Sheriff or Officer has no authority, yet if fresh suite be made and he be
taken again upon the fresh suite he shall be said to be still in execution, Co.
3. 52.

And if the Prisoner do escape against the will, and without the consent of the
Sheriff or his Officer, may then the Sheriff or his Officer take him again
where or whenever he can find him by virtue of the same Writ before the
return thereof, yea though it be in another County. And if that the prisoner
which so escaped be followed with fresh suite and taken again before an action
be brought by the Plantiff, against the Sherriff for the escape, it shall be
adjudged no escape, Co 3. 44. 52.

And if the Plantiff has brought his action against the Sheriff for the escape
before he has taken the prisoner again: Or if upon the escape the Sherriff or
his Officers did not make fresh suit after the Prisoner, yet in both these
cases, if the escape were against the will of the Officer the Sheriff may take
such prisoner again, and keep his body in custody until the prisoner has made
his agreement with the Sheriff, or otherwise the Sheriff may have his action
upon the case against such prisoner, for such his wrongful escape, if the
prisoner that so escaped be able to make him satisfaction. And the prisoner in
these cases shall not be relieved, because the escape was of his own wrong,
and without the consent of the Sheriff or Officer, co. 3. 52.

If the connusor of a Statute Merchant or Staple is taken and dies in
execution, yet the connusee shall have the execution of his goods and lands,
Co. 5. 87.

Connusor upon a Statute is taken and escape, yet his goods and lands upon the
same statute may be extended.

For although by the law unica tantum fiat executio, yet that is to be
understood of an execution with satisfaction.

Where 2. men are condemned in debt, and the one is taken and dies in
execution, yet the other may lawfully be taken in execution, co. 5, 86.

So if two be bound jointly and severally in one Obligation, and the one is
sued, condemned and taken in execution, yet the other also may be sued and
taken in execution, until the Plantiff be satisfied in deed of his entire
debt, co. 5. 86.

If a man has judgment in an action of debt, and after the judgment,
outlawes the Defendant, there if the Defendant be taken by Capias utlegat. at
the suite of the King, he shall be in execution for the Plantiff if he will,
co. 5 88.

Also in all cases when the Plantiff may have a cap. ad satisfaciendum, and the
defendant is taken by cap. pro fine, there the Defendant is in execution
forthwith, if the Plantiff will, without any prayer of the party, co. ibidem.

And in such cases, if the Sheriff suffer such prisoner to go at large, it
seems to be an escape, and that thereby the Sheriff is subject to pay the
Plantiff his debt, Fitz. 121. p.

By the law those which are in execution ought not to go at liberty within the
prison, much less abroad, though with their keeper, but such prisoner ought to
be keept in arcta and salva custodia, yea the Sheriff may keep such as are in
execution in Gives and Fetters, to the intent that they may the sooner pay and
satisfy their creditors 13 E. 1. cap. 11. 2 R. 2. cap. 12. co. 3. 44* Plow.
360. a

Where the Sheriff has one in execution for debt, and an Habeas Corpus comes
to him to have the body in the Kings Bench at a certain day, and he carries
his prisoner to London to an Inn etc. and the Prisoner of his own head goes
at large, and after comes again to the Sheriff, so as the Sheriff at the day
of the return of the Habeas corpus, does deliver the body in court, this was
adjudged to be no escape, for that the commandment of the Writ is performed
(scil.) to have the body in court at such a day, and in such case the Sheriff
may go and take what way or place he shall think to be most sure and safe for
himself, and to carry his prisoner, co. 3. 44.

It was adjudged if one being in execution no commandment, although of the K.
himself without Writ, is sufficient Warrant to discharge the Keeper etc. and
so by the same reason shall not discharge the Sheriff.

But note, that inasmuch as escapes are so penal to Sheriffs, Bailiffs of
Liberties, and Goalers, the Judges of the Law have always made a favorable
construction as much as the law will permit in favor of the Sheriffs, Bailiffs
of Liberties, and Goalers, who are Officers and Ministers of Justice, co. 3. 44.

Note, if a man recover debt or damages against against another, he may choose
to have a cap. or elegit, but if he take the Capias he shall not have the Elegit
afterward, nec e converso, 15 H. 7. 15.

Fieri facias.
THis Writ of Fieri facias is only against the goods (scil.) Leases for years
or movables goods, as Cattle, Corn, House-hold-stuffe, Money, Plate,
Apparel, and this Writ ought also to be sued within the year after the
judgment. Co. 3. 12.

In the execution of a Fieri facias, it is the surer course for the Sheriff,
either to keep the goods until the parties be agreed, or else to take good
security of the Plantiff to defend and save him harmeless, and to stay the
returning of his Writs until he may be well advised what to do therein. But
if he take a bond of the Plantiff, it is questionable whether it be good or no
in law, and not within the compass of the Statute of 23 H. 6. ca. 10. to be
taken color Officii.

But the safest and surest course for the Sheriff or Officer, is not to take in
execution, or not to meddle at all with any such goods as shall not not plainly
appear to them, to be the proper goods of the Defendant, for it seems that
the Officer is bound at his peril to take knowledge whose the goods are, or at
lest that they be the proper goods of the defendant.

Note, that after the Fieri facias a man may have the Elegit, but not e contra,
because the Elegit is of a higher nature then the fieri facias.

Upon a fieri facias the Sheriff may sell a Lease or term of years, and upon
a fieri facias the Sheriff ought to sell, to levy the debt, Co. 5. 90. Co. 8.
171.

Upon a fieri facias if the Sheriff sell the goods, and after the judgment is
reversed in a Writ of Error, yet the defendant shall not have restitution of
his goods, but the value of them for what they were sold, and those which so
buy such goods of the Sheriff may lawfully enjoy them, for the Sheriff which
made the sale, had lawful authority to sell, and by the sale the Vendee has
absolute property in the goods and, if the sale of the Sheriff by force of the
Fieri facias shall be avoided by subsequent reversall of the judgment then no
man will buy, and by consequence no execution shall be done. Co. 5. 90. and 8.
96. and 143.

Levari facias.
THis Levari facias is only to be executed upon the profits of the Lands, and
upon the goods, or the Sheriff may hereupon take the rents payable by the
tenants in execution for the debt, and bring them in Court, but he cannot seize
the land and deliver that to the party by this Writ, Plow. 441. a. and this
ought to be sued within the year, after the day of payment to be made, by the
recognizance, or after the judgment, for after the year the Connusee or
Plantiff is now by the Statute of Westminster, 2. cap. 45. to have a scire
facias, whereby the Sheriff is commanded that he give knowledge to the
Defendant that he appear in the Chancery at a certain day, there to show what
he can say why he should not pay the debt or damages, and if he come not at
the day, or do come and can say nothing why execution ought not to be done,
then the Sheriff shall be commanded to do execution. Fitz. 266. c.

And if the Sheriff upon the Levari facias shall return that he has levied
part of the sum (scil.) 20 l. part thereof which he has delivered to the
party, now upon this return the party which ought to have the money, may have
a sicut alias Levari facias directed to the Sheriff to levy the residue of the
sum, Fitz. 265. h.

Summons.
SUmmons is a Writ to the Sheriff to cite or warn one to appear at a certain
day, and the Summons must be made by or in the presence of two or three
Summoners, and these summonitors ought by law to be liberi and legales homines
as it seems.

In Summons in real actions, the Summoners in the presence of the Pernors or
Veiors, ought to summon the tenant, first to keep his day of the return, and
to name that in certainty to answer etc. Secondly, they ought to name the name
of the demandant, and Lastly, they ought to name the Land in demand, co. 6. 54.

This word Pernor, seems to signify the Pernor of the profits of the land,
or the Occupier or Farmer, thereof. And this Veior to signify such as are sent
by the Court, to take view of the place in question for the better decision of
the right. Minshaw.

Note, that the Defendant ought always to be summoned 15. days at the least
before the day of the return of the Writ, 28 E. 1. cap. 15. Fitz. 177.

Note, when the Tenant appears by the summons, he may not take advantage after
to say that he was not well summoned, and so if he be essoined, for all that
affirms the Summons, 46 E. 3. Br. Summons. 22.

Note also, if the Sheriff shall summon him which has no land to or by his
person, and shall return him summoned, it is good. And in Actions of annuity,
Covenant, or the like, Summons is the process, has he land or not, and where a
man has no land where he may be summoned, there the Sheriff may summon him by
his person 33 H. 6. 4. H. 7. 7.

In a Writ of right of Advowson, the Sheriff may summon the Defendant in the
Church, Br. return, 101. 11 H. 6.

In a quaere impedit, the Sheriff may summon the Defendant in the Church IX H.
6. and so by advise it was done inter Lancelotum episcopum Eliens. and the
Author of this book Anno 16. Jacobi regis

In a Praecipe against 4. the Sheriff cannot summon the one but that is a
summons to all, 3 E. 4. Br. Summons 10.

In a Praecipe, there ought to be two summoners, for if there be but one, and
the Tenant makes default, and loses by default, he shall have a Writ of
disceit against the Sheriff, Plow. 393.

Note, that the Tenant may wage his law of non summons and yet a corporation,
recluse, and decrepit may not do their Law, but their summons shall be tried by
the country 33 H. 6. fo. 8. Thel. 334. Quaere.

Attachment.
ATtachement cannot be by land nor by Chattel real, as a lease for years 7
H. 6. 27 H. 6. neither may a Table dormant or any other thing fastened unto the
freehold be attached 21 H. 7. fo. 26. but an Attachment must be made by
mooveables, which may be forfeited by outlary, and which shall be forfeited by
the default of the party if he appear not, Br. 1. 4

In debt, trespass or the like, a man ought not to attach the Defendant by his
horse whereupon he rides, where he has other goods whereby he may be attached,
but if he has no other goods, then the Officer may attach him by the Horse he
rides upon Br. 23. neither may a man be attached by his apparel 7 H. 6 Br.
4. But this seems to be understood of his apparel which is upon his body,
for if his apparel lies by him it seems he may be attached thereby.

Neither shall any goods be attached but the proper goods of the party, and not
goods pawned or borrowed, 35 H. 6. Br 20.

An Attachment may be made by pledges (scil.) by finding pledges or sureties to
appear, Br. Attachment, 1. 7. 9.

Also if the Officer shall give warning to the tenant in the presence of other
honest men to appear, it is good enough though he made no other Attachment by
the goods or pledges. 34 ess. Br. 9.

Where the Sheriff or his Officers shall attach another by a Cow or by any
other goods* if the party appear not at the day of his return, his Cow or
other goods attached are forfeited to the King, and the Sheriff shall be
answerable for the value thereof, and therefore the Sheriff had need either to
keep the goods attached, or else to take security to be saved harmeles therein,
9 H. 7. 6. 34 H. 6. 29.

Note, that the property of goods attached are not out of the party until the
day of the return, and that he makes default, but if at the day of the return
the party make default, then the Sheriff or his Officer may take such goods as
forfeit, though he has left such goods with the party which was attached by
them, and so note, that upon attachment the Officer may at his election take
the goods attached with him or may leave them with the owner, and after take
them upon default of appearance by the owner, 9 H. 7. 6. B. attachment 10.

28 H. 6. 3. 4. H. 6. fo. 29. and 40. 21. E. 4. fo. 78.
Note also, that by the essoine the attchment or goods attached is saved,
notwithstanding he appears not at the day of the essoine, Br. attachment, 3.
11. and no goods attached shall be forfeit, but in Courts of Record. But many
opinions to the contrary, vide.

A feme covert shall be attached by the goods of her husband, for the husband
is to bring in his wife and the defendant ought always to be attached, 15.
days at the least before the day of the return of the Writ Br. attachment,
1. 5. 6.

Yet trial of not attached by 15. days shall be only by the examination of
the Officer that makes the return, and if he be absent the attachment shall be
intended to be made according to Law (scil) by 5. days and the defendant shall
be awarded to answer, Br. attachment 6. 12. 17. 18.

Also note, that in the Kings Bench they allowed an attachment in an Assize of
No. dis. of 8. days and of less, Br. attachment 13.

Note, that if an indenture be made between 2. as parties, as inter A. ex una,
and B. ex altera part, Parties to a Deed.
and in the Deed one of them grants or lets a thing to another that is not
named in the beginning, he is not party to the deed, nor shall take any thing
thereby, Terms del ley, fo. 145.

Upon a condition for the payment of a sum of money at a certain day,
although that the last time for payment of the money by force of the condition,
is the fit time wherein the money may be numbered, before the setting of the
Sun, yet if tender be made to him which ought to receive it at the place
specified in the condition at any time of the day, and he refuse it, the
condition is saved for ever, and the Mortgagor needs not, nor the obligor
etc. to make tender thereof again before the last instant; for by the express
letter of the condition the moneys are to be paid upon the day indefinitely,
and convenient time before the last instant, is the extreme time appointed by
the law, to the intent the one shall not prevent the other, the one being
sometime there, and the other not, and the other being sometimes there and the
other not, and therefore the law appoints the extreme time, in the day, to
the intent that both parties may certainly meet together. But if both parties
meet at any time of the same day, and the Mortgagor or Obligor etc. make tender
in the place etc. to the Mortgagee etc. and he refuse, the penalty is saved for
ever, Wades case, 5. pars.

Tender of money may be made in baggs, without showing or telling of it, (if
the truth be that there was so much as should be paid, in the baggs) for when
the condition is that the Obligor or Mortgagor shall pay 250 l. the Mortgagor
or Obligor do all that which is required by the law for them to do, if they
provide the money and offer it to the Mortgagee or Obligee in baggs, which is
the usual manner to carry money, and then it is the part of the Mortgagee etc.
to tell it (if he will) or if he will give trust to the Mortgagor, he may
accept it without telling of it; then if the telling thereof belong to the
Mortgagee etc. by consequence he ought to put it out of the baggs, which is
incident thereunto, for without so doing he cannot tell it: and if the Morgagor
etc. put the money out of the baggs, yet is it at the peril of the Mortgagee
or Obligee to see it, for peradventure there may be counterfeits, and yet have
a good show of good and lawful money. Also it is at his peril to tell it,
Wade ibid.

And if a man be bound in 40000 l. to be paid at a certain day, if he tender
it in baggs, it is sufficient, for it cannot be numbered in one day, and so
hereby you may the better understand the opinion in 22 E. 4. fo. 21. it was
adjudged, that where the Lessor demands rent of his Lessee according to the
condition of re-entry, the Lessee paid the money to the Lessor and he received
it, and put it in his purse, and after in receiving thereof, at the very time
he found amongst the money he had received some counterfeit pieces, and
thereupon refused to carry away the money, but re-entred for the condition
broken. And it was adjudged that the entry was not lawful, for when the Lessor
had accepted the money, it was at his peril, and after this allowance he may
not take exeption to any of them. Wadescase, 5. pars fo. 115. Coke.

How to know the end and determination of any lease.
FIrst, see what day of the month, what year of the Kings reign, and in what
year of the Lord, the Lease took his commencement.

Next of all you are to note, for what number of years the Lease was granted,
which being done then add that number of years to that year of our Lord, in
which your Lease began, the total sum whereof being cast up will show you
the year of our Lord in which the years shall end, so that if your Lease
commenced at Michaelmas, it will end at Michaelmas, in the same year. Or if it
begin the twenty fourth of March in that year (which is but one day before the
end and change of the year) then it will end the twenty forth of March the
said year: As for example;

A Lease began Michaelmas Anno. 7. Eliz. 1564. to endure for the term of
ninety years, I demand; how many years is to come of this Lease, and when
the same term of years will be determined; first, I set down the day of the
Month, and the year of our Lord in which the Lease took his commencement, as
at Michaelmas 1564. unto which sum I add the number of years, which was
granted by the Lease, being ninety years, which being cast up makes the sum
to be one thousand six hundred fifty four, in which year at Michaelmas, the
years will be expired and the Lease determined: then to know how many years
are to come of the same Lease, I set down the Lease will expire, and then
substract out of that sum the year of our Lord which then is, as for example
one thousand six hundred twenty eight, whereby I find the subtracted number to
be twenty six, and so many years there is yet to come from Michaelmas 1628.

A Lease was made for eighty years, to commence at Michaelmas 1567 80 1647.
the Lease will end.


The year of our Lord 1628 subtracted, shows that 0019. there is 19. years
to come at Michaelmas. 1628.

A Warrant to Summon a Court of Surveigh.
THese are to will, and in his Highness name, to require you to give notice
and warning to be given to all and singular, the Tenants as well Freeholders as
Copiholders, and they that hold by Lease or at Will of or within his Highness
Manor of C. in the County of S. that they and every of them do make their
personal appearance at his highness Court of Surveigh, there to be holden upon
Wednesday next, being the 16. of July 1655. by 8. of the Clock in the forenoone
of the same day, at the usual place of keeping the Court of the same Manor,
and that they and every of them, do then and there bring and show forth or
cause to be brought and showed forth all their Deeds, Leases, Copies of
Court-Rolles and all other their evidences, whereby they, and every of them,
do pretend or claim to hold any Lands and Tenements whatsoever of or
belonging to the said Manor. And also that they and every of them do then and
there bring and show forth all such Rentalls, Court-rolls, Surveighes, Terrats,
Suit-rolls, and all other Escripts, Writings, Minuments and Records, which they
or any of them have any way concerning the said Manor, or any part, member, or
parcel of the same, and to give such further attendance, in and about his
Highness said service of survey as shall be of them and every of them
necessarily required, whereof fail not as you tender his Highness service,
dated etc.

Your loving friend, I. N.
To the Bailiff of his Highness Manor of C. or to his deputy or to every of
the Tenants of or belonging to the said Manor, and the members thereof.

Cause this to be published in the Church at the time of divine service and
cause the under Tenants to give notice to them whose undertenants they are,
that dwell remote.



ARTICLES to be enquired of at a Court of Survey and Court Baron for the Manor
etc.
1. IMprimis, you shall declare the true circuit and general Boundarie or
Boundaries of this Manor, Butts and Bonds.
and how far, and into what place or places, does the same extend, and upon
what other Lords Lands does the same bound and border, as well on the East,
West, North and South sides, and whether have any of the general or utmost
bounds, Meers, or Marks been altered, and by whom and where.

Concealments.
2. Item, whether do any person or persons within the precinct of this Manor or
any other whatsoever, covenously conceal and wrongfully occupy any part or
parts of this Manor, and who the same persons be, and where and in what place,
and what be the names of the grounds concealed or encroached, and in whose
occupation be they, and how long have the same been concealed or enclosed.

The mansion house and demean lands.
3. Item, you shall enquire of the chief Scyte and Capital Mansion house of
this Manor, with the particular Members and buildings, and what demean Lands,
Meadows, Pastures, Arable Grounds, Woods, Underwoods, and hereditaments
whatsoever are belonging to the same, what be their several names and where
and in what parts of the Manor do the same lie, and how be they butted and
bounded, and who be now the occupiers thereof, and under what Estates, Rents,
Herriots, or services to your knowledge.

4. Item, what freehold Lands, Freehold
Tenements or hereditaments be holden of this Manor, who be they that be
seized thereof, and what Rents, reliefes, works, customs, or other duties do
they pay, or ought to pay for the same, and by what tenure to your knowledge
do they and every of them hold, and how are they butted and bounded, and what
quantity and number of Acres do the same contain, and what is the true yearly
value thereof.

5. Item, Copyhold lands.
what Lands or Tenements be holden by Copy of Court-Roll, within this Manor,
who they be that are seized thereof, and what Rents, Herriots, works, customs,
or other duties, do they pay or ought to pay, for the same, and what quantity
and number of Acres do the Tenants severally hold, and the quality thereof, and
what is the true yearly value of the same.

6. Item, Tenants at will. Tenants by Indenture.
Who be they that be tenants at will or tenants by Indenture, what lands or
tenements do they hold, or what rents or duties do they pay, or ought to pay
for the same, and what is the quantity or yearly value thereof.

7. Item, Decay of houses.
whether there be within this manor any ancient houses decayed or fallen
down, or any houses or buildings out of reparations, and where and how long
have the same been ruinous, decayed or out of reparations, and in whose
default, and to what charge or value would the new erecting or repairing of
them, or any of them amount unto.

8. Item, you shall enquire of all the falling down, Wast Woods.
destruction and wastes of any Woods, Underwoods, or Trees in and upon the said
Manor or any part or parcel thereof, made or done by any person or persons,
and by whom, where and when, and to what value.

Names of commons etc.
9. Item, what be the names of the Lords VVasts, Heaths or Commons, of what name
or kind soever belonging to this Manor, which of them are free for the Lord of
this Manor to use in severalty* and who be they that do enter-common with the
tenants of this manor, in any part or parts thereof, and with what Chattle,
and where and bywhat right, custom or duty to your knowledge.

Enter commoners.
10. Item. Whether may the Lords and Tenants of this Manor enter-common in the
VVasts, Downs, Heathes, Moors, or commons of any other Manors or Lordship.
And if they may, then with what kind of Cattle, and what be the names of the
Manors and commons, and who is now seized thereof to your knowledge.

Exchange of Land.
11. Item, what exchanges have been made of any land within this Manor, by
whom, when and where were the same exchanges made, and what lands and for what
term.

Lands forfeited or escheated.
12. Item whether have any parts or members of this Manor been forfeited, or
escheated, or ought have been unto the Lord of this Manor, and not yet seized
to his use, by reason of any death, Bastardy, granting of Leases without
license, aliening of copyhold land by feoffment, Wast, Demise, or otherwise,
what, and were be the same lands, and who do occupy the same, and how and in
what manner were the same so forfeited or escheated.

13. Item, what Herriots, reliefs or other duties, Herriots reliefs etc.
are or ought to be due unto the Lord of the Manors, upon the decease of any
tenant of what estate soever, or upon any alienation or surrender, and whether
such as do hold under diverse rents, ought to pay diverse Herriots. And if they
do, of what kind or kinds be the said Herriots, or ought the same to be to
your knowledge.

14. Item what quit rents, works, Quit-rents, work, customs etc.
customs or other duties, are or have been of old time, of right paid out of
this manner, and to what person or persons, and upon what cause.

15. Item, you shall enquire if any evidences, Court-Roles, or writings
belonging to this Manor, Writings or Court-Rolles concealed.
are withheld or kept back from the Lord of this Manor, and by whom.

The interpretation, explanation, and meaning of diverse words used in ancient
Charters, etc.
Fleta, Sock.
A Power to seek after Thieves, and to do justice upon them after such
inquisition.

Also a Liberty to have Suitors to their Courts that have the same.

Also it is taken for a company of Tenants which live within such a Liberty,
and they are by the same exempted from the common services of the Prince and
Country whereunto other Subjects are ordinarily bound.

Sochemans.
Are men to whom some special Liberties are given.

Ham Socha.
Is the dwelling of a Farmer.

Dr. Cowel.
Ham is a Town, and from thence comes Hamlet.

Sack.Signifies [Causa] and from thence comes this saying, For whose sake,
scilicet, For whose cause.

Skene de verb. signif. Lam. f. 132. Sack.
Is called, Placitum and emenda de transgressione hominum in curia nostra.

It is the Amerciament paid by him which denies the thing proved against him
to be true, or affirms the contrary to the truth.

Fleta, Sack.
Significat acquietantiam de Secta ad Comitatum and hundredum, l. 1. c 47.

Cassaneus in consuetudine. Thol or Toll.
Tolvetum, alias Theo onium, has two significations, viz.

1. A Liberty to buy or sell within a certain precinct, which imports to a
Fair or Market.

2. And in the second it is a Liberty to take Toll, as to be free from the
payment thereof.

He that is infeoffed with Toll is Custome-free, and pays no custom, Skene*
when it is written, Hoc est quod vos and homines vestri de toto homagio vestro
fint quieti de omnibus mercanciis and de tolveto de omnibus rebus emptis and
venditis.

Privy contracts were held unlawful, and therefore the Lord of the Fair or
Market in testimony of the contract, received toll.

Is a power to have slaves which are called Nativi, Bondi, and Villani. Teame
alias Theme.
And all Baronies infeoffed with Theme has the same power; for unto them,
their Bondmen, their Children, Goods and Chattels properly belong. It is a
Royalty granted only by the King himself.

A compound of three Saxon words, Infangthef.
the Preposition In, fang to take, thef a Felon.

Infangthef est Justicia cognoscentis latroni^ de homine suo, si captus fuerit
super terram suam. Illi vero qui non habent has consuetudines coram Justicia
regia rectum faciant in Hundredis and Wapentagiis vel Shiris.

An out-taken-thief, Vtfangthef, Bracton l. 2. c. 24.
diciturlatro extraneus veniens aliunde de terra aliena and qui captus fuerit
in terra ipsius qui tales habet libertates.

Significat acquietanciam misericordiae intrationis in domum alienam, vi and
injuste. Handsok, Fleta l. 1. c 47.


Grith a word of the old Angles signifying Peace. Brich quasi Breach. Grith
brich, Rastal expositione verborum.


Those amerciaments due for Bloodshed.

Blout in Saxon est Sanguis, and Wite est Culpa. Blodwite, D. Cowel.


A liberty to take amerciaments pro melletis. Flitwite.


Bona utlegatorum. Fredwite.


Significat quietanciam misericordiae de latrone suspenso absque
consideratione. Hengwite, Fleta l. 1. c. 27.


Cowel, Cowel.
est muleta pro homine injuste suspenso.

Li^wite.
Is a liberty to take amends of him that defiles your Bondwoman.

Flemene frith.
A liberty to challenge the Cattle or amerciaments of your man a Fugitive.

Forstall.
To be quit of amerciaments, and cattle arrested within your lands and the
amerciaments thereof coming.

Gidel, Grest.
A kind of purgation in old time, whereof there was two sorts, viz. per ignem
and aquam.

Henfare.
An amerciament for flight for murder.

Vetito namio, is power to have Pleas of Withernam, that is, if any of his men
or Tenants to whom such power is given, be arrested in another Liberty, the
next man of that liberty that comes into his Fee shall be taken and detained
until the other be freed.

In a Charter of King Edward the Third, dated at Walton 25. Junii Anno Regni
sui 12. reciting diverse former Charters, does declare and grant, That by the
obscure, and dubious, and general words in the former Charters the Grantees
should have all amerciaments, as well of Freemen as of Villains, and that they
should receive all that the King ought to have for any fault or transgression
to be amerced in the Court of the King, before the Barons of the Exchequer,
before the Justices of the Bench, or before his Justices Itinerant at Common
Pleas, or before his Justices assigned to take Assizes, or to deliver Goals, or
to whatsoever Inquisitions to be made, or amerced before any other Justices,
Sheriffs, Inquisitors, Reeves, Bailiffs, or other ministers, as well of the
Forests as others, to whatsoever Office they were deputed by the King. And
that they have the Goods and Chattels of Utlaws, Condemned persons, and
Fugitives, and of Felons, as w^ll of themselves as of all other Felons. And
that they have all the Goods and Chattels forfeited of all their men and
Tenants, resident or not resident, and of all others resident within or upon
their Tenements, Lands or Fees.

There are diverse Immunities granted by diverse old Charters, as to be quit de
Geldi^, Danageldis, Hildagiis, Carucagiis, Auxilis, Wardpenny, Averpenny,
Thething penny, Theolonio, Pontagio, Passagio, Pavagio, Cestagio, Tallagio,
Carriagio, etc. And are explained in that which follows.

Certain Saxon words in Doomsday Book expounded by Mr. Agar of the Receipt in
the Exchequer.
A.
ALne^um, a place where Alder-trees grow. Alodium, the old translation of the
Saxon Laws uses this word for Bockland. Aloacii, or rather as I take it,
Alodacii, they that hold Bockland or Charter-land. Arabant, they that held by
tenure of Plowing and Tilling ground. Arpens, the Frenchmen say that an hundred
Perches make an Arpent. 18. Foot a Perch. 12. Inches a Foot. Columel l. 5. c.
1. Demi-arpent they take for Jugum or Jugerum.
Arsura, concerning Coynage. Avera, Service or Avarage.
B.
BAtsweines, we call them Botswains or Bothouls. Berewich, I am of Mr.
Cambden's mind in his Book, that it signifies a Town-parcel, or belongin to
another. Berquarii, I take it for to be Shepherds, we call Bercarium a
Shepherd, both seem to come from the French Beragi^. Bordacii, they be Tenants
that occupy part of the Demesns which are called Bordlands, i. Terra ad.
mensam. Bruaria, we call that which the Latins term Erica Bruere, Heath. Burse
or Colibti, it may be this word is written for Bury, which sometime I read in
this Book, Bure, is that which the Dutchmen call a Bore, Col^s a Paysant.
Burgheristhe, I think it should be Burgberiche, Violatio Buzecatle, Bursecapls
or Botsecals, the same that Botswain.
C.
CAballa, I think it should be Caballus a Horse. Caruca, a Plough. Carucata, a
Plough and Land. Censarii, such as might be taxed. Cervisarii, the Saxons had a
duty called Drinkleum, retributio potus, Canutus Laws c. 8. 28. 38. whereupon
such Tenants may be called Cervisarii. Circset, the Saxons call it Cirikseat,
but Fleta calls Circse^, quasi semen ecclesiae, Corn paid to the Church.
Coliberts, see Burf. Cosez, Cottages. Cotemans, Cotigers of Coten or Coath, an
house. Cuna servicii, a Kan of Drink.
B.
DEna terrae, a hollow place between two Hills. Drenchs, in Cheshire a Fermor.
F.
FOrtgingels, Ferthindel is the fourth part of an Ferlingi, a quantity of Land
in Huntingdon, Somerset, Hampt. Feudum, that which we call Feodum. Firma, Rent
in money or victual, but properly in victual Edgar to Ely it is limited for a
penalty to pay one nights ferm, if the privileges be broken by any man.
Foristell, Forestall, the stopping of ways, that is now used for such as buy
things before they come at the market. Fraxmetum, a place where Ashes grow.
Frustum terrae, a piece of Land.
G.
GAllum, the Saxons called it Gasell, custom paid to the King or rent. Garb,
Garben, a Sheaf of corn. Garsum ^e, a Fine or Amerciament. Goldum, Solutio.
Gribrige. Grith brecbe, Fractio pacis.
H.
HAga est in Burgo vel in Civitate. Hangennita. Hanguits, Latro suspensus sine
indico^. Harduices in Burgo Glouc. ubi sunt currucat. terrae and villanni.
Head, or rather a Hide, a port or landing-place. Henfare, an amerciament for
flight for murder. Hesthas, a service to the King in Closhaw. Hasta, I think
rather it should be so written. Henewarde, a duty to the King in Cambridgshire.
Hominacio, it may be called Dominacio; many use Hominum where we use Homagitum.
Huscarbus Famulus, a servant in your house. Hida, an uncertain quantity of
arable land in several Counties.
I.
INewardus, one attending the King in Hereford and Cambridgshires. Inland, so
the Saxons call the Demesns of a manor, and the Lands that were holden of
them Vtland. Jugum half an Arpent, 50. Perches, nota, that in one Doomesday
Book it is said, tenet unum jugum terrae, and ust di. car.
L.
LAgeman, that is, homo habens legem. Lagh is Law. Landgeble, the Saxons call
both rents and customary Gastel, and they had special names for sundry sorts;
as Beregavel, payment of Burly-cheese; Gavel, rent-cheeses; Pridgavel the
Welchmen use for Landgavel. Legruita, or rather Lethervita, but more usually
Lierwite, Lenna, A mesne of a mile of Land. Lenga, A mesne of a mile of Land.
Lennides, A mesne of a mile of Land. Libras arsas pensatas, a quantity of coin.
M.
Mansum, Houses. Mansura, Houses. Marsum, a quantity of of coin, qu^re.
P.
PAracium, the tenure that is between parceners, viz. that which the youngest
owes to the eldest. Pasuagium, money taken for mast or feeding of Hogs,
Bracton calls it Pessona. Pensa, in Saxon Peza, a weigh of cheese or other
thing.
Q.
QVarentena, that which the Saxons call Furlang, is Quarentena in diverse
places.
O
RAdechenistres, Bracton amongst other tenures speaks of Rhode Knights, which
I suppose this word expresses, Radechenight, for che. is written often-in
Doomesday Book for C. or K. as Chent for Kent, their tenure is to ride with
their Master or Mistress, the Saxons call Pad^ayarney. Radmans, I think it all
one with the former word, unless peradventure this be derived from Read,
counsel, and so Readmans signifies Counselors. Relevacion. Revalementum, a
French word of Celever, to lift up again, for the Land by the Tenants death is
as it were fallen into the Lords hands, and the Heir raises it up again; but
that which the Book of Doomesday mentions, seems rather to express the
Harriot or Heryate of the Saxons spoken of in Canutus's Laws, c. 69* Reveland,
that is reaved from the King.
S.
SAca, Conusans of Pleas in causes concerning his own Tenants. S^ca, Suit to
ones Court, or Mill, or any other liberty. Scangium, exchange, quaere. Scotum,
solutio. Sochemans. Sochi, Sochemanni, men to whom some special liberties and
privileges are given. Solin and Solus, 400. acr. and di faciunt 2. Solinos and
di.
T.
Taxes or Tallages. Corn, 24. Sheafs make a Thrave, vel potius, a weigh of
Corn.
The four Terms with their Returns.
Hillary Term begins Jan. 23. and ends Feb. the 12.
In 8, days of St. Hillary. Jan. 20 Jan. 21. Jan. 22. Jan. 23. From the day of
St. Hillary in 15. days. Jan. 27. January 28. January 29. Jan. 30. In the
morrow of the Purification of the blessed Mary Feb. 3. Febr. 4. Febr. 5. Feb.
6. In 8. days of the Purification of the blessed Mary, Feb. 10. Feb. 10. Feb.
11. Feb. 12.
Easter term begins 17. days after Easter and ends and returns.
FRom the day of Easter in 15. days From the day of Easter in three weeks.
From the day of Easter in one Month. From the day of Easter in three weeks.
Trinity Term begins the Friday sevennight after Whitsunday.
On the morrow of the holy Trinity. In eight days of the holy Trinity. From
the day of the holy Trinity in fifteen days. From the day of the holy Trinity
in three weeks.
Michaelmas term begins the twenty third of October and ends the 28. of No.
1. FRom the day of St. Michael in three weeks Octo. 20. October. 21. October. 22.
Oct. 23. 2. From the day of S. Michael in one month Octo. 27. Octo. 28.
October. 29. Octo. 30. 3. On the morrow of all Souls No. 3. Novem. 4. Novem. 5.
Nov. 6. 4. On the morrow of St. Martin No. 12. Nov. 13. Nov. 14. Nov. 15. 5. In
the days of St. Martin No. 18 Novem. 19. Nov. 20. Nov. 21. 6. From the days
of St. Martin. in 15. days, No. 25. Novem. 26. No. 27. Nov. 28.
A SVPPLEMENT TO HE LAW OF CONVEYANCES OR, Decimall Tables, For the speedy and
exact computation of the Interest and Rebate of Money, and Annuities, whether
in present, or reversion.

With a CONCORDANCE of years from the time of WILLIAM the CONQVEROR, until
the present time, whereby the year of our Lord, and the year of each King may
be presently found.

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE LAWYERS DIRECTORY,
CHAP. I. To convert the parts of a pound into Decimalls and the contrary.
IN the buyng and selling of Land or Houses we ought, as well, to consider the
value of that which is bought or sold, as the manner of conveyance: now the
interest of money being the general ground to vallue the purchase by; we will
here annex such propositions thereof, as are convenient to be known by the
buyer and the seller both.

And the propositions or questions concerning money, are of two sorts, viz.
such as have reference to the increase, or to the rebate thereof.

The increase or interest of money is either simple or compound.

Simple interest, is that which arises or is computed from the increase of the
principal only, as if a 100 l. be forborne two years, the simple interest
thereof after the rate of 6. pounds for 100. pounds for 1. year, will be 12.
pound, viz. 6. pound due at the first years end, and 6. pounds due at the
second years end.

Now the questions of simple interest being in our usual Tables performed by
addition only, do seem very easy, but many times there are so many sums
to be added together, that it proves very tedious in the opperation, and
multiplication which is nothing but a speedy addition in numbers of several
denominations will I am sure to the generallity of men be much more difficult;
but the difficulty hereof may be avoided, by the table, entitled of a Table
reduction of money into Decimalls, and the contrary; for illustration sake we
will add an examle in each.

To reduce money into Decimalls.
LEt it be required to find the Decimall answering to 6 l. 7 s. 5 d. 3.
farthings, your pounds are integers of themselves and need no reduction, and
because 2. shillings is the tenth part of a pound, half the number of
shillings is the decimall thereof to be annexd to the number of pounds with a
point between, thus in our example the decimall of 6 l. 7 s. is 6. 3. etc.
rather it is the decimall of 6. 6. for the half of seven cannot be exactly
taken, and therefore have taken the least half, for the Decimall sought, I
look the remainder which is 1. shilling 5. pence 3. farthings in the table,
and I find the Decimall thereof to be, 739583. which being annexed to 6. 3. the
Decimall of 6. 7. shillings 5. pence 3. farthings, will be. 6.3739583.

To find the value of a Decimall given in the known denomination of money.
LEt it be required to find the value of this Decimall in money, 6.3739583. the
6. which is severed from the rest by a prick, is the integer and represents 6
l. the next figure which is 3. being doubled is 6. s. and the remainder 739583
being sought in the table, gives me 1. shilling 5. pence 3. farthings: and
therefore the sum represented by the decimall is 6 l. 7. shillings 5. pence
3. farthings; and the several denominations or parts of a pound, as shillings,
pence, and farthings, being thus reduced into one denomination or into a
decimall, all questions concerning the interest or rebate of money, whether
simple or compound, may be with much ease and exactness answered by
multiplication and the help of these tables following; as shall appear by
example, first in simple and then in compound interest.

CHAP. II. Of Simple Interest.
BEfore we can compute the interest of any sum of money propounded, we must
have given the time after which it is lent, and the rate of the profit
required, and our bonds for money lent are usually made for six months time,
but if we reckon that in the usual manner, from a certain day in one month,
to the same day in the sixth month following, there will be one or two days
error: as from the tenth of February reckond by months, the six months or half
year will fall upon the tenth of August, but there being 365. days, in a
year, the half thereof is 182. days and an half; and because it is fit to
allow the time to the borrower rather then lender, you cannot account less then
one hundred eighty three, which being reckoned from the tenth of February, will
fall upon the twelfth of August, two days beyond the other, to prevent all
such mistakes, we have in the Table, entitled a Table of simple interest at 6.
per cent. besides the number of days in every month, added the days in a
year, by which you may know the exact time of any part of a year in days, as
well as the interest due for any time or number of days.

For one month (...) the twelfth part of a year we ought to reckon 31. days.

For 3. Months or one quarter 92. days.

For six months or half a year 183. days.

For 9. Months or 3. quarters. 274. days.

And how you may know from any time given, when any of these terms exspire we
will clear by example.

Question, 1. If a bond be dated the 5. of March, when is the 3. month or 92.
days expired?

To answer this question, I observe in the Calender what number of days answer
to the fifth of March, and I find 64. to which if you add 92. they make 158.
and the day of the month answering to 158. days is the 7. of June, and that is
the day on which the 3. months does expire.

Question, 2. If a sum of money be lent from the the 17. of July, to the 29.
of November, for how many days is the money lent?

To answer this question, Observe what number of days do answer to the 29. of
November, which are 333. as also what number of days do answer to the 17. of
July, which are a 198. these being subtracted from 233. there remains 135.
the number of days required.

Question 3. If a sum of money be lent from the 8. of October, to the 13. of
February following, for how many days is the money lent?

For answer hereunto, as in the last question, you must deduct the number of
days answering to the 8. of October, which are 281, from the number of days
answering to the 13. of February, which are 44. but because that cannot be don,
you must add thereto, 365. the number of days in a whole year, they make 409.
from which deducting 281. there remains 128. the number of days required.

Having thus stated the time for which the money is lent, we will now show you
how to compute the interest.

Question 4. What is the interest of 325. pounds 9. shillings 7. pence 3.
farthings, for 128. days, at 6. per cent, simple interest.

For answer to this question, I seek in this Table against the number of days,
given 128. the interest of one pound for that time, which is 0210410. and
turning the 9. shillings seven pence three farthings, into a Decimall, by the
Table of reduction, the pounds given, with the decimall parts will be
325.4822917. and then the proportion will be this; As 1 l. or 1.0000000. To the
sum given, 325.4822917. So is the number in the Table, 0210410. To the interest
sought. Now then if you multiply 325.4822917 By the interest of 1 l. 0210410
32548229170 13019291668 32548229170 6509645834 The product is, 684847289965970

From which if you cut of 14 figures, because there are so many figures in the
Decimall parts of both the terms given, the figure remaining is 6. and that is
the interest in pounds, and the figures cut are the fraction of a pound, in the
valluation whereof, you may double the first figure, and that will give you the
shillings and so the first figure of this fraction be 8. the double gives me
16. shillings, the rest 48472. etc. I look in the table of reduction and they
give me 11. pence 2 farthings, and therefore the interest of 325 l. 9. s. 7.
pence 3. farthings, for 128. days at 6. per cent. simple interest is 6. pound,
16. shillings 11. pence 2. farthings. And thus may you find the simple
interest of any greater or lesser sum, for any time under a year, and also for
any number of years required; we will next show you how to compute the rebate
of money at simple interest.

CHAP. III. Of simple Rebate.
REbate or discount of money is, when a sum of money due at any time to come is
satisfied by the payment of so much present money, which being put forth at a
certain rate of interest for the said time, would become equal to the sum first
due: and thus if 50. pound not due till two years hence, to be satisfied by the
payment of present money upon rebate, after the rate of 6. pound per cent. per
annum, simple interest, there ought to be so much ready money paid, which in
two years time after the said rate of interest would be augmented unto 50.
pounds: and to find what that sum is, use this analogy.

As the sum propounded with the interest thereof

For so long time as is propounded

Is to the sum propounded:

So is the sum propounded

To its worth in ready money.

Now the simple interest of 50. pound for 2. years is 6. pound, I say therefore,

As 56. pound to 50. pound, so is 50. pound to its worth in ready money.

And therefore to answer this question, I multiply 50. pound by 50. pound, and
the product is 2500. l. which being divided by 56. the quotient will be 44.
64285. that is 44. pound, 12. shill. 10. pence, farthing.

CHAP. IV. Of Compound Interest.
COmpound interest is that which arises from the principal, and also from the
interest thereof, and therefore is called interest upon interest. As if 100.
pound be forborne three years, and compound interest thereof is to be computed
at the rate of 6. per cent. per annum, there will arise besides the simple
interest of the principal for three years, the interest of 6. pound due at the
years end for 2. years, and the interest of 6. pound due at 2. years end, for
1. year, to compute this for any number of years under 31. at the rates of 6,
7, or 8. per cent. use this analogy.

As 1. pound or 1.00000

Is to the number in the Table.

So is the sum given

To the principal and interest required.

Quest. 1. If 345. pounds be forborne or respited until the end of seven years,
what will it then be augmented to after the rate of 6. pound per cent. per
annum compound interest?

In the second Column of the Table, entitled, [A Table showing what 1. pound
will amount unto, etc.] right against 7. years is 1.50363. which shows that one
pound being forborne 7. years, will be augmented unto 1.50363. at the rate of 6.
per cent. per annum compound interest.

Therefore, if 1. l. be augmented to 1.50363 What shall 345 751815 601452
451089 The product 518.75235

From which if you cut of 5. figures, because there are 5. figures of Decimall
parts in the sum multiplied the remainder, 518. is the l. to which it is
augmented, and 75235. are the parts of a pound, and 7. the first figure thereof
being doubled, give 14. shillings, the rest give 1. shilling 2. farthings, and
so 345 l. will in 7. years be augmented to 518 l. 15. shillings 00. pence 2.
farthings.

Question 2, What will 15 l. annuity for 5. years payable yearly, be augmented
unto, being all unpaid or forborne until the end of the said term, accounting
compound interest at the rate of 1. per cent, per annum?

In the second column of the Table, entitled a table showing what 1 l.
annuity will amount unto and right against 5. years is 5.63709. which being
multiplied by 15. l. the product is 84.55635. that is, cutting off 5. figures,
84 pounds, and the fraction reduced is 11. shillings, 1. penny 2. farthings.

CHAP. V. Of rebate or discount of money according to compound interest.
AS in simple, so likewise in rebate according to compound interest, so much
ready money ought to be paid, which at the rate of compound interest, for the
time agreed upon, would become equal to the sum first due, as the other is
to do at simple interest; and will be manifest by the following questions.

Question. 1. If 356 pounds he payable at the end of 7. years, what it is
worth in ready money, discounting after the rate of 7 per centum, per annum
compound interest.

In the third column of the fifth Table right against 7. years is 622749.
being the ready money equivalent unto 1 l. due at the end of 7. years, which
being multiplied by 356. the product is 221.698534. that is cutting off 6.
Figures and reducing the parts 221. pounds 14. shillings proxime.

Question, 2. What is the present worth of an annuity, or rent of 50. pound per
annum payable yearly for 21. years accounting compound interest, after the
rate of 6. per cent. per annum.

In the second column of the 6. Table, right against 21. years is 11.75407,
which being multiplied by 50. the product is 588.20350. from which cutting off
5. figures for the decimall parts of the number found in the table, the answer
is 588 l. and reducing the parts, 4. shillings, 3. farthings.

Question, 3. What annity to begin presently and to continue 21 years payable
at yearly payments will 588. pound 4. shillings 3. farthings purchase,
compound interest being reckoned at 6. per cent. per annum.

In the second column of the 7. Table right against 21. years is 085. which
being multiplied by 588. 203125. the Decimall of 588 l. 4. shillings 3.
farthings, the product is 49 998065325. from which if you cut 9. figures for
the number of parts in both the terms given, the yearly annuity is 49. pounds
and the Decimall 99806 etc. gives 19 s. 11. pence, 2. farthings.

Question, 4. What is an annuity of 25. pounds per An. for seven years payable
yearly, and to begin 3. years hence, compound interest after the rate at 6. per
cent, worth i^ present.

First find by the second question of this Chapter, what an anuity of 25.
pounds per annum, for 3. years at the rate propounded, is worth in ready
money, and then what an annuity of 25. pounds, per annum, for 3. and 7. years,
that is for 10. years at the same rate, is worth in ready money, the
difference of these two is the answer to the question propounded.

In the second column of the 6. table, right against 3. years is 2.67301.
which being multiplied by 25. the product is 66.82525. and the number answering
to 10. years is 7.36008. which being also multiplied by 25. the product is
184.002005 from which deduct 66.82520 there rests 117.17675 that is according
to the former directions 117. pounds 3. shillings 6. pence farthing, the
present worth of the 7 years in reversion.

Question, 5. If the Lease of a house or lands be worth 127 l. fine, and 9 l.
rent per annum, payable yearly for 20. years, and the Lessee be desirous to
bring down the fine to 40 l. and so to pay the more rent, the question is,
what rent the tenant shall pay, accounting compound interest at the rate of 6.
per centum per annum.

Find the difference between the fines which is 87 l. then by the seventh table
find what annuity or rent to continue 20. years, is equivalent, unto 87 pound
ready, so will you find 758466. that is being reduced 7 l. 11 s. 8. pence 1.
farthing, which being added to the old rent 9 l. gives 16 l. 11 s. 8. pence 1.
farthing; which the tenant must pay, to the end that the fine may be diminished
unto 40. pound.

Question, 6. There is a lease af certain Lands to be let for 20. years for
40. l. fine and 16. shillings 8. pence 1. farthing rent. per annum, payable
yearly, but the tenant is desirous to pay less rent, viz. 9 l. per annum, and
to give a greater fine, the question is, what fine ought to be paid to bring
down the rent to 9 l. per annum, accounting compound interest at the rate of 6.
per centum per an:

Find the difference between the rents which is 7 l. 11. shillings 8. pence 1.
farthing, then by the 6. Table see what an annuity or rent of 7 l. 11. shilling
8. pence, 1. farthing per annum, to continue twenty yearers is worth in ready
money, so shall you find eighty six pound nineteen shillings ten pence
proxime, which being added to the first fine forty pound gives 126. pound 19.
shillings 4. pence, which the tenant must pay, to the end that the rent may be
brought down to nine pound per annum.

Question, 7. There is a lease of certain lands worth 32 l per annum, more
then the rent paid to the Lord for it, of which Land there is a Lease yet in
being for 7. years, and the lessee is desirous to take a Lease in reversion for
21 years to begin when his old Lease is expired, the question is what sum of
money is to be paid for this lease in reversion? accounting compound interest
at the rate of 6. per cent. per an.

Find by the 6. Table, what 32. pound rent is worth in ready money for 21.
years, as if it were to begin presently, which will be found 376. 4.5024 l.
then by the 5. table find what 376.45024 l. due at the end of 7. years to
come, is worth in ready money, so will it be 250 l. 7. s. 2. d. proxime, which
is the answer to the question.

The first Table. A Table turning Shillings, Pence, or Farthings, into Decimall
parts.
S. d. Decimals 1. 1 010417 020833 031250 0. 1 041667 052083 062500 072917 0. 2
083333 093750 104167 114583 0. 3 125000 135417 145833 156250 0. 4 166667 177083
187500 197917 0. 5 208333 218750 221967 239583 0. 6 250000 260417 270833 281250
0. 7 291667 302083 312500 322917 0. 8 333333 343750 354167 364583 0 9 375000
385417 395833 406250 0.10 416667 427083 437500 447917 0.11 458333 468750 479167
489583 1. 0 500000 510417 520833 531250 1. 1 541667 552083 562500 572917 1. 2
583333 593750 604167 614583 1. 3 625000 635417 645833 656250 1. 4 666667 677083
687500 697917 1. 5 708333 718750 729167 739583 1. 6 750000 760417 770833 781250
1. 7 791667 802083 812500 822917 1. 8 833333 843750 854167 864583 1. 9 875000
885417 895833 906250 1.10 916667 927083 937500 947917 1.11 958333 968750 979167
999583 2. 0 1.000000 The second Table. A Table showing the Simple Interest of
one pound for the first 4. Months of the year at 6. per Cent.
Days January Febru. March April day Parts day Parts day Parts day Parts 1 1
000164 32 005261 60 009863 91 014959 2 2 000329 33 005425 61 010027 92 015123 3
3 000493 34 005589 62 010192 93 015288 4 4 000657 35 005753 63 010356 94 015452
5 5 000822 36 005918 64 010520 95 015616 6 6 000986 37 006082 65 010685 96
015781 7 7 001151 38 006246 66 010849 97 015945 8 8 001315 39 006411 67 011014
98 016109 9 9 001479 40 006575 68 011178 99 016274 10 10 001645 41 006739 69
011342 100 016438 11 11 001802 42 006904 70 011507 101 016603 12 12 001973 43
007068 71 011671 102 016767 13 13 002137 44 007233 72 011836 103 016931 14 14
002301 45 007397 73 012000 104 017096 15 15 002466 46 007562 74 012164 105
017260 16 16 002630 47 007726 75 012329 106 017425 17 17 002794 48 007890 76
012493 107 017589 18 18 002959 49 008055 77 012657 108 017753 19 19 003123 50
008219 78 012822 109 017918 20 20 003288 51 008383 79 012986 011 018082 21 21
003452 52 008548 80 013151 111 018246 22 22 003616 53 008712 81 013315 112
018411 23 23 003781 54 008877 82 013479 113 018575 24 24 003945 55 009041 83
013644 114 018739 25 25 004109 56 009205 84 013808 115 018904 26 26 004274 57
009369 85 013973 116 019068 27 22 004438 58 009534 86 014137 117 019233 28 28
004603 59 009699 87 014301 118 019397 29 29 004767 88 014466 119 019562 30 30
004931 89 014630 120 019726 31 31 005096 90 014794 The second Table. A Table
showing the Simple Interest of one pound for the second 4. Months of the year
at 6. per Cent.
Days May June July August day Parts day Parts day Parts day Parts 1 121
019890 152 024986 182 029918 213 035014 2 122 020055 153 025151 183 030082 214
035179 3 123 020219 154 025315 184 030246 215 035342 4 124 020383 155 025479
185 030411 216 035507 5 125 020548 156 025644 186 030575 217 035671 6 126
020712 157 025808 187 030739 218 034836 7 127 020877 158 025973 188 030904 219
036000 8 128 021041 159 026137 189 031068 220 036164 9 129 021205 160 026301
190 031233 221 036329 10 130 021369 161 026466 191 031397 222 036493 11 131
021534 162 02663^ 192 031562 223 036657 12 132 021699 163 026794 193 031726 224
036822 13 133 021863 164 026959 194 031890 225 036986 14 134 022027 165 027123
195 032055 226 037151 15 135 022192 166 027288 196 032219 227 037315 16 136
022356 167 027452 197 932383 228 037479 17 137 022520 168 027616 198 032548 229
037644 18 138 022685 169 027781 199 032712 230 037808 19 139 022849 170 027945
200 032877 231 037973 20 140 023014 171 028109 201 033041 232 038137 21 141
023178 172 028274 202 033205 233 038301 22 142 023342 173 028438 203 033369 234
038466 23 143 023507 174 028603 204 033534 235 038630 24 144 023671 175 028767
205 033999 236 038794 25 145 023836 176 028931 206 033863 237 038959 26 146
024000 177 029096 207 034027 238 039123 27 147 024164 178 029260 208 034192 239
039288 28 148 024329 179 029425 209 034356 240 039452 29 149 024493 180 029589
210 034520 241 039616 30 150 024697 181 029753 211 034685 242 039781 31 151
024822 212 034849 243 039945 The second Table. A Table showing the simple
Interest of one pound for the last four months of the year, at 6. per Cent.
Days September October November December Day Parts Day Parts Day Parts Day
Parrs 1 244 040109 274 045041 305 050137 335 055068 2 245 040274 275 045205 306
050301 336 055233 3 246 040438 276 045369 307 050466 337 055397 4 247 040603
277 045534 308 050630 338 055562 5 248 040767 278 045699 309 050794 339 055726
6 249 040931 279 045863 310 050959 340 055890 7 250 041096 280 046027 311
051123 341 056055 8 251 041260 281 046192 312 051288 342 056219 9 252 041425
282 046356 313 051452 343 056383 10 253 041589 283 046220 314 051616 344 056548
11 254 041753 284 046685 315 051781 345 056712 12 255 041918 285 046849 316
051945 346 056877 13 256 042082 286 047014 317 052109 347 057041 14 257 042246
287 047178 318 052274 348 057205 15 258 042411 288 047342 319 052438 349 057369
16 259 042575 289 047507 320 052603 350 057534 17 260 042739 290 047671 321
052767 351 057699 18 261 042904 291 047836 322 052931 352 057863 19 262 043068
292 048000 323 0530^6 353 058027 20 263 043233 293 048164 324 053260 354 058192
21 264 043397 294 048329 325 053425 355 058356 22 265 043562 295 048493 326
053589 356 058520 23 266 043726 296 048657 327 053753 357 058685 24 267 043890
297 048822 328 053918 358 058849 25 268 044055 298 048986 329 054082 359 059014
26 269 044219 299 049151 330 054246 360 059178 27 270 044383 300 049315 331
054411 361 059342 28 271 044548 301 049479 332 054575 362 059507 29 272 044712
302 049644 333 054739 363 059671 30 273 044877 303 049808 334 054904 364 059836
31 304 049973 365 060000 The third Table. A Table whereby to find the increase
of Money in Compound Interest, or Use upon Use, at the Rates of 6, 7, and 8 per
Centum, per Annum.
Years 6 per Cent. 7 per Cent. 8 per Cent. lb. Parts. lb. Parts lb. Parts. 1
1.06000 1.07000 1.08000 2 1.12360 1.14490 1.16640 3 1.19101 1.22504 1.25971 4
1.26247 1.31079 1.36048 5 1.33822 1.40255 1.46932 6 1.41851 1.50073 1.58687 7
1.50363 1.60578 1.71382 8 1.59384 1.71818 1.85093 9 1.68947 1.83845 1.99900 10
1.79084 1.96715 2.15892 11 1.89829 2.10485 2.33163 12 2.01219 2.25219 2.51817
13 2.13292 2.40984 2.71962 14 2.26090 2.57853 2.93719 15 2.39655 2.75903
3.17216 16 2.54035 2.95216 3.42594 17 2.69277 3.15881 3.70001 18 2.85433
3.37993 3.99601 19 3.02559 3.61652 4.31570 20 3.20713 3.86968 4.66095 21
3.39956 4.14056 5.03383 22 3.60353 4.43040 5.43654 23 3.81975 4.74053 5.87146
24 4.04893 5.07236 6.34118 25 4 29187 5 42743 6.84847 26 4.54938 5.80735
7.39635 27 4.82234 6.21386 7.98806 28 5.11168 6.64883 8.62718 29 4.41838
7.11425 9.31727 30 4.74349 7.61225 10.06265 The fourth Table. A Table whereby
to find the increase of Annuities in Compound Interest, at the Rates of 6, 7,
and 8. per Centum, for any year under 30.
Years 6 per Cent. 7 per Cent. 8. per Cent. lb. Parts. lb. Parts. lb. Parts. 1
1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 2 2.06000 2.07000 2.08000 3 3.18360 3.21490 3.24640 4
4.37461 4.43994 4.50611 5 5.63709 5.75073 5.86660 6 6.97531 7.15329 7.33592 7
8.39383 8.65402 8.92280 8 9.89746 10.25980 10.63662 9 11.49132 11.97798
12.48755 10 13.18079 13.81644 14.48656 11 14.97164 15.78359 16.64548 12
16.86964 17.88845 18.97712 13 18.88213 20.14064 21.49529 14 21.01506 22.55048
24.21492 15 23.27596 25.12902 27.15211 16 25.67252 27.88805 30.32428 17
28.21287 30.84021 33.75022 18 30.90565 33.99^03 37.45024 19 33.75999 37 37896
41.44626 20 36.78559 40.99549 45.76196 21 39.99272 44.86517 50.42292 22
43.39228 49.00573 55 45678 23 46.99582 53 43614 60.89329 24 50 81557 58.17667
66.76475 25 54.86451 63.24903 73.10593 26 59.15638 68.67646 79.95441 27
63.70576 74.48382 87.35076 28 68.52810 80.69769 95.33882 29 73.63979 87.34652
103.96595 30 79.05818 94.46078 113.28321 The fifth Table. A Table of the
rebating or discounting of money yearly, at the rates of 6, 7, and 8, per
Centum, Compound Interest, for any number of years under 30.
Years 6 per Cent. 7. per Cent. 8 per Cent. Parts. Parts. Parts.
1.943396.934579.925925 2.889996.873438.857338 3.839619.816297.793832
4.792093.762895.735029 5.747258.712986.680583 6.704960.666342.630169
7.665057.622749.583490 8.627412.582009.540268 9.591898.543933.500248
10.558394.508349.463193 11.526787.475092.428882 12.496989.444012.397113
13.468839.414964.367697 14.442300.387817.340461 15.417265.362446.315241
16.393646.338734.291890 17.371364.316574.270268 18.350343.295864.250249
19.330512.276508.231712 20.311804.258419.214548 21.294155.241513.198655
22.277505.225713.183940 23.261797.210947.170315 24.246978.197146.157699
25.232998.184249.146017 26.219810.172195.135201 27.207367.160930.125186
28.195630.150402.115913 29.184556.140563.107327 30.174110.131367.099377 The
sixth Table. A Table whereby to find the present worth of Annuities for any
term of years under 30. at the rates of 6, 7, and 8 per Centum, per An.
Compound Interest.
Years 6. per Cent. 7. per Cent. 8. per Cent. Parts. Parts. Parts.
1.94339.93457.92592 2 1.83339 1.80801 1.78326 3 2.16730 2.62431 2.57709 4
3.46510 3.38721 3.31212 5 4.21236 4.10019 3.99271 6 4.91732 4.76653 4.62287 7
5.58238 5.78928 5.20637 8 6.20979 5.97129 5.74663 9 6.80169 6.51523 6.24688 10
7.36008 7.02358 6.71008 11 7 88687 7:49867 7.13896 12 8.38384 7.94268 7.53607
13 8.85268 8.35765 7.90377 14 9.29498 8.74546 8 24423 15 9.71224 9.10791
8.55947 16 10.10589 9.44664 8.85136 17 10.477^5 9.76322 9 12163 18 10.82760
10.05908 9.37188 19 11.15811 10.33559 9.60359 20 11.46992 10.59401 9.81814 21
11.76407 10.83552 10.01680 22 12.04158 11.06124 10.20074 23 12.30337 11.27218
10.37105 24 12.55035 11.46933 10.52875 25 12.78335 11.65358 10.67477 26
13.00316 11.82577 10.80997 27 13.21053 11.98671 10.93516 28 13.40616 12.13711
11.05107 29 13.59071 12.27767 11.15840 30 13.76482 12.40904 11.25778 The
seventh Table. A Table whereby to find what yearly annuity to continue any
term of years under 30. any sum of money will purchase at the rates of 6. 7.
and 8. per centum compound interest.
Years 6 per Cent. 7 per Cent. 8 per Cent. lb. Parts. lb. Parts. lb. Parts. 1
1.06000 1.07000 1.08000 2.54363.55309.56076 3.37411.38105.38803
4.28859.29519.30192 5.23739.24389.25045 6.20336.20979.21631 7.17913.18555.19207
8.16103.16746.17401 9.14702.15348.16007 10.13586.14237.14902
11.12679.13335.14007 12.11927.12590.13269 13.11296.11965.12652
14.10758.11434.12129 15.10296.10979.11682 16.09895.10585.11298
17.09544.10242.10962 18.09235.09941.10670 19.08962.09675.10412
20.08718.09439.10184 21.08500.09228.09983 22.08304.09040.09803
23.08127.08871.09642 24.07967.08718.09497 25.07822.08581.09367
26.07690.08456.09250 27.07569.08342.09144 28.07459.08239.09048
29.07357.08144.08961 30 07264.08058.08882

A Table, showing the beginning of every Kings Reign from the Conquest,
together with the year of Christ, answering to every year of each Kings Reign,
the years beginning at the 25th. of March.
William the Coqueror began his Reign the 15. of Oct. 1066. and therefore had
Reigned one year complete, Oct. 15. 1067.
AN. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1067 2 1068 3 1069 4 1070 5 1071 6 1072 7 1073 8 1074 9
1075 10 1076 11 1077 12 1078 13 1079 14 1080 15 1081 16 1082 17 1083 18 1084 19
1085 20 1086

10 Months 21 Days. His reign ended the 9th of Sept. 1087.

William Rufus began his reign Sept. 9th. 1087.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1088 2 1089 3 1090 4 1091 5 1092 6 1093 7 1094 8 1095 9
1096 10 1097 11 1098 12 1099

11. Months, 18. Days.

Hen. 1. Aug. 1. 1100.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1101 2 1102 3 1103 4 1104 5 1105 6 1106 7 1107 8 1108 9
1109 10 1110 11 1111 12 1112 13 1113 14 1114 15 1115 16 1116 17 1117 18 1118 19
1119 20 1120 21 1121 22 1122 23 1123 24 1124 25 1125 26 1126 27 1127 28 1128 29
1129 30 1130 31 1131 32 1132 33 1133 34 1134 35 1135

4. Months 12. Days.

Steph. December. 2. 1135.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1136 2 1137 3 1138 4 1139 5 1140 6 1141 7 1142 8 1143 9
1144 10 1145 11 1146 12 1147 13 1148 14 1149 15 1150 16 1151 17 1152 18 1153

11. Months 20. Days.

Hen. 2. Oct. 25. 1154
An. Reg. An Dom. 1 1155 2 1156 3 1157 4 1158 5 1159 6 1160 7 1161 8 1162 9
1163 10 1164 11 1165 12 1166 13 1167 14 1168 15 1169 16 1170 17 1171 18 1172 19
1173 20 1174 21 1175 22 1176 23 1177 24 1178 25 1179 26 1180 27 1181 28 1182 29
1183 30 1184 31 1185 32 1186 33 1187 34 1188

9 Mon. 5. da.

R. 1. July 9. 1189.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1190 2 1191 3 1192 4 1193 5 1195 6 1195 7 1196 8 1197 9
1198

9. Months 19 Days

John. April 6. 1199.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1200 2 1201 3 1202 4 1203 5 1204 6 1205 7 1206 8 1207 9
1208 10 1209 11 1210 12 1211 13 1212 14 1213 15 1214 16 1215 17 1216

7. Months 0. da.

Hen. 3. Oct. 19. 1216.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1217 2 1218 3 1219 4 1220 5 1221 6 1222 7 1223 8 1224 9
1225 10 1226 11 1227 12 1228 13 1229 14 1230 15 1231 16 1232 17 1233 18 1234 19
1235 20 1236 21 1237 22 1238 23 1239 24 1240 25 1241 26 1242 27 1243 28 1244 29
1245 30 1246 31 1247 32 1248 33 1249 34 1250 35 1251 36 1252 37 1253 38 1254 39
1255 40 1256 41 1257 42 1258 43 1259 44 1260 45 1261 46 1262 47 1263 48 1264 49
1265 50 1266 51 1267 52 1268 53 1269 54 1270 55 1271 56 1272

1 Month 0 da.

Ed. 1. Nov. 16. 1272
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1273 2 1274 3 1275 4 1276 5 1277 6 1278 7 1279 8 1280 9
1281 10 1282 11 1283 12 1284 13 1285 14 1286 15 1287 16 1288 17 1289 18 1290 19
1291 20 1292 21 1293 22 1294 23 1295 24 1296 25 1297 26 1298 27 1299 28 1300 29
1301 30 1302 31 1303 32 1304 33 1305 34 1306

8 Mon. 9. da.

Ed. 2. July 7. 1307.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1308 2 1309 2 1310 4 1311 5 1312 6 1313 7 1314 8 1315 9
1316 10 1317 11 1318 12 1319 13 1320 14 1321 15 1322 16 1323 17 1324 18 1325 19
1329

7 Mon. 9. da.

Ed. 3. Jan. 25. 1326.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1327 2 1328 3 1329 4 1330 5 1331 6 1332 7 1333 8 1334 9
1335 10 1336 11 1337 12 1338 13 1339 14 1340 15 1341 16 1342 17 1343 18 1344 19
1345 20 1346 21 1347 22 1348 23 1349 24 1350 25 1351 26 1352 27 1353 28 1354 29
1355 30 1356 31 1357 32 1358 33 1359 34 1360 35 1361 36 1362 37 1363 38 1364 39
1365 40 1366 41 1367 42 1368 43 1369 44 1370 45 1371 46 1372 47 1373 48 1374 49
1375 50 1376

5 Mon. 7. da.

R. 2. June 21. 1377.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1378 2 1379 3 1380 4 1381 5 1382 6 1383 7 1384 8 1385 9
1386 10 1387 11 1388 12 1389 13 1390 14 1391 15 1392 16 1393 17 1394 18 1395 19
1396 20 1397 21 1368 22 1399

3 mon 14. da.

H. 4. Sept. 29. 1399.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1400 2 1401 3 1402 4 1403 5 1404 6 1405 7 1406 8 1407 9
1408 10 1409 11 1410 12 1411 13 1412

6 mon. 3 da.

H: 5. Mar. 20. 1412:
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1413 2 1414 3 1415 4 1416 5 1417 6 1418 7 1419 8 1420 9
1421

5 mon. 24 da.

H. 6. Aug. 31. 1422
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1423 2 1424 3 1425 4 1426 5 1427 6 1428 7 1429 8 1430 9
1431 10 1432 11 1433 12 1434 13 1435 14 1436 15 1437 16 1438 17 1439 18 1440 19
1441 20 1442 21 1443 22 1444 23 1445 24 1446 25 1447 26 1448 27 1449 28 1450 29
1451 30 1452 31 1453 32 1454 33 1455 34 1456 35 1457 36 1058 37 1459 38 1460

6 mon. 16 da.

Edw. 4 Mar. 4. 1460.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1461 2 1462 3 1463 4 1464 5 1465 6 1466 7 1467 8 1468 9
1469 10 1470 11 1471 12 1472 13 1473 14 1474 15 1475 16 1476 17 1477 18 1478 19
1479 20 1480 21 1481 22 1482

1 mon. 8 da.

R. 3 June 22. 1483.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1484 2 1485

2 mon. 5 da.

H. 7 Aug 22. 1585.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1486 2 1487 3 1488 4 1489 5 1490 6 1491 7 1492 8 1493 9
1494 10 1495 11 1496 12 1497 13 1498 14 1499 15 1500 16 1501 17 1502 18 1503 19
1504 20 1505 21 1506 22 1507 23 1508

8 mon. 19 da.

H. 8 April 22. 1509
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1510 2 1511 3 1512 4 1513 5 1514 6 1515 7 1516 8 1517 9
1518 10 1519 11 1520 12 1521 13 1522 14 1523 15 1524 16 1525 17 1526 18 1527 19
1528 20 1529 21 1530 22 1531 23 1532 24 1533 25 1534 26 1535 27 1536 28 1537 29
1538 30 1539 31 1540 32 1541 33 1542 34 1543 35 1544 36 1545 37 1546

10 mon. 1. da.

Edw. 6 Jan. 28 1546.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1547 2 1548 3 1549 4 1550 5 1551 6 1552

5 mon. 19 da.

Mar. Iul. 6. 1553.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1554 2 1555 3 1556 4 1557 5 1558

4 mon. 22. da.

Eliz. No. 17. 1558.
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1559 2 1560 3 3561 4 1562 5 1563 6 1564 7 1565 8 1566 9
1567 10 1568 11 1569 12 1570 13 1571 14 1572 15 1573 16 1574 17 1575 18 1576 19
1577 20 1578 11 1579 22 1580 23 1581 24 1582 25 1583 26 1584 27 1585 28 1586 29
1587 30 1588 31 1589 32 1590 33 1591 34 1592 35 1593 36 1594 37 1595 38 1596 39
1597 40 1598 41 1599 42 1600 43 1601 44 1602

4 mon. 15 da.

Jac. Mar. 24. 1602
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1603 2 1954 3 1605 4 1606 5 1607 6 1608 7 1609 8 1610 9
1611 10 1612 11 1613 12 1614 13 1615 14 1616 15 1617 16 1618 17 1619 18 1620 19
1621 20 1622 21 1623 22 1624

0. mon. 3. da.

Carol. Mar. 27. 1625
An. Reg. An. Dom. 1 1625 2 1626 3 1627 4 1628 5 1629 6 1630 7 1631 8 1632 9
1633 10 1634 11 1635 12 1636 13 1637 14 1638 15 1639 16 1640 17 1641 18 1642 19
1643 20 1644 21 1645 22 1646 23 1647 24 1648

King Charles died the 30 of Jan. 1648. having Reigned 11 months above 23 years
according to 28 days per mensem.

These Books following are Printed for Henry Twyford and are to be sold at his
shop in Vine-Court middle Temple.
Law Books.
THe Practick part of the Law, or complete Attorney. The second part of the
Practick part of the Law; or the Laymans Lawyer. Kitchins Jurisdictions of
Courts Leet, Courts Barron etc. Plowdens Abridgement english. Abridgment of
Lord Cokes comment on Littleton. Abridgement of Pultons Statutes at large by
Edmund Wingate Esquire The body of Law with a brief Summary by Edmund Wingate Esquire
The Office and duty of an Executor etc, in 80. Richard Brownlow Esquire
Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas. Reports in 2 Vollumes the first and
second part. His declarations and pleadings in english. Judicial Writs,
english. The 12. part of the Reports of Sir Edward Coke english. Judge Hutton
Reports in english. Judge Owens Reports english An Epitomy of all the common
and statute law of this Nation now in force, by Will. Shepherd, Esquire. The
marrow of the Law, or the second part of the faithful Councellor by Will.
Shepherd esquire Sir Robert Brooks reading on the statute of limitations. The
Book for the drawing up of all manner of Judgments. The reading upon the
statute of Bankrupts, by John Stone esquire. The Conveyancers light, or the
complete Clark, and Scriveners guide, containing exact Presidents of all manner
of assurances and instruments now in Use, by the learned Judges and eminent
Lawyers, etc. Sir John Davis, upon the question of impositions, Tonnage,
Powndage, Prizage and customs etc. The commentary upon original Writs, by Will.
Hughs esquire. Coesars commentaries by Sir Clement Edmunds fol. History of the
Wars of Sweathland and Poland by John Fowler esquire. Sir John Finnits
Observations touching reception and precedence, the treatment and audience, the
Puntillioes and contests of foreign Ambassadors. Natura Exenterata or nature
unbowelled, being choice secrets and receipts fitted for the cure of all sorts
of infirmities, collected by the Countess of Arundel. Anti-Socinianisme, being
a confutation of the Socinian heresies, with a description of their lives and
deaths by N. Cheney, M. A. The life of St. Paul. St. Bonaventures Meditations
Soliloquies and Prayers. Mr Crag against Tombs, with Mr. Crags reply to Mr.
Tombs his answer. Stevensons Poems. European Mercury, describing the ways and
Stages through the most remarkable parts of the world. An exposition on the
4th. Article of the Apostles Creed, by Io. Crompe, M. A. The humble
remonstrance of Sir John Stawell. The vindication of Sir John Stawels
Remonstrance. The discontented Colonel, by Sir Io. Sucklin, a Play. The
Floating Island, by Strowd, a Comedy.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are Printed for, and sold by Thomas
Dring at the George in Fleetstreet near Cliffords Inn.
ARtamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, an excellent new Romance, written by that
famous Wit of France, Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostre-dame, and now
englished by F. G. Esquire Fol.

The Continuation of Artamenes or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new Romance,
being the third and fourth Parts, written by that Famous Wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre dame and now englished by F.G. Esquire Fol.

The third Volume of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new Romance,
being the fifth and sixth parts, written by that famous wit of France, Monsieur
de Scudery, Governor of Nostre-dame, and now englished by F.G. Esquire, Fol.
1654.

The fourth Volume of Artamenes or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new Romance,
being the seventh and eighth parts, written by that famous Wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now englished by F.G.
Esquire, Fol.

The fifth Volume of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new Romance,
being the ninth and tenth parts, written by that famous Wit of France, Monsieur
de Scudery, Governor of Nostre-dame, and now englished by F.G. Esquire Fol.

Ibrahim, or the Illustrious Bassa, an excellent new Romance, the whole work in
four parts, written in French by Monsieur de Scudery, and now englished by
Henry Cogan Gent. Fol.

Clelia, an excellent new Romance written by that famous Wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostre-dame.

The second Volume of Clelia that excellent new Romance, written by that famous
Wit of France, Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now englished
by J.D. Fol. 1656. The History of Philosophy by Thomas Stanley Esquire containing
those on whom the attribute of the wise was conferred, with diverse figures.

The second Volume of the History of Philosophy by Thomas Stanley Esquire, Fol.

The History of Suethland and Poland by John Fowler, illustrated with diverse
Figures, Fol.

The twelfth part of the Reports Sir Edward Coke Knight.

The Reports of that Reverend and learned Judge Sir Richard Hutton Knight, Fol.

The Reports of Judge Owen in Fol.

The Reading upon the Statute of the thirteenth of Elisabeth, Chapter 1. 7.
touching Bankrupts, learnedly and amply explained by John Stone in 8o.

Anti-Socinianisme, or a brief explication of some places of holy Scripture,
for the confutation of certain gross Errors, and Socinian Heresies, lately
published by William Pinchion Gent. also a brief description of the lives and
true Relation of the death of the authors, promoters, propagators, and chief
disseminators of this Socinian Heresy; how it sprung up, by what means it
spread, and when and by whom it was first brought into England by N. Chewney M.
A. and Minister of Gods word. in 4o.

M. Cragg against Tombs, concerning Infants Baptism. in 8o.

The life and death of Freeman Sonds Esquire, by Robert Boreman, B.D. in 4o.
sticht.

An Exhortation for desperate sinners, written by the Right Honorable the Lord
Viscount Grandison Prisoner in the Tower.

A Sermon preached at the Assizes at Huntington by John Gaul.

Sand's Psalms in 8o. large.

Good Thoughts for every day in the week by D.S. in 24o.

Modern Policies taken from Machiavel, Borgia, and other choice Authors, by an
eyewitness.

Mirza, A Tragedy really acted in Persia, written by Robert Barron Esquire in
8o. large.

Five new Plays written by Richard Broom in 8o. large.

Poems, Amorous, Lusorie, moral and Divine, written by Edward Sherburn Esquire
in 8o. large.

Poems by Robert Barron Esquire in 8o. large.

Poems by William Hammond Esquire.

An Apology for Paris, written by Robert Baron Esquire.

A Catalogue of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen that have compounded for
their estates, with the sums that paid their Compositions.

The second part of Massaniello, his body taken out of the Town-ditch, and
solemnly buried, A Continuation of the Tumult: The Duke of Guise made
Generalissimo, taken prisoner by young Don John of Austria, the end of the
Commotions, by J. Howell Esquire.

The natural and experimental History of Winds etc. written in Latin by the
Right Honorable Francis Lo. Verulam, Viscount Saint Alban, translated into
english by R. G. Gent.

A TABLE OF THE Principal matters contained in this BOOK.
A.
ABeyance, Where an estate or Remainder is in Abeyance 14 Ancestors, what act
is an assurance of rents arrear, or a Condition broken 26 Actions on the Case,
For what words lie 133 For what acts lie 133 Ages, The several ages of Men and
Women 116 Administrators, To whom Letters of Administration to be granted 86
Who to grant them 87 Where one may do an act without his companion 88 Who shall
administer, and be an Administrator of an Administrator 88 Alien, where may
inherit and may have Heirs 42, 43 Appurtenants, what pass by those words, Cum
pertinentiis. 104, 105 License to Alien, where may be countermanded, where not
107 Assignee, who properly is said an Assignee 14 Where they are bound in
Covenant, where not 107 108, 109, 110 Assise, what it is to arraign an Assise
130 Attornement, where requisite 33, 34, 37, 38 By whom to be done 38 What acts
or words a good one 38 Where the Lands pass without attornement 98, 99
B.
Bail, the effect of special Bail in the Kings Bench 92 Bargain and Sale,
what consideration sufficient 58 Where Inrollment is necessary in it 58, 63
What words raise it 59, 6 What consideration averrable 59 What consideration
sufficient to alter an use in it 55, 60
C.
COmmon Recoveries, their force 62 What are fraudulent 68 What best to bind
estates tail 105, 111 Conditions, The manner of an Entry upon a Condition 119,
120 What is a Condition without words conditional 119 Against two, where void,
and the Estates or Deeds voyded 114, 115 Repugnant, where void, and the estates
or Deeds vyod 114 Who may enter and take advantage of them 6, 79, 95, 99 What
act is an affirmance of a Condition broken 31, 94 Who may enter for them broken
31, 48 Words to make it 44 In Deed and in Law, and their constitutions 487
Where one is in of his former estate upon their breaking 48 Where estates tail
may be restrained by conditions 95 Who may be bound not to alien 110 Where may
apportioned 111 By whom the money to be paid, by whom not 112 113 Impossibles,
where void and avoid the estate, or Deed 114 Considerations, which good 63
Conveyances, by how many ways lands may pass 60, 61 Covenant, The form of one
joint and several 43, 44 What words make a Covenant, what not 110 Corruption of
blood, How restored 41
D.
DEed, The premises, what they are, and their office in a Deed 1 Habendum,
what it is and its office. 1 Where a Habendum is repugnant and void 1 Its force
over the premises 2 When a Deed shall commence 14, 15 Where a Habendum is good
69 Where a Habendum is void and the premises good 103 Deed, Where void 103,
104 Where to be sued, if dated, in what place 118 Solvendum in a Deed, where
void and the Deed good 119 Voydable, where void, and by what persons 133, 134
Deceit, where lies for doing acts out of Ancient demesne 135 Defeasance, of a
Statute, where void 98 What may be defeated 130 Demand, For what things it must
be made, and at what time 25, 26, 29, 30 Where to be made 26, 27, 28, 29, 30
Who shall take advantage without it, who not 27 Dower, where lost 72 Distress,
what may be distreined without property, what not 130 Where a distress and
detention is Tortious 130
E.
ENtry, To vest what estates entry is lawful 31 Estates, what persons may take
them 4 What Estates may depend one upon another 14 What may begin in futuro 93
Where a thing in Grant may commence in futuro 105 Estrey, what properly an
Estrey 84 Execution, land at what time liable to execution, what not, 85 The
several sorts of them 153 Final, what 154 Quousque, what 154 Statute Merchant
and Staple 154, 155 156, 157 Exposition of words, Tenement and hereditament 106
Vesturum terrae 106 Herbagium terrae 106 Herbagium bonorum 106 Seperalem
Pischariam 106 Aquam suam 106 Profits of lands 108 Executors, when chargeable
40 When they have a trust 76 And when an interest 76 What they have 86 What
they may do before probate 86 What they are to do in proving the will 86 When
they may refuse What they may retain to their own satisfaction 88 What they
are to pay, and what first Where one may release and do an act without his
companion and charge him 87 Who shall be executors, and of an executor of an
executor 88
F
FEe, what words raise a fee 59 Feoffment, When a Conveyance is called a
Feoffment. 61 Fine, what it is, and what passes by it 61 What time to claim,
and who are bound by them 61 Upon fines, Feoffments, and recoveries, how the
estate settles 62 What good to bind an estate tail with proclamation 105
Forfeitures, upon what wrought 40, 85 What estates of what persons wrought by
it 40 Forged Deeds, what Deeds are suspicious 116 Fraudulent Deeds, what so
accounted 84, 68 What accounted made bona fide 82 Fresh suite, upon what the
party shall have his goods again 84
G
GRant, where by the grant of one thing another passes 69
H
Heirs, where bound by the Acts of their Ancestors 38, 39, 40, How to be
charged 39 Who may be heirs 40, 41 Where they may take 77 What words in
devises carry estates of inheritance 78, 79, 80 When Inheritances are lineall
or collateral, and how shall inherit. 124, 125 Who is to be preferred 124,
125, 126 127, 128, 129 The heirs of what persons may inherit 129 Herriots, what
may be seized, what not 131
I
JVdgement, upon what to be given 40 Jointure, what a good Jointure and the
manner of making it, and its quallifications 70, 71 Where it is a bar of
dower, where not, 72
L.
License to Alien, where may be countermanded where not 107 Limitation, what is
a limitation and what an interest 12 What words make it 95 Livery and Seisin,
how many sorts 35 How may be done 35 What Acts amount to it 36, 37 What passes
by it 36 Of what things to be given 37 Within the view, and who to take by it
37 Who may do it 36 Where void 93 Where free hold passes without it 98, 122
Legacy, where to be taken without the consent of the executor 88 What to be
paid first 89 What to be sold, to pay debts 89 Leases, for how long to be made
60 Who may make leases for three Lives or twenty one years 66 And what
quallification they must have 66, 67, 68, 69, 70 When shall commence, when
not, when inclusive and exclusive 131, 132 Livery, Several and special, and
the difference 116
M.
MAintenance, what it is 134 Mise, what it signifies 118 Misnosmer, where a
Party misnamed in a Deed shall take advantage of it 147
N.
NOtice, where requisite 33
O.
OFfices, where may be discharged without their Fee, where not 101 Where may be
forfeited 101, 102
P.
PArdon, what operation it has, what not 41, 42 Possession what, it is 128 The
several sorts of them 128 What actual, and what in Law ibid Purchase, who may
purchase 41
R.
REleases of demands, how far go, 49, 90 What they will extinct, what not 55
Before Interest, and where good 901. 91 What words sufficient to work it 91,
70 Reddendum, the manner of it 13, 24 Remainder, what it is, and its several
properties 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 Upon what estate it may depend 7 When it is
contingent 89 Where good 48 How limited is void 89, 99 Rent, in what manner
may be granted 5 What persons shall have Rent, and what time 22, 24 Within
what time to be paid, and upon what to take advantage 22, 23 Where the death
of the Party shall discharge it 23, 24, 29, 32 Where reserved shall go to the
parties, where not 27 Where the Profits shall be accounted as satisfaction 30
Remitter, where wrought 16 Reversion, what it is, and why so called 101
Revocation, where good 45, 46 Where extinct 46 How construed 47 Where uses
are revocable 55 Where may be done in part 5^1 By what to be made ibid. What
Acts a good Revocation 57, 58 What to be observed in them 58
S.
SAle in Market overt, where it bars the right owner, where not 83 Scire
facias, upon what Execution 156, 157 Surrenders, The force of Surrenders in Law
72 What drowned by them 72 Where a Deed is surrendered 73, 74 Who may
surrender 74 What requisite in them 75 The several sorts of them 75, 76. What
is surrendered by express words 76 Suspense, What estates may be suspended, by
what 13, 4. Where a Lease or other estate is suspended in the whole, where but
in part. 118, 119 Kings Silver, what it is 118
T.
Tail, what are special, and what general estates Tail 16 Who may make gifts
in Tail 77 What incident to it 95 Tender, at what time to be made to save a
condition 30 Where it is a Bar or the party may plead uncore past 111, 112
Tithes to whom they belong 120 Who shall pay them 121 When Unity of possession
discharges them, and what 121 For what things to be paid 121, 122 When a Place
is discharged, by what act 134, 135 Toll, when to be paid 134 Treasure Trove,
What said Treasure Trove 85
V
USes, the manner of their creation, 16, 17 18, 19 20 How may be raised 47 To
the uses of a man's last Will and Testament 72 Upon condition repugnant, where
void 79 Who may take the force of it 81 Usury, what it is, and when within the
Statute 121, 122, 123, 124
W.
WArranty, What words make a general VVarranty 49 Ward, where the heir is out
of Ward 131 VVast, the full definition of the word (without impeachment of
wast) 99 50 Who may punish it 50, 51 The several kinds of it 51, 52 What the
destruction 53 What recoverable ibid. What process in it 51, 53 Will and
Testament, what passes by it 64 What sufficient to pass Lands 64 Of what
things may be made 64, 65, 78, 82 Where alterable, where not 66, 79, 80, 81
Wreck. What made VVreck 84
Y.
Year, How many Parts it is divided into 118
FINIS.

