A Vindication of THOMAS HENSHAW Esquire, sometimes Major in the French Kings
service. In justiftcation of himself against the Aspersions thrown upon him.
Concerning a pretended Plott for which JOHN GERHARDE Esquire, and PETER VOVVELL
Gent: were murdered on the 10.th of August, 1654.
IN the Solitariness, to which (from the noise, and vanities of a false World,
and falser Nation) J was in Contemplation retired, to the cavernes, and Idea's
of Death; I could have passed over those several contradictory Scandals thrown
upon me, and taken my satisfaction from the blessing in store for those who
wrongfully are calumniated, if by the private sollitations of my Friends, and
the frequent al'armes of public impertinent Pamphlets; I had not been
awakened to the service of truth. And a Soldier is reduced to a sad exigencie,
who is forced to retreat to his Pen, principally where Truth is as dangerous to
be Printed as spoken.

I have seen several Pamphlets, which discribed, or framed a Plott, as false,
as senceless; where I am named a chief contriver. Truly these Writers have the
advantage and liberty of the Press, to dispose of any man's fame, as freely as
the High Court of Justice do of his body: And much at a rate: For if a
business (such as has been noised) were to be Executed; The King could not be
so indigent of Friends, that an Ale-house-keeper (meaner of Condition then
Profession) should be picked up, as a Person fit for the Honor Mr. Wharton
would give himself of Proclaiming the King in London.

And for Parson Hudson, were he deaf, and dumb, he might be an indifferent
Secretary, but being blind he is altogether an unfit correspondent for a King.

For some of the Mercenary Coll: Aldridge, etc.
hired Witnesses, that mentioned great sums of Money promised to them, I
believe the men spoke according to their inclinations. But they know Pluto to
be the God of Riches, and his chief Steward, and Cash-keeper in England, will
surely pay them for their lies: Or he himself will reward them, when they
audit their accounts. I should wonder why that subtle Sir that swayes the
Scepter in this Region of false-hoods, could not dictate better to them. But
truth will appear in despite of her Enemies.

For the other witnesses, Mr. John Wiseman (my half Brother) and Mr. Charles
Gerharde, Brother to the late murdered John Gerharde: I pity their youths,
and wish they had not been Phalleris licet imperet, and ad moto ducet perjuria
tauro.
frighted from Truth, nor flattered from Honor.

And for the discourse mentioned, with the Rightful King of England, it is as
false as the hearts of the Inventers of all these lies; Not but that according
to my duty, I shall ever faithfully serve him; and be proud if the loss of my
blood may advance his interest: With tears of Joy I saw him in health; yet
certainly my Brother cannot swear, I had the Honor to Kiss his hands, or
made any address to his Majesty. Indeed those that understand how deservedly
His Highness Prince RVPERT is esteemed at the Court of France, will not blame
me (who have received some hard measure there) if I made Suite to so worthy a
Patron, by his means and favor to get remedy.

For the business attested by Mr. Charles Gerharde, I must confess (from a
long Experience of his worth, and my knowledge of his affection to his injured
King and Country) together with Colonel Charles Finch, I had some discourse
with his Brother of the possibility the enslaved Gentry of this Nation, had of
Righting the best of Princes, and freeing themselves from so insupportable a
yoke: But that ever any such thing was agreed on, much less concluded to be
put in Execution, as (with so spacious a form of Time and Place) is pretended,
is as untrue, as if any man should affirm, that the Idol of this Nation is
not an enemy to God, whose houses he has laid waste, a Traitor to his King,
whose Lands he possesses, and an Imposter to his Poor young men. I believe
they might be terrified with his threats, as dismayed by the Examples of his
cruelty upon others, whose known Innocence was no safeguard against the
uttermost extremities of a most loathsome Dungeon.

O the barbarousness! O the impudence of an imperious tyrant? With what
arrogance? With what foul language did he insult over Gentlemen, better then
himself? But let this be the comfort of the afflicted, that the Lord has
looked down from Heaven, that he might hear the groanings of the fettered,
and loose the Children of them that are slain.

Now they that know the cunning of their Examiner, know also that he uses
artifice (with allurements, as well as threats) enough to stagger the
resolutions of Elder years: And they are not the first of many thousands that
have believed him, and consequently been deceived by him. What shall be added
to a deceitful Tongue? The sharp arrows of the Almighty, with coals of
desolation.

For my being lately at Paris, I am not obliged to give any man account, though
some notorious Liars, instruments (and some of the Mr. Clapole.
brood) of Cromwell have reported, that I had Money from him for my journey:
Others further suggest, that Mr. A dead man cannot contradict them
Henry Elsing carried me to him to receive money for betraying Gentlemen in
this pretended Plot, with other the like inventions; which had they been true,
Cromwell needed not have tempted so many, with so large sums to betray my
life, as by many Gentlemen of Honor in London will be attested.

And truly men of worth should be more tender of reporting things upon trust to
the prejudice of a Gentleman's repute, who cannot appear to contradict them. In
a Country, whom he has cheated out of all her Liberties.

For the little printed Libell (as they call it) wherein is mentioned his
cruelty, avarice, and ambition, as unsatisfied as the Sea, or grave, etc. if
that were it is meant, I confess I writ it, but deny it to be a Libell: And
Cromwell is more civil then in his actions to give the lie, to one no more
Complementall with him. And yet I subscribe my self altogether unable to speak
his deserts.

And now I appeal to all impartial people, if these amazed terrified
witnesses (who from their own mouths stood convicted) were more sufficient
then the Judges, of whom so many are so notoriously perjured, that I blame not
Mr. Vowell, for not admitting them to be his Peers. And I believe when the
great leveller Death shall have reduced them to what by their Sentence he is
already brought, they will not so confidently stand before him in Judgment.

What he dyed for, I understand not; Further then himself in his last intended
Speech (now in Print) delivered; where he speaks as if the Sacrifices of
humane blood begun to Baall, and Beelzebub must be continued, And since the
Noblest for birth, and most eminent for Virtue, has (with such greediness)
been already quaffed off; the still growing thirst, must be allayed with such
as is remaining.

Our Savior observed of the great binders of Burdens, that for a pretense
They made long Prayers, whilst they devoured Widows houses: But our Pharisie
was at prayers (or seeking the Lord) whilst he gave order for the Murdering
his Sovereigne, Tantum religio poterat suadere malorum!
and Widowing three whole Nations; And having thus bereaved them of their
Crown, and glorious Head; he has made them a false visard (like his own
hands and heart) forged out of rusty Iron. And what is yet more grievous, their
Children are constrained to bow down before this monster Idol; as the Indians
worship the Devil for fear of harm.

Now notwithstanding his persecuting my Friends, his dealing with base People,
and consulting with Wizards for the finding me out, and his offers of sums of
money, larger then the Fee-simple of his own rightful Inheritance. (How
highly he thirsts for blood! And how dearly his draughts cost the Nation!)
Alexander, ia: who lived in the Mewes, received 100. l. and has a yearly
Pension promised him for (inventing) then discovering this pretended Plott.

Yet by Divine providence my Soul is escaped, as a Bird from the snare of the
fowler; But not from his unjust lips, and deceitful tongue; for when he
could not reach my Person to gratify his most inveterate malice with my blood,
he struck at my reputation, and by his Practices he made Mr. Gerhard my friend
(whose memory I shall ever Honor) dye in a belief, that I was in his custody,
and persuaded him (as he has almost the whole world) to credit that I was the
Author of all his own invented lies; To which, to give a better gloss, he
has varnished them with (his usual tincture) Blood: For which color he was
wilfully bent the innocent Gentleman should find such justice, as his mercy
commonly distributes.

And he has so exquisite an art of Brewing, then spreading the black issue of
his brain, with Circumstances. and appearances of Truth; that many of my
intimate Friends, have been induced to doubt my Loyalty. Insomuch, that I
should have appeared in defense of my honor, and justification of my self, if
we might have had legal trial: But it had been madness to indulge the
luxurious malice of my Enemies, with that blood, which I am obliged to preserve
for the service of my King and Country.

When the measure of his Iniquities is full, vengeance will overtake him, In
the mean time as God set a mark on Caine the first, so he has set a guard
on Cromwell the greatest Murderer.

J cannot but pity the common Soldiers, who share largely in his guilt, but
yet continue poor, and in slaverie to him, as Witches, to the Devil.

At the great day of reckoning, when inquisition shall be made for Blood, it
will not excuse them, to say, they were Commanded; for their hands support the
Murderers, and all their mischiefs: And though now they are ingenious to
delude themselves, they will then know, that there is no drop of blood spilt,
from which the Souls of those far remote, as well as of those present
receives not a stain.

I pray God their eyes may at length be opened, that they may not longer
hazard their precious Souls in the service of Sin, and Satan; for the wages
is death, and that death Eternal.

Fear not those that can Kill the body but not hurt the soul, but fear him
that can bring both Body and Soul to destruction. And they that truly serve,
and fear him, will not for the vain hopes of the frail world be disloyal
to the best King in it: For whom I shall ever pray, that God will guide, and
Protect him, and give me one day a possibility, of testifying to the world;
that I am as much as any man living, his true and faithful Subject; of which,
God Almighty raise him sufficient numbers.

FINIS.
Printed at the SPAVV. MDCLIV.


