A DECLARATION FROM THE Isle of Wight, and County of Hampshire Concerning the
KING: And the trial of Captain Burley, upon high Treason about the late Muteny
in the said ISLE.

ALSO The Mayor and Aldermens Letter of the City of Rochester in Kent, to Sir
Thomas Fairfaxes Ofcers, to keep their Forces from coming thither: And the
Answer thereunto.

Together with the burning of the Gates of Canterbury. A Regiament gone to
Dover, and the Governors Propositions concerning delivering up of the Castle
to whom Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint.

Janua. 23. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbott.



London, Printed by R. I. 1648.

A LETTER FROM The Major and Aldermen of the City of Rochester, to Sir Thomas
Fairfaxes Officers, to keep their Forces from coming thither.
Sir,
THE marching of some of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Forces into this County is a
great grief to the disaffected party whose designs thereby are like to be
utterly frustrate. The last week Colonel Hewsons Regiament of foot containing
about fourteen hundred men, marched into Canterbury without any manner of
opposition, neither indeed could there be any, for before their coming, upon
appeasing of the late mutiny on the 24. of December last the gates of the City
were burnt down, to prevent the design of those which endeavored to bring
the whole City into a confusion, and would have kept it by force against the
Parliaments forces, For which Sir William Manwood. Mr. Norwood, J. Baker, Tho.
Annis and above forty others were taken into custody and are since sent from
Canterbury to Leeds Castle for better (...) th^^gs ^^^^ue (...) p^^c^^n (...),
a^^ the Soulders behave themselves very civilly, most of them being quartered
in Innes and Victualling houses. At nine of the clock at night a Drum is beaten
through the City, and if afterward any of the Soldiers are found out of their
quarters or any way disordered they are committed to custody of the Marshall
(...) have punishment.

On Saturday last Lieutenant Colonel (...) (Lieutenant Colonel to Colonel
(...) with about five hundred of that Regi^ment marched from Canterbury to
Sandwich, but before they came quite at the Town the Mayor and Aldermen met
them and showed great respect to them, and the Mayor spak to the Officers and
declared the good affection of their Town in general to the Parliament, and
the Army, and after some further discourse the Officers accompanied the Mayor
and Aldermen into the (...) and at their earnest request dined with them, in
the mean while the private Soldiers and some of the inferior Officers stayed
about half a mile from the town, to whom the Mayor caused to be sent two
Hogs-heads of strong beer, and great store of bread and cheese and other
victuals, and toward night they were drawn to another place to quarter, and
afterward returned back again to Canterbury, where they (...) but one nights
stay, for although the rest of the ^^^^ent remain here, yet these five hundred
men has Orders not to stay but to march away again toward (...) (...) with a
Letter to Lieutenant Colo. J^bbs and the rest of the Officers, from the Mayor
and Aldermen of the City of Rochester, signifying unto them, That whereas they
h(...) what they (...) Their (...) Rochester It was not the intent of that City
to show the least opposition thereunto, setting forth their good affection
toward His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and the forces (...), but for that it
had plea^ed God, the very day (...), to lay his hand on (...) City they d^^ed
for prevention of any further infection in the City or the indangering the
Army, that they would forbear to quarter in that Town. To which the Officers
returned(...) to the Mayor and Aldermen (...) they could not (...) from the
orders they had, which were to come to Rochester, And on Thursday about four a
clock in the afternoon they marched into the City where they were friendly
^^^^rtained and particular quarters appointed du(...) in which business the
discreet care of the Officers of the Army and the Constables of the Town is
observable, For as the poor were altogether eased for were not the rich over
burdened, neither were there above four or five houses which had Tickets to
billet above one Soldier in a house, so that when there came but one where
they expected two or three, repining thoughts vanished, and the Soulders were
made welcome there, and nothing seemed to sad the hearts of the people but the
dying of two of the town that night of the sickness, and some others infected
therewith, which indeed proved to be such a terror to the Country people that
the market was very small there on Friday last.

There is one thing more which I had almost forgotten, and that is this,
Colonel Rainsboroughs Regiament is marched to Dover, and we hear that the
Governor of the Castle (Captain Boys) offers to resign His commission if His
Excellency require it.

In the mean while he supplicates for pay for the Soldiers under His
command, and having done long service in that Castle, So I rest,

Canterbury, the 22. Jan, 1647. Your assur^^ ^^iend Jo. Hewet.
Postscript.
THis evening as I was sealing up of my Letters came a Post to Town which
brings news that Sir Lewis Dives is escaped out of the Kings Bench, and is
gone into France or the I Will of Jersey, and he reports further that he gave some
great affront to his keepers* Here was also a great report that the King was
coming from the I Will of Wight toward London, But by other intelligence from
Westminster which seems to carry far more weight, it is said that nothing of
that nature has hitherto been moved in the House, which gives me assurance
that the other report is altogether groundless, and fained and only raised by
such as would have it so. This is all which he has at present to accommodate
his friend who still remains.

Your faithful Friend Jo. Hewet.


Die Lunae, 24 Januar. 1647.
THE Commissioners which went down into Hampshire to try Captain Burley and
others, which were chief Actors in the late mutiney in the (...) of Wycke (and
had a (...) (...)ments Commissioners came away, which carried the four Bills
to his Majesty return to London (...) and this day report was made thereof to
the House, to this effect.

That the said (...) before the said Commissioners, and Indicted of high
Treason, to which Indightment, he pleaded not guilty, and so putting himself
upon the trial of the Country, he was found guilty by the Grand Jury, which
are the representative body of the Isle of Wight. and County of Hampshire, and
after verdict was brought in, the Judges gave sentence (according to Law) that
the said Captain Burley should be hanged, drawn and quartered:

Two others were also indighted, and were found guilty of a Riot, for which
they were deeply fi^ed, some others which were more principal actors in the
business have made an escape.

There was also this day read in the House of Commo^^ a Declaration from the
Grand Jury of the Isle of Wight, and County of Hampshire, to this purpose:

We the Grand Jury men of the Country of Hampshire being called to give our
Verdicts concerning Captain B^rley and others; do Declare according to our
consciences, that the design to carry away the King, was with an intent to
engage the Kingdom in a new war and to bring a general ruin and
destruction on the same. And therefore we further declare that we do approve of
the said Votes concerning the King, and their proceedings against such as shall
any ways oppose or disobey the Orders of Parliament, in settling the peace of
the Kingdom and the rights and liberties of the Subject in persuance whereof we
will live and dye in defense and maintenance of both houses of Parliament.

Signed by the Foreman, and the rest of the Jury.



FINIS.
This Declaration of the Grand Jury is ordered forthwith to be printed and
published.

Im. G.M.


