THE MODERN ASSURANCER, OR THE CLARKS DIRECTORY.

Containing the PRACTICK PART of the LAW, in the exact Forms and Draughts of
all manner of Presidents for Bargains, and Sales, Grants, Feoffments, Bonds,
Bills, Conditions, Covenants, Joyntures, Indentures; to lead the Uses of Fines
and Recoveries, with good Provisoes, Covenants to stand seized, Charter-Parties
for Ships, Leases, Releases, Surrenders, etc. And all other Instruments and
Assurances now in use: Intended for all young Studients and Practizers of the
LAW.

By J.H.

With an exact Table wherein may be found the principal Matters therein
contained.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Vine-Court Middle Temple, and Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1658.

THE MODERN ASSURANCER, OR THE CLARKS DIRECTORY Containing the Practick Part of
the LAW, in the exact Forms and Draughts of all manner of Presidents.

Printed for H: Twyford, and N: Brooks, 1658.



TO THE READER.
THere are many Books of Presidents, of Conveyances, Assurances, and
Instruments now extant, which indeed are very good and useful in their
several natures and kinds. But there being no Piece so contrived as to contain
in it self all manner of Instruments; I was desired by several persons to make
an exact Collection of some Presidents of every sort: so that with this Book
(and my former Collections, Entitled the Conveyancers Light) you might be
sufficiently furnished with perfect Presidents fitted for every purpose,
without the trouble of turning over other Books: And the same are so
Methodically disposed under particular Heads, that you may out of the same
extract any Grant, Covenant, Proviso, Article, Condition, Agreement, or any
other thing as your Case shall require: And by the means aforesaid, you may
find both Matter and Form to compose, perfect, and complete, any Instrument
whatsoever; And the Forms that are here put for Conditions of Bonds, may with
much ease be turned into Provisoes, Conditions, or Covenants, as occasion shall
require. I shall add no more, but hoping that these my Endeavors will answer
thy Expectation; I leave them to thy Candid Censure,

John Herne.

THE MODERN ASSURANCERS STUDY opened; Being a Collection of all manner of
ASSURANCES now in use both absolute and Conditional.
Articles of Agreement.
Articles of Agreement upon a marriage.
ARTICLES Indented of Agreement, concluded upon between I. Q. of Graies-Inne in
the County of M. Esquire, W. R. of C. in the County of M. Esquire, W. Q.
Citiz^n and Mereer of L. and R. B. Citizen and Draper of L. aforesaid on the
one party: And W. B. Citizen and Haberdasher of L. on the other party, of, for
and concerning a marriage to be had and solemnized by Gods grace between the
said W. B. and I. Q one of the Daughters and Orphants of I. Q late Citizen,
etc. The which said Articles being agreed and fully concluded upon between the
said parties first above mentioned the eight and twentieth of January in the
year, etc. do hereafter ensue in manner and form following, That is to say,

First the said W. B. does faithfully agree, promise, and conclude to and with
the said I. Q. W. R. W. Q. and R. B. That he the said W. B. shall by Gods grace
before the 25. of June next coming, take to wife the said I. Q. (if she will
thereunto consent and agree.)

Item, the same W. B. does promise, conclude and agree in manner and form
aforesaid, That he shall before the end of Easter term next ensuing, together
with his brethren H. B. and B. B. levy a Fine unto such persons as shall be
named by the said I. Q. W. R. W. Q. and R B. The which Fine shall be Sur
Conusans de droit come ceo, etc. of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments in the
County, of the clear yearly value of fifty pounds of, etc. over and above all
charges and reprises; The which Cognizees in the same Fines and their Heirs
shall be seized of the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments comprised in
the said Fine from the time of the celebration of Matrimony between the said W.
and I. to the use and behoof of the said W. B. and I. and of the heirs males
of the body of the said W. B. to be begotten of the body of the said I. and for
lack of such issue, then to the use of the said W. B. and of the heirs males
of his body lawfully begotten: And for lack of such issue to the uses, intents,
and true meaning of an entail thereof made by one H.B. deceased, Father of the
same W. B.

Item, the same W. B. does promise, conclude, and agree in manner and form
abovesaid, That he shall and will within the time and space of four years
next ensuing the date hereof, purchase, obtain, and procure Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments of the clear and yearly value of fifty pounds by the year,
above all charges and reprises to be lawfully assured and conveyed unto him the
said W. and to the said I. and to the heirs males, etc. upon the body of the
said I. to be begotten with the remainder of the same Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments to the said W. B. and his heirs for ever. And if it fortune that
the said W. B. do decease within the said four years now next ensuing as
aforesaid, and before that he have purchased, obtained, and procured Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments to the clear yearly value of fifty pounds by the
year in manner and form above rehearsed, Then shall the said W. B. leave,
give, and bequeath unto the said I. by his last Will and Testament, or
otherwise, the full and entire sum of six hundred pounds of, etc. over and
besides such part and portion as she the same I. may justly and lawfully claim
and challenge by the most laudable and ancient custom of the City of London.

Item, the same W. B. is pleased and contented, That if the same I. shall
fortune to decease before him the said W. B. That then it shall and may be
lawful for the said I. by her last Will and Testament to give and bequeath the
full sum of two hundred pounds of, etc. to what person or persons it shall
best stand with the likeing, good will and pleasure of her the said I. And the
same W. B. does most faithfully promise and agree to content and pay the same
sum of two hundred pounds, to such person and persons as to whom she the said
I. shall in manner and form aforesaid, will, bequeath, name, or appoint the
same to be paid within three months next after her decease, any Law or usage
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Item, the said W.B. does by these presents for him and his Executors promise
and agree in manner and form aforesaid, That if after such time as the full
portion, legacy or child's part being due unto her the said I. be contented and
paid unto the said W. B. There fortune any debt or bond to appear to be
lawfully due to any person or persons by the late Father of the said I. and now
not contained in the inventory made of his goods and debts, and which his
Executors shall hereafter be lawfully compellable to pay, That then the same W.
and his Executors shall contribute, portion, and portion like, as equity,
conscience and reason will or shall require for and toward the payment of the
same. In witness whereof the said parties to these present Articles indented
of Agreement, enterchangeably have set their Seals, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants where two young men having taken their Masters Shop
after his decease they are bound to the Administrators to gather in his debt,
etc.
THis Indenture, etc. Between A. G. and W. D. Citizen and Aldermen of L.
Administrators of the goods and chattells which late were of R. C. late Citizen
and Salter of L. on the one part, And R. A. and R. H. Citizens, etc. on the
other part witnesses, That the said A. G. in part of the performance of the
Testament of the said R. C. and for diverse other good considerations, etc. Has
demised, etc. to the said R A. and R H. all that the Shop of the late dwelling
house of the said R. C. in the Parish, etc. To have and to hold the said Shop,
etc. from, etc. for five years, etc. yiedling, etc. forty pounds, etc. at the
Feasts, etc. And the said R. A. and R. H. for themselves and either of them,
their Executors, and Administrators do covenant and grant to and with the said
A. and W. and to and with either of them, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them by these presents in form, etc. That they the said
R. and R. and either of them, by all earnest ways and means without suit in
Law to the best that in them shall lie shall endeavor themselves to obtain, get
in, and come by all such debt and debts as any Debtor or Debtors did owe unto
the said R. C. at the time of his decease and yet remain unpaid for any Wares,
Merchandises or other things whatsoever which did belong to the said R. C. And
that once every week or otherwise at any time and from time to time at all
times upon any reasonable demand or request to be made by the said A. and W
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, they the said R. and R.
and either of them, their Executors, and Administrators shall make true account
to the said A. and W. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for so much
of the said debts and every part thereof as the said R and R. and either of
them, or any for them or either of them in the mean time shall have, receive,
or take satisfaction for by any means. And then shall make speedy and ready
payment to the said A. and W. or to one of them, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns of and for so much of the said debts as the said R.
and R. or either of them or any other for them or either of them shall have
received or taken satisfaction of as aforesaid without any manner of fraud or
covin. And also that they the said R. and R. or either of them, their Executors
or Administrators during the said term of five years shall not by any means
directly or indirectly, by themselves or any of them, or by any other for them,
or any of them take or receive payment or satisfaction for any Goods or Wares,
which they or any of them shall sell to any the late Chapmen or Customers which
were of the said R. C. and yet have not paid all the debt which they did owe to
the said R. C. before such time as such Chapman and Customer of whom the said
R. and R. or either of them, their Executors or Administrators, or any of them
shall receive payment or satisfaction for any of their own goods or wares,
shall first have truly paid all the whole debt which such Chapman or Customer
did owe to the said R. at the time of his decease (All such Chapmen or
Customers which were of the said R. C. at the time of his decease as are
dwelling within the City of L. or the Suburbs thereof only except.) A rentry
for non-payment of the Rent, etc. In witness, etc.

A Bill of Credit.
THis present writing witnesses, That I R. M. of London Alderman do undertake
to and with H. E. of the City of E. Merchant, his Executors and Administrators,
That if he deliver unto Sir F. D. Knight, of any of his Assigns to his use,
any sum or sums of money amounting to the sum of five hundred pounds of,
etc. or under; And shall take a Bill under the hand and seal of the said S F.
confessing and showing the certainty thereof, That then I my Executor or
Administrator having the same Bill delivered to me or them shall immediately
upon the receipt of the same Bill pay or cause to be paid to the said H. E. his
Executors or Assigns, all such sums of money as shall be contained in the
said bill, To the which payment well and truly to be made, I bind me, etc. In
witness, etc.

A Bill into the Chancery to have Witnesses examined in perpetuam Rei memoriam.
IN most humble wise shows unto your Lordships, your Orator I. S. Citizen and
Grocer of L. that whereas one I. C. deceased was lawfully seized in his demesne
as of fee, of and in three Messuages with the appurtenances in H. B. and A. in
the County of H. and of and in twenty acres, etc. and the said I. C. so being
seized of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises with
their appurtenances did about the twelfth day of June in the second and third
years of the reigns of our late sovereign Lord, etc. by his Deed of Feoffment
for and in consideration of diverse great sums of money to him by your Orator
paid thereof, enfeoff your said Orator, to have and to hold to your said
Orator, his Heirs and assigns for ever, to the only use of, etc. By force
whereof your said Orator entered into the laid Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
other the Premises, and was thereof lawfully seized in his demesne as of fee,
and the profits thereof coming has ever since taken and received as was
lawful for him to do, But so it is and it may please your Lordships, that by
reason your Orator has his estate in and to the Premises to him conveyed by
force of the same Feoffment, and that the perfecting of your Orators Estate by
the same Feoffment by order of Law, there is required execution thereof by
livery of seisin which being matter in Deed, is to be proved by Witnesses.
Certain troublesome and ill disposed persons by the procurement of J. C. the
younger, to the end to discredit your Orators title in and to the Premises
have of late notoriously and publicly in diverse places within the said County,
and other places reported that your Orator never had any such estate to him
conveyed by Feoffment, but that the said Feoffor thereof dyed seized: By which
indirect practices they intend to make men doubt and suspect your Orators right
in and to the same, and so to continue in their suspicion till such time as
your Orators witnesses which now are living and can testify the execution of
the said Deed should be dead, and then to bring your said Orators estate into
trial, and in and by the common Law of this Realm, wherein it shall behoove
your said Orator to make proof of the execution of his said Feoffment, the
want of which said proof considering the said false and slanderous rumors may
then put your said Orator in great hazard of the loss of his said estate and
right which if it should happen would be to the great hinderance of your said
orator and against Law and conscience, It may therefore in the consideration
of the Premisse please your good Lordships to grant unto your said orator his
Highness Writ of Subpoena against such persons as your orator shall think
convenient witnesses in the premises commanding them thereby having their
costs allowed to appear before your honors in the Court of Chancery there to
be examyned by the examyners of the said Court and testify their knowledges for
and concerning the executyon and proof of the same deed and all other
circumstances concerning the same, so as the same examination and depositions
may remain in this honorable Court, in perpetuam rei memoriam And your orator.
etc.

A Bill of Exchang.
AT double usance I pray you pay by this my first bill of Exchang my second not
being paid unto R. P. Merchant or the bringer hereof the sum of 39 l. 5 s.
Flemish money Current in Hamborowgh for merchandises, and is for the very value
thereof here by me received of the said R. P. at the day I pray you make him
good payment. And thus God keep you.

A Charter Party.
IN the name of God Amen. This Charter Party Indented of a Freightment made
this 28 th. day of N. In the year of our Lord 1651. Between J. C. Master of the
good ship or vessel called the F. of L. of the burden of 200. Tuns or there
abouts now riding at Anchor in the river of Thames of the one part, And A. C.
of L. Merchant of the other part Witnesses, that the said J. C. has granted
and letten the said Ship to Freight unto the said A. C. and he the said A. C.
has accordingly hired the said Ship for a voyage by Gods assistance to be made
with her as is hereafter mentioned. That is to say the said J. C. for him his
executors and administrators, does covenant, promise, and grant, to and with
the said A. C. his executors, and assig. by these presents, that the said Ship
shall with the first good wind and weather that God shall send next after the 10
th. day of D. next ensuing the date above written shall set sail and depart
from and out of the said river of Thames upon her said intended Voyage, and
before such departure shall receive and take into her all such goods and
merchandises as he the said A. C. his Factor or assigns shall lade or cause to
be laden aboard her which she may conveniently stowe and carry in her over and
above her victual, tackle, and apparel, and by Gods assistance as wind and
weather shall serve and the periles and dangers of the Seas excepted directly
sail and appley unto Nantz in Brittany, and there discharg the said goods out
of her, and also receive relade and take in to her again all such other goods
or merchandises, as the said A. C. his Factor or assigns shall relade or cause
to be reladen aboard her, and which she may conveniently stow and carry in her
as aforesaid, and then the said Ship shall with the first good wind and weather
that God shall afterward send (the danger of the Seas excepted) directly sail
and apply unto the Island of Saint Michael in the Dominions of the King of
Portugal and there to discharg and relade again according to the order and
direction of the said A, C. his Factor or assigns, and according to the like
order shall directly sail and apply to the Island of Terceras and Fyall, and
there make a discharge of the said merchants goods and merchandises, and also
at Terceras and Fyall aforesaid shall receive relade and take into her again,
all such goods and merchandises as are there usually laden which the said A.C.
his Factor or assigns shall relade or cause to be reladen aboard the said Ship
(and which she may conveniently stow and carry in her over and above her
victual tackle and apparel, and the said ship being so reladen at Terceras
and Fyall she shall (as wind and weather shall serve and the perrils and
dangers of the seas excepted) sail retorn and come back to the Island of Saint
Michael, and there receive such other goods and merchandises as the said
Merchant shall please to lade which are there accustomed to be laden (and which
the said ship may carry as aforesaid conveniently, and then the said Ship shall
with the first good wind and weather that God shall afterward send (the
perils and dangers of the Seas excepted) directly sail and apply unto
Falmoth, Plymouth, Dartmouth or the Isle of weight, or to one of those said
places; and the said Ship being accordingly arrived at one of the said places
the said I. C. or any other person that shall be master of the said Ship for
the time being shall send express notice by writing to be given or at least
unto or for the said A.C. his executors Factors or assigns, at or in the now
dwelling house of the said A. C. situate in D. near Algate London that the
said Ship and goods are safely arrived at one of the places aforenamed, and at
such place of arrival the said Ship shall stay six days for an answer, and
directions to be returned and given by him the said A. C. his executors,
Factors or assigns for the sailing and applying of the Ship before mentioned
unto Haverdegrace in France, Amsterdam in Holland, or to the parts of the city
of L. the charge of sending a messenger to give such intelligence as aforesaid
shall be satisfied and paid by the said A. C. his executors, Factors or
assigns, and according to such answer direction and appointment the said Ship
shall with the first good wind and weather that God shall send (the perrils and
the dangers of the Seas excepted) directly sail and apply either to
Haverdegrace in France or Amsterdam in Holland or the Port of this City of L.
which of the said places the said Ship shall be so ordered and appointed to
sail and apply unto, and within ten days after the arrival of the said Ship
at the same place to be appointed, the said Ship shall make her right discharge
of the said merchants goods and merchandises, and there end and finish her said
intended voyage (the perrils and dangers of the Seas excepted) And the said
ship shall tarry and Spend at Nantz the Island of Saint Michael Terceras and
Fyall for her several discharges and reladings there as before mentioned during
the space of threescore working days at Harbor, And the said I. C. or the
master of the said Ship for the time being shall at all and every of the said
places receive a note or notes in writing to be made and given by the said A. C
his executors, Factors, or assig. certifying therein how many days the said
ship shall have tatried at every several place before mentioned, and if the
said note or notes be not so given by the said merchant his factor, or assigns
then the master shall or may make protest. And the said A. C. for him his
executors and administ. does covenant promise, and grant to and with the said
I. C. his executors administrators, and assigns, by these presents, That the
said A. C. his heirs, executors, administ Factors or assigns, shall and will
not only within the said 60. days before limited lade relade and discharg
aboard and out of the said Ship at Nantz Saint Michael Terceras and Fyall, as
is particularly before herein mentioned which goods and Merchandises usually and
accustomary to be landen at the same place or places. And after notice of the
arrival of the said Ship unto Falmouth, Plymouth, Dartmouth, or the Isle of
Weight, shall within six days limited give order and direction unto the said
J. C. or the master of the said ship for the time being whether the said Ship
shall sail unto Averdegrace, Amsterdam, or to the Port of this City of L. to
make there right discharge: And shall at such place to be appointed discharge
the said goods and Merchandises out of the said Ship within ten days after the
arrival of the said Ship at such appointed place of discharge as aforesaid,
but also shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the said J C.
his Executors, administrators, or assigns, Freight for the said Ship at and
after the rate of four pounds of lawful money of England per Tonn for every
tonn of goods and merchandises accounting three Chests of Sugars to a Tonn two
thousand pounds of Tobacco and one and twenty Quintalles of wood Portugal
weight to a Tonn, and for other goods or Merchandises according to the usual
custom, and all such moneys as so shall arise and grow due to be paid for the
Freight or hire of the said Ship as before mentioned shall be satisfied and
paid unto the said J. C. his Executors, administ. or assigns within three
days next after the discharge of the said Ship at Haverdegrace or Amsterdam
which of them shall be appointed as aforesaid, And the same moneys to be paid
also according to the course of the exchange at such place to be appointed as
aforesaid, And in case the said Ship shall be discharged at L. by the order and
direction as aforesaid, Then the same moneys to arise and grow due at the said
rate of Four pounds per Tonn as aforesaid shall be truly paid unto the said J.
C. his executors, administrators, or assigns in L. within three days next
after such discharge of the said Ship at L. as aforesaid. And further, it is
agreed by and between the said parties, to these presents, that in case the
said A, C. his executors, Factors, or assigns, shall not fully lade the said
ship upon her return from the said voyage, Yet nevertheless the said A. C. his
executors, or administrators, shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto
the said J. C, his executors, or assigns, at and after the rate of Four
pounds of lawful money of England Per tonn for so many Tons as the said Ship
can or may carry by measure within 3. days after the last discharge to be made
by the said Ship in the said voyage, together with averidg accustomed, And it
is agreed that all Port charges that shall arise and grow due to be paid from
the said Ship for the said intended voyage shall be satisfied and paid in this
manner viz. Two third parts thereof by the said A. C. his Factors or assigns,
and the other third part thereof by the said J. C. his executors or assigns,
And further it is agreed that the said A. C. his Executors, or assigns, shall
truly satisfy and pay or cause to be paid unto the said I. C. the sum of five
pounds sterling to buy him a Hat, Provided always, and it is agreed by and
between the said parties to these presents that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said A. C. his executors, Factors or assigns, or any of them to
keep the said ship at Demoridge, at Nants, Saint Michael, Terceras, and Fyall,
before mentioned during the space of thirty days and no more if need shall
require after the expiration of the said threescore days before limited for the
stay of the said Ship at Nants, S Michael, Terceras and Fyall, before mentioned
for every day of which demoridge the said A. C. his executors, Factors, or
assigns shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said J. C. his
executors, administ. or assigns, the sum of three pounds of Lawful money of
England Per day for every day the said Ship shall be so occasioned to stay as
aforesaid after the expiration of the said threescore days before limited, and
the same moneys to arise and grow due for demeridge to be paid as it shall grow
due any thing aforesaid to the contrary notwithstanding, And moreover, it is
agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, that the said A. C.
his executors, Factors, or assigns, shall and will pay or cause to be paid
unto the said I. C. his executors, or assigns, all such sum and Sums of
money as he or they shall have occasion for at the Island of S. Michael,
Terceras, and Fyall so that the same moneys do not exceed the Sum of
threscore Millrees at most which is to be deducted out of such Freight as shall
grow due as aforesaid And it is agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents That the Master shall not lade any goods aboard the said Ship for any
other Merchant only the Master or his company shall have Five Tunns for their
own use without allowance for the same if occasion shall require. And further,
it is agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, That the said
A. C. his executors, Factors, or assigns at his and their own costs and
charges at every-Port and Place where the said Ship shall arive shall provid
demudge Bulke-heads, Deals, and Nails, and other necessaries, in case any
corn or grain shall be laden aboard the said Ship in the said voyage. And
further, it is agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, that
in case the said Ship by default of the said merchant his Factors, or assigns,
shall be dispatched from Nants, S. Michael, Terceras. and Fyall, aforesaid
within the said threscore days before limited and thirty days at Demoridge as
before mentioned, that then it shall and may be lawful for the Master of the
said Ship to retourn with the said Ship to L. the Merchant paying Frait as
aforesaid, And the said J. C. for him his executors and administ. does covenant
Promise and grant to and with the said A. C. his executors and assigns, by
these presents that the said Ship at the time of her departure from and out of
the said river of Thames upon her intended voyage shall be strong and
sufficiently victualed, tackled, furnished, and apparrelled with Masts, Sales,
yards, anchors, Cables, Rops, Cords, boat oars, twelve pieces of Ordinance,
guns, gunpowder, Shot, tackle apparel, ammunition, and furniture meet and
needful for the said Ship and voyage together with the aforesaid Master and
Twenty men and boys which men and boys or so many of them as shall be
needful, shall be ready at all due times with the boat of the said Ship and
shall serve and carry the said merchant his Factors or assigns, or any of them
to and from Land during the said voyage. And to the performance of all and
singular the covenants, grants, articles, payments, agreements, and all other
things before herein contained by and on the part and behalf of the said I. C.
his executors, or administrators, or any of them to be paid don and performed
as aforesaid the said J. C. binds himself his Executors, and administrators,
and espcially the said Ship with her Freight tackle and apparel unto the said
A. C. his executors, administrators and assigns, in the sum or penalty of
two thousand pounds of Lawful money of England truly to be paid by these
presents. And likewise to the performance of all and singular the covenants,
grants, articles, payment, agreements, and all other things before herein
contained by and on the part and behalf of the said A. C. his executors,
Administrators, Factors or assigns, or any of them to be paid don and
performed as ^foresaid, the s^id A. C. binds himself his executors,
Administrators and goods unto the said I. C. his executors administrators, and
assigns, in the like sum or penalty of two thousand pounds of like lawful
money of England truly to be paid by these presents, In Witness etc,

A Charter Party.
IN the name of God Amen, This Charter party Indented a fraighment made the 15.
of May, Anno 1657. Between L.T. and W. L. Partowners of the good Ship called
the L. of London of the burden of 100 tonns or thereabouts, now ryding at an
anchor in the River of Thames within the Port of this City of London (of which
Ship the said W. L. is Commander under God) on the one part, and R. M of London
Merchant on the other part Witnesses, That the said Partowners have granted
and letten to freight the said Ship unto the said Merchant by the month for and
during the term or space of twelve months, certain to begin and to be
accounted from the departure of the said Ship from Gravesend, outward bound
upon her present intended voyage at and for the rate and price of two hundred
and ten pounds of lawful money of England, per month; and for such and so long
time after the expiration of the said twelve months, not exceeding twelve
months more, as it shall please the said Merchant, his factors or assigns to
keep the said Ship in his service and employment, at and for the like rate and
price of two hundred and ten pounds of lawful money of England per month: And
so after the same rate and price for a lesser time then a month accounting the
months as they shall fall out in the Callendar, and that the said Merchant has
accordingly levied the said Ship by the month at the rate and price aforesaid
for a voyage (by Gods assistance) to be made with her as is hereafter
mentioned. (That is to say) the said Partowners for themselves, their Executors
and Administrators, do covenant, grant, and agree jointly and severally to and
with the said Merchant, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these
presents, That the said Ship upon or before the twentieth day of June now next
ensuing (wind and weather permitting) shall be ready and fitting to set sail
and depart from hence upon her said intended voyage, as wind and weather will
permit (the dangers of the Seas excepted) shall directly sail and apply unto
such parts and places within and without the Streights of Gibralter where the
said Ship may safely arrive and lawfully trade not exceeding the Latitude of
thirty degrees, and further to the Southward, as the said Merchant, his Factors
or Assigns, shall direct, order and appoint; And that the said Ship (the
perils and dangers of the Seas excepted) shall end her voyage in the Port of
London; And further that the said Ship before her departure from hence, and
during the time that she shall be in the service and employment of the said
Merchant, his Factors or Assigns by virtue hereof shall lade, receive, and
take into her, and also discharge and un-lade out of her all such Goods,
Merchandises and lading which she may conveniently stow and carry in her over
and above her victuals, tackle and apparel, as the said Merchant, his
Factors or Assigns shall think fit to lade and put into her, or discharge and
un-lade out of her, and the said Merchant, for him, his Executors and
Administrators does covenant and grant to and with the said Partowners and
either of them, their and either of their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns by these presents, That he the said Merchant, his Factors or Assigns
shall and will permit and suffer the said Ship with her ordinance, tackle, and
apparel to be safely returned in the River of Thames from the said voyage,
and be there discharged from and out of her said intended employment, at the
expiration of twenty four months to be accounted from the time of the said
Ships entrance into her monthly pay as aforesaid (the perils and dangers of
the Seas, and necessary use and wearing of her tackle and apparel and
furniture in the mean time only excepted.) And further that the said Merchant,
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns shall and will well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said Partowners or either of them, their or either of
their Executors or Assigns in London, freight for the said Ship for the said
intended voyage at and after the aforesaid rate of two hundred and ten pounds
of lawful money aforesaid monthly, for every month that the said Ship shall
remain and be in the service and employment of the said Merchant, his Factors
or Assigns by virtue hereof: And also after the same rate for a shorter time
then a month, that is to say, from the time of the said Ships entrance into
her monthly pay as aforesaid, until she shall be returned into the said River
of Thames from her said voyage and be there discharged from and out of her said
intended employment, and accounting the months as aforesaid: And that all the
moneys which at and after the rate aforesaid, shall arise or grow due to be
paid for the freight of the said Ship for her said intended voyage shall be
truly paid unto the said Partowners o^ either of them, their or either of their
Executors or Assigns in London, in manner and form following (That is to say)
the one half or moiety thereof within three days next after the return and
discharge of the said Ship in the said River of Thames; and the other moiety or
half part thereof within three months then next following, together with
average, primage, and Petilodminage accustomed. Provided always, and it is
conditioned, concluded, and fully agreed upon by and between the said parties
to these presents, That in case the said Ship shall be out upon her said
intended Voyage six months to be accounted as aforesaid, and at the end of the
said six months shall be well and in safty in the service of the said Merchant
his Factor or assigns (that then the said Merchant his Factors, or assigns)
shall three month next after the expiration of the said six months true and
certain notice or Certificate of such the wellbeing of the said Ship at the
end of six months being in the mean time given or left to or for the said
Merchant, his executors or assigns, at his now dwelling house in London so
much Freight as at and after the rates aforesaid shall be due for the said Ship
for six months service. And further that in case the said Ship shall be out
upon the said voyage twelve months, And at the end of the said twelve months
shall be well and in safty in the service of the said Merchant or his assigns,
that then the said Merchant his executors, or assigns, shall and will within
three months next after the expiration of the said twelve months true or
certain notice or certificate of such the wellbeing of the said Ship at the
end of twelve months being in the mean time given or left in manner and Form
aforesaid well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said Partners or
either of them their or either of their executors, or assigns in London over
and above the first said six months Freight so much Freight as, at and after
the rate aforesaid shall be due for six months service more. And moreover that
in case the said Ship shall be out upon the said voyage eighteen months and
at the end of the same eighteen months shall be well and in safty in the
service of the said merchant or his assigns, that then the said merchant his
execut. or assig. shall and will within three months next after the expiration
of the same eighteen months, true and certain notice or certificat of such
the well being of the said Ship at the end of 18. months, being in the mean
time given or left in such manner and form as is before mentioned, well and
truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said partners or either of them their or
either of their Factors, Executors or assigns, in London over and above the
said six months Freight so much Freight as at and after the Rate aforesaid
shall be due for other six months service, any thing aforesaid to the contrary
notwithstanding. Provided further, and it is conditioned and agreed between the
said parties to these presents that in case the said Ship shall be returned into
the River of Thames from the said voyage, and be there discharged of and out of
her said intended employment before the expiration of the said First Twelve
months to be accounted as aforesaid. Yet nevertheless the said Partners or
either of them their or either of their Exeuctors, or Assigns, shall have and
be allowed freight for the said Ship at and after the rate aforesaid, for the
full time of twelve months any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding: And moreover it is agreed that the said Merchant for him, his
Executors and Administrators, does hereby covenant and agree to furnish and
deliver during the said Voyage unto the said Master of the said Ship for the
time being, all such moneys as he shall have occasion to use for buying of
Provisions and other necessaries, and payment of men's wages which said moneys
shall be deducted and and allowed from time to time out of the freight that
shall respectively grow or become due by virtue hereof, and for that each and
every Doller, which shall be supplied in Christendom, the said Partowners
shall allow five shillings a Doller, and the said Partowners for themselves,
their Executors and Administrators do covenant and grant jointly and severally
to and with the said Merchant, his Executors or Assigns by these presents,
that the said Ship at the time of her departure from hence upon the said
Voyage, shall be strong and well and sufficiently victualled, tackled,
furnished, and apparrelled with Masts, Sail, Saile-yards, Anchors, Cables,
Ropes, Cords, Boat-oares, twenty five pieces of Ordinance, Guns, Gunpowder,
Shot, Tackle, Apparel, and Furniture meet and needful for the said Ship and
Voyage, together with the said Commander, three hundred forty three men and a
boy which men and boy, or so many of them as shall be requisite, shall be ready
at all due times with the Boat of the said Ship, and shall serve and carry the
said Merchant, his Factors and Goods according to custom, to and from Land
during the said Voyage. And lastly it is agreed between the said parties that
all such port charges as shall arise or grow due to be paid during the said
Voyage, and all such Steringree as during the same Voyage, shall be used in and
about the said Ship, shall be paid, borne, sustained in this manner, that is to
say one half by the said Merchant, his Executors or Assigns, and the other
half part thereof by the said Partowners, their Executors and Assigns: And to
the performance, etc.

A Charter-party passed.
IN the name of God Amen, this Charter party of a Freightment made between R.
F. of L. Mercer and E. F. of R. in the County of M. Master under God of a good
Ship called the Royal Merchant of L. of the burden of three hundred Tuns or
thereabouts, now ryding at an Anchor in the River of Thames, on the one part of
which Ship the said R. and E. are Partowners; And T. C. Mercer, and R.S.
Haberdasher, Merchants of London, owners of the other parts and residue of the
said Ship, on the other part witnesses, that the said R. F. and T. W. have
granted and letten to freight all their part of the Ship unto the said T. C.
and R. S. for a Voyage with her to be made by Gods grace in manner and form
following, that is to say, The said R. F. and E. W. for their part do covenant
and grant to and with the said T. C. and R. S. by these Present, That the said
Ship with the first good wind and weather that God shall send next after the
date hereof, shall by Gods grace directly sail from the River of Thames, with
such Goods and Merchandises as shall be laden in her unto the Port of Ligor^a
in Italy under the Dominion of the Duke of Florence, and there shall discharge
such Goods and Merchandises as shall be appointed there to be un-laden, and
from thence shall take her direct course with as much convenient speed as may
be unto the Isle of Janta in Graecia, under the Government of the Seignory of
Venice, and there shall tarry and abide by the space of forty working days
next after her first arrival there at an Anchor for to un-lade such goods and
merchandise as is or shall be appointed there to be un-laden freight free. And
also within the same time shall re-lade such Goods, Wares, and Merchandises as
the said T. and R. their Factors and assigns will there charge and lade into
the said Ship after the rate as follows, that is to say, accounting twenty
hundred net of Currance, for a Tun fifteen barrells of Oil, for a Tonne so
many Galls as will fill four Hogsheds for a Tonne, and for all other Wares and
Merchandises to be laden in the said Ship by the said T. and R. their Factors
or assigns after such rate as shall be reasonable, by 4 indifferent persons
whereof two to be chosen by the said T. and R. and the other by the said R. and
E. and that the said Ship with her burden shall with the first and next good
wind and weather after the expiration of the said forty working days by Gods
grace directly sail and come from the Isle of Janta unto the said City of
London for her right discharge or as near thereunto as she conveniently may;
and the said T. and R. do covenant and grant, and either of them covenanteth
and grants by these presents, That they, their Factors, Deputies, or
assigns, or some of them, shall and will well and truly pay or cause, etc. to
the said R. and E. or either of them, their or either of their certain
Attorneys, executors, or administrators, in the said City of L. six pounds of,
etc. for every Tonne of such wares and merchandises as aforesaid as shall be
laden in the said Ship by the said T. and R. their Factors deputies or assigns
ratable according to the parts and interests of the said R. and E. of and in
the said Ship in manner and Form following that is to say, one third part
thereof upon the right discharge of the said Ship and one other third part
thereof within the space of six weeks then next following, and the residue
thereof within the space of 6. weeks then next ensuing. And the said R. and E.
do covenant and grant and also warrant that the said ship for their parts shall
be strong and staunche and well and sufficiently victualed,, tackled and
apparelled with saile-yards, Anchors, Cables, Ropes, Guns, shot, Artillery,
gunpowder, and all other instruments, tackle and apparel needful and
necessary in such a ship for a like voyage; together with an able Master, 56.
men and a boy which men and boy shall be ready at all due times with the said
Cock-boate of the said Ship to serve the said T. and R. their Factors, and
assigns to and from Land during the said voyage and also to discharge and
relade the said Ship as opportunity shall serve. And to the aforesaid covenants,
grants, articles and all other things on the parts of every of the Parties
aforesaid truly to be holden kept and performed in all things as is aforesaid
the fame Parties do bind themselves one to an other, That is to say the said R.
and E. and either of them do by these presents bind themselves and their
several executors and goods, and their several Parts and interrests in the
said Ship with the furniture of the same to the said T. and R. and to their
executors, and administrators, And the said T. and R. and either of them do
likewise bind themselves their executors and administrators and all their goods
to the said R. and E. their executors and administrators in the sum and
penalty of 200 l. of etc. by the party or parties infringing Covenant to the
parties observing, truly to be paid by virtue of these presents. In Witness
etc. Dated etc.

Another Charter party.
IN the Name of God Amen, This charter party Indented of a Freightment made
between T. P. citizen and Alderman of L. And R.C. cityzen and Draper of L.
owners of the good Ship called the Primrose of London of the burden of 140.
tunns or there abouts at this present riding in the River of Thames within the
port of London whereof is Master under God for this present voyage T. W. on the
one part, And B. L. Merchant of Portugal now recident in London on the other
part, Witnesses, That the said owners and masters have granted and letten the
said Ship to Freight to the said merchant, And the said merchant has hired the
said Ship for a voyage with her to be made by Gods Grace in form ensuing, that
is to say, The said owners and master for them their Executors and administ.
and every of them do covenant and grant, and every of them covenanteth and
grants by these presents to and with the said merchant his executors, and
Administ. and every of them in form following, That is to say, That the said
Ship shall ride and tarry within the river of Thames until the fifteenth day
of this instant month of July, and shall receive into her within the said Port
of London Freight Free all such goods, wears, and merchandise, as it shall
please the said merchant his Factors or assigns there to charge and lade into
her before her departure, And not to receive into her before her departure any
of the goods corn or merchandises of any person or persons without the
special concent and agreement of the said Merchant his Factors, or assigns,
(except three packs of merchandises freight free of the proper goods of the
said R. C.) And that the said Ship shall with the first good wind and weather
that God shall send next after the said 15 th. day of this said instant month
of July depart and Sail from the Port of the said city of London with the
said received goods of the said merchant unto G. of this Realm, where she shall
tarry and abide by the space of ten days next ensuing her first arrival there
at an Anchor to receive into her Freight free as much corn as she may safely
carry, over and besides her victual, tackle, apparel munition and furniture
And moreover that the said Ship shall with the first good wind and weather that
God shall send next after the expiration of the said ten days directly Sail
from G. aforesaid unto Lushborne in the realm of Portugal as nigh the same
town as she may safely arive to make her right discharge, where the said Ship
shall tarry and abide by the space of 45. days next ensuing her first arrival
there at an Anchor, as well to discharge such goods received into her within the
said Port of London and at G aforesaid, As also to recharg and receive into her
140 Tunns in all such goods wares, and merchandises, as it shall please the
said Merchant his Factors or assigns there within the said 45. days to lade
into the said Ship before her departure. Provided always and it is agreed
between the said parties to these presents, And the said owners and Master do
covenant and grant for them their execut. and administrators, and every of them
by these presents to and with the said Merchant his Executors and assigns,
That if the said Merchant his Factors, or assigns cannot within the said 45.
days lade the said Ship at Lushborne aforesaid, That then the said Ship shall
tarry and abide at Lishborne aforesaid by the space of 15. days next after the
expiration of the said 45. days, and that the said Ship being as above at
Lushborne aforesaid laden shall with the first good wind and weather that God
shall send thereunto most apt and convenyent next after the expiration of the
said abiding days, or so soon as she shall be laden directly Sail from thence
to Andwerp or London to such of the same places where it shall please the said
Merchant his Factors, or Assigns that the said Ship shall make her Port of
discharge, In consideration whereof the said Merchant for him his executors
Factors and assigns and for every of them does covenant and grant by these
presents to and with the said owners and master their executors administ. and
assigns that the said Merchant his execut. or assigns shall and will as well
within the said Port of London and G. as at Lushborne aforesaid within every of
the said limited abiding days as well discharge the said Ship as recharge and
lade into her 140. Tonnes of whatsoever goods or merchandises reckoning and
accounting two Pipes for a Tonne four Hogesheads for a Tonne three Puncheons
for a Tonne, 6. Tertians for a Tonne, 22. Kintales di. of the weight of
Andolozia for a Tonne and of bags of Spices and Chests of Sugar according to
the use of merchants and merchandises. And also that he the said merchant his
Factors, or assigns shall within the said abiding days at Lushborne aforesaid
or so soon as the said Ship shall be there as above laden give their notice
unto the said master or his assigns whether the said Ship shall make her right
discharge at Andwerp or London And also that he the said Merchant his Factors
or assigns shall and will truly pay or cause etc. unto the said owners or to
one of them their executors or assigns for every Tonne of the said Ships
lading that shall be discharged or unladen at London aforesaid 50 s. of Lawful
money of England the one half thereof within 6. days next after the right
discharge of the same Ship at London foresaid, and the other half thereof
within one month next ensuing the expiration of the said 6. days together
with petty lodeminage Primage and Average there wont and accustomed after the
use and custom of English Ships. And also all such charges and duties of 3. d.
upon the Tonne as shall be due to be paid toward the reparations at
Dover-haven of this Realm according to a Statute in that behalf Provided. And
also that he the said merchant his Factors, or assigns, shall truly pay or
cause to be paid, etc. to the said owners or their assigns, freight for every
Tonn of the said Ships lading from Lushborne aforesaid that shall be discharged
at Andwerpe aforesaid 56 s 8 d. of good and Lawful money of England or the
just value thereof in money there current the one half thereof within six
days next ensuing the right discharge of the said Ship at Andwerpe aforesaid
and the other half thereof within one month next ensuing the expiration of
the said six days, together with pety lodeminage, Primage and average there
wont and accustomed after the use and custom of english Ships, And moreover
that the said Merchant his Factors or assigns, shall and will for every day,
that the said Ship shall tarry as above at Lushborne aforesaid over and above
the said 45. days there truly pay or cause to be paid etc. to the said master
or his assigns 6. Duckers money there current without fraud or guile. And the
said owners and master does covenant grant and warrant by these presents that
the said Ship shall be able to receive into her upper hatches at Lushborne
aforesaid over and besides her victual, tackle and aparell the said quantity
of 140. Tons, And that the said Ship is and shall be strong and staunch and
well and sufficiently victualed, Tackled aparrelled and furnished with Masts,
Sails, sail yards, Anchors, cables, rops, cords Guns, gunpowder shot
artilery, tackle, aparell, boat and furniture meet and decent for such a Ship
and for such a voyage together with an able master, 26. able men and a boy
which men and boy shall be ready at all times convenient during the said voyage
with the cock or boat of the said Ship to serve the said Merchant his Factors,
or assigns to and from land. And to all and singular covenants grants, and
articles, above expressed which on the behalf of the said owners and master
and every of them are well and truly to be kept and performed in all things as
above the said owners and master bind themselves their executors and
administrators, and every of of them and especially the Ship aforesaid with the
Freight, tackle and aparell of the same unto the said Merchant, and to his
Executors and Administrators in the penalty and sum of four hundred pounds
of, etc. truly to be paid by these presents: And in like manner to all and
singular covenants, grants, articles and agreements above expressed which on
the behalf of the said Merchant, his Factors and assigns, and every of them
are truly, etc. the said Merchant binds himself, his executors,
administrators and goods, and every of them unto the said owners, and to their
executors and administrators in the like penalty and sum of four hundred
pounds of, etc. truly to be paid by these presents: In witness whereof the
parties aforesaid, to these Charter parties indented interchangeably have set
their seals. Dated, etc.

Another Condition for delivery of Tin.
THe Condition, etc. That if he the within bound A. B. his etc. Do well and
truly deliver or cause, etc. to the within named, etc. his Executors, etc. to
his or their own proper use and behoof for ever, on the first day of the next
Midsomer, delivery of Tin at T. in the County of C. at the Queens Majesty's
beam, there 250 l. weight of good soft white Merchantable Cornish Tin frank
and free of all charges and demands whatsoever without fraud or covin. That
then, etc.

A Condition for delivery of Wool.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named N. B. has heretofore had
and received of the within named R. W. the sum of thirty pounds of lawful,
etc. If therefore the said N. his, etc. do frank and freely deliver or cause,
etc. to the said R. W. his, etc. as well the full number and quantity of twenty
eight weight of Wool clean washed, well dried, and shorn according to the
custom of the Country, there accounting one and twenty pounds to every weight
thereof, as also so much Wool more of like goodness as shall amount unto the
sum of five pounds ten shillings after the rate of seventeen shillings six
pence for every weight thereof, or else five pounds ten shillings, therefore,
at or before the tenth day of July now next coming: That then, etc.

A Condition for payment of an Annuity, during ones life.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden A. B. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, do well and truly pay or cause, etc. to the within
named C. I. or his Assigns, one annuity or yearly payment of ten pounds of,
etc. at the house, etc. for by and during all the term of the natural life of
the said C. at or in the days of the Feasts of, etc. by even and equal
portions. The first payment thereof to beg in and to be made in the day of the
Feast of, etc. next, etc. and so from thenceforth to have continuance by and
during all the term of the natural life of the said C. without fraud or
covin. That then, etc.

A Condition that the Obligor shall be ready at a certain place to marry the
Obligee within thirty days warning.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound E. H. do and shall be ready at
S. in the County, etc. to marry and take to husband the within named C. T.
within the Parish Church there according to the order of the Church in that
behalf used always within thirty days respit next after the time the said C.
shall require her so to do, and do marry and take to husband the said C. T.
accordingly: That then, etc.

A Condition that a man shall marry one before a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden C. T. do marry and take to his
wife according to the Laws of the Church in that behalf used the within named
E. H. at or before the feast, etc. which shall be, etc. so that the said E.H.
be willing thereunto, the same E. being in the mean time of good and honest
Conversation: That then, etc.

A Condition that a man shall not become surety without license.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden T.H. do not at any time
hereafter bind or charge himself by any Bond, Bill, Promise, Agreement or
otherwise to or for the payment of any other debt or debts, or sum or sums
of money then only for such Debts and Sums of money* as are or hereafter
shall be by the said T. H. properly owing in respect of his own traffic or
business without the consent, good will and agreement of the within named W.
S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns: That then, etc.

A Condition for ones appearance at a certain day and place to answer to such
things as shall be objected against him.
THe Condition, etc: That if the within bound R. H. his Executors, or
Administrators do personally appear before our Sovereign Lord the King in his
Bench at Westminster, at or before the tenth day of Michaelmas term next coming
after the date within written, and then and there do answer unto all such
Actions and Demands as the within named R. I. shall there bring or cause to be
brought against the said R. H. of for and concerning the taking down, wasting,
and carrying away of one Barn of the said R. I. lately standing and situate
in L. in the County of B. That then, etc.

A Condition where one is bound not to sell away his interest in a Shop before
A. B. have the refusal thereof.
THE Condition, etc. That whereas the within named E. C. has and holds that
little corner Shop on the east side of M. street next to W. in the Parish of,
etc. for the term of twenty years and above yet to come, as appears by one
Lease thereof made to the said E. by one W. M. and M. his wife by Indenture
dated, etc. If the said E. heretofore has not, or she, her Executors, or
administrators do not hereafter grant, bargain, sell, alien, or do away her
said Interest and term of years or any part thereof of and in the Premises to
any person or persons, nor take any partner to her the said E. to occupy the
said Shop before she make offer thereof to be sold to the said I. H. if he will
buy the same. And if for and considering that the said I. will give for the
said Lease and term of years then to be to come as much as any other will give
therefore plainly and simply without any colorable or deceitful dealing of
the said E. or her Executor in that case to be used. She the said E. her
Executor or administrator will then grant and bargain the same to the said I.
H. before any other person or persons: That then, etc.

A Condition for the good service of a man.
THe Condition, etc. That if I. P. Son of the within bound I. P. now servant of
the within named F. H, do from henceforth from time to time during so long time
as the said I shall remain in the service of the said F. well and faithfully
serve the same F. as his Master in and by all things according to the order and
duty of a good and faithful servant: That then, etc.

A Condition for a servants true service with his Master, and for making of
true accounts of that shall come to his hands.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound T. T. is contented, and has
covenanted, promised, and agreed the day and year within written to and with
the within named T. B. That he the said T. T. shall and will dwell with, and
serve the said T. B. for and during all the term and space of four years next
ensuing from and after the Feast, etc. next, etc. and fully to be complete and
ended for the wages of four pounds of, etc. by the year to be paid yearly
therefore to the said T. T. by the said T. B. or his assigns. If he the said
T. T. do justly, faithfully, and truly remain, continue, dwell with, and serve
the said T. B. for and during all the said term and space of four years, and
do also from time to time and at all times hereafter upon reasonable request
make and deliver unto the said T. B. his executors or assigns a good, just,
true, and full account, payment and satisfaction of all and singular such
sums of money, debts, and other goods of the said T. B. as he the said T. T.
shall receive or cause to be received, or that shall come to the hands,
custody, or possession of the same T. T. or any other persons by his means or
procurement: and further if the said T, T. do not at any time during the said
term of four years imbezill, purloin, or unlawfully consume, make, or do
away, or give his consent, the imbeziling, purloining, or unlawfully
consumeing, making or doing away of any of the money, debts, goods or chartells
of the said T. B. his Executors or assigns, by any ways or means either
directly or indirectly: That then, etc.

A Condition to answer that an apprentice shall endammage his Master.
THe Condition, etc. That where R. B, etc. has put himself an apprentice,
etc. If the said R. B. shall at any time or times during the said term of seven
years imbezill, purloin, or unlawfully and untruly make away, consume, wast or
mispend any of the Goods, Wares, money or Merchandise of the said B. B. his
Executors, Administrators or assigns or any of them, If then and in every such
case the within bound S. B, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or assigns,
or any of them do and shall always within six months next after notice or
warning to him or them thereof given by the said B. his Executors,
Administrators or assigns or any of them well and truly satisfy, content and
pay, or cause, etc. unto the said B. B, his executors, administrators or
assigns, the full value in lawful english money of all and every such goods,
wares, money and merchandise of the said B. his executors, administrators and
assigns, and every or any of them so to be imbezilled, purloined or unlawfully
and untruly made away, consumed, wasted, or misspent by the said R. B. as
aforesaid; That then, etc.

A Condition that a man shall leave his wife two parts of his lands and goods
if she survive him.
THe Condition, etc. That if it do fortune the above bounden T. G. to marry and
take to his wife I. B. etc. and if after the same marriage had and consummate
it do happen him the said T. to decease, and the said I him to survive; If then
the said T. before the time of such his decease shall as well assure and leave
to the same I. two full parts of all such goods and chattels as he now has or
hereafter shall have the same into three parts being divided. As also shall
assure and convey two full parts of all such Lands and Tenements as he the said
T. hereafter shall purchase or procure to be purchased or conveyed to his use
at any time during the life of the said I. the same in three parts to be
accounted; So that immediately upon every such several purchase, two parts at
the least of all Lands and Tenements to pass in every such purchase shall at
the first assurance and conveyance thereof to be made be conveyed and assured
to the said I. and to their Heirs, or to them and the heirs of their two
bodies, and for lack of such issue to the Heirs of the said I. for ever and not
otherwise: That then, etc.

A Condition to pay a sum of money or deliver a Chain by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound Sir H. C. Knight and W. S. or
either of them, or the Executors, etc. do well and truly pay or cause, etc. to
the within named T. C. his certain Attorney, Executors or Administrators at the
now mansion house of the same T. situate, the sum of eighty four pounds ten
shillings of lawful, etc. on the seventeenth day of Apr. next, etc. Or in
default thereof do at or before the seventeenth day of Apr. aforsaid, well and
truly deliver or cause, etc. to the said T.C. his Executors, etc. at the said
now mansion house of the said T. one chain of Gold weighing thirty ounces of
22. Carrets the ounce five or better: That then, etc.

A Condition where two Executors are, that each shall answer a moiety of that
shall be recovered for any act done by their Testator.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named H. E. and the within bound
I. E. have jointly taken upon them the execution of the Testament of T. E, late
of R. in the county of E. Genr. deceased. If hereafter it shall happen that any
sum or sums of money, or other demand hereafter shall be lawfully demanded
against the said Executors or either of them, or their several Executors or
Administrators for any thing done, made, or acknowledged by the said T. E.
whilst he lived: If then in every such case the said I. E. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators upon reasonable request do and shall bear and
satisfy with the said H. his Executors and Administrators, the moiety and one
half of all such charges, costs, losses and damages as shall grow or happen to
them or any of them by reason of any such demands as aforesaid: That then, etc.

A Condition to re-deliver a Letters Patents by one borrowed of another.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named A. P. immediately before the
ensealing and delivery of the Obligation within written, has delivered and
lent to the within bound R. N. one Letters Patents under the great seal of
England, bearing date at G. the, etc. containing four skins of vellom made and
granted by our said Sovereign Lord the King to the said A. P. and to one A. K.
of L. Gent. of diverse concealed Lands upon a warrant therefore granted by our
Sovereign Lord the King unto Sir I. P. Knight: As by the Letters Patents at
large it does and may appear: If the said R. N. his Executor or Administrator
at or on this side the tenth, etc. next, etc. well and truly do re-deliver or
cause, etc. the said Letters Patents to the said A. P. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns at the now mansion house of the said A. situate,
etc. whole, safe, and uncancelled, and in any part thereof not defaced, hurt,
broken or impaired, That then, etc.

A condition for sealing of a general quittance by one by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if H. F. of L. etc. at or before the Feast, etc.
next, etc. do make, seal and deliver to the within named E. B. at his Chamber
in the Inner Temple of L. one general acquittance to the use of E. L. of, etc.
whereby the said H. shall release and quite claim to the said E. L. all
Actions, Suits, Quarrels, Debts, Accounts, Judgments, Executions and Demands
whatsoever: That then, etc.

A Condition where one is become surety and is to become surety for the
Obligor, and has lent and is to lend to the Obligor diverse sums of money,
all expressed and to be expressed in a Book indented, the Obligor is bound to
make payment thereof at the days in the said Book limited.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above named R.M at the request, and for
the proper debt of the above bound E.T. has entered and hereafter may happen to
enter into diverse bonds unto diverse persons for payment of diverse sums of money,
And also has heretofore at and by like request laid out and paid and hereafter
may lay out and pay diverse sums of money for the debt and in the behalf of the
said E. All which bonds and sums of money already made and paid are mentioned
and expressed in one Book indented thereof, made between the said E. and R. and
begun the eleventh day of July in the year, etc. as by the said Book indented
does appear. And whereas also the said R. and E. have agreed that all other
such bonds and sums of money as the said R. hereafter shall make or pay for
the said E. shall be entered into the said book indented, and from time to time
shall therein be signed with the hand of the said E. T. or of L. Y. now servant
of the said E. as hereafter from time to time shall happen to be messenger from
the said E. to the said R. in that behalf, if therefore the said E. his, etc.
from time to time do well and truly satisfy, content and pay, or cause, etc.
to the said R. M. at, etc. situate, etc. all and singular sum and sums of
money as the same shall be severally due and payable by virtue of the said
several bonds which are expressed or shall be expressed in the said book
indented in form aforesaid. And also all other sum and sums already
mentioned, and which hereafter shall be mentioned in the said book indented as
the same severally be or shall be there written down and appointed to be paid
without Fraud or Covin: That then, etc.

A Condition where one has received diverse Legacies to the use of Children, he
is bound to make payment thereof to them at the times limited in the Will.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That where R. C. of, etc.
deceased, by his last Will and Testament in writing by him made and ordained
the eighteenth day of June, in the year of our Lord God: etc. and in the 18.
year of the King, etc. amongst other things did give and bequeath to the above
named R. W. by the name of R: V: Son to B: W: deceased, his late Daughter, the
sum of two hundred pounds of, etc. And by the same his last Will and Testament,
did will and bequeath to T: W: V: W: and I: W: Brothers to the said R: W: the
sum of three hundred pounds of, etc. that is to say, to every one of them the
sum of a hundred pounds: And by his said last Will and Testament did also
give and bequeath to E:W: and A:W: Daughters of the said B: the sum of 1000.
marks of, etc. That is to say, to either of them two daughters 500. marks. And
further willed that all the said Legacies so appointed to the said five
Children, to wit, T: W, V: W: etc. should be and remain in the hands of the
above bounden R: W: Uncle to the said five children last mentioned, which T.W,
the said R:^: has appointed by his last Will to be his sole Executor: And that
the said R. should be bound in the sum of three thousand pounds of, etc. to the
said R:W: to pay the said several Legacies to the forenamed five children, as
they shall severally accomplish their several ages of one and twenty years, or
at the days of their several marriages, whether shall first happen to come:
And has willed moreover, that if it do fortune any of the forenamed five
children to decease before payment made unto them of their said several
Legacies, That then the part or portion of him, her, or them so dying shall be
equally divided amongst the forenamed five children then living: And over this
also has wholly given and bequeathed the residue of all his goods and
cattalls, debts, moneys, plate, jewels, and household stuff (His Legacies being
paid, his Funeral debts and expenses being discharged) to all the aforesaid
children equally and indifferently to be divided amongst them; as by the said
last Will and Testament plainly and at large may and will appear. And whereas
the said R:W: now being above the age of one and twenty years, has already had
and received such of the Legacies aforesaid, as to him are presently belonging
by virtue of the Will and Testament aforesaid, as by one acquaintance which the
said R.W has thereof made to the said R:W: plainly may appear. And that all
other the said Legacies, Gifts, and Bequests made as abovesaid to his said
brethren and sisters, are now to their use in the hands and custody of the said
R: W: as by the said last Will and Testament is appointed: If the said R:W: his
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, do at the usual place of payments and
Receipts in the Royal Exchange, within the City of L: well and truly severally
content and pay all and every the said Legacies severally made to the said T:W:
V:W: J:W: E:W: and A: W: as it aforesaid, as they shall grow severally due and
payable, and according to the true intent and meaning of the said last Will and
Testament. Or else if the said R.W. his, etc* in the last day of six months
next after lawful requests thereof to be made at the now Mansion house of the
said R:W; situate in N. in the County of C. do at the said place in the Royal
Exchange aforesaid, severally content and pay all and every the said Legacies
made to the said T:W: V:W: etc. severally growing due as is aforesaid, to such
person and persons to whom the same shall appoint, and as the same shall grow
due and payable, according to the true intent and meaning of the said last Will
and Testament, That then, etc.

A Condition to leave a woman two hundred pounds in money, and Goods for her
Thirds by the Custom of London, and if her part come to more out of the
Husbands Goods at his decease, that then that overplus be answered also.
THe Condition, etc. That if A. now Wife of the above bound E:S. and natural
Daughter of the above named T: M: do survive the said E: If then the Exectors
or Administrators of the said E: within the space of, etc. next after the
decease of the same E. upon the request of the said A. her Executors or
Assigns, do well and truly pay yield and deliver, or cause, etc. into the
hands and possession of the said A. her Executors or Assigns for her third
part to her common of the Goods and Chattels of the said E. by reason of the
custom of L. money, Goods and Chattels to the value of two hundred pounds of
lawful, etc. which the said A. may have and enjoy from thenceforth to and for
her own proper use and behoof for ever, without any let, trouble, re-claim
eviction or recovery of any person or persons, and also if the said third part
coming to the said A. is aforesaid do exceed the value of two hundred pounds.
If then within the space aforesaid, and upon like request as aforesaid, the
Executors or Administrators of the said E. do well and truly yield, pay, and
deliver to the said A. so much more money or goods as the said third part
aforesaid to her coming as is aforesaid, shall exceed in value the said sum
of two hundred pounds: That then, etc.

A Condition for working with one for a certain time for certain wages.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named F. F. for reasonable
consideration him moving, has put himself a servant to the within named A. U.
him to serve from the date within written unto the end and term of one whole
year from thence, etc. and fully, etc. The said A. therefore yiedling and unto
the said F. weekly four shillings of, etc. and finding to him the said F.
meat, drink, Victuals and washing of his Linen during the said term; if
therefore the said F. do and shall, daily by and during all the said term in
the best manner that he can for the wages and consideration aforesaid, as well
in the house of the said A. as in any other place, and with any other person
which he the said A. his Executors or Administrators shall name and appoint
well and truly and diligently, and sufficiently work to and for the use,
benefit and behoof of the said A. his Executors or Administrators without Fraud
or Covin, all and every such work and works belonging to the art of the said A.
as the said A. or his Assigns shall reasonably and lawfully assign and
appoint: That then, etc.

A Condition that where a Widow marrying haveving A lease of a house and diverse
goods therein the husband is bound not to sell any part thereof during the
marryage if she survive him then to leave the same discharged of encumbrances
done by him.
THe condition etc. That whereas there is an agreement and conclusion made
between the within bounden G. K. and A. H. of R. in the county of M. Widow for
a marryage to be had and solemnized between them two, and whereas the said A.
by virtue of one Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc. granted and made by one
I. P. Esquire and one I. B Gent. and other conveyances is possessed of one
message one orchard and a garden with the appurtenances in R. with-insaid, for
all the residue of the term of 21. years in the said Indenture mentioned and
yet to come, and is also possessed of certain Plate, Jewels, household stuff
and implements in the said message with the appurtenances now being. If it
shall so be that the said G. and A. do marry together. Not to alien the Lease.
If then at any time or times after the said marryage and during the natural
life of the said A. the said G. does not alien, bargain, grant, forfeit,
charge or encumber the said message and other the premises with their
appurtenances or any part thereof, or the said Lease and Interest for years,
or any part thereof any manner of ways nor do remove, convey or carry away or
cause etc. any of the said Plate, Jewels, household stuff or implements from or
out of the said message; or bargain, sell, change or alter the property
thereof or any part thereof, or cause or suffer any execution thereof or of any
part thereof by the means or occasion of the said G. at any time during the
life of the said A. without the concent and agreement of the same A. and if
also it so be, that the said G: do decease before the said A. and the same A.
do him survive, if then the said G. do leave the said Lease and interest which
then shall not be expired and also all the said Plate, Jewels, and
household stuff and implements, which shall not be before aliened changed or
made away by concent of the said A. of such good and lawful estate, right,
title, interest, thereof and of every part thereof free from all encumbrances
before that done, made, caused, procured or agreed unto by the said G. And so
as the said A. and her assigns for her and their own use may lawfully have
possess and, enjoy the premises from the decease of the said G. without any
let suit trouble or impediment of or by the executors, or administrators, of
the said G. or of or by any other person or persons by reason or means of any
pact or thing done or caused or to be done or caused by the said G. or by his
assent occasion or Procurement. That then etc.

A Conditioon to make one Free at a certain time,
THe Condition etc. That if the within bounden A. B his executors
administrators, or assigns, do at and in the Feast of etc. which shall be etc.
or within etc. then next following upon reasonable request to him or them to be
made by the within named C. D. cause and procure the said C. to be lawfully and
orderly according to the custom of the City of L. admitted into the liberty
and Freedom of the same City without any manner of fraud or covin and the only
costs and charges of the said C. So always that the said C shall not be
lawfully hindered thereof by reason of any Act or thing hereafter to be done
occasioned from or affirmed by the said C. That then, etc.

A Condition to pay such sums of money as one shall be compelled to pay by
reason of a bayling one in the Counter.
THe Condition etc. That whereas the within named I. B. and certain other
persons did take to bail and became sureties for one I. C. Citizen etc. being
lately arrested to the Counter in Woodstreet of L. by reason of an action there
commenced against him by one T. D. Clothier, If the said I. B. his heirs
executors, or administrators, or any of them shall at any time hereafter by
reason of the said Baylment and suretyship and without his or their own
procurement be lawfully adjudged awarded or compelled by due order and course
of the Law to satisfy and pay to and for the use of the said T. D. his
executors or assigines any manner of sum of money or any part or parcel of
any sum of money whatsoever recovered or adjudged or hereafter to be recovered
or adjudged against the said I, C. in or by means of the said account, If then
the within bound S. P. his heirs etc. do within etc. next after sufficient
notice admonition and request to him or them in that behalf to be given and
made by the said I. B. his executors, or administrators, well and truly pay or
cause to be paid to the said I* his Executors, etc. at etc. so much Lawful
English money at one entire payment as the said I. his Executors, or
administrators, or any of them shall be so as is aforesaid and by the reason
and means above mentioned adjudged awarded or compelled to satisfy and pay to
or for the use of the said T. D. his executors, or assigns, that then, etc.

A Condition not to become surety.
THe Conditon etc. That if the within bound T. G. without the special request
and agreement of the within named R.M. at any time hereafter do not become
surety or bound for any person or persons nor promise or undertake to pay or
satisfy any debt or duty of any person or persons whatsoever which shall
amount or arise above the valve of 6 l. 13 s. 4. d. of Lawful money of England
except only it be for the mere proper and only debt of the same T. G.
himself without fraud or covin That then, etc.

A Surrender of copy hold Land conditional.
MEmorandum that on the 10. day of September in the 24. year of our Sovereign
Lord Charles by the grace of our God, King, H. in comitate Midd,
etc. R.N. of H. in the county of M. Yeomon one of the customary Tenants of the
said Manor of H. has without the Court surrendered into the hands of the Lord
of the said manor by the hands of T. K, and I. K, Yeomen two of the customary
tenants of the said Manor of H. one Croft with the appurtenances commonly
called or known by the name of great Gilberts Lands now in the tenure or
occupation of the said R. N or his assigns containing by estimation 18. acres
be it more or less situate lying and being within the said Manor, to the use
and behoof of T. S. Citizen and Clothworker of L. and of his heirs and
assigns forever according to the custom of the said Manor upon and under
this condition nevertheless that is to say. That if the said R. N. his Heirs,
Nota, a way to remove Surrenders conditional is, that for the day of the Court
holding after the surrender, other security be given for the money, and then
the lands to be new surrendered after the Court to a day, etc.
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, do well and truly pay, or cause to be
paid to the said T. S. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the
sum of forty-four pounds of, etc. at one entire payment, on the eleventh of
Febr. which shall be, etc. at the now Mansion house of the said T.S: situate,
etc. That then and from thenceforth the said Surrender to be void and of none
effect: And that then and from thenceforth it shall be lawful to and for the
said R: N: his Heirs and Assigns, to have again and re-enjoy the said Croft,
as in the former estate of the said R. the said Surrender to the contrary
notwithstanding.

A Condition upon the same Surrender.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within bounden R. N. has on the day of
the date within written, without the Court surrendered into the hands of the
Lord of the Manor of L. in the County of M: by the hands of, etc. recite and
sursum redd. usque ad finem, as by the writing of the said Surrender more
plainly may appear. If the said R: were of the time of the said Surrender
lawfully seized of a good and perfect estate in Feesimple, to the only use of
himself, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to the custom of the said
Manor, of and in the said Court, and then had lawful power, and good right,
and lawful authority to surrender the same Croft to the use of the said T: S:
and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to the custom of the said
Manor. And also if the said Croft were at the time of the said surrender, and
at all times hereafter, and from time to time shall continue and be to the said
T: S. his Heirs and Assigns for ever discharged, acquitted, and saved harmless
of and from all Surrenders, Estates, Titles, Troubles, Forfeitures, Seisures,
Cause and Causes of Forfeiture, or Scisure, and all other charges and
encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, or suffered heretofore, or hereafter
before the said eleventh day of Febr. to be had, made, done, or suffered. (The
Services and Customs from and after the same day to grow due to be done for
the premises, to the Lord of the said Manor for the time being only except)
And if also the said T.S* his Heirs and Assigns, shall or may lawfully,
peaceably, and quietly, according to the tenor, form, and effect of the said
surrender and custom of the said Manor, have, hold, and enjoy to his and
their own proper use and behoof forever, the Croft aforesaid, without any let,
resistance, disturbance, or interruption of the said R his Heirs or Assigns,
and without any lawful let, resistance, disturbance, impediment, or
interruption of any other person or persons whatsoever. And moreover in case
the said R: N. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, do make
default, and do not pay the said sum of four and forty pounds to the said T:
S. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, on the said eleven, etc.
at the said now dwelling house, etc. If then from and after such default made,
the said Croft shall and may be and remain to the said T: his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, of the full and clear yearly value of five pounds of, etc.
over and beyond all Rents resolute, and other charges and reprises whatsoever:
And if then also and from thenceforth the said R: and N: his Heirs, and all
other persons which shall or may have any thing in the said Croft, or any part
thereof, do and shall from time to time, and at all times during the space of
five years then next following, upon the reasonably request and at the costs
and charges in the Law of the said T. his Heirs and Assigns, do, knowledge,
execute, and suffer, and cause, etc. all and every such act, and acts, thing,
and things for the clear and absolute having and enjoying to and by the said T.
S. his Heirs and Assigns, to his and their own proper use for ever, of the
said Croft with the appurtenances, according to the custom of the said Manor;
as by the said T. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Council learned shall
be devised, advised, or required, that then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition by a Father, to make his Sons Wife a Jointure, and to pay a sum
of money by a day, and to leave the Son and his Wife a more sum at his
decease.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas there is a Marriage
agreed upon and contracted between A. A. the younger, Son and Heir apparent of
the said A.A. the elder, now Lord Mayor of the said City of L: on the one
party, and M: C: the only Daughter of I.C:. late cited, and, etc. deceased on
the other party: If the said A: A: the elder, or his Heirs, at their own
proper costs and charges on this side the 20 day of, etc. next, etc. upon
reasonable request, and two days respite for the overlooking thereof, do make
and convey, or cause to be made and conveyed a good and perfect assurance in
the Law of all those Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of Freehold and
Copyhold, whereof the said A: the elder has delivered particulars to the said
H: S: expressing and rating the same at the clear yearly value of a hundred
pounds of, etc. over and above all charges and reprises, to and for the only
use and behoof of the said A.A. the elder for the term of his natural life
only, without impeachment of wast, and after his decease, to and for the use
and only behoof of the said A.A. the younger, and M.C. and of the Heirs of
their two bodies betwixt them two lawfully to be begotten: And for lack of such
Issue, then to the use of the Heirs of the body of the said A.A. the younger
lawfully to be begotten: And for lack of such Issue, then to the use of the
said A.A. the elder, and of his next Heirs for ever, in such manner and form,
and to such persons, and by such manner of lawful and reasonable conveyance
and assurance in the Law, as by the said H.S. and E, B. or the Survivor of
them, or by their or any of their Council learned in the Law, shall be
lawfully and reasonably devised, or advised, and required as aforesaid, The
same Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments by good and lawful title and
conveyance in the Law, then at the time of the said Assurance making, being in
the lawful Seisin of the said A.A. the elder, and A.A. the younger, or of one
of them, to the only use of themselves and their Heirs, or the Heirs of one
of them, without any Condition, to the el^er and full yearly value of a
hundred pounds of, etc. above and beyond all charges and reprises: And the same
also then being free and clear discharged or acquitted, or from thenceforth
saved and kept harmless, of and from all and singular former Grants, Estates,
Titles, and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, or knowledged by the said A. A.
the elder, or A.A. the younger, or by or under their Title or Estate, or the
Title or Estate of either of them; the Rents and Services from and after the
decease of the said A.A. the elder, to be due to the chief Lords of the Fee and
Leases for term of years, not to be prejudicial to the yearly value
aforesaid only except. And if also the said A.A. the elder, his Executors, or
Administrators within six months next and immediately ensuing, from and after
the day of the solemnization of marriage between the said A. A. the younger,
and the said M. C. do well and truly content and pay, or cause, etc. to the
said A. the younger, and M.C. toward the preferment of the same A. in the same
marriage the sum of a thousand pounds of, etc. without any manner of fraud or
covin. And moreover if the said A.A. the elder, at the time of his decease, do
by his last Will and Testament give and bequeath, or otherwise leave by
sufficient conveyance or assurance to the said A.A. the younger, and to the
said M.C. the sum of a thousand pounds of, etc. So as the said A. the
younger, and the said M. if they two be then living, may have and enjoy by and
after the decease of the said A. the elder, the said sum of a thousand
pounds, either by the gift, bequest, or leaving of the said A.A. the elder,
without fraud or covin, That then, etc.

A Condition by one having the Office of the Keeper of the Worsted Hall, and
Hall for English Bays in London granted unto him to collect the Duties, and be
accountant to the Hospital upon request.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named Governors, that is to say,
the Mayor and Comminalty, and Citizens of the City of London, Governors of the
Possessions Revenues, and Goods of the Hospitalls of Edward King of England,
the sixth, called Christ's Bridewell, and St. Thomas the Apostle, have admitted
the within bound R.W. to the Office of the Keeper, of the Market places
commonly called the Worsted Hall, and the Hall for English Bays, within the
City of London, therein truly and faithfully from time to time, to collect,
gather, and receive, for the use of the said Governors, toward the relief of
the poor children harbored in Christ's Hospital in Newgate-market of London
aforesaid, all and singular such Profits, Rites, and Duties as shall there be
due or payable, to the use aforesaid, for Worsted, Bays, or any other Wares or
Merchandises to be brought to the said Halls, or either of them, or for any
Hallage or Stoage of the same in the said Halls, or either of them. If
therefore the said R. and W. by and during all the term that he the said R.
shall continue in the said Offices, or either of them, do well and faithfully
collect and gather all and singular the said Profits, Rites, and Duties, as a
diligent, true, and faithful Officer ought to do: And if also the said R. his
Executors and Administrators, from time to time, when as he or they shall be
thereunto reasonably required by the said Governors or their certain
Attorneys, or the Treasurer of the said Hospital for the time being, do yield,
make, and give up to the said Governors, their Deputies or Attorneys, or to
the said Treasurer, as well a perfect, just, and true account of all the
Premises: As also full and true payment of and for all the said Profits,
Rites, and Duties, which shall be had or received by the said R. his Servants;
Deputies, or Ministers whosoever, from time to time, during his continuance in
the said Office, or either of them, That then, etc.

A Condition to put in Surety by a day, to save one harmless, having given his
word for a Debt.
THe Condition. etc. That where the within named E. B. at the request, and for
the debt of the within bounden T. B. has agreed and undertaken for the payment
of thirty pounds of, etc. by the said E. his Executors or Administrators, to be
paid to F. D. Citizen and S. of L. his Executors or Administrators, according
to the tenor and effect of one pair of Indentures dated, etc. made between the
said F. on the one part, and the said E. on the other part: If the said T.
together with one A.B. of, etc. or together with W.B. of, etc. do make or cause
to be made, and lawfully seal and deliver to the said E.B, his Executors or
administrators, at the house, etc. at or before the Feast, etc. one lawful and
sufficient Deed obligatory, wherein the said T.B with the said A. B. or with
the said W.B. shall stand jointly and severally bound to the said E. his
Executors and administrators, in the sum of forty pounds of, etc. for the
keeping harmless of the said E. his Heirs, Executors, and administrators, of,
for, and concerning the said thirty pounds which the said D.E has undertaken
to be paid to the said F. his Executors or administrators, as aforesaid, That
then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to save one harmless being bound for Childrens Portions in the
Chamber of London.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named T.W. together with the
within named Mary W. and R.S. and one M.G. of L. Habardasher, stands bound by
Recognizance, knowledged before the right honorable Lord Mayor of the City of
L. in the inner Chamber of the Guildhall in the same City, the day and year
above written, to G. H. Chamberlain of London aforesaid, in a hundred and fifty
pounds for the payment of, etc. to the use of E. and P.C. children and Orphans
of R.C, late Citizen, etc, as by the said Recognizance, and the Condition
subscribed thereunto may plainly appear. If the said M.W. and R. S. their
Executors and administrators, do from time to time at all times hereafter well
and sufficiently save and keep harmless the said T.W. his Heirs, Executors,
and administrators, and every of them, of and for the said Recognizance, and of
and for all actions suits, costs, damages, executions, attachments and demands
by reason of the same Recognizance to come, grow, or arise to or against the
said T. his Heirs, Executors, or administrators, or any of them, That then,
etc.

A Condition to save one harmless being Bail for ones appearance in the Kings
Bench, upon an Arrest by Latitat.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas one W.E. being arrested in London by a
Latitat out of the Kings Bench at Westminster, at the Suit of I.H. of C. in the
County of E. Merchant, the within named R.M. and P.B. have taken the said W: E:
to bail before the Sheriffs of London, for his appearance in the Bench
aforesaid, according to the tenor of the said Writ: If the within bound I: E:
and I: F: their Heirs, Executors, and administrators, do from time to time,
and at all times hereafter save and keep harmless the said R.M. and P: B:
their Heirs Executors and administrators, and every of them, of and for the
bail aforesaid, and all costs, charges, and damages which shall thereby grow,
happen, or arise, That then, etc.

Another like Condition.
THe Condition, etc That whereas the within bound I: F: was heretofore arrested
by a Latitat directed out of the Court of the Kings Bench at Westminster, upon
an action of Trespass at the Suit of, etc. in which action, the within named
A: B: has in the said Court taken to bail the said I. as by the Records
remaining in the Court of his Majesty's Bench aforesaid plainly appears: If
the said I. his heirs, etc. do, etc. save harmless, etc. the said A. etc. and
all his Lands, etc. against all persons of and for the said bail, and of and
from all actions, etc. to grow or arise by means of the same bail, That then,
etc.

A Condition that where two are bound to pay money at a day, if they bail, then
to pay it within a month after.
THe Condition, etc. That where by one former Obligation dated, etc. G: M. and
I: E: Citizens, etc. are become bound to the within named C: F: in the sum of
a hundred and fifty pounds of, etc. for the payment of a hundred pounds of like
money on the 10. of March next, etc. at the Shop, etc. as by the said
Obligation and the Condition thereupon endorsed, more plainly, etc. If the said
G: M: and I: E: their Executors and Administrators, and every of them do make
default in payment of the said sum of a hundred pounds, at the day and place
above mentioned, contrary to the tenor of the said recited Obligation: If then
within the space of one month next after notice given to the said R^ M: his
Executors or Administrators of such the default of the parties abovesaid, in
payment of the said sum of a hundred pounds, he the said R: M: his Executors
or Administrators (upon delivery unto him or them of the said former Obligation
good and effectual in the Law, with a lawful and sufficient assignment made
to the said R, from the said G. for the ensuing and recovering of and against
the said G. and I. and their several Executors and Administrators, or any of
them, the said sums of money, in the said former Obligation mentioned, do
well and truly pay or cause, etc. to the said C. his certain Attorney,
Executor, or Administrator, at the place aforesaid, the sum of a hundred
pounds of, etc. without fraud or covin, That then, etc.

A Condition that if a Goldsmith re-deliver not such Plate and Silver as shall
be put to him to be wrought, then the Obligor upon certain warning to make it
good.
THe Condition, etc. That if L. G. of L. Goldsmith, shall make default, and do
not from time to time at all times well and truly re-deliver or cause, etc.
unto the within named H. G shall agree and promise all and singular such
weights and masses of Silver as the said H. G. shall at any time during two
years next, etc. deliver by himself or any of his Servants, or otherwise by
any other person into the hands of the said L. to be made and wrought into
plate or for any other purpose, or otherwise upon reasonable request do not
satisfy and content the said H. his Executors or Administrators of and for the
same weights and masses, and every part and parcel thereof. If then within
forty days next after reasonable request and declaration to be made to the
within bound E. G. his executors or administrators by the said H. his executors
or administrators of such weights and masses of Silver aforesaid, or of any
part thereof as the said L. shall make default of re-delivery, or of
satisfaction, or contentation therefore to the said H. his Executors,
administrators or assigns: The said E. G. his Executors or Administrators do
and shall well and truly recompense, pay, and satisfy or cause, etc. to the
said H. his executors or administrators the full value of all such Silver as
the said L. shall leave not re-delivered or otherwise contented or satisfied
for, to the said H. his executors or administrators as aforesaid: That then,
etc.

A Condition that where a Legacy is given to a Child, the Father receiving it
to the Child's use, is bound to save the Executors harmless.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named R. C. by his last Will and
Testament did give and bequeath to I. S. one of the Sons of the within bound A.
S. the sum of twenty pounds of, etc. to be paid unto him the same I. or his
Assigns when he should accomplish the full age of twenty one years; And did
further will that if the said I. did decease before he should accomplish his
said age of twenty one years, That the said twenty pounds should go and
continue to and amongst the residue of the Children of the said A. then living:
As by the said last Will at large will appear. And whereas the within named A.
G. and W. D. at the earnest suit and request of the said A. S. at the ensealing
hereof, have paid and delivered the said twenty pounds to the same A. to the
use of the said I. his Son, and of such other of his Children as the same shall
or may appertain according to the appointment of the last Will and Testament
aforesaid, if the said A. S. and the within bound A. B. their Executors or
Assigns or some of them do well and truly pay or cause to be paid the said
twenty pounds and every part thereof to such of the children of the said A. as
the same shall appertain as aforesaid, at such time as the same shall be due
and payable, or else if the said A. and A. their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators or some of them, do from time to time at all times hereafter
acquit, discharge, exonerate or well and sufficiently save and keep harmless
as well the said A. and W. their Executors and Administrators of the said R. C.
as well against the said I. as against all person or persons which claim or
lawfully might claim any right or title to the said twenty pounds or any part
thereof, of and for the said twenty pounds and every parcel thereof, and also
of and from all Actions, etc. to happen, arise, or grow to or against the said
A. and W. their Executors and Administrators, or the Executors or
Administrators of the said R. C. or any of them of and for the said twenty
pounds or any part thereof: That then, etc.

A Condition that if the Obligee procure the Obligor a Lease in Reversion from
his Majesty of certain Lands by a day then the Obligor to pay him a certain
sum of money therefore.
THe Condition, etc. That where the above named T. E. at the instance and
procurement of the above named R. B. has undertaken to travel and make suit
for the obtaining of a Lease in Reversion to be made and granted in due manner
and form from our Sovereign Lord the King for the yearly rent of, etc. and for
the term of 21. years to commence at the end or determination of such Lease
and Leases as now are in possession, the same Lease in Reversion to be made as
aforesaid to the said R. B. and his Assigns of all those Messuages, Cotages,
etc. with their Appurtenances situate, etc. which A. B. and C. D. now have and
hold or lately had and held of our said Sovereign Lord the King for and by the
payment of the yearly rent of, etc. If the said T. E. his Executors and
Assigns shall obtain and procure the said Lease to the said R. B. and his
assigns in form aforesaid to be made on this side, and before the Feast of
Easter next coming. If then upon delivery or lawful tender of delivery of the
said lease made and passed of the Premises to the said R. B. his Executors and
Assigns as aforesaid under the great Seal of E. whole, safe, and uncancelled
the said R. B. his Executors or Assigns do pay, etc. to the said T. E. his
Executors or Assigns for the said Lease the sum of one hundred pounds of,
etc. at, etc. situate, etc. within the space of twenty one days next after
such time as the said T. E. his Executors or Assigns shall signify and give
knowledge to the said R. B. his Executors or Assigns by letter or any other
certain Message, That the said Lease shall be so obtained as aforesaid, and
shall be ready under seal to be delivered as aforesaid: That then, etc.

A Condition to convey a Lease or pay a sum of money by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That where G. C. of C. in the County of N. Esquire, is by
force of an Indenture dated, etc. made between the within bound W. C. on the
one part: And the said G. on the other part lawfully entitled to possess and
enjoy for the term of forty four years at the least now to come, and under
the only payment of, etc. of lawful, etc. therefore yearly to be paid during
the said Term, all that Capital Message, etc. situate, etc. now in the
occupation, etc. and all those three Messuages, etc. all which Premises were
demised or letten to farm to the said W. C. by A. B. etc. by an Indenture of
Lease and dated, etc. to him made by C D. for the term of fifty years, and for
the yearly rent of, etc. as by the same Indenture of Lease it may amongst other
things plainly appear. If the said W. C. or the within bound P. P. or either
of them, or the Executors, etc. before the last day of October next, etc. do
deliver or cause to be delivered to the within named I. L. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns at the now dwelling house, etc. a good lawful and
absolute bargain sale, assignment, and conveyance in the Law to be made from
and in the name of the said G. C. to the said I. L. his Executors and
Administrators by writing as well of the said Indenture of Lease, and of the
said Indenture dated, etc. made between the said W. and G. as is aforesaid; As
also of all the right, title, estate, interest and term of years of the said G.
C. which he has or ought to have by force of the same Indenture, of and in all
and singular the Premises granted by and in the said Indenture of Lease. In
which writing so to be made by and from the said G. to the said I. L. as is
abovesaid, there shall be contained and expressed, and covenant and grant on
the part of the said G his Executors and Administrators to this effect that the
said G. C. shall covenant and grant for him, his Executors and Administrators
to and with the said I. his Executors and administrators, That as well the said
Indenture of lease and term of years, as also all and singular the Premises
demised in and by the said Indenture of Lease shall from the time of the date
of the said writing to be made by the said G. as is abovesaid, continue and
endure to the said I. L. his executors, administrators and assigns at all
times upon lawful request until the end of the said term of fifty years
clearly discharged, acquitted or saved harmless of and from all and singular
former bargains, etc. before that time had, made, or done by the said G. C. or
by any other person or persons by his means, commandment, or procurement, the
Rents and Covenants reserved in the said Indenture of Lease only excepted. Or
else if it shall fortune the said G. C. to decease and depart out of this
present life before the said last of October next, etc. and the said writing of
Assignment to be made by the said G. as is abovesaid, then being not before
made and delivered to the said I. L. his executors, administrators or assigns
as is aforesaid, Then if the said P. P. his Executors, etc. do well and truly
pay or cause, etc. to the said I. L. etc. at, etc. the sum of eighty four
pounds of, etc. which the said W. C. owes to the said I. on the sixth of
November then next, etc. at one entire payment, That then, etc.

A Condition to make Grant of an Annuity for two lives by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if E. G. of D. in the County of N. E. Esquire, at or
on this side the last of June next, etc. by writing Indented under his hand and
seal to be knowledged and enrolled in the high Court of Chancery, give, grant,
and confirm to the within named R. M. his executors, administrators and
assigns, one annuity or yearly rent of twenty pounds of, etc. being yearly
issuing and going out of the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
whereof the said E, shall then be seized in Fee-simple to the clear yearly
value of thirty pounds of, etc. and which shall be and remain clear of all
charges and encumbrances prejudicial to the same yearly value, the same
annuity to be had, levied, taken, paid and enjoyed to the same R. M. his
executors, administrators and assigns by and during all the term of the
natural lives of D. M. now wife of the said R. M. and of R. M. Goldsmith, Son
of the said R. M. Alderman, and by and during all the term of the natural life
of the longest liver of them the said D and R. yearly in the Feast days of,
etc. or on the twentieth day next ensuing every of the said Feast days by even
portions at the Shop, etc. The first payment thereof to begin, etc. That then,
etc.

A Condition that if the Obligor sell his house, then the Obligee to have the
preferment thereof before another.
THe Condition, etc. That if the case the within bound T. G. his executors,
administrators or assigns or any of them shall at any time or times hereafter
be minded or disposed to bargain, sell, give, grant, alien, demise, let, set,
or otherwise do or put away that Capital Message, etc. and three Messuages,
etc. in the occupation, etc. situate, etc. or any of them, or any part or
parcel of them or of any of them, or the interest or term of years yet to
come, or any part thereof which the said T. G. has or had, should, ought,
might, or may have, of, in or to the said Messuages with the Appurtenances by
virtue, force, or means of one Indenture of Lease dated, etc. made and granted
by A. B. to C. D. for the term of, etc. beginning, etc. or by virtue of any
other writings or conveyances whatsoever, That then if the said I. H. his
Executors or Administrators shall have the preferment of buying and first offer
thereof, and shall have the bargain and sale of the same before any other
person or persons, so that the said I. H. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns within twenty days next after offer thereof to him or them made will
and do give and pay for the same as much ready money as any other person or
persons without Fraud or Covin will give and pay for the same: That then, etc.
or else, etc.

A Condition that where the Obliger has taken up money by exchange at Antwerp
for the Obligee, to be returned by Re-change to London, the Obligor is bound to
pay it at re-change with the interest,
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named I. A. at the special request
of the within bound I. L. has appointed G. L. servant to the said I. A. now
resident in Antwerp there to provide and take up as much Flemish money as shall
satisfy eight hundred fifty eight pounds seventeen shillings six pence of
lawful money of England, which the said I. L. has taken up in the City of
London by way of Exchange unto Antwerp aforesaid, and from thence to be
returned again by re-change to be paid and clearly satisfied in the City of
London aforesaid, by the said I. L. his Executors or Administrators according
to the order in such case used amongst Merchants. If when the said G. L. or any
whom he shall appoint shall fortune to return the Bills of the said re-change
upon the said I.L. his Executors or Administrators unto the City of London, The
said I. L. his Executors or Administrators do indelayedly accept the said Bills
according to the effect thereof, and the customs of Merchants without fraud,
covin or delay. And do well and truly make payment or other contentation and
satisfaction of and for the said eight hundred fifty eight pounds seventeen
shillings six pence of lawful money of England so to be re-changed as
aforesaid, and of and for the exchange and re-change thereof, and all charge
arising of or about the same, so and in such sort as no charge, loss, or
hindrance thereby, or thereof do come, grow, or happen to the said I. A. and G.
L. or either of them, or to the Executors or Administrators of either of them,
for or touching the Premises in or by the default of the said I. L. his
Executors or Administrators, That then, etc. Or else, etc.

A Condition upon a Letter of Attorney for receiving of sundry debts.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound E. L by his writing or Letter
of Attorney bearing date etc. has authorized and made the within named I I.
his lawful Attorney irrevokeable to ask, levy, recover, and receive for him
and in his name of C. H. of, etc. And R. B. of W. etc. and of Sir T. K. of O.
in the County of K. Knight, and of every of them, and of the Heirs, Executors
and Administrators of them and every of them, all such debts, duties, sum
and sums of money, and other things that they or any of them were indebted,
or did owe unto him the said E. or which they or any of them stood bound to pay
unto him by Bond, Bill, Obligation, Specialty, Recognizance, or otherwise; as
by the said writing or Letter of Attorney more plainly, etc. If so be the said
E. L. his Executors or Administrators do from henceforth and at all and every
time and times hereafter at and upon the lawful and reasonable request or
demand of the said J. J. his executors, administrators or assigns at his and
their costs and charges in the Law justly uphold and maintain with effect the
said writing and Letter of Attorney, and the power and authority thereby given,
and also all and every such lawful action and actions, Suits, Plaints, Pleas,
Processes, Judgments, and Executions of the same as the said J. his executors,
administrators or assigns or any of them hereafter shall attempt, have,
commence, pursue or bring in the name of the said E. his executors, or
administrators against the said C. R. and Sir T. or any of them, or against the
heirs, executors, administrators, Goods, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
of them or of any of them by force of the same writing or Letter of Attorney or
otherwise, of and for the having, recovering and receiving of all the same
Debts, Duties, and sums of money or any part of them without being nonsuit,
releasing, discharging or otherwise, making void the same action or actions,
Suits, Plaints, Pleas, Processes, Judgments, and Executions of the same or any
of them without the special license, consent, and agreement of the said J. J.
his executors, administrators or assigns first had and obtained in that
behalf in writing, and further if the said E: his Executors, administrators,
or assigns, have not at any time or times hereafter received, released, or
discharged, nor at any time or times hereafter do receive, release, or
discharge any of the foresaid debts, sum and sums of money, or other things
which the said E: L: by the foresaid Writing, or Letter of attorney, has
authorized and appointed the said I. to recover and receive of the foresaid C:
R: and Sir T: or any part of them, nor any condemnation, judgment, or execution
to be had obtained, gotten, or sued forth thereupon or therefore, or any part
thereof, without like license, consent, and agreement first had and obtained in
that behalf in wriring as aforesaid. And further if the said I.I. his Executors
and assigns do or may at all times hereafter peaceably and quietly have, take,
recover, receive, and enjoy to his and their own proper use for ever, all the
same debts, duties, sum and sums of money, and other thing and things which
is or shall be recovered or received of the said C: R: and Sir T: or any of
them, or of the Executors or administrators of them or any of them as
aforesaid, and every part thereof, without any let, trouble, claim, eviction,
recovery or interruption of the said E: L: his Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, or any of them, or of any other person or persons in the behalf,
right, or title, or by the means or procurement of them, or any of them, That
then, etc.

A Condition where one is bound with Sureties to certain of his wives friends
to leave her the worth of four hundred pounds, money, Goods, and Chattells, if
she survive him.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas marriage is concluded, and by Gods favor
shall be shortly solemnized between the within bound I. S. and H: D: of N: etc.
within said Widow, if it shall fortune the said J. hereafter to decease, and
the said H: him to survive: If then the within bound F. S. his Heirs,
Executors, or Administrators, or the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of
the said I: S: do within the space of three months next after the decease of
the said I: S: freely and quietly deliver and give, or cause to be freely and
quietly delivered and given to the said H: or to her Assigns, for her use, so
much ready money, goods, and chattells as then shall be clearly and
sufficiently well worth four hundred pounds of, etc. and which the said H: from
thenceforth may lawfully have, hold, and enjoy to her own use, without any
manner of lawful trouble, reclaim, or recovery of, or by any person or
persons, That then, etc.

A Condition that a man and his wife shall bring up Children, and to pay their
Portions.
THe Condition, etc. That where the above bound A. P. in her Widowhood, did
choose and take upon her as well to keep and bring up A: and S: her Daughters:
As also (if God so will) the Child wherewith she is now great, until their
several marriages or ages of one and twenty years, according to the liberty to
her in that behalf given by the above named R: R: in and by his last Will and
Testament, and so has lawful right to detain and keep the several Legacies
which the said R: R: in his Testament did give unto the said Children, until
the said Children shall severally be married, or severally accomplish the age
of one and twenty years, As by the said last Will, etc If the above named T: P:
and A: his wife, their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, do bring up and
keep the said Children until their several ages or marriages aforesaid: And
as they or any of them shall severally attain to the said age, or be married,
do pay or cause, etc. unto them and every of them, severally all such sum and
sums of money, as to them or any of them shall then be payable, according to
the tenor and true meaning of the said last Will and Testament, without fraud
or deceit, That then etc.

A Condition where A. and B. are bound as Sureties with C. and A. and B. bind
themselves to one another to pay half of the money.
THe Condition, etc. reciting the first bound, and that A: and B. entered
thereinto at the request of the said C: If C: do pay to the party according to
the condition of this Bond. Or else before the said 8. of October, do clearly
acquit and discharge the said A: and B. of and for the said Bond; or else if
the said A. do lawfully pay or tender, or cause to be paid or tendered to the
party the said eighth of October, one hundred and ten pounds of the said two
hundred and twenty pounds, That then, etc.

A Condition to pay money taken up by exchange upon the rechange thereof to
London.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named H. K. at the special request
of the within bound E.C. for her, together with her, has taken up by way of
exchange, at double usance for Hambrough of one R.P. the sum of thirty pounds
sterling, at the rate and price of, etc. and given their Bill of exchange
directed to one W: I: for payment thereof with advise to take the same up again
for London, by exchange at double usance as the exchange shall then go upon the
said H: K: and E: C: If the said E: C: her Exetutors, Administrators, or
Assigns, or any of them do truly content and pay, or cause, etc. the said
sum of thirty pounds, to such person or persons, as the Bills of exchange
shall be returned to be paid, and at such due time and place as therein shall
be mentioned: Together with all costs, charges, interests, and damages thereof
arising, chancing, or happening, be it by exchange, rechange, or otherwise; and
thereof and of every part thereof, do at all times hereafter clearly acquit,
discharge, or save harmless the said H. K. his Executors, Administrators, and
Goods, and every of them, as well against the said R. his Executors, Factors,
and Assigns, as against all other person and persons, That then, etc.

A Condition to make an assurance of certain Copyhold Lands for one and twenty
years Rent-free.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound T: P: before, etc. next, etc. do
procure and obtain from the Lord of the Manor of H: in the County of M: a
lawful grant to him, his Heirs and Assigns, by Copy of Court-Roll, according
to the customs of the said Manor of, etc. of and for all that Copyhold Land,
which the said T: F: or his Assigns now occupy, situate, etc. And by virtue
thereof, and of the license in that behalf to be obtained, do before the five
and twentieth day of, etc grant and assure the said Copyhold Land to the within
named G: N: his Executors and Assigns, to hold to the said G: and his
Assigns, for the term of one and twenty years from, etc. without any Rent
therefore paying to the said, etc. And also if the same G: and his Assigns in
the mean time from henceforth do or may occupy and enjoy the said Copyhold
Land, without any thing therefore answering to the said, etc. And if moreover
the said G: his Executors and Assigns, by virtue of such assurance to be had
from the said T: as aforesaid, may have, hold, and enjoy the said Land in form
aforesaid, and during the term aforesaid, without any let, trouble, or
eviction of the said T: or his Heirs or Assigns, or of any other by his or
their means or procurement, That then, etc.

A Condition for sealing of an Obligation by a third man, by a day, where two
have already sealed it.
THe Condition, etc. That where there is one other Obligation, dated the day
and year within written, made for the binding of the within bound I: H: W: H:
and one C: H: of, etc. jointly and every of them severally their Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, unto the said H: P: in the sum of, etc. to be
paid to the said H: P: his certain Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, upon
the condition of the same former Obligation, As by the same former Obligation
with the Condition thereof already sealed and delivered to the said H: P: by
the said I: H: and W: H: and now remaining with the same H: P: may appear: If
the said C: H: at his next being within any part of the City of London before
he shall then next depart from o^ out of the said City, do come to the now
dwelling house of the said H: situate, etc. and do there sign, seal, and
deliver the said Obligation whole and safe to the said H: P: or to his Deputy
for his use. So that the said H: P: after notice to him given of the next being
of the said C: H: in the said City, do not wilfully, or of fraud withdraw
himself, and the said Obligation from the said C, coming to seal and deliver
the same, That then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless a Woman's Jointure.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound G: ^: his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, do from time to time and at all times hereafter discharge and
keep harmless as well all that the Manor of K. with the Rights, Members, and
appurtenances thereof in the County of K: and all Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments whatsoever belonging to the same Manor, as also the within named
H: ^: his Heirs and assigns, of and from all such right of Dower, and of and
from all such estate and estates of Inheritance or of Freehold, as the said G:
and I: his wife have, or either of them has or hereafter can or may have or
claim to have of right to the premises, or any part thereof: And of and from
all Suits, Actions, and Demands whatsoever, to be had, brought, or pursued,
for, or concerning the same, That then, etc.

Another Condition to like effect.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound A: C: has bargained and sold
to the within named T: S: two Closes lying in, etc. and all that his Toft, etc.
To have and to hold the said, etc. to the said C: and his Heirs upon condition
of and for the payment of two hundred pounds in manner and form as appears by
a pair of Indentures in that behalf made between the said A: C and T. dated,
etc. If the said A: C: his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, from time to
time and at all times after full payment made of the said sum of two hundred
pounds, according to the purport of the said Indenture, do upon reasonable
request save and keep harmless the said T: his Heirs and Assigns, and also
the said Closes, etc. of and from all demand in Law or in right, or of Dower or
other Interest whatsoever, with K: now wife of the said A. at any time
hereafter shall lawfully demand or claim to have of or in the premises, or any
part thereof, That then, etc.

Another Condition to like effect.
THe Condition, etc. that where the above bound W: P: has heretofore sold,
given, and granted unto the above named T: L: one Message or Tenement with the
appurtenances, situate, lying, and being in W: aforesaid, as by a deed thereof
made dated, etc. more at large does appear. If therefore the said Message or
Tenement, and other the premises, and every parcel thereof, be at all times
hereafter, and from time to time so acquitted, discharged, or otherwise
sufficiently saved harmless of and from the Dower and right and title of Dower
of K: now the wife of the said W: P: as that neither the said T: L: nor his
Heirs and Assigns, nor any of them by reason thereof, or for touching or
concerning the same, be not at any time hereafter molested troubled, or sued,
That then, etc.

A Condition that an Apprentice shall make accounts, and to answer that the
Master shall lose by his untruth.
THe Condition, etc. That where E: P: Son of R: P: of, etc. has put himself
Apprentice to the within named A: P: for the term of nine years, from the
Feast of all Saints next, etc, as by a pair of Indentures of Apprenticehood
thereof made, bearing the date within written appears. If therefore the said
E: P: do from time to time, during the said term, at all times within the
space of fifteen days next after every such time as he shall be thereunto
reasonably required by the said A: his Executors or Administrators, or any the
Factors or Assigns of any of them, make and yield up to him or them, a true
and full account and reckoning of all such Goods, Wares, Chattells, Debts,
Money, and Merchandises, as at any time during the said term shall be
committed and come into the hands and custody of the said E: by the said A: his
Executors, Factors, or Assigns: And also if the said within bound W: P: his
Executors or Administrators, do from time to time within one month next after
reasonable request to any of them made by the said A: his Executors or
Assigns, make or cause to be made to him or them full recompense and
satisfaction of and for all such losses and damages, as the said A: his
Executors or Administrators shall sustain or lose by any falsehood or untruth to
be found in the said E: P: his Apprentice, at any time during the said term.
And further if the said E: P: do not at any time or times during the said
term, unlawfully depart or absent himself out of the Service of the said A:
That then, etc.

Memorand. the last branch for absence was left out in the Obligation, that in
this behalf was passed to Mr. B.

A Condition for the quiet enjoying of a house, upon the sale of the Lease
thereof.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound I: O: by his Poll deed, dated,
etc. has bargained, sold, assigned, and set over to the within named R.F. all
his estate, etc. which he has or ought to have, of or in all that Tenement
situate, etc. which A.B. demised, etc. to, etc. for the term of, etc. as by
the said Poll deed, etc. If the said R.F. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, under the payment of the yearly Rent reserved by the said Indenture
of Lease made by the said A.B. and under the performance of the Covenants,
Grants, and Agreements therein contained, from thenceforth to grow due to be
paid and performed, shall or may peaceably and quietly from the day of the date
within said, have, hold, and enjoy the said Tenement, and other the premises
with the appurtenances, for, by, and during all the residue of the said term
of, etc. clear and free discharged, or otherwise well and sufficiently saved
and kept harmless, of and from all and singular arrearages of Rent charges and
Encumbrances whatsoever, the yearly Rent and Covenants aforesaid, only
except, and without any let, trouble, or interruption of the said, etc. his
Executors, etc. and without any lawful let, interruption, or expulsion of any
other person or persons having or claiming, or which shall have or claim any
former estate, right, or title, in or to the premises, or any part thereof,
That then, etc.

A Condition for discharging of Encumbrances in a sale of Land in Feesimple.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named N: B: has by his Deed
indented, dated, etc. given and granted to the within named T: T: his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, all that Message or Tenement with the appurtenances,
situate in C. etc. now in the Tenure of B.D. or his Assigns. If the said T.
T. his Heirs and Assigns, shall or may from henceforth forever, peaceably and
quietly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the said Message, with all and singular
the appurtenances clear and free discharged, or otherwise at all times
sufficiently saved harmless by the said N: B: his Heirs and Assigns, of and
from all and singular former Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Charges,
Estates, and Encumbrances whatsoever, had* made, done, or granted by the said
N. or by any other person or persons, by or under the estate of the said N.
except one Lease made of the said Tenement with the appurtenances, by the said
N. to the said I.D. by Indenture dated, etc. upon which Lease there is reserved
ten Marks of, etc. yearly Rent, which hereafter during the continuance of the
said Lease, shall be due and payable to the said N. his Heirs and Assigns,
according to the tenor of the same Lease, That then, etc.

A Condition that if Land mortgaged shall be forfeited, it shall remain to the
Mortgagee free of Encumbrances.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the right honorable F. Earl of B. by his
Indenture dated, etc. for the sum of five hundred pounds of, etc. therein
specified, has conveyed to the within named R.M. and to his Heirs and
Assigns the Moiety of the Rectory and Parsonage of, etc. in the County of B.
and the Moiety of the Manor of W. with the appurtenances in the same County of
B. And the Reversion and Reversions thereof with other things; as in and by the
said Indenture will appear, If the said Earl his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, do make default, and do not pay the said sum
of, etc. and every part thereof, to the said R M. his Executors or
Administrators, according to the purport and true meaning of the said
Indenture: If then in such default of payment of the said sum of five hundred
pounds, or any part thereof, made the said R. M. his Heirs and Assigns, for
his and their own use for ever, shall and may lawfully have, hold, and enjoy
all the said Moiety of all and singular the said premises, and also to the
same use may lawfully have, take, receive, and enjoy the Rents and Profits
thereof for ever, clearly and freely discharged, or at all times sufficiently
kept harmless of and from all former Grants, Bargains, Estates, Titles,
Charges* and all other Encumbrances whatsoever, mentioned in the said
Indentures (except only as in the said Indentures is excepted) That then, etc.

A Condition upon a Poll deed for discharging of Encumbrances in sale of a
Lease.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound Sir H: L: Knight. by his Poll
deed, dated, etc. has bargained, sold, and assigned over to the within named
T: H: as well the Mead called Friars Mead, in H: which A: by Indenture dated,
etc. demised to the said Sir H: for the term of, etc. As also all the estate,
etc. which the said Sir H: has in the same: as by the said Poll deed more at
large will appear: If the said Mead now be, and by and during all the residue
of the said term of twenty years now to come, shall be and stand clear and
free acquitted and discharged, or otherwise by the said Sir H: his, etc. at all
times saved harmless, of and from all and singular former Bargains, Sales,
Grants, Leases, Forfeitures, Surrenders, Re entries, cause, and causes of, etc.
and all other charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, or agreed
unto by the said Sir H: except such estate and interest as the said Sir H:
heretofore has made to one R: H: and his Assigns, of and in the said Mead
only to have continuance and endurance until the 25. of March, which shall
be, etc. and no longer, except also the yearly Rent reserved by the Indenture
aforesaid, and the Covenants therein specified, which shall from henceforth
grow due to be paid and performed, That then, etc.

A Condition to make a Voyage to Venice, and from thence to return with
expedition.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named E: R: has undertaken to
make a Voyage in his own person into the City of Venice. If the said E. do as
well enter upon the said Voyage on this side, the tenth day of September next,
etc. and do continue in the same Voyage until he attain unto the same City,
and do personally enter into the same City before the twentieth day of Novem:
then next following, except by vehement sickness or diseases of his body he be
let to the contrary: As also do from thence return into the Realm of England
with all convenient expedition, as the health of his body will suffer: And
there show himself at the now Mansion house of the said R: M: in London, within
twenty days next after his return into the said Realm of England, That then,
etc.

A Condition where two having taken an Administration during a Minority, each
is bound to save harmless the other of that shall come to his hands.
THe condition, etc. That where the within bound W: L: and the within named W:
S: have the administration of the Goods and Chattells of W; K: of London C.
deceased, to them committed, during the minority of I: K: Son and sole Executor
of the last Will and Testament of the said W: K: By reason whereof since the
same Administration committed sundry sums of money, and other the Goods late
pertaining to the said W: K: have come to their hands, and much more of the
residue of the Goods, Chattells, Debts, and money which were of the said W: K:
are likely to be received, recovered, and gotten by the said W: L: and W: S:
for which they are and shall stand charged to answer and account for. If the
said W: L. his Executors and Administrators from time to time hereafter, as he
or they shall be required, do and shall yield and make a full perfect and true
reck^ning and account to the said I: his Executors and Assigns, and to all and
every such other person or persons as he or they shall appoint in that behalf,
of and for all such and as much of the said Goods, Chattells, Debts, and money,
as already are, or before, or between any such account making, shall be had,
received, or meddled withal by the said W: his Executors Administrators, or
Assigns: And do also from time to time and at all times hereafter well and
sufficiently discharge, or save and keep harmless the said W. S. his Executors
and Administrators, and all and every other person and persons, of and for all
and singular such and as much of the said Goods, Chattells, money, and debts,
as are or shall come to the hands or possession of the said W: his Exeeutors,
Administrators, or Assigns, and were due, appertaining, owing, or belonging to
the said W: K: in his life time, That then, etc.

A Condition upon a Letter of Attorney for recovery of didivers debts with a
clause that the Constitutor shall show his Book to prove them.
Recital of the Letter of Attorney.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within bound T. C. has made his Warrant
of Attorney of the date within written to the within named T. L. enabling him to
recover, demand, and receive, and to detain to his own use after the receipt,
all and singular sum and sums of money mentioned or specified in the
Schedule annexed to the same Warrant of Attorney. If the said T. C. his
executors or administrators do not revoke, countermand or repeal the said
Warrant of Attorney, Not to revoke.
or the power or authority thereby given or granted, also if the said T. C. his
executors or administrators shall not acquit, Not to release the sums nor
withdraw actions.
release, discharge or exonerate at any time hereafter, any of the said sums of
money, or withdraw, dis-continue or make nonsuit any action or suit hereafter
to be commenced or prosecuted by the said T. L. his executors or assigns for
the recovery of the same sum or sums of money or any of them without the
request of the same T. his executors or assigns. Further if the said T. C. his
executors and administrators do from time to time as request shall be to him or
them reasonably made, To avow actions.
do and shall as well avow justly and suffer to be maintained in his or their
name or names at the costs and charges of the said T. L. his executors or
assigns, all and every action and suit that the same T. L. his executors or
assigns shall pursue or prosecute for or concerning any of the sum or sums
of money aforesaid; To show Books to prove the debts.
as also for the better proof of the same to be true debts and better
atchieving thereof do and shall bring forth all and every the book and books of
the said T. C. wherein the same debts or any of them be entered that the same
may be showed, seen, and delivered in evidence as often as occasion shall
serve; and also if the said T. C. have not acquitted, That the debts are not
acquitted or received. Or if any be received to recompense the same to the
Obligee, upon request. The Obligee to enjoy the debts to his own use.
released or received any of the said debts. Or if any of them be received,
acquitted or released, Then if the said T. C. his executors, administrators or
assigns upon probable proof to him or them offered and declared, do within
four days then next following, pay and recompense to the said T. L. his
executors or assigns, the full and even value of all and every the same debts
as so are acquitted, received or released: and also if he the said T. L. his
executors and assigns shall and may have, hold, and enjoy without any account
to the same T. C. his executors or administrators, all such of the said debts
as shall be received or obtained by the said T. L. his executors or assigns:
That then, etc.

A Condition for re-delivery of Silver wrought into Plate of such form and
fashion as shall be appointed.
THe Condition, etc. That if from time to time and at all times hereafter as
often and when as any Silver shall be by the within named A. M. his servants or
assigns delivered to the within bound I. H. or his assigns, to the intent to
be made and wrought into Plate, the said I. H. or his assigns do and shall
well and truly re-deliver or cause, etc. unto the said A. or his assigns, all
and every the same Silver made and wrought into such form and fashion as from
time to time by the said A. or his servants or assigns shall be required or
appointed, and that at all times and from time to time within such time and
space after the receipt by the said J. of the said silver as shall be accorded
and agreed upon between the said A. M. or his servants and assigns, and the
said J. H. That then, etc.

A Condition where P. M. has received a Legacy of an Executor is bound to pay
his ratable part back again, if any debts happen afterward to be paid by the
said Executor, yet concealed from his knowledge.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound P. M. has had and received of
the within named H. W. Executor of the last Will and Testament of one H. L.
late of L. deceased the sum of twenty pounds of, etc. a Legacy which the said
H. gave and bequeathed to the said P. M. if it fortune that any sum or sums
of money which the said H. M. owed at his decease yet concealed from the
knowledge of the said Executor, shall fortune hereafter to be demanded and
received at his hands, or at the hands of his executor and administrator, then
if the said P. his executors or administrators shall and do well and truly pay
or cause, etc. to the said H. W. his executors or assigns within the space of
three months next after notice in that behalf to be given by the said P. his
executors or administrators a ratable part and portion of money back again,
toward the answering and paying of such sum and sums of money so happening
to be demanded and paid, That is to say, ratably according to the value of the
said twenty pounds paid to the said P. respecting the quantity thereof rated
with the other Legacies of the said H. paid and to be paid to other the
Legatories according to the quanty thereof: That then, etc.

A Condition where debts are owing by reason of partnership, and the one of the
Partners having the trade and receipt of the debts in his own hands is bound to
his other Partner to pay him a half thereof upon receipt, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named J. C. and the within bound H
P. by reason of their joint occupying of Woollen cloth have yet owing to them
in debts the sum of two hundred ninty three pounds, if the same H. P. his
executors or administrators do pay or cause, etc. unto the said J. C. his
executors or administrators upon the receipt of any part of the same sum of,
etc. the one half of every such sum and sums so fortuning to be received
by the said H. his executors, or administrators within four days next after
the lawful demand of the said J. his executors or administrators therefore to
be made to the said H. P. his executors or administrators, and further if the
said H. P. his executors or administrators do not acquit, release, or compound
for any the said debts or any part thereof more to the prejudice of the said J.
his executors, or administrators, Then to the prejudice of the said H. his
executors or administrators: That then, etc.

A Condition to leave a Son his Child's part.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas marriage is to be had and solemnised between
the within named J. B. and A. S. Daughter of T. S. Citizen, and C. of L. and
whereas in consideration thereof, and of other considerations the within bound
R. B. has agreed hereby to bind himself unto the said J. B. for assurance a
full child's part and portion to be allowed to the said J. A. out of the goods,
chattells and credits of the said R. B. which he shall happen to have at the
time of his decease, If therefore it happen the said marriage to be solemnized,
Then if the said I. B. and A. and the Survivor of them, or the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of the Survivor of them shall and may have, receive
and enjoy after the decease of the said R. B. so good, and full child's part and
portion of the goods, chattels and credits of the said R. B or the value
thereof within twelve months next after his decease, to be paid or allowed by
the executors or administrators of the said R B. as any other of the children
of the said R. B. shall then have or be entitled to have of his goods,
chattels and credits aforesaid: That then, etc.

A Condition to pay the Remainder to make up a child's part, where part is paid
aforehand.
THe Condition etc. That whereas marriage is shortly to be had and solemnized
between the within named I. B. and A. S. Daughter of the within bounden T. S.
and whereas in consideration thereof the said T. S. in part of payment of the
child's part and portion of the said A. his Daughter, to her to be due after his
decease of his goods, chattels, and credits, and for a present advancement unto
her in respect of the said marriage, has paid at the ensealing hereof to the
said I. B. the sum of five hundred pounds of, etc. And moreover has promised
to leave unto the said I. and A. the rest of a child's part and portion after
his decease: If therefore it fortune the said marriage to be solemnized, Then
if the said I. B. and A. and the Survivor of them, or the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of the Survivor of them shall and may have, receive,
and enjoy after the decease of the said T. the residue of her child's part and
portion according to the promise of the said T. S. aforesaid, that is to say so
much of the goods, chattels, and credits, or the value of so much thereof
within twelve months next after his decease to be paid or allowed by the
Executors, or Administrators of the said T. as with the said five hundred
pounds paid aforehand as aforesaid shall make up and supply as good and as full
a portion as any other of the children of the said T. shall then have or be
entitled to have, That then, etc.

A Condition to keep one harmless who delivers a Chain fearing to be put
into the Exchequer.
THe Condition etc. That where the within bound R. S. has sold and delivered
to the within named L. L. a Chain of Gold weighing, etc. for and in
consideration of the sum of eighteen pounds: If so be that the said R. S. at
any time hereafter shall be by any information, plaint, suit, or action
impleaded, troubled or sued in any wise by reason of the said Chain for any
lack of weight, goodness, or finenesse that can be pretended or found to be in
the same or otherwise by reason of any Statute or Act of Parliament, wherein
the said R. S. may be charged concerning the same, The which Chain
nevertheless the said L. L. received of the said R. of the weight, finenesse
and goodness that it ought to have, and at such reasonable rate as it was well
worth, then if the said L. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do and
shall upon reasonable request therefore to be made, repay and recompense to the
said R. his executors and administrators all and every such sum and sums of
money, and other charges as he or they or any of them shall happen to disburse,
sustain, or pay out by reason of any such information, plaint, suit, action, or
otherwise by reason of any Statute or Act of Parliament as aforesaid, That
then, etc.

A Condition to put in sureties to the Chamber for a sum already committed and
now delivered by consent to another man's hand.
THe Condition, etc. That where the above bounden T. A. the day and year above
written has taken out of the hands and custody of the above named T. G. the
sum of two hundred pounds of, etc. being the part and portion of P one of the
children and orphans of the above named C. B. deceased, afferring to the same
P. for his part of all the goods and chattels which were of his said Father
according to the custom of the city of L. and the said T. A. has taken upon
him to satisfy the Chamberlain of the said city with sureties for the payment
thereof to the use of the said P. according to the custom of the said City in
that behalf used. If therefore after request to be made to the said T. A. or
the above named R. E. their executors or administrators or any of them by the
said T. G. or the above named I. L. or R. M. or their assigns, the same T. A.
and R. E. their executors or administrators with such other good able sureties
with them, as by the said Chamberlain of the said City for the time being shall
be allowed, do within the space of (...) days next following such request made
become bound to the same Chamberlain according to the usual order and custom
of the said City for the sure payment of the said, etc. to the use of the said
P. O. That then, etc.

A Condition to procure new sureties to be bound in the Chamber of London to
the discharge of a surety bound already if he request it.
THe Conditon etc. That whereas the above named E. A. together with T. S. and
W. G and I. G. at the special instance and request of the said T. S. and W. G.
and I. G. by Recognizance by them knowledged before the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen of the City of London in the inner Chamber of the Guild Hall of the
same City on the three and twentieth of October now last past is holden and
stands bound to G. H. Chamberlain of the said City* and to his Successors in
the sum of four hundred pounds of, etc. for the payment of three hundred
pounds of the parts and portions of W. M. I. and T. children and orphans of W.
H. late Citizen, and S. of London deceased. And further, as by the said
Recognizance, and the condition thereof more at large it will appear, If the
said E. A. his heirs, executors or administrators, at any time hereafter, do
make request to the said T. S, W. G. and I. G. their executors and
administrators or to any one of them, to procure that the said E. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators may be discharged and acquitted of and from the
said Recognizance, If the said T. W. and I. their Executors or Administrators
for and to the discharging and acquitting of the said E. his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators of and from the same Recognizance, do within two months
next after such request made as aforesaid, bring in to be bound a new by
Recognizance, to be taken and knowledged before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the said City of L. for the time being, another good sufficient person in the
stead, place and liew of the said E. and if also the said E. his heirs
executors, and administrators and every of them, be in the mean, and from time
to time at all times hereafter saved harmless by the said, etc. their
Executors and Administrators of and from all losses, costs, damages,
Judgments, and Executions whatsoever to arise, come or grow of or by means of
the said former Recognizance in any wise: That then, etc.

A Condition for the assurance of a Parsonage to a Clerk presented against them
that can claim former presentment by the saeme assurance.
THe Condition. etc. That where N. S. of S. in the County of M. Gent. at the
request of the withinbound W. W. has presented R. G, Son to the within named
T. G. as Clerk unto the Parsonage and Rectory of, etc. in the County of M.
whereupon the said R. is inducted into the said Parsonage and Rectory by the
consent of the right reverend Father E. Bishop of L. If the said R. G. shall or
may by virtue of the said presentation and induction at all times hereafter
during the natural life of the same R. lawfully, peaceably, and quietly, have,
keep, possess, and enjoy the said Rectory and Parsonage with all the
Appurtenances of the same, and all profits, commodities, tithes, pensions,
advantages, casualties and emoluments whatsoever to the said Parsonage by any
means due, incident, annexed, or belonging with all and singular their
Appurtenances whatsoever, without lawful let or interruption of the said N. S.
his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns or any of them, or of any other person or
persons whatsoever, claiming or having or that shall, etc. any former
presentation, advowson, or grant made by the said N. or by any other by his
means, consent, or agreement. That then, etc.

A Condition for ones forth coming when he shall be called for.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the within bound R.M. be
always forth-comming when he shall be called for, and do also from time to
time upon warning make his personal appearance at and in such place or places
as shall be to him notified, there to speak and answer for himself before such
person or persons as shall be appointed to be auditors for and concerning such
things as against the said R. M. shall be said, spoken or alleged: That then,
etc. or else it to stand and remain in full strength and virtue.

A Condition where two are bound one to another, not to do prejudice upon a
Bond in both their names.
THe Condition, etc. That where I. F. Citizen and Draper of London, stands
bound to the within named R. C. and W. W. in two hundred pounds of, etc. as by
Recognizance or writing obligatory according to the form of the Statute of
late provided for the recovery of debts to them jointly made by the said I.
dated, etc. and knowledged and sealed before Sir R.C. Knight, Lord chief
Justice of England will appear. And whereas in truth the said R, and W. are
equally to take benefit of the said Statute, and for that purpose the said
Statute was made to them as is aforesaid: If therefore he the said R. C. for
his part heretofore has not done, or he, his executors or assigns at any time
hereafter without the request and consent of the said W. his executors or
administrators shall not do or procure to be done any act or thing whereby or
by means whereof the said writing, obligation or sum of two hundred pounds
or any part thereof, is or shall be released or acquitted any manner of way, or
whereby any action, suit, process, or execution hereafter to be had or taken
upon the said Statute shall or may be barred, defeated, made frustrate, or lose
his effect; And if also the said R. C his executors, administrators and
assigns, and every of them do and shall from time to time and at all times
hereafter agree, permit, and suffer that the said two hundred pounds if it
shall be forfeited, shall be recovered, taken, and levied the one moiety
thereof for the only use and behoof of the said R. his executors,
administrators and assigns, and the other moiety thereof for the said W. his
executors, administrators and assigns without any let, denial or
contradiction of the said R. his executors, administrators or assigns: That
then, etc.

A Condition to justify a Letter of Attorney, such a one as will serve at all
times if there be more sums then one, and whereas the Constitutee is to have
them.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound I. M. his executors,
administrators and assigns do at all times hereafter aver, justify, maintain,
and allow all such actions, suits; Writs, Pleas, Plaints, Processes,
Condemnations, Judgments, Executions and Demands as it shall fortune the
within named I. C. his executors or assigns at any time hereafter to commence,
conceive, purchase, exhibit, procure, or prosecute by force of a Letter of
Attorney of the date within written, made from the said I. to the said I.
against all or any the persons, debtors therein named, their executors or
administrators for recovery of the several sums of money by every of them
severally owing mentioned in the said Letter of Attorney to the only use
therein specified. And do permit and suffer the said I. his executors and
assigns to recover and receive all and every the said several debts and
sums of money, and the costs, damages and profits of suits and other
advantages to come or grow any way to the only use of the said I. his
executors and assigns for ever, without account, or without release,
acquittance, discharge, nonsuit, countermandment, dis-avowry, retraxit, or
other avoiding of the same persons, sums of money, debts, suits, or other
demands accrewing upon the same without the consent in writing of the said I.
his executors or assigns first had for the same: That then, etc.

A Condition upon a Letter of Attorney that the Constitutee may receive the
money to his own use.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named T. D. has a Warrant of
Attorney of the date within written to him, his executors and assigns made by
the within bound I. B. to recover, demand and receive of I. H and R. G. fifty
pounds wherein they stand bound to the said I. B. by their Obligation dated,
etc. As by the said Warrant of Attorney appears. If the said I. B. his
Executors and Administrators do and shall suffer the said Warrant of Attorney
to stand and continue unrevoked, not made frustrate, or countermanded, and do
and shall suffer the said T his Executors and assigns to sue for, recover,
receive, and enjoy to and for his and their own use, the said sum of fifty
pounds from time to time without any let, molestation, impediment or account of
the contrary^: And also do and shall upon the r^asonable request, and at the
costs and charges of the said T. his Executors or Assigns avow, justify and
suffer to be maintained all and every lawful action, suit, plea, process,
judgment and execution that he or they shall take, have, pursue, or prosecute
upon the said Obligation in the name or names of the said I his Executors or
Administrators without being non suit, discontinuing or hindering any of the
same actions, suits, judgments or executions; and also if the said Obligation
or sum of money, or any part thereof be not acquitted or released, nor
hereafter shall be acquitted or released by the said I. his Executors or
Administrators, nor attached without the request of the said T. his executors
or Administrators: That then, etc.

Another Condition upon a Letter of Attorney.
THe Condition, etc. That where the above named G. M. by his Warrant of
attorney of the date within written has constituted, made, and ordained the
above named R. S. his executors administrators and assigns to recover and
receive diverse sums of money in the same Warrant of Attorney expressed, and
particularly mentioned: As by the said Warrant may plainly appear. If the said
G. his Executors and Administrators do and shall permit and suffer the said R.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns to recover and sue for the said
sums, and every of them, and the same to take, receive and enjoy to his and
their own use without any account thereof, or of or for any part thereof to be
yielded or demanded to or by the said G. his Executors or Assigns, and without
any other let, impediment, or disturbrance of the said G. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns: And also do and shall from time to time at all
times hereafter, upon and at the reasonable request, costs, and charges of the
said R. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, avouch, justify, and
suffer to be maintained all and singular such lawful Processes, Actions,
Suits, and Executions as the said R. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns
shall sue, take, have, or prosecute in the name or names of the said G. M. his
Executors or Administrators for the Recovery and getting of the said sums or
any of them without being nonsuit, making release, retraxit, or other
discontinuance of or in any such Suit, Action, or Process: otherwise then by
the consent of the said R. his Executors or Administrators: And also do make
from time to time to the said R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
such further Letters or Warrants of Attorney, for and concerning the recovery
and suits aforesaid, or any of them, as by him or them at their own costs shall
be devised and reasonably required: And further if the sums of money mentioned
in the said Letter of Attorney, and every of them be at the ensealing and
delivery hereof lawfully and truly owing to the said G not attached, and shall
be proved owing as aforesaid by the said G. or his assigns, at the costs of
the said R. his Executors or assigns when he or they shall have need requiring
the same proof, and hereafter shall not by any means be attached, nor by the
said G. his executors or administrators received, acquitted, released, nor
compounded for, nor any part thereof without the consent and request of the
said R. his executors or administrators: That then, etc.

A Condition to pay money upon an Act executory.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound T. A. or I. A. ^o as well content
and pay to the within named I. W. the sum of twenty pounds of, etc. at such
time as the said I.W. shall deliver to the said T. and I. one sufficient
Warrant in Writing, under the hand and seal of the within named I. T. by
means whereof W. C. of B. in the County of L. Servant to C. A. Gent. by the
Queens Majesty's Letters Patents, in due form to be made, and sealed with her
great Seal of England, shall be, or lawfully may be before the end of Trinity
Term next coming, made and constituted, Searcher of the Port of B. aforesaid,
and of all the Members, Creeks, and places thereof, with the grant of all Fees
and Wages to the same belonging, in as large and ample manner as R T. late had
and enjoyed the same; As also after the receipt of the said Warrant, do
moreover content and pay to the said J. W. his Executors or Administrators, one
other sum of twelve pounds of, etc. at the now dwelling house of the said T.
situate, etc. on the fourteenth day of October next coming, That then, etc.

A Condition where two are Executors, and the one is bound to the other to pay
half the Legacies and Debts, and to have half of the rest of the Testators
Goods,
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named J. P. deceased, by his last
Will and Testament in Writing, dated, etc. has made and ordained the within
bound A. B. and the within named Agnes B. by the names of his Wife and Son his
Executors: And by the same his last Testament, has given and bequeathed to the
said A. and A. the residue of all his Goods, Chattells, and Debts, to remain
after his debts paid, and Legacies fulfilled to be equally divided between
them: As by the said last Will and Testament plainly is expressed. If the said
Andrew his Executors or Assigns, at their own charges, do as well, well and
truly pay or cause to be paid or discharged to every person, as of right it
does belong, and in due time the Moiety, and one half of all such Legacies and
Bequests, as the said J. by his said last Will and Testament, has severally
given, willed, or bequeathed: Or for such Moiety from time to time at all
times, do sufficiently keep harmless the said A. her Executors and
Administrators: As also do from time to time at all times agree and suffer that
the said A. her Executors and Assigns, shall and may for ever for their own
use, have, hold, keep, and enjoy the one half of the said residue to remain as
aforesaid, of all the said Goods, Chattells, and debts which were of the said
J. without let, interruption, demand, or vexation of the said A. his Executors
or Administrators, or of any other by or from them or any of them. And moreover
if the Executors and Assigns of the said A. at the Harvest next happening
after her decease, may have take and enjoy for their own use, the one half of
the Corn and Grain then to be growing, standing, or being, in or upon any
Ground belonging to the Farm of S. in E. within said which Farm the said A.
and A. now do occupy together: The said Executors or Assigns of the said Agnes
then yiedling and allowing to the said Andrew, his Executors and Assigns
twenty pence of, etc. for the moiety of the rent of every acre of Ground
whereon such Corn and Grain shall be standing growing, or being. And if also
the said A. his Executors and assigns do allow and yield to the said Executors
or assigns of the said Agnes, if they or any of them require it, twelve pence
for every tithe of every acre of such of the Ground of the said Farm, as shall
be in sallow at the decease of the said Agnes, That then, etc.

A Condition to make one free by a day, and to suffer him in the mean time to
take the benefit of his own labor.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named A. B. is now the Apprentice of
the within bound C.D. until the Feast of St. James the Apostle, which shall
be, etc. as by an Indenture thereof made to the said C.D. by the said A.B. does
appear: If the said C.D. his Executors and administrators at the only charges
of the same C.D. his Executors or administrators, do upon reasonable request,
cause the said Indenture to be enrolled according to the custom of the City of
L. So that the said A.B. thereunto do in due manner give his consent. And if
also the said C.D. his Executors and administrators, at the like charge. of the
same C. D. his Executors and administrators, do upon reasonable request at the
said Feast of St James the Apostle, which shall be, etc. or within three months
then next following, do procure the said A.B. to be lawfully admitted into the
liberty and freedom of the City of London, according to the custom of the
City aforesaid: And do also freely permit and suffer the said A.B. peaceably to
employ and bestow the science, art, and service of the said A, B. to the only
use and behoof of the same A.B. until the said Feast of Saint James the
Apostle, which shall be, etc. and do not at any time demand the same, or any
satisfaction or account therefore, or thereto, That then, etc.

A Condition to save one harmless of the keeping of a Child who has been
charged for the reputed Father thereof.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within bound P.H. has married and taken
to wife one M. now his wife at this present, and one woman-child of like name,
has been lately born by her, for the which the within named G.G. has been
charged for the reputed Father thereof; If at all times and from time to time
hereafter the said G G. shall and may stand discharged against the said P.V and
M. his wife, and either of them, and the assigns of them, and of either of
them, of and for all and every the premises, and also against all and every
person and persons, of and for the keeping, finding, and bringing up of the
said Child, and of and from all actions suits, costs, charges, and molestations
concernng the premises, or any of them, That then, etc.

A Condition where one having dealt in the affairs of another, and made an
account, if upon the better examination thereof it be found faulty, then the
Obligor to make recompense to the Obligee.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound I. R. having had to do in the
business of the within named R. S. whose apprentice the said J. lately was,
has now immediately before the day of the date hereof, being a point to leave
the service of the said R. yiedling an account in writing to the said R. for
and concerning such goods, wares, and things of the said R. as he the said I.
had delivered and committed to his charge and dealing whereof no former account
has been yielded. If it fortune in the better examination of the said account
now lastly given up, or otherwise, that any indirect dealing has been made
therein, or of or with any the goods, wares, money, or merchandise of the said
R. on the part of the said I. or that the said I has done any act or thing to
charge the said R. whereof concealment is made, and the said R. has not made
acceptance at the making and giving up of this last account. If then the said
R. his Executors and Administrators shall and may have his and their recompense
of the payment of the said J.R. his Executors or Administrators, of and for all
such things as the said R. his Executors or Administrators shall be damnified
in, by means of any indirect dealing or act done to charge the said R. by the
said J. as aforesaid, and that according to the damage that the said R. his
Executors or Administrators shall incur by any such means, the same being
provable and requested at the hands of the said J. his Executors or
Administrators, That then, etc.

A Condition by a Jailer to save a Sheriff and an under Sheriff harmless of
all things particularly concerning his charge.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound N. W. his Executors and Assigns,
and every of them shall and do at all times, and from time to time, during so
long time as the within named J. H. shall be high Sheriff of the County of K or
shall stand charged with the Goales of the said Shire, and the Prisoners of and
in the same, acquit, discharge, or save harmless the said I. H. his Heirs and
Executors, of and from all and all manner of Prisoners committed, or hereafter
during the time aforesaid to be committed to the charge of the said high
Sheriff, or his under Sheriff, or by the said high Sheriff, or his under
Sheriff, or Bailiff, or Bailiffs, by any process, or otherwise lawfully
apprehended, and by the said high Sheriff, or his under Sheriff, or his or
their Assign or Assigns delivered, or which hereafter shall be delivered over
in charge unto the said N. or his Assignee, and of and for the custody of all
and every such Prisoner and Prisoners,: and also shall and do keep safely all
and every Prisoner and Prisoners at the ensealing hereof, being and remaining
in the Goal of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, of her Goal of M. or
wherein the custody and keeping of the said N.W. or his assign or assigns, or
any of them: And also shall and do at all and every time and times hereafter
during the Sherifalty aforesaid, safely keep all and all manner of such
Prisoner and Prisoners as shall be hereafter committed and delivered in charge
unto the said N. by the said high Sheriff, or his under Sheriff, or by his or
their assign or assigns, or by any other person or persons having authority
to commit the same. And also shall not, nor do not deliver nor suffer to be
delivered, or let escape any Prisoner or Prisoners whatsoever, delivered unto
the said N. in charge, without special commandment or precept in writing of
the said high Sheriff, or under Sheriff, under the seal of the said high
Sheriff or under Sheriff to the said N. directed and delivered. And also if the
said N. shall and do at all times, and from time to time, as often as need
shall require, during the time of the aforesaid Sherifaldry, at his own proper
costs and charges, bring, carry, or cause, etc and before the Queens Council,
or any other the Justices or Commissioners of her Majesty, the Justices of
Assizes, or any other being Commissioners of the Peace, or for Goal delivery,
or for the arraignment of any of the said Prisoners, all and all manner of the
said Prisoners, or so many of them, under that number of all, as he shall be
called, required, or commanded by the said high Sheriff, or his under Sheriff,
unto such place and places as shall be given to the said N. or his assigns, in
charge by the said high Sheriff, or his under Sheriff, or by his or their
assigns. And then and there also shall safely keep at his like costs and
charges, all and every of the said Prisoners, and every of them, for and during
so long time as they and every of them shall so there remain by the commandment
aforesaid: And from thence shall at his like costs and charges convey and
carry, or cause, etc. all and every the said Prisoners, unto such place or
places as he the said N. shall be commanded by the Queens Council, Justices,
Commissioners, Sheriffs, under Sheriffs, or any of them. And the said Prisoners
and every of them so carried or conveyed, as is aforesaid, shall and do at his
costs and charges safely keep, until they the said Prisoners and every of them
shall be by due order of Law discharged, acquitted, or executed. And do also at
his like costs and charges execute, or cause, etc. all and every such Prisoner
and Prisoners as shall be during the said term, lawfully convicted. And
further shall do or cause, etc. all and every such other corporal punishments
as shall be assigned or appointed to any and every such Prisoner or Prisoners,
according to their several judgments in that behalf. And also that if the said
N. shall not, and do not hereafter during the time that he the said high Sheriff
shall be charged with the said Goal and Prisoners, ask, require, demand,
exact, extort, have, or take any Fee or Fees of any Prisoner or Prisoners to
him by any means as is abovesaid, committed, delivered, or given in charge, but
such Fees only as shall be, have been, and are lawfully demandable and
leviable of every the said Prisoners, of ancient use and right; So that the
said Sheriff or his under Sheriff shall not, nor do not incur and suffer any
ignominy, prejudice, slander, or hurt, by reason of any such excessive
exaction, or extortion in taking of unlawful Fees. And do also well and truly
behave himself in the execution of his Office of Jaylorship aforesaid in all
points: and thereof do discharge save and keep harmless the said high Sheriff,
and his under Sheriff, their Heirs and Executors, against the Queens Majesty,
her Heirs and Successors, and all and every other person and persons, That
then, etc.

A Condition where one having received a Childs part of his Fathers Goods in
the Fathers life, is bound not to make further claim therefore, nor to trouble
his Fathers Executors or Administrators after his decease.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within bound W. K. the younger, has as
appears by his acquittance made in that behalf, of the date within written,
had and received aforehand of the within named W. K. his Father full allowance
and satisfaction of all his Childs part and portion of the Goods, Chattells,
and Debts whatsoever of his said Father, whereof he shall fortune to dye
possessed, or then to be entitled unto. If therefore the said W K. the
younger, his Executors or Administrators, or any other for or in the name or
names of him or them, or any of them, at any time or times hereafter before, or
after the death of the said W. the elder, do not nor shall not claim, demand,
challenge, or desire to have any further or more allowance for or of his said
Child's part or portion, then he has already had and received: Neither do nor
shall at any time or times after the death of the said W. the Father in quiet,
vex, molest, or trouble the Executors or Administrators of the same W. or any
of them, for in respect of the Childs part or portion of the said W. the
younger aforesaid, or for or by reason of any the Goods, Chattells, or Debts of
the said W. K the elder, whereof he shall fortune to dye possessed, or then be
entitled unto as aforesaid, other then for such as the same W. the elder shall
by his last Will and Testament give and bequeath to the said W. the younger,
That then, etc.

A Condition not to make any challenge against one for any contract of
Matrimony, nor to trouble or vex any person whom the Obligee shall marry.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound E. M. or any other person or
persons for her, or in her name, do not at any time or times hereafter make any
challenge, claim, or demand in Law, to or against R. N. of L. Merchant, for or
by reason of any contract, promise, or matter of Matrimony whatsoever,
heretofore passed, concluded upon, or had in talk between the said E. and R.
neither do at any time or times sue, vex, trouble, or molest the said R. or any
other person or persons, whom he shall hereafter fortune to marry, for or
concerning the premises, or any of them in Law or otherwise, that Then, etc.

A Condition to confess an Action in one of the Counters by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named A. B. at the time of his
decease did owe unto N. W. and others the sum of two hundred pounds of, etc.
for the which actions are now depending against the said R. R. in the Counter
in Woodstreet of L. And whereas the within named R. M. at the request of the
within bound R.R. and T.T. has at his own charges on the behalf of the said R.
compounded and taken order for the said debt, with the said N W. and the said
other persons. If therefore the said R. R. and T.T. when as the said R.M. at
any time between the five and twentieth day of March, and the 6th of June next
coming, shall enter an action of debt in any of the two Counters in London,
against the said R. and T. upon the demand of two hundred pounds, as due and
owing to them by the said R. do then within two days next after the entering of
the same action personally appear in the same Counter, where the said action
shall be entered, and do there in open Court, in due form of Law, and according
to the use and custom there used, plainly and apertly confess and acknowledge
upon Record themselves to owe to the said R. M. the said sum of two hundred
pounds, to be levied of the said R. and T. and either of them, and of all their
Goods and Chattells, and the Goods and Chattells of every of them, to the use
of the said R.M. and his Executors, That then, etc.

A Condition by a Bailiff of a Manor for the due execution of his Office, and
for making true account of the Rents and Revenues of the Manor.
THe Conditioner, etc. That where the within named R. T. has appointed the
within bound R. K. Bailiff of the Manor of E. in the Counry of E. If the said
R. K. shall well and truly execute the said Office, and to the best he can or
may gather and receive the Rents, Issues, and Profits of and within the said
Manor, from time to time to be due to the said R. And thereof and therefore
shall at two times in the year yearly make true account and due payment to
the said R. or his assigns, from time to time so long as the said R. shall
continue or deal in the said Office, That then, etc.

A Condition to make a Woman a Jointure by a day, and to make safe delivery of
the Writing thereof to the Woman's Friends.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound T. W. in his life time, and
before the end of one year next ensuing, the date within written, do as well
plainly and lawfully assure, or cause, etc. by good and lawful conveyance and
assurance in the Law to E. now wife of the said T. and natural Daughter of the
within named T.S. or to some other person or persons, to the use of the same E.
for and in the name of her Jointure, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of
freehold or of Copyhold, of the clear yearly value of forty pounds, or above,
of such good and clear title in the Law, so as the said E. if she fortune to
survive the said T. shall or lawfully may from the decease of the said T. have,
take, perceive, receive, and enjoy yearly Rents and Profits thereof, to her
own only use, to the clear yearly value of forty pounds, or above, beyond all
charges and reprises, for and during the term of the natural life of the said
E. without any let, molestation, recovery, or eviction: As also within twenty
days next after the making of such conveyance and assurance as aforesaid, do
well and safely deliver, or cause, etc. all the Writings and Instruments
thereof, and therefore to be made into the hands of the said T.S. if he be then
living, or else into the hands of the said E. or of such other person or
persons as she shall appoint safely to her use to be kept, That then, etc.

A Condition where such as have Childrens Portions out of the Chamber of
London, and being by reason thereof charged with their Education, are bound to
pay their Mother yearly (who has undertaken their Education) after the rate
of seven pounds per cent.
THe Condition, etc. That where the above bound T. S. W. G. and I.S have had
and received into their hands of the above named A.H. the sum of seven
hundred forty three pounds of the portion of T. M. W. and I. Children and
Orphaus of the above named W. H. and thereupon by several Recognizances taken
and knowledged, according to the custom of the said City of London, with
others, are become bound to G. H. Chamberlain of the said City, and to his
Successors, for the payment thereof, to the use of the said Orphans. As by the
said Recognizances and their Conditions does appear. And whereas the said T. S.
W. G. and I.S. by the custom of the said City of L. and that by reason of the
having the portions aforesaid, stand charged and chargable with the education
and bringing up of the said Children, at their proper costs and charges. If the
said T. S. W G. and I. S. their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, in
consideration that the said A. being natural Mother to the said Children, has
taken upon her (as most convenient it is) their Education and bringing up; do
from henceforth content and pay, or cause, etc. to the aid A. her Executors or
Assigns, in the days of the Feasts of, etc. or within ten days next ensuing
either of the same Feasts, yearly by even portions, at the now Mansion house
of the said A. situate, etc. between the hours of one and five of the Clock
in the afternoon, of every of the same days, for and toward the finding and
education of the said Orphans, and of the Survivors of them yearly from year
to year, during their several nonages, rateably, and according to the
proportion of seven pounds for every hundred pounds, of the said sum of seven
hundred forty three pounds, that now does, or at any time hereafter shall
remain or be in the hands or possession of the said T. W. and J. or any of
them, or of their or of any of their Executors or Administrators, and so after
the same rate for every part of the said sum of four hundred seventy three
pounds from time to time, according to the quantity of all the time wherein the
same sum, etc. or any part thereof, shall fortune to be or remain in the
hand of the said T. W. and J, or any of them, or in the hands of their or any
of their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, That then, etc.

A Condition that where two have money out of the Chamber, being Childrens
Portions in equal part, each is bound to repay a moiety, and accomplish the
Condition of the Recognizance to the Chamber pro part Sep.
THe Condition* etc. That whereas the within named W. C. and I. H. together
with the within bound I. A. and T. T. with others by way of Recognizance taken
and knowledged before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, in the inner
Chamber of the Guildhall of the Gity of L. according to the Custom of the same
City, are and stand bound to G. H. Chamberlain of the said City, as well for
and touching the sure payment of two hundred and sixty pounds, to and for the
use of I. S. M. and T. Children and Orphans of J.J. late Citizen and
Merchant-taylor of L. deceased: As also for and touching the payment of a
Legacy of seventy pounds given to the said Orphans by their said Father; as by
the several Recognizances thereof in the said Chamber knowledged, and their
several Conditions will appear. And where also the one moiety; or half part
of the said sum of two hundred and seventy pounds, and also the one moiety of
the said seventy pounds remains in the hands and custody of the said J. A.
and T. T. If the said J.A. and T.T. and every of them, their Executors and
Assigns, and every of them at all times hereafter, and from time to time for
their part, do as well bear and pay to the said Chamberlain and his
Successors, Chamberlains of the said City, for the time being, to the use of
the said Orphans, one moiety or half part of all the said sum and sums of
money, and the moiety and one half of all other payments and charges which
shall be due, payable, or belonging to the same Orphans, or to any of them, of
to the said Chamberlain, or his Successors, for their use, or the use of any of
them, by force or virtue of the said Recognizances, or any of them, when as the
same or any part thereof shall be required by the said Chamberlain or his
Successors: And also from time to time, according to the order and custom of
the said City of London, and agreeably to the conditions of the said
Recognizances; do satisfy the Lord Mayor of the City of London, and the Court
of Aldermen, and the said Chamberlain for the time being, with sufficient and
competent surety and sureties in the stead, lieu, and place which the said J.A.
and T.T. now have in the said Recognizances from time to time, as often as any
such surety or sureties by virtue of the said Recognizances, or any of them
shall be required, or demanded in the stead, lieu, or place of the said J. and
T. or either of them, eitheir by the said Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, or
by the said Chamberlain for the time being, or by any Officer or Minister of
the said Mayor and Court of Aldermen, or Chamberlain, or any of them for the
time being, that then, etc.

A Condition that one who has taken a Lease paroll of a Shop, and certain
Implements for so long as the Lessor and he can agree, shall during his abode
therein, pay the rent, and upon a certain warning avoid.
THe Condition, etc. That where the above named S. E. has demised and letten
to farm to the above named T. G. all that Shop, etc. now in the occupation of,
etc. and all such Implements as now remain in the said Shop and are specified
and expressed in a Schedule to this present Obligatian annexed. To have and to
hold the said Shop and Implements to the said T. and his assigns from the
Feast of Saint Michael the Arch-angell last, etc. by and during the term of
one whole year from thence next following and fully to be complete; and to
have and to hold the same from the end of that year at the pleasure of the said
S. and his assigns from half year to half year so long as the said S. and
his assigns shall so agree paying therefore to the said S. and his assigns
the yearly rent of fourteen pounds of, etc. during so long time as the said T.
or his assigns shall hold or occupy the said Shop, the same rent from time
time from henceforth to be paid in the Feast days of, etc. or within, etc.
next after every of the same Feast days by equal portions, viz, three pounds
ten shillings for every payment thereof. If the said T. his executors or
assigns do as well yield and truly pay to the said S. E. at the Shop aforesaid,
three pounds ten shillings of, etc. at every Feast day of the four several
Feasts aforesaid, or within, etc. next after every of the same Feast days for
the rent of the said Shop and Implements from time to time during so long time
as the said T. his executors or assigns shall occupy the Shop aforesaid; as
also if the said S. his executors or assigns upon any of the evens or vigills
of any of the four several Feast days aforesaid, and after the twenty
seventh of September now next ensuing at the Shop aforesaid, shall give warning
for the rendering and yiedling again of the said Shop to the said S. his
executors or assigns. If then the said T. his executors, or assigns at the
end of one half year next after such warning so given, do without fraud or
covin render and yield again the said Shop and all the said Implements (in so
good case as they now be) to the said S. his executors or assigns then being
ready to accept and receive the same: That then, etc.

A Condition that a Silver-worker shall re-deliver the Silver to him delivered
to be wrought in Fashions prescribed always within a time certain.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound R. H. has made request to the
within named A. M. to work his Silver, and has offered to finish the
workmanship thereof, and to make safe re-delivery of the same to the said A. M.
his executors or assigns always within the space of thirty days next after
the several times of any delivery thereof to be made to him the said R. to be
worked upon as aforesaid; If therefore the said R. H. from time to time as
often as for that purpose any Silver shall be delivered to him by the said A.
M. his executors or assigns do work the same Silver or cause it to be wrought
according to such fashion and workmanship as shall be appointed. And also do
re-deliver or cause, etc. unto the said A. his executors or assigns at the
Shop now in the occupation of the said A. in W. of I. the said Silver ready
wrought in such workmanship as therefore shall be appointed as aforesaid,
within thirty days respite according to the offer of the said R. in that
behalf made as is aforesaid to the said A. M. That then, etc.

A Condition to procure the grant of an out-lawes goods to the Obligee by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound W. B. before the second day of
February next coming at his proper costs and charges, do as well procure and
obtain to be made and granted to the above named R. Y. or to his Executors or
Administrators a good lawful perfect, sure, and sufficient gift, grant,
conveyance and assurance or grants, etc. in the Law in writing or writings
sealed against and from the Queens Majesty, heirs and Successors and against
and from every other person that right has of all and singular such goods and
chattells as have been in any wise forfeited to the Queens Majesty aforesaid,
by I. G. late of London Haberdasher by reason of any Outlagary or Outlagaries
whatsoever in any Action personal or mixed, pronounced against the said I. G.
by any title, name, addition or calling whatsoever at any time or times between
the last Session of the Parliament holden at Westminster in the eihgth year,
etc. and the five and twentieth day of June in the ninth year of her said
Reign: As also in the mean time until the said second day of February do
save, defend, and keep harmless all the said goods and chattels in whose hands
soever they or any of them now be, or shall be from all seisures of the same or
any part thereof to be made without the special procurement and request of the
said R. his Executors or Administrators: And do also before the said second day
of February deliver the said writing or writings safe, whole, and uncancelled
to the said R. his Executors or Administrators at the now dwelling house
without fraud or covin: That then, etc.

A Condition to take one in execution upon a Statute by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas one X, C. of, etc. by a certain writing
obligatory commonly called a Statute dated, etc. knowledged and sealed before,
etc. according to the Statute in that case provided, has bound himself to the
above named I. L in three hundred pounds of, etc to have been paid at a day now
past: As by the said writing obligatory more plainly will appear; And whereas
the said three hundred pounds is now clearly forfeited to the said I. L. And
thereupon the above named H. D. for and upon good considerations has agreed
and promised to and with the said I. L. to procure the Kings Majesty's Writ or
Writs for the taking of the body of the said X, and for the levying of the said
three hundred pounds to the use of the said I. L. according to the course of
the Laws of this Realm in that behalf ordained. If the said H. D. do sue
out the said Writ or Writs accordingly to be directed to the Sheriff of the
said County of D. and to any other Sheriff or Sheriffs of any other County or
Countyes as shall seem meetest to the said H. And the same to be returnable in
Cr. Anim. now next coming: And before the same day of return do as well
procure and cause the body of the said C. by virtue of the said Writ or Writs
to be lawfully taken and detained in execution for the said three hundred
pounds, as also do procure, return thereof in due form, and lawfully to be
made upon the said Writ or Writs at the day of the return thereof aforesaid
before the Kings Majesty in his high Court of Chancery without any manner of
fraud or covin: That then, etc.

A Condition not to become surety nor play at Dice or Cards.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound A. B. at no time or times
hereafter during the space of four years next, etc. become charged, surety or
bound by word, promise, bond, bill or otherwise for the debt or cause of any
person or persons other then for his own debt or cause for any sum or sums
of money, Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandises, or other things whatsoever
above the value of twenty shillings at one time: And further if the said A. B.
or any for him at no time or times hereafter during, etc. venture, hazard, or
play at any Game or Games at or with the Dice or Cards for any sum or sums
of money, goods, chattells, wares, Jewels, or other thing or things whatsoever:
That then, etc.

A Condition in case of divorce or separation where the man and wives friends
are bound for not entermedling one with another.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas there is, or with as
much expedition as may be there shall be by sentence definitive a divorce or
separation passed and had between the within named R. P. and I. now his wife by
both their assents. If therefore the said I: do from time to time and at all
times hereafter quietly permit and suffer the said R. P. to live, continue,
remain, and be frank and free from and against the said I. at and according to
his own will, liberty, discretion and pleasure, and in such place and places,
and with and in the company of such person or persons as the said R. P. shall
think most meet and convenient without any cohibition, lettance, meddling,
molestation or contradiction of the said I. or any other by her assent or
procurement, and if also the said I. or any other person or persons by her
assent, means or procurement do not at any time hereafter, neither in word
nor deed, nor by any other way or means whatsoever, either directly or
indirectly, disquiet, molest, vex, defame, hurt or trouble the said P. nor
challenge or make any title, claim, entermedling or demand to or for the said
R. or to or for any such goods, implements, stuff of household, or any other
thing whatsoever that he the said P. or any other for him or to his use at any
time hereafter, shall have or be in possession of, * neither ask, demand, or
recover of or against the said R. P. his Executors or Administrators, any
manner of allowance or other thing whatsoever, for or toward the diet, meat,
drink, apparel, sustenance or lodging of the said I. That then, etc.

Memorand. that this last clause from this mark * is left out in the man's
Obligation made to the woman's friends.

A Condition upon a sale of Land passed by Feoffment.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above bound Master and Keepers, etc. by
their deed of Feoffment bearing date the day and year above written, have
enfeoffed, bargained, sold, and delivered to the above named A. C. and his
Heirs for ever, tone Garden with the Appurtenances now in the occupation, etc.
and one house or kitchen with a yard adjoining with their Appurtenances now in
the proper tenure or occupation of the said A. C. situate in G. in the Parish,
etc. containing such lengthes and breadths, and lying within such bounds and
limits; As by their Deed of Feoffment aforesaid, sealed with their common seal
thereof made to the said A. plainly and at large may and will appear. If the
said Master, etc. now be and until livery be made to the said A. C. and his
heirs of the Premises by the Feoffment aforesaid, shall be and stand lawfully
seized of the Premises mentioned to be conveyed by the said Feoffment of a
good lawful and absolute estate to them and their Successors in Fee-simple,
without any manner of condition or limitation, and have good and lawful right
of such an estate, to bargain, sell, and assure the same to the said A. C. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever: And also if the said A. his Heirs and Assigns
from henceforth shall or lawfully and quietly may have, hold, occupy and enjoy
the said Garden house or kitchen and yard thereunto adjoining with their
Appurtenances, and every part of the same, and the Reversion and Reversions
thereof, for and to the only use of the said A. his Heirs and assigns for
ever, without any let, trouble, eviction or impediment of the said Master, etc.
or their Successors, and without any lawful let, trouble or eviction of or by
any other person or persons by their means, title, or procurement other then
by the means or title of that Lease made to R. P. which is specified and
mentioned in the Feoffment aforesaid: And if also the said Premises and also
the said A. C. his Heirs and assigns, and every of them from henceforth shall
be and stand clearly and absolutely acquitted, exonerated, discharged, or
otherwise saved harmless of and from all and singular Bargains, Sales,
Feoffments, Grants, Leas^s, Annuities, Amerciaments, Forfeitures, Estates,
Titles, Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever heretofore had made or done, or
hereafter to be had made or done by the said Master, etc. or their Successors,
or by the late Keepers and Cominalty of Freemen of the craft or mystery of B.
of the City of London, other then only the said Lease made to the said R. P.
as aforesaid; And further if the said Master, etc. and their Successors at and
upon the reasonable request and costs and charges in the Law only of the said
A. his Heirs, Executors or assigns from time to time at all reasonable and
convenient times during five whole years now next ensuing, do and shall make
all and singular such other and further reasonable Conveyances and Assurances
of and for the Premises to be had, conveyed, and made sure from them and their
Successors to the said A. his Heirs and Assigns for the only use of the same
A his Heirs and Assigns, as by the said A. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or
their learned Council shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised with
warranty only against the said Master, etc. and their Successors, or otherwise
without warranty: That then, etc.

Another like Condition.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above bound S. W. heretofore by his poll
Deed bearing date, etc. has bargained and sold, given and granted to the above
named R. F. and to his Heirs for the only use of the said R. and of his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, all those two Messuages or Tenements with their
Appurtenances in the same Deed mentioned now or late in the several tenures
of, etc. situate, etc. within the meets and bounds there expressed. As by the
said Deed whereunto if reference be had, will more plainly appear. If the said
R. F. his Heirs and Assigns from henceforth for ever, shall or lawfully may
have, hold, and enjoy the said two Messuages or Tenements, and all other
Hereditaments with their Appurtenances granted to the said R. and his Heirs by
the Deed aforesaid, and have, take, receive and enjoy the Rents, Issues, and
profits thereof to the only use of the said R. his Heirs and Assigns from
time to time, and at all times without any let, impediment, eviction, charge,
or encumbrance thereof, or of any part thereof by reason of any former estate,
act, or thing, right or title whatsoever done, had or grown before the said
estate of the said R. (except the old accustomed rents and services, hereafter
to grow due to be paid and done to the chief Lords of the Fee thereof: And also
one Lease which the said S. by Indenture dated, etc. has made of one of the
said Messuages, etc. for the term of twenty one years to C. B. and for the
yearly rent of forty shillings therefore yearly to be paid during the same
Lease. And also except moreover one other Lease which the said S. by Indenture
dated. etc. has made of the other of the said Messuages with the Appurtenances
to W. N. for the term of one and twenty years, and for the yearly rent, etc.
therefore yearly to be paid during the same Lease: That then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless of certain Obligations, and to deliver them an
acquittance for the same by a day, or the Obligations cancelled,
THe Condition, etc. That where, etc. by three Obligations, all bearing date,
etc. unto T. S. etc. in the first in three hundred pounds to pay, etc. on, etc.
in the second in, etc. to pay, etc. in the third, etc. to pay, etc. As by the
same several Obligations with their several Conditions upon them severally
endorsed will appear. If the said X. H. W. D. and F. F. their Heirs,
Executors or Administrators or any of them, do as well from time to time at all
times save or keep harmless the said I. M. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them of, for and from the said Obligations and
every of them, and all Suits, Actions, and Demands, Costs, Charges, Judgments
and Executions of or by means of the said Obligations or any of them, to be
had, sustained, pursued, or brought against the said I. M. his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators or any of them; As also do procure that at or on
this side, etc. either the said Obligations and every of them be delivered to
the said I. M. his Executors or Administrators at the now mansion, etc.
discharged and cancelled, or else good and lawful Releases, Acquittances, or
other discharge sufficient in the Law to discharge and acquit the said I. M.
his, etc. of and for the said Obligations, or for so many of them as at the
time and place aforesaid, or in the mean time before hand shall not be
delivered to the said I. M. his Executors or Administrators so discharged and
cancelled as aforesaid, That then, etc.

A Condition that a Chapman being trusted by an occupier in London for wares,
shall make payment allwaies for the same at such time as the redeliverer and
chapman shall agree.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas order and composition is had, made, and
concluded between the within named W.S. and one R.C. of the City of Oxon.
Haberd. that the said W. or his assigns shall deliver or cause to be delivered
unto the said R. or his assigns, for and during the time and space of four
years next, etc. such and so many Hats, Caps, and other Wares and things
belonging to the Trade and Occupation of a Hab. of Hats and Caps, as the said
R. or his assigns shall think meet and convenient to take up (the same Hats,
Caps, Wares, and other things so to be taken up by the said R. or his assigns
as aforesaid, at one time, not amounting over and above the sum of, etc of
lawful, etc. If therefore the said R. or his assigns do from time to time,
during the said time and space of four years now next ensuing, well and truly
content, satisfy, and pay, or cause the said W. his Executors or assigns, to
be well and truly and fully contented, satisfied, and paid, for all such Hats,
Caps, and other Wares, or things whatsoever, which the said R. or his assigns
shall from time to time within the space aforesaid, have, receive, or take up
at the hands of the said W. S. his Executors, administrators, or assigns, and
for every part and parcel of the same Hats, Wares, or other things whatsoever,
and within such reasonable time and space as shall be concluded and agreed upon
between the said W. and R. or their assigns in that behalf, without fraud or
covin, That then, etc.

A Condition for repayment of money upon request, for payment of certain
interest yearly, during the Obligators having of the Principal toward the
Education of Children; and for renewing of Sureties in case of death, or decay
in the Obligors.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above named the right honorable Sir F.
K. and Sir W. M. Knights, have delivered to the above bounden W.G.I.S. and T.S.
three hundred seventy five pounds five shillings nine pence half penny
farthing, of current money of England, raised and levied of certain of the
Lands of T. W. of K in the County of H. Esquire, for the preferment and
advancement of three of the daughters of the same T.W. If the said W.G. I.S.
and T.S. their Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, do not only well and
truly recontent, and repay, or cause, etc. to the said Sir F.K, and Sir W. M.
their certain Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, the said sum of three
hundred seventy five pounds five shillings nine pence half penny farthing, at
the Counting House commonly called the Tendering house, situate in the West
side of the Royal Exchange in London, on the last day of the expiration of
twenty six weeks next ensuing, from and after such time as the said Sir F. and
Sir W. their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them shall
require the repayment thereof, of the said W.G. I.S. and T. S. or any of them,
or of the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of any of them, between the
hours of one and six of the Clock in the afternoon, on the said last day of
the expiration of the said twenty six weeks, without any further delay: But
also do yearly contribute and pay to the said Sir F. K. and Sir W. M. their
certain Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, the sum of two and twenty
pounds ten shillings of lawful, etc. on the eight and twentieth day of
September, and four and twentieth day of March, by equal portions, at the
Counting House aforesaid, between the hours of nine and eleven of the Clock in
the several forenoons of the said several days of September and March, for
and toward the charges of the education of the said daughters of the said T.
W. from time to time, so long as the said three hundred seventy five pounds
five shillings nine pence half penny farthing, shall remain in the hands of the
said W.I. and T. their Executors or Administrators, or in the hands of any of
them not recontented, and repaid, according to the tenor of this present
Condition. And moreover if any of the said persons above bounden shall happen
hereafter to decease, or apparently to decay in his or their former substance,
before such time as the said three hundred seventy five pounds five shillings
nine pence, etc. be repaid as aforesaid. If then within one month next after
reasonable requests in that behalf to be made to any other of the same persons
living,, or to the Executors or Administrators of the Survivors of them, they
or any of them do procure so many other as sufficient and able persons as those
above bound now are reputed to be (for and in consideration of the cancelling
and making void of this present Obligation) to become bound a new to the said
Sir W. and Sir F. or to the Survivor of them, their Executors and
Administrators, by one other good and sufficient Obligation of like penalty,
and with like Condition as aforesaid, and then to be sealed, and lawfully and
safely delivered to the said Sir F. or S. W. or to the Survivor of them, his
Executors or Administrators, or to one of them, without any manner of fraud or
covin, That then, etc.

A Condition upon an Indenture of Partnership.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden R. T. his, etc. do well and
truly observe all the Covenants, etc. contained, etc. according, etc. Or else
if the said R. T. his Executors or Administrators, do from time to time abide
perform, and keep the Order, Doom, and Judgment of the two Master Wardens of
the several Companies of Drapers and Merchant-Taylors, within the City of
London, which shall be for the time being, touching and concerning the
satisfaction and payment of all such damages, and other sums of money, as
they from time to time shall adjudge and set down in writing for the breach and
not performance of the Grants, Covenants, Conditions, Articles, and agreements,
or any of them specified in the said Indentures, which on the part and behalf
of the said R. his Executors and Administrators are to be observed, performed
and kept: And do truly satisfy and pay, etc.

Another Condition upon an Indenture of Partnership.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas in one pair of Indentures, bearing date the
day and year within written, made between the within named H. H. on the one
party, and the within bound W.P. on the other party, diverse and sundry
Covenants, Grants, Articles, Clauses, Sentences, and agreements are contained
on the part and behalf of the said W. P. his Executors and Administrators, or
some of them to be performed; as in and by the said Indentures more plainly may
appear. If the said H. H. his Executors or Administrators shall at any time or
times hereafter, incur, sustain or receive any damage, loss, or hinderance to
or above the value of forty shillings of lawful, etc. by reason or means of
the breach, not performance, or not accomplishment of the said Covenants,
Grants, Articles, Clauses, Sentences and agreements, or any of them, on the
part and behalf of the said W. his Executors, or Administrators, by the true
and plain meaning of the said Indentures to be performed. Then if he the said
W. his Executors, or Administrators from time to time, within the space of two
months, next after request, or warning to him or them, shall have been made or
given by the said H.H. his Executors or Administrators, for or touching a
recompense, or satisfaction to the same H. his Executors or Administrators, to
be had or made, of or for such damage, loss, or hinderance as aforesaid, do
and shall well and truly recompense and satisfy to the said H.H. his Executors
or administrators, at the Shop now in the occupation of the said H. situate in
P. Churchyard London, the full value in lawful English money, of all and
every such damage, loss, and hinderance, as he the said H. his Executors or
administrators shall so incur or sustain as aforesaid: and that without fraud,
covin, or deceit, That then. etc. or else, etc.

A Condition for sealing of a Lease annexed to this Obligation by a day.
THe Condition, etc. That if the Dean and Canons of the within named
Free-chappell for the time being, shall after the Feast of the Annunciation,
etc. which shall be, etc. within one month next after request made to the then
Dean of the said Free-chappell by the said E.K. or any other person or persons
by him in that behalf sufficiently authorized, seal and deliver the Writing
indented, and engrossed, filed, and annexed to this present Obligation, as
their true and lawful Deed, without any Condition, to the use of the said E.
if he be then living. And if it shall happen the said E. to dye before the said
Feast of the Annunciation, etc. which shall be, etc. If then the Dean and
Canons of the said Free-chappell for the time being, shall after the said Feast
of the Annunciation, etc. within one month next after request made to the said
Dean of the said Free-chappell, at the time of the said request, by the
Executors, or Administrators of the said E.K. or some of them, seal and
deliver, or cause to be sealed and delivered as their lawful Deed, one
sufficient Lease by Indenture, to be made to the Executors and administrators
of the said E. K. of the same Message or Tenements, and other the
Hereditaments specified in the said Writing indented and hereunto annexed,,
containing the number of years and rent, with the like Covenants and
agreements, to all intents and purposes, as be contained in the said Writing
indented hereunto annexed, as their lawful Deed, to the only use and behoof
of the Executors and administrators, of the said E.K. That then, etc.

A Condition for enjoyance of Land for ever, and that an Heir shall make
assurance thereof when he comes to age.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above bound G. B. for, and in the behalf
of P.C. Son and Heir of I. C. late of L. Grocer, deceased, has bargained and
sold to the above named T. L. and his Heirs for ever, all that new Message,
etc. situate, etc. which the said G.B. since the decease of the said I. C. had
of the Lease and demise of N. L. Gent. And which the same G. by his Deed
indented bearing date the day and year above written, has assigneds and set
over to the said T. L. If the said T, L. his Heirs and Assign, from
henceforth to his and their own proper use and behoof forever, shall or
lawfully may have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the said new Message, with the
appurtenances, withouth any let, disturbance, eviction, suit, or molestation of
the said P. C. his Heirs or assigns, or of any other person or persons,
having, or which shall have or claim to have any lawful Estate, Right, Title,
or Interest to the said Message, with the appurtenances, or to any part
thereof, by, from, or under the Estate, Right, Title, or Interest of the said
I.C. And if also the said P.C. and his next Heir or Heirs, and all and every
such other person and persons, as have or shall have any lawful Estate, Right,
Title, or interest in, or to the said new Message with the appurtenances, or
in or to any part thereof, at and upon the reasonable request or requests of
the said T.L. his Heirs or Assigns, at the costs and charges in the Law of
the same T. his Heirs or Assigns, do and shall make such lawful and
sufficient conveyance and assurance: conveyances, estates and assurances of and
in the same new Message with the appurtenances, unto the said T.L. his Heirs
and assigns, to his and their own proper use and behoof for ever: As by the
said T. L. his Heirs or assigns, or his or their Council learned in the
Laws of this Realm, from time to time, during the space of five years, next
after the time wherein the said P. C. and his next Heir or Heirs shall
accomplish his or their full age of one and twenty-yeares, or otherwise in the
mean time before hand, shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised,
with Warranty thereof to be made only against the said persons and their
Heirs, from whom such conveyance and assurance shall be required to be made as
aforesaid, That then, etc.

A Condition that one in whose name a Purchase of Copyhold Land is taken in
trust, shall make surrender upon requests, etc.
THe Condition, etc. That where the above bound I. C. by the purchase, and at
the costs and only charges of the above named A. C. his Father, according to
the custom of the Manor of B. in the Parish of I. in the County of M. now is
and stands seized of an estate of inheritance, of and in one Message or
Tenement with the appurtenances and one close of Meadow and Pasture, called B.
close, and of, etc. containing, etc. And also according to the custom of the
Manor of C. in the said County of M. is and stands seized as aforesaid, of
and in, etc. All which the said I. C. late had of the surrender of A. B. and C.
D. If the said I. C. from time to time, at all times hereafter do, and shall
make and execute to every person and persons, and their Heirs, such Surrender
and Surrenders, Grants, Conveyances, and Assurances, of all and singular the
premises or any part thereof, in such time and in such manner and form, as
the said A.C. either by word or writing of his hand, at any time during his
life, or by his last Will or Testament, shall in any wise command, will, or
appoint the said I. C. to do. And if also the premises and every part thereof,
by the said I. C. in form aforesaid, to any person or persons to be
surrendered, granted, conveyed, or assured, shall stand, be and continue for
ever to the same person and persons, and their Heirs, and every of them clear
and free discharged and acquitted, of and from all former Bargains, Grants,
Estates, Leases, Titles, Charges, Forfeitures and Encumbrances whatsoever, had,
made, procured or agreed unto; or to be had, made, procured, or agreed unto by
the said J. C. That then, etc.

An Obligation upon a Deed of Feoffment.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound W: G: by his Deed, bearing
date the day and year within said, has enfeoffed the within named N:S: of and
in one Tenement with the appurtenances in H. Lane, in the Parish of, etc. in
London, late in the Tenure, etc. and now in the Tenure, etc. as in the said
Deed is recited. If the said W.G. at the time of the making of the said
Feoffment, and execution of the limitation upon the same, were the very true,
sole, and lawful Owner of the said Tenement with the appurtenances: and
thereof then stood lawfully and solely seized in his Demesne as of Fee simple,
to the only use of himself and his Heirs, without any condition or
limitation of use. And if also the same Tenement with the appurtenances, for
ever hereafter, do stand and continue to the said N. and his Heirs, clear and
free discharged and acquitted, or otherwise at all times sufficiently saved
harmless, by the said W. his Heirs and Executors, of and from all and
singular former Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases, Charges, Estates and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, or granted by the said W.G. or by any
other person or persons, by or under the Estate of the said W.G. except one
Lease made of the said Tenement with the appurtenances, by the said, etc. unto
one J. D. Clothworker, by Indenture bearing date, etc. upon which Lease there
is reserved five Marks yearly Rent, which hereafter during the continuance of
the said Lease, shall be yearly due and payable to the said N. his Heirs and
assigns, according to the tenor of the said Lease. And if moreover the said W.
and his Heirs, and every such other person and persons, as have, or shall
claim to have any Estate or Interest, of, in, or to the said Tenement with the
appurtenances, or any part thereof, by or under the Estate of the said W.G.
except such as shall claim by the Lease aforesaid, at all times, during two
years next, etc. at the request and charges of the said N. and his Heirs, do
and shall make, knowledge, do, and suffer all and every such further conveyance
and assurance of the said Tenement with the appurtenances, to the said N. and
his Heirs with Warranty thereof only against the said W. G. and his Heirs;
as by the said N. his Heirs or assigns, or by his or their learned Council
shall be lawfully and reasonaby devised or advised, That then, etc.

A Condition to cause an Obligation wherein one stands bound to be cancelled
by a day, or else to put in sureties to the Obligees liking to save him
harmless.
THe Condition, etc. That where the above named I. R. together with the said T.
P. and A. his wife, and the said H. P. at the special desire of the same T. is
and stands bound to I. F. and H. R. of, etc. in the sum of one hundred
pounds of, etc. for and concerning the payment of certain several sums of
money to the children of the said A. and of R. R. her late husband according to
the Testament of the same R. As by the said former Obligation, bearing date the
day and year abovesaid, and Condition thereupon endorsed may appear. If the
said T. P. his Executors or Administrators do within the space of two years
next ensuing the date abovesaid, procure and cause the said former Obligation
wherein the said I. R. stands bound as aforesaid, to be made void and
cancelled, or else within the said space do put in such sureties as the said
I. R. his Executors or Administrators shall like of, and will agree to accept
to be bound to the same I. R. his Executors and Administrators to save
harmless them and every of them, of and for the said former Obligation against
all men for ever: And in the mean and all times hereafter for ever, do
sufficiently save and keep harmless the said I. R. his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators as well against the said I. and H. their Executors and
Administrators as also all and every other person and persons of and from the
said former Obligation, and of and from all Actions, Suits, Judgments, Costs,
Damages, Executions and Molestations to grow or arise thereof at any time: That
then, etc.

A Condition to answer a Fine back (per Rat.) if a Tenant will surrender his
Lease before the end thereof.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound B. L. for a Fine of, etc. of
lawful, etc. has demised and letten to farm to the within named W. N. for
the term of one and twenty years next ensuing from the Feast of Saint Michael,
a Tenemen called, etc. with all Lands, etc. thereunto belonging with other
things: As by a pair of Indentures thereupon made between the said B. on the
one part, and the said W. on the other part bearing date, etc. will appear. If
at any time hereafter during the said term it shall happen the said W. N. his
Executors or Assigns to dis-like, to hold and occupy the Premises any longer
by the payment of the yearly rent reserved by the said Indentures. And thereof
shall give notice to the said B. his Heirs or Assigns by the space of one
whole year and above beforehand: And then in the Feast of Saint Michael next
to ensue from the first day of October next following the said notice so to be
given, shall and will surrender and yield up to the said B. his Heirs or
Assigns at the Tenement aforesaid, that part of the said Indenture sealed by
the said B. and all the residue of the interest and term of years by virtue
thereof in the said Tenement, and other the Premises, then to be to come
without any fraud or covin: If then the said B. his Heirs or Assigns do in
the Feast of Saint Michael at the said Tenement accept the said Surrender, and
do also then and there well and truly re-pay or cause, etc. to the said W. N.
his Executors or Assigns the residue of the said Fine of forty pounds first to
be paid, defalked and deducted from the same so much lawful English money as
shall amount to four pounds a year for every years occupation, that the said
W. his Executors or Assigns shall before such Feast of Saint Michael aforesaid
have holden or occupied the Premises by virtue of the Indenture of Lease
abovesaid: That then, etc.

A Condition to save harmless of a Recognizance entered into for childrens
portions.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named I. P. in his life time
together with the within bounden W. H. and I. H. and one J. C. Fishmonger
became bound jointly and severally by one Recognizance: Taken and knowledged in
the inner Chamber of the Guild Hall of the City of L. before Sir A. B. Knight,
then Lord Mayor and the Aldermen of the same City, the second day of October in
the (...) year, etc. to G. H. Chamberlain of the City of L. in the sum of
sixty pounds of lawful, etc. with condition for the sure payment of forty
eight pounds of like money to the use of A. B. and C. children and orphans of
R. G. Grocer deceased, and for performance of diverse other clauses and articles
mentioned and contained in the said Condition of the same Recognizance: As by
the same Recognizance and Condition thereof more plainly may appear. If the
said I. and W. or either of them, their or either of their Executors or
Administrators or some one of them at all times hereafter, and from time to
time do discharge and acquit, or otherwise sufficiently save and keep harmless
the Heirs, Executors and Administrators of the said I. P. and every of their
Goods, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Possessions and things, and every part
and parcel thereof against the said G H. and his Successors, Chamberlains of
the same City, and all and every other person and persons of and for the said
Recognizance, and every clause and article contained in the Condition of the
same, and of and from all Actions, Suits, Judgments, Losses, Extents, and
Executions touching or concerning the same, other then only such as the said
H. P. his Executors or Administrators by their wilful means shall procure to
be sued or brought against the same H. his Executors or Administrators: That
then, etc.

A Condition to save Executors harmless of Legacies given to certain children
by the Testator, and which Legacies the Executors have delivered to the
Obligors for the Childrens uses: Also to re-pay the same Legacies, or a
rateable part thereof in case the Overplus of the Testators goods (above his
Legacies) will not satisfy his debts.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named W. K. and S. S. Executors of
the last Will and Testament of Dame E. D. Widow deceased, Have before the
making of this present Obligation, paid, satisfied and delivered unto the
within named T. C. for the use and behoof of E. C. R. C. and M. C. God-children
of the said Lady D. and Children of the said T. C. and M. his wife the sum of
ninty pounds which the said Lady D. in and by her last Will and Testament did
give to the said E. C. R. C. and M. C. viz. to every of them thirty pounds a
piece: As by the said last Will and Testament of the said Lady D. bearing date,
etc. remaining of Record in the prerogative Court of of Canterbury more plainly
will appear. If the said T. C. and the within bound B. D. To pay the Legacies
according to the Will.
their executors and administrators do well and truly satisfy, content, and
pay the said several Legacies (so as before given) to the said E. R. and M. or
to the Survivor of them, and to every of them, or to their Heirs or Assigns
according to the true purport, effect and meaning of the last Will and
Testament of the said Lady D. before mentioned: And also do at all times
hereafter save and keep harmless the said W. and S. and either of them, And
save harmless the children.
and the Executors and Administrators of either of them against the said E. R.
and M. children of the said T, C. and M. his wife, and against all other
persons claiming, etc. of and for the said sum of ninety pounds, and every
part thereof claiming by the said E. R. and M. or any of them, and of and from
all Actions, Suits, Molestations, Costs, and Charges touching the same sum or
any part thereof, and further in case it do fortune that any debts due by the
said Lady D. or any other thing or things whatsoever wherewith the said Lady D.
or her Executors or Assigns might or ought to be charged withal by Law, shall
be at any time hereafter lawfully demanded and recovered without any fraud or
covin against the said Executors of the said Lady D. or either of them, To
re-pay a rateable part, etc.
which debt or any other thing or things so recovered shall extend to a greater
value or quantity then the overplus of the goods of the said Lady D. will
extend to satisfy over and above the Legacies given in and by her said
Testament, and over and above such charges as the said Executors have been at
and laid out in and about the Funerals of the said Lady D, and also over and
above such costs and charges as the said Executors have sustained, or shall
hereafter sustain in and about the probate of the Testament and last Will of
the said Lady D, If then the said T.C. and B.D. or either of them or the
Heirs, Executors or Administrators, of either of them within three months
next after reasonable request to them or any of them to be made, shall render
repay and yield back again to the said W, R. or S, S. or to the Survivor of
them or to the Executors or Administrators of the same Survivor such a rateable
part and portion of the said sum of ninety pounds, as being equally rated to
and with the other Legacies expressed in the Will and Testament aforesaid shall
fall out to be due and may suffice toward the discharge, satisfaction and
restitution of the said debts of the said Lady D. and of any other thing or
things whatsoever, wherewith the said Lady D. or her Executors or assigns
might or ought to be charged withal by Law exceeding the said Overplus of her
said goods, and which shall be demanded, and recovered as aforesaid: That then,
etc. Or else, etc.

A Condition to release one all charges to be given by sentence in the
spiritual Court,
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That where there is a Suit in a
cause of Matrimony depending in my Lord Archbishop of Christ's Court of the
arches in London between B B. of L. Plaintiff on the one part, and E. F. of
London Clothworker, Defendant on the other party: If the said E. F. shall from
time to time and at all times so long as the said Suit shall depend in the said
Court, offer, perform, That he shall do his best to obtain absolutory
sentence.
and do his best good will, diligence and endeavor for the obtaining of
absolutory sentence in the said Cause: And within one month next and
immediately upon the obtaining of sentence in that cause (if it happen the same
to be given absolutory, and in the behalf and discharge of the said E. F. from
the said B. and the contract of Matrimony pretended in that Suit to have been
made and to be between the said B B. and E. F.) shall and do discharge and
release the said B. That he shall release her from all charges in Law.
of and from all and whatsoever charges the said B. shall be condemned and
adjudged to pay unto the said E. F. in and by virtue of that sentence
absolutory if any such charges shall be allowed him by the said sentence, and
for all other matters concerning this Suit, as well temporal as ecclesiastical
slanders, debates, or any other thing whatsoever depending upon this said Suit
before and until the day of the date of that release so to be made. That he
shall release her from all other matters whatsoever:
And further if within six months next and immediately following the
pronunciation or giving of sentence absolutory in the said cause in the said
Court by the Judge of that Court or his sufficient Deputy for and in the
behalf and discharge of the said E. F. from the said B. and her said pretended
contract of Marriage, That the Obligor^ shall pay 70 l. within 6. months after
sentence given.
the above bound H. F. and R. B. or either of them, or the Executors, etc.
shall and do well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the above named G. B.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them at the house of T.A.
Skinner, situate, etc. the sum of seventy pounds of lawful, etc. And
lastly, if the said E. F. and some other able and sufficient man with him,
shall at the day of the payment of the said seventy pounds, or within fourteen
days next following, enter into such lawful and sufficient Bond unto the said
G. B. or his assigns, for not reviving of the said Suit or Cause of Matrimony,
That E.F. with some other shall be bound not to revive the said Suit after
Sentence given.
nor molesting of the said B. concerning the same matter directly or
indirectly, by himself, or any other, as shall be by the learned Council of
the said E.F. and B. or G. B: or their assigns reasonably devised, or advised,
That then, etc.

A Condion to make a release of charges to be adjudged by a Sentence in a
Spiritual Court, and not to revive a Suit of Matrimony against the Obligee,
nor any way trouble him in that behalf.
THe Conditon^ etc. That whereas there is a Suit in a Cause of Matrimony
depending in my Lord Archbishop of C. his Court, of the articles in L. between
B. B. of L. Plaintiff on the one part, and E. F. of L. Clothworker Defendant,
on the other part. If the said B.B. her Executors, Administrators, or Assigns,
or any of them upon lawful request to her and them, or any of them, made by
the said E. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at the now dwelling
house of A. B. Uncle of the said B. situate within the City of London; after
Sentence given in the said Cause of Matrimony, shall and do within six days
after the said request, clearly acquit and discharge the said E. F. his
Executors and Administrators, of and from all charges whatsoever, that shall be
adjudged in that Sentence unto her, and for her the said B. And of and for all
other matters concerning this Suit, as well temporal, etc. until the making
of that release, so as before to be made, (the Bond made for payment of seventy
pounds hereunder mentioned only excepted.) And further if the above bounden
G.B. and I.B. or one of them, or some other sufficient and able man with the
said G. or J. at or within fourteen days next following; That day time and
instant when the sum of seventy pounds shall be paid or tendered unto the said
J. or his assigns, according to the true meaning and purport of a Bond, with
Condition made to the said G and bearing date the day and year above written,
shall and do enter into such a lawful and sufficient Bond of two hundred Marks
of, etc. That the said Suit or Cause of Matrimony by the said B. neither by any
man, by her means and procurement is not, neither shall be revived, neither the
said E.F: molested, either directly or indirectly by the said B. or by any
other, by her the said B. consent or procurement. And further that the said B.
has not, neither hereafter shall revoke any acknowledgment or confession that
she has made touching the delivery of the said E.F. from her the said B. and
from the Suit of Matrimony commenced against the said E.F. by her the said B.
if that Suit or any such confession before that day shall be ended and made; as
shall be by the learned Council of the said E.F. and B. or G.B. or their
assigns reasonably devised or advised, That then, etc.

A Condition to redeem a Lease mortgaged, if the Mortgagor redeem it not
himself at the day.
THe Condition, etc. That where W.M. Citizen and Goldsmith of L. by his
Indenture, bearing date the day and year within written, for the surety of
payment of a hundred pounds of, etc. to the within named I. I. his certain
Attorney, Executor, or Administrators, at the now dwelling, etc. on the first
day, etc. has mortgaged unto the said I. I. all that Lease of his now dwelling
house in W. of London, which was conveyed unto him by E. P. Citizen, etc. and
which was granted unto the said E.P. by, etc by his Indenture of Lease, bearing
date, etc. As by the said Indenture made betweeen the said W.M. and I I. does
and may appear. If the said W.M. his Executors, Administrators, or assigns, or
some of them, do not well and truly pay, or cause, etc. to the said I. I. his
certain Attorney, Executor, or administrator, the said sum of a hundred
pounds at the day and place limited for the payment thereof, by the said first
recited Indenture. If then the said R: M: his Executors or administrators upon
reasonable request to them or any of them to be made by the said J.J. his
Executors or administrators and for and in consideration of a lawful and
sufficient assignment and conveyance to be made from the said J.J. his
Executors or administrators, to the said R. his Executors and administrators of
the said Lease, and of all the right interest and term of years which the
said I. his Executors or administrators shall then have to come in the Tenement
with the appurtenances, demised by the said Original Lease clearly acquitted
and exonerated of and from all former Bargains, Sales, Leases, arrearages of
rents, forfeitures, re-entries, and cause and causes of forfeiture and
re-entry, and of and from all other Titles, troubles, and encumbrances
whatsoever, then to be had, made, or consented unto by the said J. J. his
Executors or Administrators, do well and truly pay or cause, etc. to the said
J.J. his certain Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, at the said dwelling,
etc. the sum of a hundred pounds of lawful, etc. without fraud or covin,
That then, etc.

A Condition that an Heir shall make a Lease of land for three lives when he
comes to age.
THe Condition, etc. That if the above bound G. H. when he shall accomplish and
come unto the full age of one and twenty years, or within three months then
next following, do seal and deliver unto the above named J.H. and to such
other two persons, as the said J. shall thereunto nominate and appoint a good
sure sufficient and lawful Lease in writing, of and in one Message or
Tenement, and all houses and buildings thereunto belonging, and all Orchards,
Gardens, Lands, Meadows, Leasures, Pastures, Feedings, Commons, Commodities,
and Profits whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances, to the said
Message or Tenements belonging, or in any wise appertaining, set, lying, and
being in M. in the said County of S. and late in the Tenure and Occupation of
one W.W. To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and all other the
premises with their appurtenances, before mentioned, to the said J.H. and to
those other two persons whom the said I. shall nominate and appoint, and to his
and their assigns, for and during the term of the natural life of the said
I.H. and for and during the natural lives of those other two persons whom the
said I. in the said Lease shall nominate and appoint, reserving always to the
said G. H. his Heirs or assigns, the yearly rent of 20. s. of lawful
English-monie, to be paid yearly by equal portions, at the two usual Feasts,
by the said I. H. and by those other two persons to be named by the said I.H.
in the said Lease, or by his or by any their assigns, during all the said term
of three lives. And also if the said G.H. when he shall accomplish the full age
of one and twenty years before specified, or within three months then next
after as aforesaid, do deliver or cause to be delivered to the said I H. and to
those other two persons to be named in the said Lease, full and peaceable
possession livery, and seisin, of and in all the said Message or Tenement, and
of and in all and singular the premises with their appurtenances whatsoever,
in as ample and large manner as the said W.W. or his assigns, have had,
occupied, and manured the same, That then, etc.

A Condition to leave a Wife 100 l. Jointure during her life, if she survive
the Husband.
THe Condition, etc. That if after marriage had and solemnized between the
within bound N.W. and M.C. Sister of the within named I.C. the said N. do
depart this present life, and the said M. do survive and overlive the said N.
Then if the said N. at the time of his decease, do leave Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments of a good and clear Title in the Law, of the clear yearly value
of a hundred pounds of etc. over and beyond all charges and reprises
whatsoever, lawfully and sufficiently assured unto the said M. or to her use,
for and during all the term of her natural life, for and in the name of her
Jointure, in such sort that she the said M. and her assigns, from the time of
such decease of the said N. may lawful have and enjoy the same Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, and perceive and receive the yearly Rents and
Profits of the same, to the cloer yearly value abovesaid, by and during all the
term of the natural life of the said M. to and for the only use of her and
her assigns, without any lawful ler, molestation, recovery, encumbrance or
interruption of or by any person or persons whatsoever, That then, etc.

A Condition depending upon a Release of a Contract of Marriage.
THe Condition, etc. That where there is a Suit in a Cause of Matrimony,
depending in the Court of the Arches, between B. B. of London Plaintiff, on the
one part, and E. F. of London Clothworker on the other part: Wherein as it is
hoped and thought the said E. shall be delivered and discharged by Sentence
absolutory of the Judge of the said Court, from the claim and demand of the
said B. there made and propounded against him: If the said E. shall at his own
costs and charges from time to time, and at all times, so long as the said Suit
shall depend in the said Court, offer perform, and do his best good will,
diligence, and endeavor, for the speedy obtaining of Sentence absolutory in
the said Cause, wherein neither the said E. nor the said B. shall be condemned
in any expenses or charges, for, in, or concerning the said Suit, That then,
etc.

A Condition for payment of money upon request.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound A. B. his, etc. do pay, etc. to
the within named C.D. his, etc. the sum, etc. of lawful, etc. at one entire
paynent, at the Mansion House of the said C. D. situate, etc. at or before the
end and expiration of six weeks, next after request, shall have been made by
the said C.D. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, at the
Shop now in the occupation of the said A. B. in W. of L. for, or touching the
payment of the said sum of, etc. That then, etc.

A Condition by a Raker to a Scavinger, for ridding of Streets in London.
THe Condition etc. That whereas the within named R. M. the day of the date
within written, has paid unto the within named W.M. the sum of ten shillings
of, etc. and has promised and undertaken to pay moreover to the said W. the
sum of, etc. of like money in form following: That is to say, etc. If
therefore the said W: M: his Heirs, Executors, administrators, or assigns, do
weekly by and during the space of one whole year next ensuing, the date within
written, on three several days in every week, viz. on Tuesday, Thursday, and
Saturday, and in meet and convenient time, of and upon every such day, clearly
rid and carry away, out of and from all and every part of the Parish of St. P.
in W: of London, where the said R: M: is Scavenger, all such dust sweepings and
other things as shall be swept or laid together in any place or places of or in
the said Parish, or which ought to be rid or carried away by the Scavenger
there for the time being: And do also at all times hereafter sufficiently save
harmless the said R: M: of and for all such costs, charges, molestations,
troubles, imprisonments and demands, as shall or may grow, or happen to or
against him the said R: M: for or by reason of the non-riddance, or not
carrying away of any of the dust sweepings, or other things aforementioned at
any time during the time aforesaid, That then, etc.

A Condition to save a Merchant harmless that has taken up money at double
usance for the Obligor.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named Sir L. D. at the request of
the above named J: T: and for the use of the same I: at the Royal Exchange
here in London, has taken up of W: G: etc. by way of Exchange at double
usance, as is commonly used amongst Merchants, the sum of, etc. and has paid
and delivered the same to the said I: T: If therefore the same J: his
Executort, etc. on the, etc. next, etc. pay, etc. to the said Sir L. etc. the
said sum, etc. therewith to pay and satisfy the said sum of, etc. so taken
up as aforesaid: And do also then and there without further delay content, pay,
and recompense to the said Sir L etc. all such costs, charges, and losses, as
in the mean time shall arise or grow to the said Sir L. his Executors, etc. for
or by reason of the exchange or rechange, of or for the said sum of, etc. so
taken up by exchange at double usance as aforesaid, That then, etc.

A Condition that if Land purchased be evicted from the Vendee, then the Vendee
to pay ^ certain rate for every Acre recovered. And if the Land fall charged
with any Statute, Recognizance or Rent then to discharge them or satisfy the
Vendee what he shall be endamaged.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within bound A.B. by his Deed indented,
bearing date, etc. has bargained, sold, given, and granted to the within
named, etc. all those Lands, etc. If the said Lands or any part thereof be at
any time hereafter lawfully recovered or evicted from the said, etc. his Heirs
or assigns. If then the said A: his Heirs, etc. do within six months after
notice given to him or his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of the said
recovery, or eviction, pay, etc. to the said, etc. his Heirs or assigns, at,
etc. seven pounds of, etc for every acre so recovered or evicted. Or if the
premises or any part thereof, be at any time-hereafter put in execution, or
extended by reason of any former Statute-merchant, or of the Staple, judgment,
condemnation, recovery, or recognizance, or any rent or arrearages of rent be
recovered out of the premises, or any part thereof: Or the same lawfully
charged with the payment, with any rentcharge, or the arrearages of any
rent-service. Then if the said A, etc. do from time to time always after
notice given to him, his Heirs, etc. of any such execution, extent, or rent
recovered or charged aforesaid, pay the said debt and every debt due by reason
of any such recovery, statute, judgment, or condemnation, or discharge the said
execution had of the said lands by reason thereof; and do pay or discharge such
rent, rents, and arrearages of rents, or otherwise satisfy and pay to the said
I, and his Heirs, so much as he, his Heirs or assigns, shall thereby by any
means be hurt or endamaged, That then, etc.

A Condition by one who having a Remainder in Land granted the same to the
Queen to prevent the sale by him in Possession conditional, nevertheless that
if he delivered to A. B. a Ring of Silver of a certain value, that then the
Grant should be void: And where now having made a Letter of Attorney to deliver
that Ring, he is bound not to revoke it, and to make assurance of the Land, etc.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That where the within named G. E.
did stand seized of and in the manor of N. upon S. in the County of N. with
the Appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee tail, the Reversion and Remainder
thereof to the within bound T. E. and to the Heirs of his body lawfully
begotten or to be begotten: As by sufficient Conveyance in the Law thereof made
more plainly, may and does appear. And whereas the said T. E. by his Indenture
bearing date the two and twentieth of June, etc. for the consideration therein
expressed, has given and granted unto our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, all
that his Reversion or Remainder whatsoever, of and in the said Manor of N. and
of and in all and singular the Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings,
Rents, Reversions, Services, and Hereditaments whatsoever to the said Manor
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or at any time here tofore accepted,
etc. as part parcel or member thereof; And the Reversion or Remainder of and
in all other his Lands, etc. situate, etc. within the Towns and ^eilds of,
etc. To have and to hold the said Reversion or Remainder of and in the said
Manor with the Appurtenances, and of and in all and singular other the
Premises before in and by these presents mentioned with all and singular their
Appurtenances to our said Sovereign Lady the Queens highness, her Heirs and
Successors for ever under this proviso and condition hereafter mentioned, that
is to say, Provided always that if the said T. E. or his Assigns, at any time
hereafter during his natural life do give and deliver, or cause, etc. unto A.
of Q. in the County of L. Gent. his Executors or Assigns one Silver Ring of
the value of five pounds of, etc. That then and from thenceforth the said Deed
indented, and the Gift and Grant therein contained, and every clause, article
and sentence therein specified for and concerning the said Grant of the
Premises shall be utterly void and of none effect to all intents and purposes,
any thing in the said Indenture contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding, as by the same Indenture appears. And where W. W. of N. in
the County of W. Gent. has bargained, compounded and agreed with the said G.
and T. for the Premises to be assured to the said W W. his heirs and assigns
in Fee-simple absolutely. And where also the said T. E. being minded that the
said Deed indented and every thing therein contained, for and touching the said
Gift and Grant shall cease, determine, and be clearly void to all intents and
purposes, and according to the true meaning of the said Condition and Proviso
contained in the said Deed indented, Has by his Letter of attorney dated, etc.
made and constituted F. B. Gent. his lawful attorney to deliver or cause to be
delivered unto the said A. F. his executors or assigns one Silver Ring of the
value of five shillings in the performance and fulfilling of the said Proviso
and Condition, as by the said Letter of attorney more plainly may appear: If
the said T. E. do from time to time, and at all times hereafter without fraud,
guile, let, or interruption suffer the said Letter of attorney and the
authority thereby given and limited to stand and continue in full strength,
force and effect without any revocation or disannulling thereof directly or
indirectly, and further if the said T. his heirs, executors or administrators
do from time to time, and at all times discharge, exonerate and acquit, or
otherwise upon reasonable request, sufficiently save harmless as well the said
W.W. his heirs and assigns, as also the said Manor and all and every part
thereof, of and from all and singular former Gifts, Grants, etc. had made or
done by the said T. E. or any other person or persons by his assent, consent,
means, or procurement: And if also the said T. E, do make further assurance,
etc. That then, etc.

A Condition for Childrens portions in the Chamber of London.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound E. B. do before the Feast of
All Saints now next ensuing bring into the Court to be holden before the Mayor
and Aldermen of the City of L. which for the time shall be good and sufficient
sureties to be bound for the true and sure payment of seven hundred ninety two
pounds one shilling nine pence of, etc. to and for the use and behoof of the
children and orphans of the within named C. B. deceased for their several
parts and portions of the orphanage and legacy of their said Fathers goods. Or
else do within the time aforesaid, pay to the Chamberlain of the City of L.
which for the time shall be to the use of the said orphans, the said sum of,
etc. That then, etc.

A Letter of Attorney upon an Obligation not forfeited.
BE it, etc. I. W. de la B. Merchant stranger, resident at London, have made,
ordained, constituted and put in my place, and by these presents, etc. R. M.
etc. his executors and assigns, and every of them, my true, lawful and
irrevocable attorney and attornyes, for me and in my name, and in the name or
names of mine executors and administrators or any of them to demand or receive
of J. M. the younger Goldsmith, and W. N. Grocer, Citizen, etc. and either of
them, their or either of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
or of any of them on the sixteenth day of October now next coming at or within
the now or late dwelling house of A. P. situate, etc. the sum of three
hundred pounds of, etc. specified or mentioned in the Condition of an
Obligation of four hundred pounds bearing date, etc. now last past, wherein
the said I. M. and W. N. do stand bound to me the said V. giving, and by these
presents granting for me, mine Executors and Administrators unto the said R. M.
his Executors and Assigns and evevery of them full power and authority for and
in the name and names of me the said V. mine Executors and Administrators, and
every or any of us (for and in default of payment of the said sum of three
hundred pounds, or any parcel thereof being left unpaid at the said day and
place expressed in the said Condition of the said Obligation to sue and implead
and cause, etc. the said I. and W. and either of them, their and either of
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every or any of them
for the said sum of four hundred pounds expressed in the said Obligation,
and to recover in the same Suit, and to sue execution upon the same Recovery
according to the Laws of this Realm; and also to acquit, compound for, and
discharge the said Obligation and the said sums of money, and either of them,
and every parcel of either of the same. One Attorney or more under him or them
to substitute, and at his and their pleasure to revoke. And all and every other
act and acts, thing and things whatsoever to do and cause to be done for the
recovery, obtaining, getting and discharging of the said sums of money and
either of them, and every part and parcel of either of the same in as ample
manner and form as I the said V. mine Executors or administrators might or
could do in proper person. Ratifying, establishing and confirming for me, mine
executors and administrators all that, and whatsoever my said attorney or
attorneys or any of them for me or in my name, or in the name of mine executors
or administrators shall do or cause to be done in or about the Premises or any
of them by these presents. In witness, etc. dated, etc.

A Condition upon the same Letter of Attorney.
THe Condition, etc, That where the within bound V. de la B. by his writing or
Letter of attorney of the date within written has made and ordained the within
named R. M. his executors and administrators, his attorney and attorneys for
him and in his name, and in the name of his executors, etc. as well to demand
and receive of I. M. etc. on the, etc. next coming at, etc. the sum of three
hundred pounds of, etc. specified or mentioned in the Condition of an
Obligation of four hundred pounds bearing date, etc. wherein, etc. as also
(for non-payment of the said sum of three hundred pounds, or any part thereof
at the day and place expressed in the said Condition of the said Obligation) to
sue for, and recover the said sum of four hundred pounds specified in the
said Obligation in manner and form as by the said writing and Letter of
Attorney more at large appears. If the said V. his executors and
administrators and every of them do from time to time and at all times
hereafter as well suffer the said Letter of Attorney and the power and authority
thereby given or limited to stand and continue in full strength, force and
effect without any manner of revocation or disannulling thereof, either
directly or indirectly, as also at the request and charges in the Law of the
said R. his executors and assigns maintain and justify with effect all and
every such action and actions, Suits, Judgments, and Executions as by the said
R, his Executors or Assigns shall be pursued or prosecuted in the name or
names of the said U. his Executors and Administrators or any of them against
the said I. and W. or either of them, or either of their Heirs, Executors or
Administrators or any of them, upon or by means of the said Obligation for the
recovering or obtaining of the said sums of money or either of them, or any
parcel of either of the same; And if also the said R. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them shall and may from time to time,
and at all times hereafter at his and their will, liberty, and pleasure ask,
levy, sue for, recover, receive, have, retain, and enjoy the said sums of
money and either of them, and every parcel of either of the same, to and for
the only use of the said R. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as well
without yiedling or making any account of or for the same, or either of them,
or any part or parcel of either of the same: As also without any ler, bar,
stay, impediment, molestation, disturbance, hindrance, or interruption, that
shall or may grow, happen, arise, or be by reason, occasion, or means of any
release, discharge, nonsuit, retraxit, disavowry, or other act or thing
whatsoever made, done, caused, or consented unto, or any time hereafter to be
made, etc. by the said U. his Executors or Administrators or any of them, or
any other person or persons by his or their means or procurement, unless it
shall be by and with the request and consent of the said R. his Executors, or
Assigns: That then, etc.

Another Condition upon a Letter of Attorney for recovering of diverse debts.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas, etc. If the said T. S. his Executors or
Administrators do not at any time hereafter revoke, countermand, Not to revoke:
or repeal the said Letter of Attorney, or the power and authority thereby
given or granted: And if also the said T. his Executors and Administrators and
every of them at the reasonable request and costs and charges of the said W. B.
To make further warrants of Attorney.
his Executors or Administrators do and shall from time to time make and give
to the said W. his Executors and Administrators, such other and further
irrevocable warrants of Attorney as shall be needful in or about any Suit or
Suits, or Recovery of or for the Premises or any part thereof. And also if he
the said T. S. heretofore has not released, That no release is made nor shall
be made.
discharged or acquitted neither he, his Executors or Administrators at any
time hereafter do or shall release, acquit, or discharge the said Obligations
and Stature-staple aforesaid or any of them, or any sum or sums of money in
them or any of them contained, Neither do or shall discharge, withdraw,
discontinue, or cause to be nonsuited, any Action, Suit, Process, or
Judgment which the said W. his Executors or Administrators shall hereafter
commence and prosecute, For not withdrawing Suits.
or cause to be commenced, prosecuted or had in the name or names of the said
T. S. his Executors or Administrators for or touching the Premises or any part
thereof against any of the said parties mentioned to be bound in the said
Obligations and Statute or any of them without ehe special license, consent,
and agreement of the said W. his Executors or Administrators. And further if
the said T. his Executors and Administrators from time to time as request shall
be to him or them reasonably made, do and shall avow, To justify Actions.
justify and maintain, and suffer to be maintained in his or their name or
names at the costs and charges of the said W. his Executors and assigns all
and every such lawful Actions, Suits, Pleas and Processes which the said W.
his Executors or assigns shall commence or prosecute in the name or names of
the said T. his executors or administrators for the recovering or obtaining of
the said sums of money or any of them. And further if the said W. his
executors, administrators and assigns shall and may to his and their own use,
without demand of any account or reckoning to be demanded or required, or to be
made or given to the said T. his executors, That the Oblige^ shall enjoy the
sums of money and benefit of suits without account.
administrators, or assigns have, hold and enjoy all and every the said sums
of money mentioned in the said Obligations and Stature from time to time as the
same or any part thereof shall be recovered or obtained against any of the
parties aforesaid, their heirs, executors or administrators or any of their
Lands, Tenements, Goods, or chattells, together also with all the benefit,
profit, advantage, recovery and commodity to arise or grow of or by any Suit or
Suits, Judgment or Judgments to be had or given of, for, or concerning the
Premises or any part thereof: That then, etc.

A Condition to deliver Saffron.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden R. M. his, etc. do at, etc.
situate, etc. frankly and freely deliver or cause, etc. to the within named A.
B. his, etc. for the use of the same A. B. his, etc. at or before, etc. next,
etc. twenty pounds weight of good new and Merchantable English Saffron of the
growing Counties of Essex and Cambridge: That then, etc.

A Condition to deliver Corn.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden I M. his heirs, executors, or
Administrators or any of them do and shall between the tenth day of Feb. next
ensuing the date within written, and the twentieth day of March then next
following, frankly and freely deliver, or cause, etc. to the Wardens and
Comminalty of the art or mystery of Goldsmiths of the City of L. within named,
or to their certain Attorney, Successors or Assigns, sixty quarters of good,
sweet, clean, dry, and well dressed wheat of the best sort, of the growing of
the County of Cambridge, safe on Land at the Bridge house stairs of L.
situate in or near the Borough of S. in the County of S. That then, etc.

A Condition to deliver Corn at sundry days.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound I. S. his Executors,
administrators or assigns do frankly and freely from all charges and demands
deliver or cause, etc. to the within named W. K. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns to their own use, eight quarters and two bushells of good, sweet,
dry, full, clean, and merchantable Wheat at the water-mill called, etc.
situate, etc. in form, etc. That is to say on Friday which shall be the three
and twentieth day of this present month of S. within written five bushells,
and from thenceforth at every four weeks end on the Friday severally five
bushells of the said Wheat without fraud or covin until the said S. quarters
and 2. bushels of the said Wheat shall be fully delivered, and every bushel
thereof to weigh fifty six pounds of lawful sised weight, That then, etc. Or
else, if default shall be made in delivery of the said Wheat, or any part
thereof contrary to the tenor and true meaning of this present Condition, That
then, etc.

A Condition for delivery of Tin.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bound T. N. his, etc. do deliver or
cause, etc. to, etc. his, etc. at the next Midsomer delivery at T. in the
County of C. at the Queens beam, there so much good, soft, white and
Merchantable Tin of Cornwall frank and free of all charges and demands
whatsoever, as at the price there to be set between the Merchants and the
Tinners at the said next Midsomer delivery shall amount to the sum of one
hundred pounds of, etc. without fraud, etc. That then, etc.

Covenants.
For Covenants upon assurance made of a woman's Jointure in Freehold and
Copyhold Lands.
THis Indenture, etc. Between the Right worshipful Sir A A. Knight, Citizen
and Alderman of L. on the one part, and H. S. and E.B. Citizen and Ironmongers
of L. on the other part. Witnesses that whereas the said Sir A. in
consideration of marriage to be had and now finished and solemnised between A.
A. the younger, Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir A. the elder, and M. C.
Daughter of, etc. and for a Jointure to the said M. to be had and made of the
Lands and Hereditaments of the said A. the elder, free and copy, he the said A.
the elder, did not only bargain and sell to the said H. S. and E. B. all that
the Manor or Capital Message with the Appurtenances called or known by the
name of G. situate, etc. in Y. in the County of W. now in the tenure of, etc.
and all those Messuages, etc. now or late in the several tenures of, etc. But
also by Feoffments and other lawful Conveyances and Assurances in Law; Has in
like manner conveyed and assured the said Premises, and the Reversion and
Reversions thereof with their Appurtenances to the said H. S. and E. B. to have
and to hold all and singular the said Manor, Message, etc. to the said H. and
E. and their Heirs to and for the use of the said A. A. the elder, for the
term of his natural life without impeachment of waste, and after his decease
to and for the use and behoof of the said A. the younger, and M. and the Heirs
of their two bodies between them two lawfully to be begotten, and for lack of
such issue to the use of the heirs of the body of the said A. A. the younger
lawfully to be begotten, and for lack of such issue then to the use of the said
A. A. the elder, and of his heirs and assigns for ever: As by two several
Deeds indented of Feoffment thereof made and enterchangably sealed by the said
parties, and both bearing date, etc. And by one pair of Indentures
interchangably made and sealed between the same parties bearing the same date,
and enrolled amongst the Rolls of the high Court of Chancery more at large may
appear: And whereas the said A. the elder for the said purpose has also
surrendered all those Copyhold-Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the Parish
of H. aforesaid, according to the custom of the Manor there for and to the
use of the said A. the elder, for the term of his life only: The Remainder to
the use of the said A. his Son, and to the said M. and to the heirs of their
two bodies, etc. And for lack of such issue to A. the youngers heirs of his
body, ut supra, And for lack of such issue: Then to the use of the said A. the
elder and of his heirs and assigns for ever, according to the custom of the
said Manor: The said A. the elder for him, etc. Covenanteth, etc. in form,
etc. That the said H. the elder at the time of the several liveries made of
the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments conveyed by the said two
Feoffments; And at the time of the ensealing, delivering and acknowledging of
the said former Indentures of Bargain and Sale was by good and lawful right
and title in the Law, solely seized of and in all and singular the Premises
conveyed by the said Feoffments and Indentures in his demesne as of fee to the
only use of himself and of his heirs for ever, without any condition or
limitation of use, and that the said A. the elder at the time of the making of
the said surrender of the copyhold lands and Tenements aforesaid, was thereof,
and of every part thereof lawfully seized to the only use of himself and his
heirs according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, by good and lawful
right and title, according to the said custom without any Forfeiture or former
Surrender thereof, or of any part thereof heretofore made and knowledged to the
contrary by the said A. the elder, or his means in any wise. And that all and
singular the Premises conveyed by the said two Feoffments, and by the said
former Indentures shall continue to the uses therein expressed of the clear
yearly value of one hundred pounds of, etc. over and above all yearly charges
and re-prises whatsoever, and clear and free discharged and acquitted, or
otherwise, etc. saved harmless by the said A. the elder his, etc. of and from
all and singular former bargains, etc. had, made, done, knowledged, or agreed
unto by the said A. the elder: The rents and services from and after the
decease of the said A. the elder, to be due to the chief Lords, etc. and
Leases for term of years made of the Premises or any part of the same, not
prejudicial to the clear yearly value aforesaid only excepted and
fore-prised: And moreover the said A. the elder Covenanteth, etc. That he the
said A. and his Heirs, and all and every other person and persons whatsoever,
having or lawfully claiming, or which shall or may lawfully claim any right,
estate, title, or interest, of in or to the Premises or any part thereof by or
under the said A the elder (The said Lessees for their several estates and
interests in the same Premises above excepted only except) shall and will
thereof, and of every part thereof at all times during the space of two years
next ensuing the date of these Presents upon reasonable request, make,
knowledge, do and execute, and cause, etc. in the Law to the said H. and E.
and their Heirs, and to the Survivor of them and his Heirs all and every such
further act and acts, thing and things, assurance and assurances in the Law
with warranty only of the said A. the elder, against him and his heirs, or
otherwise without warranty; As by the said H. and E. their Heirs or Assigns,
or their learned Council shall be reasonably devised or advised for the
further better and more perfect assurance, surety and sure making of all and
singular the Premises with their Appurtenances to be had and made sure, only
to the several uses and behoofs above mentioned. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants between the Fathers of a man and woman to be
married, where each covenanteth to assure them Land and money of equal
quantity by a day, and where each is to allow them more Land a piece at their
decease.
THis Indenture, etc. Between T. W. of B. in the County of S. Clothier on the
one part. And M. W. of K. in the County of W. Clothier on the one part,
witnesses, Thet for and in consideration of marriage to be had, solemnised,
and consumnate between R.W. Son and Heir of the said M and E. W. eldest
Daughter of the said R. W. It is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed
between the said parties to these Presents in manner and form following, That
is to say, Consideration of marriage.
The said M. for him, his heirs, Executors and Administrators does covenant
and grant to and with the said T. W. his Executors and Administrators by these
Presents; That the said R: W. by Gods favor shall marry and take to his wife
the said E. W. and her espouse and wed according to the law of God and use of
the Church of England, Each of the fathers covenant that the children shall
marry by a day.
on this side the first day of May which shall be in the year of our Lord God,
etc. If the same E. will thereunto agree: And in like manner the said T. W. for
him, etc. does covenant with the said M etc. that the said E. W. by Gods favor
shall marry and take to her Husband the said R. W. and him espouse and wed
according to the Law and use aforesaid on this side, and before the first day
of May which shall be, etc. if the said R. will thereunto agree. And in further
Consideration of the said marriage so betwixt the said R. and E. to be had and
consumate as aforesaid: The said M. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators does further covenant, grant, and promise to and with the said
T. his Ex. and Adm. by these Presents in manner and form following* that is to
say, The husbands Father covenanteth to assure Land by a day.
That he the said M. on this side the first day of May above named, shall and
will at his own charges and expenses make and execute, or cause to be made and
executed to the said R. and E. and to the Heirs of the said R. or to some
other person or persons, and their heirs such estate and conveyance, or
estates and conveyances, of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments in the County
of G. to the clear yearly value of twenty pounds above all reprises, and
whereof the said M. at the time of the making and executing of the said estates
and conveyances shall be lawfully seized in his demesne as of fee simple, so as
by force of the same estates and conveyances of the said R. and E. immediately
from and after the time of their said enter marriage shall and may lawfully
have and hold all the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and take the
yearly profits thereof, of the clear yearly value aforesaid, To uses.
to the only use of the same R. and E. for and during tht term of their
natural lives, and the term of the natural life of the longer liver of them:
And so as after the decease of the said R. and E. the said Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments by force of the said Estates or Conveyances shall or may lawfully
descend and come to the heirs of the body of the same R. lawfully to be
begotten. And for lack of such issue the same Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments to revert to the said M. W. and to the right heirs of the same
M. for ever without any condition in or upon any of the said estates or
conveyances to be made to the contrary in any wise: And that at the time of the
making and executing of the estates and conveyances aforesaid, Discharge of
Encumbrances.
the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments shall be, and from thenceforth
shall contiue from time to time, at all times to the said R. and E. and to the
heirs of the body of the same R. clear and free discharged and acquitted, or
saved harmless from all former estates, titles, conveyances, grants, charges,
and encumbrances whatsoever had, made, or agreed unto, or to be had, made or
agreed unto by the said M.W. which shall or in any wise may be prejudicial to
the said estates and conveyances to be made to the uses above specified, or to
the clear yearly value abovesaid. And further that the said M.W. at the time of
his decease, if the said R. W. his Son or any issue of his body of the body of
the said E. lawfully to be begotten shall then be living, The Father to convey
other Lands at his decease.
shall and will over and above the Premises, leave other Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, whereof the said M in his life time by good conveyance in the
Law shall be seized in his demesne as of fee simple, which also shall be, and
may reasonably continue of the clear yearly value of other twenty pounds above
all yearly rents and reprises, and whereof the said M. in his life time shall
have made, and conveyed such estates and conveyances as that by due course and
force of the Laws of this Realm, the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
of the said clear yearly value of twenty pounds, and clear and free from all
former grants, estates, charges, and encumbrances made, done or knowledged, or
to be made, done or knowledged by the said M. W. and M, his wife, or by either
of them, shall immediately by and after the decease of the said M. and M. his
wife, lawfully and rightfully descend, come, and fall to the said R. and E. and
to the Survivor of them, and to the Heirs of the body of the same R. to the
only use and behoof of the said R. and E. and of the Survivor of them for the
term of their natural lives, and the term of the natural life of the longer
liver of them, and after their deceases to the use of the heirs of the body of
the said R. lawfully to be begotten. The Reversion of the Premises to be to
the right heirs of the said M. for ever. And moreover that he the said M. his
Exec. or Adm. at the day of the solemnization of the said marriage between the
said R. and E. shall and will freely give and pay to the said R. one hundred
pounds in ready current money of England, The Husbands Father at the marriage
to give 100 l. in money.
and in like manner for the consideration aforesaid, the said T. W. for him,
his Executors and Administrators does covenant, grant, and promise to and with
the said M. W. his Exec. and Adm. by these presents in manner and form
following, That is to say, That he the said T. W. on this side the said first
day above named shall and will at his own charges and expenses make and
execute, or cause, etc. to the said R. and E. or to some other person and
persons, The wives father to assure Lands.
such estate and conveyance, or estates and conveyances of Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments in the County of, etc. to the clear yearly value of 20 l. above
all reprises: And whereof the said T. at the time of the making and executing
of the said estates and conveyances shall be lawfully seized in his demesne as
of Fee-simple: So as by force of the same Estates and Conveyances of the said
R. and E. immediately from and after the time, Uses.
etc. word for word as on the part of M. W. only changeable in this, that this
Land is to come to the woman's heirs, and the reversion to the said T. And
further that the said T. W. at the time of his decease shall and will over and
above the Premises leave other Lands, Tenements, And to give money at the
marriage.
and Hereditaments, etc. as the said M. has before covenanted, etc. And a
clause for payment of a hundred pounds at marriage, as the said M. also has
covenanted. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants amongst diverse interessed for safe custody of a
Grand Lease.
An Indenture Quinque party.
THe Indenture quinque partite made, etc. between I.S. of D in the County of W.
Gent. on the first part, W.N. of London, Esquire on the second part, F.M. Gent.
on the third part, I G of D. aforesaid Gent. on the fourth part, and the
Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of M. of the City of L. on the fifth
part, Recital of the date and Lease of the Bishop of W. made to her Majesty.
witnesses, That whereas the Reverend Father in God I Bishop of W. by his
Indenture of Lease bearing Date the fourth day of December now last past,
before the date of these presents, has demised, granted, and to farm letten
unto our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, diverse Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Parkes, Scites, and parts of Manors, and other hereditaments, with their
appurtenances, in the County of S. the particulars whereof and all writings
made for or about the said Lease to her Majesty or any other from the said
Bishop, Schedules of the particulars, etc. in the said Lease of the Bishops to
be annexed to these Quinque partite Indentures.

The necessity for the parties interessed to have the said Lease always ready,
etc.


and from her Majesty, for the assignment of the said Lease and premises to
the said I. S. are mentioned in several Schedales to every part of these
presents annexed, and in the same Schedules is also expressed, to how much of
the premises every of the said several parties now are severally interessed,
and in what manner. And forasmuch as it is necessary that the said original
Lease and writings aforesaid, be always ready to be showed forth in defense
and maintenance of the said several interests of the said several parties and
their Assigns, in and to the premises, as they are severally interessed to
any part thereof. And that the said J.S. from the beginning had those parts of
the premises mentioned in the said Schedules to be to the several interests
of the said W. N. F. M. and J: G: only in trust for the several behoofs of
the said W.F. and J. and their several Assigns, and not otherwise: I.S. but a
man of trust in her Majesty's assignment to him for the parties interessed in
the Bissiops Lease.

The accord between the parties interessed to have the said Lease, etc. safely
kept.

In a little Iron Chest with one Lock, and every of the interessed to have a
several Key to it.


Therefore they the said J: W: F. and J. every of them for himself, his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, have granted, covenanted, and agreed
together; and by these presents do, etc. in manner and form following: That is
to say, that as well the said original Lease, as all other the writings
aforesaid, in presence and sight of all the said parties, shall be put up
together into one little Iron Chest or Box to be closed with a good Lock, unto
which Lock shall be four several Keys, whereof the said J.S. to have one, the
said W. N. to have another, the said F. M. to have one other, and the said I.
G. the fourth; And then the said Lease and Writings being so put up into such a
Chest or Box, the same presently to be locked and delivered to the said
Wardens, for the time with them and their Successors in their common Hall
safely to be kept, The said Chest to be in the custody of the Warden for the
time being.

In what manner the said Wardens shall as occasion requires suffer the said
Lease of the Bishop to be showed for the behoof of the parties interessed
therein.


to and for the safeguard and preservation of the several interests of the said
J. W. F. and I. and their several Assigns, in and to such severerall parts as
they severally have, or shall have of the premises. Nevertheless the said
parties interessed for them severally, and their several Assigns, do grant,
appoint, covenant, and agree together, and also give their full authority and
Commission to the said Wardens and Comminalty, and their Successors: That as
often as any of the said parties interessed, or their Assigns shall have need
in any Court of Record of her Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, before her or
their privy Council, or other authorized Commissioners to be assigned by her
Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, to show forth the said Original Indenture
of Lease and Writings aforesaid, or any of them; that then and so often the
said Wardens and their Successors, by any of themselves, or their Officer or
Officers, at the reasonable requests of any of the said parties interessed, or
their Assigns, shall and may send the said Chest or Box into any such Court as
aforesaid, or before the said privy Council or Commissioners as aforesaid,
there to be opened by the said interessed party, or his assigns: And the said
original Lease and Writings, or any of them then there to be read and seen, as
the case for defense or maintenance of the right of the said interessed, or his
assigns shall require. And then presently there and in the same Court, The
said Lease to be presently locked up again after it has been showed in place
requisite, and returned to the Wardens.
or otherwise before the said privy Council, or Commissionrs where the same
shall be showed, to be put up again into the said Chest or Box, and the same to
be then locked again, with the Key thereof in the custody of the said
interessed party or his assign; at whose request the said Chest and Writings
were brought thither. And then presently to be safely redelivered to the
bringer thereof, and by him to be directly and immediately returned to the said
Wardens for the time being, to their said Common Hall, there again to be kept
as before. And this form and manner from time to time to be observed at every
showing of the said Lease or Writings, or any of them, when and wheresoever.
And the said Wardens and Comminalty do acknowledge and confess by these
presents, The Wardens to acknowledge the receipt of the Lease, etc. and the
custody thereof to the end aforesaid.
that they the said Wardens now being, have had and taken into their custody,
and now have in their custody the said Chest or Box, and therein the said
original Lease and Writings, and every of them as they are expressed in the
said Schedules, the same with safety to be kept and used in manner and form
aforesaid. And also the said Wardens and Comminalty for them and their
Successors, do covenant, grant, and promise, to and with the said parties
interessed, and every of them, their several Executors and assigns by these
presents; That they the said Wardens and their Successors for the time being,
shall and will well and faithfully keep in such good and sufficient custody (as
they do keep their own Writings and evidences) the said Chest or Box, and the
said Lease and Wrings to them now delivered as aforesaid, by the said
interessed: and the same shall upon reasonable request of any of the said
parties interessed, or their assigns, for reasonable recompense for their
travel and pains therein to be taken, in case, The party interessed in the
showing of the lease to recompense the travel of the Wardens, or of their
Officers for carrying and recarrying of the same to the common Hall.

The party interessed and requiring the Lease to be showed, to enter bond to do
nothing to binder the safe redelivery thereof to the Wardens custody.


place and manner aforesaid, carry out, or cause to be carried out the said
Chest or Box, and suffer the same to be opened, and the said Lease and other
Writings, or any of them to be perused as aforesaid: So always as the
interessed party or his assigns, do first before such carrying out of the said
Box, enter good Bond with sufficient Sureties of 600 l. of lawful, etc. to the
said Wardens and Comminalty; That the said Wardens or any of them for the time
being, or any other person or persons, by their appointment carrying out the
said Chest or Box, shall or may peaceably and quietly have and keep in his
custody the said Chest or Box, Lease and Writings, and every of them, and
peaceably and quietly carry with him or them the said Chest or Box, Lease and
Writings, and every of them have again to the said Common Hall, without any
cancelling, hurt, or defacing to be done to them or any of them, from the time
of the carrying out of the same, till they be returned into the said Hall
again, into the former quiet custody of the said Wardens for the time being,
without any manner attempt, act, or thing, to be done, attempted, procured, or
assented unto for the contrary, by any means by the said interessed party or
his assign, then making request for the carrying out of the said Chest or Box,
Lease, and Writings, or any of them. And the said parties interessed, and every
of them for himself, The party interessed to give his said Bond first, as also
the recompense of him that shall carry the Chest, before the Wardens deliver it
out to be showed.
and for his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, do covenant, promise, and
agree, to and with the said Wardens and Comminalty, and their Successors by
these presents; That any of them the said interessed, on the behalf of himself
or his assigns, shall not require the carrying out of the said Box or Chest
from the said common Hall at any time, except he so requiring and so
interessed, do first make and deliver to the said Wardens and Comminalty and
their Successors, or to some of them, for the common use of the said Wardens,
etc. such a Bond, with such sureties as is aforesaid; and shall also first
satisfy the person or persons which shall carry out the said Chest, etc. of
and for their pains therein to be taken. In witness etc.

An Indenture where one purchasing Land charged with a Recognizance compounded
with the Recognizee for the Recognizance, and binds him to extend the same at
the Purchasers request, and at his instruction: And after the extent to convey
over the interest growing by the extent, etc.
THis Indenture, etc. between R.B. of L. Gent. on the one part, and T.R. of C.
in the County of C. Esquire, on the other part: Witnesses, that where T.B. of
N. in the County of H. Esquire by his Recognizance or Writing obligatory, bearing
date the five and twentieth of April, etc. knowledged and sealed before Sir
R.B. Knight, then chief Justice of the same King, of his Common Bench at
Westminster, according to the form of the Statute of the Staple, stands
bound to the said R: B: in two hundred pounds of, etc. payable, as by the same
Recognizance it may appear: After which Recognizance so made, the said R.B. by
Indenture of Defeasance made betwixt him and the said T.B. bearing date the
said five and twentieth day of April, did covenant and grant to and with the
said T. that if the same T. his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, did pay,
or cause to be paid to the said R. his Executors or administrators the sum of
a hundred pounds of, etc. at the Feast etc. then next following: That then the
said Recognizance should have been void and of none effect. As by the same
Indenture appears? At which Feast the said T.B. or any for him did not pay
the said sum of a hundred pounds, neither at any time sithence hitherto has
paid the same, or any part thereof to the said R. B. or to any other for his
use: So that the said Recognizance now stands clearly forfeited to the said
R. B. and by his agreement now remains in the custody of the said T. R. And
the said R. for him, his Executors, and Administrators covenanteth and grants
to and with the said T.R. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, that he
the said R.B. in any wise heretofore has not: And that his Executors or
Administrators at any time hereafter shall not release, discharge, or acquit
the said Recognizance or sum of money therein specified, without the special
request and agreement of the said T. or of his Heirs or Executors. And where
the said T. B. since the knowledging of the said Recognizance, has enfeoffed
sundry persons of his Manors, Lands, and Tenements; and amongst others has
conveyed to the said T. R. and to his Heirs, the Manors of C and B. in the
County of C. and H. and the Manor and Parsonage of C. in the said County of C.
The said R. B. for reasonable considerations, him specially moving, is
contented, and does covenant and grant for him, his Heirs, Executors, and
admini^strators, to and with the said T.R. his Heirs, Executors, and
administrators by these presents; That he the said R.B. his Executors,
administrators, or assigns, at any time hereafter without the request of the
said T.R. or of his Heirs, Executors, or administrators, shall not sue or
prosecute any extent or execution upon any of the Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments of the said T.B. or of his Heirs or Feoffees by reason of the
said Recognizance: And that he the said R. his Executors or Administrators at
any time during the time of one and twenty years now next ensuing, at and upon
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges of the said T: R: his Heirs
Executors or assigns, shall in due form of Law sue and take execution of the
said Recognizance at the instruction and information of the said T: R: and of
his Heirs, Executors, administrators, or assigns, upon the Lands and
Tenements of the same T.B. his Heirs and his Feoffees: And that after the said
Manors, Lands and Tenements, or any of them, (...) any part of them, or any of
them, or any rent or form reserved (...) of any of them, shall be extended and
delivered to the said R. B. his Executors or administrators, in execution for
or by reason of the said Recognizance, shall within one month next after the
said Manor, or any other the premises so delivered, or at any other time,
upon reasonable request to be made within five years then next following, by
the said T R. his Heirs, Executors, or assigns, to the said R. hi^ Executors,
administrators, or assigns, make, seal, and deliver to the said T: R: his
Heirs, executors, or assigns, such a sufficient Lease in writing, or other
conveyance as shall be devised by the learned Council of the said T. R. his
Heirs, Executors, or assigns, as well for the assurance and sure making of
the said several Manors of C. and B. and Manor and Personage of C. As also
of all other the Manors, Lands, and Tenements aforesaid, and of every part of
them, and of all Rents and Services reserved out of any of them, and of all the
issues and profits growing and issuing out of any of them, mean, between the
deliberate of them made to the said R. his Executors or administrators: and the
conveyance of them over to be made by him his Executors or Administrators, to
the said T.R. his Executors or assigns, during and for such time and term, as
the said R. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall have at any time
in the same, by reason of the said Recognizance, or the execution or executions
thereupon to be made, discharged of all encumbrances done by the said R. his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, yiedling for the said Manors and other
the Premises, yearly for every year during the said execution and executions,
to the said R. his Executors, or Administrators, one Pepper-corne if it be
demanded the said Lease, or other conveyance to be made at the only costs and
charges of the said T. R. his Executors or Administrators. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants, to make assurance of certain Lands by a day, to
Uses in this Indenture contained, with condition that if any of the Vsees go
about to discontinue the Estate limited, otherwise then to make Joyntures,
Leases, Copy estates, etc. his interest shall be determined.
THis Indenture, etc, Between Sir G.S. of W. in the County of S. Knight, on the
one part, and E.G. Citizen and Goldsmith of London, J.F. of C. in the County of
S. Esquire, and H B. of B. in the said County of S. Esquire, and H. G. the
younger, Citizen and Goldsmith of L. on the other part, witnesses, that it is
covenanted granted, concluded, and agreed between the said parties to these
presents, in manner and form following, that is to say, the said S^r G.S. for
and in consideration of the hearty love which he bears to Dame D. now his
wife, Consideration of his love to his wife and Son.
daughter of the said E. G. and for the natural and Fatherly affection which
he bears toward H. S. Son of him the said Sir G. and Dame D. And for and in
consideration of the performance and fulfilling of certain Covenants, Grants,
and Agreements heretofore had, made, and done, between the said Sir G. on the
one part: And the said E: G: and H: G: on the other part, does covenant, grant,
and agree, for him, his Heirs Executors, and Administrators, Covenant to make
over a fair estate of Mannnors, etc.
and every of them to and with the said E.G.I.F. H.B. and H. G. their Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, that he the said Sir G. S.
before the 00: day of April next coming, after the date hereof, by his
sufficient Deed in writing, under his hand and seal, shall give, grant, and
confirm to the said E: G: I.F.H: B: and H: G: and to their Heirs, all that the
Manor of C. in the said County of S. with all the Rights, Members, and
Appurtenances thereunto belonging, and all that the Manor of B. with all and
singular the appurtenances thereunto belonging, in the County of C. And all
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meases, Warrens, Meadows, Leasues, Pastures,
Waters, Feedings, Fishings, Rents, Reversions, Services, Escheats, Waives,
Straives, Fines, Amerciaments, Herriots, Relieves, Courts Le^ts, view of Frank
pledge, Profits of Courts, Advowsons, Right of Patronages of Churches, and all
other Profits, Advantages, common Franchises, Liberties, Jurisdictions, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Manors, and other the Premises, or any
of them, or any part or parcel of any of them belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, or with the same or any of them, or any part or parcel of any of
them, had, used, occupied, or enjoyed, as any part, parcel, or member of the
same Manors and other the Premises, or of any of them, or so reputed, known,
taken, or accepted, demised, or letten to Farm: To have, hold, and enjoy the
said Manors of C. and B. with all and singular their appurtenances, and all
and singular the said Message, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and all
and every other the Premises with their appurcenances, and the Reversion and
Reversions of all and singular the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, and of all other the Premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances, unto the said E.J.H. and H. their Heirs and Assigns for ever,
to the uses and intents, and under the Provisoes and Conditions hereafter
mentioned? That is to say, of the Manor of B. and of all and singular the
appurtenan. to the same belonging, to the use of said Sir G: S: for the term of
his life, To the uses following.

Of the Manor of B. to the uses of Sir G and his wife for life, after to H: S:
after to a second, third, fourth, and fifth Son.


without impeachment of Wast: and of the said Manor of B. with all and
singular the app. to the use of the said Sir G: and Dame D: for the term of
their lives, and of the longer liver of them, without impeachment of Waste,
during the life of the said Sir G: and after the decease of the said Sir G.
then of the said Manor of B: with all and singular the appurtenances, to the
use of the said H. S. and of the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and for
default of such Issue, then to the use of the second Issue Male of the body of
the said Sir G: and Dame D. between them lawfully to be begotten, and for
default of such Issue, to the third Issue Male of the body of the said Sir G.
and Dame D. lawfully begotten, and to the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten;
and for default of such Issue, then to the use of the fourth Issue Male of the
body of the said Sir G: and Dame D: and to the heirs of his body lawfully
begotten? and for default of such, then to the use of the fifth issue male of
the body of the said Sir G. and Dame D. lawfully begotten, and for default of
such Issue, then to the use of the right heirs of the said Sir G. for ever.
And of the said Manor of C. Of the Manor of C. to the uses of, etc.
with all and singular the appurtenances, to the use of the said Sir G. and
Dame D. his wife, without impeachment of Waste, during the life of the said Sir
G. and after their deceases, then to the use of the said H: S: and of the
heirs of the body of the said H. lawfully to be begotten, and for default of
such issue to the use of the second Issue male of the body of the said Sir G:
and Dame D: between them to be begotten, and to the Heirs of the body of the
same second Son lawfully to be begotten (and so to three more Issue males one
after another) And for lack of such Issue, then to the use of the right heirs
of the said Sir G.S. for ever. Proviso to determine their estates who go about
to discontinue the Estate tail other then Ioyntures to wives, or Leases, etc.
Provided always, and it is covenanted, concluded, and agreed by and between
the said parties to these presents, for them and their heirs by these present
Indentures; That if the said H: S: or any Issue of his body lawfully to be
begotten, or any other such Issue male as aforesaid to be begotten of the
bodies of the said Sir G: and Dame D: or any Issue of the body of any such
Issue male, shall at any time after he or they, or any of them shall be in
possession of the said premises or of any part thereof, or receive or take any
Issues or profits of the said Premises, or any part thereof intend, agree, or
go about to do and execute, or willingly or wittingly to suffer to be done or
executed, any act or thing, whereby the Estates before limited or appointed,
of and in the said Manors, Lands, or Tenements, or any part thereof, shall be
discontinued, recovered, barred, cut off or avoided, or altogether altered or
changed, unless it be for the making or granting of any of these estates
hereafter mentioned, and then also for the terms and times hereafter
mentioned, and for no longer; That is to say, for a Jointure or Joyntures to be
made to such as the said H. or any of the said issues before mentioned, shall
take to his lawful wife for the term of life or lives, of such wife or wives
only, or for the preferment of the younger Sons, or of the Daughters of some
of the said issues: So that the estates so to be made for the preferment of the
said Sons and Daughters, be not to continue above ten years at the most, or
for the help or relief of any of the said Issues, when they or any of them
shall be compelled to go serve the Kings Majesty, or any his Heirs or
Successors in the Wars, or for Grants by Copies of Court-rolls, according to
the customs of the several Manors, Leases, or Demises, for and during one
and twenty years, or for two or three lives at the most, from the time of the
making of any such Lease, or Demise of Lands unusually letten, upon which
Grants, Leases, and Estates so to be made and granted, other then of the
estates made for the Joyntures aforesaid, or for the preferment of the said
younger Children or Daughters, the old accustomed Rents, or more, shall be
reserved to be paid yearly, during the continuance of the said Leases and
Estates to those in reversion of the said premises, according to the Estates
and limitations before in these presents mentioned and appointed, that then and
after plain and due proof of the said intendment, agreement, and going about,
had and made the estate, right, title, and interest of the said person so
intending, agreeing, and going about, shall from the time of the said intending
and agreement cease and determine. And that then and from thenceforth the said
E. I. H. and H. The use of the Premises to descend to the next issue limited
by these presents.
and the Survivors of them and their heirs, and every other person having,
claiming, or pretending to have any estate, right, title, or interest, of in
and to the premises, or any part thereof, shall stand and be seized of all and
singular the said premises with the appurtenances, to the use of the next
issue, to whom the said Manors, Lands, and Tenements are limited and appointed
by these presents, to descend, remain, or come; as if the said person that so
intends or goes about to do or suffer to be done as is aforesaid, at the
time of the said intendment, agreement, or going about, had been dead and
departed this present life, and to the use of the Heirs of the body of the
said Issue lawfully begotten, under like condition as aforesaid. Provided
moreover, Proviso, that if the Assurer be minded to sell the Manor of B. then
to assure other Lands in lieu thereof, and to the uses aforesaid, and the
Trustees to stand seized to the use of the Purchasor.
and it is further agreed between the said parties to these presents, That if
the said Sir G.S. at any time during his natural life, shall be minded or
disposed to bargain, sell, or convey away the said Manor of B. with the
appurtenances, and in lieu and place thereof to convey and assure so much other
Lands and Tenements to the said E.I.H. and J. and to their Heirs, or to the
survivor of them and his Heirs, according to the estates, and to the uses
above mentioned; and for the doing of the same, do obtain the consent and
agreement of the said E. and H. G. or of the survivor of them in writing, under
their hands and seals, or under the hands and seals of the survivor of them,
that then the said E. J. H. and H. and the survivor of them and their Heirs,
immediately from and after the time of such consent and agreement of the said E.
and H. G. or of the survivor of them, and from and after a sufficient
conveyance and assurance made by the said Sir G.S. of other Manners, Lands, or
Tenements, to the yearly value of the said Manor of B. in form aforesaid, to
the said E.G. and H G or to the Survivor of them or to such as the said E. and
H: C. the younger, or the survivor of them shall nominate and appoint, the said
E. and H. and the survivor of them and their heirs, shall stand and be seized
of and in the said Manor of B. with the appurtenances, to the only use and
behoof of such person or persons and their heirs for ever, to whom the said
Sir G.S. shall so bargain and sell the same as aforesaid, and to none other use
or uses whatsoever, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. Discharge of encumbrances.
And the said Sir G. S. for him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and
evry of them, does covenant and grant to and with the said E. and H. G. their
heirs, executors, and administra- and every of them by these presents in manner
and form following, that is to say, That all and singular the said Manors,
Messuages, Lands Tenem. and Hereditam. and all and every other the Premises,
and the reversion and reversions thereof, from henceforth shall continue
clearly and freely acquitted and exonerated, or at all times hereafter shall be
saved harmless of and from all former Bargains, Sales, Joyntures, Dowers,
Statutes, Bonds, Recognizances, Entailes, arrearages of Rents, Annuities, Fees,
Intrusions, Judgments, Forfeitures, and Executions, and of and from all other
charges, grants, titles, and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, or done by the
said Sir G. at any time before the making and sealing of these presents, the
rents and Services from henceforth to be due to the chief Lords of the Fee or
Fees of the Premises, and the Estate of M. B. of, in, and to the said Manor
of B. with the appurtenances for the term of her life only: And all Leases for
terms of years, and grants by Indentures or Copy of Court Roll heretofore
made, whereupon the old and accustomed rent or more is reserved and payable
during the said term only except. And further that he the said Sir G S. from
time to time within five years next ensuing the date of these presents, shall
and will do, make, knowledge, and suffer, and cause, etc. all and every such
further devise and devises, thing and things, at the costs and charges of, etc.
as by the said E. and H. their heirs or assigns, shall be lawfully and
reasonably devised or advised, for the further surety of all and singular the
Premises, and of the reversion and reversions of the same with their
appurtenances, to the said E. and H. and the survivor of them, and to their
heirs and assigns, to the uses and behoofs before specified, and to none other
use or intent. In witness, etc.

A Covenant in a purchase of Land, that if the Vendee be evicted, then the
Vendor to pay the Vendee back again a certain sum of money for the quantity
evicted.
ANd the said A. covenanteth, etc. that if any of the said Premises shall at
any time hereafter be lawfully evicted or recovered against the said R. P his
heirs or assigns, or he the said R P. his Heirs or Assigns be lawfully put
from the same, not being through the negligence, consent, faint pleading, or
default of the said R.P. his heirs or assigns, That then the said W. his heirs
or assigns, shall within six months next after notice thereof reasonably given,
pay to the said R. P. his heirs or assigns, for every acre and half acre, or
greater or lesser quantity so evicted, or so put from after the rate of six
pounds for the acre, at the now Mansion House of, etc. without fraud, covin, or
further delay. In witness, etc.

An Indenture where two Owners of a Ship, Covenant with their Ship to fetch a
certain quantity of Salt from beyond the Seas, and to deliver it to a Merchant
at Dublin, and the Merchant covenanteth upon the receipt to pay a sum of
momonie for the same.
THis Writing indented, or Charter party made between W. G. of L. Habd. and
J.T. of L. Grocer, Owners of the good Ship of London, called the Dragon, of the
burden of five and fifty Tonnes and upward, whereof is Master under God for
the present Voyage, one J.N. on the one part, and J.C. the elder of Dublin, in
the parts of Ireland Merchant, on the other part; Witnesses, that it is
covenanted, bargained, and agreed between the said parties in manner and form
following; that is to say, The said W. G. and J. T. for them, their Executors,
Administrators, Factors, and Assigns, and every of them do covenant and grant,
to and with the said J.C. his Executors, Administrators, Factors, and Assigns,
and every of them by these presents; That the said good Ship within the space
of eight days now next ensuing, or so soon after as wind and weather will
suffer, shall at the charges and adventure of the said Owners, depart from and
out of the Port of London aforesaid, where she now rides at an Ancker, and
from thence shall keep direct course as wind and weather will permit, toward
some of the Bays for Salt, within the Kingdoms or Territories of France,
Spain, or Portugal. And that the said W. and J. their Agents or Factors, at
their own costs and charges, with all convenient expedition, shall fully
freight and lade, or cause to be laden the said Ship with good and Merchantable
Salt, and then immediately as wind and weather will serve, shall at their like
adventure as aforesaid, depart from the same place of lading with the said
Ship, and her lading toward the Port of Dublin in Ireland. And that for the
attaining to the same Port of Dublin, the said Master and his Mariners, with
all good end endeavor according to their knowledge and understanding, shall set
and apply their course without any fraud or covin; and that so soon as the said
good Ship shall have finished her said appointed Voyage, and shall arrive in
safety with her Lading in the Port of Dublin aforesaid, that then in the same
Port she shall ride at Anchor in the common place of ankorage there, called the
Poole of Clumme Tarfe: And that then within one day next after the same
arrival there, the said Master or the said Owners, or one of them, or some of
their agents, Factors, or Messengers, shall signify the said arrival of the
said Ship unto the said J. C. his Executors, Administrators, Factors, or
Assigns, at the now dwelling house of the said J. C. in Dublin aforesaid; And
then and there shall be ready to deliver all the Salt in the said Ship, which
shall be fifty five Tonnes at the least, after four Bordeaux Hogsheads to
every Tonne, in measuring to be once shaken, and then being full to be stricken
off. And that the said Owners, their agents, Factors, or assigns, shall then
in form aforesaid, make true, plain, and undelayed delivery of all the Salt
to be brought in the said Ship into the said port of D. unto the said I. C.
his, etc. of and from aboard the said Ship, into their Loyters to be brought
and laid close aboard the same Ship, all the same Salt then being freed and
cleared of and from all manner of former charges of what manner or sort soever.
For and in consideration of which said Bargain, Covenants, and agreements so
made by the said Owners, to and with the said I. in form aforesaid: The said J.
C. for him etc. does covenant, etc. to and with the said Owners, their
Executors, Administrators, Factors, and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents, That upon notice given to the said I. C. his, etc of the safe
arrival of the good Ship aforesaid, in the Port of D. he the said J his
Executors, etc. shall and will be ready to take and receive her said Lading of
Salt, with all reasonable and convenient expedition; and within ten days next
after the receipt thereof upon reasonable request, shall at the said dwelling
house of etc. pay and content, or upon good and true account according to the
tenor and true meaning of these presents, shall allow to the said Owners, their
Factors or assigns, then shillings of, etc. for every Hogshead of the said
Salt to be delivered to the said J. C. his, etc. as aforesaid, for and in
consideration of which said Covenants, Grants, and agreements truly to be kept
and performed, and in part of payment for the said Salt, the said I. C. now at
the ensealing and delivery of these presents, has before hand contented and
paid to the said Owners a hundred pounds of, etc. so to be reckoned and
accounted upon at the delivery of the said Salt; which said sum of a hundred
pounds, they the said Owners do acknowledge by these presents, that they have
had and received accordingly: and thereof and therefore do clearly discharge
and acquit the said I. C. his Executors, Administrators, Factors and assigns,
and every of them by these presents. If the Ship or Goods miscarry in the
Voyage, then the hundred pounds repayable at a time and place certain, etc. In
Witness, etc.

A Covenant where one having sold Land, the Vendee may distrain of other Land
of the Vendors for tithe to be recovered against the Vendee; in respect of the
Land sold.
THis Indenture, etc. Between E: B. of E. etc. on the one part, and R.L. of,
etc. on the other part witnesses; That whereas heretofore the said E.P. and H.
P. his Son and Heir apparent, have bargained and sold to the said R. his
Heirs and assigns for ever, all that close of Meadow-ground called, etc.
containing, etc. And also all those two parts in three parts divided, of all
that field called, etc. As by the Indentures thereof made between the said E.
and H. on the one part, and the said R. on the other part, bearing date, etc.
more plainly and at large may and will appear. The said E.P. for him, his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators and every of them does covenant and grant
to and with the said R. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
and every of them by these presents; That when and as often as he the said R.
his Heirs, or assigns, shall at any time hereafter be constrained or
compelled by any order of Law spiritual or temporal, either to pay tithe, or
any sum of money for the Premises, bargained by the said former Indentures,
or any part or parcel thereof, or else to pay unto the Parson or Proprietary
of M. Minister and Vicar there, or either of them, his or their Successors or
assigns, any sum or sums of money in recompense for the same tithe, that
then and so often it shall be lawful unto the said R. L. his Heirs and
assigns, into the Manor of E. with the appurtenances, in the said County of
L. and into all other the Lands Tenements, and Hereditaments of the said E. P.
in M. aforesaid, and into every part and parcel thereof, to enter and distrain
for such sum or sums of money, as the said tithe of the said above
bargained Premises does or shall amount unto, or then shall be esteemed to be
worth, or for such sum or sums of money, as the said R. his Heirs or
assigns shall be compelled by order of Law to pay unto the said parson
proprietary and Vicar his or their Successors or Assigns for and in recompense
of the same Tithe, together with his or their reasonable costs and charges in
suits of the Law had and sustained in and about the same. And the Distress and
Distresses then and there so taken, lawfully and quietly to bear, lead, drive
and carry away. And the same to detain, imparke and keep until the said sum
or sums of money which the said R. his Heirs or Assigns shall be so
compelled to pay as aforesaid, Together with his and their costs and charges in
Law as is aforesaid shall be to the said R. his Heirs or assigns fully
satisfied and paid. A Covenant by E. P. That if during his, and R. L. his life,
he shall be minded to sell the Manor of S. R. L. shall have the preferment
thereof before another. In witness, etc.

Mr. Fuller Consultor.

Assignments.
An Assignment of a License to transport Wool; for satisfaction of a debt due
to the Assignee, with covenant that if the Assignee levy not his debt by a day,
the Assignor will pay it.
THis Indenture, etc. Between Sir F. W. Knight, one of her Majesty's principal
Secretaries on the one party. And C. H. Governor of the Fellowship of the
Merchant Adventurers of England on the other part, Witnesses that whereas our
said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, by her Graces Letters Patents under
her great Seal of England, bearing date, etc. Has granted and given license,
power and authority unto the said Sir F. W. by the name of her well beloved
Servant F. W. and to his Assign and Assigns, Deputies and Factors whatsoever,
and to every of them, that they and every of them shall and may at his and
their will, liberties and pleasure, at all times from thenceforth, and from
time to time during the space of twelve years next ensuing the date of the
Letters Patents, bargain, provide, buy, and obtain, receive, have, and take
in, bargain, sale, gift, or otherwise, of any person or persons so much Wool
and Woolls of any Country or sort as shall amount the full accomplishment,
number and quantity of one thousand Sarplers of Wool accounting three Sacks of
Wool to every Sarpler, over and besides the clacking, berding, clensing, and
refusing of the said Wool or Woolls, and that the same Wool and Woolls, and
the refuse Wool and other Woolls clacked, berded, and taken out of the said
Wool or Woolls without fraud or covin: The said Sir F. and his Assigneee,
Assigns, Deputies, Factors or Attorneys, or his or their assign or assigns,
or any of them shall and may at his and their, or any of their will and
pleasure, bargain, sell, utter, and put away from time to time to such person
and persons as shall or will buy or obtain the same without any danger of any
Act, Law, Statute, Provision, and Proclamation, or of any Penalty or Forfeiture
whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding; And further our said Sovereign Lady
the Queens Majesty by her highness said Letters Patents, did give and grant
license and authority unto the said Sir F. W. and his Assignee, Assignees,
Factors, Deputies Attorneys, and to every of them whatsoever, that they and
every of them at all or any time or times hereafter within the said space of
twelve years, as well by him or them self or selves, as by his or their
Factors, Attorneys, Servants or Deputies whatsoever, or any of them shall and
may ship, lade, freight and imbarke, or cause, etc. at the Port of London, or
any other Port of this her Highness Realm, where shipping of Woolls is or
has been used in any Ship, Vessel, or Bottom whatsoever at one time or at
several times at his or their pleasure or pleasures during the said time and
space of twelve years, the said number and quantity of one thousand Sarplers of
the said wool, so clacked, bearded, and cleansed, accounting three Sacks of
the said Wool to every Sarpler, according to her Majesty's weight, and just
standard now used in her Port of London for the weight of Woolls by the
oversight of her Majesty's Officers, Ministers, and other persons then
appointed, or which should be appointed for the weighing of Woolls: And the
same so shipped, laded, freighted and embarked, shall and may convey,
transport, and carry out, or cause, etc. of this Realm into any place or places
beyond the Seas, whatsoever whereunto at that time there should not be any
restraint or prohibition from her Highness her Heirs or Successors to any
English Merchant to trade or resort with their Merchandises, and there to sell,
put away, and utter the same at his or their pleasure, for his or their most
profit and commodity: As by the said Letters Patents wherein diverse other
grants and things been contained more at large appears, Of which Woolls there
yet remain to be provided, bought and transported (as between the said parties
is estimated) the quantity of seven hundred Sarplers or thereabouts. Now in
consideration that the said C. H. at the request of the said Sir F. has taken
up of diverse persons for the use of the said Sir F. diverse sums of money
amounting in the whole to the sum of nine hundred sixty pounds, as by account
remaining betwixt the said Sir F. and the said C. may appear, and for payment
of which said sums of money the said C. stands bound unto diverse persons by
Bonds and Specialties: The said Sir F. W. for the more surety or satisfaction
of the said sums of money unto the said C. his Executors and Administrators,
and for all the interest therefore to be paid. Has granted, assigned, and set
over, and by these presents does grant, assign, and set over unto the said C.
H. and his assigns the said Letters Patents, and all his right, property and
interest in and to the same, and in and to all licenses, grants, liberties,
privileges, and authories whatsoever granted by the said Letters Patents, and
also does by these presents assign, make, ordain, constitute and appoint the
said C. H. and I. P. his Servant and either of them, his full and only
Deputies, Attorneys and Assigns jointly and severally to bargain, provide,
buy and obtain, retain, have and take in, bargain, sale, gift, or otherwise
of any person or persons, so much Wool or Woolls of any Country or sort as
shall amount unto the full accomplishment, number, and quantity of all the
residue of the said one thousand Sarplers of Wool yet remaining to be provided
and transported, and to bargain, sell, convey, and transport the same at their
and either of their wills and pleasures, and all other things whatsoever in the
said Letters Patent mentioned to do and cause to be done as the said Sir F.
could or might do, according to the true intent and meaning of the said
Letters Patents and the said Sir F. W. for him, his Heirs and Executors does
covenant and grant to and with the said C.H. his Executors and Assigns by
these presents, That he the same C. his Executors and Assigns shall or may
have, perceive, and enjoy to his and their own use, all such benefit, profit,
and commodity as hereafter shall be gotten, gained, or had by force of the said
Letters Patents, or any matter or thing therein contained for any act done or
to be done by the said Sir F. his Executors or Assigns to the contrary until
the said nine hundred sixty pounds, and the interest thereof shall be truly
paid or satisfied to the said C. his Executors or Assigns, and further the
said Sir F. W. for him, his Heirs and Assigns does covenant and grant to and
with the said C. his Executors and Assigns by these presents, That if the said
C. or his Assigns within two years next ensuing the date hereof, shall not
clearly get and have to his and their own use by virtue of the said Letters
Patents, and of these presents, so much money as will satisfy and pay the said
debt of nine hundred and sixty pounds for whi^ the same C. stands bound as
aforesaid, and all the interest thereof: That then the said Sir F or his
assigns shall conrent and pay unto the said C. or his Assigns the same sum
of nine hundred sixty pounds with the interest thereof, or so much thereof as
shall not be gotten or gained by the said C. or his assigns as aforesaid,
Provided always that upon the payment or other satisfaction as aforesaid made
to the said C. his Executors or Assigns as well of the said nine hundred sixty
pounds, as also of such other money as the said C. his Executors or assigns
shall disburse or lay out for the forbearing and interest of the said nine
hundred sixty pounds, the gift, grant, and assignment aforesaid shall be void
and of none effect. In witness, etc.

Deputations.
A Deputation in a License to transport cloth, continuable till the Deputy
shall have levied a certain debt to him owing by the Constitutor.
TO all the Queens Majesty's Customers, Comptrollers, Surveyors, Serchers, and
Officers of her highness Ports, Creeks, and passages, and to all other to whom
these presents shall come C. Lord H. of E. Knight of the order of the Garter
sends greeting, whereas heretofore our Sovereign Lady the Queen by her
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster
the second day of this present July, has given and granted license, power, and
authority, to me the said C. Lord H. mine Executors, Administrators or Assigns
whatsoever as well Englishmen as strangers borne being made denizens, and not
made denizens, and every of them, That I and they by my self or themselves, or
by mine or their or any of their Factors, Deputies or Assigns, as well
Englishmen as Strangers borne, or any of them whatsoever during the space of
three years next ensuing after the date of the said Letters Patents shall and
may lawfully provide and buy, or cause to be provided and bought with mine or
their, or any of their own proper goods, or the goods of any other, and for
mine or their or any of their own proper use, or for the use of any other, the
number and quantity of four thousand broad woollen clothes or kersies
answerable to the same, accounting three kersies for one broad cloth as well of
such sorts of cloth as be commonly called Kentish cloth or Suffolk cloth, or
of any other sort whatsoever, and as well white as colored clothes or kersies;
And the same four thousand broad woollen clothes or kersies answerable to the
same to be accounted after the rate aforesaid, and every parcel thereof
un-wrought and un-dressed within this Realm, That is to say, not rowed,
barbed, first coursed and shorn, or otherwise wrought and dressed, or un
wrought and un-dressed, and being white or otherwise colored in any Ship or
Ships, Vessel or Vessels being of her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, or
appertaining to her Friends or Confederates whatsoever, when and as often as to
me or them, or to mine or their Attorneys, Factors, Assigns or Deputies,
Englishmen, Denizens, or Strangers borne, whatsoever or any of them it shall
seem good at one or diverse times within the said time of three years in any
Port or Ports of this Realm of England to lade or ship, and the same from
thence into any the Ports of beyond the Seas, then being in league and amity
with her Majesty to transport, send, convey, ship and carry over, or cause,
etc. there to be sold, disposed, or uttered, unrowed, unbarked, not first
coursed and un-shorne, or otherwise at mine and their will and pleasure, and to
mine and their most benefit and advantage, paying unto her Majesty, her heirs
or successors at the full end of two years next after the transportation of any
of the said clothes or kersies for the customs subsidies and imposts, and all
and singular duties whatsoever to her Majesty her heir or successors therefore
by any means due or to be due such sums of money as Merchants mere Englishmen
borne, and Citizens of her City of London to her Majesty, her Heirs and
Successors for the like Merchandise out of the said Realm to the parts of
beyond the Seas to be transported, do or are bound or have been accustomed, or
be ordered to pay and not more, or otherwise without any molestation, pain,
forfeiture, or loss to be therefore had, sustained, incurred, paid, or borne
by me or them or any of them against her Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, or
any person or persons, bodies politic or corporate, to be demanded, sued for,
or recovered thereof, and without any manner of let, interruption, or
disturbance of any person or persons whatsoever, and also without any special
license or dispensation to be had therefore under the great seal of Eng. Any
thing contained in the Statutes recited in the Letters Patents aforesaid, or in
any of them, or in any other Act, Statute, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation,
Imposition, Restraint, or thing before the date of the said Letters Patents, or
hereafter to be had or made to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding: As in and by the said Letters Patents containing diverse other
Articles, Covenants, Appointments, Grants and Authorities plainly and at large
will appear. Know ye that I the said C. Lord H. have made, ordained and
constituted, and by these presents do make, etc. R. Y. of the City of L.
Grocer, my Attorney, Factor and Deputy to provide and buy, or cause, etc. the
said number and quantity of four thousand broad woollen clothes or kersires
answerable to the same as aforesaid, or any part of them or any of them, and
the same or any part or parcel thereof in any such Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels as aforesaid, when and as often as to him, his Attorneys, Factors, or
Assigns, it shall seem good at any time within the said term of three years
in any port or ports of this Realm of England, to lade or ship, and the same
from this Realm of England, into any the ports beyond the Seas, then being in
league and amity with her Majesty, To transport, send, convey, ship, and carry
over, or cause, etc. there to be sold, disposed, or uttered at the will and
pleasure of my said Attorney, Factor, and Deputy to my most benefit and
advantage, and in such and so large, absolute and ample manner and form as I
my self by virtue of the said Letters Patents, or by warrant of any other or
further authority or license to be had or procured by means of any thing
specified in the said Letters patents may or can do. Giving and granting by
these presents to my said Factor and Attorney, my full and whole power and
authority for me and in my name to do, procure, knowledge, and require, and
cause, etc. all manner of thing and things whatsoever, that I my self by
virtue or warrant of the said Letters Patents, or of any thing therein
contained, can, may, or might, do, procure, knowledge, and require, or could or
might have done, procured, knowledged, or required, or otherwise have caused to
be done, etc. if these presents had not been made; ratifying and allowing for
me, mine Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all and whatsoever my said
Factor and Deputy and his Attorneys, Factors and Deputies, shall do or cause to
be done in the Premises, or any part thereof by these presents: And forasmuch
as I the said C. Lord H. have had and taken up before hand of the said R. Y.
the sum of nine hundred pounds of lawful, etc. whereof, etc. I the said C.
Lord H. for and in consideration of satisfying again, and recompensing of the
said nine hundred pounds to the said R. Y. his Executors and Administrators for
me, mine Executors, etc. do covenant, etc. to and with, etc. That this present
Letter of Attorney and Deputation, and all the authority, strength, and effect
thereof shall remain and continue unto the said R. Y. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to every of them in all his full force and
virtue, and at any time hereafter shall not be revoked or disallowed by me the
said C. Lord H. mine Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or otherwise until
by warrant of the same the said R. Y. his Executors, Administrators or assigns
for their own use, shall have had and levied of the Premises in clear profit,
the full sum of nine hundred pounds of lawful, etc. beyond all charges
whatsoever, and I the said C. Lord H. for the consideration aforesaid have
given and granted, and by these presents, for me, mine executors,
administrators and assigns do give and grant to the said R. Y. his executors
and administrators nine hundred pounds of lawful, etc. of the first clear
profits which shall rise or be levied and received of the Premises, the same
nine hendred pounds to be had, received, perceived, levied, taken and enjoyed
to the only use, behoof and benefit of the said R. Y. his executors,
administrators and assigns without any account thereof or therefore, or for
any part thereof to me the said C. Lord H. mine executors, administrators or
assigns ar any time to be made, given or yielded, or in any wise to be
therefore required. In witness, etc. Dat. 29. Julij, etc.

A Deputation in a license for planishing of Plate, with an annuity granted for
the same.
THis Indenture, etc. between R. S. of London Goldsmith, on the one part, and
R.H. of London aforesaid Goldsmith on the other part, Witnesses that whereas
our Sovereign Lord the King by his Letters Patents, bearing date at Richmond,
etc. for the consideration therein expressed, has given and granted license
and authority to the said R. S. by himself, his Servants, and any such as he
shall set on work to planish and hollow all and all manner of chargers of
Silver, Platters of Silver, Dishes of Silver, Sawcers of Silver, Trenchers of
Silver, Basins of Silver, Bolls of Silver, and such like Vessels of Silver
hereafter to be uttered and sold within his Highness City of L. or Suburbs of
the same with diverse prohibitions and commandments for and concerning the
Premises, to endure for the term of the natural life of the said R. S. As by
the said Letters Patents whereunto relation be had more plainly, and at large
may and will appear. Now the said R. S. for the consideration hereafter
appearing in these presents, has given, Assignation.
granted, and assigned the said R. H. from henceforth to be servant of the said
R. S. in the said faculty and science to use and exercise the same art,
science, and mystery as servant of the said R. S. from the date of these
presents during the natural life of the said R. Together with all privileges,
benefits and commodities to come or grow of or by the exercise of the same
office, and by the prohibitions, privileges, preheminences and commandments
aforesaid, and by all, every or any of them, to have, hold, use, occupy,
exercise and execute, and cause, etc. the said Office to the said R. H. his
Servants and Assigns in as large and ample manner and form to all intents and
purposes as the said R. S. should or might have had, used, executed and
occupied the same if this present Indenture had not been had or made from the
date hereof during the natural life of the said R S. to and for the behoof and
best profit, benefit and commodity of the said R. and his assigns. And the
said R. S. covenanteth, etc. That the said Letters Patents, and all other the
Premises are clear and free, and so shall continue during the life of the said
R. S. of and from all former grants, deputations, bargains, charges and
encumbrances had, made, or consented unto by the said R. S. And that he the
said R. S. shall at the ensealing of these presents, deliver unto the said R.
H. the said Letters Patents uncancelled and un-defaced, or by any other means
made void in the Law by the said R. S. and moreover the said R. S. does by
these presents depute and appoint, and set on work the said R. H. his Servants
and assigns to be the only workmen of and for the said R. S. in the said art,
craft, mystery or science to be done, used, and executed upon all and singular
the Vessels and pieces of silver above specified by and during all the term
of the natural life of the said R. S: within the City or Suburbs of L
aforesaid, in as ample manner, and with all the commodities aforesaid given or
granted, or prohibited or commanded to or for the said R: S: by virtue of the
Letters Patents aforesaid, as he the said R: S: should, ought and might have
done if this present Indenture had never, etc. and the said R: S: further
covenanteth, etc: That the said R: H: and his assigns shall and lawfully may
as aforesaid, use, and exercise the art, craft, mystery or science aforenamed,
touched or specified during all the term aforesaid, to his and their only use
and behoof without any let or interruption of him the said R: S: or any other
claiming in, by or from him, for and in consideration of which said Covenants,
articles, agreements, gifts, grants and assignments by the said R: S: to the
said R: H: made as abovesaid, and on the part and behalf of the said R: H: and
his assigns well and truly to be observed, performed, and kept according to the
true meaning of the said parties to these presents: The said R: H: covenanteth,
etc: That he the said R. his Executors or assigns shall and will from
henceforth during the natural life of the said R. S. well and truly yield and
pay to the said R. or his sufficient Deputy or assigns, one yearly sum of,
etc. at or in a certain Hall called Goldsmiths Hall, situate, etc. on the 00.
day of N. and on the 00. day of N. by even portions, between the hours of,
etc. of the same several days, In witness, etc.

A Deputation in the moiety of a License granted for buying and bringing into
the Realm of a certain quantity of goods and green fish.
TO all men to whom these presents shall come I. D. of the Town of R. in the
County of S. Gent. and W. H. Yeoman purveyor for the Kings Majesty's Sea Fish
sending greeting in our Lord God everlasting, whereas our Sovereign Lord the
Kings Majesty by his Letters Patents under his great Seal of England, bearing
date at G. etc. of his special grace and mere motion, and for certain
considerations him moving, has given and granted license, liberty and
authority to us the said I. and W. that we our selves and the survivor of us,
and the Factor or Factors, Deputy or Deputies, Assign or Assigns of us, and
the survivor of us shall and may at all times for and during the space of ten
years which did commence and next ensue from the fourteenth day of, etc. now
last past, buy, bargain and bring into this Realm of Eng. at our will and
pleasure, all and all manner of Cod and Lings in Barrells or other Casks, and
all other Fish commonly called green fish or green Cod in Barrells or Casks, in
any manner of Ship or Ships, or other Vessel or Vessels or Bottomes being
english or strangers, and in league or amity with his Majesty, and the same so
had and brought into this Realm to utter and sell by our selves, our factor or
factors, deputy or deputies, assign or assigns, or by the factor, etc. of the
survivor of us to our most profit, gain, and advantage and to the most profit,
etc. of the Survivor of us, to any person or persons during, and by all the
said term of ten years without any manner of let, impeachment, damage or
penalty to be had, suffered or demanded, forfeited or sustained by us the said
I. D. and W. H. our Factor or Factors, etc. or any of them for the same, The
Statute made at the Parliament holden at Westminster the twelfth day of, etc.
touching the deceitful packing used in Cod and Lings brought in Barrells into
this Realm, or any thing therein contained, or any other Act, Ordinance,
Statute, Proclamation, Restraint, or other thing heretofore had or made or
hereafter to be, etc. to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding: So
that the said quantity of Fish so barrelled to be brought in by virtue of the
said License, exceed not in the whole the number of six thousand lasts of
barrelled Fish, and also that the same be brought in within the said term of
ten years: As by the said Letters Patents containing therein diverse other
Grants, Liberties, Authorities, Articles and Provisions more plainly and at
large may and will appear. And whereas it is heretofore bargained and agreed
between us the said I. D. and W. H. That I the said I. D. and mine Assigns for
our part shall have and enjoy the benefit and advantage of buying, bringing
into this Realm, and uttering in the same of three thousand lasts, the one
moiety of the said six thousand lasts of barrelled Fish: And that the said W.
H. and mine Assigns for our part shall have and enjoy the benefit and
advantage of buying, etc. of other three thousand lasts, the other moiety of
the said six thousand lasts of barrelled Fish: And whereas also I the said I.
D. for and in consideration of, etc. which before the ensealing of these
presents I have had and fully received of T. S. of London Esquire, have given,
granted, bargained and sold to the said T. S. all my right, title, and
interest, power, license and authority in to and for the buying, bringing into
this Realm, and uttering in the same the said three thousand lasts of
barrelled Fish: Now to the intent to convey and make a good assurance of the
said license to the said T. S. his Factors and Assigns for to buy, bring into
this Realm, and there to utter three thousand lasts of the said barrelled
Fish, and also to the intent to convey and assure to the said T. and his
Assigns, all such right and interest whatsoever, as I the said I. D. have or
had, or may or ought to have in or to the said Letters Patents, and all and
every the Grants, Liberties, Licenses and Authorities thereby given or granted,
so as I the said I. or any other to my use shall have no further right or
interest to deal or meddle in any of the Premises at any time hereafter we
the said I. D. Deputation.
and W. H. have made ordained and constituted: And by these presents do make,
etc. the said T. S. his Factor and Factors, Deputy and Deputies, our lawful
and sufficient Deputy and Deputies from time to time at the pleasure of the
said T. his Factors, Deputies or Assigns, Factor, Deputy or Assign, or any of
them by virtue of the License aforesaid, during the said term of ten years to
buy, bring into this Realm, and there to utter the said three thousand lasts of
barrelled Fish, and every of any part thereof in so large beneficial and
^ample manner as we our selves can or might do by virtue of the said license:
And all the whole and commodity to come or arise of or by the said 3000. lasts
of barrelled Fish, and of every or any part thereof, the same to take and enjoy
to the said T. his Executors, Deputies and Assigns to their own use, without
any account making thereof, or therefore, or for any part thereof to us the
said I. and W. or either of us, our Executors, Administrators or Assigns. And
also we the said I. and W. have given, granted, and assigned over, and by these
presents do give, grant and set over to the said T. S. his Factors, Deputies
and Assigns, all our whole power, liberty and license whatsoever to us given
by the said Letters Patents to, or for the buying, Grant of the benefit of the
license for a moiety, and to seife Fish brought in contrary to the Patent
etc. of three thousand lasts of the said barrelled Fish, parcel of six
thousand lasts thereof aforesaid, and also full power and authority to arrest,
seize, and attach all such Fish as the said T. his Factors, Deputies or
Assigns shall happen during the said term to find brought into this Realm
contrary to the said Statute and tenor of the Letters Patents aforesaid, and of
so much thereof as shall be arrested, seized, or attached by the said T. S. his
Factors, Deputies or Assigns or any of them, they to have take and enjoy all
such forfeiture, benefit and advantage thereby, as by the said Letters Patents
are in any wise given or granted to the said I. D. and W. H. their Factors,
Deputies or assigns, and we the said I. D. and W. H severally either of us for
his several part for himself, his Executors and Administrators do covenant
and grant to and with the said T. S. The parties do severally covenant.
his Executors and Administrators, Factors, and assigns and every of them by
these presents in manner and form following; That is to say, That the said T.
S. his Factors, Deputies and Assigns shall or lawfully may have and enjoy all
and singular the Premises to them above granted or limited by these presents
according to the true meaning of the same without any impediment by or through
the means of the said I. D. his Executors or assigns for his or their part,
or by or through the means of the said W. H. For enjoyance.
his Executors or assigns for his or their part: and that the said I. D. and
W. H. for their several parts at all times hereafter at the reasonable request
and costs and charges in the Law only of the said T. S. his Factors, Deputies
or assigns shall and will make all such further Deputations, assignments,
Conveyances, and assurance of and for the buying, For further assurance.
bringing into this Realm, and there uttering by virtue and authority of the
said Letters Patents the said three thousand lasts of barrelled Fish, and for
such arresting, seizing and attaching as aforesaid of barrelled Fish to be
brought into this Realm contrary to the said Statute and the tenor of the said
Letters Patents, as by the Council learned in the Laws of this Realm of the
said T. his Factors or assigns or any of them shall be lawfully and reasonably
devised or advised according to the plain and true meaning of these presents
and not otherwise. In witness, etc.

Joyntures.
A Woman's Jointure in Land.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R.P. Cit. and Leather seller of L. on the one
part, and R. R. and W. R. of L. Goldsmiths on the other part, Witnesses that
the said R. P for and in consideration of a marriage to be had and solemnized
between the said R.P. and M. P. Widow, natural daughter of the said R: R: and
Sister of the said W: R: late the wife of I: P: late of L: Carrier deceased,
and for a Jointure to be made and assured to the said M: does by these presents
covenant and grant for him, his heirs and assigns, to and with the said R: R:
W: R: their heirs, executors, and assigns: That he the said R. his heirs and
assigns and all and every other person and persons, and their heirs and
assigns that now be or hereafter shall be seized of or in all those three
Messuages or Tenements with all their appurtenances to the same Tenements or
any of them belonging or therewith now had or occupied by the said R. or his
assigns situate lying and being in B: in the Parish of Saint M: in the county
of S: and of or in one field with the appurt. called T: field lying on the
south side of the field called H: situate in the parish of St. O: in the said
borough of S: shall from henceforth stand and be seized of the said Messuages,
Ten: and the said close called T: field, and of all other the Premises with
their Appurtenances to the use of the said M. P. for the term of her life, and
after her decease to the use of the said R. P. R. P. covenanteth, etc. That he
the said R. P. is at the ensealing and delivery hereof sole seized of all and
singular the Premises of a good perfect and sure estate in the Law in
Fee-simple, to the only use and behoof of him the same R. and his heirs and
assigns without any Condition; And that the said M. shall or may lawfully
have, hold, occupy and enjoy the same Premises during her natural life, if
she fortune to survive the said R. without any molestation, interruption, or
eviction of the Heirs or Assigns of the said R. P. or of any person or
persons having, or which shall have any lawful estate, title, or interest in
or to the said Premises or any part thereof, by, from, or under the said R. or
under his estate in any wise. In witness, etc.

An Indenture for a woman's Jointure.
THis Indenture, etc. Between A. C. the elder of L. Salter on the one part,
That T.E. of S. in the County of C. Gent. on the other part witnesses, and for
and in consideration of a marriage now immediately hereafter to be had and
solemnized between A. C. the younger of Graies-Inn in the County of M. Gent.
son and heir apparent of the said A. C. the elder, and D. R. Daughter in law
of the said T. E. and natural Daughter of W. R. late of S aforesaid Gent.
deceased, the said A. C. the elder, for him, his heirs, Executors and
Administrators does covenant, grant, and agree to and with the said T. E. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents in manner and form following;
That is to say, That he the said A. C. and his Heirs, and all and every other
person or persons now being, or which hereafter shall be or stand seized of or
in all that the scire of the Manor of I. with the appurtenances in the County
of C. aforesaid, and of or in all the demesne Lands thereunto belonging now in
Lease to F. R. and his Assigns for certain years yet enduring for the yearly
rent of fifty pounds of, etc. or above, and of and in the Manor of B. with the
Appurtenances in L. aforesaid, of the clear yearly value of forty pounds or
thereabouts, and of or in one Message with the Appurtenances in P. in the
County of S. now in the tenure of I. P. of the yearly rent of eleven pounds or
thereabouts, shall thereof and of every part thereof (from and after the time
of espousalls lawfully had between the said A. the younger, and the said D. and
from and after such time as the said A. and D. from the said espousalls shall
have lived together unto the time wherein the same D. shall fulfill and
accomplish her age of nineteen years) stand and be seized to the use of the
said D. for and in the name of her Jointure, for and during all the term of
her natural life. And further that the said A. C. A: the elder, and of his
heirs without any condition or limitation of use. And that the same site,
Manor, Message, and other the Premises shall be and stand to the said D. and
her assigns for and in the name of her Jointure, according to the purport and
true meaning of these presents, for and during the term of her natural life,
clear and free discharged and acquitted, or otherwise by the said A. the elder,
and his heirs, sufficiently saved harmless of and from all former grants,
bargains, sales, estates, and encumbrances whatsoever had or made by the said
A. C. the elder, leases for term of years, whereupon the old yearly rents or
more are reserved to be yearly payable to the said A. the elder, his heirs and
assigns, and the chief rents and services to the chief Lords of the Fee or
Fees of the Premises to be due in respect of their Seignories only except and
fore prised: And that from and after the decease of the said A. C. the younger
(if the said A. C. the younger and D. shall be marrryed together as aforesaid,
and after the espousalls betwixt them two had, do live together until such time
as the same D. shall have accomplished her age of nineteen years) the said
site, Manor, Message, and other the Premises shall be or lawfully may be,
and continue to the said D. and her assigns for and during all the term of
the natural life of the same D. for and in the name of her Jointure as
aforesaid of the clear yearly value of sixty pounds of, etc. beyond all charges
and re^prises, and moreover the said A. C. the elder covenanteth, etc. That he
the said A. C. the elder on this side the Feast of All Saints now next coming,
if the said marriage betwixt the said A. the younger, and D. shall in the mean
time be had, and they both do so long live, shall and will convey and assure
all the said site, etc. and all other the Premises and the reversion thereof
and therewith so much other Lands and Tenements then to be by good and lawful
Title in the sole seisin of the said A. the elder, as of his demesne in fee, as
together shall amount to the clear yearly value of a hundred pounds of
lawful, etc. unto the said A.C. the younger, and the heirs males of his body
on the body of the said D. lawfully to be begotten: And that as well the Site,
Manor, Message, and other the Premises, as also the said other lands and
tenements so therewith to be conveyed and assurred as aforesaid, from the time
of the making of the said conveyance thereof, and assurance shall be and stand
to the said A. the younger, and the heirs male of his body on the body of the
said D. lawfully to be begotten, clear and free discharged and acquitted, or
otherwise by the said A. the elder, and his heirs sufficiently saved harmless
of and from all former Grants, Bargains, Sales, Estates and Encumbrances
whatsoever, had or made, or to be had or made by the said A. the elder, or his
heirs, Leases for term of years made of the Premises or any part thereof,
whereupon the old accustomed rents are reserved to be yearly payable to the
said A. the elder and his heirs only except and foreprised. In witness, etc.

An Indenture for a Woman's Jointure in Land without clause, Nota, if the
Jointure had been made before marriage, the Wife then could not claim Dower.
that if after the Husbands death she forsake her Jointure, and seek her Dower
at the Common Law, this Jointure to be void.
THis Indenture, etc. between Sir G. S of W, in the County of S. Knight, on the
one part, and E.G. etc. J.F. etc. H. B. and H. G. the younger, etc. on the
other part witnesses; That the said Sir G. S. for and in consideration of the
hearty love and affection which he bears to Dame D. Consideration of money in
marriage, and performance of former covenants.
now wife of the said Sir G. and one of the daughters of the said E.G. and also
in consideration of the sum of one thousand pounds of, etc. paid and
delivered to the said Sir G. by the said E.G. before the making and sealing of
these presents for the preferment in marriage of the said Dame D. And for and
in consideration of the performance and fulfilling of certain Grants, Promises,
and Agreements heretofore had made and done, between the said Sir G. on the one
part, and the said E. G. and H. G. on the other part, does covenant, grant, and
agree for him, Covenant by a day to grant by deed certain Manors, etc.
his Heirs and Executors, to and with the said E.G. J. F. H. B. and H. G.
their Heirs Executors and administrators, and every of them, that he the said
Sir G. before the tenth day of April next coming after the date hereof, shall
by his sufficient Deed in writing, under his hand and seal, give, grant, and
confirm to the said E. J H and H. their heirs and assigns, all that the
Manor of W. in the County of S. with all the rights, members, and
appurtenances, thereunto belonging, and the Park adjoining to the said house,
commonly called W. Park; and also the Manor of A. alias A. in the said County,
with all the rights, members, and appurtenances to the same belonging: And all
and singular Message, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Leasures,
Feedings, Waters, Fishing, Deer, Game of Conies, Rents, Reversions, Services,
Escheats, Waifs, Straies, Fines, Amerciaments, Heriots, Wards, Marriages,
Reliefs, Leets, and Profits of Courts, and all other Profits, Advantages,
Emoluments, Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, and Jurisdictions, and all
other Hereditaments whatsoever, within the Towns, Parishes, and Fields of W. A
alias A. aforesaid, or in either of them, or elsewhere in any other place or
places to the said Manors of W. A. alias A. and to the said Park, or to any of
them belonging or in any wise appertaining, or being accepted, known, reputed,
or taken, as part parcel or member of the said Manors, Park, or any of them,
or so being usually occupied demised or letten; and all that his Capital
Message or Mansion house, situate and being near C. Lane near to the City of
L. with all Rooms Buildings Gardens Easements and Commodities to the same
belonging or appertaining: And also all that his Message or Tenement called
the D. and all the Houses Builddings Gardens Grounds Tenements void Rooms and
Cellars, with the appurtenances which the said Sir G. has, situate lying and
being at the S. in the Parish of Saint C. without the Bars of the Inner- Temple
of L. aforesaid, and all and singular the reversion and reversions of all the
said Manors of W. and A. and of either of them with their appurt. and of the
said Park Message Lands and Tenements aforesaid, with their appurtenances, and
of all and every the Premises with the appurtenances; To have hold and enjoy
the said Manors of W. Habendum.
and A. with the appurtenances, and all and every the Premises before
mentioned, and the reversion and reversions of the same unto the said E. J. H.
and H. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the uses hereafter expressed, and
to no other use intent or purpose: To the use, etc. first of the Husband then
of the Wife, and after of the husbands heirs.
that is to say, To the use of the said Sir G. for and during the term of his
natural life, without impeachment of Wast and after his decease to the use of
the said Dame D. during her natural life, and for and in the name of part of
the Jointure of the said Dame D. and after her decease to the use of the right
heirs of the said Sir E.G. for ever. Covenants for discharge of encumbrances.
And the said Sir G. covenanteth, etc. to and with the said E. and H.G. etc.
That all and every the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Messuages and
Hereditaments with their appurtenances, and all and every other the Premises
covenanted and expressed to be granted, and the reversion and reversions of the
same, and every part and parcel of the same, at the time of the said Gift,
grant, and assurance so to be made, shall be, and from henceforth shall
continue clearly and freely acquitted exonerated and discharged, or at all
times hereafter shall be sufficiently saved harmless of and from all former
Bargains Sales Joyntures Dowers Statutes-merchant, and of the staple, Bonds
Recognizances Entailes arrearages of Rents Annuities Fees Judgments and
Executions, and of and from all other charges, grants, titles, and encumbrances
whatsoever, had made or done at any time before the sealing of these presents,
the Rents and services from thenceforth to be due to the chief Lord or Lords of
the Fee or Fees of the Premises, Exception of Leases and Estates by Copy.
and all Leases for term of years and Grants by Indenture heretofore made, or
by Copy of Court roll, according to the customs of the said Manors or of
either of them, whereupon the old and accustomed Rent or more is reserved and
payable during the continuance of the said terms and Estates always excepted.
Further assurance.
And further the said Sir G.S. covenanteth etc. to and with the said E. and H.
G. That he the said Sir G. S. and his heirs from time to time, at all times,
within the term of five whole years next ensuing the date of these presents,
shall and will not only make, do, knowledge, and suffer, and cause, etc. all
and every such further devise and devises, thing and things, at the costs and
charges in the Law of the said E. and H. their Heirs, Executors, or assigns,
or some of them; as by the same E. and H. their heirs or assigns, or by their
learned Council in the Law, or any of them shall be reasonably and lawfully
devised or advised, for the further surety, assurance, and sure making of all
and singular the said Manors, Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, with their
appurtenances aforesaid, and the reversion and reversions of the same, and of
all and every other the said Premises with the appurtenances whatsoever, to
the said E. J. H. and H. and to the sorvivor of them, and to their Heirs and
Assigns, to the only intents, uses, and behoofs before specified. And it is
further covenanted, condescended, Agreement that the Husband may sell Woods,
and make Leases for 21. years, or three lives, reserving the old Rents.
and agreed between the said parties to these presents, for them, their Heirs
Executors and Administrators, and the true intent and meaning of these presents
been; That the said Sir G. for and during all the term of his natural life, at
his will and pleasure, may lawfully fell, cut down and carry away any timber,
trees or woods whatsoever, standing or growing in or upon the soiles or grounds
of the Premises, or any of them: And also to demise, grant, or to Farm let by
Copy of Court roll, according to the custom of the said Manors, or for the
number and term of one and twenty years, or for longer number and term of
years, to end and determine upon the end of three lives at the most, or for
one, two, or three lives at the most, such part of the Premises as usually and
accustomably have been granted by Copy, or have been used to be demised and
letten for term of years or lives, so always that the said grant and demise
extend not to the Mannor-house of W. nor to the Park of W. nor to the said
house near C. Lane, nor to any part thereof: And so always that the said Sir G
do leave to the said Dame D. to go and remain with the said Manor house the
number of three hundred acres at the least, beside the Park: And so also that
upon all and every such granting, letting, or demising of the Premises, or any
of them, the said Sir G. do reserve and save the old usual and accustomed
rent, duty and service, and rents, duties, and services before accustomed to
be paid, yeilden, and done for the Premises or any of them, so and in such
sort, that the same rent, duty and service from time to time at all times, may
and shall continue due and payable to the said Sir G. for term of his life,
and after his decease to the said Dame D. his wife, and to her Assigns, for
and during the term of her life, and after her decease, to the use of the
right Heirs of the said Sir G. for ever. And it is further covenanted granted
concluded provided and agreed by and between the said parties by these
presents, Agreement if the wife demand he^ Dower at the Common Law, her estate
in these Lands to cease.
That if the said Dame D. after the death of the said Sir G. demand by action
or Writ of Dower, to have her Dower at and by the order of the Common Laws of
this Realm, of any of the Manors Lands Tenements or Hereditaments of the said
Sir G. And do disagree and refuse to accept and take the said Premises, and
the Manor of C with all and singular the appurtenances, to her by other
sufficient conveyance to be limited and appointed, for and in the name of her
Jointure. Or if the said Dame D. do by Action, Suit, or Entry challenge or
demand the Manor of A. in the County of S. by reason of any conveyance
heretofore had and made, and will not permit and suffer the Heirs of the said
Sir G: to receive and take the Issues and profits thereof: That then the Estate
and interest of the said Dame D: That then, etc.
in and to the said Manor of W: with the appurtenances, to be void and of none
effect. And then and from thenceforth the said E: I: H: and H: shall stand and
be seized of the said Premises, with all and singular the appurtenances, to
the use of the said Sir G: and his Heirs for ever; any thing in these presents
contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And further it is condiscended and
fully agreed between the said parties to these presents: That the said Dame D:
shall at all times necessary, during her life, well and sufficiently support,
repair, and amend the said Mansion house of W: and the House and Buildings
belonging to the same in all needful and necessary reparations. In witness,
etc.

A Woman's Jointure in Land passed by Recovery with single Voucher, with
Condition to make good Leaeses to be made by the Husband and the Wife.
THis Indenture, etc. Between E. G. of the one part, and A.B. and C.D. on the
other part, witnesses, That the said E: G: in consideration of the marriage
had between him the said E. and L. now his Wife, Daughter of R: C: Esquire,
deceased, and to the intent to make and convey unto the said L* a convenient
Jointure of certain of the Lordships Manors Lands Tenements and Hereditaments
of the said E: G: and for diverse other good considerations the said E: G:
especially moving, does covenant and grant for himself, his Heirs Executors
and Administrators, to and with the said A: B: and C: D. And it is covenanted
granted and agreed between all the said parties to these presens, in manner and
form following; that is to say, That the said E: G: To suffer a recovery with
simple Voucher.
within the space of one year next coming, after the date of these presents,
shall permit and suffer the said A: B: and C: D: and the Survivor of them, by
Writs of Entry sur disseisin in le port returnable before the Justices of the
Common Bench, according to the course and order of common Recoveries, with
simple Voucher to recover against him the said E. all those his Lordships and
Manors of E: C: W: and W: in the said County of N: with their appurtenances,
and all other the Lands Meadows Pastures Woods Rents Reversions and
Hereditaments of the said E situate lying and being in E. C. W. and W. in the
said County of N. And also the Lordships of, etc. in the County of L. and all
others the Lands etc. by such convenient names and additions as shall be
reasonably devised. And that executions shall be had and made of and upon the
said recoveries. User of the Recovery.
And further it is by these presents granted and agreed between the said
parties to these presents, That the said recoveries to be had and executed as
aforesaid; and every common recovery with Voucher, within the space of one
year next ensuing, to be su^tered by the said E. of the Premises, and every
or any part thereof, by what names or additions soever the same shall fortune
to be had or suffered, immediately from the execution thereof shall be. And that
the persons who shall recover the Premises, and every or any part thereof, and
their heirs after every such execution, shall stand and be seized of the
Premises with the appurtenances, to the only uses, limitations, and intents
hereafter in these presents expressed and mentioned; that is to say, To the use
and behoof of the said L. To the woman for her life, for her Jointure, and in
recompense of her Dower.
now wife of the said E. for term of her life for her Jointure, and in full
recompense of such Dower as the said L. now is, or hereafter shall be entitled
unto, or may hereafter claim or demand of any the Manors Lands Tenements or
Hereditaments of the said E. her Husband, and after her decease, to the use and
behoof of the said E. B. and of the Heirs of his body lawfully coming; After
to the husband and his heirs, and to diverse remainders, according to an ancient
entaile made by the husbands Father.
and for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof of the said R. G. Brother
of the said E. and of the heirs males of his body lawfully coming; and for
default of such Issue respectively and ratably, to the use of such person and
persons, and their heirs, or the heirs of their bodies begotten, or for other
whatsoever estates, in such manner and form, and under such uses estates
conditions and limitations, as particularly and proportionably thereof is
limited appointed or declared by any lawful devise or conveyance made by E.G.
Esquire, deceased, late Father of the said E. party to this Indenture for ever.
For the strengthening of Leases to be made by the husband and the wife, or the
husband after the wives decease.
Provided, and nevertheless it is agreed between the said parties to these
presents, That if the said E.G. the Son, at any time or times hereafter, during
the lives of the said E. and L. jontly by any Indenture to be made in the name
of the same E. and L. on the one part, and any other person or persons on the
other part, or after the death of the said L. by any Indenture to be made in
the name of the said E. of the one part, and any other person or persons on the
other part shall make any Lease or Leases of the said Manors, etc. or of any
part or parcel thereof, other then of the Capital Message of the said Manor
of great A. and the demesne lands of the said Manor of great A. or of any part
thereof, for any term or terms of years: and do reserve thereupon payable
yearly, during such Lease or Leases unto the said E. and L. and unto the heirs
of the same E. at the two usual Feasts or days of payment by even portions,
the yearly rents now usual to be paid or payable, for the Premises so to be
demised, or other yearly rents of better yearly value; That then and from
thence forth the Recoveries and Executions before mentioned, as concerning the
Lands or Tenements in form aforesaid, to be letten shall be, and the
Recoverers before mentioned and their heirs, shall of and in the Premises so to
be letten as aforesaid, stand and be seized from the several beginnings of
every such Lease severally, to the use of those person or persons to whom such
Lease or Leases thereof shall be made, and severally of their Executors and
Assigns, during his or their said Lease or Leases, so as the person or persons
to whom such said Lease or Leases shall hereafter fortune to be made their
Executors or Assigns, shall pay to such person or persons, who for the time
shall have the next and immediate estate of the Freehold of the Premises so
hereafter to be demised, according to the limitation of the uses aforesaid, all
such rents in such form as upon their several Lease or Leases shall be
limited or appointed to be paid; and so as the said several Lessees, their
several Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, do observe and keep all such
Conditions in Law, as Tenants for term of years by the Laws or Statutes of
this Realm of right'ought to observe and keep: And of and concerning the
reversion and reversions and Freehold of the Premises, in form aforesaid
hereafter demised, to the use and uses of such person or persons, and in such
manner and form, quantity and condition, to every intent, construction, and
purpose after and according to the declarations and limitations of the uses in
these presents limited, as if such Lease or Leases had never been had nor
made: Any thing to the contrary, etc. In witness, etc.

Consultors.
Manwood, Wilbraham, and Fr. Sanders,


For the assurance of a Woman's Jointure.
THis Indenture, etc. between T.B. of W. in the County of K. Esquire, on the
one part, and M.L. Mercer, R.M. Goldsmith, and T.A.S. Citizens of L. on the
other part, witnesses, That the said T.B. for and in consideration of a
marriage to be had and solemnized, between E. D. Gent. Cousin of the said T. B.
and A. L. Widow, and for a Jointure to be made and assured to the said A. and
for her preferment and advancement, does by these presents covenant and grant
for him, his Heirs and Assigns, to and with the said M. L. R.M. and T. A.
their Heirs Executors and assigns that the said T.B. his heirs and assigns,
and all and every other person and persons their heirs and assigns that now
be, or hereafter shall be seized of one Message or Tenement with the
appurtenances in P, called, etc. with all Lands, etc. to the same belonging, or
with the same demised or occupied; and also of all those Messuages, etc. shall
from henceforth stand and be seized of the same to the use of the said A. for
term of her life, and after her decease, to the use of the said T.B. his heirs
and assigns for ever. And the said T: B. for him, etc. covenanteth, etc. that
the said T. B. is at the ensealing and delivery hereof sole seized of the
premises, of a good and sure estate in Feesimple, to him and his heirs: And
that the said A. shall or may lawfully hold occupy and enjoy the same during
her life. In witness, etc.

Bydell Consultor.

Indentures.
An Indenture for the knowledging of a Fine by a man and his Wife, to the
intent to exclude the Woman from having (for her Dower) the third part of Land
leased by her Husband, after the Marriage betwixt her Husband and her.
THis Indenture Tripartite made, etc. Between C. B. Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty, and K. his Wife on the first part, F.M. of L. Gent. on the
second part, and G. S. and H.M. on the third part, witnesses, That whereas the
said C.B. in and by one Indenture, bearing date the third of July last, etc.
made between the said C: on the one part, and the said F.M: and E.N. of, etc.
on the other part: The said C. B. for the considerations in the said Indenture
expressed, did demise, etc. to the said F. and E. all that the Manor, Capital
Message, or Farm called W. in the County of M. with all and singular the
rights, members, and appurtenances thereof, and all and singular his Messuages
Lands Tenements Rents Reversions Services Privileges Franchises Commodities
and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances set,
lying, and being, arising, growing, happening or coming, in the Towns Parishes
Hamlets or Feilds of K. and W. in the said County of M. to the said Manor or
Capital Message or Farm belonging, or in any wise appertaining or esteemed,
etc. as part thereof, etc. And all and singular other Message Meadows
Feedings Pastures Woods under-Woods Privileges Franchises Commodities
Advantages Rents Reversions Services and Hereditaments whatsoever, of the said
C. B. in K. and W. aforesaid, in the said County of M. except and always
reserved to the said C: B: his heirs and assigns, all the Oaks and Trees
whatsoever standing growing or being in or upon one piece of ground environed
with a Wall called the L: which said Oaks and Trees are to grow as an ornament
to the Mansion house of the said Manor Message or Farm: To have and to hold
to the said F: and E: etc. from the Feast of Michaelmas next ensuing the date
of the said Indenture, for and during the the term of 41. years from thence,
etc. and fully to be complete and ended, yiedling and paying therefore yearly
during the said term unto the said C. his heirs and assigns, 66 l. 13 s. 4 d.
of lawful, etc. at the feast of the Annunciation, etc. and St. Mich: etc. by
even portions; as by the said Indenture amongst othet things therein contained,
more plainly may appear: The Estate Title Interest and term of years of which
said E: N: the said F: M: now has. Now for and to the intent to bar and
exclude the said K: wife of the said C. B, of and from all such Estate, Right
or Title of Dower, as she the said K. shall or may have or claim, of, in, or to
the same premises, or of, in, or to any part or parcel thereof during the
said term: And for the better ratifying and confirming of the said Grant,
Demise, or Lease; and for the better and more assured payment of the said Rent,
in and upon the said Demise and Lease reserved. It is covenanted, granted,
condiscended, concluded, and fully agreed by and between all the said parties
to these present Indentures in manner and form following; that is to say, The
said C. B. for him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and ecery of
them, does covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said F: M. his
Executors, Administrators, and assigns, and every of them by these presents,
That the said C. B. and the said K. now his wife, shall and will before the
Feast of Pentecost now next ensuing, at the costs and charges in the Law of the
said F.M. his Executors Administrators, and Assigns, or some of them knowledge
and levy one Fine unto the said G.S and H.M. to be had and engrossed, with
sixteen Proclamations, according to the due course and order of the common
Laws and Statutes of this Realm in that case provided, of and in all that the
said Manor, Capital Message, and all the said Message Farms Lands Tenements
Meadows Feedings Pastures Commons Woods underwoods Reats Reversions Services
and Hereditaments, and all other the Premises aforesaid, with their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, by such name or names, and
in such manner and form, as by the said F.M. his Executors or assigns, or any
of them, or by his or their, or any of their Council learned in the Law, shall
be devised or advised; By which Fine the said C.B. and K. his wife shall
knowledge the said Manor Messuages Lands Tenements Hereditaments and Premises
to be the right of the said G.S. as those which the said G: S: and H: M: then
shall have of the Gift of the said C: B: and K: And the same by the said Fine
shall remise and quite claim from them the said C: and K: and their Heirs, to
the said G: S: and H: M: and to the Heirs of the said G: S: for ever. And
further the said C: and K: his wife, shall for them and the heirs of the said
C: warrant the same Manor, etc. to the said G: and H: and to the Heirs of the
said G: for ever, against the said C: and K: and the Heirs of the said C: for
ever. And further that he the said C: B: shall and will within convenient time,
from henceforth what in him is, suffer, do, and procure to be done at the costs
and charges of the said F: M: his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, or
some of them all and every such thing or things as shall be necessary or
convenient of and for the engrossing and perfecting of the same fine and
Proclamations as is aforesaid. The which Fine so to be levied of the said
Premises, or any part thereof, between the said parties or any of them, before
the Feast of Pentecost now next ensuing shall be and shall be adjudged, deemed,
and taken to be, to the uses intents, and purposes hereafter expressed and
declared, and to none other use, uses, intents, or purposes: that is to say,
for the ratifying, confirming, and assured having and enjoying not only of the
said Manor, Capital Message, Farm, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
before mentioned to be demised and leased to the said F: M: his Executors
Administrators and assigns, according to the tenor, true intent, and meaning
of the said Demise and Lease, for and during all the now residue of the said
term of one and forty years, for and under the Covenants, Grants, Articles and
agreements, Conditions, Penalties, Rents and Reversions in the said Indenture
of the said Demise and Lease comprised and specified to be yielded, paid, and
pone according to the tenor of tue said Indenture. But also of the said Rent
and of the reversion of all and singular the premises, Rent and Reversion.
to the use and behoof of the said C. B. and of his heirs and assigns for ever.
And the said F. M. for him, etc. covenanteth with the said C. and K his wife,
and the said G. and H. and every of them, and their and every of their heirs
executors and administrators by these presents, that he the said F. M. his
Executors Administrators and assigns, or some of them, shall and will at his,
their, or some of their costs and charges in all things at all times hereafter,
bear, pay, and disburse, all and all manner of duties, sums of money,
payments, and charges whatsoever, payable, for or by reason of the said Fine
before mentioned, which at any time hereafter shall or may accrue, due, or be
or any present Fine or Fines to be paid by reason of the said Fine. And of and
for the same and every of them shall acquit and discharge, or otherwise
sufficiently save harmless the said C: K: G: and H: and every of them, their
and every of their Heirs Executors and Administrators, and every of them. In
witness, etc.

Leases.
A Deed where two are possessed of a Lease to make them Tenants in Common to
prevent the Survivorshir.
THis Indenture, etc. between R: C: etc. of the one part, and I: H: of the
other part (recite the Lease) Now this Indenture witnesses, That to the intent
no advantage of Survivorship of the said estate and term of years should be
between the said R: C: and I. B: but that they should be Tenants in Common
thereof; As for other causes hereafter in these presents declared. The said R:
C: has granted remised and released, and by these presents does grant, remise,
and release unto the said I: B: all the estate, right, title, and interest, and
term of years of him the said R: C. of in and to one moiety of the said
Message, Lands, and Premises, with the appurtenances before mentioned, to be
to them demised by the said C: D: as aforesaid; To have and to hold the moiety
of the said Message, Lands, and Premises, with the appurtenances, unto the
said I: B: his Executors, Administrators, and assigns, for and during all the
said term and years yet to come and unexpired: And the said I: B: in
consideration thereof, has granted, remised, and released, and by these
presents does grant, remise, and release unto the said R: C: all the estate,
right, title, interest, and term of years of him the said I: B: of in and to
one moiety of the said Messuages, Lands, and Premises, with the appurtenances
before mentioned, to be to them demised by the said D: C: as aforesaid; to have
and to hold the moiety of the Premises with the appurtenances unto the said R:
C: his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, for and during all the said
term and years yet to come and unexpired. And the said R: C: for himself, his
Executors, Administrators, and assigns, and for every of them does covenant,
grant, and agree, to and with the said I: B: his Executors, Administrators and
assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, in manner and form
following; That is to say, that he the said R: C: his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, shall and will quietly permit and suffer the said
I: B: his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them from time
to time, and at all times during the continuance of the said Lease and term,
to have, take, peaceive, and enjoy the full and whole moiety and half of the
Rents, Issues, and Profits of the said before mentioned demised Premises, and
of every part thereof, without any let, distutbance, or interruption of or by
the said R: C: his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or of any other by
his procurement and consent: And that the said R: C: etc. shall from time to
time, during the said Lease pay discharge and bear the full moiety of all the
yearly and other Rents reservations, payments, and charges, which by force and
virtue of the said Lease, are by them the said R: C: and I: B: their and either
of their Executors, etc. to be borne and discharged, at and upon such days and
times, and in such manner as in and by the said recited Indenture of demise is
required. And that all the Covenants, Articles, and agreements to be found by
the said R.C. and I.B. their Executors, etc. by force of the said recited
Indenture of Lease, shall from time to time during the said term be performed,
borne, and done, at the indifferent and equal costs and charges, and expenses
of the said R.C. and I.B. their, etc. And that the said R.C. his Executors,
etc. shall and will upon reasonable request, at his and their view, proper
costs and charges, well and sufficiently save and keep harmless the said I. B.
his Executors, etc. of and from all Actions, Suits* and troubl^s by occasion or
reason of not paying, doing, or performing by the said R.C. his Executors, etc.
the aforesaid payments, covenants, articles, and agreements which he or they
oughr for his part or portion to pay, bear, discharge, and perform, according
to the true meaning of these presents: And that if the said I B. his Executors,
etc. shall at any time hereafter be minded to renew the said Lease of the said
Premises for a longer time and term from the said D.C. that then he the said
R C. his Executors, etc. shall and will upon reasonable notice thereof to him
or them to be given by the said I. B. his executors, etc. and upon the request
of him or them made unto him the said R.C. his executors, etc. for such
renewing and new taking of such Lease, join with the said I. B. in all
needful and reasonable causes and things for the renewing of the said Lease,
and new taking of the said Premises, for any longer term or estate from the
said D C. to them the said R. C. and I. B. etc. and that the said R.C. etc.
shall and will bear, pay, and defray the half of the Fine, and all other
charges to be expended for and about the renewing of the said Lease, and new
taking of the same Premises: And of the said R.C. his Executors, etc. shall at
any time or times hereafter be minded to alien, sell, or part with the said
estate, interest, or term, or any part thereof, of, in, and to his said moiety
of the said premises, or any part or parts thereof, to any person or persons
other then to the wife or children of the said R.C. or any of them, that then
the said R. C. shall first make offer thereof at the lowest price, for which he
or they shall or will alien or sell the same, unto the said I. B. his
Executors, etc. and shall not make offer thereof unto any other, until the
said I.B. his Executors, etc. shall have first refused the same, or neglected
to accept of the said offer by the space of one month next after such offer.
And if the said I.B. his Executors, etc. shall accept of the said offer, and
agree to give the price so set for the same, that then the said R C. his
Executors, etc. shall upon payment to him or them of the money so set for the
price thereof, well and sufficiently grant, convey, and assure to the said I:
B. all that his or their moiety of the premises: And all this and their
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, and term of years, in and to the same then to
come of, in, and to the said original Indenture of Lease discharged, or upon
reasonable request saved and kept harmless by him or them, of all former
Grants, Charges, and Encumbrances, had, made, or done by him or them. The like
Covenants in all things from I: B: to R: C.

A Lease to a Woman for so long and so often as she shall remain in Widowhood.
R. B: Esquire, and P: B: Esquire, by Indenture, dated, etc. for the fatherly
and brotherly love and affection that they bear to S: C: daughter of the said
R: B. and sister of the said P: B: and toward her advancement and better
maintenance and stay of Livering done, demise to the said S: all their
Tenements and Gardens situate in B. Street, etc. except the Mansion house,
etc. To hold to her and her assigns, from Michaelmas, etc. to the end and term
of one and twenty years, etc. without impeachment of waste, so long and so
often as the said Lady S. shall remain in Widows estate; yiedling yearly to
the said R. so long as he shall live, and after to the said Lord W: his Heirs
and assigns, ten shillings, etc. And for the consideration aforesaid, do
further demise unto the said Lady S. all the Premises, Habend. from the end of
the same one and twenty years, unto the end and term of sixty years, if she
live so long, without impeachment of waste, so long and so often as she shall
remain in Widowhead, yiedling the yearly rent as aforesaid. Provided always,
that it shall not be lawful for any person that shall be husband of the said
Lady S. to make any Grant, Demise, or alienation of the Premises, or any part
thereof, at any time during the Coverture, etc.

A Lease to them that assured the Land for the certain payment of an Annuity.
THis Indenture, etc. Witnesses, That the said E: and A: Vide an annuity
(entitled, An annuity granted for two lives, with the inheritance of Land
assured to the payment thereof) whereupon this Lease depends.
for and in accomplishment of their former promise and agreement in that
behalf made to and with the said, etc. have demised, etc. to the said, etc.
all that their Manor, etc. and all and singular Messuages, etc. with the
Leasures heretofore had of the Grant of the Lessees by an Indenture, etc.
Habend, etc. to the Lessees their Executors and assigns, from the day of the
date hereof, during the term of one and twenty years, if either of the Lessors
live so long. Provided always, that if at any time during the natural lives
or life of the said E. and A. or either of them the Lessees, their Heirs,
Executors, or assigns, shall make default at any time, and not pay or cause to
be paid to the Lessors, and the Survivor of them, yearly that annuity or yearly
payment of a hundred pounds, etc and every part thereof to the said E: and A:
granted by the said former Indenture above in these presents, recited according
to the tenor, etc. of the same Indenture, That then this Lease to be void, etc.
and a re-entry, etc. In witness, etc.

A Lease upon Condition, that when the Lessor shall have paid the Lessees, such
money as he owes them, or they stand bound for him, or when they shall be
satisfied by Profits of the Land, this Lease shall be void.
THis Indenture Tripartite, made, etc. between the right honorable Sir F.W.
Knight, one of the principal Secretaries of our Sovereign, etc. on the one
part, and R.M. Citizen and Alderman of L. on the second part, and W.D. of W. in
the Parish of K. in the County of M. Gent. on the third part witnesses, That
the said Sir F. Intent.
W. for and to the intent that the said R: M: and W. D and either of them, and
the Heirs, Executors, and Administrators of either of them, shall and may be
well and truly satisfied, recompensed, contented, paid, and saved harmless, of
and for all and singular such sum and sums of money whatsoever, as they the
said R. and W. or either of them heretofore have lent or delivered to the said
Sir F. or to any other person or persons, to or for his use, by his consent,
request or agreement, or at any time hereafter shall lend and deliver to or for
the use of the said Sir F. by or at his request, consent, or agreement. And
also of and for all and singular such Bills, Debt, Obligations, and other Bonds
whatsoever, which the said R. and W. or either of them heretofore have made, or
hereafter shall make jointly with the said Sir F. or otherwise without him for
his debt, or at his request, has demised, granted and to farm letten: Demise.
And by these presents, etc. to the said R: M: and W: D: all that the Lorship
and Manor of B: with all the rights, members, and appurtenances thereof, in
the County of W: and all and singular Mills, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Feedings, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services, Moors, Waters, Fishings,
Fines, Amerciaments, Heriots, Courts Leets, Viewes of Frankpledge, and all that
which to view of Frankpledge does belong, assise, and assay, of Bread, Wine,
and Ale, and all other Profits, Commodities, Emoluments, and Hereditaments
whatsoever, to the said Lordship or Manor belonging or appertaining: And all
and singular Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions,
Privileges, Liberties, Jurisdictions, Profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments
whatsoever, with their appurtenances, which the said Sir E. has, or ought to
have in use, possession, remainder, or reversion, or in any other estate
whatsoever in B: A: I: ^: L: W: H: and W: or in any of them within the said
County of W. or elsewhere, in any other place or places within the same County;
To have and to hold the said Manor of B. and all the rights, members, Habend.
and appurtenances thereof, and also all and singular other the Premises with
their appurtenances, to the said R: and W: their Executors and assigns, from
the Feast of the Annunciation, etc. for, by, and during all the term of
fourscore and nineteen years from thence next following, and fully to be
complete and ended, Reddend.
yiedling and paying therefore yearly by and during the said term to the said
Sir F. his Heirs and assigns ten pounds etc. in the Feast of Saint Michael,
etc. and the Annuciation, etc. or within the space, etc. by even portions.
Provis^.
Provided that if at any time or times hereafter, during the said term the
said Sir F: W: his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, shall well
and truly satisfy content, recompense, or pay, ot cause to be well, etc. to
the said R: and W: their executors, administrators, or assigns, or to any of
them, all and singular such sum and sums of money whatsoever, as they the
said R: and W. or either of them heretofore have lent or delivered to the said
Sir F: or to any other person or persons, to or for his use, by his consent or
agreement, or at any time hereafter shall lend or deliver to or for the use of
the said Sir F: at his request, or by his consent or agreement. And also all
and singular such sum and sums of money as be or shall be mentioned, in any
Bill or Bills of debt, obligation or obligations, or other Bonds whatsoever,
which the said R: and W: or either of them heretofore have made, or hereafter
shall make jointly with the said Sir F. or otherwise without him, or for his
debt, or at his request; Together with all such costs, charges, losses,
interests, and damages whatsoever, as the said R. and W. or either of them, or
the executors or administrators of either of them shall bear, or reasonably
sustain for or by reason of any the sum or sums of money, Bills, Bonds, or
Obligations aforesaid, or any of them: Or if the said R. and W. or either of
them, their executors, administrators, or assigns, or any of them shall be at
any time or times hereafter, during the said term fully satisfied, by reason
of the Issues, Profits, Fines, or Revenues of the Premises, as partly by the
said Sir F: W: his Heirs Executors Administrators and Assigns, of any of
them, and partly by the Issues, Profits, Fines, and Revenues of the Premises,
of and for all and every the debts, sum and sums of money: aforesaid, and
of and for all the costs, charges, and losses aforesaid; That then and from
thenceforth this present Lease, Grant, and Demise of the Premises made as
abovesaid, shall cease and become void. And that then and from thenceforth, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said Sir F.W. his Heirs and Assigns,
into all and singular the Premises above demised with their appurtenances,
wholly to re-enter, as in his or their former estate, these presents, or any
thing therein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding And
the said Sir F: W: for him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
covenanteth, etc. to and with the said W: and R: and either of them, and the
Heirs, Executors, Admin. and assigns of them and of either of them; That he
the said Sir F. has good, lawful, and absolute right, title, and authority to
demise and grant all and singular the Premises with their appurtenances, to
the said R. and W. and their assigns, for and during the term of years
aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid. And also that the said R. and W. or
either of them, and the Executors Administrators and assigns of them, or
either of them shall and may lawfully have, hold, occupy, and enjoy all and
singular the said Premises with their appurtenances, for, by, and during all
the said term of, etc. under the Condition and Proviso aforesaid, in manner
and form aforesaid, without any let, trouble, or eviction of the said Sir F.
his Heirs and Assigns, other then only the Farmers and Lessees of the
Premises, or any part thereof, which have or claim any Estate or Interest
only for term of life or lives, year or years, whereupon the accustomed
yearly Rent or Rents be reserved, and shall be yearly payable during the said
Estates and terms, and all Copyholders and Copyhold Estates, according to the
custom of the said Manor, for and by the payment and doing of the old Rents
and Services to be paid and done for the same Copyholds. And furthermore the
said R. and W. for themselves, and their several Execut. Adm. and Assigns, and
every of them does covenant, etc. to and with the said Sir F. his Heirs and
assigns, by these presents; That they the said R. and W. and their and either
of their assigns, whilst they two shall be both living, and also the Survivor
of them two, and the Executors Administrators, and Assigns of the same
Survivor, shall from time to time take, employ, and bestow all the Revenues,
Profits, and Commodities whatsoever, which shall be or lawfully may be had,
taken, or received, of or for the Premises* or any part thereof, truly and
faithfully in and to the payment of the sum and sums of money aforesaid lent
or delivered, or to be lent or delivered as aforesaid, and in and to the
satisfaction and contentation of and for such Bills Obligations Bonds Costs
Charges Losses Interests and Damages as aforesaid, as well to the plain and
upright payment, satisfaction, recompense, and saving harmless of the said R:
M: his Heirs Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, of, for, and
touching the Premises: As also to the like upright payment satisfaction,
recompense and saving harmless of the said W: D: his Heirs Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, of, for and touching the said Premises,
without any manner of fraud or covin. In witness, etc. unto two parts of these
presents, whereof the one is remaining with the said R: M: and the other with
the said W: D: the said Sir F etc. And to the other part thereof remain^ing
with the said Sir F. the said R. and W. etc.

A Lease passed by a Fine, one render of a Brewinghouse, together with a Demise
of Implements, and a Covenant that if any of the Implements shall be delivered
at the terms end, the Tenant shall answer the price of them.
THis Indenture, etc. Between E. B. of P. in the County of S. Esquire, and E.
his Wife, And E. C. of L. in the County of C. Esquire, and E. his Wife,
Daughter and sole Heir of I. D. late of P. aforesaid Gent. deceased, on the
one part, and M: R: etc. on the other part, witnesses, That for diverse good
considerations it is covenanted, concluded, and fully agreed by and between the
said parties to these presents, in manner and form following: And first the
said E: B: and E: his Wife, do for them and either of them, their Executors and
Assigns, covenant and grant to and with the said M: R: his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, That before the end of the next Term called
Midsomor Term, if the said Ellen be then living, upon lawful request, and at
the costs and charges of the said M. his Exc^utors or assigns, one Fine shall
be levied and knowledged with Proclamations between the said parties to these
presents; in manner and form following, of one Message and Brewhouse, with
the appurtenances, set and being in the Parish of, etc. And of all Cellers,
Sollers, etc. to the same belonging, late in the tenure or occupation of P, S.
and I. S. Citizens, and, etc. of L. and now in the tenure or occupation of A:
R: Brewer, which Message, Brewhouse, and Premises abut, etc. and all that
Celler, contain-in length, etc. And of all that Message, Tenement, or
Ale-brewhouse rooms, etc. to the same Tenement, Ale-brewhouse belonging, set,
etc. in the said Parish, etc. abutting, etc. And of all and singular lights,
casements, commodities, and hereditaments to the Premises or any part thereof
belonging or appertaining, or to or with the same demised, used, letten to
Farm, or enjoyed to and by the parties before mentioned, and to the uses and
intents, and under the conditions hereafter in these presents mentioned and
declared, by the name or names of two Messuages or Brewhouses with the
appurtenances, and of one Celler in the Parish of, etc. in the City of L. In
and by which Fine the said M. R. shall remise release and quite claim from the
said M.R. and his heirs, unto the said E. and Ellen his wife for term of life
of the said Ellen, all his right title estate and interest of the foresaid
Messuages and other the Premises with the appurtenances: For which release and
quite claim, the said E. and Ellen his wife shall by the same fine render the
said Message and Cellar, and other the Premises with the appurtenances, unto
the said M.R. his Executors and Assigns, to have and to hold the same unto the
said M. R his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the Feast of the
Nativity of Saint John Baptist, next coming after the date hereof, for and
during, and until the full end and accomplishment of one and twenty years
then next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, if the said Ellen should
so long live, yiedling and paying therefore yearly unto the said E.B. and
Ellen, and their Assigns during the said term, if the said Ellen do so long
live, the yearly rent of five pounds of, etc. at four Feasts, etc. or within
thirty days, etc. And the said R.C. and Eliz. his wife, do for them, their
Heirs Executors and Administrators, covenant with the said M. etc. that within
four months next after request thereof made, the said Eliz. then being living,
and of the full age of one and twenty years, at the costs and charges of the
said M.R. his Executors and Assigns, one Fine shall be knowledged and levied,
with Proclamations of the aforesaid Premises, to the uses and intents, and
under the conditions hereafter in these presents expressed, mentioned, and
declared, by the name or names of two Messuages with the appurtenances ut
praedict. In and by which Fine the said M. or his Executors shall remise
release, and quite claim from his or their heirs, unto the said R. and E. and
to the heirs of the said E. all his or their estate, etc. in and to the
foresaid Message and Premises with the appurtenances: For which release and
quite claim the said R. and Eliz. shall by the same Fine render unto the said
M. or to his Executors, the same Messuages and Premises with the
appurtenances, to have and to hold the same Premises unto the said M. his
executors and assigns, from the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist,
next coming after the date of these presents, for and during the term of one
and twenty years, from thence, etc. yiedling, etc. unto the said R. and Eliz.
and to the heirs of the said Eliz. after the decease of the aforesaid Ellen B.
the yearly rent of fifty pounds of, etc. at four terms, etc. or within
thirty days, etc. And the said M. R. for him, his Executors administrators and
assigns, does covenant and grant to and with the said E. B. Ellen his wife, R.
C. and Eliz. his wife, and to and with the Heirs Executors administrators and
assigns of them and every of them by these presents, in manner and form
following; that is to say, That the said M.R. his executors and assigns, the
said Brewhouse, etc. from time to time, within six months after warning given
by the said E. or Ellen, during the life of the said Ellen, or by the said R.
and Eliz. his wife, or any of them, or by the Heirs or assigns of the said
Eliz. during the said term, shall repair, etc. And likewise all the
Implements, brewing Vessels, and necessaries contained in a Schedule to these
presents annexed, shall repair, maintain, and amend, as often and when as
need shall require, during the said term, or at the furhtest within two months
after warning or notice thereof given by the patties aforesaid, or any of them,
and in the end of the said term shall leave and deliver to the said Ellen, if
she be then living, to her only use the same Implements, etc. or the like in
value, and of as good value as the same be now praised and valued in the said
Schedule. And if the said Ellen be then dead, then to leave and deliver the
said Utensills, etc. to the next heir of the said J.D. to their only use. And
if all or any of the said Implements and necessaries, shall in the end of the
said term be lacking, lost, or wanting, then to pay at the end of the said
term, or within thirty days after to the said Ellen if she be living, and if
she be dead, then to the Heirs of the said I. D. so much money as the same
Implements and Premises so wanting, be valued and praised at, the payment to
be made at the great Door of the aforesaid Beer-brewhouse. And also the said M.
his Executors or Assigns, shall the Siegs, etc. and that the said the said M
his Executors or Assigns, all and singular the foresaid Houses and Buildings,
so well and sufficiently repaired, etc. in the end of the same term, shall
leave and deliver up to the said Ellen, if she be living, and if she be
deceased, to the Heirs of the said J. D. without further delay. A Covenant for
liberty to enter to view reparations, etc. And if it happen the said yearly
Rent of fifty pounds, or any part thereof, shall be beh^nd and unpaid in part
or in all, after any of the said Feasts, or days wherein it shall be due by
the space of thirty days, being lawfully demanded at the great Door of the
said Beer-brewhouse,, That then the said term shall cease, determine, and be
and remain utterly void. And then the same Fine so to be levied, and the same
Premises and the Estate to be limited in and by the same Fine, shall be to the
only use of the said Ellen, if she be living, and if she be dead, then to the
use of the Heirs of the said J. D. And from and after such default of payment
of the same Rent, or any part thereof, it shall be lawful for the said E: and
Ellen, during the life of the said Ellen, and after her decease, to the said R.
C and Elizabeth, and the Heirs of the said Elizabeth, into all and singular
the Premises to enter, as in their former estate, the said Fine, or any thing
in these presents to the contrary notwithstanding. And the said E: B: for
himself and the said Ellen his Wife, and either of them, their Heirs,
Executors, and Assigns, further covenanteth with the said M. his, etc. That he
the said M. R. his Executors and Assigns, and every of them for and under the
said yearly Rent of fifty pounds in form as is aforesaid to be paid, and
under the Covenants, Grants, Conditions, and agreements of these presents, on
his or their parts to be observed, performed, and kept, shall or may according
to the tenor and true meaning of these presents, peaceably and quietly have,
hold, occupy, and enjoy all the said Beer-brewhouse, Ale brewhouse, and all and
singular the Premises with the appurtenances, and also all the Implements,
etc. without any let, trouble, or interruption of the said E: B: and Ellen his
Wife, or either of them, and without any other lawful eviction or expulsion of
any other person or persons, by his or their means, title, or procurement,
during the said term of one and twenty years, if the said Ellen shall so long
live. And the said Rt C. as well for himself as the said Eliz^ his Wife, and
either of them, and for the Heirs of the said Eliz. does covenant, etc. That
he the said M. his Executors and Assigns, and every of them, under the said
yearly rent* etc. and other the Covenants, etc. shall or may, etc. peaceably,
etc. the said Brewhouse, etc. and also all the said Implements, etc. without
any lawful let, etc. of the said R. and Eliz. his Wife, or either of them, or
the Heirs or Assigns of the said Eliz. and without any lawful let, etc. of
any other person or persons, by his, her, or their title, means, or
procurement, during the said term of one and twenty years. Provided always,
and it is agreed between the said parties to these presents, That if the said
M. his Executors, Administrators, or assigns, at any time during the said
term, shall erect and and set up, build, or finish, in or upon the aforesaid
Tenement, parcel of the Premises called the Ale-brewhouse, any Implement,
brewing Vessels* or Utensills; that then the said M: R. his Executors, or
assigns, at or before the expiration or determination of these presents, shall
and may to his and their own use and behoof, take away, convert, and dispose
the same Implements* etc. any thing to the contrary, etc. In witness, etc.

A Lease passed to strengthen the former Lease granted in the Brewhouse.
THis Indenture, etc. between E: B: of P: in the Counnty of S. Esquire and Ellen
his wife, Executrix of the Testament and last Will of J.D etc. on the one part:
And A: R: of L: Brewer, on the other part, witness. That whereas the said I. D.
by his said last Will and Testament, dated, etc. reciting where J: W: of L:
Brewer, was then possessed by means of an Indenture of Lease for term of years,
which should then be fully ended and determined at the Feast of Saint Michael
the Arch-angell, which then should be in the year of our Lord, etc. of his
great Brewhouse, lying* etc. did will and assign unto the said Ellen, by the
name of Ellen his true and faithful Wife, full power and authority to make a
Lease of 21. years, fully to be complete and ended, and to begin at the end
and expiration of the aforesaid Lease of the said Brewhouse, with all the
Vessels, Implements, and things then letten to or with the said house, and
contained in a Schedule indented and annexed to the said Indenture of Lease
made of the said Brewhouse, and under such Covenants, Grants, and Provisoes as
she and her learned Council and Friends shall think best for the commodity,
increase, and preservation of the then Inheritance of the said house and such
Fine and Rent in the same Will limited: As by the said Will more plainly may
appear. This Indenture now further witnesses, that the said E. and Ellen
according to the intent and true meaning of the said last Will and Testament.
And in consideration of the sum of three hundred pounds of, etc. to be paid
before the ensealing hereof, have demised, granted, and to Farm letten: And
the said Ellen by these presents, does demise unto the said A: R: the said
Brewhouses and all the said Implements, etc. And also the said Ellen and E.
only in consideration of the Rent hereunder mentioned, have demised, etc. And
the said Ellen by these presents does demise, etc. unto the said A: all the
great Cellar, etc. to have and to hold the said great Beer-brewhouse
Implements, etc. unto the said A: R: his Executors administrators and assigns,
from the end and expiration of the said Lease of the aforesaid Brewhouse, which
was in the year, etc. for the term of one and twenty years fully, etc. and
to have and to hold the said Cellar, unto the said A. his Executors and
assigns, from and immediately after the said Lease of the Brewhouse aforesaid
be ended, which was in the year, etc. for the term of sixteen years, fully
to be complete, etc. yiedling and paying for the said Brewhouses, unto the said
Ellen B. or her assigns yearly, during the said years, if she so long do
live, forty pounds of, etc. And after her decease during the residue then to
come of the said one and twenty years, to the Heirs of the said J. D. twenty
pounds of, etc. at four terms of, etc. That is to say, at the Feasts, etc. or
within thirty days, etc. and yiedling and paying yearly for the said great
Cellar, during the said sixteen years, to the said Ellen and her assigns, if
she so long live, and after her decease to the Heirs and assigns of the said
J.D. forty shillings of, etc. at the four terms or Feasts before specified,
or within thirty days, etc. And the said A.R. for him, etc covenanteth, etc.
to and with the said E: and Ellen, and their assigns by these presents, that
the said A. his, etc. the said Brewhouses, etc. shall repair, etc. during the
several terms before, in and by these presents demised, That is to say, the
said Brewhouses for and during the said one and twenty years, and the said
Cellar during the said sixteen years: And the same Premises so repaired, etc.
in the end or determination of the terms before mentioned, shall leave, yield,
and deliver up, together with the said Implements, etc. in as good case as they
now be; reasonable wearing of the said Implements only except. Provided
always, and it is covenanted, granted, concluded, condiscended, and fully
agreed by and between the said parties, That the said E: and Ellen, or any of
them during the life of the said Ellen, or the Heirs of the said J. D. shall
not during the former term made of the Premises, granted to one M: R: and as
long as the said M: R: his Executors or Assigns, shall pay the rent in the said
Lease reserved, ask, demand, or have the rent reserved in these presents, nor
shall be chargable with any Covenants Grants Articles or Agreements in these
presents contained. And provided always, and the said parties do covenant and
agree, That if the said M: R: his Executors and Assigns, by reason of the said
former Demise, or the said A. R. his Executors and assigns, shall and may have
and enjoy the said Premises by these presents, demised against the said E: and
Ellen, during the life of the said Ellen; that then the said E: and Ellen, nor
any of her Heirs Executors or assigns, shall not be charged nor sued in or
upon any action of Covenant to be brought upon this present Deed: for the true
meaning of these presents is, That this present Demise was and is made, and
demised to the said A: R: at the request of the said M: to the end, that by
virtue of the said last Will of the said J.D. he might the rather have
assurance during the said term in these presents mentioned. In witness, etc.

A Lease of Tynne-work for security of payment of a sum of money.
THis Indenture, between M. T. of T. in the County of C: Esquire, on the one
part, and R.B. Citizen and Goldsmith of ^. on the other part, witnesses, That
the said M.T. for and in consideration of the sum of 100. Marks of lawful,
etc. whereof, etc. Has demised, granted, betaken and to Farm letten, and by
these presents, etc. unto the said R. B. all that his Tynne-work within his
Manor of T. and S: which Tinn work is commonly called and known by the name of
P: and also all and singular Rights, Profits. Jurisdictions, Preheminencies,
Customs, Liberties, Authorities, Interests, and Commodities whatsoever, which
the said M: T: has or can, or may, or ought to have of, for, in, or out of the
said Tinn work: And also all Tinn and Tinn Ore for the said Tinn work or
Seigniory thereof, or otherwise to be paid or yeilden for or touching the same
to the said M: T: his heirs or assigns, To have and to hold all the said Tinn
work, Habend
commonly called P and all and singular the said Rights, Profits,
Jurisdictions, Preheminencies, Customs, Liberties, Authorities, Interests,
Commodities, Tinn and Tinn Ore aforesaid, and all other the Premises
whatsoever to the said R.B. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, from the
Feast of St. Michael the Archangell next ensuing. etc. for, by, and during all
the whole term of five years from thence, etc. Paying therefore yearly to
the said T.M. his Heirs and Assigns, Reddend.
six pence of lawful, etc. in the Feast of Easter only, at one payment, if it
be then demanded, for all rents and demands by the said R: B. his Executors or
Assigns, to be paid for or out of the Premises during the said term.
Provided always, that if the said M. T: Proviso.
his Heirs, etc. do pay, etc. to, etc. the sum, etc. at, etc. on, etc.
between the hours, etc. or otherwise in the mean time before hand; That then
and from thenceforth the Lease, Grant, and Demise made of the Premises by
these presents, shall cease and determine, and become clearly void and
frustrate, And that then and from thenceforth it shall be lawful to and for
the said M: T: his Heirs and Assigns, into all the Premises to re-enter, and
the same to repossesse, as in his or their former estate these Indentures, or
any, etc. And the said M. T. for him, his Heirs, etc. covenanteth, etc. in
form, etc. that if the said M: his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns shall make
default to pay the said sum of a hundred Marks to the said R.B. his Executors
and Administrators in form aforesaid, that then the said R. B. his Executors
and Assigns for their own use, shall and may lawfully have, hold, and enjoy
the said Tinn work called P: and have take, and enjoy all the said Rights,
Profits, Jurisdictions, Preheminencies, Customs, Liberties, Authorities,
Interests, and Commodities, Tinn and Tinn Ore whatsoever, which the said M. T.
his Heirs or Assigns, can, or may, or ought to have of, for, in, or out of
the said Tinn work, for, by, and during all the said term of five years
without any let, denial, resistance, or interruption of the said M: his Heirs
or Assigns, and without lawful let, etc. of any other person or persons
whatsoever. And also that then further the said R: B: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, shall and may yearly for their own use every
year, during the said term of five years, have, take, gather, levy, and
enjoy of clear yearly profits of the Premises to the sum of twenty pounds
of, etc. beyond and besides all manner of costs, charges, and expenses
whatsoever, without any manner of account thereof, or therefore, or for any
part thereof to be made or given to any person or persons. In witness, etc.

A Lease for a hundred years, defeasible upon payment of a sum of money.
THis Indenture, etc. Between the right honorable H. Earl of H: Lord H. etc.
of the most honorable Order of the Garter, Knight and Lord President of our
Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty's Council established in the North on the
one part, and A. G. and W. D. of L: Aldermen, M. C. of L. Draper, A. S. of L:
Mercer, and T. A. of L. Haberdasher on the other part, Witnesses, That the
said Earl of H: for diverse causes and considerations him especially moving,
has demised, granted, and to Farm letten, and by these presents, etc. unto
the said A. G. etc. all that his Manor and Lordship of A. in the County of S.
with all and singular the appurtenances, and all Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services, Profits, and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Manor
belonging or appertaining, or occupied, used, demised, or leased, as part,
parcel, or member of the same, or reputed, taken, Counted, or known, as any
part, parcel, or member thereof; To have and to hold the said Manor,
Lordship, Lands, Tenements, and other the aforesaid Premises, unto the said A:
G. etc their Executors and Assigns, from the day of the date hereof, for and
during the term of a 100. years, fully to be complete and ended, under the
conditions hereafter in these presents mentioned and declared: And the said
Earl does for him his Heirs Executors and assigns covenant and grant to and
with the said A.G.W.D.M.C.A.S. and T. A. That the said Manor and Lordship of
L. and all other the Premises, at the ensealing and delivery hereof are, and
at all times hereafter, for and during the aforesaid interest for years, shall
be discharged, acacquitted, or otherwise within six months after request
thereof made by the said A.G. etc. or by any of them, or by the Survivor of
them, his or their Executors or assigns unto the said Earl, his Heirs
executors or admin. sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of and from all and
all manner of titles, charges, and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, or done
or to be had, etc. by the said Earl, all Leases not exceeding three lives, or
forty years, and all Copies by Court Roll made by the said Earl of the said
Manor, and other the aforesaid Premises, or of any part thereof excepted and
foreprised. Provided always, that if the said Earl, his Heirs Executors
administrators or assigns, shall within six years after the date hereof, pay
or cause, etc. unto the said A: G: etc. or to any of them, or to the Executors
Administrators or assigns of any of them, at the usual place for receipt of
money in the Royal Exchange in L: the sum of five thousand pounds of lawful,
etc. That then and from thenceforth this present Lease shall cease and be
utterly void: any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And
the said Earl does further covenant and grant for him, etc. to and with the
said A.G. etc. That if the said sum of five thousand pounds, shall not be
paid according to the intent and true meaning of the said Proviso, That then
from and after the default of payment of the said sum of five thousand
pounds, the said A. G. etc. shall or may for and during the said term of a
hundred years, peaceably and quietly have, hold, and enjoy the said Manor and
other the demised Premises, without the let or interruption of the said Earl,
or of his Heirs, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, except before
excepted. And whereas the said A: G: have heretofore at the instance and
request of the said Earl, taken up upon their credit the said sum of five
thousand pounds for the behalf and use of the said Earl: and have also entered
into diverse Bonds for the payment of diverse sums of money for the said Earl.
And whereas also the said A: G: etc. have delivered to the said Earl such
bonds and statutes as the said Earl stood bound to the said A. G: etc. for the
saving of them harmless of and from the same sums of money. Now the said
Earl in consideration thereof, does for him his Heirs and Assigns, covenant,
promise, and grant to and with the said A: etc. That for the better assurance
of the said Manor and other the Premises unto the said A: etc. for and during
the aforesaid term of a hundred years, the said Earl his Heirs and
assigns, and all and every other person and persons that have or hereafter
shall have any estate of in and to the said Manor, Lordship and premises, or
of, in, or to any part or parcel thereof, shall stand and be seized thereof,
and of every part and parcel thereof to the use of the said A: G: etc. and of
their Executors and assigns, under the Condition aforesaid, and according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents, for and during all the said
term of years above mentioned, and for no longer or other time or term. In
witness, etc.

A Lease in reversion of a house in London well passed, with Covenant that if
the Tenant be distrained upon for Rentcharge issuant out of the house, he
shall retain his own Rent for satisfaction.
THis Indenture, etc. Between W: H: Citizen and Clothworker of L: on the one
part, and W. W. Citizen and Clothworker of L* on the other part, Witness. That
whereas W: G: of B: in the County of W: Esquire, by his Indenture of Lease,
dated, etc. has demised, etc. unto A: W: then of L. Widow and now deceased,
her Executors administrators, and assigns, for the term of etc. from, etc.
for and by the payment of the yearly Rent, etc. all that his then Message or
Tenement, with Shops, etc. situate at W: end in the Parish of S.P. in L* as by
the said Indenture of Lease, etc. sithence the time of the granting of which
said Lease, the said W: H: has purchased of the said W: G: the reversion of
the said Message with the appurtenances to him and his Heirs in Feesimple,
without Condition. And sithence that time also the said Message is converted
and divided into two several Tenements and dwelling Houses, and are now in the
several occupations of the said W: W: and of one B: S: of L: Clothworkers. Now
the said W: H: in consideration of the sum of two hundred pounds of lawful,
etc. whereof, etc. has demised, etc. all that corner Tenement with the
appurtenances situate, etc. now being in the proper occupation of the said
W.W. being part of the said Message which was demised to the said A: W: as
abovesaid, in such manner and form as the same is now holden and occupied by
the said W. W. and divided from the residue of the said Message, now in the
occupation of the said B: S: which Tenement or dwelling house, in the Tenure of
the said W: W: mentioned and intended to be demised by these presents, does
contain all these several rooms hereafter expressed; that is to say, one
Celler, etc. to have and to hold the said Tenement or dwelling House with the
appurtenances, above mentioned by these presents to be demised, containing such
several rooms as aforesaid, and all other the Premises by these presents
above demised to the said W: W: his, etc. from the eighth day of Man, which
shall be in the year, etc. (Anquiltemps de lias fait aua' Agnes Whithorne ut
pred. (estant maintenant au propriety ^udit William VVithorne) finist. unto
the end and term of fifty years, etc. yiedling and paying therefore yearly
from thenceforth, during the said term of fifty years to the said W: H: his
heirs or assigns, nine pounds of, etc: at the feast days of, etc. by even
portions, the first payment thereof to begin and to be made in the feast day of
the Nativity, etc. which shall be in the said year of our Lord, etc. And if it
shall happen the said yearly rent of nine pounds, or any part thereof to be
behind and unpaid at any time during the said term of fifty years, by the
space of twenty days next over or after any of the said Feast days, wherein
the same or any part thereof ought to be paid as aforesaid, and no sufficient
and overt distress, can or may be found in or about the said Tenement or
dwelling House with the appurtenances, demised by these presents, which shall
or may be lawfully had and taken away for the said Rent, that then and from
thenceforth it shall be lawful to the Lessor to re-enter, etc. and the Lessee
to expel, etc. these presents, etc. And the said W.W: covenanteth, etc. that
he the said W. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, at his and their own
proper costs and charges, shall and will from time to time, as often as need
shall be, during the said term of fifty years, well and sufficiently repair,
uphold, sustain and maintain all the said Tenement or dwelling House with the
appurtenances, by these presents demised, and every part thereof, in and by all
manner of needful and necessary reparations whatsoever. And also at his and
their like costs and charges, all the pavements as well within the said
Tenement, as without in the Kings high Street to the same Tenement belonging,
and all the Siegs and Widraughts to the said Tenement appertaining; shall cause
to be paved, cleansed, scoured, and made clean from time to time, as often as
need shall be, during the said term of fifty years and all and singular the
Premises in such reparations, being at the end of the said term of fifty
years, shall and will leave and yield up: And the said W: H: covenanteth, etc.
in manner and form, etc. That he the said W: H: his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, or assigns, shall and will from time to time, during the said
term of, etc. clearly and sufficiently keep and save harmless the said
Tenement and Premises by these presents demised, and also the said W: and W:
his Executors and assigns, of and from one yearly rentcharge of thirteen
pounds eight shillings four pence, yearly issuing and going out of the whole
Message aforesaid, as it was demised to the said A. W. as aforesaid, and
payable to the above named W: G. his heirs or assigns for ever. As also of
and for all other Rent-charges, Rents, and Encumbrances whatsoever, at any time
during the said term of, fifty years to be due, issuing and going out of the
said Tenement with the appurtenances, by these presents demised, or any part
thereof (the said yearly rent of nine pounds by these presents, reserved to the
said W: H. his Heirs and assigns always saved and excepted.) And also that
if it happen at any time during the said term of fifty years, the said W. W.
his Executors Administrators or assigns, or any his or their Goods or
Chattells be distrained for the said yearly Rent charge of thirteen pounds
eight shillings four pence, payable to the said W. G. his Heirs or assigns as
aforesaid, or for any part thereof, or for any other Rent charge whatsoever, or
encumbrance to be due issuing or going out of the said Tenement with the
appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof, that then for and in satisfaction
of every such Rent charge or Encumbrance, for which the said W: W: his
Executors or assigns, or any his or their goods or chattels shall be
distrained as is aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful to and for the said W.
VV. his Executors and Assigns, to detain and keep in his and their own hands,
to their own use and behoof, the said yearly rent of nine pounds, by these
presents reserved, or so much thereof as the said Rentcharge so distrained for
shall amount unto, without any damage, penalty, forfeiture, or loss therefore
to be incurred or sustaied by the said VV. VV. his Executors or assigns in any
wise; The said clause or article of distress and condition above mentioned in
these presents, for and concerning the said yearly rent of nine pounds by
these presents reserved, or any other thing abovesaid to the contrary
notwithstanding. And moreover that he the said VV. VV. his Executors
Administrators, and assigns, by and under the payment of the said yearly rent
of nine pounds, according to the true meaning of these presents, and by and
under the performance of other the Covenants, Grants, and Agreements above
expressed, on the part and behalf of the said VV. VV. his Executors and
assigns to be performed, shall or lawfully may by and during all the said
term of fifty years, peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the
said Tenement or dwelling house with the appurtenances, by these presents
demised, without any let, trouble, or interruption of the said VV. H. his
heirs or assigns, or of M: his wife, and without lawful let, trouble,
interruption, expulsion, or eviction of any other person or persons whatsoever:
A Covenant on VV. H. his behalf, that he is absolutely and solely seized in
his demesne as of Feesimple, without condition of the reversion of the said
Message by these presents demised, immediately after the expiration of the
Lease to A: and VV. and that he has full power and authority to lease and
demise the same in manner and form as before: And that for the better
assurance and sure making of the demised Premises to the said VV. VV. his
Executors and assigns, for and during the years aforesaid, under the
Reservation, Covenants, and Conditions aforesaid, the said VV: H: and the said
M: now his wife, and the heirs of the said VV: H: shall and will at any time
after the commencement of the said Lease, during the first two years, next
within the commencement thereof, do such further act or acts, as the said VV.
VV. his Executors or Assigns, shall reasonably devise and require, the same to
be done at the costs and charges in the Law of the said VV. VV. his Executors
or Assigns. In witness, etc.

An under-Lease binding the Tenant to pay the Rent and perform the Covenants
contained in the grand Lease, with liberty to the Lessor to resume the things
letten, if he be so minded.
THis Indenture, etc. between G: B: of L: Gent. on the one part, and VV: M: of
F: in the County of C: Gent. on the other part, witnesses, That where N: S.
Bachelor of Divinity, Master of the College of St. J: Recitation of the former
demise.
the Evangelist, in the University of C: and the Fellows and Scholars of the
same College by their Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc. Have demised,
granted, and to Farm-letten unto the said G: all that their Rectory or
Parsonage of H: in the County of C: aforesaid, with all manner of Tithes,
Oblations, and Commodities to the same belonging (except the Grove or Spring of
Ashes.) And where also the same Master, Fellows, and Scholars, have by their
said deed demised, granted, and to Farm-letten to the said G: B: the Mansion
place of the Parsonage, with all Houses, Barnes Stables Meadows Feedings
Pastures Lands and Tenements, Orchards, Holts, Rents, and Services thereunto
belonging, with all and singular the appurtenances in the Town and Feilds of H:
D: and C. (except before excepted) as fully as P. O. and J: B: lately had the
same; The Habendum of the former dimission.
To have and to hold the said Rectory and other the Premises to the said G.
his Executors and Assigns, from the Feast, etc. unto the full end and term of
twenty years, from thence, etc. yiedling, etc. to the said Master, Fellows,
and Scholars, Reddend.
and their Successors within the said College, the sum of one and twenty
pounds of, etc. at the Feasts of St. Michael, etc. and the Annunciation, etc.
by even portions, as by the said former Deed indented, more plainly and at
large amongst other things therein contained will appear. The said G: B: for
and in consideration of the sum of two hundred and sixty pounds of, etc. The
present dimission.
to him* his Executors or Assigns, to be paid by the said W: M: his Executors
or Assigns, in manner and form hereafter expressed in these presents, has
demised, etc. and by, etc. to the said W: M: ^ll that the said Rectory and
Parsonage of H. with all manner of Tithes Oblations and Commodities thereunto
belonging, and the Mansion place of the said Parsonage, with all Houses Ba^nes
Stables Meadows Feedings Pastures Lands and Tenements, Orchards, Holts, Rents
and Services thereunto belonging, with all and singular the appurtenances, in
the Town and Feilds of H: D: As fully, etc.
and C. (except before excepted) as fully as the same to the said G are demised
by the said former Deed indented above recited. Habend, etc.
To have and to hold the said Rectory and other the Premises to the said W:
his Executors and Assigns, from the Feast of the Annunciation, etc. last, etc.
Reddend. the rent reserved in the former dimission.
by and during all the term of ten years, from thence etc. and fully to be
complete and ended: The said VV: M: his Executors and Assigns, yiedling and
paying therefore yearly during the said term of ten years to the said Master
Fellows and Scholars, and their Successors, the said yearly rent of one and
twenty pounds reserved by their said Indenture of Lease, after the very tenor
and effect of the same Lease. And moreover yiedling and paying to the said G.
Reddend. another rent to the present Demisor.
his Execurors or assigns yearly hereafter and from henceforth the sum of
four and twenty pounds of, etc. in the Feast of St. Michael, etc. and the
annunciation, etc. or within thirty days next after every of the same days by
even portions, at the now Mansion house of F: G: Esquire, situate, etc. until
the said sum of two hundred and sixty pounds shall be fully paid. Covenant
that the Lessee pay the rent and perform the covenants contained in the grand
Lease, and the rent reserved by this Lessor.
And the said W.M. covenanteth, etc. in form, etc. that he the said W.M. his
Executors and Assigns, during the continuance of the Lease to them made of the
Premises by these presents, and according to the intent and true meaning of
the same, shall as well yield and pay the said yearly rent of one and twenty
pounds in manner and form aforesaid, to the said Master Fellows and Scholars,
and their Successors, and do perform and fulfill all and every other Covenants,
Grants, and Articles, thing and things whatsoever, by force of the said former
Indenture of Lease, on the part of the said G: B: and his assigns to be
performed, done or fulfilled; and thereof and of all Bonds concerning the same,
shall save and keep harmless the said G: his Executors and Assigns, during
the continuance of this present Lease, against the said Master, etc. their
Successors and Assigns, as also shall well and truly pay the said yearly sum
of four and twenty pounds to the said G: his Executors and assigns in form
aforesaid, Lessee to yield up the Premises to the Lessor at the end of the
term.
without fraud or co^vin; and that in the end of the said term of ten years,
or other determination of this present Lease, the said W: M. his Executors and
assigns upon reasonable request shall quietly without contradiction or
resistance, leave and yield up all the before demised Premises, to the said G:
B: his Executors or Assigns. The Lessee shall not sue for a new Lease in
reversion.
And that the said VV: M. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, or any
other person or Persons, for or by them or any of them, shall not by any mean
directly or indirectly sue or labor to get or procure any new Lease of the
Premises from the said College in reversion thereof, to prevent or prejudice
the said G. or his Assigns in any wise. Lessee to deliver to the Lessor
acquittances for the rent reserved by the grand Lease.
And further that he the said VV.M. his Executors or Assigns, shall from time
to time during the continuance of this present Lease, within thirty days next
after the said several Feast days of St. Michael, etc. and the Annunciation,
etc. give and deliver to the said G: B: his Executors or Assigns, at the said
Mansion house of the said P.G. such sufficient Acquittance as the said W. or
his Assigns shall or may get or receive of the said Master Fellows and
Scholars, their Successors or Assigns, for the several payments of the said
yearly Rent of one and twenty pounds. Lessee not to alienate, etc.
And moreover that he the said W.M. his Executors or Assigns, shall not at any
time during the said term of ten years, (without the special license and
agreement of the said G. B. his Executors or Assigns, grant, alienate, or
assign the Premises or any part thereof, or his or their said interest or
estate of or in the same Premises, or any part thereof, to any person or
persons, (except only so much thereof, as ly or shall arise in C. aforesaid,
and the arable Glebeland, and that to be letten only to the halves from year
to year, and none otherwise. And the said W.M. covenanteth* etc. The Leassee
to surrender his Lease of the Premises to the Lessor after premonition given
to the Lessee.
That if at any time hereafter during the said ten years, the said G. shall
intend and purpose to dwell in any place within seven miles distance of the
said Rectory, and shall be minded to resume the said Rectory and other the
Premises into his own occupation and use, and thereof shall give premonition
to the said VV.M. his Executors or Assigns, at the said Rectory, in any of the
feast days of S. Michael, or the Annunciation: And thereupon the said G. with
his Family, before the end of two years next after the said premonition given,
shall come and dwell within the said seven miles distance of the same Rectory,
that then in such case the said W: M: his Executors or Assigns, at the end of
the said two years next ensuing, from the day of such premonition given, shall
leave and surrender all the said Rectory and other the Premises into the hands
of the said G: B: if he do require the same. The Lessee shall not be charged
with any rent longer then his enjoyance of the Premises.
Provided always, that the said W: M: his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, shall not be charged with the payment of the said yearly rent of one
and twenty pounds, or the said yearly payment of four and twenty pounds, or
with any other charge toward the said Master Fellows and Scholars, or their
Successors, for any longer time then the said W. his Executors or Assigns shall
or may hold and occupy the said Rectory and other the Premises by virtue of
these presents. Provided also, that if it shall fortune the said W: Forfeiture
in case of nonperformance of Covenants.
M: his executors or assigns to make default of or in performance of any the
Covenants Clauses or Articles aforesaid, on their or any of their parts to be
performed; That then and from thenceforth this present Lease shall cease and
clearly determine, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary
notwithstanding. Covenant for enjoyance.
And the said G: B: covenanteth, etc. That he the said W: his executors and
assigns, according to the intent and true meaning of these presents shall or
lawfully may have, hold, and occupy the said Rectory and all the Premises
during the said term of ten years, without any let, interruption, or eviction
of or by the said G his executors or assigns, at any time contrary to the
purport and true meaning of these presents. In witness, etc.

A Lease to Two in Common.
THis Indenture, etc. Between M: L: Citizen and Clothworker of L.
administrator, of all and singular the Goods and Chattells which late were of
A: I: late of L: Widow deceased, late sole executrix of, etc. her late husband,
etc. on the one part, and R: H. and H.L: two of the ordinary yeomen of his
Majesty's Chamber on the other part; witnesses, That where one T: L: late of
L. Esquire by his Indenture of Lease, bearing date, etc. did demise, etc. to one X:
C; Citizen and Mercer of L: all that parcel of ground called C. late
appertaining to the late priory of H: then dissolved, being in the Parish of
St. L: in the County of M: That is to say, between a parcel of ground there
then in the Tenure of, etc. together with a Fishpond and a Well within the said
ground called the C: with all profits and Commodities to the same belonging, or
in any wise appertaining; to have, etc. for ninety years from Midsomer last,
before the date of the said Indenture of Lease, and for the yearly rent of
forty shillings sterling, as by the said Indenture of Lease, etc. And where the
said X: C: by his Indenture dated, etc, did bargain, sell, assign, and set
over to the said J. J: and his assigns the said Indenture of Lease, and all
his right, etc. which he the said X: C: then had, or ought to have had, of and
in all the said parcel of ground called, etc. with the Well and Pond therein,
and other the Premises with their appurtenances, by virtue of the said
Indenture of Lease, or otherwise: as by the said last recited Indenture more,
etc. all the residue of which term, estate, and interest of which said J: J:
of and in the Premises now to come, the said M: L: by virtue of the
administration aforesaid to him committed, of the Goods and Chattells of the
said A: I: late the wife and sole executrix of the said J: J: deceased, now
lawfully has and enjoys. Now the said M: L. for diverse considerations him
moving, has demised, etc. and by these presents, etc. unto the said R: H: and
H: L: all that parcel of ground as it is now divided, being part of the said
Close called the C. which now is in the Tenure of the said R: H: and which
lies along, etc. and contains, etc. to have, hold, and enjoy the one moiety
of the said parcel of ground so demised and so bounded, or howsoever the same
be bounded, with all and singular the appurtenances thereof in severalty to the
said R. H: his Execut. or assigns, from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangell
next coming, etc. unto the end term of fifty years, etc. and to have and to
hold the other moiety of the said parcel of ground so demised and so bounded,
or however with all and singular the appurtenances in severalty to the said H
L. his, etc. from the Feast of St. Michael, etc. unto the end, etc The said R:
H: his executors and assigns, yiedling and paying yearly during the said
term, for his and their said moiety, to the said M. ^: his executors and
assigns, thirty shillings of, etc. at the Feasts of, etc: or within, etc: And
the said H: L: his executors and assigns yiedling ut supra: And if it shall
happen the said yearly ^nt of thirty shillings so reserved, and to be paid by
the said R: H* his Executors or assigns, or any part thereof, to be behind
unpaid by the said space of, ande. next aftet any of the said Feasts, in the
which it ought to be paid, being lawfully, asked, that then and from
thenceforth it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said M: L. his Executors
and assigns, into the said parcel of ground wholly to re-enter, and the same
to have again, retain, and repossesse, as in his or their former Estate, any
thing, etc. And if it happen the said other yearly Rent of thirty shillings,
etc. that then, etc. ut supra. And the said R: and H. do severally for
themselves, and their several Executors, administrators, and assigns,
covenant, etc. in manner, etc. That they the said R. and H. their Executors,
Administrators, and assigns, at their own proper costs and charges, shall and
will from time to time and at all times, during the said term of fifty years,
well and sufficiently repair, amend and keep in as good case as they now be,
all and singular the Fences, and Enclosures, in and upon their said several
moyeties of the premises now being, and all Houses and Buildings which
hereafter during the same term shall be erected and built, in and upon their
said several moyeties of the said parcel of ground, shall likewise uphold,
sustain, repair, and amend, when and so often as need shall be, during the
said term of fifty years; and all and singular the Premises so being well
and sufficiently repaired and amended in the end of the same term, shall
quietly leave and yield up: And that when and as often as any Stage-plaies or
other shows shall be played and showed within the same parcel of ground
during the said term, That then and so often they the said R. and H. their
Executors, administrators, and assigns, shall permit and suffer the said M. L.
and J. now his wife, and four or less in number, with them or one of them to
enter into the Premises, then and there to have their standing Franck and
free, during such Plays and Shows, without any thing giving therefore. And
the said M. L. covenanteth, etc. That they the said R. and H. their Executors,
administrators, and assigns, and every of them for the yearly Rent above
reserved, and with and under the Covenants, Grants, articles, and agreements
above expressed, shall or may peaceably, quietly, have and enjoy both their
said several moyeties of the said parcel of ground demised by these presents,
for and during all the said term of fifty years, without any let or
interruption of the said M. his Executors Administrators and Assigns, or of
any of them, or of J. now the wife of the said M. or of any of her Assigns, or
of any other person or persons now, or hereafter claiming any estate, right or
title in or to the Premises, or any part thereof, by, from, or under the said
M. L. or the said J. J. or A. his wife, or any of them at any time during the
said term of fifty years. In witness. etc.

Here would be a Covenant that R. H. and H. L. may make any Buildings, etc. and
for that purpose dig and turn up the ground, etc. which otherwise will be
wast, etc.

A very good Lease of a Manor in Reversion.
THis Indenture, etc Between the right honorable W. Viscount H. Lord F. of C.
on the one part, and E. M. servant to the said Viscount on the other part;
witnesses, That where the right honorable H. Recital.
late Earl of E. and Lady M. his wife, by their Indenture of Lease dated, etc.
did demise and let to Farm to one J.E. and his Assigns, all that their Manor
called A. together with a Marsh then called C. Marsh, alias A. Marsh, as it
then was divided and bounded by several marks: And also all Lands Meadows
Feedings Pastures Rents and Services whatsoever, with all and singular their
appurtenances and commodities to the said Manor or Marsh belonging, or in any
wise appertaining (except only all Wards, Marriages, Reliefes, Exception.
Escheats, Felons Goods, Wrecks of the Sea, and Fish Royal happening within
the said Manor or Marsh) To have and to hold the said Manor and Marsh, and
all other Premises except before excepted, from the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel next following the date of the said Indenture, unto the end and term
of fifty years from thence next following, for a certain yearly Rent therefore
reserved to be yearly payable during the said term, as by the said Indenture of
Lease, amongst, etc. Of which said Manor and Premises, Recital of this
Lessors seizure of the reversion in fee.
the said Viscount is now lawfully seized in his demesne as of Feesimple, to
the use of himself and his heirs for ever, and the reversion of the Premises
being immediately expectant in the same Viscount and his heirs, upon the
determination and ending of the said Lease and Estate granted as aforesaid,
Demise.
to the said I: E: Now the said Viscount in consideration of the good and
faithful Service to him heretofore done and bestowed by the said E: M: has
demised, granted, and to Farm-letten, and by, etc unto the said E: M: all that
Capital Message or Mansion house called A: Hall, with the appurtenances, in
the County of E: and all the said Marsh called, etc. with all and singular the
appurtenances; and all and singular Messuages, And all Message, etc.
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leasowes, Pastures, and Hereditaments whatsoever,
which the said Viscount has, or ought to have in A: which heretofore have been
occupied and enjoyed, to and with the said Manor, Place and Farm of A: and
all and singular Messuages, Mills, Houses, Edifices, Barnes, Stables,
Buildings, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Commons, Marshes,
Waters, Streams, Fishings, Ponds, Profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments
whatsoever, with all and singular the appurtenances to the said Mannor-house
belonging or appertaining, or as any parts or parcells of the same known,
Accepted, reputed, etc.

Reversion, etc. Exception of, etc.


accepted, or reputed, or therewith heretofore being usually had, occupied,
letten to farm, or enjoyed; And the Reversion and Reversions of all and
singular the Premises and of every part thereof (except always and
nevertheless reserved out of this present Lease, to the said Viscount, his
heirs and assigns, all and singular Lands Tenements and Hereditaments
hererofore letten by Copy of Court Roll, and the Rents and Services of all
Freeholders to the same Manor belonging, Court Leets, and Perquisits of Courts
Wards, Marriages, Reliefes, Escheats, Felons Goods, VVrecks of the Sea, and
Fishes royal whatsoever, within the said Manor, or any other the Premises:
And except also all Copy-Woods and Springs within the said Manor, and the
Soil of the same Copy-Woods and Springs, and all Woods, Underwoods, and Trees
whatsoever, standing, growing, or being in or upon the Premises, or any part
thereof. To have and to hold the said Mannor-house mess. mills, houses, lands,
tenements, Habendum.
meadows, feedings, fishings, and hereditaments whatsoever, with their
appurtenances, and the said marsh ground called, etc. and all other the
premises by these presents demised and the reversion and reversions of all and
singular the premises except only before by these presents excepted) to the
said E. M. his executors administrators and assigns, immediately from and
after the end and expiration of the said term of fifty years granted, as
abovesaid, to the said I. E. or from any sooner or former determination or
forfeiture thereof to happen unto the end and term of etc. then next following,
and fully to be complete and ended Yiedling and paying therefore yearly,
during the said term of etc. Reddend.
granted in the premises by these presents unto the said Viscount, his heirs
and assigns, seventeen pounds of, etc. in the Feasts of the Annunciation, etc.
and S. Michael, etc. by even portions: The first payment of the same rent to be
made and to begin at such of the same Feasts as shall next ensue and follow
after the time wherein the premises by these presents demised, shall or may by
virtue thereof come to the hands and possession of the said E. his executors or
assigns. And if it shall happen, etc.
And if it hall happen the said yearly rent of seventeen pounds, or any part
thereof to be behind and unpaied on or after any of the said Terms or Feasts
of payments thereof by the space of six weeks, and it being in the mean time
lawfully asked, That then, and at all times after, it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said Viscount, his heirs and assigns into the said
Mannor-house of A. with the appurtenances, and into all and singular other the
Premises by these presents demised, with their appurtenances wholly to
re-enter, and the same to have again, re-tain and repossesse, as in his or
their former Estate. And from thence the said E. his executors, administrators
and assigns, and all other fermors and occupiers thereof wholly to expel, put
out, and amove. These presents, etc. And the said E. M. covenanteth, etc. in
form, etc. That is to say, That ^e the said E. his executors, administrators,
or assigns, Reparation^.
at their own proper charges, shall and will from time to time, during all the
said term, well and sufficiently repair, sustain, maintain and uphold the said
Mannor-house, with the appurtenances and all the houses, edifices and buildings
belonging to the said demised Premises, with the appurtenances, so often as
any need shall require, during the said term of, etc. in and with all manner of
reparations and things which thereunto shall be needful. And also shall and
will, well and sufficiently maintain and keep the said marsh-ground called C.
marsh, and all other the enclosed grounds and pastures belonging to the said
demised Premises, hedged or ditched, and all the sea, walls and bancks of the
same ground sufficiently repaited and maintained in good reparations, so often
as need shall require, during the said term of, etc. And further, that it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said Viscount, View of reparations.
his heirs and assigns, and to his and their surveyors and officer from time
to time during the said term, at two times in every year thereof at their
pleasure, to enter into the said Mannor-house of A. with the appurtenances, and
into all and singular other the Premises, to view and see how the same have
been maintained and repaired. And that if upon any such view, or viewes, it do
forutne that any default or defaults of reparations shall be found needful to
be amended, and monition be then given for the amending thereof to the said
E.M. his executors or assigns, That then, Amendment of defaults within six
months.
and so often he the said E. his executors, or assigns, shall and will, well
and sufficiently repair, re-edifie and amend every such default so to be found
and admonished as aforesaid, within the space of six months next ensuing,
after every such monition. And the said E. M. for him, etc. furthermore
covenanteth, Quitrents.
etc. That he the said E. his executors and assigns, shall from time to time,
at all times during the term of years granted by these presents, at his and
their own charges, bear and pay all manner of Quitrents, Court-rents, and
whatsoever hereafter to be going out or payable of or for the said Manor and
house, and other the said demised Premises, with their appurtenances, or of, or
for any part thereof. And the said Viscount for him, Houseboot, etc.
his heirs, executors and administrators, does covenant, etc. in form, etc.
That is to say, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said E. his
executors, administrators and assigns, to have and take upon the Premises
demised by these presents, Timber for the repairing of the said Mannor-house,
and other the Premises, as need shall require during the said term; and also
to have and to take for fire boot, ploughboot, cartboot, hedgeboot, gateboot
and harrowboot, to be spent and employed in and upon the Premises by these
presents demised, and not elsewhere sufficient wood of the lops and shreds of
the trees, standing and growing in and upon the same Premises, And that so
often, and from time to time when need shall require, during the said term of,
etc. And also that he the said E. his executors, administrators and assigns,
Warranty.
for the payment of the said yearly rent of seventeen pounds, in manner and
form aforesaid, and under the performance of the other covenants and articles
mentioned in these presents, on the part of the said E. to be performed, shall
and may from the end or expiration, or any other sooner determination of the
said former term granted by the Indenture of Lease above mentioned, unto the
said I. E. for and duting all the said term of years granted in the faid
Premises by these presents, lawfully and quietly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy
all the said Message or Mannor-house, called A. with the appurtenances
thereof, and all other the Premises demised by these presents, without any
let, eviction, or molestation of the said Viscount, his heirs or assigns, or
of any other person or persons, claming, in, by, or from them, or any of them,
or by their, or any of their estates or inerests. And the said E. M:
covenanteth, etc. That the said E: his executors, The Tenant to suffer the Lord
keep Court in the Mannor-house.
administrators and assigns, shall at all times, and from time to time during
the said term, permit and suffer the Steward, Surveyor, and Officers of the
said Viscount and his heirs, to enter into the said Mannor-house, and other the
demised Premises, to keep the Courts of the said Viscount and his heirs, as
heretofore has been used and accustomed: And that it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said Viscount, his heirs and assigns at his and their will and
pleasure, to cut, fell, and carry away, in by, and through the said demised
Premises at all times requisite, during the said term the woods in these
presents before excepted, without let, interruption or denial of the said E.
or his assigns. In witness, etc.

A Lease of an house in London, containing a Condition, that if a certain sum
of money (for an Income) be not paid at the times appointed, the Lease shall be
void.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R. T. Citizen and Mercer of London, the one part,
And R. S. Citizen and Armourer, etc. on the other parr, Witnesses, that the
said R. T. has demised, etc. to the said R. S. his executors, and assigns,
all that his Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, called the Helmet,
set, lying and being in C. in the parish, etc. in the city of London, now being
in the several tenures or occupations of the said R. S. and of H. B. and W. K.
And all and singular houses, buildings, yards, cellars, sollers, chambers,
rooms, commodities and easments whatsoever to the said Message and Tenement,
belonging, or appertaining. All which said Message and Tenement, and other the
Premises the said H. B. yet has and holds to him and his assigns, for the
term of four years next following, from the Feast of the Nativity, etc. last
past before the date hereof, of the Demise and Lease to him thereof made by R.
P. of A. in the County of ^. Esquire, by Indenture, bearing date, etc. To have,
hold, Habend.
and enjoy the said Message and Tenement, with the apputrenances, and all and
every other the Premises with their appurtenance to the said Ric. S. his
executors, administrators, and assigns, from the Feast of the Nativity, etc.
which shall be in the year of our Lord God, etc. by and during all the whole
term of one and twenty years, from thence next, Reddend.
etc. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, by and during all the said term of
one and twenty years, unto the said R. T. and to his heirs and assigns at the
now mansion house of the said R. T. situate in F. Lane in London, ten pounds
of, etc. in the Feast days of S. Michael, etc. or within thirty days next
ensuing every of the same Feast-daies by even portions. And if it happen, etc.
And if it happen the said yearly rent of ten pounds or any part or parcel
thereof to be behind and not paid at the place of payment before limited, by
the space of thirty days next after any of the said Feast-daies wherein it
ought to be paid, as aforesaid, That then, and at any time after, it shall and
may be lawful, to and for the said R. T. his heirs and assigns, into the
said Message and Tenement, and other the Premises, with their appurtenances
wholly to re-enter, And the fame (as in their former estate) to have again,
retain, and re-possesse, And the said R. S. his executors, adminst, and
assigns, and all others, whatsoever they be, therefrom utterly to expel and
amove. Reparations.
These presents, etc. And the said Ric. S. for him his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, Covenanteth and grants, to and with the said R.
T. his Heirs, Executors administrators, and assigns, and every of them by
these presents, That he the said Ric. his Executors, administ, and Assigns, at
his and their own costs and charges, all the aforesaid Message and Tenement,
and all other the Premises, with their appurtanances in all things, and by all
things well and sufficiently shall repair, sustain, and maintain, and as often
as need shall be, new make, and re-edifie by and during all the said term: And
also at the like costs and charges of the said Ric. his Executors and Assigns,
all the pavements, as well of the said Message as in the street before the
same, and all the sincks and singes, gutters and widraughts to the said
Message belonging, well and sufficiently from time to time, shall cause to be
paved, purged, made clean and emptied, as often as need shall be, during the
term aforesaid, And all and singular the Premises well and sufficiently
repaired, shall leave and yield up in the end or other determination of the
said term: And further, that it shall be lawful, to and for the said R.T. his
Heirs and Assigns, two times in every year, during the said term, to enter and
come into the said Message and Tenement, and other the Premises, and every
part thereof, to view and see how the same be repaired. And that the said Ric.
S. his Executors, Adminstrators or Assigns, from time to time, during the said
term, shall and will repair and amend, every default there upon such view
found, which shall be needful to be amended, within the space of six months
next after admonition and knowledge thereof to any then inhabiting there, given
at the taking of any such view as aforesaid. And moreover, that he the said
Ric. S. shall yearly, during the said term, bear and pay at their own costs
and charges, not only one yearly Quitrent of thirteen shillings, yearly going
out of the Premises, but also all tasks, tallages, and fifteens, tithes, and
other duties therefore to be paid; And thereof shall acquit and discharge the
said R. T. his Heirs and Assigns during the said term: And the said R. T. for
him, etc. Covenanteth, etc. That he the said Ric. his Executors and Assigns,
shall or may lawfully, have, hold, occupy and enjoy all and singular the said
Message and Tenement, and all and every other the Premises, with their
appurtenances, from and after the said Feast of the Nativity, etc. in the said
year of our Lord God, etc. by, and during all the said term of twenty one years
from thence next following, and fully to be complete, under and according to
the paiments, Conditions, Covenants, and articles in these presents specified
on the part of the said R. his executors, administ. and assigns, well and
truly to be fulfilled and kept, without any let, disturbance, or interruption
of the said R. T. his heirs or assigns; And without any lawful let*
disturbance, or interruption of any other person or persons, which have or
shall have any lawful estate, right, title, or interest in or to the said
Message or Tenement, and other the Premises, or in or to any part or parcel
thereof. For which Lease, Covenants and Grants above specified, on the part of
the said R. T. made and granted to and with the said Ric. S. in form aforesaid,
the said R. S. for him, his heirs, executors and administrators, covenanteth,
grants, and agrees by these presents, to and with the said R. T. his
executors and assigns, That he the said Ric. his executors, adminstrators or
assigns, shall and will truly content and pay, or cause, etc. to the said R.
T. his executors, or adminstrators, the sum of two hundred pounds of, etc. in
manner and form following; That is to say, fifty pounds thereof in hand at the
ensealing of these presents, whereof the said R. T. does acknowledge himself
paid. And of these fifty pounds, does clearly acquit the said Ric. his heirs,
executors, and administrators by these presents; And other fifty pounds thereof
at the Feast, etc. And, etc. And the other twenty five pounds residue and in
full payment of the said sum of two hundred pounds, on, etc. All and every
which said several five payments yet unpaid, are to be paid at the said
Message called the Helmet, without the great door thereof, opening into C.
between the hours, etc. in the afternoon, of every of the said several
Feast-daies for the said several payments above limited and appointed.
Provided always, Proviso.
and it is agreed* granted and concluded, by and between the said parties, to
these presents, for themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns, That if the said R. S. his executors, administrators and assigns do
make default, and do not pay, or cause to be paid, all and every the said five
last payments abovesaid, amounting to the sum of one hundred and fifty
pounds, and every part of every the same payments unto the said R. T. his
executors or adminstrators, or to his or their lawful Attorney at the place
and Feast-daies, and between the hours above in these presents limited, or
otherwise to the said R. T. his Executors or assigns, at some other time and
place; That then and so soon as any such default shall be made in payment of
any of the said five payments, or any part of any of them: these presents and
the Lease and interest thereby made and granted of the said Message and other
the Premises to the said R: S: his Executors administrators and assigns,
shall cease, determine, and be utterly void and frustrate of all intents and
purposes, as though the same had never been had or made: And that then and at
all times from and after every such default made, it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said R: T: his heirs and assigns, into the said Message and
Tenement, and into all and every other the Premises with their appurtenances
wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, as in the former estate of the
said R. and of his Heirs, and all Occupyers thereof, from thence clearly to
expel and amove these presents, etc. In witness, etc. Pass Consultor.

A Lease depending upon a Bargain and Sale, with Condition not to let or set.
THis Indenture, This Lease depends upon a bargain and sale, entitled a
bargain and sale of land, where notwithstanding it is provided that if the
Vendor pay to the Vendee a certain sum of money within ten years, and a rent
for the premises yearly, for that he shall occupy the same, the sale shall be
void.
etc. Between A: R: etc. on the one part, and J: K: etc. and A: his wife on the
other part, witnesses, That the said A: R: has demised, etc. to the said J:
K: and A: his wife all that Message with the appurtenances in N: aforesaid,
called the Whitehart, and all and singular other Messuages Lands Tenements,
Rents, Reversions and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their appurtenances,
situate, lying, and being in N: aforesaid and C: in the County of N: which the
said J. by a former pair of Indentures, bearing date, etc. now last past made,
and interchangably sealed and delivered between the said I.K. on the one part,
and the said A: R: on the other part, has bargained and sold to the said A:
and his Heirs forever, in manner and form, as by the same former Indentures
will appear; To have and to hold all the said Message, and all other the
premises with the appurtenances, to the said J: and A. and to their Executors
Administrators and Assigns from henceforth, until the feast of Christmas next
coming, etc. and from thence by and during the term of one and twenty years,
from thence, etc. and fully, etc. yiedling and paying therefore yearly during
the said term, unto the said A: R. his Heirs or Assigns, at the said Message
called the Whitehart forty pounds of, etc. at the Feasts of the Annunciation,
etc, and Saint Michael, etc. Christmas, etc. or within one and twenty days,
etc. by even portions: And the said J.K. for himself, and the said A: his wife,
and for their Executors Administrators and Assigns, and every of them
covenanteth, etc. that he the said J: K: and A: his wife, and their Executors
Administrators and Assigns, shall at their own costs and charges from time to
time and at all times during the said term of, etc. maintain, sustain, uphold,
and defend all and singular the said Message and other the premises, in and
with all and all manner of reparations which thereunto at any time during the
said term shall be needful; and the fame so sufficiently repaired in all
things at the end of the same term, or any other ceasing or determination
thereof shall so leave and yield up. Provided always, Proviso.
that if the said I. K. and A: his wife, or their Executors administrators or
assigns at any time during the said term, do alien, let, set, demise, or
grant to Farm, or otherwise do put away or suffer to be recovered against them
or any of them the said Message with the appurtenances called, etc. or any
part thereof, or do demise, grant, alien, or let to Farm any other the said
Message with their appurtenances and other the premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, or their interest or term of years aforesaid, or any part
thereof, to any person or persons without the specciall consent and agreement
of the said A: or of his Heirs or assigns, first thereunto had in writing
under his Seal: That then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to
A: R: to re-enter, etc. In witness, etc.

A Lease by a Bishop for three lives, with Letter of Attorney to deliver
possession.
THis Indenture, between the right Reverend Father in God E: by the providence
of God Bishop of L: on the one part, and R: W: Citizen and R: of L: and K: his
wife, and R: W: the younger son of the said R: W. S: on the other part;
witnesses, That the said Reverend Father in God, for and in consideration of a
surrender to him made by the said R: W: S: of a former Lease which the same R:
W. had and enjoyed for certain years yet not expired, of the Tenement
hereafter in these presents granted, and for diverse other considerations him
the said Reverend Father thereunto especially moving, has demised, etc. and by
these presents for him and his Successors, does demise, grant, and to Farm let
unto the said R: VV: S K. his wife, and R. VV. the younger, all that his
Tenement, with Shops, Cellars, Sollers, and all other the appurtenances
whatsoever, to the said Tenement belonging or in any wise appertaining, set,
lying and being within P: Churchyard in the Parish of St. F. beside the
Cathedral Church of St. P. in L. within the Franchises and Liberties of the
said Reverend Father now Bishop of L. abutting upon, etc. To have and to hold
the said Tenement, with Shops, Cellars, Sollars, and all other the Premises,
with all and singular their appurtenances to the said R: W: S. K. his wife, and
R VV. the younger successively, and to their assigns, for and during the
natural lives of the same R. W. S. K. his wife, and R: W: the younger, and the
life of the longest liver of them, yiedling and paying therefore yearly,
during this present Lease, and grant unto the said Reverend Father and his
successors, or to his or their assigns (the Sea of the Cathedral Church of
St. P. in L: aforesaid, being full) and to the Dean and Chapter of the same
Church, their Officers or Ministers (the said See being void) three and fifty
shillings and four pence of lawful, etc. at four usual terms or feasts of
the year, that is to say, at the feasts etc. by even portions: And if it
happen the said yearly rent of three and fifty shillings four pence, to be
behind unpaid in part or in all, by the space of forty days next after any
Feast or day of payment thereof aforesaid, in which it ought to be paid, if it
be lawfully asked, that then, or at any time after it shall be lawful to and
for the said Reverend Father and his successors and assigns, (the Sea aforesaid
being full) and to the said Dean and Chapter, their Officers and Ministers (the
said See being void) into the said Tenement, with all and singular the
appurtenances wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain, and
repossess, as in their former estate. And the said R: VV. S. K: his wife, and
R: W: the younger, and their assigns, and every of them from thence clearly to
expel, put out, and amove, this present Lease, or any thing therein contained
to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And the said R: W: S: K:
his wife, and R: W: the younger, for them and their assigns, and every of them
do covenant and grant, to and with the said Reverend Father and his successors
by these presents, that they the said R: K: and R: and their assigns, or some
one of them at their own proper costs and charges, the said Tenement, in and by
all things well and sufficiently shall repair, sustain, support, and maintain
as often and when as need shall require during the said term; And all the
Privies or Widraughts to the Premises belonging, shall cause to be purged,
scoured, and made clean: And all the Pavements as well within the said Tenement
as without in the Street, to the same Tenement belonging, shall pave, repair,
and amend, or cause etc. from time to time, as often and when as need shall
require during the said Lease. And the said Reverend Father for him and his
successors covenanteth and grants to and with the said R: K: and R. and their
assigns, and every of them by these presents, That they the said R. K. and R.
and every of them for the yearly rent abovesaid, shall and may peaceably and
quietly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy all the said Tenement and other the
premises with the appurtenances, by and during the natural lives of the said
R: K: and R. and during the natural life of the longer liver of them, in
manner and form aforesaid, without let, denial, or interruption of the said
Reverend Father or his successors. To all which Covenants Articles and
Agreements on the parts of the said R: K: and R: and their assigns, well and
truly to be observed, performed, and kept, in manner and form before
rehearsed. The said R: W: S: binds himself, his Executors, and assigns, unto
the the said Reverend Father and his successors, in the sum of forty pounds
sterling by one Obligation, bearing the date of these presents. And moreover
the said Reverend Father has made, ordained, and put in his place, and by
these presents does make, etc. his well beloved servant S: H: his true and
lawful Attorney, for him and in his name to enter into the said Tenement with
the appurtenances, or into some part thereof in the name of the whole, and
possession and seisin thereof, or of some part thereof in the name of the whole
for him the said Reverend Father and in his name to take, and after such
possession so taken and had thereof, to deliver unto the said R: W: S: K: his
wife, and R: W: the younger, or to some one of them, in the name of them all,
according to the form and effect of these presents, holding firm and stable,
all that and whatsoever his said Attorney shall do or cause to be done, in or
about the premises, or any part or parcel thereof: In witness whereof to the
one part of these Indentures remaining toward the said R: K: and R: the said
reverend Father in God has set his seal: and to the other part, etc.

The possession and seisin of the Message or Tenement within demised with the
appurtenances on the second day of March, in the year within written, was
taken and had quietly by the within named S: H: the Attorney within named, and
by him was then lawfully and quietly delivered for and in the name of the
reverend Father the Bishop of L: within mentioned, to the within named R: W: S:
in the name of him the same R: W: and of the within said K: his wife, and R.W.
the younger, according to the form and effect of this present Indenture, in
the presence of these persons whose names are hereunto subscribed; Viz.

K. Wife of the said R. W. S. and R.W. the younger being deceased, and R. W. S.
being sole seized for term of his life, of the Tenement aforementioned,
surrendreth the same to the Bishop (by Deed enrolled in the Chancery) who in
consideration of such surrender demiseth the Premises to the said R. W. for
one and twenty years, from the date of the Lease, for the like Rent, and under
such Covenants as are comprised in the Lease aforesaid.
A Habend. in a Lease for three lives.
TO have and to hold, etc. to the said E: D: and Eliz. Habend to two, and the
rem^inder to a^ third.
his Wife, from the making of these presents, for and during the natural lives
of the said E: and Eliz: and for and during the natural life of the longer
liver of them, and after the deceases of the said E. and Eliz. the remainder
thereof to the said J. D. for and during his natural life, yiedling, etc.
during the natural lives of the said E. Eliz. and J. and the life of the
longest of them, to the said W: N. and B. N. etc.

A very good Lease of a House in London, where the Lord is bound by special
Covenant to maintain the Principal.
THis Indenture, etc. Between F. H. Citizen and Goldsmith of L. on the one
part, and I. B. Citizen and Goldsmith of the same City, on the other part,
witnesses, that the said F: H. has demised, granted, betaken, and to Farm
letten, and by, etc. does, etc. unto the said I.B. all that Message or
Tenement with the appurtenances, situate, standing and being in W. of L. in
the Parish of, etc. now in the proper occupation of the said F. and all that
Shop and Cellar, and all and singular Sollers Commodites and Easements to the
said Message or Tenement now belonging or appertaining, and therewith by the
said F. now had, used, and occupied, together with such Implements as are
mentioned in a Schedule hereunto annexed (except and always reserved out of
the Lease and Demise aforesaid, that Shop, etc. now in the occupation of N: M:
Goldsmith, and all those two Shops, etc. now in the occupations of W: G:
Girdler, and E: H: Cutler) To have and to hold all the said Message and
Tenement, Shops, Cellar, Sollers, Commodities, Implements, and Easements
aforesaid (except only before excepted) to the said I: E: his Executors
Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus, next following after the date of these presents, for, by, and during all
the term of one and twenty years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended, yiedling and paying therefore yearly, by and during all
the said term of one and twenty years, to the said F: H: his Heirs and
Assigns, six pounds thirteen shillings four pence, of, etc. in the Feasts of,
etc. or within the space of thirty days next after every of the same Feast
days yearly, by equal and even portions. And if it shall happen the said
yearly rent of, etc. or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid by the said
space of thirty days, over or after any of the said Feast days of payment
aforesaid (being in the mean time lawfully asked) that then and from
thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for the said F: H: his Heirs
and Assigns, into the said Message or Tenement and other the Premises above
demised, with their appurtenances wholly to re-enter, and the same to have
again, retian, and repossess, as in his or their former estate, any thing above
mentioned to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And the said I:
B: for him his Executors administrators and assigns, and for every of them,
does covenant and grant to and with the said F: H: his Heirs Executors
administrators and assigns, and every of them by these presents, in manner and
form following; That is to say, That he the said I: B: his Executors*
administrators and assigns, at his and their own costs and charges, shall from
time to time and at all times during the said term, as often and whenas need
shall require, or within the time and space of three months, next after every
monition or warning in writing given to the said I: B: his Executors or
Assigns, as is hereafter limited in these presents, well and sufficiently
maintain, sustain, and keep the said Message and all other the demised
Premises (except only before excepted) in and with all manner of necessary
reparations, as tiling, lathing, longing, plastering, boording, flooring,
walling, lead-work, glassing, paving, as well within, as in the street without,
Brick-work, Stone-work, Stairs, and such other like, and the Privies and
Widraughts in the said Message, shall do to be cleansed and emptied, as often
as shall be needful during the said term (except always all great Timber and
Principals, and the Workmanship thereof, which from time to time shall be
prepared, wrought, and set up by the said F: H. his heirs, executors, or
assigns, at his and their own costs and charges, as often as need shall be
during the said term.) And also that it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said F: H: his Heirs or assigns, with two or three Workmen with him or them
yearly, at four several times during the said term, upon reasonable request
and Premonition to be made and given at the said Message, to enter into the
same Message, and other the demised Premises, to view and survey the estate
of the reparations thereof: and that if upon any such view and survey there
shall be found any default or defaults of reparations, or lack of amendment of
any thing in the demised Premises, or any part thereof, which by the said I:
his executors administrators or assigns, ought to be made, amended, repaired,
or kept as aforesaid, and warning given and left in writing, at the said
Message, for the making, amending, or repairing thereof, that then the said I:
B: his executors administrators and assigns, at their own costs and charges
shall and will well and sufficiently make, repair, and amend all and every the
said default and defaults within the space of 3. months from time to time, next
after such warning thereof to be given and left in writing as aforesaid: And
that at the end of the said term, the said I: his Executors or Assigns shall
leave and yield up all the Implements aforesaid, in the said Message, in as
good case as they now are (reasonable wearing only except:) And that if the
said I: his Executors Administrators or assigns, at any time during the said
term shall be sued for the occupation of the Premises, or any part thereof,
that then the said I: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, with such
expedition as they reasonably may, shall thereof give notice to the said F: his
Heirs or Assigns.

And the said F. H. for him, his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns,
and every of them, does covenant and grant to and with the said J. B. his
executors, and assigns, and every of them, by these presents, in manner and
form following, That is to say, That he the said F. his heirs, executors and
assigns, shall as well keep harmless the demised Premises, of all former
Leases, Grants, and Encumbrances, made by the said F. as also shall bear and
pay all and all manner of chief rents and rent-charges, which during the said
term shall be due, issuing or going out of the Premises, or any part thereof
(The yearly rent before reserved by these presents, the Parsons tithe, Clerks
wages, Church duties, watch and ward, and such like, always excepted) And also
at their own costs and charges, shall keep, maintain, uphold and re-edifie as
need shall be, all the great Timber and Principals of the said Message and
Tenement, from time to time, during the said term: And also that he the said
J.B. his executors and assigns for the said yearly rent in form aforesaid to
be paid, and under the other Covenants, grants, articles, conditions and
agreements in these presents contained and expressed, to be kept and perfomed
for or on the part and behalf of the said J. his exec. adm and assigns, shall,
or lawfully may have, hold, occupy and enjoy all the said Message and
Tenement, and all other the Premises, with their appurenances (except before
excepted) by and during the said term of one and twenty years, without any let,
disturbance, or interruption of the said F. H. his heirs, executors or
assigns, or of any other by his or their means, assent, title, or procurement,
and without any lawful let, vexation, molestation or eviction of any other
person or persons, having, or which shall have any former lawful estate,
title, or interest, in or to the said Message, and other the above demised
Premisse, or any part thereof; For, and in consideration of which said Lease,
demise covenants and agreements, so as aforesaid made by the said F. H. to and
with the said J. B. the same J. has not only paid beforehand to the said F*
forty pounds of lawful, etc. and is also become bound by his Deed obligatory
of the date of these presents, to pay to the said F. his certain Attorney,
executors, or adminstrators, the sum of one hundred pounds of like money, on
the twenty third day of December next coming; But also has agreed, to content
and pay moreover to the said F. his certain Attorney, executors or
administrator, the sum of three hundred pounds of, etc. at the Church door of
Saint P. in W. of L. opening into the W. aforesaid, in manner and form
following; That is to say, one hundred pounds thereof on the twenty third day
of December, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, etc. and one other
hundred pounds thereof on the twenty third day of December, which shall be,
etc. and one hundred pounds thereof on the twenty third day of, etc. which
shall be, etc. in full payment of the said three hundred pounds. Provided
always, that if it shall happen the said sum of three hundred pounds, or any
part or parcel thereof to be behind and unpaid at any of the days of payment
thereof, or of any part thereof aforesaid, That then, and at all times
hereafter, it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said F. H. his heirs
and assigns, into the said Message, and all other the above demised Premises
wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, and re-possesse as in his or
their former estate; And the said J. B. his executors, administators and
assigns, and every of them from thence to expel, amove, and put ou^, These
presents, or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding; And
the said F. H. covenanteth, etc. That at and upon payment made of the said
sum of three hundred pounds, or any part thereof unto the said F. H. his
certain Attorney, executors, or administrators, according to the tenure and
effect of these presents, he the said F. his executors, or adminstrators, upon
reasonable request, shall, and will sign, seal, and deliver to the said J. B.
his executors, administrators, or assigns, such reasonable acquittance from
time to time, testifying the several payments of every part of the same three
hundred pounds, as the same shall be made, in form as aforesaid, as in that
behalf shall be reasonably devised and required by the said J. B. his executors
or assigns, without any delay, fraud or covin: In witness, etc. A Bond of one
hundred marks for keeping the reparations on J.B. his part to be kept.

A Lease for a thousand years, without impeachment of waste, containing diverse
good Covenants.
THis Indenture, etc. Between T. H. of B. in the County of B. Gent. on the one
part, And T. R. of C. in the County of C. Esquire on the other part, Witnesses
that the said Tho. H. as well for and in consideration of the sum of eight
hundred pounds, of lawful, etc. Whereof, etc. As also for diverse other good
causes and considerations, Has demised, granted, and to farm letten, And by
these presents, etc. all that the Manor of B. with the appurtenances in the
said County of B. And the Mansion house and Demesnes of the said Manor; and
all and singular other the houses, edifices, barns, stables, dove-houses,
buildings, lands, tenements, meadows, leasows, pastures, commons, woods,
underwoods, rents, reversions, services, and hereditaments whatsoever, with
their appurtenances to the said Manor, Mansion House and demesnes, or any of
them, or to any part thereof belonging or appertaining, or acepted, reputed,
taken, known, occupied or enjoyed; as any part, parcel, or member of the said
Manor, Mansion House demesns, other the Premises, or of any part or parcel
thereof: And all and singular Messuages, manors, lands, tenem. and
hereditaments of the said Tho. H. in the said County of B. All which Premises
lately were parcel of the Possession of W.H. Esquire deceased. And the
reversion and reversions of all and singular the Premises with their
appurtenances; And the rents and profits thereof, To have and to hold the said
Manor of B. and the Mansion house and demesne of the same Manor, and all and
singular other the Premises with their appurtences unto the said T.R. his
executors, administrators and assigns, from, etc next, etc. unto the end and
term of one thousand years from thence next following, and fully to be complete
and ended without impeachment of any manner of waste; And the said Tho. H.
covennanteth, etc. in form, etc. That the said T. H. in his own right, and to
his own use now is and stands sole seized in his demesne as of fee simple, of
and in the said Manor of B. with the appurtenances, and of all and singular
other the Premises, with their appurtenances above mentioned to be demised;
And that he the said T. H. has lawful right, title, and authority, to lease,
demise, and grant all and every the said Manor, and other the Premises to the
said T.R. his executors and assigns in manner and form aforesaid, for and
during the term of years aforesaid. And also that the said Manor, Message,
lands, tenements, rents, reversions and hereditaments, and all other the
Premises, with their appurtenances, by these presents, mentioned to be
demised, now are, and at all times during the said term of a thousand years,
shall be and continue unto the said T. R. his executors, administrators, and
assigns, clearly exonerated, acquitted and discharged, or otherwise
sufficiently saved and kept harmless by the said T. H. his heirs, executors,
administrators, or some of them, of and from all manner of former bargains,
gift, grants, leases, estates, rents, charges, rents-seck, arrerages of rents,
fines, statutes, merchant and of the staple, recognisances, judgments,
executions, dowers, joyntures, titles, charges, and encumbrances whatsoever,
had, made, done, caused or knowledged by the said Tho. H. or by the said W. H.
or by either of them, or by any other person or persons, having, or which shall
have, or lawfully claim to have any former estate, right, title, or interest,
of, in, or to the Premises, or any part thereof, by from, or under the estate
or title of the said Tho. H. or of the said W. H. or any of the ancestors of
the same W. The old accustomed rents and services thereof hereafter, during the
said term to grow due to be paid and done to the chief Lord or Lords of the fee
or fees of the same, or any part thereof, and all yearly rents and payments not
exceeding in the whole the sum of fifty pounds of, etc. issuing or going
forth of the Premises, or any part thereof, whereof forty pounds yearly is to
be paid to E. W. widow, late wife of the said W. H. only for, and during the
term of the natural life of the said E. and no longer; only except and
foreprised: And also the said Tho. H. covenanteth, etc. That the said T. R. his
executors, administrators and assigns, shall, or lawfully may, by and during
all the said term of a thousand years, have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said
Manor, Message, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, and all and every other
the Premises, with their appurtenances, and the rents, issues and profits
thereof to his and their own use, perceive, receive, and take, without any let,
trouble, or interruption of the said T. H. his heirs, executors,
administrators or assigns, and without any lawful let, trouble, interruption,
expulsion, eviction, or recovery of any person or persons whatsoever (except
before excepted) And further, that he the said Tho. H. and his heirs, and all
and every other person and persons whatsoever, having, or lawfully claiming, or
which shall have, or lawfully claim, to have any former estate, right, title
or interest, of, in, or to, the Premises, or any part thereof by or from the
said Tho. H. at all times, from time to time during five years now next coming,
at and upon the reasonable request, and costs and charges in the law only of
the said T. R. his executors, administrators or assigns, shall and will, do,
make, knowledge and suffer, and cause to be, etc. all and every such lawful
and reasonable, acts and things in the law, for the further and better
assurance of the said Manor of B. with the appurtenances, and other the
Premises with their appurtenances to be assured to the said T. R. his
executors and assigns, for and during the said term of a thousand years without
impeachment of any waste, as aforesaid, as by the said T.R. his executors,
administrators, or assigns, or his, or their council learned in the Laws of
this Realm, shall be lawfully and reasonably devised or advised: And also that
the said Manor and the Premises abovementioned, to be demised by these
presents, now are, and during the natural life of the said E.H. shall be, or
lawfully may be and continue to the said T. R. his executors, administratorts,
and assigns, of the clear yearly rent and profit of eighty pounds of, etc.
above all reprises; And from and after the decease of the said E. for, and
during the residue of all the said term of one thousand years, then to be to
come of the clear yearly value of one hundred and twenty pounds of, etc. beyond
all charges and reprises whatsoever. In witness, etc.

A very good Lease of an Inn by a Company in London.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R. P. and G. H. Wardens of the art or mystery of
Salters of the city of London, and the assistants and commonalty of the same
mystery on the one part; And W. H. of London aforesaid Inholder, on the other
part, Witnesses, That the said Wardens, Assistants and Commonalty of one
assent and consent, for them and their successors, for good and reasonable
causes them moving, Have demised, granted, and to farm letten, And by these
presents, etc. unto the said W: H. all that their great Message or Inn,
called and known by the sign of the George in B. street of London, with all
shops, cellars, sollers, warehouse, chambers, stables, easments, rooms, yards,
and implements to the same Message or Inn belonging or appertaining, late in
the tenure or occupation of I. A. Inneholder, and sithence in the tenure or
occupation of E. D. Innholder, lying and being in or near B. street aforesaid,
in the parish of A. in L. aforesaid, To have and to hold the said great
Massuage or Inn, and all other the Premises, with their appurtenances, to the
said W. H. his executors, administrators and assigns, in as large and ample
manner and form as the said J. A. and E. D. or either of them or their assigns
had or held the same, and nor otherwise, from the Feast or the Nativity of S.
John Baptist, now next coming, by and during all the term of twenty one years,
from thence, etc. Yiedling and ^ paying therefore yearly during the said term,
to the said Warden and Communalty, and to their successors and assigns, or to
their rent gatherer for the time being, sixteen pounds of, etc. at the Feasts
of, etc. by even portions, And the said W. H. for him, his executors,
administrators, and assigns, does covenant, and grant, to and with the said
Wardens and communalty, and their successors by these presents, in manner, etc.
That he the said W. H* his executors, and assigns, at his and their own proper
costs and charges, the said Message or Inn, and all and every other the
Premises, with their appurtenances, in all manner of reparations whatsoever
they be, well and sufficiently shall repair, sustain, support and maintain,
when, and as often as need shall be, during the said term: And also that the
said W.H. his executors and assigns, at his and their like costs and charges,
all the pavements, appendicts, widraughts, and s^^ges to the said Message or
Inn appertaining or belonging, well and sufficiently shall make, keep, cleanse,
and make clean from time to time, when, and as often as need shall require*
during the said term, And at the end of the same term all the Premises, so
well and sufficiently made, maintained, repaired, paved, cleansed and amended,
shall leave and yield up. And also that it shall be lawful to and for the said
Wardens and commonalty, their successors and assigns, with their workmen, into
the said Message or Inn, and all other the Premises, twice in every year
yearly, during the said term, or oftener, at their pleasures, to enter, and
there to view, search, and oversee the estate of the reparations thereof; And
all decays and defaults in the same to be found; And that he the said W. H.
his executors, administrators and assigns, from time to time, within the space
of three months next after any such decay or default in reparation of the
Premises, or any part thereof found, and warning thereof given at the Message
or Inn aforesaid, shall and will, well and sufficiently amend and repair all
and every the said defaults and leakes of reparations at the proper costs and
charges of the said W.H. his executors, administrators and assigns, in all
manner of things whatsoever, which shall be needful; And further the said W.
H. covenanteth, etc. That he said VV. H. his executors, administrators or
assigns, or any of them at any time or times during the said term, shall not
alien, let, set, give, grant, bargain, sell or mortage, or otherwise do away,
or suffer to be recovered, alienated, altered, or changed his or their estate,
right, title, interest, or term of years, or any part thertof, in, or t^^ he
Premises, or any part thereof, to any person or persons, or bo^^y ^olitique or
corporate, by any manner of means, way, or device whatsoever: And also that he
the said VV.H. his executors, administrators or assigns, during the said term,
shall not cut, or alter any principal, or principalls, or great timber of the
new frame of the said Message or Inn, nor shall convert or employ the said
Message or Inn, and other the Premises, or any part thereof, to any other
use then only an Inn, as the same is now occupied and used, except it be by
the consent and agreement of the said Watdens communalty, or their successors,
first thereunto had and obtained in writing; Provided always, that if it shall
happen the said yearly rent of sixteen pounds, or any part thereof, to be
behind and unpaid by the space of six weeks after any of the days of the
Feasts aforesaid, wherein the same, or any part thereof ought to be paid, as
aforesaid, it being in the mean time lawfully asked: Or, if the said VV. H. his
executors, administrators or assigns, or any of them, at any time or times,
during the said term, do alien, let, set, give or grant, bargain, sell or
mortgage, or otherwise do away, or do suffer, or cause his or their said
estate, right, title, interest, or term of years, or any part thereof to be
forfeited, recovered, aliened, altered, or changed from him or them, or any of
them to any other person or persons, body politic or corporate, by any means,
way, or device, by reason of any debt, owing or to be owing, trespass,
offense, or fault committed, or to be committed by the said VV. H. his
executors, administrators or assigns; Or if any of the principal or
principalls, or great timber of the said new frame, shall at any time during
the said term, be cut, or altered, or the said Message or Inn, with the
appurtenances, or any part thereof converted or employed to any other use, then
only an Inn, as the same is now occupied and used, except it be by consent
and agreement of the said Wardens and communalty, or their successors, first
thereunto had and obtained in writing, That then, and at all times from
thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Wardens and
communalty their successors, and assigns, or any of them, into the said
Message or Inn, and all and every other the Premises, with their
appurtenance, wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again and re-possesse as
in their former estate; And the said VV. his executors, administrators and
assigns, and all other persons from thence clearly to expel and put out;
These presents, etc. And the said Wardens and communalty, for them, their
successors and assigns, do covenant, etc. That they the said Wardens and
communalty, their successors and assigns, at their own costs and charges,
shall bear and pay, or otherwise discharge all Quitrents which shall be due to
be paid for or out of the Premises, during the said term: And also that he the
said W. H. his executors, administrators, and assigns, for the foresaid yearly
rent of sixteen pounds in form aforesaid, yearly to be paid, and under and
according to the other covenants, grants, articles, charges, provisoes,
conditions, and agreements aforesaid, for and on the behalf of the said VV. his
executors and assigns, to be kept and performed, shall, or may lawfully and
quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said, etc. and all other the
Premises, with their appurtenances, by and during all the said term, etc.
without any let, trouble, or interruption of the said, etc. and without any
lawful let, interruption or expulsion of any person or persons whatsoever, by
the means, title or procurement of the same Wardens, the successors, or
assigns, or any of them. In witness, etc.

A Lease in London where to abate the Parsons duty part of the rent is taken up
by way of Income.
THis Indenture, etc. Between D. S. etc. on the one part, And H. W. etc.
Witnesses, that the said D. S. in consideration of the sum of ten pounds of
lawful, etc. to him beforehand paid by the said H: W: and also in
consideration of the sum of one hundred and fifty pounds of lawful, etc. in
the name of a Fine or Income to be paid to the said D: ^: his Heirs Executors
Administrators or Assigns, by the said H: W: his Executors Administrators or
Assigns, at the Message or Tenement hereafter in these presents demised, in
manner and to me following: that is to say, five pounds yearly, at the Feast
of the Nativity of St. J: B: St. Michael, etc. the Birth, etc. and the
Annunci^tion, etc. or within twenty eight days next ensuing every of the said
Feasts, by even portions. until the said sum of, etc. be fully paid to the
said D: S. his Heirs Executors Administrators or Assigns. the first payment
thereof to be made at the Feast of the Nativity, etc. now next ensuing, or
within twenty eight days then next following; Demise.
has demised, granted, and to Farm letten, and by these presents, etc. unto,
etc. all that his Message or Tenement, with a Yard, and all other the
Commodities and appurtenances thereunto belonging, situate, lying, Habend.
and being in T: Street, etc. abutting, etc. To have, hold, and enjoy the said
demised Message or Tenement, Reddend.
with the Yard, and all other the Commodities and appurtenances thereunto
belonging, unto the said H: ^: his, etc. from, etc. unto the end, etc. yiedling
and paying therefore yearly during the said term to the said D: S: his Heirs
and Assigns, three pounds of, etc. at the Feasts of the Nativity, etc. or
within eight and twenty days next after every of the same Feasts by even
portions. Covenants, to pay the rent and fine.
And the said H: W: covenanteth with the said D. his Heirs Executors
Administrators and assigns, and every, etc. in manner, etc. That he the said
H: his Executors Administrators and assigns, shall and will well and truly
satisfy, content, and pay, or cause, etc. to the said D.S: his heirs or
assigns, as well the said sum of, etc. and every part thereof in form
aforesaid, as also the said yearly rent of 3 pounds, For repara^ions.
and every part and parcel thereof, according to the true intent limitation and
meaning of these presents And that he the said H: his Executors Administrators
and assigns, at his and their own proper costs and charges, all the said
Message on Tenement, and other the Premises with their appurtenances above
demised, and every part and parcel thereof in Timber, Lead, Glass, Iron, and
all other things whatsoever, well and sufficiently, as well within as without,
shall and will repair, support, uphold, amend, sustain, and maintain, when and
as often as need shall require, during all the term aforesaid. For cleansing
the Privies.
And also at his and their like costs and charges, shall purge empty, and
cleanse, or cause, etc. the moiety of all the Privies, Vaults, Widraughts, and
Sieges within the said Tenement above demised, or thereunto belonging, or
serving: And shall also amend and pave, or cause, For amending the Pavements.
etc. all the Pavements as well within the Yard, as without in the Street, or
elsewhere to the said Tenement belonging, as often, and when as need shall
require, during this present Lease and Demise: and in the end thereof, For
leaving the premises repaired.
all the said demised Premises, shall leave and yield up to the said D: S: his
heirs and assigns, in good and sufficient reparations being. And further the
said H: ^. covenanteth, etc. Liberty to view the reparations.
That it shall be lawful to and for the said D: S: his heirs and assigns,
and every of them, with his and their Workmen to enter into the said Message
or Tenement, and other the premises with the appurtenances, and into every
part and parcel thereof once in the year yearly, during the said term, a^
his and their will liberty and pleasure, within the space of two days next
after premonition in that behalf to be given by the said D. S. his heire^ or
assigns, to the said H: W: his Executors Administrators or assigns, or to any
of them, and the necessary reparations of the said demised premises, and every
part and parcel thereof, to view, peruse, and oversee, and of the defaults of
the same, if any be to give knowledge, monition and warning to the said H. his
Executors administrators or assigns, or to the Occupyer or Occupyers of the
said demised premises, Defaults in reparations to be amended within three
months warning.

The Tenant to pay a sum of of money if he lot or sell.


or any part or parcel thereof, for the repairing and amending of the same. All
which defaults so there from time to time, found; the said H. for him, etc.
covenanteth, etc. that he the said H. his Executors Administrators or assigns,
shall within three months next after such monition thereof given, at his and
their proper costs and charges, cause to be sufficiently repaired and amended.
And the said H. W. covenanteth, etc. That he the said H. his Executors or
administrators, or some of them shall and will, give and pay or cause to be
given and paid to the said D. his heirs or assigns, the sum of five pounds
of, etc. at one entire payment, immediately when and as soon as he the said H:
his Executors administrators or assigns, or any of them shall bargain, sell,
alien, demise, let, set, grant, do away, or suffer to be done away, or had or
recovered this present Lease, interest, and term of years, or any part
thereof, The Tenant not to cut or alter any principalls.
or the said demised premises, or any part or parcel thereof. And it is
further covenanted and agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents, that it shall not be lawful to and for the said H: W: his Executors
administrators or assigns, or any of them at any time hereafter during the
said term to cut, remove, alter, or transport any principal post or partition
of the said demised premises, without the special license and consent of the
said D. S. his heirs or assigns, Proviso, if the rent or fine be not paid, or
reparations not done upon warning, then a forfeiture.
first in writing sealed, obtained, and had. Provided always, and it is agreed
between the said parties to these presents, that if it shall happen the said
yearly rent of three pounds, or any part or parcel thereof to be behind and
unpaid over or after any Feast or term of payment aforesaid, wherein the same
ought to be paid by the said space of twenty eight days, being in the mean
time lawfully asked at the said demised Message or Tenement. Or if it shall
fortune the said sum of 150 l. or any part or parcel thereof to be behind or
unpaid in part or in all, contrary to the true intent, limitation, and meaning
of these presents, being lawfully demanded at the said demised Message or
Tenement: Or that the said defaults and reparations of the said demised
premises, be not repaired, made, or done within the time and space of monition
and warning in that behalf above limited and appointed: That then and from
thenceforth this present Indenture of Lease, and the interest and term of years
thereby granted and limited, shall clearly and utterly cease, determine, and be
void, frustrate, and of no force or effect in the Law. And that then and at all
times it shall and may be lawful to and for the said D. his heirs and
assigns, and every of them, into all and every the said demised Premises
wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain, and repossess, as in
his or their first and former estate. And the said H. his Executors and
administrators, and all other Occupyers of the same therefrom utterly to
expel, put out, and amove, this Indenture of Lease, or any thing therein
contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And the said D.S: for him,
his heirs and assigns covenanteth, etc. that he the said H: his Executors
administrators and assigns, paying to the said D: S: his heirs or assigns,
the said sum of one hundred and fifty pounds, and the said yearly rent of
three pounds in form and manner above limited and mentioned, and also duly
observing performing, and accomplishing all and singular other the Covenants,
Grants, Clauses, Provisoes, Conditions, Articles, and Agreements in these
presents contained, expressed, or mentioned, which on the part and behalf of
the said H: his Executors administrators and assigns, or of any of them, or to
be observed, performed, and accomplished, according to the purport, true
intent, limitation, and meaning of these present Indentures, shall or may
lawfully peaceably and quietly, have, occupy, and enjoy the said Message or
Tenement, and other the Premises with the appurtenances above demised, by and
during the said term of, etc. without let, resistance, or interruption of the
said D. S. his heirs or assigns or any of them, and without lawful let,
resistance, or interruption of any other person or persons lawfully claiming,
or which shall lawfully claim by, from, or under the said D: or his state or
Interest. In witness, etc.

A Lease in London, where to abate the Parsons duty, part of the Rent is
payable by way of Annuity.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R: D: etc. on the one part, and F: B: etc
Witnesses, That the said R: D: for the considerations hereafter in these
present Indentures expressed, has demised, etc. to have, etc. yiedling, etc.
covenants for reparations and view, etc. and tum: In consideration of which
said Demise, Lease, and Grant so had and made of the said Message, etc. and
other the Premises in form aforesaid; and for the peaceable and quiet having
and enjoying of the demised Premises, according to the true intent and meaning
of these present Indentures. The said F: B: for him, etc. does covenant and
grant to and with the said R: D: his, etc. that he the said F. B: his
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall and will well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said R: his Executos administ. etc. at the foresaid
Message or Tenement by these presents demised every year yearly during the
said term of nineteen years, one annuity or yearly payment of nine pounds
o^, etc. at four usual terms or Feasts in the year, that is to say, at the
Feasts, etc. or within the space of four and twenty days next after every of
the same Feast days, being there lawfully asked by even and equal portions,
the first payment there of to begin and to be made in the Feast, etc. or, etc.
Provided always, and it is conditioned, concluded, and agreed by and between
the said parties to these present Indentures, for them, etc. and every of them
by these presents, that if it shall happen the said yearly rent of forty
shillings to be behind or unpaid, in part or in all, after any Feast day of
payment thereof abovesaid, in which the same rent ought to be paid by the space
of four and twenty days being lawfully demanded: Or if default shall happen
to be made in payment of the said annuity or yearly paymenc of, etc. or any
part or parcel thereof, contrary to the true intent and meaning of these
present Indentures, that then, etc. a forfeiture and re entry etc. A clause of
special Warranty, and tum: In witness.

A Lease for a thousand years, conditional for payment of a sum of money.
THis Indenture, etc. Witnesses, That the said A: G: for and in consideretion
of the sum of fifty pounds of, etc. whereof, etc. has demised, granted, and
to farm letten, and by these presents, etc. unto the said W: S: all that
Message or Tenement with the appurtenances called C: situate, etc. in the
Town, Parish, and Fields of E: in the County of E. one Marsh called, etc.
containg, etc. one croft called, etc. containing by estimation, etc. And all
and singular Houses Buildings Barnes Scables Yards Orchards Gardens Lands
Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement
belonging or appertainining: and the reversion and reversions of all and
singular the premises and all and singular rents and profits whatsoever
reserved upon any former demise made of the Premises, or any part thereof; To
have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular other the
premises with the appurtenances:, to the said W: his Executors and Assigns,
from the Feast, etc. next, etc. for, by, and during the term of one thousand
years, from thence, etc. without impeachment of any manner of waste, yiedling
and paying therefore yearly by and during the said term, to the said A: G:
his Heirs and Assigns, one penny only at the Feast of Easter if it be
demanded. And the said A: G: covenanteth, etc. in form, etc. That he the said
A: G: now is the sole and lawful Owner of all and singular the above demised
Premises, of a good, lawful, perfect, and absolute estate in the Law, in Fee
simple: and has full power, and good lawful and rightful authority, to
demise and let to Farm the said Message and all other the Premises, to the
said W: S: his Executors and Assigns, for and during the term of years
aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid: And that the said Message and other
the Premises now are and stand, and during the said term shall stand and
continue discharged and acquitted, or otherwise, by the said A: G: his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at all times saved harmless, of and
from all and singular former Estates, Titles Charges Grants Leases and
Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, caused, or procured by the said A: G:
or H: G. Esquires, deceased, Brother of the said A: or by either of them (such
Estate as one H: B: has in the same from year to year, always to be
determined upon one half years warning only except and foreprised.) And that
the said W. S his Executors and assigns, shall, and may have, hold, and enjoy
the Message, and all other the Premises with their appurtenances, during the
said term of a thousand years, without any let or resistance of the said A:
G: his heirs or assigns, and without any lawful let, resistance, or eviction
of any other person or persons during the same term. Provided always, that if
the said A: his Heirs, Executors* etc. do pay, etc. to the said W: S. his
certain Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, the sum of fifty pounds of,
etc. at, etc. on the tenth day, etc. between the hours, etc. That then and
from thenceforth these presents, and the Lease, Grant, and Demise thereby made
of the said Message of Tenement, and other the Premises with their
appurtenances as abovesaid, shall be clearly and utterly void, frustrate, and
as absolutely determined and annihilated, as if the same had never been had or
made, any thing abovesaid to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.
In witness, etc.

A Lease of a Parsonage with very good Covenants.
THis Indenture, etc. Between A: S: Clark, Parson of the Parish Church of H: In
the County of S: on the one part, and C: A: of H: aforesaid Gent. on the other
part, Witnesses, That the said A: for diverse good considerations, etc. has
demised, etc. unto the said C. all the said Parsonage of H: aforesaid, with all
and singular the appurtenances, and all and every the Mansion Houses, Barnes,
Stables, Orchards Glebelands Meadows Pastures Fold Cross Commons Tithes Fruits
Oblations Obventions Portions Rents Commodities Profits Courts Leets, view of
Franckpledge Perquisits of Courts Extents and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the
said Parsonage belonging, or as part, parcel, or member thereof had, used,
occupied, or enjoyed (All Woods under Woods and Trees, standing or growing in
or upon the Premises, or any part thereof, and one Chamber called the
Bell-Chamber, with free ingresse, egresse, and regresse, to and from the same,
always saved, reserved, and excepted; to hold, etc. from Michaelmas last for
two years, etc. from thence, etc. yiedling and paying therefore yearly, by
and during all the said term of two years, to the said A: his Successors and
Assigns, five pounds, etc. at the Mansion house, etc. at the feasts etc. or
within eight and twenty days, etc. by even portions. And the said C: A: for
him, his Executors and Administrators, and every of them, does covenant and
grant to and with the said A: S. his Successors, executors, and administrators
by these presents, in manner and form as ensues, To repair the Chancel.
from Article to Article, that is to say, That he the said C. A. his Executors
administrators and assigns, at their own costs and charges during the said
term, shall keep, sustain, and maintain the Chancel of the said Parish, well
and sufficiently maintained and repaired, and also the Parsonage Mansion house,
and all the Barns Stables Dovehouses and other buildings of the same in good
and sufficient reparation of Windtight and Watertight throughout every part of
the same. Fences.
And all the Hedges Fences and Enclosures of all the enclosed grounds of the
said Parsonage, or thereunto belonging, well and sufficiently hedged, ditched,
and defenced, and all the premises so sustained, repaired, hedged, ditched;
and defenced at the end of the said two years, shall leave and yield up to the
said A. his Successors and assigns, as and by the view and judgment of four
honest and sufficient persons appointed to take the same view, and to give them
judgment thereupon, if to the said A. it shall be thought so needful. And also
that he the said C. his Executors administrators and assigns, Provide a
Minister.
at their like costs and charges as aforesaid, shall find and provide a
convenient and sufficient Minister to serve the Cure of the said Parish,
lawfully, competently, and sufficiently, and shall cause Divine Service from
time to time to be done in the Chapel, within the said Parish, so far as to
the duty of the said A. of right does or shall appertain, Sermons.
and shall also procure such number of Sermons to be preached within the
Parish Church aforesaid, as by the Law ought to be so, as no complaint nor
other clamor be made, to the hurt or damage of the said A: Tenths.
And shall well and truly content and pay from time to time, all and singular
Tenths, Subsidies, Synages, Proxies, and other charges, annuities, rents, and
payments ordinary and extraordinary whatsoever to be due or payable out of or
for the said Parsonage, or any other the premises in any wise, at any time
during the said term, and shall also pay and discharge the Tenths to be due to
the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, at or before Christmas, etc. next
ensuing the end of the same term: And of all and singular the said charges,
payments, annuities, and rents, service of the said Cure, and Sermons to be
preached, shall discharge or save harmless the said A. his Successors,
Executors, and Administrators, by and during all the said term, the payment or
charge of the first Fruits for the Premises to be paid by the said A: always
excepted and to be paid and discharged by the said A. his Executors and
Administrators, Parish Bull. Discharge all demands toward the Parish.
at their own proper charges. And moreover that the said C. A: his Executors
administrators or assigns, shall during the said term find to the said Parish a
Bull, and do and discharge all other duties and demands toward the
Parishioners of the said Parish of H: which they justly and lawfully demand and
require of the said A: only as of their Parson and Incumbent of the said Parish
Church for the time being: Flight of Doves.
And that he the said C: A: his Executors administrators or assigns, during the
said term, shall maintain the flight of Doves belonging to the Dovehouse of the
said Parsonage, and at the end thereof, or before the first of June next
ensuing, shall not destroy the old Doves to the said Dovehouse belonging,
neither destroy or spoil any quicksets or young springs in or upon any part of
the premises. And that the said C. his executors, administrators and assigns,
during the said term, shall find and freely yield to the said A. a fit and
convenient stable-room for one horse or gelding in or upon the Premises,
wh^les the said A. shall be resident or abiding within the said parish, Leave
books of oblations.
And also at the end of the said term, shall leave and deliver to the said A.
the said Parsonage, and all other the Premises abovementioned, and all such
books of oblation, tith^s, duties, rents and profits, which the said A. has,
or which he, his executors, administrators or assigns then shall have
concerning the said Parsonage, or any tithes, oblations, obventions, duties,
rents and profits thereof, or of any part thereof, and all quittances of
tenths, subsidies, rents and arrerages of any payment whatsoever, paid or to be
paid for the Premises, or any part thereof by the said A. his executors,
administrators or assigns, Provided always that the said A shall deliver to
the said C. a plain and perfect remembrance of the handwriting of the said A.
confessing the receipt to his own use, of all and singular the said books,
quittances, and other things whatsoever, Not to let, etc.
to be delivered as aforesaid, Provided always, that it shall not be lawful
to, or for the said C. his executors, administrators, or assigns, to grant, or
in any wise demise, any of the Tenements belonging to the said Parsonge, for
any longer term, or for any greater estate or interest, then in and by these
presents is granted to the said C. That is to say, for the term of two years
only, and no longer, any thing to the contrary, etc. And lastly, that if upon
reasonable warning first given by the said A. to the said C. his executors or
assigns, for the reasonable avoiding and amoving of such Curate or Minister,
as they shall then presently have in the Cure of the said parish Church. The
same A. shall be disposed to take the charge of the same Cure, and will be
personally resident upon the same, C. his executors, administrators and
assigns, shall within reasonable time after such warning given, receive the
said A. in his own person, to execute the charge of the same Cure^; and
therefore shall content and pay during the said term of two years to the said
A. over and above the rent reserved by these presents from the time that he
shall enter into the charge of the said Cure, and shall execute the same,
twenty marks of, etc. for his salary, by the year, or after the rate of twenty
marks for a year, the same to be paid quarterly, at the four usual quarter
Feasts, as the same or any of them shall ensue and follow from the time wherein
the said A. shall execute the charge aforesaid. Hedgeboot.
And the said A. covenanteth, etc. That he the said C. his executors and
assigns, shall and may, have, and take all shreds and lops of all manner of
usual trees, standing or growing, in or upon any the Premises (such trees as
stand or gr^w in or about the Churchyard of the Parish Church aforesaid, only
except) to and for the making of hedges, etherings and stakes for the enclosed
grounds, as aforesaid, when, and as often as need shall be, during the said
term: And also that the said C. etc. under the said yearly rent of, etc. shall
enjoy without let of the said, etc. And without lawful let or interruption of
any manner of person or persons claiming, by, from, or under the said A. or his
estate. In witness, etc.

A Lease of a House in London, knowledged by the Lessor and his wife before the
Recorder, and an Alderman, and inroled in the Hustings.
THis Indenture, etc. Between W. M citizen and mercer of L. and M. his wi^e, on
one part, and F. C. of L. widow on the other part, Witnesses, that the said W.
and M. as well for and in consideration of a certain sum of lawful, etc. to
the said VV. well and truly beforehand paid by the said E. C. Whereof, and
wherewith, etc. As also for and in consideration of sixty pounds more of like
money in the name of a fine to be paid to the said W. his certain Attorney,
executors, or administrators, by the said E. her execut or administ. at the now
Mansion House of the said W. situate in C. street in London, in manner, etc.
viz. three pounds thereof on the twentieth day of December next, etc. and the
other three pounds, the residue of the said sum of sixty pounds on the
twentieth of June, which shall be, etc. Have demised, etc. unto the said E. C.
all that their corner-shop, situate and being under the Message there now
occupied by the said E. which said shop is at the corner of M. street, etc. and
contains in length, etc. To hold, etc from Midsummer next, etc. for twenty
one years, etc. and fully to be complete, yiedling and paying therefore yearly
to the said W. and M. and the heirs and assigns of the said W. four pounds,
etc. at the Feasts of, etc. or within the space of fifteen days next after
every of the same Feast days, by even portions; And if it shall happen the
said yearly rent of four pounds, or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid
by the said space of fifteen days over or after any of the Feast-daies of
payment thereof abovesaid, and being in the mean time lawfully asked; And no
sufficient distress then and there can or shall be found, which shall or may
be had, and lawfully carried away; Or if the said E. her executors,
adminstrators or assigns, shall not pay, or cause to be paid, or lawfully
tender to pay the said fine of sixty pounds, and every part thereof, to the
said W. his certain Attorney, executors, or administrators, at the place
aforesaid, and in manner and form aforesaid, That then, and from thenceforth,
it shall, and may be lawful, to and for the said W. and M. and the heirs and
assigns of the said W. or any of them, into the said corner-shop to re-enter;
and the same to have again, retain, and re-possesse as in their former estate;
And the said E. her executors, and assigns, and all others there from to
expel, amove and put out; This present Indenture, or any thing herein
contained to the contrary, etc. And the said W. M. for him, his heirs, etc.
covenanteth, etc. in manner, etc. viz. That he the said W. M. and M. his wife,
without any other, having any estate with them, or either of them, at the
ensealing of and delivering of these presents, are, and stand seized of the
said corner-shop, to them the said VV. and M. and the heirs and assigns of the
said VV. for ever in fee simple, without any manner of entaile or remainder
over in any wise: And without any condition, mortgage or defeisance; And that
she the said E. her executors, administrators, and assigns, paying the yearly
rent and fine aforesaid, in manner and form above limited, shall, and may
peacebly and quietly have, hold, and enjoy all the said corner shop, without
any let, trouble, expulsion or interruption of the said VV. and M. or of the
heirs or assigns of the same VV. And without any lawful let, expulsion or
eviction of any other porson or persons, during the said term of twenty one
years. In witness, etc.

A Lease from a Parson and Churchwardens of a Church in London, with condition
that the Tenant shall not let, nor set without their consent.
THis Indenture, etc. Between J. J. Clerk, Parson of the parish Church of Saint
P. in VV. in L. And T. A. Merchant-taylors, and G. R. Cordwainer, citizens of
London, Wardens and Keepers of the goods, rents, and ornaments of the said
parish church on the one part, and R.W. citizen and Leather-seller of L. and H.
his wife, parishoners of the parish aforesaid on the other part, Witnesses,
that the said Parson and Churchwardens, by and with the assent and consent of
the most worshipful and substantial parishoners of the said parish, have
demised, etc. unto the said R. and H. all that little shop or shed, as the same
is now had and occupied by the said R. situate in W. in the said parish of St.
P. on the west side of the said Church door, leading out of the said Church
into W. aforesaid, To have, etc. to the said R. and H. their executors,
administrators and assigns, from Midsummer next, etc. unto the end of twenty
one years. etc. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said term unto
the said Parson and Churchwardens, and their successors, Parsons and
Churchwardens of the said parish church for the time being; forty six
shillings eight pence, of, etc at four Feasts, etc. by even and equal
portions; And the said R. and H. his wife, for themselves, etc. Do covenant and
grant, to and with the said Parson and Churchwardens, and their successors,
Parson, and Churchwardens of the said parish church for the time being, And to
and with every of them in form, etc. That he the said R. and H: his wife, their
executors, administrators, and assigns, shall and will at their own proper
costs and charges, by and during all the said term of, etc. keep and maintain
the said shop or shed in sufficient reparations, as well with windows, bars,
bolts and locks, as otherwise, in, by, and with all manner of needful and
necessary reparations whatsoever; And the same shop or shed, in such
reparations being at the end of the said term of, etc. or other determination
of this present Lease, together with all the said windows, doors, bolts and
locks, shall and will quietly leave and yield up to the Parson and
Churchwardens of the said parish church, then for the time to be, to the use
of the said parish: And also that the said R: and H: or either of them, or the
executors, administrators or assigns, of them or of either of them, at any
time or times, during the said term, shall not alien, let, set, grant bargain,
sell, or other ways do away, or suffer to be recovered, aliened, altered or
changed, his or their estate, right, title, interest, or term of years, or any
part thereof, of, in, or to the Premises, or any par thereof by any manner of
way, device or means whatsoever, without the special license, consent and
agreement of the said Parson and Churchwardens of the said parish church for
the time being, and six of the honest and substantial parishoners of the said
parish in writing, under their hands and seals, first in that behalf to be had
and obtained; Provided always, that if it shall happen the said yearly rent
of, etc. or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid, by the space of twenty
eight days, over or after any of the said Feasts, wherein the same, or any
part thereof ought to be paid as aforesaid, being lawfully asked; or if the
said R. and H. or either of them, or their several executors, etc. do at any
time or times, during the said term, without such license and consent first had
and obtained, as aforesaid, alien, let, set, give, grant, bargain, sell,
mortgage, or otherwise do away, or suffer, or cause his, her, or their said
estate, right, title, interest, or term of years, or any part thereof, of or in
the said shop, or shed, or any part thereof, to be recovered, aliened, altered,
or changed, from him, her or them, or any of them, to any other person or
person, by any way or means, or device, or by reason of any debt, owing or to
be owing, trespass, offense, or default committed, or to be committed by the
said R. and H. or either of them, their executors or administrators, or any of
them; That then, and from thenceforth, this present Lease and Demise, and the
term of years thereby granted, shall cease and be void, etc. And that then a
re-entry in the Parson and Churchwardens, any thing to the contrary, etc. A
clause of special warranry by the Lessors. In witness, etc. To one part of
these Indentures, remaining with the said R. and H. as well the said J. J. T. A
and G. R. have set their seals; As also S. L. D. Knight and Alderman of L. and
R. M. of the same city Alderman, parishoners of the same parish, in declaration
of their consents to this Lease, have subscribed their names; And to the other
part, etc.

A Lease of the moiety of the Customs and Imposts of Wines to be brought into
a certain Port, during a certain term, where the parties agree to constitute a
Deputy, to receive the profits to their use.
THis Indenture, etc. Between VV. S. of Y. in the County of N. Gent. on the one
part, And T. L. of L. Merchant-tailor on the other part, witnesses, that the
said VV. S. has demised, leased, and to farm letten, and by these presents,
etc. unto the said T. L. the moiety and one half of all and all manner of
customs, subsidies of tonnage, imposts, sums of money, and duties
whatsoever, which should, might or ought to grow due, chargeable or payable to
the said VV. S. as assign of F. R. Esquire, of, for, or by reason of any
manner of Wines of the growth of France, and the Dominions and countries of the
same, or of, or for the subbsidie of tonnage of all manner of Wines of the
growth of France, Spain, and Portugal, and the Dominions and countries of the
same, and of, and for all Renish wines, according to the rate taxed, and
assessed by the Statute made in the first year of the reign of our Sovereign,
etc. That now is, which during the space of five years to be accounted from the
Feast of S. Michael, etc. last, etc. shall happen to be shipped, or brought
into the Port of B. in the county of L: or any the members, or places of lading
or unlading, belonging or appertaining to the said Port, and within the
jurisdiction of the Customhouse of the same Port (forfeitures of such wines, if
any shall happen, and the duties of Butlerage and Prisage only excepted) And
also all and every such authorities, liberties, powers, privileges and
preheminences within the said Port of B. and members of the same (only for the
moiety of the Premises, by these presents demised, and no otherwise) as the
said W. S. as assign aforesaid, has, may, might, should, or ought to have in
the said Port or members thereof, any manner of way; All and singular which
demised Premises, amongst other things, the King by his Patents demised to the
said F. R. And the said F. the same amongst other things, by his Indentures,
dated, etc. did lease and demise to the said W. S. To have, receive, perceive,
take, levy, and enjoy the said moiety, and one half of all and singular the
said customs, etc. except, etc. to the said T. L. his executors and assigns,
from the Feast of S. Michael last, etc. unto the end and term of five years
from thence, etc. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said term,
unto the said W. S. etc. fifty pounds of, etc. A clause that if the rent be
unpaid, etc. That then and from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful, to
and for the said W.S. his, etc. at his and their liberty and election utterly
to determine and make void these presents, and the interest of the said T. L.
his executors, etc. of, in, and to the Premises by these presents demised, And
the same to resume and take again into his and their hands and possession, and
to repossesse and enjoy to the only use of the said W. his executors and
assigns, as in his or their former right or estate, Any thing to the contrary,
etc. And it is covenanted, granted, and agreed by and between the said parties,
to these presents, and every of them severally, does covenant, grant and agree,
to and with the other of them, for himself, his executors, etc. by these
present Indentures, That they the said VV. and T. and their several executors,
adminstrators and assigns, for their several moieties and interest in the
Premises demised by these presents, at their several equal costs and
charges, shall bear, pay, do and accomplish toward the said F. R. his
executors and assigns, all things whatsoever, by reason of the said Lease made
to the said VV. S. to be paid, done and accomplished, for the Port of B. and
members thereof; And shall in like manner severally bear and sustain, all other
charges of and for the Premises. And in like sort shall have several right
and interest every of them, to one several moiety, of all and singular
profits, gains, commodities, allowances, discharges, and advantages to come or
grow of the Premises by these presents demised, according to the tenor,
limitation, purport and true meaning of the said Lease of the said F. R. made
to the said VV. as aforesaid (whereof the said T. has, and keeps a true copy
in his custody, signed with the hand of the said VV. S.) the payment of the
yearly rent of three hundred pounds, reserved by the said Lease made by the
said F. R. only except, Of and for which yearly rent of three hundred pounds,
the said VV. S. his executors and assigns, shall discharge and acquit the said
T. L. his executors and assigns at all times; And it is agreed between the
said parties, etc. That the said VV. and T. their executors and assigns,
during the said term, by their mutual consents, and at their equal costs and
charges, shall ordain, authorize, depute and constitue for them, a sufficient
Deputy or deputies from time to time, which for them, and in their names,
shall, and may receive to their use, all duties, imposts, customs and sums of
money to come or arise toward the said W. and T. their executors or assigns
for the Premises in the said Port of B. and members thereof to be received or
had; In witness, etc.

A Lease of a House in London, to take place in reversion after the decease of
one who has an estate for life in the same.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R. S. citizen and Habardasher of L. on the one
part, And E. O. of L Habardasher on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas
one J. R. of L. Esquire, is seized for term of his natural life amongst
others, of, and in all that one Message or Tenement, with a shop, cellar, etc.
to the said Message or Tenement belonging or appertaining, now in the tenure
of, etc. situate in the Parish of S. M. within the city of L. and to the said
W. M. demised by the said J. R. for the term of thirty eight years, if the said
J. R. should so long live; As by an Indenture of Lease, bearing date, etc.
thereof made by the said J.R to the said W. M. more plainly appears. The
reversion of which said Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, after the
decease of the said J. R. to the said R. S. and his heirs for ever, of right
appertains and belongs; Now the said R. S. for, and in consideration of,
etc. Whereof, etc. Has demised, granted, and to farm letten, and by, etc. unto
the said E. O all the said Message or Tenement, with all shops, cellars, etc.
to the said Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining, in as
large and ample manner as the said W. M. now occupies the same, To have and to
hold the said Message, Tenement, with shops, cellars, etc. and other the
Premises above demised, with all and singular the appurtenances unto the said
E. O. his executors and assigns, from the day of the decease of the said J. R.
unto the end and term of twenty five years from thence, etc. Yiedling and
paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said R. his heirs and
assigns, nine pounds of, etc. at four Feast, etc. The first payment thereof to
be made and to commense and to begin at such Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, as
shall next and immediately happen, come, and follow, from and after the death
and decease of the said J. R. And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of,
etc. or any part thereof to be behind unpaid by the space of fifty six days,
next over or after any Feast or term of payment thereof, or of any part
thereof, in which it ought to be paid, as aforesaid, the same being lawfully
demanded at the said Message, That then, and so often the said E O. his
executors, administrators and assigns, shall forfeit and lose to the said R S.
his heirs and assigns, five marks of lawful, etc. Nomine poenae; And that
then, and so often, it shall, and may be lawful, to and for the the said R S.
his heirs and assigns, to enter into the said Message, and all other the
demised Premises, and there distrain, as well for the said yearly rent, and
every part thereof, so behind and unpaid; as also for the said Nomine poenae,
from time to time, so to be f^rfeited and lost, as aforesaid, and all arrerages
thereof; And the distress and distresses there to be found, lawfully and
quietly to take, lead, drive, and carry away, And the same to detain, hold and
keep, until they of the said yearly rent, and of every pain to be forfeited,
as aforesaid, and being unpaid, and of all arrereages of the same, together
with their costs and damages in that behalf, to be sustained, shall be fully
paid and satisfied; And if then there shall be no sufficient open and overt
distress in or upon the said Message, and other the said demised Premises to
be found, which may lawfully and quietly be had and taken away, That then and
from thenceforth, it shall be lawful to and for the said R. his heirs and
assigns, and every of them, into the said Message or Tenement, with the
appurtenances, and into all and singular other the above demised Premises,
wholly to re-enter; And the said E. O. his executors, administrators and
assigns, from thence clearly to expel and put out, These Presents, or any
thing, etc. to the contrary, etc. And the said E. O. for him, etc. covenanteth,
etc. That he the said E. his executors, administrators and assigns, at his and
their own proper costs and charges, all the said Message or Tenement, and all
other the Premises above demised by these presents, with the appurtenances, in
and by all manner of reparations, as well great timber as other, well and
sufficiently shall repair, sustain, maintain and uphold from time to time, as
often, and when as need shall require, during the said term; And also at his
and their like costs, all the pavements, as well within the said Message or
Tenement, as without in the street before the same, to the same belonging, as
often, and when as need shall require, shall cause to be paved, made and
amended. And the widraughts, privies, sincks and gutters belonging to the said
Message or Tenement, as often, and when as need shall be, during the said term
of twenty five years, shall cause to be cleansed, scoured and purged, And at
the end of the said term of twenty five years, the same Premises so being well
and sufficiently repaired, sustained, maintained, paved, amended, scoured and
cleansed, as aforesaid, to the said R. his heirs or assigns, shall so leave,
surrender and yield up; And also the said Tenant covenanteth, etc. That he the
said E. his executors, administrators and assigns, at his and their own proper
costs and charges, from time to time, during the said term of twenty five
years, shall bear and pay his rateable and competent part and portion of all
such charges and expenses, as shall be requisite and needful to be made of and
for the cleansing, scouring and making clean of a certain sinck or watercourse
which passes through the ground or soil of the said Message or Tenement above
by these presents demised where through issues and comes as well the waters
that come and fall from two other tenements; as also the waters that fall or
come from the said Message or Tenement demised by these presents: And
moreover, the Tenant covenanteth, etc. That it shall be lawful to and for the
said R. S. his heirs and assigns, four times in every year at his and their
will and pleasure, with workmen, during the said term of twenty five years,
into the said Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances before by these
presents demised, and into every part thereof to enter and come; And upon such
entrance made, there to view, survey, search and see if the same and every part
of the same be well and sufficiently repaired; And that if upon any such view
or survey any default in reparation of the said Premises, or any part thereof
shall be found which shall have need of amendment, And whereof the said R. his
heirs or assigns shall leave notice in writing at the said Message by these
presents demised, That then, from time to time the said E. his executors,
administrators or assigns shall well and sufficiently, and clearly and
thoroughly repair and amend every such default within the space of six months
next after such notice thereof left in writing as aforesaid, at all times
during the said term without any default, fraud or covin; And the said R. S.
for him, etc. covenanteth, etc. That the said E. his, etc. by and under the
payment of the said yearly rent and performance of the covenants, articles and
agreements aforesaid, for and on the part of the said E. his executors and
assigns to be performed, shall or may peaceably and quietly have, hold, etc.
the said Message, etc. by and during all the said term of, etc. without any
let, etc. of the said R. his, etc. at any time during the same term, and
without any lawful let, etc. of any person or persons, having, or which shall
have any lawful right or title to the said Message, etc. by or from the said
R. his heirs or assigns at any time, during the same term. In witness, etc.

A Lease of old housing, where the Tenant covenanteth to pull down the same,
and new build it within a certain term, at his own cost and charges.
THis Indenture, etc. Between W. H. citizen and Grocer of L. on the one part,
And T. S. citizen and Bricklayer of L. on the other part, Witnesses, That the
said W. H. for the consideration hereafter in these presents expressed, has
demised, etc. unto the said T. S. all that his old Stable now in the occupation
of, etc: situate in P. Lane, etc. And all that his old Shed next adjoining on
the West Side of the said Stable, and that his Garden-plot or piece of ground,
containing from East to West, etc. situate on the West Side of the said old
Shed; To have, etc. to the said T: S, etc. from, etc. for four and twenty
years, yiedling, etc. unto the said W. his Heirs and Assigns, three pounds
of, etc. at four feasts, etc. by even portions: for and in consideration of
which said Grant, Lease, and Demise by these presents made and granted of the
said demised Premises, by and from the said W. to the said T. as aforesaid.
The said T. S. for him, etc. covenanteth with the said W. his, etc. That he the
said T. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, Pull down the old Building.
shall within four years next ensuing the date hereof, take and pull down all
the old Edifices and Buildings of the said demised Premises, and in lieu and
stead thereof, shall and will within the said four years at the proper costs
and charges and expenses of the said T. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, New Build. Tenement of three Stories and a Garret. Height of the
Stories.
make-new, build, erect, set up, and perfectly finish upon the Ground and
Soil, where the said old Buildings now stand, one new and substantial
Tenement of new Timber, which shall contain three Stories in height, with a
Garret over the same: The first Story whereof shall contain in height nine
Foots of assise; and the second Story thereof shall contain in height eight
Foots and a half of assise, Content. A Cellar.
and the third Story thereof shall contain in height seven Foots and a half of
assise. And that the said new Tenement shall contain from the East to the West
four and twenty Foots of assise or above, and from the North to the South, as
the, room will suffer. And that he the said T. his Executors or Assigns,
within the said four years, at his and their like costs and charges, shall
make and finish under the said new Tenement, a new Cellar of Brick for the same
new Tenement, with a strong Cellar floor over the same Cellar, A Vault.
and also one Vault for a Privy of Brick-work, and a new Tonnel of Brick for
the same. Chimneys.
And also shall within the said 4 years make three several Brick Chimneys
within the said new Tenement, whereof one to be in the Hall, another in the
Kitchen, and the other in the Chamber; Foundation of Chimneys.
all which Chimneys shall be supported and borne up with a strong Pillar of
Brick, or a strong Arch of Brick, out of the groundwork or foundation of the
same Tenement: And shall make two Mantletrees of stone to two of the said
Chimneys which shall be in the said Hall and Camber. And shall and will also
within the said four years, make, set up, and finish within the said new
Tenement, four saire strong, Bay-Windowes.
new bay Carpenters Windows, which shall every of them contain in length six
Foots of assise, at the least; Clear Stories.
And as many clear Stories as shall be needful for or about the said new
Tenement: And shall within the said four years perfectly finish the said new
Tenement, withal Glasing, Tiling, and all other things necessary whatsoever,
Proviso for non payment of rent.
meet and convenient for the same. Provided always, that if it shall happen
the said yearly rent of three pounds, or any part or parcel thereof to be
behind and unpaid by the space of eight and twenty days, next after any Feast
or term of payment above mentioned, wherein the same ought to be paid, or
being lawfully asked at the said demised Premises: Any Covenants for new
building.
Or if it happen the said T. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, to make
default of or in performance, fulfilling, or observing of the said Covenant,
Grant, or agreement touching the new building, erecting, and setting up of the
said new Tenem. or of or in the making, erecting, building, or finishing of the
said new Tenem. with and other the Premises, or any of them, within the space
of four years next coming, from and after the Feast of, etc. contrary to the
form aforesaid; To re-enter.
that then and at all times after it shall be lawful to and for the said W: H:
his heirs and assigns, into all and singular the Premises with the
appurtenances, wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain and
repossess, as in his or their former estate, and the Tenants to expel, etc.
any thing to the contrary, etc. And further the said T: S: covenanteth, etc.
that he the said T. his Executors administrators and Assigns, To repair after
building.
at his and their own proper costs and charges shall well and sufficiently from
and after the erecting and new building of the said new Tenement, uphold,
amend, maintain, keep and sustain the same new Tenement with the appurtenances,
and every part and parcel thereof, in and by all things needful from time to
time, at all times during the said term of four and twenty years. Enclosures.
And also that he the said T: his, etc. at his and their costs and charges,
shall well and sufficiently uphold and maintain all the Fences and Enclosures
of the said Garden plot or piece of ground, and every part and parcel thereof
from time to time, Pavement.
during the said term of, etc. And also amend or new make the Pavement in the
Street, before the said demised premises, and cause the Privy and Widraughts
of the said demised premises, Privy.
to be sufficiently cleansed amd emptied from time to time as often as need
shall require, during the said term of four and twenty years; and in the
end, expiration, cessation, or other determination whatsoever of the said term
of, Lead, repaired,
etc: shall leave and yield up unto the said U: his Heirs and Assigns, the
said new Tenement and other the premises, and
in good and sufficient reparations, and furnished with Glass, All Glass, etc.
Glass-windowes, Casements, Doors, Locks, Bolts, Hinges, Lead, and Tiling: And
that he the said T. his Executors Administrators or Assigns, Not to remove any
new building.
or any of them, or any other person or persons, by his or their means,
consent, or procurement, shall not at any time hereafter, during the force and
continuance of this present Lease and Demise, remove, pull down, or take away,
or cause, etc. any Building, Room, or Edefice whatsoever, which he the said T:
his Executors, administrators, or assigns, shall make, or set up, or cause,
etc. in, upon, or about the said demised premises, or any part or parcel
thereof: and shall leave the same there standing, as they shall be made and set
up, without spoiling the same, or any of them, for the use of the said W: his
Heirs or assigns, at the end or surceasement of this present Lease and Demise.

And moreover the Tenant covenanteth, Liberty to view.
etc. that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said W: his Heirs and
assigns, and three or four such other persons as he or they will bring in his
or their company at convenient time in the day, at his and their free will,
liberty, and pleasure, to enter into all and singular the premises twice in
the year, yearly during the said, etc. to view, survey, and see whether the
said new Tenement be builded, maintained, and kept in reparation in form
aforesaid, or not. And of all defaults there from time to time, found and
needful to be amended, to give warning for the repairing and amending thereof,
within six months after such warning so given, within which said six months the
said T: covenanteth, etc. fully and sufficiently to repair and amend all and
singular such defaults as aforesaid, without fraud or longer delay. A Covenant
of special Warranty by the Lord. In witness, etc.

An under Lease back again, by one having two Leases from a man of the
Premises demised by the one of them, conditionally he may enjoy that letten by
the other.
THis Indenture, etc. Between A: C: and J: C: Citizen and S. of London, on the
one part, and W: G: of M: in the County of M: Esquire, on the other part,
witnesses, That where the same W: G: by his Indenture of Lease dated, etc. did
demise to the said A: C: one Message called R. Tenement, with the
appurtenances, situate in the Parish of T: in the County of H: and all Houses,
Edifices, etc. to the said Message appertaining; to have and to hold to the
said A. C. his Executors and assigns for the term of forty years, commencing at
the Feast of, etc. for the yearly rent of eight pounds therefore yearly to be
paid; as by the same Indenture of Lease amongst other things therein contained,
more plainly, etc. And where the said W: G: has agreed, covenanted, and
promised, to and with the said A: C: his Executors and assigns, that it shall be
lawful to and for the said A: his Execut. and Ass. to fell cut down stub,
grub, carry away and enjoy, to the only use of the said E: and of his Ass. all
and all manner of woods, under woods, timber, trees, great trees, shrubbs,
thorns and bushes whatsoever, growing or being, or to grow or be in or upon the
Premises, or any part thereof at any time during the said term without any
impeachment thereof, or therefore, saving always sufficient hedges and
enclosures about all and singular the enclosed grounds of the said Premises:
And where also the said W. G. by one other his former Indenture of Lease,
dated, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned, Has demised, granted, and
to farm letten unto the said A. C. and J. C. and to their executors and
assigns, all that great Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, situate
and being in B. street, in the Parish of, etc. And all houses, etc. to the said
Message belonging, etc. To hold, from the Feast of Saint Michael, etc. now
last past, for the term of sixty years then next ensuing, and fully to be
complete, paying therefore the yearly rent of three pounds six shillings eight
pence, of, etc. in manner and form as by the said former Indenture of Lease
last specified may also appear: Now the said A. C. and J. C. for diverse
considerations them specially moving, Do by these presents, demise, grant, and
to farm let unto the said W. G. his executors, or assigns, all the said great
Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances situate in B. street aforesaid,
and all other the Premises to the same Message or Tenement belonging, or
therewith occupied or demised as aforesaid, To have and to hold the said
Message, and other the Premises with the appurtenances, in B. aforesaid, unto
the said W. his executors and assigns, from the day of the date of these
presents, by and during all the term of fifty nine years and nine months from
thence, etc. and fully, etc. charged and onerated by all the same term, with
the said yearly rent of three pounds six shillings eight pence, thereupon
reserved by the said former Indenture of Lease made by the said W: G: to the
said A: C: and J: C: as aforesaid, Provided always, that if it happen that the
said A: C: his executors, administrators or assigns, or any of them, shall at
any time hereafter be lawfully evicted, expelled, or put out, of or from the
possession or occupation of the said Message, called R: Tenement, with the
appurtenances, or any other the Premises demised by the first Lease, etc. or
of, or from any part or parcel thereof before the full and clear end and
expiration of all that term of forty years, mentioned in the said first
recited Indenture of Lease thereof made, as aforesaid, or to be lawfully
interrupted, let, molested, or sued in Law for the felling, cutting down,
stubing, grubing, taking, or carrying away of the said woods, underwoods, etc.
contrary to the said covenant, promise, and agreement of the said W: G: above
recited; That then and from thenceforth these present Indentures, and all and
every covenant, article and sentence therein contained, which on the part of
the said A: and J. their executors or assigns, or any of them from thenceforth
shall be to be performed, shall be clearly void, etc. And then a re-entry in A:
and J: C: etc. And an expulsion of W: G: etc. Any thing to the contrary, etc.
And the said W: G: covenanteth with the said A: and J: etc. That if it shall
happen the said A: C: his executors, administrators or assigns, or any of them
to be lawfully evicted, expelled, or put out of the said Tenement, called R: or
out of any other the Premises, or any part thereof demised to the said A: by
the said first recited Indenture of Lease at any time before the end and
expiration of the said term of forty years therein granted by the same
Indenture, or to be lawfully let to fell, etc. the said woods and
underwoods, etc. at any time, during the said term of forty years, contrary to
the covenant, promise, and agreement of the said W: G: above in these presents
recited, That then and at all times, from and after the time of such
expiration, expelling, putting out, let, molestation, resistance, or
interruption, The said A: and J: their executors and assigns, shall and may
lawfully and quietly re-enter into the said great Message in Southwark, and
into all other the Premises demised by these presents, And the same, and all
the issues rents and profits thereof lawfully and peaceably from thenceforth
for ever, have, take, perceive, receive, possess, hold and enjoy, to the only
use of the said A: and J. their, etc. by and during all the residue of the said
term of sixty years, which then shall be to come, without any let of the said
W: etc. and without lawful let of any others, etc. In witness, etc.

A Lease made of Lands by an Heir out of possession thereof, to one, to the
intent he may recover the same.
THis Indenture, etc. Between R: C: of W. in the County of M. yeoman, cousin and
next heir of R: C: of T. in the County of K. yeoman deceased, and son and next
heir of R: C: late of C. in the County of K yeoman also deceased on the one
part. And VV. G. of C. in the County of S. Gentleman, on the other part,
Witnesses, That the said R. C. does by these presents demise, grant, betake,
and to farm let unto the said W. G. all that his Manor of T. in the tenure of
A. B. Esquire, or his assigns in the County of K. with the appurtenances, and
all the lands, tenements, rents, services, commodities and profit thereunto
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, called or known by the name of S. and
T. with all their appurtenances, lying in the parish of T. and now in the
tenure of T. O. or his assigns, Together with all other lands, tenements,
rents, services, commodities and profits, situate, lying or being within the
parish of T. in the said County of K. And all other the Manors, Messuages,
lands, tenements, liberties, privileges, franchices, rents, commodities and
hereditaments with their appur. in the said parishes, or any of them which did
descend or come, or ought to have descended or come to the said R. C. after, or
by the deaths of the said R. C. and R. C. or either of them, or otherwise in
possession, reversion or remainder, To have and to hold all the said Manors,
lands, tenements and hereditaments; and all and singular other the Premises,
with their appurtenances, to the said G. his executors and assigns from the
date hereof, by and during, and until the end and term of, etc. from thence,
etc. Yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said term to the said R.
C. his heirs and assigns, 00 l. of lawful, etc. at the Feasts of S. Michael,
etc. and the Annuntiation, etc. by even portions: And the said A. C. for him,
his heirs, etc. covenanteth, etc. to and with the said G. etc. That all and
singular the said Manors, etc. and other the Premises, with the
appurtenances, at all times, during the said term of, etc. shall be and
continue to the said G. his executors, administrators and assigns, clear and
free discharged and acquitted, or upon reasonable request, therefore from time
to time made, sufficiently saved harmless by the said R. his heirs, executors
and administrators, of and from all and singular former grants, bargains,
sales, leases, titles, charges and encumbrances whatsoever, had made, done or
agreed unto by the said R. or by any other person or persons by the ascent,
means, or procurement of the same R. in any wise. In witness, etc. Bullock
Gonsultor.

A Lease by the Queen of certain hundreds, and the grant of the Offices of
Steward and Bailiff in the same Hundreds, during the Lease.
THe Queen, To all, etc. Know ye that We, as well for and in consideration of
the good and faithful service which J. E. one of the yeomen of Our Chamber
heretofore, has done to Us, and hereafter intends to do, As of Our certain
science, mere motion, and special Grace, Have demised, granted, betaken, and
to farm letten, And by these presents do demise, grant, and to farm let unto
the said J. E. all those Our Hundreds of W. A. and F. with all and singular
their rights, members, and appurtenances in Our County of S. And all those Our
certain yearly rents, or common fines of four pounds two shillings nine pence;
And all other rents of free suitors within the said Hundred, and every, or any
of them, And the three weeks Court there; And all, and all Mannor-Courts,
leets, view of frank pledge within the said Hundreds and perquisits, and
profits thereof, And all suits to the Courts of the said Hundreds, and to every
or any of them, And all goods and cattels waved and strayed of felons,
fugitives, felons of themselves, or of them which be condemned or outlawed, of
them which he put in exigent: And also all manner of fines, amercements and
issues which shall come, grow, happen, arise, or renew in any Court or Courts
to be holden within the Hundred aforesaid, or which shall happen, grow, arise,
or renew before Our Justices of Assizes, or Our Justices of Peace, or Our Clerk
of the Market within the said County of S. And which shall, may, or ought to be
levied within the said Hundreds; And all and singular liberties, privileges,
franchises, rights, jurisdictions, profits, commodities, advantages and
emoluments whatsoever to the said Hundreds, or any of them belonging or
appertaing, or within the said Hundreds, or any of them happening, growing,
renewing, or arising; And also all and singular Our liberties, privileges,
franchices, rights, jurisdictions, commodities, profits and advantages within
the said Hundreds, growing, happening, renewing, or arising whatsoever, any
person or persons whatsoever heretofore in the right of the said Hundreds or
any of any them ever at any time had held or enjoyed or ought to have had, etc.
(except nevertheless, and always reserved to Us, Our heirs and successors,
all, and all manner of fines, amercements and issues yearly, and from time to
time, coming, growing, or renewing in any of Our Courts of Record, and liberty
to levy and gather the same within the Hundreds aforesaid) Saving to the said
J. and his assigns, all those issues, fines and amerciaments which shall come,
grow, happen, arise, or renew in Our Court-Hundreds, as is aforesaid, or before
Our Justices of Assise, or Our Justices of Peace, or Our Clerk of the Market,
from time to time, at any time hereafter, as is aforesaid. And further, We of
Our especial Grace, certain Science and mere motion, have given and granted;
And by these present, for Us Our heirs and successors, do give and grant to the
said J. the Office of Steward and Bailiff within Our said Hundreds of W. A. and
F. in Our said County of S. And all and singular rights, privileges,
liberties, profits, fees, customs, wages, preheminences, and jurisdictions
whatsoever to the said Offices, or to either of them due, incident or
belonging; And the keeping of all and singular courts, leets and law days
within the said Hundreds, and every or any of them. And We, for Us, Our heirs
and successors, do by these presents, ordain and constitute the said J. E. Our
Steward and Our Bailiff, within the said Hundreds, and every of them, To have
and to hold all the said Hundreds, certain rents, or common fines, rents of
free suitors, and perquisites and profits of Courts, within the said Hundreds
and every of them, And the said issues, fines, and amerciaments, and the said
Offices of Steward and Bailiff, with all the rights, customs, fees, wages, and
liberties thereof, and all and singular other the the Premises, with all and
singular their appurtenances (except only before excepted) to the said J. E.
his executors and assigns, from the Feast of S. Michael, etc. last past, etc.
for by and during all the term of twenty one years from thence, etc. Yiedling,
and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, to Us, O^r heirs and
successors, at the Receipt of Our Exchequer at Westminster, or to any other Our
Receiver of any of our rents, revenues, within the said County of S. for the
time being, six pounds sixteen shillings eight pence, of lawful, etc. at the
Feasts of the Annunciation, etc. and S. Michael, etc. by even portions;
Provided always, that if it shall happen the said yearly rent of, etc. or any
part thereof to be behind and unpaid by the space of forty days after any
Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, wherein the same ought to be paid as aforesaid,
That then, and from thenceforth this present demise, and grant, shall be
utterly void, and had for naught, Any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary notwithstanding, And We of Our mere motion, certain science and
special Grace, for Us and for Our heirs and successors, do further grant by
these presents, That this Our present grant and demise, under the said yearly
rent and condition aforesaid, shall be good, firm, and stable, Any misrecitall,
not recital, misnaming, not true naming, express mention of the true yearly
value or certainty of the Premises, or any of them, Or any statute,
prohibition, ordinance, proclamation, or restraint to the contrary thereof
before this time, made, ordained, or provided, or any other cause or matter
whatsoever in any wise notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

Licenses.
A License by a Lord of a Manor to a Copyholder to pull down houses on
Copyhold land.
TO all and singular My Stewards, Surveyors, Bailiffs, and other Officers
whatsoever, within my Manor of L. in the County of S. J: E: Earl of O: Send
greeting; Whereas I am informed that H: G: of London, Goldsmith, has lately
purchased of T: T: of N: Esquire, certain old houses, within my said Manor,
being Copyhold, which the said T: T: has surrendered to the use of the said H:
G: and his heirs, according to the custom of the said Manor, My will and
pleasure is, And by these presents I give and grant to the said H: G. his heirs
and assigns, my full license and absolute liberty and authority, to pull down,
and to take and carry away all the said houses, and every or any part thereof,
to and for the use of the said H: his heirs and assigns, from time to time, as
to him or them, or any of them, shall seem meet; Any custom or usage
whatsoever within the said Manor, if any be heretofore had or used to the
contrary notwithstanding; And I will and command you and every of you, that the
said H: and his assigns, may quietly have and enjoy the full and whole benefit
of my said grant and license without any denial, let or impediment of you or
any of you, as you tender my good contentation in that behalf, In witness, and.

A License to let and set, where a Proviso is contained in a Lease to the
contrary.
TO all, etc. R: H: Doctor of Divinity, Warden, and the College of the Souls
of all faithful people deceased, of O: send greeting; Whereas we the said
Warden and College, by our Indenture of Lease, sealed with our common Seal,
and bearing date, etc. did grant and demise unto F: M: of, etc. all that our
Manor of, etc. To have, etc. and fully to be complete and ended, In and by
which Indenture it it provided,
with a clause, that the said F: M: or his assigns, shall not give, grant,
let, set, or otherwise alien, that his Lease during the said term of, etc. to
any person or persons whatsoever, without the express, consent, and assent of
the said Warden and College, or their Successors, first had, and obtained
under their common Seal. Now know ye, that we the said Warden and College,
for us and our Successors, have consented and agreed, and by these presents do
consent and agree, that the said F: M: shall or may bargain, give, grant, set,
or let the said Estate, interest, and term of years, of and in the Premises,
in and by the said recited Indenture demised, and of and in any part or parcel
thereof, to any person or persons at the will and pleasure of the said F: or
his Assigns; The said Covenant or any thing in the said Indenture mentioned or
contained, to the contrary notwithstanding. In, etc.

Mortgages.
A Mortgage of a Lease with good Covenants.
THis Indenture, etc. Between T: I: Citizen and Vintner of L: on the one part,
and J. J. Citizen and Founder of L: on the other part, witnesses, That where,
etc. by Indenture of Lease dated, etc. did demise, etc. to E: B: Widow, all
those their Messuages and Tenements called the Cardinals Hat, and Bores-head,
with Cellars, etc. set and being in the Parish of St. S: without N: in the
Suburbs of the City of L: To have, etc. And for the yearly rent of nine pounds
of lawful, etc. therefore yearly to be paid, as by, etc. The Estate, Lease,
Interest, and term of years, of which the said E: B: of and in the premises,
for and during all the residue of the said term of forty years now to come,
the said T. J. for him, his Executors and Administrators, covenanteth and
grants by these presents, that he has, and that he is thereof lawfully
possessed by virtue of good and sufficient conveyances in the Law to him
thereof made: And now the said T. J. for and in consideration of the sum of a
hundred and nine pounds, eighteen shillings of, etc. whereof, etc. has given,
granted, bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and by these presents does
give, etc. all the said Message and Tenements, with their appurtenances,
called the Cardinals Hat, and Bores-head aforesaid, and all and singular other
the premises: and also all the Estate, right, title, interest, term of years,
claim and demand of the said T: J. of in, and to the said Message, Tenements,
and other the Premises, with their appurtenances, together with the said
Original Indenture of Lease, and all other Writings and Conveyances which the
said T: J: has touching or concerning the same Premises, to have and to hold
the said Messuages, Tenements, and all other the premises with their
appurtenances, and also all the said Estate, right, title, interest, term of
years, claim and demand of the said T: J: of, in, and to the same, to the
said I: I: his Executors and Assigns, from henceforth, for, by and during all
the residue of the said term of forty years now to come and unexpired. And
the said T: J: covenanteth, etc. in form, etc. that the said T: J: at the time
of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is the very true lawful,
sole, and rightful Owner of the said Indenture of Lease, and of all and every
the premises thereby demised or granted, and of all the residue of the said
term of forty years now to come and unexpired, and has good right and
lawful authority to give grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over all and
every the same Premises, to the said J: I: his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, in manner and form aforesaid: And that by the said Original
Indenture here is made, a good Lease of all the premises, which according to
the true meaning of these presents, shall or may have endurance and continuance
in the said I: I: and his assigns, by and during all the residue of the said
term of forty years yet to come: and that the same Message, Tenements, and
other the premises, with their appurtenances, now are and be, and on the
eighteenth day of June, which shall be, etc. shall be, and from thenceforth
shall stand and continue to the said I: his Executors or assigns, according to
the purport and true meaning of these presents, for and during all the residue
of the said term of forty years then to be to come and unexpired, clearly and
freely discharged and acquitted, or otherwise from time to time at all times
sufficiently saved harmless, of and from all and singular former Bargains,
Sales, Grants, Leases, Arrearages of Rent, Forfeitures, Re-entries, and Cause
and Causes of Forfeiture and Re-entry, and of and from all other Charges,
Estates, Titles, Troubles, and Encumbrances whatsoever, (the yearly Rent and
Covenants specified in the said Original Indenture of Lease, from and after
the said eighteenth day of June, which shall be in the said year, etc. to grow
due to be paid, done, and performed on the part of the said E. and her Assigns
only except) Provided always, and the said J. J. covenanteth, etc. That if
the said T. J. his Executors, etc. do pay, etc. to the said J. J. his certain
Attorney, Executor, or Administrator, at the now Mansion house of, etc.
situate, etc. the sum of, etc. of lawful, etc. on the said eighteenth day
of June, which shall be, etc. between the hours, etc. That then and from
thenceforth these presents, and the Gift, Grant, Bargain, Sale, and Assignment
thereby made, of all and singular the Premises, shall be clearly void and of
none effect: And that then and from the time of such payment made to the said
I. I. his Executors or Assigns in form aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said T. J. his Executors and Assigns, the said Tenements and
other the premises with their appurtenances, to have again, repossesse, and
re-enjoy, as in his or their former Estate, any thing herein mentioned to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding, And the said J. J. for him, his
Executors and Administrators covenanteth, etc. that he the said J. his
Executors or Administrators, after full payment made to him or them of the said
etc. in form aforesaid, shall and will upon request to him or them therefore,
deliver, or cause, etc. to the said T. his Executors or Assigns, whole and
uncancelled, as well the said Original Indenture of Lease, as also all the
several Conveyances thereof, which hereafter are particularly recited, that is
to say, one poll Deed made from the said E. B. to one R. W. one other poll Deed
made from the said R. to one W. A. and one Deed indented, made from the said W.
A. to the said T. J. without any delay, fraud or covin. In witness, etc.

A Mortgage of a Lease to save harmless of a Bond by the Mortgagee entered
into, binding the Mortgagor upon the Condition to pay the Rent reserved upon
the Lease, and deliver to the Mortgagee Acquittances for it by a certain day.
THis Indenture, etc. Whereas W. G. Citizen and Carpenter of L. by his
Indenture of Lease demised, etc. And whereas also E. B. Citizen and Haberdasher
of L. together with T. C Citizen and Parriar of L. and with me the said W. R.
at the special request and desire of me the said W. R. and for my only debt
and duty by our Writing or Bond Obligatory, bearing date the two and twentieth
day of February, in the four and twentieth year of the reign etc. stand and
be jointly and severally bounden unto J. C: etc. Citizen and Clothworker of L.
in the sum of forty pounds of lawful, etc. with Condition thereupon
endorsed, for the true payment, at the now dwelling house of the said I. C.
situate and being, etc. of the sum of twenty pounds of like money, in manner
and form following, that is to say, on the first day of Ma^ch next coming,
after the date of the same Writing or Bond obligatory, twenty shillings on the
first day of April then next ensuing, twenty shillings on the first day of May
then next ensuing, twenty shillings; and so from henceforth every month monthly
following, on the first day of every month twenty shillings, until the said
sum of twenty pounds and every part thereof shall be so fully and truly paid,
as by the same Writing or Bond obligatory, and the Condition thereof more
plainly and at large may appear. Now know ye, that I the said W. R. for the
full and clear indemnity and discharging of the said E. B. his Executors and
Administrators, and every of them against the said I. C. his Executors
administrators and assigns, and every of them, and all other of and for the
said writing or Bond obligatory. And also of all actions, suits costs,
penalties, damages, and all other damages concerning the same, have given,
granted, bargained, sold, delivered, assigned, and set over, and by these
presents do fully and clearly give, grant bargain, sell, deliver, assign, and
set over unto the said E. B. as well the said Indenture of Lease, as also all
such Estate, Right, Title, Interest, term of years, claim, and demand, as I
the said W: R: have, should, may, might, or ought to have or claim, to, of,
and in the said Message or Tenement, Yard, Shed, and all other the Premises
with the appurtenances, in and by the said Indenture of Lease demised and
granted, by force of the said Indenture of Lease, or otherwise, by any other
ways or means, right, interest, or title whatsoever; To have and to hold the
said Message or Tenement, Yard, Shed, Indenture of Lease, and all other, etc.
Provided always, that if I the said W: R: my Executors Administrators or
Assigns, or any of us, do well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the
foresaid J: C: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, at or within the
foresaid now dwelling house of the said J: C. situate, etc. the foresaid sum
of twenty pounds of lawful, etc. on the days of payment thereof mentioned in
the Condition of the foresaid writing or Bond Obligatory: And that according to
the true intent and meaning thereof, for the full and clear indemnity and
discharge of the said E: B: his Executors and Administrators, and every of them
in that behalf. And shall also from time to time, until full payment of the
said sum of twenty pounds be made according to the true intent and meaning of
the foresaid writing, or Bond Obligatory, well and truly pay or cause to be
paid to the foresaid W: G: his Executors Administrators or Assigns, the
foresaid yearly rent of five pounds, in and by the said Indenture of Lease,
for the rent and farm of the premises reserved: And that at the Feast days
of payment thereof mentioned in the said Indenture of Lease, or within the
space of twenty days next after every of the same Feast-daies, and within the
same space of twenty days, shall bring show and deliver to the said E: B: his
Executors Administrators or Assigns, at the now dwelling house of the said E:
situate in the Parish, etc. a sufficient and lawful Acquittance, under the
hand and Seal of the said W: G: his Executors Administrators or Assigns,
testifying the payment and receipt of the same rent accordingly, or shall make
sufficient proof unto the said E: B: his Executors or Assigns, at the place
aforesaid, within the time and space aforesaid, of the payment of the said
rent, in manner and form aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning
hereof: that then I the said W: R: shall have again redelivered to me, my
Executors Administrators or assigns, the said Indenture of Lease whole and
uncancelled. And that then and from thenceforth this my present writing and
every Covenant, Gift, Grant, Bargain, Article, and Agreement herein contained,
shall be clearly void and of none effect, any thing in these presents expressed
to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And if default shall happen to be made
in payment of the said sum of twenty pounds, or any part thereof, by me the
said W: R, my Executors administrators or assigns, contrary to the true intent
and meaning of the foresaid Writing or Bond Obligatory, or in performance of
any the Conditions aforesaid, in part or in all, contrary to the form
aforesaid: That then I the said W: R: for me, my Executors and administrators,
do covenant and grant to and with the said E. B. his Executors administrators
and assigns by these presents, that this my present Writing and every
Covenant, Gift, Grant, Bargain, Article, and Agreement herein contained, shall
stand and remain in full strength and virtue: and that the said E: his
Executors administrators and assigns, immediately from and after such default
of payment made of the said sum of twenty pounds, or any part thereof,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of the foresaid Writing or Bond
Obligatory, or in performance of any Conditions aforesaid, shall and may
lawfully, peaceably, and quietly enter, have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the said
Message or Tenement, Yard, Shed, and all other the premises with the
appurtenances, in and by the said Indenture of Lease demised and granted
(except as in the same is excepted) according to the contents, true meaning,
form and effect of the said Indenture of Lease, without any let, trouble,
title, expulsion, eviction, recovery, or interruption of me the said W: R: my
Executors administrators or assigns, or any of us, or of any other person or
persons whatsoever, during all the residue of the said term of seven and
twenty years then to come. In witness whereof to this my present writing, I
the said W: R. have set my Seal the four and twentieth day of February, in
the four and twentieth year of the reign of our Sovereign, etc.

Provisoes.
A very substantial Proviso barring a man and his Executors, not to do away a
Lease, unless the Taker come to the Landlord and take anew.
PRovided always, that if it shall happen at any time hereafter this present
Lease, to be by the said J. C. his Executors Administrators or Assigns,
aliened, sold, set over, or departed from, to any manner of person or persons;
or that the same Lease be by the said I. C. by his last Will and Testament in
writing or without writing, bequeathed to any manner of person or persons: or
if the same Lease do come to the hands and possession of his Executor or
Executors, administrator, or administrators, by reason of Executorship, or
Letters administratory of the Ordinary; or else to be by order of Law as a
Chattell of the same I. C. extended and put in execution by force of any Process
or Precept out of any the Queens Majesty's Courts, or of her Heirs or
Successors, Kings and Queens of England, taken out of the hands and possession
of the said I. C. or out of the hands and possession of the Executor or
Executors, administrator, or administrators of the said I. C. That then he,
she, or they that shall so receive, have, and enjoy the same Lease, by reason
of any the fore-recited ways or means, shall within forty days next after
the receipt or obtaining thereof, come to the said R. B. his Executors or
assigns, and surrender in his or their old Lease, into the hands of the said
R. B. his Executors or assigns: and receive and take at the hands of the said
^. his Heirs or assigns, a new Lease of so many years as shall be then to
come undetermined of the same old Lease, which new Lease shall also contain
the like Covenants, payments, and promises in every point as this present
Lease, does, and shall also enter and be bound in the like Bond, for the
performance of such Covenants as the said I C. shall for the performance of the
Covenants comprised in these presents be bound in; which Lease and Bond shall
be made at the costs and charges of him, her, or them that shall and will take
the benefit of the same Lease: and if she or they which shall come to the
lawful possession hereof, by reason of any of the ways or means before
recited, do not surrender in his or their interest in the old, and take a new
as aforesaid; Or else do refuse to enter into Bond as aforesaid, for the
performance of such Covenants as the said I. C. shall for the performance of
the Covenants comprised in these Indentures, be bound in, that then the Lease
to be void, and re-entry, etc.

Wills.
A Clause in a Testament to enable an Executor to sell his Testators Lands.
ITem, I will and ordain that the Executor of this my Testament, or his
Executor, or Executors, Administrator or Administrators, for and toward the
performance of my said Testament, within the space of four years next after
my decease, shall bargain, grant, alien, and sell away in Fee-simple, all
those my Lands, etc. for the doing, executing, and perfect finishing whereof, I
do give, grant, will, and transfer by these presents, to my said Executor, and
to his Executors and Administrators, full and lawful power, authority, right,
and title, and interest to grant, alien, bargain, and sell, and also to convey
and assure all my said Lands, etc. to any person or persons, and to their
Heirs for ever, in Feesimple, by all and every such lawful way and means in
the Law, and otherwise as to my said Executor, etc. or to his or their Learned
Council shall seem meet and reasonable.

Releases.
An Indenture testifying the payment of a sum of money, according to a
Condition contained in a Deed of Feoffment, for making void of the same
Feoffment.
THis Indenture, witnesses, That whereas heretofore J. W. B. then of H. in the
County, etc. Gent. by my Deed indented, bearing date the twelfth day of
September, in the year, etc. did enfeoffe my Brother F. B. J. B. and R: G.
Husbandman, and one N. L. Gent. deceased, of and in all that my moiety of the
manner of H. with the appurtenan. in the County of H. with all those my Lands
Tenm. Rents Reversions and Services, being parcel of the said Manor of H. or
thereunto belonging: and all other my Messuages Lands Tenements Rents
Reversions Services and Hereditaments in H. aforesaid, to such use and uses as
in the said Feoffment are specified, with this Proviso notwithstanding, that if
I the said W. B. or mine Heirs, at any time hereafter should pay or tender to
pay to the said F. B. N. C. I. B. and R. G. or to any of them, or to the Heirs
of the Survivor of them, ten shillings of, etc. then declaring or to them
signifying mine intent then to be, to have again, that my moiety of the Manor
aforesaid, and all and singular the premises in mine ^old state; that then
immediately and from thenceforth my said former Writing, Deed, and Feoffment
should be void and of no force, any thing in the same to the contrary
notwithstanding, as by the same former Deed indented more plainly may appear.
Now be it known, that I the said W. B. minding to make the said former Deed
indented, and Feoffment aforesaid, clearly void, have for that purpose
according to the tenor of the said Proviso, paid to the said I. B. on the day
of the date of these presents, ten shillings of, etc: then declaring and
signifying, and by these presents now declaring, and signifying to my said
Feoffees now living, and to every of them that mine intent then at the payment
of the said ten shillings, was and now is to have again, that my moiety of the
Manor aforesaid, and all and singular the premises in mine old estate, that
is to say, in such estate as I had thereof before I made the said former Deed:
And that now from henceforth the said former Writing, Deed, and Feoffment shall
be void. And I the said I. B. do knowledge that I had and received the said ten
shillings at the hands of the said W. B. as aforesaid, and heard him declare
his intention to be by the payment thereof as is aforesaid: and also we the
said F. B. and R. G. do take notice thereof and knowledge our consent thereunto
by these presents; to both parts whereof as well I the said W. B. as the said
F. B. I. B. and R. G. have set our Seals, given, etc.

Surrenders.
A Surrender Conditional by Tenant for term of life, to him in Reversion for
a Recovery to pass.
THis Indenture, etc. between, etc. witnesses, That whereas the said A B. now
has, and holds diverse Lands Meadows Pastures and Commons situate, etc. of
an Estate for term of his natural life, under a certain yearly rent by
virtue of a Lease thereof unto him made by Indenture, the reversion thereof to
the said H. S. and his Heirs appertaining. Now this Indenture witnesses, that
the said A. B. for diverse good causes, etc. does by these presents surrender
and yield up unto the said H. S. all the Estate and Interest of the said A. in
and to the said Lands, etc. upon condition nevertheless, that if the said H.
S. his Executors administrators or assigns, do not, or shall not well and
truly pay, or cause, etc. to the said A. the sum of five hundred pounds of,
etc. on the, etc. at the, etc. that then and from thenceforth this present Deed
of Surrender shall be utterly void and of none effect, and then the said A. B.
to have again the said Lands, etc. as in his first and former Estate, any
thing to the contrary, etc. And the said H. S. for him, etc. does covenant,
etc. for the Tenants enjoying, till the day in the Condition mentioned.

A Surrender by two Tenants for life to him that has the Reversion.
THis Indenture, etc. Between Sir E. L. of, etc. and R. F. of, etc. and T. F.
of, etc. of the one part, and S. H. and M. his wife of the other part,
witnesses, That whereas the said Sir E. L. and R. F. by force and means of
good and sufficient conveyance and assurance in the Law, are, and do stand
lawfully seized in their Demesne as of Freehold, for and during the term of
the natural life of the said T. F. of and in all that the Farm, etc. the
immediate remainder or reversion of the said Farm to the said S. H. and M. his
wife, and the Heirs of the said M. belonging and appertaining. Now the said
Sir E. L. and R. F. at the request of the said T. F. to them in this behalf
made, and for diverse and sundry good and reasonable causes, etc. them in this
behalf moving; have granted and surrendered, and by these presents, etc. unto
the said S. and M. and to the Heirs of the said M. the said Farm, etc. And
all the estate, right, title, interest, claim, and demand of the said Sir E.
and R. and either of them, to, of, or in the said Farm, etc. and every or any
part or parcel thereof; To have and to hold all and singular the premises
with the appurtenances, to the said S: and M: and the Heirs and Assigns of
the said M: to and for the proper use and behoof of the said S: and M: and of
the heirs and assigns of the said M: for ever. And the said Sir E: L: for him
etc. covenanteth, etc. that the said S: and M: and the Heirs and assigns of
the said M: shall or may from time, etc. hereafter lawfully, etc. have, hold,
occupy, possess, and enjoy the said Farm, etc. and all the Rents, Issues,
Revenues, and Profits thereof or thereby from time to time coming, growing,
arising, or renewing, to perceive, receive, take, and enjoy to their own proper
use and behoof for ever, as well free and clearly discharged, etc. of, for, and
from all and singular former Bargains, etc. had, made, etc. or to be had,
made, etc. by the said Sir E. As also without any let, etc. The like Covenant
by R: F. In witness, etc.

Testimonialls.
A Testification of having the assignment of a Lease in trust, where it is set
over to be saved from drowning by purchase of the fee simple.
TO all, etc. H. B. of L. Haberdasher, and S. H. of L. aforesaid, Draper, send
greeting: Whereas W. N. of B. in the County of E Gent. by his poll Deed bearing
date, etc. Has conveyed, bargained, sold, assigned and set over to us the said
H. and S. those two several Indentures of Lease, whereof the one bears date,
etc. and the other bears date, etc. made to the said W. N. by M. B. Gent. of
all the marsh-grounds, etc. As by the said Deed of the said W: N: more plainly
and at large may and will appear: Know ye, that we the said H: and S: had the
same conveyance, bargain, sale and assignment to us made as aforesaid, only in
trust to be used and employed from time to time, at the appointment, will and
pleasure of T. M. citiz. and Haberdasher of L with whose only money the said
Leases were purchased, and to us the said H: and S: conveyed, as aforesaid, and
not otherwise, or in any other manner whatsoever, which Leases and conveyance,
we have therefore on the day of the date hereof delivered into the custody of
the said T: S: by him, his heirs and assigns, to be preserved or annihilated
at his or their pleasure, binding our selves, and premising for us, our heirs,
executors and administratos by these presents, That we and the survivour of us,
his executors and administrators, shall and will, grant and convey, bargain,
sell, and set over the said Leases, and either of them, and all our estate,
title and interrest, of, in and to the said marsh grounds, and other the
Premises, at all times hereafter, when as the said T. S. his heirs or
assigns, shall require the same to such person or persons as the said T. S.
his heirs or assigns shall in that case nominate and appoint, In witness, and.

A Writing or Testimonial certifying the payment of a sum of money according
to a Condition contained in an Indenture, for making void of the same, and uses
therein contained.
BE it known that on the day of N. in the year, etc. in the forenoone of the
same day, W: B: the elder, citizen and Mercer of L. was living, and then being
personally present in the Chapel in W: London, called the Me^cers Chapel,
with his own hands the same day in the same Chapel, did pay to the proper
hands of W: B: the younger, natural son of the said W. B. the elder, the sum
of 100 l. of lawful, etc. at one entire payment, according to the tenor,
purport and effect of one pair of Indentures, made between the said W: B: on
the one part, and A: B. C: and D. natural sons of the said W: B: the elder on
the other part, And bearing date, etc. which said sum of one hundred pounds
the said W: B: the younger had and received accordingly, And then and there the
said W: B: the elder, did plainly and openly declare, that he did so pay the
said sum of one hundred pounds, to the intent that according to the condition
contained in the said indentures, the same Indentures, for all the lands,
tenements, and hereditaments therein specified, from henceforth should be and
remain to the use of the said W: B: the elder, his heirs and assigns for ever,
and to none other use or uses, And to the intent also, that from thenceforth,
the said W: the elder, his heirs and assigns, and all other, person and
persons, and their heirs, seized, or to be seized, of or in all that Message,
etc. and all and singular other lands, tenemnts and hereditaments in the said
Indenture specified, or of every or any part thereof, should from thenceforth
stand, and be thereof, and of every part thereof seized to the only use of the
said W: the elder, his heirs and assigns, and to none other use, uses or
intents, any thing in the said Indentures expressed, or thereupon to be
construed to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding; Whereupon we A: B: C: D,
and E: F: which were present with the said W: B: the elder, in the Mercers
Chapel aforesaid, when and whilst, as he did with his own hands there pay the
said sum of, etc. of lawful, etc. unto the said W. the younger, in manner
and form abovesaid, being called and required by the said W: B: the elder, to
bear witness of the said payment and other the Premises, for testimony of the
truth in this behalf to all to whom it does and may appertain have hereunto
with the said W. B. the elder subscribed our names, and set our seals, Given,
etc.

Uses.
An Indenture to lead the Use of a Recovery to strengthen a Lease of Land in
London made by a Tenant for life, and the Tenant, in tail in remainder.
THis Indenture tripartite made, etc. Between L: H: of L. widow, late wife of
T. H. of L. Gent. deceased, and before that the wife of C. W. late citizen and
Merchant-taylor of L. deceased, and C: W: of L. Gent. son of the said C: W:
deceased, and of the said L. on the first part, And E: D: of L. Gent. and R: W:
citizen and Goldsmiths of L. on the second part. And T: P: of L. Draper, on the
third part, witnesses, Recital of the Lease.
that where the said L: H: and C: W: the son, by their indenture of Lease,
bearing date the first day of this instant month of February, for the
considerations therein mentioned. Have demised, granted, betaken, and to farm
letten to the said T: P: all that Message or Tenement, being the corner
Message or Tenement over against Leaden Hall corner, in the parish, etc. and
all shops, etc. To have, etc. from Michaelmas, etc. for twenty one years, etc.
Yiedling, etc. to the said L: and C: the son and to the heirs and assigns of
the said G. twenty pounds of, etc. at four Feasts, Surrender by the Tenant for
life.
as by the said Indenture of Lease, etc. It is now fully concluded,
condescended, and agreed, by and between the said parties, to these presents,
in manner and form following: That is to say; First the said L: H: does by
these presents, surrender to the said C. the son, her estate, title, and
interest of and in the said Message or Tenement, shops, etc. and other the
Premises with the appurtenances, upon condition, That within three months
next after the date hereof, Condition of the surrender.
the said Message, etc. shall be lawfully assured to the said L. H. for the
term of her life, with the reversion expectant, to and in the said C. the son,
and his heirs, according to the form hereunder limited: And the said, C. W. the
son, does covenant and grant, For better assurance to suffer a Recovery.
for him and his heirs, to and with the said E. D. R. VV. and T. P. and every
of them, their heirs, executors, and administrators, and the heirs, executors
and administrators of every of them, by these presents, That for the better
assurance, and sure making of the said Message, etc. to the said T. P. his
executors and assigns, for, and during the said term of twenty one years, the
said C. W. the son, shall permit and suffer the said E. D. and R. VV. to pursue
and bring the Kings Majesty's Writ of Right patent out of her Majesty's High
Court of Chancery, against the said C: VV: the son, to be directed to the Major
and Sheriff of the city of London; upon which Writ of Right patent, according
to the custom of the city of London, for passing of common Recoveries for
assurance of lands, tenements, and hereditaments, the said E: D: and R: VV:
shall demand against the said C: W: the said Message or Tenement, and other
the Premises, with the appurtenances, by the name of one Message, and two
shops, with the appurtenances in the parish of S. P. etc. And unto which Writ
the said C. VV. by himself, or his sufficient Attorney, shall appear and vouch
to warranty the common vouchee; (Whereupon recovery, judgment and execution
may be had, according to the course of of common recoveries with voucher used
in the said city) And it is by these presents covenanted, Use of the Recovery.
granted, expressed, concluded, condiscended, declared, and agreed upon, by and
between all and every the said parties to these presents, That the said E. D.
and R. W. and their heirs, from and immediately after judgment and execution
in form aforesaid shall be had, shall stand and be seized of and in the said
Message, etc. with the appurtenances, And that the said recovery and the
execution thereof, and all other recoveries to be had or executed of the
Premises, or any part thereof by or between the said parties, or any of them,
by what names, or in what manner or form soever shall be, and shall be
adjudged, deemed and taken to be to the uses and intents hereafter in these
presents mentioned and declared; That is to say, to the use of the said L: H:
for and during the term of her natural life, And after the decease of the said
L. to and for the only and proper use and behoof of the said C. W. and of the
heirs of the same C. for ever, and to none other use, uses, intents, nor
purposes whatsoever. In witness, etc.

An Indenture for raising of Uses in Land, with a Condition to alter the same
at pleasure.
THis Indenture, etc. Between Dame A. L etc. late wife, etc. on the one part,
And J. H. Grocer, and J. N. Goldsmith, citizens of London on the other part;
Whereas the said Dame A. L. for diverse causes and considerations her specially
moving, Has by writing indented, sealed with the seals of the said Dame A: and
of one T: H: now Treasurer of Christ's Hospital in L. bearing date the 00 day
of this present April, revoked, annulled, made frustrate and void, And by these
presents, does revoke, annull, make fruustrate and void, all and singular use
and uses, limitations of use and uses, and estates, at any time or times
heretofore created, limited, raised, or made by the said Dame A: by Indenture
made between her and any others, or otherwise of, or in the lands, tenement and
hereditaments hereafter in these presents expressed and mentioned, and of, and
in every part and parcel of the same, other then such as have been created,
limited, or raised, or made to the use of the said Dame A. L. and of her heirs
and assigns for ever, and other then Lease or Grant, Leases or Grants by me
made of the Premises, or of any part thereof, for term of life, lives, or
years; as by the said former Writing indented more at large does and may
appear. Consideration.
This Indenture now witnesses, that the same Dame A: L: for and in
consideration of the marriage heretofore had between the said Sir T: L: and the
said Dame A. and in consideration of the natural love and motherly good will
which the said Dame A. has, and bears to K: B: and W: B: daughters of the
said Sir T. L. and Dame A. And for and toward the better advancement and
maintenance of the said K: B: and W: B: and for and toward the more certain and
quiet stay, order, and disposition of the lands, tenements and hereditaments
hereafter mentioned, in and to such of the children and kindred of the said Sir
T: L: and Dame A: and in and to their heirs and assigns for ever, as she does
think most worthy for their duty and obedience to enjoy and possess the same,
and for diverse other causes and considerations, the said Dame A: specially
moving, Covenants.
Does Covenant, grant and agree for herself, her heirs and assigns, to and
with the said J: H: and J: N: their and every of their heirs and assigns, And
it is now covenanted, granted, concluded, and fully agreed, between the said
parties to these presents, for them, their heirs, executos and assigns, and
to and with other of them, their heirs, executors and assigns, in manner and
form following: First, To make an estate by a day.
that she the said Dam A: L: and her heirs, before the Feast of All Saints
next, etc. shall make, assure and convey, or cause to suffer to be made,
assurred, or conveyed to the said J: H: and J: N: and their heirs, or the
Survivor of them and his heirs for ever, a good, sure and lawful estate in
fee simple, of and in one Message and Tenement, with the appurtenances in,
etc. and of and in, etc. And of and in all other the Messuages, lands,
tenements, and hereditaments of the said Dame A: whereof she the said Dame A:
is seized of any estate of inheritance in H: and J: aforesaid in the said
County of, etc. to the uses, behoofs, intents, limitations, and purposes
hereafter in these presents expressed or mentioned under the provisoes and
conditions hereafter mentioned, and to none other use, behoof, limitation or
purpose; That is to say, to the use and behoof of the said Dame A: and of her
assigns, for term of her life without impeachment of waste: To stand seized to
uses.
And it is further covenanted, granted, conditioned, and fully agreed beween
the said parties to these presents, that immediately, from and after the death
of the said Dame A: the said J: and J: and their heirs, and the survivor of
them and his heirs, shall stand and be seized of, and in all that, etc. To the
use and behoof of the said K: B: and of her heirs and assigns for ever. And
of and in, etc to the use and behoof of the said W: B: and of her heirs and
assigns for ever. Provisoes for the making good of Leases.
Provided always, and nevertheless it is covenanted, granted, condiscended,
conditioned, concluded and agreed between the said parties to these present
Indentures for them, their heirs and assigns, to and with the other of them;
That if the said Dame A: has made, or at any time hereafter, during her
natural life, shall make any demise, lease, or grant, for term of life, lives,
or years of any of the said lands, tenements and hereditaments, and other the
Premises, or of any part or parcel of the same, to any person or persons,
That then, and from henceforth, the said J: and J: and their heirs, and the
survivor of them, and his heirs, shall stand and be seized of such parcel, and
of so much of the said lands, tenements, and other the Premises, with the
appurtenances, as is, or shall be so demised, letten, or granted by the said
Dame A: to the use and behoof of such person or persons to whom any such
demise, lease or grant is, or shall be so made, only for, and during such
estate and interest, as is, or shall be comprised in such demise, lease, or
grant, according to the purport of the same demise, lease or grant, so long as
such person or persons, to whom such demise, lease or grant is, or shall be so
made, shall and will within forty days next after reasonable request, not
only pay the rents, duties, customs, and services reserved, or which shall be
reserved upon any such lease or grant to such person or persons, to whom the
use, reversion, or remainder thereof, immediately shall then appertain by means
of any conveyance covenanted to be made by these presents, or else of any
covenant contained in these Indentures; But also perform all such covenants,
grants, articles and agreement, as on the part and behalf of such person or
persons shall be to be performed, fulfilled, or kept, comprised in such demise,
lease or grant, and use herein contained or limited, to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding, Provided always, and it is further covenanted, etc,
Condition to avoid the now uses upon payment of ten shill. to, etc.
between the said parties by these presents, That if the same Dame A: at any
time hereafter, during her life, do render or pay to the said Treasurer, or to
any one of the Governous, of Christ's Hospital in London, for the time being,
or to any other, to their, or any of their use, the sum of ten shillings of
lawful, etc. for the behoof and relief of the poor children of the said
Hospital of Christ's Church within the city of London, for the intent and
purpose to alter all or any of the uses aforesaid. That then and fronceforth,
the aforesaid use and uses, shall cease, etc.
limitations and intents limited, or appointed by this present Indenture shall
cease, determine, and be utterly void; And that then, and from thenceforth the
said J: and J: and their heirs, and the survivor of them and his heirs, and the
said Dame A: and all other person and persons, being then seized of the said
lands, tenements, and other the Premises, with their appurtenances, shall,
etc. to the use of the said Dame A: and of her heirs and assigns for ever, and
to none other use, intent or purpose, This Indenture, or any thing therein
contained to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding; If the party seized in
see die before assurance made, then uses are raised according to the estates
prelimited.
And the said Dame A. for the considerations before in these presents declared,
and for diverse other causes her moving, Does covenant and grant, for her self,
her heirs and assigns, to and with the said J. and J. their heirs, executors,
and administrators, and the heirs, executors, and administrators of either of
them. That if she the said Dame A. do happen to die before the said Feast of
All Saints next, etc. and before any estate or assurance by her made of the
said Messuages, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, and other the Premises,
with their appurtenances, to the said J. and J. and their heirs, or the
survivor of them and his heirs, according to the intent and true meaning
aforesaid, That then she the said Dame A. and her heirs, and all and every
other person and persons, and their heirs, having any estate of interest, or
inheritance, in or to the said lands, tenements, and other the Premises, with
their appurtenances, or in or to any part or parcel thereof, shall immediately
from and after the last instant, of the third day next before the day of the
death of the said Dame A. for the considerations aforesaid, stand and be
seized, of and in the said Messuages, lands, tenements, meadows, pastures,
woods, under-woods, rents, reversions, services, and hereditaments, and of and
in all and singular other the Premises, with their appurtenances, to the
several uses, intents, behoofs, purposes and limitations before in these
presents expressed and limited under such provisoes, determinations and
conditions, and in such manner and form as are before in these presents
mentioned and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose, And that if
the said Dame A. do happen to live until the said Feast of, etc. next, etc.
And that before the same day, there be no estate or assurance by her made of
the said Message, lands, tenements and hereditaments, and other the Premises,
with the appurtenances, to the said J. and J. and their heirs, or to the
survivor of them and his heirs, according to the true intent and meaning
aforesaid, That then and from thenceforth for ever, for the considerations
aforesaid, the said Dame A. and her heirs, and all and every other person and
persons, and their heirs, having, or which then shall have any estate or
interest of inheritance, in or to the Premises, with their appurtenances, or
in or to any part or parcel thereof, shall from thenceforth for ever, for the
considerations aforesaid, stand and be seized of and in the said Message,
lands, tenements and hereditaments, and of, and in all and singular other the
Premises, with their appurtenances, to their several uses, intens, behoofs,
purposes, and limitations before, in and by these presents, expressed under
such provisoes, determinations and conditions, and in such manner and form as
are before in these presents mentioned and declared, and to none other use,
intent, or purpose. Expressing of conveyances to be the uses aforesaid.
And it is further covenanted and agreed between the said parties to these
presents, That all and every estates, assurances, and conveyances whatsoever,
at any time hereafter to be made by the said Dame A. to the said I. and I. and
their heirs, or to the survivor of them and his heirs, of the said lands,
tenements, hereditaments, and other the Premises, with their appurtenances, or
of any parcel thereof, shall be to the several uses, interrests, purposes and
limitations before in these presents expressed under such provisoes,
determinations, limitations, and conditions, as are before in these presents
mentioned and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose. In witness,
etc.

A signification to defeit uses created in land, according to a Proviso, etc.
TO all to whom this present Writing indented shall come X. H. Esquire sends
greeting in our Lord God everlasting, Whereas Sir J. S. of O. in the County of
N. Knight, by the assents, consents and agreements of Sir. R. C. Knight, I. S.
Esquire son and heir apparent of the said Sir I. S. and T. S. another of the
sons of the said Sir I. S. as well at the contemplation of our sovereign Lady,
the Queens Majesty, and by the mediation of the Right honorable W. Lord B.
Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter. T. Earl of S. and Knight of the
said most noble Order of the Garter, And R. Earl of L. of the same most noble
Order of the Garter, Knight, by Indenture quadripertite, bearing date, etc. for
and in consideration of the sum of two hundred marks of lawful, etc. ordered
and appointed by the said Earl of S. and Earl of L. to be paid by the said X.
H. to the said Sir I. S. and for and in consideration of certain Messuages,
lands, tenements, and hereditaments, situate, lying and being in M. B. and N.
in the said County, then being of the clear usual yearly rent of seven pounds
16 shillings and one penic, And by the said Indenture quadripertite, conveyed
and assured by the said X: H: unto the said Sir I: S. and to his heirs and
assigns, to his and their own uses, and for diverse other good considerations in
the same Indenture specified; has bargained and sold, given and granted unto
the said X. H. and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the use of the said
X. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, certain Lands and Tenements
supposed to be one Yard-land and a half with the appurtenances, in H.
aforesaid, then or late before, being in the tenure or occupation of the said
X. H. or of his assigns, and also all other those Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments with the appurtenances in H. and C. in the said County, and in
either of them, then or late before, being in the tenure or occupation of the
said X. or of his assigns, which the same Sir J. S. at any time theretofore
had or was seized of: and also one Message and certain Lands supposed to be
one half Yard-land, be it more or less, with the appurtenances in C.
aforesaid, then or late before, being in the tenure or occupation of R. T. or
of his Assigns: and also three parts of one Message, or Farme-place of one
Dove house, one. Garden, one Close, and of two yard lands with the
appurtenances in H. aforesaid, then or late before, being in the tenure or
occupation of one H. P. or of his assigns: And also three parts of one
Message, etc. and one other Message, etc. And all other those Lands Tenements
and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances in H. aforesaid, which the said Sir
J. S. at any time then to fore had or was seized of, situate, lying or being
in H. aforesaid: And also all those Messuages Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments, with all and singular their appurtenances, situate, lying, or
being in C: aforesaid, and then or late before being in the tenure or
occupation of the said X. H. and of R: T: or of either of them, or of the
assign or assigns of them or either of them, which the said Sir I. S: at any
time then to fore had or was seized of, situate, lying, and being in G.
aforesaid: All which said Premises in H: and C: aforesaid, then were of the
usual clear yearly rent of fifty seven pounds thirteen shillings. And whereas
the said Sir I: S: by the said Indenture quadripartite, has covenanted,
granted, and agreed for himself, his Heirs Executors and administrators, to
and with the said X: H: his Heirs and assigns, that if he the said X. H. his
Heirs or assigns, or any of them, at any time then after, should attempt or
go about to procure, get, or obtain any further assurance of the foresaid
Lands Tenements and other the Premises in H. and C. aforesaid, Act of
Parliament.
or any parcel thereof to be assured or conveyed by any Act of Parliament in
any Session or Sessions of the two next Sessions of Parliament then next to be
holden, to be had or made to the said X. H his Heirs and assigns, against the
said Sir J. his Heirs and assigns, and every of them, and against all such
other person or persons and their Heirs, as should or might have, claim, or
demand, any Estate or Estates, right, title, use, or interest of, in, to, or
out of the premises in H: or C: aforesaid, or of, in, to, or out of any part,
or parcel of the same, by, from, or under ^he said Sir J. or by reason or
means of any act or acts, thing or things, assurance, or assurances then to
fore had, made, or done by the said Sir I. or by any other person or persons,
by his assent, means, or procurement: That then he the said Sir I. S. I. S. the
Son and T: S. the Son, and every of them, shall all as much as they, or any of
them conveniently could or might consent unto, and give their furtherance, for
the further and better assurance and sure making of the Premises in H: and C:
aforesaid, and every part and parcel of the same, unto the said X. his Heirs
and assigns, to the use of the same X and of his Heirs and assigns, to be
had and made by Act of Parliament as is aforesaid, as in and by the said
Indenture amongst diverse other things therein contained, more plainly and at
large it does and may appear. And further, whereas the said X. H. by his
Indenture quadripartite, Recital of an Indenture to raise Uses.
bearing date, etc. made between the said X: H: by the name of X: H: Esquire,
Captain of the Guard of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, attendant upon her
royal Person on the first part, and Sir W: M: Knight, etc. on the second part,
F: S: Esquire, on the third part, and W: D: Gent. on the fourth part,
Consideration of payment of debts owing.
has for and in consideration of the true payment of such debts as the said X.
did then owe, or at the time of his decease should owe either unto our said
Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, or to her Highness Heirs and Successors,
Covenant that the parties to whom the assurance is made shall stand seized of
the Manors, etc.
or to any other person or persons: And for diverse other good causes and
considerations in and by the said Indenture at large set forth specified and
declared, has for him and his Heirs covenanted, granted, and agreed, to and
with the said Sir W: M: I: S: and W: D: and their Heirs Executors and
administrators, that he the said X. his Heirs and assigns, and all and every
other person and persons, and their heirs and assigns, which then stood and
were seized, or which then after should stand or be seized, of or in the Manor
of H: with the appurtenances, in the County of N: and of and in the Scites and
Demesnes of the late dissolved Monastery in S. in the said County of N. and of
and in all those Woods, under Woods, and Grounds called C. Wood, in the said
County of N. and of and in the Manor of B: with the appurtenances, in the
County of S: and of and in the Site and Demesnes of the late Monastery of B:
in the said County of S, and of and in all those two Parks in the County of W:
commonly called C: Parks, whereof the one is called the H: Park, and the other
the W: Park, and of and in the Manor of S. in the said County of W, with the
appurtenances, and of and in the Advowson of the Church of S. aforesaid, and of
and in all the Castle and Manor of C: with the appurtenances, in the Isle of
P: in the County of D: and the advowson of the Church of C. Castle with the
Chapel of K. thereunto annexed, in the said County of D: and of and in all
other the Manors Messuages Lands Tenements Reversions Services Woods
under-woods, Liberties, Franchises Jurisdictions and Hereditaments of the said
X. in H. S: C: B: C: S: C: and the Isle of P. in the Counties of N: S: W: and
D: or any of them, And all other Lands, etc.
and of and in all or any other the Manors Messuages Mills Orchards Gardens
Lands Tenements Meadows Leasures Pastures Woods under Woods Rents Reversions
Services Advowsons Parsonages Tithes Waters Fishings Courts Liberties
Jurisdictions Profits Commodities and Hereditamen^s whatsoever, of the said X.
H. with all and singular their appurtenances situate, lying, or being in the
said County of, etc. or any of them, or elsewhere within the Realm of E: of or
in the which Manors Lands Tenements and other the Premises, the said X: H.
then had any Estate of Inheritance in Feesimple in Possession Reversion or
Remainder, should from thenceforth stand and be seized thereof, To Uses.
and of every part and parcel thereof, to such use and uses as be in and by
the said Indenture quadripartite last recited, set forth, specified, and
declared, Proviso to defeat the same by sealing and recording a Writing.
as in and by the same Indenture it does and may at large appear, with one
Proviso in the same Indenture contained, whereby it is provided, covenanted,
granted, concluded condiscended and agreed between the said parties to these
presents, for them and their Heirs; that if the said X. H: at any time then
after during his life, by his writing subscribed with his hand and sealed with
his Seal, and enrolled in any of the Courts of Record of the Queens Highness,
her Heirs or Successors, should signify or declare that his will and pleasure
should be that the uses and behoofs limited or expressed in those presents,
should be void and of none effect, as touching or concerning all the said
Manors Lands Tenements Hereditaments and other the Premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, that then all the uses behoofes, intents, estates, and
limitations conveyed, Uses.
raised or contained by or in those presents touching or concerning all the
said Manors Lands Tenem. and Hered. and other the prem. whereof, or in the
which the uses, intents, or behoofs limited or expressed, in those presents
should be so signified or declared to be void and of none effect, or touching
or concerning any part or parcel of the same premises, whereof or in the
which the uses, intents, or behoofs limited or expressed in those presents
should be so signified or declared to be void and of none effect, Void.
should from thenceforth be utterly void and of none effect, and that then all
and every person and persons, and their heirs, which then stood, or were
seized, or which then after should stand or be seized of or in the said Manors
Lands Tenements Hereditaments and other the premises, or of or in any part,
parcel, or member of the same, should from thenceforth stand and be seized of
and in the same premises, o^ of or in the which uses, intents, or behoofs
limited or expressed in those presents, should be so signified, or declared to
be void and of none effect, or of or in such part or parcel of the same
premises, Seized to the use of X: H.
of or in the which uses, behoofes, or intents limited or expressed in those
presents, should, etc. to the use and behoof of the said X. H. and of his
heirs and assigns forever, and to no other use, intent, or purpose: And that
then and from thenceforth it should and might be lawful to and for the said X:
H: and his heirs, into the said Manors Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, and
other the premises, whereof or in the which the uses, intents, or behoofes,
limited or expressed in those presents, should be so signified or declared to
be, etc. or into such part, parcel, Re-have.
or member of the premises, whereof or in which, etc. should be, etc. to
re-enter, and the same to rehave and enjoy, as in his or their former estate or
estates, the said Indenture or any limitation of use in the same, or any
clause, sentence, article, or agreement therein contained, to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding, Pro ut Sciatis.
as in and by the said Indenture more plainly may appear. Know ye me the said
X. H. for and to the intent to get and obtain further and better assurance of
the aforesaid Lands Tenements and other the premises in H. and C. or in either
of them to me the said X. mine heirs and assigns, to the use of me the said
X. and of mine heirs and assigns, against the said Sir J: S: his Heirs and
assigns, and every of them, and against all such other person and persons, and
their heirs, as shall or may have claim or demand any estate or estates,
right, title, or interest, of, in, to, or out of the premises in H. and C.
aforesaid, by the said Sir J. to me bargained and sold, or of, in, to, or out
of any part or parcel of the same, by, from, or under the said Sir J: S: or by
reason or means of any act or acts, thing or things, assurance or assurances
heretofore had made, or done by the said Sir J: or by any other person or
persons, by his assent, means, or procurement to be had and made by Act of
Parliament in the next Session of Parliament to be holden, according to the
true intent and meaning of the aforementioned Covenant in the said former
recited Indenture quadripartite, amongst other things contained. Signification
to avoid, etc.
And for and upon diverse other considerations me moving, to have signified and
declared by this my present Deed indented, subscribed with my hand and sealed
with my Seal, which I mean shall be enrolled in one of the Courts of Record of
the Queens Highness, her Heirs or Successors, do signify, pronounce, and
declare, that my whole mind, full meaning, intent, will, and pleasure is, that
the uses, behoofs, intents, estates, and limitations conveyed, raised,
contained, limited, or expressed by or in the said Indenture quadripartite,
bearing date, etc. for, touching, or concerning only the said Lands Tenem. and
other Hereditaments in H. and C. aforesaid, and by the said former Indenture
quadripartite to me, mine heirs and assigns, bargained and sold by the said
Sir I: S: shall from henceforth be void and of none effect. And that I the said
X. and mine heirs and all and every other person or persons, and their heirs
which now stand or be seized, or which hereafter shall stand or be seized, of
or in the said Lands Tenements and hereditaments in H. and C: aforesaid, and by
the said Sir I. to me and mine heirs, by the said former recited Indenture
quadripartite, bargained and sold as is aforesaid, or of or in any part or
parcel of the same, shall from henceforth stand and be seized of and in the
same to the use and behoof of me the said X. H. and of mine heirs and assigns
for ever, and to none other use, intent, or purpose. The said last recited
Indenture quadripartite, Notwithstanding, etc.
or any limitation of use in the same, or any clause, sentence, covenant, or
agreement therein contained, or any other matter, cause or thing whatsoever, to
the contrary thereof in any notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

A payment of a sum of money to the intent to alter uses raised in land, etc.
THis Writing indented, Witnesses, That I, Dame A: L: of L. widow, late the
wife of Sir T. L. Knight, late Alderman of the city of L aforesaid deceased,
Have on the day of the date hereof, paid unto the hands of T. H. now Treasurer
of the Hospital of, etc. within the said city of L. to the use of Sir J. L.
Knight, now Lord Mayor of the same city of L. the sum of ten shillings of,
etc. for the behoof and and relief of the poor children of the said Hospital
of, etc. within the said city of L. for the intent and purpose to alter all the
uses limited, appointed, raised, or made by one pair of Indentures, bearing
date, etc. made betwixt me the said Dame A. on the one part, And Sir W. C.
Knight, I. S. one of her Majesty's Justices of her Pleas before her Highness,
to be holden, and T. B. Esquire, on the other part, of and in those two
Messuages, etc. and of and in all that, etc. and of and in, etc. and of and in
all other the Messuages, lands, tenements, or hereditaments, mentioned or
specified in the said former Indentures above expressed in these presents. And
I the said Dame A. L. do by these presents, revoke adnull, make frustrate, and
avoid all and singular use and uses, limitations of use and uses, and estates
by me at any time or times heretofore created, limited, raised, or made, of or
in the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof by the said former Indent.
above recited, or otherwise, other then such as have been created, limited,
raised, or made to the use of me the said Dame A. and of mine heirs and
assigns for ever, and other then lease or grant, leases or grants by me made
of the Premises, or of any part thereof for term of life, lives, or years; So
as now from henceforth, I the said Dame A. and all other person and persons,
seized of any estate of inheritance, of or in the Premises, or any part
thereof, and of every part thereof stand and be seized to the use of me the
said Dame A. and of mine heirs and assigns for ever, and to none other use,
intent, or purpose; The said former Indenture, or any former act or thing by me
the said Dame A. heretofore done, caused, procured, or agreed unto to the
contrary notwithstanding. And I the said T. H. do knowledge and confess by
these presents, That the said Dame A. did pay unto me the said T. H. the sum of
ten shillings, and that I had and received the same of the said Dame A. in
manner and form aforesaid. In witness whereof, we the said Dame A. and T. H. to
both parts of this present Writings indented, have set our seals. Given, etc.

An Indenture leading the use of a fine after the fine knowledged.
THis Indenture, etc. Between W. H. citizen, and G. of L. on the one part, And
R. W. citizen and G. of L. on the other part, Witnesses, that whereas the said
W. H. heretofore by his Indenture dated, etc. for the consideration therein
mentioned, did give, grant, bargain, and sell to the said R. and to his heirs
and and assigns, for the only use of the said R. and of his heirs and
assigns for ever, all that Message or tenement, with the appurtenances,
situate in P. in the Parish of S. in the County of M. which sometimes was
parcel of the possessions of, etc. And also two gardens, etc. And the
reversion and reversions, etc. And where by the said former Indentures, the
said W. did covenant to and with the said R. That he the said W. and A. then
yet his wife before the last day of Easter Term then next following, should
knowledge and levy in due form of Law, one fine, with Proclamations of all and
singular the Premises, to the said R. and his heirs, according to the common
and usual order of fines before the Justices of our Sovereign Lord the King,
of his Common bench at Westminster, by the name of, etc. As by the said former
Indentures more at large, may and will appear, which said fine, by assent of
the said parties, was forborne, and not levied until the morrow after the Feast
of the holy Trinity now last past, at which time the fine aforesaid has been
had and levied by the said W. and A. his wife, in manner and form aforesaid;
And now the said W. for him and his heirs, And the said R. for him, his heirs
and assigns, have covenanted and agreed together, And now do covenant, grant
and agree together by these presents, And by the same presents do clearly and
plainly express and declare, That the said fine of the Premises, levied by
the said W. and A. his wife, to the said R. and his heirs, as aforesaid, was so
had and levied to the use of the said R. and of his heirs and assigns, And was
always meant and intended to be, And is meant and intended to be, And from
henceforth for ever shall be and be deemed and taken to be, to and for the use
and behoof of the said R. and of his heirs and assigns for ever, and to none
other use or uses, intent or purposes whatsoever. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of a Jointure before Marriage.
THis Indenture, etc. Between, etc. In consideration of the said intended
marriage, and in pursuance and part of the performance of certain Articles,
etc. And for the better provision of maintenance for her, the said C. and in
part of her Jointure of the lands and tenements of the said R. he the said R.
G. has demised, granted, bargained, sold, ser, and let to farm; And by these
presents does, etc. unto the said B. All these Mess. etc. And the reversion and
reversions, remainder and remainders thereof, and of every part thereof, with
the appurtenance. To have and to hold unto the said B. and C. etc. and the
survivour of them, and his heirs, from the day of the date hereof for and
during all the time and term of one hundred years from thence next ensuing, and
fully to be complete and ended, To the uses, behoofs, intents and purposes
herein expressed, mentioned and declared, And to no other use, behoof, intent
or purpose in any wise; That is to say, That the aforesaid H. B. and A. B. and
their heirs, shall stand and be possessed of all and singular the Premises,
to the only use and behoof of the said R. G. and his assigns, during so many
years of the foresaid term as shall expire in his life time, and immediately
after his decease, to the only use and behoof of the aforesaid his intended
wife and her assigns, during so many years of the said term as shall expire in
her life time, and after her decease, then to the only use of the first son of
the said R. upon the body of the said C. to be begotten, and the heirs of his
body, during all the then remaining time of the term aforesaid. And for default
of such issue, to the second, third, and fourth sons of the said R. upon the
body of the said C. to be begotten, and the heirs of their bodies successively:
And for default of such heirs males, then to the use of the first daughter of
the said R. on the body of the said C. to be begotten, and the heirs of her
body, And so to their second, etc.

An Indenture for the acknowledging and leading the use of a fine to the use of
the Conizors.
THis Indenture, etc. Between W: B: of S. in the County of S. yeoman, and J:
his wife, one of the daughters and heirs of the said J: L. late of S.
aforesaid deceased, on the one part, And J: M: of L. Cordwainer, and W: F: of
the same city, Cloth-worker on the other part, Witnesses, that for diverse good
and especial causes and considerations, it is covenanted and agreed between
the said parties, That the said W: B: and J: his wife, before the Feast of All
Saints next coming, in due form, and according to the course of the Laws of
this Realm, shall levy one fine before the Kings Majesty's Justices of his
Common bench at Westminster, of one tenement, etc. All which Premises, come to
the part of the said J: upon the division made between her and J. her sister,
the other daughter, and coheir of the said J: L: And that by the same fine
they shall express all and singular the Premises by the name of two
Messuages, two Cottages, two Gardens, twenty acres of land, four acres of
meadow, and ten acres of pasture, with their appurtenences in S: and W: in the
County of S. And also by the same fine, shall knowledge all and singular the
Premises, to be the right of the said J: M: as those which the said I. M. and
W. F. then shall have of the gift and grant of the said W: B: and I: his wife,
And the same then by the said fine, shall remise and quite claim from them and
their heirs, to the said I: M: and W: F: and the heirs of the said I: M: for
ever. And moreover, that the said W: B: and I: his wife, by the same fine shall
grant, for them and the heirs of the said I: that they shall warrant the said
tenements, with the appurtenances to the said I: M: and W: F: and to the heirs
of the said I: M: against them the said W: B. and I. and the heirs of the said
I. for ever. The Use.
And it is covented, concluded and agreed, between the said parties, to these
presents, and every of them, for themselves and their heirs, do covenant and
agree with the other of them, and their heirs, and the heirs of every of them
by these presents, That the said fine so to be levied of the said Message,
tenements, cottages, and other the Premises, with their appurtenances, as
aforesaid shall be, and by these presents is fully and plainy expressed, agreed
and declared to be to the uses and intents hereafter in these Indentures
expressed, and not to any other use or uses, intent or intents whatsoever, That
is to say, to the only use and behoof of the said W. B. and J: his wife, and
of the heirs of the survivor, of the same W. B. and I. for ever. In witness,
etc.

An Indenture for knowledging a Recovery to sundry uses, with provision that
the Estate Tail be not altered.
THis Indenture Tripartite made, etc. Between I. F. of B. in the County of B.
Esqire, on the one part, And the right worshipful Sir I. M. Knight, I. H. and
H. C. Esquires, on that other part, And the right worshipful R C. of S. in the
County of S. Esquire, and I. N. and M. F. Gent. on the third part, Witnesses,
that for diverse reasonable causes and considerations, the said I. F. especially
moving, and also upon great trust and confidence by him reposed in the said Sir
I. M. J. H. H. C. R. C. J. N. and M. F. It is covenanted, granted, condescended
and agreed, between the said J. E. Sir J. M. etc. and every of them the said
parties, for his and their part, does severally covenant and grant, to and with
other, in manner and form following, that is to say, That he the said J. F.
before the Feast of St. Andrew. the Apostle next, etc. shall permit and suffer
the said Sir J. M. J H. H. C etc. an M. F. to recover against him the said J F.
by Writ of Entry Sur dissesin in the post, with voucher or vouchers over,
according to the order and of course of common Recoveries before the Kings
Justices of Common Plees at Westminster, the Manors of S. and N. lying and
being in the County of K. and all lands, tenements, and hereditaments, with the
appurtenances, being part, parcel or member of the same, or any part thereof,
or reputed, taken, demised, or occupied, as part, parcel, or members of the
said Manors, or either of them, and all other his Lands Tenements, and
Hereditaments in the said County of K by the names of the Manors of ^: and M:
with the appurtenances, one Barn two thousand acres of Land, a thousand acres
of Meadow, a thousand acres of Pastures, a thousand acres of Fresh-marsh, a
thousand acres of Salt-marsh, and ten pounds of quit Rent with the
appurtenances in S: N: L: M: and O: in the said County of K: which said
recovery the said J: F: also covenanteth, promises, and granreth to suffer to
be executed by a Writ of Habere facias seisinam, according to the common Laws.
And it is further covenanted, granted, condiscended, and fully agreed between
the said parties: And the said Sir I: M: I: H: etc. for them and every of them
their Heirs and Executors, and the Heirs and Executors of every of them, do
covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said J: F: his Heirs Executors
and assigns, and every of them by these presents, that as well the said Sir J:
M: Knight, J: H. etc. and their Heirs, immediately after such recovery so had,
made, and executed, shall stand and be seized of and in the said Manors, and
all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances: As also the said
recovery shall be to the only uses, intents, and meaninings hereafter in these
presents expressed and declared, and to none other uses, behoofs, or intents
and meanings: That is to say, of, and in as much of the premises with the
appurtenances as now be, or late were in the several tenures or occupations of
W. G. and C: S: and of all such quit rents as one F. S. of R. for himself, does
pay unto the said J. F. and his heirs, in the County of K. The Uses, etc.
To the only use of M. D. widow, mother of the said J. F. and her assigns,
for term of her natural life; And after the decease of the said M. to the use
of the said I. F. for term of his life, without impeachment of wast, And after
the decease of the said I. F. then to the use of the executors of the last Will
and Testament of the said I: F: for term of six years immediately after his
decease, if it fortune the said I. F. Toward the performce of a Will.
to survive the said M. for and toward the performance of the last Will and
Testament of the said I: F: And if it fortune the said J. F. to decease and
die, leaving the said M. then after the decease of the said M: to the use of
the Excutors of the said J. for and during the term of six years next after the
decease of the said M: for and toward the performance of the said last Will and
Testament of the said J: F: And after the decease of the said J: and M: and
after the end of the said six years, then to the use of Dame J now wife of the
said J: F: and late wife of Sir F. F. Knight, deceased, for term of the life of
the said Dame J. And after the decease of the said Dame J. and also after the
decease of the said M. and J F. and after the end of the said six years, then
to the use of the heirs males of the body of the said J. begotten upon the body
of the said Dame J: and the heirs males of the body of the said heirs males
lawfuly begotten, An use to certain heirs ma^es as long as they go not about to
discontinue the estate hereby limited.
as long as the said heirs males, or any of them shall not alien, discontinue,
suffer any recovery, knowledge or levy any fine, or do or suffer any to be
done, any other act or acts whereby the Premises, or any part thereof shall be
discontinued, altered or changed from the estate or interest aforesaid, And if
it shall happen any of the heirs males of the body of the said J: F: If these
heirs go about to discontinue the estate, then this Recovery to be to the use
of other persons till they do the like.
to be begotten upon the body of the said J. to alien, discontinue, suffer any
recovery, knowledge or levy any fine, or do or suffer to be done any act or
acts, whereby the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof shall be
discontinued, altered, ^or changed from the estate or interest,
beforementioned, That then as well the said Sir J: M: H: etc. and their heirs,
and the survivor and survivors of them, and the heirs of the survivors of them
shall stand and be seized, And also the said Recovery of the Premises last
before specified, shall be to the only use and behoof of B: F: son and heir
apparent of the said I: F: and the heirs of his body lawfully begoten, as long
as the said B: F: shall not alien, etc. or do any other act or acts, etc. And
if it shall happen the said B F. or the heirs males of the body of the said B:
to alien, Then the Recovery to be to the use of B. F: etc. and so diverse other
remainders over every remainder, being bound in form prelimited. And it is
further covenanted, granted, condiscended and agreed between the said parties
to these presents, And the said Sir J: M: J: H: etc. and every of the said
parties, for them and every of them, their heirs and executors, and the heirs
and executors of every one of them, Do covenant and grant, to and with the said
J: F: his heirs, executors and assigns, and every of them, by these presents,
That as well the said Sir J: M: etc. and their heirs, and the survivor and
survivors of them and their heirs, shall stand and be seized of and in all the
residue of the said Manors, lands, tenements, and all and singular other the
Premises, with the ^^^purtenances, as also the said Recovery shall be to the
only us^ the said J: F: and Dame J: his wife, and their assigns, for term of
their lives, and life of the longest liver of them, without impeachment of
wast, during the life of the said J: F: And after the decease of the said J:
and Dame J: then to the use of the heirs males of the said J: begotten upon
the body of the said Dame J: and the heirs males of the body of the said heirs
males lawfully begotten, as long as the said heirs males, of any of them shall
not alien, etc. (And so diverse remainders, over to diverse sundry persons, each
remainder bound in form prelimited) And it is further covenanted, condiscended,
and agreed, between the said parties to these presents, That the costs and
charges of the said Recovery shall be born and paid by the said J: F: his
Executors, or Administrators. In witness, etc.

An Indenture to knowledge several Recoveries of land in several Counties to
sundry uses.
IT is now covenanted, granted, promised, concluded and agreed, by and between
the said parties, by these presents, in manner and form following, That is to
say, That the said Sir T: C: and Lady J. his wife, shall before the Feast of
Pentecost next ensuing the date hereof, suffer the said T. F. and T. W. to
pursue three of the Kings and Queens several Writs of Entries Sur disseisin in
the Post against the said Sir T. C. and Lady I. his wife, before the Kings and
Queens Majesty's Justices of the Common Pleas at Westminster, By one of which
said several Writs of Entry, the said T. F. and T. W. shall demand against the
said Sir T. and J. all and singular the said Manors, Messuages, lands,
tenements, rents, reversions and hereditaments, with the appurtenances, in the
said County of Y. by the name of the Manors of St. O. etc. sixty Meeses,
thirty Cottages, etc. And by one other of the said Writs of Entry, the said T.
and T. shall demand against the said Sir T. and I. all and singular the said
Manors, etc. and other the Premises in the County of the City of Y. by the
name of the Manor of S. with the appurtenances, and of three Messuages, etc.
And by the said third Writ of Entry, the said T. and T. shall demand against
the said, etc. all and singular the said Message, and other the Premises,
with their appurtenances in the said County of M by the ^e of ten Meeses, etc.
The foresaid three several Writs of Entry, ^very of them to be returnable
before the Kings and Queens Majesty's, And that at the day of the return of
every of the said several Writs of Entry, the said Sir T. and J. shall appear
thereunto, and after Declaration severally made upon every of the said several
Writs of Entry by the said T. F. and ^: W: the said Sir T. and Lady J. after
defense by them made thereunto shall vouch to warranty the said T. L. of C. who
shall then be ready personally, or by his lawful Attorney, to enter into
warranty, and shall warrant the same, And the said T. L. of C. after
Declaration made by the said T: F: and T: W: against him, shall vouch to
warranty the common vouchee, the which shall then be ready personally to enter
into the warranty, And shall warrant the same; And that after Declaration made
by the said T. F. and T. W. against the said common vouchee, the same common
vouchee after several defenses by him made, shall traverse the Disseisin
supposed by the said several Writs of Entry and Declaration, whereunto the
said T. F. and T: W: shall imparle after which imparlance granted the said T. F
and T: W: shall come again into the same Court, And the said common vouchee
shall then make default, and depart in despite of the Court, Whereupon the said
T: F: and T: W: shall have judgment to recover seisin of the said Manors,
etc. against the said Sir T and J: And the same Sir T: C: to recover over in
value against the said T: L: of C. And the said T. L. to have judgment to
recover over in value against the said common vouchee; And the same common
vouchee to be amercied. And also it is concluded and agreed between the said
parties to these prese^ts, That the said T. L: of C: shall suffer the said T:
F: and T: W: to pursue the Kings and Queens Writ of Right patent, against the
said T: L: to be returnable and returned before the Mayor, Aldermen and
Sheriffs of the city of L. in the Court of the Hustings of the same city of L.
according to the Laws and customs of the same city; By which Writ of Right,
the said T: F: and T: W: shall demand against the said T: L. of C. all the said
Message, lands, tenements, and other the Premises, with their appurtenances
in the said city of L. by the name of two Messuages, and two gardens, with
their appurtenances, in the Parish of St. P. in the said city of L. And that at
the day of the return of the same Writ the said T: E: of C. shall appear
thereunto, and after Declaration thereupon made, the said T: L: after such time
as he shall have made defense thereto, shall vouch to warranty the common
vouchee therewith shall be then and there ready to enter into warranty, and
shall warrant the same, And after that Declaration ther^ against him made the
same vouchee, after defense by him made shall join the mise upon the mere
right; That is to say, that the said common vouchee has more right to hold the
same two Messuages, and two gardens, with their appurtenances, in manner and
form as he holds the same, Then the said T: F: and T: W: have to demand the
same, whereupon the said T: F: and T: W: shall imparle, after which imparlance
the said T. F. and T. W. shall come again into the said Court, And the said
common vouchee shall then make default, and shall depart in despite of the same
Court, Whereupon the said T: and T: shall have no judgment according to the
Laws and customs of the said city to recover seisin of the said two Messuages,
and two gardens, against the said T. L. and the said T. L. to take judgment to
recover over in value against the said common vouchee to be amercied: And it is
concluded, covenanted, granted, and agreed by these presents, betwixt all the
said parties, to these presents, That as well all and every the said recoveries
to be had, pursued, and executed in manner and form aforesaid; As also all and
every other Recovery and recoveries hereafter to be had of the same Premises,
or any other parcel thereof, by or against the said Sir T: and Dame J. with a
vouchee over of the said T: L: of C. aforesaid, and every Fine and fines, Deed
and Deeds, enrolled, and all and every other assurance, conveyance, and
assurances hereafter to be had, made, or suffered of the Premises, or any part
thereof, between the said parties, to these present Indentures, or from one of
them to another, or by or from all the said parties, to any other person or
persons, at all and every time, from time to time hereafter, shall be to the
only uses hereafter in these presents mentioned, And that the said persons
mentioned in these present Indentures, and their heirs, and all and every
other person end persons, that shall be seized and taken to be seized of the
Premises, and every parcel thereof by virtue of the said recoveries, fines,
and assurances, shall be seized to the uses hereafter expressed; That is to
say, the said recoveries, and other assurances to be suffered, had, made and
extended of the Manors, lands, tenements, reversions, services, and
hereditaments, and all other the Premises with the appurtenances, in the said
County of Y. the city of Y. and County of M. shall be to the only use and
behoof of the said Lady J. C. and of the heirs of the body of the said Lady,
J. by the said Sir T. L. Knight, deceased, her late husband, lawfully begotten.
And if it happen the said Lady J. C. to die without issue of her body, of her
said late husband lawfully begotten, Then to the only use of the said T. L. of
C. his heirs and assigns for evermore. And the said Recoveries and other
Estates and Assurances hereafter to be suffered, had, made and executed of the
said two Messuages, and two Gardens, with their appurtenances in the said city
of L. shall be to the only use and behoof of the said Dame J. C. her heirs
and assigns for evermore. In witness, etc.

An Indenture to lead the use of a Recovery.
THis Indenture, etc. Between J. R. of L. in the County of E. Esquire, and C.
R. son of the said J. R. on the one part, And T. R. and A. R. on the other
part, Witnesses, that whereas the said J. R. stands seized in his Demesne as
of an Estate of inheritance, or of Freehold, of and in diverse Messuages, with
their appurtenances, situate, lying and being within the city of L. hereafter
mentioned, That is to say, of, and in five messuages in L. in the Parish, etc.
and of and in, etc. It it now covenanted, granted, and agreed, by and between
the said parties, to these presents, and their heirs, That the said Messuages,
and all commodities, and easements to the same belonging, with the
appurtenances whatsoevr, and every part and parcel thereof, situate, lying
and being within the said city of L. Whereof the said J. R. is seized of any
estate of inheritance, or of freehold by the several names of, etc. with the
appurtenances in the city of L. before the Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle next
ensuing the date hereof, shall be recovered by a Writ of Entry Sur deseisin in
le past, to be pursued of the said Message, and other the Premises, with
their appurtenances, by the said T. and A. R. or the survivor of them, against
the said J. R. whereunto the said J. R. shall appear, and vouch to warranty the
said C. R. who shall likewise appear and enter into the warranty, and vouch
over the common vouchee, who shall enter into a warranty, and after imparlance
to a day make departure in despite of the Court, to the end a perfect recovery
may be had of the Premises, with such vouchers as is aforesaid, according to
the due course of and order Recoveries at the Common Law, which said Recovery
shall be in due form of law executed. And after the execution thereof, it is
covenanted, granted, concluded, condiscended, and fully agreed, by and between
the said parties to these presents, and their heirs, That the said T: R: and
A. and their heirs, and the heirs of every of them, shall stand and be seized
of the said Message, etc. and every part and parcel thereof to be recovered
in form aforesaid, by what name or names, or in what manner soever the same
shall be recovered to the only use and behoof of the said J. R. and his heirs
for ever. In witness, etc.

THE TABLE.
ARticles of agreement upon a Marriage, fol. 1 Assignment of a License to
transport Wool, for satisfaction of a debt due to the Assignee, with Covenant,
that if the Assinee levy not his debt by a day, the Assignor will pay it. 137
B.
BIll of Credit, 5 Bill in Chancery to examine Witnesses in perpetuam rei
memoriam, 6 Bill of Exchange, 7
C.
CHarter-partie, with Covenants large, 7 CHarter-party large, 12
Charter-party-passed, 16 Another Charter-party, 18 See more in Partners.
Conditions.
For delivering Tynne, 22 For delivering Wool, ibid. For paying an Annuity, 23
To marry the Obligee upon warning, ibid. Not to become Surety without license,
24 For appearing at a day and place to answer, etc. ib. For letting the Obligee
have the refusal, ib. For the good Service of a man, 25 For a Servants true
Service and accounting, ibid. That an Apprentice shall not damage his Master,
26 For leaving an Estate to a Wife, ib. For paying a sum of money, or
delivering a Chain, 27 Between Executors for each answering a moiety of what
shall be recovered for their Testators Acts. ib. For redelivering Letters
Pattents borrowed, 28 For sealing a general Acquittance, ibid. For paying such
sums as are or shall be expressed in a Book, this is in nature of a standing
Counter-security between a Debtor and his Surety, 29 For paying Legacies
according to a Will, 30 For levying a Wife a certain sum, and what more her
Thirds shall amount to by the custom, 31 For working a certain time for
certain Wages, 32 That the husband shall not sell the wives goods, but leave
them discharged of Encumbrances done by him, 33 To make one free at a certain
time, 34 For paying the Obligee what shall be recovered against him for being
Bail to the Obligor, ibid. For saving one harmless for beeng bail, 41 42 Not
to become Surety, 35 Condition on a Surrender, 36 For making a Jointure paying
a sum of money at a day, and leaving another at death, 37 For collecting
duties, and being accountable by an Officer to a Company, 39 For giving the
Obligee Counter-security by a day, 40 For saving one harmless being bound in
the Chamber of London, 41 Where two are bound, if they bail, then to pay the
money within a month, 42 For making good of Plate delivered to a Goldsmith, if
it be not redelivered, 43 For saving harmless an Executor for paying a Child's
Legacy to the Father, ibid. For paying money if the Obligee procure a Lease, 44
To convey a Lease, or pay a sum by a day, 45 For granting an Annuity by a
day, 47 That the Obligee shall have the refusal, if the Obligor sell his
house, ibid. For returning money taken up at Antwerpe by rechange to London, 48
On a Letter of Attorney for receipt of debts, 49 For leaving a wife four
hundred pounds in money or goods if she survive, 50 That a man and his wife
shall bring up Children and pay their Portions, 51 Between Co sureties, each
for paying half the debt, ib. To pay money taken up by Exchange upon rechange
thereof at London, 52 To make assurance of Copyhold-Lands Rent free* ibid. For
sealing an Obligation by a third party, two having sealed, 53 To save harmless
a woman's Jointure, ibid. Another to the like effect, 54 Another to the like
effect, ib. That an Apprentice shall account, etc. answer what his Master shall
lose by his untruth, 55 For quiet enjoyment of a house upon sale of a Lease
thereof, 56 That if a Mortgage be forfeited, it shall remain to the Mortgagee
free from Encumbrance, 57 For discharging of Encumbrances, or sale of a Lease
by poll Deed, 58 For making a Voyage to Venice, and returning with expedition,
58 For two Administrators during a Minority, each saving the other harmless,
59 Upon a Letter of Attorney for recovering debts, with clauses that the
Constitutor shall not revoke but avow the Actions, and show his Book to prove
them, 60 For redelivery of Silver wrought into Plate of such form as shall be
appointed, 61 For repaying a Legacy received of the Executor, shall pay debts
yet concealed, 62 For one Partner having the Trade and receipt of debts, his
paying the other Partner a moiety, ibid. For leaving his Son his Child's part,
63 For paying the remainder of a Child's part, where part is paid before, ibid.
For saving one harmless, who delivers a gold Chain, fearing to be put into the
Exchequer, 64 To put in Sureties to the Chamber for a sum delivered thence to
another hand, 65 To procure new Sureties in the Chamber to discharge a Surety
already bound, if he request it, ibid. For assuring a Parsonage to a Clark
presented, against them that can claim former Presentiments, 66 For ones forth
coming when called for, 67 For not doing prejudice on a Bond in the name of
both parties, 67 For justifying a Letter of Attorney, 68 That the Constitutee
in a Letter of Attorney, shall receive the money to his own use, 69 Another on
a Letter of Attorney, ibid. For paying money upon an Act Executory, 71 Between
two Executors for paying half the Legacies and debts, and having half the best
of the Testa^ors goods, ib. To make one free by a day, and that in the mean
time he shall take the benefit of his own labor, 72 For saving harmless the
reputed Father from keeping a Bastard, 73 For making good an Account, if on
further examination it prove faulty, ibid. By a Jailer for saving the Sheriff
and Undersheriff harmless, 74 For one that has received his Child's part, not
to make further claim, nor trouble his Fathers Executors, etc. 76 Not to
challenge Contract of Matrimony, nor trouble any person the Obligee shall
marry, 77 To confess an Action in one of the Counters by a day, ibid. For a
Baylifs due executing of his Office, and accounting, 78 To make a woman a
Jointure, and deliver the writing thereof to her friends, 79 By such as have
portions forth of the Chamber of London, for the paying for the Education of
the Children, ibid. For repairing a moiety and performing the Condition of the
Recognizance, where two have money forth of the Chamber, 80 For paying Rent,
and voiding on warning on a Lease at Will. 82 For a Silver-workers re-delivery
of Silver wrought in fashions, prescribed always within a certain time, 83 For
procuring a grant of an Outlawes Goods by a day, 83 For taking one in execution
on a Stat. by a day, 4 Not to become Surety, nor play at Dice or Cards, 85 In
case of Divorse, where the man and wives Friends bind themselves not to
intermeddle, 85 For quiet enjoying and discharge of Encumbrances, etc. on sale
of Land passed by Feoffment, 86 Another like Condition. 88 For saving harmless
from Obligations, and delivering them up, or acquittance for them, 89 To pay
for such Wares as shall be delivered from a Tradesman in London to his Chapman
elsewhere, ibid. For repayment of money on request, for paying certain interest
yearly during the Obligor having the principal toward Childrens maintenance,
and for renewing sureties in case of their death or decay, 90 Upon an Indenture
of Partnership, 92 Another to the same effect, ib. For sealing a Lease annexed
to the Obligation by a day, 93 For enjoying land for ever, and that an heir
shall make further assurance when he comes of age, 94 That a Trustee in
purchase of Copyhold-land shall surrender on request, 95 Upon a Deed of
Feoffment, ib. For saving harmless from, or cancelling an Obligation by a day,
97 For answering back a Fine (per rate) if the Tenant will surrender his Lease
before the end, ib. For saving harmless from a Recognizance for Childrens
portions, 98 For saving Executors harmless from Legacies delivered to the
Obligor for the Legatees use, and for repairing a rateable part, if the
Overplus of the Testators Goods will not satisfy his debts, 99 To release all
charges given by sentence in the Spiritual Court, 101 To release charges to be
adjudged in the Spiritual Court, and not to revive a Suit of Matrimony against
the Obligee, nor trouble him in that behalf, 102 For redeeming a Lease
mortgaged, if the Mortgagor redeem it not by the day, 103 That an heir shall
make a Lease when he comes of age, 104 For leaving a Wife a Jointure, 105 Upon
a Release of a Contract of Marriage, 106 For paying money on request, ib. By a
Baker to a Scavenger for ridding the streets, ib. To save a Merchant harmless
that has taken up money at double Vsance for the Obligor, 107 For the Vendor
paying a rate for every acre that shall be recovered against the Vendee, and to
satisfy or discharge Encumbrances that shall appear, 108 Not to revoke a
Letter of Attorney, but save harmless the premises from Encumbrances, and
make further assurance, etc. 109 For Childrens portions in the Chamber of
London, 110 On a Letter of Attorney upon a Bond not forfeited, 112 The like on
a Letter of Attorney for recovering diverse debts, 113 To deliver Saffron, 115
To deliver Corn, ibid. To deliver Corn at diverse days, ib. For delivery of
Tynne, 116
Covenants.
In a purchase that the Vendor repay the Vendee a sum for such part as the
Vendee shall be evicted of 133 For the Vendees distraining other Lands for
Tithes to be recovered against him in respect of the Land he purchased, 136
That if a tenant be distrained for a rent charge, he shall retain his own rent
for recompense. 181 One common Jointure in freehold and copyhold. 116 Between
the fathers of a man and woman to be married for allowing them money and lands,
and more at death. 118 For safe custody of a Lease amongst diverse Interessed.
122 Touching a Recognizance for the Cognizees, extending the land at request of
the purchaser, and to convey over the interest growing thereby. 126 To make
assurance of lands to uses conditioned, that the uses interst shall determine,
if he go about to discontinue. 128
Deputations.
IN a License to transport cloth continuable till the deputy shall have levied
a debt owing to him by the constitutor. 140 In a License for planishing of
plate, with an annuity granted for the same. 144 In the moyetie of License for
byuing and bringing in of fish. 146
Indentures raising uses, etc.
FOr acknowledging a fine by a man and his wife to exclude her from her dower
in lands leased by him after their marriage. 161 For making two possessed of a
Lease, Tenants in common to prevent survivorship. 164 To lead the use of a
Recovery to strengthen a Lease made by tenant for life, and he in tail in
reversion 265 For raising uses in land with condition to alter the same at
pleasure. 267 Leading the use of a fine after the fine acknowledged. 268
Leading a fine to the use of the Cognizor. 270 For suffering a Recovery to
sundry uses, with provision that the intaile be not altered. 271 Indenture of
Covenants to raise uses conditioned, the Vsees interests to be void if he
discontin. 128
Joyntures.
A woman's Jointure in land. 149 Indenture for a woman's Jointure. 150 A Jointure
with clause of being void if she seek her dower. 152 A Jointure in land passed
by Recovery, with clause for making good of Leases to be made by husband and
wife. 157 For assuring a woman's Jointure. 160 A Jointure before marriage. 169 A
Jointure in freehold and copyhold, with diverse covenants. 116
Leases.
TO a woman so long and often as she shall continue in widowhood. 166 To them
that assured land for certain payment of an Annuity. 167 Upon condition of
being void on the Lessers paying the Lessees such money as he owes them, or
they as bound for him or when they shall be satisfied by the profits. 168 Of a
Brewhouse by fine, with a Demise of Implements to be redeemed, or answered at
the end of the term. 171 Another Lease to strengthen the former of a Brewhouse.
ib. Of Tin work for securing a sum of money. 177 For an hundred years
deseazable on paying a sum of money. 179 Of an house in London. 181 An
Vnderlease binding the tenant to pay the rent and perform the covenants in the
Grand lease, with liberty to the Lessor to resume the things letten, if he be
minded. 184 A Lease to two in common. 188 Of a Manor in reversion. 191 Of an
house in London on condition to be void for nonpayment of money at times
appointed. 196 A Lease with condition, not to set or let. 199 By a Bishop for
three lives, with a Leter of Attorney to deliver possession. 200 A very good
Lease for an house in London. 204 A Lease for a thousand years without payment
of wast with diverse good covenants. 208 By a Company in London of an Inn, etc.
208 A Lease in London, where to abate duties to the Parson, part of the rent is
taken up by way of fine. 213 A like Lease, the rent being payable by way of
Annuity. 217 For a thousand years conditionally for a sum, etc. 218 Of a
Parsonage with good covenants. 220 Of an house in London acknowledged before
the Recorder, etc. and enrolled in the Hustings. 223 Of a Shop by the
Church-doore by the Parson, and Churchwardens, with condition not to let
without consent. 224 Of the customs and impost Wines in a Port, with an
agreement to constitute a Deputy to recover the profits. 226 Of a house in
Land. in reversion after an estate for life. 228 Of old housing to be plucked
down and rebuilt by the Tenant. 231 A re-demise of one Lease conditioned for
quiet holding another from the same party. 235 By an heir forth of possession
to the end he may recover the Premises. 237 By the Queen of certain hundreds,
with a grant of the Offices of Steward and Bailiff in same. 239
Letters of Attorney.
UPon an Obligation not forfeited. 111 To deliver possession. 200
Licenses.
By a Lord to his Copyholder, to pull down houses on his land. 249 To let and
set where a Proviso is in a Lease to the contrary. 242
Mortgages.
OF a Lease with good covenants. ibid. Of a Lease to save harmless from a
bond, binding the Mortgagor to perform the condition. 245
Partners. See in Title Charter-party.
AN Indenturee between partners being to gather the former shopkeepers debts,
and pay them to his Executor. 4 Between two owners of a shop, for fetching
salt, and delivering it to a Merchant in Dublin, and the Merchant to pay a
sum for the same. 134
Provisoes.
A very substantial Provisoe barring a man and his Executors, not to make away
a Lease, unless the Lessee take a new one, 248
Releases.
OF a moiety in the Lease between the Joynt-tenants thereof to prevent
Survivorship, 164 Testifying the receipt of a sum of money, and making void a
Deed of Feoffment, 250
Surrenders.
Conditional for life to him in Reversion for a recovery to pass, 251 By two
Tenants for life to him in Reversion, 252
Testimonialls, Declarations, etc.
OF a Trust in a Lease, 253 Certifying the payment of money according to a
Condition in an Indenture for making void thereof, 254 To defeat Uses according
to a Proviso, 261 Of payment of a sum of money to alter Uses, etc. 267
Uses.
AN Indenture to knowledge several recoveries of land in several Counties to
sundry Uses. 274 An Indenture to lead the Use of a Recovery. 277
Wills.
A Clause in a Will to enable an Executor to sell his Testators Lands, 249
FINIS.
These Books are Printed for H. Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Vine-Court Middle Temple, in Fleetstreet.
THe Practick part of the Law, or the Complete Attorney. The second part of the
Practick part of the Law, or the Lay-mans Lawyer. Kitchins Jurisdictions of
Courts Leet, Courts Barons, etc. Plowdens Abridgment in English. Abridgement of
Lord Cokes Comment on Littleton. Abridgement of Poultans Statutes at large, by
Edmund Wingate, Esquire. The Office and Duty of an Executor in 80. The body of
the Law, with a brief Summary, by Edmund Wingate, Esquire. Richard Brownlow
Esquire, Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas. His Reports, the first
part. His Reports, the second part. His Declarations and Pleadings in English.
His Judicial Writs.
The twelfth part of the Reports of Sir Edward Coke, English, Fol. Judge
Huttons Reports, English, Fol. Judge Owens Reports, English, Fol. The Epitomy
of all the Common and Statute Law of this Nation now in force, by Wlliam
Sheppard, Sergeant at Law. The Marrow of the Law; or a second part of the
faithful Counselor, by Sarjeant Sheppard. Sir Robert Brook's Reading on the
Statute of Limitations. The Book for the drawing up of all manner of
Judgments. The Reading upon the Statue of Bankrups, by John Stone, Esquire.
The Conveyancers Light, or the Complete Clerk, or Scriveners Guide, containing
exact Presidents of all manner of Assurances and Instruments now in use, by the
Learned Judges, and Eminent Lawyers, etc. Collected by John Herne. The Law of
Conveyances, showing the natures, kinds, and effects of all manner of
Assurances, with directions to sue out all manner of Writs of Extent, Elegit,
and Judicial Writs upon Statutes, Recognizances, Judgments, etc. by John
Herne of the Middle Temple, Gent. The Modern Assurancer, or the second part of
the Practick part of the Law, containing exact Forms and Draughts of all manner
of Presidents now in use, etc. The Grounds and Maxims of the Law, by Mich.
Hawks. Perkins in English. Abridgement of Doctor and Student. Cowels
Interpreter, in Fol. Sergeant Bridgmans Reports. The Pleader, containing the
forms of all Declarations and Pleadings, Issues, Judgments, and Proceedings in
all kinds of Actions, as they were taken and entered by the late
Prothonotaries, and published by John Herne. Sir John Davis upon the Law of
Impositions: Tonage, Poundage, Prizage, and Customs, etc. The Commentary on
Original Writs, by William Hughes, Esquire. An Abridgement of the Common Law,
drawn out of the old and new Books of Law, and reduced into Chapters, Sections,
and Divisions, by William Hughes, Esquire. An Abridgement of the Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament, from 1640. to 1656. by William Hughes, Esquire.
Caesar's Commentaries, with Sir Clement Edmonds Observations in English, Fol.
The History of the Wars of Suethland and Poland, by John Fowler, Esquire, in
Fol. Sir John Finnets Observations touching the Reception and Precedence, the
Treatment and Audience, the Puntillioes and Contests of Foreign Ambassodors.
Natura Exenterata, Or Nanture unbowelled; being choice secrets fitted for the
cure of all sorts of infirmities: collected by the Countess of Arundell.
Anti-Socinianisme, being a Confutation of the Socinian Heresies, with a
Description of their lives and deaths, by N. Chewney, M. A. The Life of the
Apostle Saint Paul. S. Bonaventures Meditations, Soliloquies and Prayers. Mr.
Cragg against Mr. Tombs, upon the Argument concerning Infants-Baptisme, with
Mr. Crags Reply to Mr. Tombs his Answer. Stevensons Poems. European Mercury,
describing the Highwaies and Stages through the most remarkable parts of
Christendom. An Exposition on the fourth Article of the Apostles Creed, by
John Crompe, M. A. The humble Remonstrance of Sir John Stowell. The Vindication
of Sir John Stowell. The discontented Colonel, by Sir John Sucklin. The Floting
Island, by William Strowd, a Comedy. Londinopolis, or a Prospect of the famous
Cities, London and Westminster. Eight Sermons of Mr. Craggs, in 80. with a
Discourse of Marriages. Things New and Old; or a Storehouse of Similies, etc.
by John Spencer, a large Fol. Olaus Magnus his History of the Goths, Sweads and
Vandals. The Minister of State. Killing Murder and no Murder, by Mich. Hawks.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are Printed for Nath. Brook, and are
to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
Excellemt Tracts in Divinity, Controversies, Sermons, Devotions.
THe Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councels, and
ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr. Vanes Lost Sheep returned home: by Edw.
Chesensale Esquire Octavo.

Judgment set, and Books opened, Religion tried whether it be of God or man, in
several Sermons, by J. Webster, Quarto.

Isreal's Redemption, or the Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
Earth, by K: Matton.

The Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, and Profaneness; or a more hopeful
way to Grace and Salvation, by K: Young, Octavo.

The sum of Practical Divinity, or the Grounds of Religion in a
Chatechisticall way, by Mr. Christopher Love, late Minister of the Gospel: a
useful Piece.

Heaven and Earth shaken; a Treatise showing how Kings and Princes, their
Governments are turned and changed, by J. Davis, Minister in Dove^: admirably
useful, and seriously to be considered in these times.

The Holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion; to which is added Songs in
the night, or cheerfulness under afflictions; by J. Hall Bishop of Norwich.

Admirable and Learned Treatises of Occult Sciences in Philosopy, Magic,
Astrology, Geomancy, Chemistry, Physiognomy, and Chiromancy.
Magic and Astrology vindicated, by H. Warren.

Lux Veritatis, Judicial Astrology vindicated, and Demonology confuted, by W.
Ramsey Gent.

Co^nelius Agrippa his fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy: Magical
Elements of Peter de Abona, the nature of Spirits; made English by R. Turner.

Paracelsus Occult Philosophy, of the Mysteries of Nature, and his secret
Alchimy.

An Astrologicall Discourse with Mathematical Demonstrations proving the
influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies, by Sir Chr.
Heydon Knight.

Supernatural Sights and Apparitions seen in London, June 30, 1644. by William
Lilly: as also all his Works in one Volume.

The admired Piece of Physiognomy, and Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the
Simmetricall Proportions, and Signal Moles of the Body, the Interpretation of
Dreams; to which is added the Art of memory, illustrated with figures, by R:
Sanders in Folio.

The no less exquisite then admirable Work Theatrum Chemicum, Britannicum:
containing several Poetical Pieces of our famous English Philosophers, who
have written the Hermitique Mysteries in their own ancient Language; faithfully
collected into one Volume, with Annotations thereon: by the Indefatigable
Industry of Elias Ashmole, Esquire, illustrated with Figures

Excellent Treatises in the Mathematics, Geometry of Arithmetic, Surveying,
and other Arts, or Mechanics.
Tectonicon, showing the exact measuring of all manner of Land, Squares,
Timber, Stone, Steeples, Pillars, Globes: as also the making and use of the
Carpenters Rule.

The unparalleld work for ease and expidition, entitled, The exact Surveyor;
or the whole Art of surveying of Land, showing how to plot all manner of
Grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champain, Plain, Wood-lands, or Mountains,
by the Plain Table; as also how to find the Area, or Content of any Land, to
Protect, Reduce, or Divide the same; as also to take the Plot or Cart, to make
a Map of any Manor, whether according to Rathburne, or any other Eminent
Surveyors Method: a Book excellently useful for those that sell, purchase, or
are otherwise employed about Building: by I. Air.

The Golden Treatise of Arithmetic, Natural and Artificall, or Decimalls; the
Theory and Practice united in a simpatheticall Proportion betwixt Lines and
Numbers, in their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of Form, Figure,
Magnitude, and Affection, demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by
Calculations, and confirmed with variety of Examples in every Species: made
compendious and easy for Merchants, Citizens, Seamen, Accountants, etc. by
Th. Wilsford Corrector of the last Edition of Record.

Semigraphy, or the Art of Short-writing, as it has been proved by many
hundreds in the City of London, and other places, by them practiced, and
acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest, and swiftest method; the meanest
capacity by the help of this Book, with a few hours practice, may attain to a
perfection in this Art: by Jer. Rich. Author and Teacher thereof, dwelling in
Swithens Lane in London.

Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Chy^urgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving, etc.
Culpepers Semiotica Uranica, his Astrological judgment of diseases from the
Decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged: the way and manner of finding out the
cause, change, and end of the Disease: also whether the sick be likely to live
or dye, and the time when recovery or death is to be expected, according to the
judgment of Hipocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is added Mr.
Culpeper's censure of Urines.

Culpeper's last Legacy, left to his wife for the public good, being the
choycest and most profitable of those Secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery; which
whilst he lived, were lock up in his Breast, and resolved never to be published
till after his death.

The Art of Simpling: an Introduction to the knowledge of gathering of Plants,
wherein the difinitions, divisions, places, descriptions, differences, names,
virtues, times of gathering, uses, tempratures of them are compendiously
discoursed of: also a discovery of the lesser World, by W. Cole^.

Adam in Eden, or Natures Paradise: the History of Plants, Herbs, and Flowers,
with their several original Names, the places where they grow, their
discriptions and kinds, their times of flourishing and decreasing: as also
their several signatures, anatomicall appropriations and particular Physical
virtues; with necessary Observations on the seasons of planting and gathering
of our English plants. A Work admirably useful for Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons,
and other ingenious persons, who may in this Herball find comprised all the
English Physical Simples, that Gerard or Parkinson, in their two Voluminous
Herballs have discoursed of, even so as to be on Emergent occasions their own
Physicians, the Ingredients being to be had in their own Feilds and Gardens,
published for the general good, by W. Coals, M. D.

The complete Midwives practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the
body of Mankind: or perfect Rules derived from the experiences and writings not
only of our English, but the most accomplished and absolute practices of the
French, Spanish, Italians, and other Nations: so fitted for the weakest
capacities, that they may in a short time attain to the knowledge of the whole
Art: by Dr. T. C. with the advice of others, illustrated with Copper Figures.

The Queens Closet opened: incomparable secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery,
Preserving, Candying, and Cookery; as they were presented to the Queen by the
most experinced persons of our times, many whereof were honored with her own
practice.

Elegant Treatises in Humanity, History, Romances, and Poetry.
Oedipus, or the Resolver of the secrets of love, and other natural Problems
by way of question and answer.

The admirable and most impartial History of New England, of the first
Plantation there, in the year 1628. brought down to these times, all the
material passages performed there, exactly related.

The Tears of the Indians: the History of the bloody and most cruel
proceedings of the Spaniards in the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica,
Mexico, Peru, and other places of the West Indies, in which to the life are
discovered the Tyrannies of the Spaniards, as also the justness of our War so
succesfully managed against them.

The Illustrious Shepherdess. The Imperious Brother: written originally in
Spanish by that incomparable Wit, Don John Perez de Montalban: translated at
the requests of the Marchioness of Dorchester, and the Countess of Strafford,
by E. P.

Fons Lacrymarum, or a Fountain of Tears, the lamentations of the Prophet
Jeremiah in Verse, with an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas: by J. Quarles.

Poetical, with several other accurately ingenious Treatises, lately Printed.
Sportive Wit, the Muses Merriment: a new Spring of Drollery, Joviall Fancies,
etc.

The Conveyancer of Light or the Complete Clark, and Scriveners Guide, being an
exact D^aught of all Presidents and Assurances now in use: as they were penned
and perfected by diverse learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, and great
Conveyancers, both ancient and modern: whereunto is added a Concordance from
King Rich. the Third, to this present.

Themis Aurea, the Laws of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, in which the
Occult secrets of their Philosophical Notions are brought to light: written by
Count Mayerus, and now Englisht by T. H.

The Iron Rod put into the Lord Protectors hand: a Prophetical Treatise.

Medicina Magica tamen Physica, Magical but Natural Physic: containing the
general Cures of Infirmities and Diseases belonging to the bodies of men, as
also to other Animalls and domestic Creatures, by way of Transplantation: with
a description of the most excellent Cordial out of Gold, by Sam. Bolton of
Salop.

J. Tradiscan's Rarities, published by himself.

The perfect Cook: a right Method in the Art of Cookery, whether for Pastery,
or all other manner of Alla mode Kickshaws, with the most refined ways of
dressing of Flesh, Fowl, or Fish, making of the most poinant Sawces, whether
after the French or English manner, together with fifty five ways of dressing
of Eggs: by M. M.

Admirable useful Treatises, newly Printed.
The expert Doctors Dispensatory: the whole Art of Physic restored to
practice: the Apothecaries Shop, and Chyrurgeons Closet opened: with a Survey,
as also a Correction of most Dispensatories now extant, with a judicious
Censure of their defects, and a supply of what they are deficient in: together
with a learned account of the virtues and quantities, and uses of Simples and
Compounds, with the Symptoms of Diseases, as also prescriptions for their
several cures: by that renowned P. Morellus Physician to the King of France: a
work for the order, usefulness, and plainness of the Method, not to be
paralleld by any Dispensatory, in what Language soever.

Cabinet of Jewels, Man's Misery, Gods Mercy, Christ's Treasury, etc. In eight
Sermons, with an Appendix of the nature of Tithes under the Gospel, with an
expediency of Marriage in Public Assemblies, by I. Cragg Minister of the
Gospel.

Natures secrets, or the admirable and wonderful History of the Generations of
Meteors, describing the temperatures of the Elements, the heights, magnitudes,
and influences of Stars, the causes of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges,
Epidemicall Diseases and Prodigies of precedent times, with presages of the
VVeather, and descriptions of the Weather-glass: by T. Wilsford, Gent.

The Mysteries of Love and Eloquence; or the Arts of Wooing and Complementing,
as they are managed in the Spring Garden, Hide Park, the New-Exchange, and
other Eminent places. A Work in which are drawn to the life the Deportments of
the most Accomplished persons: the Mode of their Courtly Entertainment,
Treatment of their Ladies at Ball, their accustomed Sports, Drolls and Fancies,
the witchcraft of their persuasive Language, in their approaches, or other more
secret dispatches, etc. by E. P.

The so much desired and deeply learned Commentary on Psalm. 15. by that
Reverend and Eminent Divine Mr. Christopher Carthwright Minister of the Gospel
in York.

The Saints Tombe-stone, or the Remains of the Blessed: A plain Narrative of
some remarkable passages in the holy life and happy death of Mrs. Dorothy Shaw,
wife of Mr. John Shaw, Preacher of the Gospel at Kingston on Hull, collected by
her dearest Friends, especially for her sorrowful husband and six daughters
consolation and invitation.

The Accomplished Cook, the mystery of the whole Art of Cookery, revealed in a
more easy and perfect method then has been published in any Language: Expert
and ready ways for the dressing of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish, the raising of
Pastes, the best directions for all manner of Kick-shawes, and the most poinant
Sauces, with the terms of Carving and Sewing: the Bills of Fare, an exact
account of all Dishes for the season, with other All-amode Curiosities,
together with the lively Illustrations of such necessary Figures, as are
referred to practice: approved by the many years experience and careful
industry of Robert May, in the time of his attendance on several persons of
honor of this Nation.

The exquisite Letters of Mr. Robert Loveday, the late admired Translator of
the Volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating of his memory,
published by his dear Brother Mr. A. L.

The new World of English words, or a general Dictionary, containing the
Terms, Etimologies, Definitions, and perfect Interrpretations of the proper
significations of the hard English words throughout the Arts and Sciences,
Liberal or Mechanic, as also all other Subjects that are useful or appertain
to the Language of our Nation, by I. T. and others in Folio.

The way to Bliss, by Elias Asmoll, Esquire.

FINIS.

