A CHANGLING NO COMPANY FOR Lovers of Loyalty, OR The Subjects Lesson in Point
of Sacred Submission to, and humble Compliance with God and the KING; Wherein
Confusion is reduced to Order, misery to Mercy; Reproach and shame to Freedom
and Honor.

Return, return, O Shulamite, Return, return, Cant. 6. ult.

In those days when there was no King in Israel, every man did that which was
good in his own eyes, Judge. 17.6.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, for Thomas Parkhurst, and are to be sold at the
three Crowns, at the lower end of Cheapside, 1660.

To the Clergy of England.
Beloved;
THe last and great temptation is over. You have been set in a late
Declaration, I will not say like our great Master upon a pinnacle of the temple;
but like the Swine-herd of Stow upon Lincoln minster, and all the remaining
husks, (for the mast is gone long since) you shall have and enjoy, if etc. Is
it not sad to consider that you are not only a covering to their eyes, that are
filled with robbery, but that they should by the tender of toys, and tristes,
(which yet are not theirs to give) allure you into that confederacy, which may
not only wound your consciences, but stain your profession, with such a blot
and dishonor as shall never be washed out; Honest Mephibosheths resignation is
a much better resolution, Let them take all so that my Lord the King may but
return in peace. How near have you been to suffer by diverse factions, and yet
your lives and interests are maintained, perhaps that you might live to
vindicate that which you helped to destroy. Remember, O remember; Curse ye
Meroz, yea curse bitterly, etc. Now consider how are the mighty fallen. Your
words were more powerful then the Soldiers swords, you foresaw not the event,
(it seems you were no true prophets) and are now sorrowful. Oh if you had
known (God grant your ignorance may excuse) you would never have cried down the
King as a Tyrant, to the ruin of him, his family and kingly government. Well
you have still the same weapons, and the good old cause, the King and the
Parliament laid before you; pray for it, plead for it, but curse no body, no
not your enemies, persecuters and slanderers, that if it be the will of God,
there may be a returning of our wanderings, and a healing of our errors, in the
procuring of which you may assure your selves of the constant and fervent
desires and prayers of

A true friend to truth and Peace W. H.

TO THE READER.
GOod thoughts are the best company in bad times; and holy meditations are not
only a cure, but a cordial for a fainting soul under heavy destractions.
Sacred writ (in the perusal of which we ought with care and reverence to be
conversant) as it is of divine inspiration, so is it also of infallible
consolation and direction. In the which you may be pleased to observe, and it
is pleasant in the observation, That the most horrid confusions have produced
happy conclusions; and the most distracted Queries have returned satisfied with
most gracious Answers. The Jews being told plainly by Peter, that they denied
the holy one, and the just, and desired a murderer to be given to them, were
pricked in their hearts, wounded with the sense, and covered with the shame of
their bloody act, amazed cry out, Men and brethren what shall we do? Their
extremity is Gods opportunity; his mercy prevents the excess of their misery,
and their fainting question has a soul reviving answer; Repent and be
baptized, etc. and you shall receive the gilt, etc. for the promise is to you,
and your children, etc

The Jailer trembling at the earthquake, every joint of him being out of frame,
to see the foundation of his prison shaken, more captivated now at the
enlargment of his prisoners, then they were when put in the dungeon, and their
feet made fast in the stocks; feeling the terrors and seeing the wonders of the
Lord, cries out, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? He that had kept them sure,
must now be secured by them, or perish, yet his doubtful question had a
faithful answer, Believe and thou shall be saved, etc

Saul, afterward Paul, at first a persecutor, at last a Preacher; at first a
vessel wherein was no pleasure, but at last a chosen vessel, and a vessel of
honor, stopped in the hight of his speed, disrobed of his authority, dismounted
in the heat of his violence, confounded with the appearance of Gods glory, and
his own shame; before so impudent that he durst do any thing, now so humble
that he will learn his duty; cries, Lord what would thou have me to do? God
who had cast him down that he might raise him up, made him blind for a time
that he might see better for ever after, leaves him not where he laid him, but
raising up his soul with a most propitious answer, as his body with a
powerful word, bids him arise, Go into the City, and it shall be told him, etc.

It is needless to tell you what condition this nation is in; we are not
distracted, but distraction; not confounded, but confusion it self; God and man
may justly join in that sad complaint and solemn appeal, Hear O Heavens and
hearken O Earth, I have nourished and brought up children and they have
rebelled against me. A sinful nation, a nation laden with iniquity, a seed of
the wicked, and corrupt children, may be the just and grand character of our
nation, and as our sin, so our shame is increased; as our rebellion and
impiety, so our desolation and miseries are multiplied. Hence it is, that the
head is sick and the heart is heavy, that from the head to the foot there is
nothing but swellings and sores full of corruption; such as not only have not,
but seem as though they cannot be wrapped, bound up, or mollified with oil. Is
not the daughter of Sion, like a cottage in a vineyard, (homely, lonesome, set
up a little for necessity, but neither furnished for delight nor ornament,) like
a lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers, solitary whose furniture is scarce so much as
a table, a stool, a bed and a candlestick,) or like a besieged City; never more
punctually verified then in our age, the Vision is so plain, that he that runs
may read it. Are not the foundations of our government out of order? has not
God overturned, overturned, overturned it? have we not had (what nation can say
the like) in few years, a King, and no King; a Parliament, and no Parliament; a
Protector, and no Protector; a Committee of safety, and no Committee of safety;
an Army, and no Army? and have we not now a strange kind of Synecdocicall
power, wherein a part and no part, challenges the principle, and yet are not
able to maintain the interest? Are we not run into those straits that we cannot
march on, retreat, nor stand stillwith safety? are we not (if I may intermingle
a jest with serious truths) in Tarletons Wood, where we may see under, over,
and through it, each end and side of it, and yet cannot get out of it? Is not
our nation betrayed by it self, either pitied, scorned, or hated by all? where
have we a friend? where not an enemy?

In such a case, who will not say, What shall I do? It has often been the
result of my serious thoughts, I have often with Paul breathed out, Lord, What
would thou have me to do?

Your consciences, your honors, your interests, your posterities, cannot I am
confident but engage your most constant desires and endeavors with a holy and
watchful prudence for the glory of God and the peace and happiness of this
nation. In such a case if you shall enquire of God (as I hope you have done)
take this return as an Oracle of divine truth, and a most sacred directoty, My
sons fear you the Lord and the King, etc.

Let not the greatest take it for a solecisme, that the meanest of their
servants calls you son, God often intrusts his treasure in earthen vessels.
Poor Eliah was in some sense a Lord with that good and great Courtier Obadiah;
and Moses, a man, and of mean parentage, upon a divine account was no less
then a God to Pharaoh, but indeed the counsel is of God; who am I that I
should attempt or undertake such a design, unsolicited by any, but moved by
that good ^^irit of God mercifully preventing me in all the duties of my
calling I have appeared.

It is very true that there is something in piety, as well as Policy to
countenance that which some account unparaleld prudence, evidenced in silence,
the prudent will keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time. But there
is as a time to keep silence, so a time to speak: Believe it the banes betwixt
the King and his people has been published once and again, those that it is
either now time to speak, or to be silent for ever.

Such a marriage would be honorable amongst all men; May it therefore go on
and prosper, all that are sons of Sion, pray for the Peace of our Jerusalem,
and may they prosper that love it, in order to which fear the Lord and the
King; This is our duty, and will be our safety.

I have had some struglings within me whether fully to subscribe my name or no;
I have resolved not to do it, not that I fear any danger, or apprehend any
cause of danger; The greatest enemy is envy; but because I would not Court
applause, or worship the Rising Sun. Take all the notice I shall afford you, I
am A Lover of Truth and Peace W. H.

A CHANGLING no Company for the Lovers of LOYALTY.
Prove. 24.21, 22. My son, fear thou the Lord, and the King: and meddle not with
them that are given to change.

For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?


THe genius of the Text as it is plain, pleasing and plausible, so it is
necessary, just and honorable: I cannot in these days of confusion but
congratulate the Text to the times, (oh that I could reduce the times to the
Text) I cannot but own it as a guide to the blind; as a nail of the Sanctuary
fastened in a sure place; as a seasonable speech spoke by him that sits in the
congregation of the Gods, is president in all the counsels of men, and
establish or overthrows them at his pleasure, what shall I say, I look upon
it as the only balm of our Gilead, prepared by God and to be applied by men for
the health and recovery of the daughter of his people.

Licurgus the great Lawgiver to the Lacedaemonians and no less then a King in
Sparta, ordained that if any man came to propound a novelty, he was to come
with a halter about his neck: to signify his submission to a speedy execution
in case that which he propounded was judged evil and inconvenient tending to
sedition or ruin; but if just, necessary, and safe, his halter was taken off,
and an honorable reward assigned him for his good service and encouragement:
The latter of those I expect not: the former I do not fear: I know whose the
command is, and who has appointed it: It is divine, and therefore
uncontrollable: It is a charge, not a humble Petition or Advice. But was it
merely moral: The saying of Seneca, Isocrates, Plato, Aristotle, yea of
Machivell himself: The state of affairs justly looked upon with prudent and
impartial eyes, such as are neither bloodshot, nor have the beams of profit
and self-love, then I durst and would, if called to it, before a free and full
Parliament, not packt by faction, nor over-awed by force, propound it in the
Lacedemonian posture, as the best advise, most seasonable and suitable counsel,
that they can take, or any man can give: Fear the Lord, etc.

Wisdom and authority (say our Lawyers) necessarily concur to the being of a
law: Wisdom without authority, makes as little impression upon some men's
spirits, as an arrow upon a wall of flint, it may be powerful to do well, but
seldom prevalent to hear well. The wisdom of a poor wise man may deliver the
city, but no man regards or rewards the poor wise man: Authority without
wisdom easily degenerates into tyranny, no fury, like a fool clothed with
authority; Absolon and Abimeleck of old, our Butlers, Brewers and Cobblers now
adays can sufficiently evince it: I countenance it in none, I abhor it in
all: better is a wise child then an old and foolish King. But in my text
wisdom and authority go hand in hand, and God himself having joined them
together let not man dare to put them asunder: if we look upon God the Author
of this, and all other holy writ, who shall resist his will. If upon the
penman, it was Solomon, for his wisdom styled the Preacher; for his authority,
the son of David, king of Israel.

Solomon as he had a threefold title, so had he also a threefold employment, in
holy Scripture, we may not unfittingly term his three books his Ethics, his
Physics, and his Metaphysics, or if you will they seem to have relation to
or resemblance with the three integrall parts of his sacred building. The First
was the Court of the people, common to all Israelites. The Second, The Court of
the Priest into which might come only the Tribe of Levi. The Third, The Temple
and holy of holies, into which might enter Priests especially consecrated to
that purpose for the time, and the high Priest in the most sacred and solemn
feast.

The Song of songs is only a fit subject for sanctified souls, none that are
common or profane may enter into it, or intermeddle with it. Ecclesiastes is
only fit for the Preacher or worthy Churchman. But the book of the Proverbs is
of general concernment, belonging equally to the Prince and Peasant: and such
is the Text equally directed to every man, high and low, rich and poor, every
soul.

My son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, etc. The Text is easily divided into
two general Parts. First, A Doctrine: which is a word of Command. Secondly,
The Reason, which is a word of Terror.

The Doctrine is 1. Positive, My son, etc. 2. Negative, and meddle not, etc.


The Positive consists of three Parts: First, The Scholar: My son, etc.
Secondly, The Duty: Fear. Thirdly, The Object of this fear; God and the King.

In the Negative: First, the Prohibition; meddle not. Secondly, The hateful
object; The Seditious.

In the Reason, That word of terror Observe.. First, an Assertion; In which
observe; 1. The Terror, Destruction: 2. The Propriety or particularity, Their:
3. The certainty, It shall come: 4. The Expedition, Suddenly.

Secondly, An Expostulation, in which the Assertion is doubled, illustrated and
confirmed: Who knows the ruin of them both?

Of those in their order; But first I shall commend the work and workman unto
the Protection of the Allmighty.

My God, my God, Who art also my King, send help unto Sion; By thee Kings
reign, and Princes sit in judgment; build up our Sion, but not with blood,
establish our kingdom in righteousness and equity: Look not, O Lord, look not
upon the iniquities of our Jacob; behold not in severity the multiplied
transgressions of our Israel: but thou O Lord, the Lord God of Hosts return
unto us, and let the joyful shout of a King be amongst us; Remember thy sure
mercies of old, and regard the face of thine anointed. Cloth thy Priests with
salvation O Lord, and let thy Saints rejoice in thy goodness. As the just
punishment of our breach of Covenant with thee, thou have broke thy Covenant
with us, and being angry with thine anointed have profaned his Crown, and east
it unto the ground; but return O Lord, for the salvation of thy people, and for
the salvation of thine anointed. Wound the head of the house of the wicked, and
discover the foundations of their cruelties, and subtiltyes even to the neck.
Bring the wickedness of the Wicked to an end: but guide the just in thy fear.
Order the heart and hand of thy servant; sanctify both to thy glory and the
Nations good. Prosper thy Word, as a word of truth, meekness, and
Righteousness. With joy and gladness let our Princes be established: That thy
name may be remembered through all generations, and the people shall give
thanks unto thee world without end, Amen, Amen. Son, is a word that intimates
authority and relation, and enjoynes submission, and obedience; he must have,
if not gray hairs, yet gravitie sufficient to speak him a father who calls
another man his son. It is sometimes a Civil Complement; if Dives call Abraham
father, Abraham by a return of civilitie will call him Son. Thus Joshua to
Achan, My Son, give glory to God. Son, is sometimes the denomination of
Rational creatures, Angels and men; and here, if the Sons of God be
assembled, Satan himself will come amongst-them, though he be turned out of
doors with Ishmael; and with Cain doomed to wander; when the Sons of God are
assembled, Satan will come, if not to claim, yet to clamor for a blessing; and
though with Ruben he shall not prevail, yet with Esau, he will accuse,
threaten, condemn, seek the destruction of his younger Brother who has got
the blessing. But let it be used when, by whom, and in what sense it will, it
speaks authority in him that speaks it, and calls for attention in the party
spoken to. A son honors, i. e. is bound to honor, love, and obey his
Father. But

My Son, intimates a more singular authority mixed with affection; and not
only commands but constrains to a singular obedience mixed with reverence and
holy fear. When Isaac was to be sacrified, we read not of the least
opposition, cry, or complaint; though he was suddenly surpised, and had no
less then the appearance of unnatural cruelty and barbarism, to heighten,
and aggravate the Act. That expression, My Son, did as it were charm him to
obedience; The cords of affection, and bands of love, binding an ingenuous
nature faster then Sampsons new and untried Ropes. But from the Son of Abraham
come to the Son of God: This is that my beloved Son. By which expression God
did not only acknowledge him for his Son, but oblige him as a Son to duty.
Hear him what he says, In the volumne of thy book it is written of me, I come
to do thy will; yea though it was to be led as a lamb to the slaughter, and
to lie bound, and dumb, as a sheep before his shearer. But to come to our
selves, he that has sealed the Charter of our adoption, has imposed upon us a
necessity of subjection. He that has entered us into the Prerogative Office of
the Sons of God, commands us to receive him, and to believe in his Name. You
then that are or would be called, The Sons of God, learn Gods love, and your
duty; his authority, and your submission.

Where the word of King is, there is power; if the Lion roar, who will not
fear? If the Lord have spoken, who can but prophecy? Let not your prudence,
obstruct your piety, nor your love of the world, extinguish the love of God in
your hearts. He that knows the will of God, and dares not do it for fear of
men, he is as ill, if not worse, then profane Esau, who sold his birthright
for a mess of pottage.

Every man therefore, that desires the honor, or claims the privilege to be
the Son of God: That prays our Father, as The sons of the living God, let them
with Reverence, observe The duty; Fear;

Fear is sometimes so far from a duty, that it is a disturbance. It puts all
out of frame, and makes him more timorous then the Hare, That ought to be bold
as the Lion. The Apostle calls it by a fit name, when he calls it the Spirit of
bondage; for this is that that not only binds a man up both hand and foot, but
casts him into utter darkness. Unbelievers, and those that are thus fearful,
Rev. 21.8.
as they are both blind, and usually lead one another, so they fall into the
same ditch. The Indians fear the Devil, and sacrifice to him, not out of love,
but least he should hurt them. And many that are called Christians, fear God
upon no better account. This was the sad effect of the first transgression; I
was afraid, because I was naked, etc. and, to subdue this in us was the end of
Gods sending his Son into the world, that we being delivered from our enemies,
might serve him without fear. The love of God shed abroad in our hearts casts
out this fear.

Secondly, Therefore fear is an awful respect to, and regard of, with love,
reverence, and honor: This seasons all the duties of men, and makes them
acceptable to God. This fear attends upon, and ushers in, great joy. This is
Commanded; Serve the Lord with fear, Heb. 12.28.
and rejoice with trembling. To distinguish this from the former, the Apostle
calls it Godly Fear; God is the Author of it; I will put my fear in their
hearts. The end of it, Esa. 32.40.
and the object of it first, and immediately; and man only so far, as God has
communicated something of himself, as his Majesty, wisdom, authority, power
to him.

Fear the Lord, and the King: Observe first the Method: The Lord, Then the
King. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, and the beginning of
wisdom is the fear of the Lord. A man may be witty, but not wise without it,
he may be as subtle as the serpent, but cannot be as innocent as the dove.
Jacob covenanting with Laban, calls to witness, the Fear of his Father Isaac;
Genesis 31.53.
i. e. That God that Isaac his Father feared. David does not only explain
this duty, what it is, but press it upon us, why it is to be done, with
prevalent arguments; Come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the
Lord our maker: for he is the Lord our God, he has made us, etc.

This is a duty confessed by all, though practiced by few; The fool indeed
says in his heart, there is no God; in his heart, i. e. in his secret
thoughts, as rather desiring that it was so, then concluding that it is so; in
his heart, not with his lips in articulate words. He is afraid either that the
Echo of his own expression should give him the lie, or that for Atheism and
blasphemy, openly profes^'d, he should strike him with death, who first
breathed into him the breath of life. But to leave such speculative, and
practical Atheists, either in mercy to be converted, or in terror to be
confounded. What strange spectacle is this that I see; Professors, pious and
precious souls, such as seem not without the power of godliness, and yet want
the form; no outward posture of the body that may express the reverence of
the soul: No sacred esteem of times, places, or things separated to holy use,
who to avoid superstitious vowing, exclude all formalities of worship: deny
God, those external Civilities of his worship, that they will scarcely deny
their equals, and dare not deny their superiors. The servant as though he was
free from his Master, sits in the Congregation with his hat on, and that not in
winter only but in summer, not upon any account of infirmity, but I fear
presumption, for heat and sweat will make him lay it by. What will Turks,
Jews, and Pagans think of us, who in the externalls of their worship do far
outstrip us; and perhaps in their zeal also, though it be not according to
knowledge? What will the holy men of God, The noble army of Martyrs, The
glorious Society of Saints, and Angels, who not only kneel, but fall flat on
their faces, not only uncover their heads, Rev. 4.10.
but cast their Crowns down to the earth before him. What will they say to
David, or rather what will David say to them, who while they boast of his
Spirit, deny his practice in every letter, and whereas they would be thought to
be men after Gods own heart, they seem to proclaim it, that they think him
like themselves. See what David did, and do the like; I will come into thy
house in the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I worship toward
thy holy Temple, Psalm. 5.7.

This fear of God, then is an awful apprehension of the sacred Majesty of
Almighty God, proceeding from a loving, and a loyal heart, binding over the
soul to all services of love, with a voluntary resignation of our selves, our
profits, pleasures, preferments, and what is ours, to his will and pleasure.

This is not only The whole duty of man, to fear God, and keep his
Commandments, but his chiefest dignity; which not only preserves the soul
here in grace, but also Crowns it with glory hereafter. My son, fear thou the
Lord.

The other object of our fear is The King.

It is our Saviors order and Command; To give unto Caesar, the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods. The Apostle appoynts that tribute
be paid to whom it belongs, and Honor to whom honor is due. Come forth ye
sons and daughters of Jerusalem, see the Regalia, that Throne of Majesty,
which God himself has set up for him, and that Crown of honor, wherewith
God himself has Crowned him in the day of his espousalls; He has joined him
with himself in the same expression, Clothed him with the Robes of his own
honor, mounted him in royal equipage with himself, and causing it be
proclaimed by Solomon (no meaner a person then the greatest of Princes is his
Herald) Thus shall it be done to that man that the Lord will honor; Fear the
Lord, and the King.

The Act is the same Fear. Fear The Lord. The King.


Of the first I have treated already, now of the second and next immediate
object of our Fear; The King, i. e. A single person clothed with authority,
chosen of God, and of the people, sitted for, called to, and settled in power
and dignity, is to be feared, i. e. with a loyal and loving heart reverenced,
and obeyed, next and immediately unto the Lord, in the Lord, and for the Lord.

Neither was this any National, or legal command only imposed upon the
Israelites; but see also the very same made by the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, Honor the King. Evangelicall, Moral, universal, and perpetual.

Where let me first congratulate the word honor by way of explanation, which
takes off the edge of admiration from subjects, and of ambition from Princes.
It includes not only reverence, obedience, and care of, or for, but also
Recompense, Reward, Maintenance. Kings themselves are servants, designed to
defend, preserve, keep safe, (as a Shepherd his flock) the people committed to
their charge. Our bare heads, our bended knees, all our salutations, and signs
of reverence, our honor and fear are indeed a tribute due unto God, but paid
to the King as his Stuard, commissioned by him to require, and receive them of
us. Wonder not then, that God should thus guild an earthen pot, and lay up the
treasure even of divine honor in an earthen vessel. It is the Lord; He may do
what he will: and the Honor is his, he may do with his own what he pleases.

Two things lie plain before us: First, That kingly government is of divine
institution, and approbation; commanded and commended by God himself. All other
governments, and governors, are appointed by the King, and in subordination to
him. The text is plain, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to every ordinance,
(or law,) of man for the Lords sake, whether to the King, as supreme, or to
Governors sent ( i. e. authorized, commissioned, appointed) by him. Thus Daniel
was by the King made a great man, and a Governor, and he that reigned over one
hundred twenty and seven Provinces, Est. 1.1. appointed Governors over every
Province, v. 14. But to clear this, Moses was singled out of God, made a King,
so called, so esteemed by God and men. Visibly vindicated against those
seditious Rebels, who despising the Magistrate, and the Minister; The King,
and the Priest: Moses and Aaron cried out, you take too much upon you; All the
Congregation is holy^ Whence then sprung the Sanedrim, from God or from Moses?
from God by way of approbation, but from Moses (by the advice of Jethre his
father in law) by way of institution. The text is plain, Provide thou, Exodus
18.21. and 24. Moses obeyed the voice of his father in law, and Moses chose men
of courage, and made them heads, etc. and after in the 11 of Numbers, though
God gave the 70 Elders of the Spirit of Moses (observe it is said of the Spirit
that is upon thee, v. 17. see also 25 verse, i. e. the Spirit of wisdom,
authority, counsel and strength) yet they were gathered and presented before
the Tabernacle of the Congregation by Moses, nor were they then put first into
office (for they were Officers and Governors before, v. 16.) but furnished by
those gifts to a more cheerful bearing of their public burden. So that it is
clear, God called Moses to be King, Moses called the Elders to sit in Counsel
and Parliament with him.

Nay further, I shall own it as a Favor in him that will let me see either
Judea, or any other Nation or Country mentioned in any part of the Scripture,
either put into that form of Government, which is called a States government
by a Command from God, or (when they had put themselves into it, show me where
it is approved of God or commended; or where ever such a Nation deserved the
name of a Commonwealth, or that God was glorified, virtue encouraged, sin
punished, or mischiefs prevented. The Israelites were indeed often without a
King, but, alas, see the miseries that followed; Rapes, whoredoms, idolatries,
oppressions, cruelties, civil wars, factions, what not, till blood touched
blood, and neighbor fought against neighbor, brother against brother, and
many thousands slain, (the sad character of our times) and thus they continued
to devour one another, till God gave them into the hand of the enemies round
about, Goliath, Ammon, Amaleek, the Philistines, etc. till they had neither
liberty to rejoice in, nor weapon to defend themselves withal, yea not
allowed so much as a smith in Israel, to make or mend their instruments of
husbandry; but every man must go down to the Philistines to sharpen his axe,
and his share, and his weeding hook, vid. 1 Samuel 13.18.

This was the time when there was no King in Israel, every man did what was
good in his own eyes (notwithstanding the Counsel of Seventy) this was their
sad and deplorable Liberty; their horrid and miserable reformation. O England,
England, look in this glass, and see what is awanting but the last act (which
God in much mercy prevent) and now after 12 or 14 years trial of it, tell me
if such confusions have been found, such taxes and burdens imposed, such
villainies hatched, and such dangers threatened in some hundreds of years before
us. Do not all faces gather blackness? are not all complainers, all loosers,
unless some few who having in the morning devoured the prey, will needs sit
down at night to devide the spoil.

I intend not to enter upon the dispute, or to set Kingdoms and Commonwealths
together by the ears, about a form of Government. My judgment I shall
deliver in few words.

First, That God did appoint, yea found Monarchy or Kingly government, and as
it were commend it to all Nations and Countries, in creating one and but one.

Secondly, That the whole Scripture approves of it, and threatens its contrary
as a general Curse, presaging if not enforcing a Nations ruin.

Thirdly, That all Nations under Heaven have found most comfort, content,
freedom and happiness in it: yea experience has showed it as most true, that
those Nations that were not content with this government cut out for them by
the wise and providentiall hand of God, have seldom or never cut well for
themselves after: such changelings ever reading their follyes in the miseries
that followed.

I have read the Apology, and defense of those times; perused Declarations,
Remonstrances, and what not: I find every sect, every man of the earth grown
great: every ambitious Spirit raised (no matter how) to honor, yea every devil
set upon a pinnacle, saying as that imperious General did, Am I come up hither
without the Lord. Esa. 36.10.
The name of God is especially blasphemed in this, that it is made use of to
palliate all manner of villainies: lesuites and Anabaptists agreeing in this
(and it is feared in other things also) as smoking firebrarnds in foxes
tails, by subtlety, and cruelty to devour those great ordinances of God
Magistracy and Ministry. Yet shall I tell you, I have found only two things of
seeming weight against what I have delivered.

First, The free State of Venice, ancient and venerable, surpassing most
kingdoms, feared abroad, lovely and amiable at home. This is she that gives a
great part of the world law upon salt water, that has dealt with the great
Turk often at arms end: The best bulwark and fortress of Christendom, whose
valor, and success while other nations stand and look on, let them admire
her, but be ashamed themselves, who like fools, or knaves are quarrelling one
with another, she in the mean time calling upon us for our aid and assistance.

Answ. It is confessed she is ancient and honorable; and it is no less then a
wonder that in all those changings, successions, and vicissitudes that have
been she still remains without visible decay or symptom of old age: when
almost all other Pollitick bodies, all kingdoms in Christendom have met with
changes and revolutions. But consider,

First, The convenience of her situation, upon a great many small Islands in
the jaws of the Sea, easily commanding within her self, not easily commanded
by any other: She sits as one, and alone as a mistrisse, a mother, one that at
the first maintained her own interest within her self, in a word she seems as
a City governed by a Lord Mayor, and a Court of Aldermen; which being at the
first so planted, not easily violable by any other foreign or domestic force
does still continue, but it is not thus with us. All generations have read, The
kingdom of England; Ten for one in this Nation never consented to this change,
nor so much as once dreamt of it: and although many, admiring that justice that
they could not understand, being fearful to be found fighters against God did
submit, yet the sudden blasting, and the sad effects of it, has called upon
them to acknowledge their folly, and to alter their judgment in point of
government.

But further, What place or persons shall assume this authority or execute it:
Shall any City or persons challenge the superiority, the government is no less
arbitrary, and far more dangerous then formerly; In a word, I profess when I
have seriously weighed our late Kingly government so happily constituted as it
was, and our state government fumbled up of so many hetorodox and hetorogeniall
principles, and persons; nothing has more troubled me then to find the fault
in the former, or one virtue or convenience in this latter, and therefore
cannot but conclude that the constitution of it, is most likely to set persons,
and places, at perpetual odds and enmities, and certainly was contrived by
them that having plunged the Nation into so many not to be avoided miseries
made it their work to secure their own interest, though to the ruin and
confusion of all, in the conclusion.

But again, the state of Venice was laid in peace, ours in blood; Sion her
self will not stand long if built in blood: she, i. e. Venice, remains in the
mercy of God as a living monument to all nations, what a poor distressed
handful of persecuted Christians, watered with the blessing of God from on
high may grow to in time; we are likely to stand, as spectacles of horror and
amazement, verifying the proverb, We cannot let well be well, and this will not
be the lest of our sorrows in our sufferings, that our destruction is from our
selves, and when God had so fenced and guarded us from the force of other
nations that we might sleep securely despite their malice, we have armed our
selves, within our selves, against our selves to our own confusion.

Secondly, There is a Piece writ by Milton, called Populi Anglicani defensio,
etc. The defense of the people of England; I confess his learning and Oratory
to be considerable: I will not enter the lists with him, and the rather because
I conceive it may be to contest with a shadow, if he be dead, but if he be now
living, (and do not subsist as a mercenary under this power, nor wrapped in so
much guilt that he may less fear the gallows then a restoring of kingly
government,) let him justify the proceedings, and vindicate the sad effects of
this fatal change; let him give a satisfactory answer to the late six Queries
presented by the excluded members, and let him make it appear that the
advantage has or is very likely to answer to those vast sums expended,
Treasures exhausted, trading damnified, miseries multiplied, besides the blood
spilt, the guilt and dishonor contracted: if he can make it appear that there
was at first just cause for it, or that there is any commodity by it: I will
then give him the better of it, and be of his opinion, but if he have seen, as
questionless he has the miseries, and oppressions in these bleeding nations,
and do foresee, as he easily may do if living, that danger that is heightened
and occasioned by our changlings, I dare say he himself will answer himself
sufficiently, and either own his ignorance, or argue his impudence.

But to conclude this in a word, Arguments taken only from event; or success
are not infallible, for subordinate states, a government so ordered may do
well, but in such a nation as this it cannot; and for my part I cannot see but
that kingly government is most convenient, most suitable to and agreeing with
the genius of these nations; had it been left indifferent to frame our selves
at pleasure into any form of government, which I conceive is now questionable,
I must have propounded kingly government, and if the Scripture must be our
guide, I must and shall ever say, My son: fear thou the Lord, and the King. And
that is the second thing.

The King is to be feared, i. e. loved, honored and obeyed next and
immediately to God himself and that by the command of God.

This I shall first prove to be the ordinance of God; Secondly, Demonstrate the
grounds or causes of it, why so. Prove. 30.31. A King against whom there is no
rising up, i. e. ought not to be, nor did ever any rise up, but they found it
better to sit still, being convinced of their folly in their fall.

Prove. 20.2. The fear of a King is as the roaring of a lion, He that provokes
him to anger sins against his own soul: which expression in Scripture ever
infers a most mortal, dangerous and desperate sin, Eccl. 10.20. Curse not the
King, no not in thy chamber, etc.

Ezra 7.26. He that will not obey the law of God, and the Kings law, let him
have judgment without delay whether to death or to banishment, to confiscation
of goods, or to imprisonment.

In the Gospel and New Testament.

Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Mat. 22.21. Which is well and
fully expounded by the Apostle, Romans 13.7. Give to all men their due; Tribute
to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor. Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject, and in the 5 verse. Wherefore we
must be subject. 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort that prayers, supplications,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings and all that
are in authority, etc.

I might add more, but something has been said and more may be: See the
Reasons why God will have it so, for although no man may say to God why do
thou so, yet what reasons God has given we may and ought to take notice of.

First Reason: See Eccl. 8.2. Because of the Oath of God. I counsel thee to
obey the King, etc. Oh the promises, Covenants, and Oaths that have been taken
and made in this nation to that end, is it not for the violation of these that
the land mourns? are we yet devising new oaths, and never kept the old ones? it
is folly and madness to bind others in those cords that we our selves break at
pleasure before their faces, hear and fear, and assure your selves that God
will visit for these things, and his soul will be avenged upon such a Nation.

Second Reason: That we may lead under them a godly, peaceable and quiet life;
Oh value the comforts of a peaceable government. Submission has ever purchased
true liberty of conscience. Where is he, or what is he, that being of a pious
and peaceable spirit found not that tolleration that piety could ask, or
modesty request: Turbulent spirits indeed, some of them made voyages into
foreign parts only there to proclaim their follyes, and to air their
factions, which done many have returned convinct, converted, and what was
partly occasioned by themselves, they have owned as matter of lamentation.

Third Reason: Power is ordained of God, Romans 13.1. He, ( i.e. he that bears
and executes that power, i.e. The King, He) is the Minister, that is a servant
sent and appointed of God; See it twice repeated, verse. 4. and again, verse. 6.
By me Kings reign, Prove. 8.15. The Apostle is plain, Romans 13.2. He that
resists, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist, (be they who
they will) shall receive to themselves damnation. Comment upon the Text who
will, and evade it who can. See also David's positive assertion included in a
most vehement and uncontrollable question: Who can (1 Samuel 26.9.) lay his hand
on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? if a statesman, if an injured person,
then David: if reasons of state principles of policy, if all that wit and
reason can contrive to have excused it could have excused it, it had been
excusable in David, but David could not; The Lord keep me from doing this thing
to my master, etc. for he is the Lords anointed, vid. 1 Samuel 24.7. may he ask,
who can? he must produce a commission written with Gods own hand, that can do
it and be innocent. I am not ignorant of what is objected against this, in case
of Tyrants, bloody Princes, etc. all that I shall say is, Reason is a good
servant, but a bad Master; God sees that good for me, that neither I nor my
reason can see good for my self. David had reason enough on his side, but see
what he says, As the Lord lives, either the Lord shall smite him or his day
shall come, or he shall go down into the battle and perish, (1 Samuel 26.10.)
but the Lord keep me, etc. In a word, he that can thankfully and humbly wait
upon the justice of God when he gives us such a king in his anger, can
submissively and patiently wait upon his pleasure to take him away in his
wrath.

Fourthly, The King is the most visible resemblance of the invisible God. His
servant authorized and commissioned by him to execute his will. He is as the
very garment wherewithal the Majesty, justice and power of God is covered and
presented to the eye as a visible object; I speak not of a Princes robes but
his royalty, not of his outward apparel, but his spiritual gift and
sovereignty. The Queen of Sheba, (2 Chronicles. 9.8.) has this expression, Blessed
be the Lord thy God that loved thee, that set thee on his throne as king,
instead of the Lord thy God.

That saying of God himself, 1 Samuel 16.1. I have provided me a King, is very
considerable; He was a man after Gods own heart in his public administrations
of judgment and justice; though his personal faults were very great. It is no
untruth to say he was a better King then a man. In his infirmities he teaches
even the most precious Saints and servants of God to remember that they are but
men; but in his executions of justice he lessons Princes that they ought to be
no other then gods, i.e. Ambassadors, Stewards, servants substituted and
appointed by God.

I might add many more reasons why God is pleased so strictly to charge and
require submission and obedience, doubtless, every act of obedience, and
disloyalty, especially public, and in eminent persons does as it were
unloose the bands, and dissolve the Covenant betwixt a King and his Subjects.
If Kings be (as usually they are) too ready to improve advantages to increase
their power and greatness, Treasons, disloyalties, etc. gives them
opportunities, and makes them eye those as Captives subdued, which before they
beheld as subjects, yea as sons in their Dominion. It is good therefore to
fear the King, to prevent our misery and his tyranny, it being most certainly
true in Politics, That every rebellion subdued, makes the King more a King,
and the Subjects more subject. But we have said sufficient to persuade, yea to
enforce obedience from such as fear the Lord, Their consciences are dear unto
them, and a godly peaceable and quiet life most desirerable. The oath of God
they fear and the Covenant, as a Covenant of God they hold inviolable: They
can look beyond the shadow to the substance, and in and under the visible man,
can see the justice, wisdom, power, and Majesty of God, and pay the tribute of
their fear and reverence due to God, to the King as his receiver. They have
learnt our Saviors lesson; If a man (much more a King) will take away thy
coat, let him take thy cloak also; They judge it better to be famous for their
sufferings, then infamous for their actings. Thus good Mephibosheth when he had
more cause to be angry at the Kings unjust connivance and distribution, does
not only submit without the least impatience or opposition; but gives us the
best counsel in his own example, and the best instruction in his resolution;
Let him take all, so that my Lord the King may but return in peace.

To reasonable men enough has been said, to unreasonable men, and such as have
no faith, it is to small purpose to say any more; Their subtilties can evade,
or jealousies pervert what can be said, nor will they read their sin, but in
their punishment; nor be convinced of this duty, till they have overwhelmed
themselves and the Nation in unavoydable ruins.

Before I leave this, let me congratulate this happy union, The Lord and the
King, not here alone, but elsewhere joined together; and observable it is that
the fear of God and honor of the King go hand in hand, and where the King is
dishonored, the fear of God is also violated. It was a fatal prediction (the
unhappy consequence of homebred distractions) that Israel refusing directions
from the Law and the Testimonies, should go to and fro, and fretting
themselves, should Curse their God, and their King. It was also a happy
prediction, (and oh that our eyes might see the accomplishing of it) that
Israel upon his Conviction should seek the Lord, and David their King. Thus in
Blessings and Cursings, God and the King are joined. The Almighty himself in
order to the preservation of peace, and administration of Justice, is pleased
with his own hand to put into the same scabbard of eternal truth, the Sword of
the Lord and of Gideon.

I have now done with the positive part of the doctrine; My son, Fear the
Lord, and the King. Now I come to the Negative part; Meddle not with the
seditious, or those that are given to change.

First, Meddle not. Medlers are fruit that was never planted in the paradise of
God, nor are suffered to prosper in the places of his pleasure. They will
indeed as ill weeds be springing up, (and when they are over-growne they are
dangerous) but the diligent hand must weed them out. God has made ample
provision against this corruption, he condemns them as inordinate walkers,
that are busy-bodies, 2 These. 3.11. Such as go from house to house, are not
only idle but pratlers, and busybodyes, 1 Timothy 5.13. If such suffer, they
suffer justly, to prevent which we have a divine Caution, 1 Pet. 4.15. Let no
man suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a
busy-body; (the word is expounded word for word, a Bishop in another man's
diocese) Thus vices are linked together, and as evil words corrupt good
manners, and evil thoughts hatch, and generate evil words, so needless
intermedlings, especially in State-affaires, often ushers in evil doings;
these carry us forward to theft and sacrilege, these to murder and what not.
Sin, if not prevented, ever plunging the soul into more and more sin, one
mischief covering it self with another, conceiving it cannot be safe but by
so doing. As we see it was thus with David in the matter of Vriah, and Ahab in
the case of Naboth, the beginnings of which are often but small, but alas, alas,
how great a sire will a little spark kindle.

He that made the whole world the object of his contemplation, as he was
grieved to see some idle, and others ill employed, so was he also grieved to
see many bufie in other men's matters. Such endeavors are seldom acceptable,
or successful, and this connivence they carry ever along with them, if well
they are but well, if evil the more pains the less thanks, ye accessaries in
this case come in as principles, and bear the reward of their follyes in their
sufferings. Briefly, God has placed every man in his own station, appointed
him some office, calling, employment, or business of his own. This let him do
it with all diligence, and following the Aposties rule; Let him study to be
quiet and meddle with his own business, 1 These. 4.15.

Sin, and sinners, in general we must not meddle with; My son, if sinners
entice thee, consent thou not, if they say, We will lay wait for blood, etc.
vid. 1 Prove. v. 11. -- We shall find precious riches, and fill our houses with
spoil. Cast in thy lot amongst us, we will all have one purse. My son, walk
not in their way, refrain thy foot from their paths, etc.

Good old Jacob (whom neither affection to his children, nor love of gain
could court to the countenancing of cruelty) abominates that villainy of his
sons in slaying the Sichemites (though they pretended great and urgent reasons
for it) especially after overtures of peace for the future, and tender of
satisfaction for bypast injuries, he confesses that it made him stink in the
nostrills of other Nations; and many years after, even upon his deathbed, to
evidence his perpetual hatred of such treachery, he disclaimes any society
with, or approbation of that act; Into their secrets let no^ my soul enter in
their assemblies, mine honor be not thou united: and passes sentence upon them
that were chief actors in it, Simeon, and Levi, Devide them O God in Jacob,
and scatter them in Israel, Genesis 49. 5-7.

But to speak to the object in the text, The seditious. Sedition is the
murderer of piety, the bane of charity, the mother of consusion. It is a
hell upon earth, as having nearest relation to, and confederacy with the Devil
and his Angels. Satan never acts so like himself, as when in the shape of an
Angel of light, he attempts works of darkness; and by his delusions, and
devices, throws all into extremities, and those often contrary, casting some
into the fire, and others into the water. Sedition is that Grand Trapan, which
not only carries away deceived souls, such as in the simplicity of their
hearts go on thinking no evil, but also perverts good intentions, and in time
converts them into most horrid practices. Sedition has this evil in it, that
it usually corrupts the best knowing, such when corrupted to be ever the worst.
That poison is most mortal that has seized on the vitalls; and thus it is in
a Church, or State, when Religion is turned to faction, and peace the daughter
of piety is so fatally betrayed that she becomes the mother of dissension, and
grandmother of destruction. Nor do I wonder at it in our dregs of time, when
in those purer days the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that he feared he
should sinde (what he was unwilling to find) strife, envyings, wrath,
contentions, backbitings, swellings, and discords. Behold an Army of Saints,
whose Cause is envy and swellings, whose Artillery, is strife, wrath, and
contention, and whose Military provision seems no better then backbitings, and
discords. If thus it be with the green tree, what shall become of the dry? and
if the righteous could not be preserved from those evils, how shall the wicked
and ungodly appear?

But to come to the Text, the seditious seem to be of two sorts (which I
gather from the last word Both, a word necessarily relating to two) and indeed
in Stateaffaires two factions or seditions are most dangerous.

First, Such as would have Monarchy degenerate into tyranny; Who cannot be
content to have Sovereignty, like the tree of life planted in the midst of the
paradise of God, whose fruit is food, and whose leaves are physic to heal the
Nations, but they must have it, as that overgrowne tree, whose height must
reach to heaven. It was a foul sign of Babels approaching ruin, when his
Princes and people, who knew the King to be but a man, must honor him as a
God; Is not this great Babel that I have built for mine Honor, etc. preceded
that fatal deposing; Thy kingdom is taken from thee, etc. Dan. 4.28. Herod's
flatterers were his murderers, had not they cried out, The voice of God and
not of man, Herod might have been a man much longer; but they giving and he
accepting divine Honor, he was smitten with a mortal disease, He was eaten
with worms, and gave up the ghost, Acts 12.22.

Such as those, Hosea 7.3. That make the King glad with their wickedness, and
Princes with their lies, That see vanity, and devise folly, and say, The Lord
says it: Arbitrary Power, and government at pleasure; This shall be the
Custom, 1 Samuel 8.11. They interpret it, This shall be the right, power,
prerogative royal of your King, to take your sons, your daughters, your
tenths, and till you cry out because of your King. Such as Rehoboams young
Counselors, Make thy little singer heavier then thy Fathers loins, 1 Kings
12.10.

I take no delight to rub up old sores, yet I request those whom it may concern
to remember, That flatterers have been most fatal to Prin^^^ A Court Parasite,
is a Court Plague: It is most certainty true, That a King is made for the
people, and not they for him: Their safety and welfare, ought to be the aim,
and end of his government, in requital of, and thankfulness for which, his
ease should be their labor, his honor their endeavor, his safety, their
hazard: and in as much as their security is his chiefest work, their tribute,
and Honor ought to be duly paid to him as his just wages.

Princes are called Gods. An unjust, cruel, tyrannical god, is nonsense and
blasphemy, with all sacred reverence be it spoken and received. If God
himself were as the son of man, that he might err, or could be deceived, an
arbitrary and unlimited power terminated in cruelty and oppression, would
depose him from his royalty, and make him even such a Creator hateful to his
Creatures.

God who is the holy one, of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, may deal
with men, as the Potter with his Clay, and who shall say, What do thou? his
ways are unsearchable, and his judgments past finding out; but for man, yea
the best of men, who in their best estate are altogether vanity, though they
be called gods, they must die like men, and therefore must act according to
those Laws, which the King of Kings has laid before them for his glory, and
his peoples good.

It is recorded concerning king Joash, 2 Chronicles. 24.2. That he did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, all the days of Jehoiada the Priest: and
no longer: What, no Bishop, no King; how true that Maxim is let others
dispute: Sure it is that a good Priest makes a good King, or at least if he can
help it will not endure a bad one. But what was the matter with Joash, after
the death of Jehoiada, v. 17. The Princes of Judah came and did reverence unto
him, and he hearkenod unto them, etc. Did they reverence him! it was but (...)
duty, but duty it self (as every virtue) has two extremes, but he hearkened
unto them, puffed up with pride he forgot to be humble, and allured by their
flatteries was persuaded to do that which in the conclusion tended to his ruin
and the Nations woe.

Those therefore that are or shall be the Counselors of a King, remember what
is written, As a roaring Lion, and as a hungry Bear, such is a wicked Ruler
over a poor people, Pro. 28.15. It is not for Princes to be drunk with
ambition, no more then with wine, this will make him err in judgment, no
less, then that. It is better for Princes to be sons of Consolation, then of
terror; and those that take a delight to be, and be accounted Hunters before
the Lord, it is just in God that they fall into the snare, and that the venom
of his arrows dry up their spirits. Is the Prince naturally merciful, cherish
and preserve that temper in him, do not as the Lioness did her young Lion,
teach him to catch, and to devour the prey, Eze. 19.4. persuade him not to
wast, and destroy, or show himself terrible with the noise of his roarings,
least the Nations beset him, and lay snares for him, and he fall into their
pit. The greatest Triumph of a King, is to gain the hearts, and win the good
affections of his people. He that has these, shall never want their hands to
vindicate, nor purses to maintain his Honor, and interest. That service is
quickest in dispatch, and soars highest that is mounted upon the wings of love.
A beloved Prince is as the breath of our nostrills, The anointed of the Lord,
worth ten thousand of us, no dangers shall disquiet his repose, no cares line
his Crown, no terrors torment his spirit, if his subjects can help it. All
Israel will come up to Hebron, to attend the Coronation of such a King: on the
contrary, what sadder spectacle in the world then to see a King, mounted on his
triumphant Chariot, enriched with the spoils, and drawn by his gald-backt,
naked, and impoverished subjects. Which that neither we, nor our children may
see, let Kings, and Counselors ponder and observe this truth, That when Kings
in governing, go beyond the limits of moderation, they pass the lines of
security, and run the hazard of their own ruin.

When Kings make their Will their Law, and their own Pleasure, their
Prerogative Royal, Subjects often make their Power their Privilege, and
conceive Might a sufsicient Right to vindicate their Liberties. As I cannot
allow the first, so I dare not approve the second. I have heard the Advocates
of The Kings Bench, and am not altogether ignorant what is said for the Common
pleas, I have summoned a Grand Jury of my serious thoughts in the Case, which
have returned an Ignoramus, and I am resolved to leave both parties to stand or
fall to their own Master.

But for this first branch of this seditious faction, let them Consider the
text; Fear the Lord, and the King: First the Lord, then the King; The King
after, in, with, and for the Lord; He that would be able to give a good account
of his loyalty, must prefix these prepositions as Essentials of piety, he
cannot love the King, that fears not God: Are drinking of healths, swearing,
ramming, damming, hideous and desperate execrations and Cursings the symptoms
of a loyal subject: do such damnable and deplorable carriages speak those
that use them the servants of a Christian King, defender of the faith, or the
Cursed vassalls of Baal^zebub Prince of the Devils.

Oh that my Counsel might be acceptable to such, to break off this sin by
Repentance, and this iniquity by a public confession, that there may be a
healing of the error; That that may be effected, (which for fear of them has
been partly obstructed) which is by all desired, That our Judges may be
restored as at the first, and our Magistrates as at the beginning. Thus far of
the first.

The second sort of seditious persons, are such as will have no King. Every
small discontent arms them into desperate undertakings. What portion have we
in David? or what inheritance in the son of Ishai? To your tents O Israel; Now
look to thy own house David? Stay, stay, a little, may not a man be more
zealous then religious? more forward then wise; consider the end of it, will it
not be bitterness, and an evil day? But further, Have we no share in David,
no inheritance in the house of Ishai? Was he flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bone, at his inauguration, and have we no interest in the succession? Is
that the best Counsel, To thy tents of Israel. Well go on, rejoice in
Jeroboam, and his golden Calves. Make priests of the meanest of the people;
submit to any thing rather then a return to the house of David. God permits
much that he does not approve of. Let me with the peace of a good conscience,
lie with Lazarus upon a dunghill, yea die like a dog in a ditch, rather then
stand in the way of sinners, or sit in the seat of the scornful. May my memory
perish rather then deserve such a Monument as Jeroboam had; This is Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin.

Sedition has sometimes success, but does never prosper; the conclusions of it
though purchased by blood are less valuable then water. It is in this case as
it was with David, Oh that any would give me to drink of the water of the well
of Bethlehem, (his enemies the Philishins then lying round about it) His
worthyes will venture their lives to satisfy his longing, (what will not zeal
and affection do) but when he has it he refuses to drink it; but pouring it on
the ground says, Is not this the blood of these men, The blood of men is a
dear rate for an imaginary liberty; such a one as like Plato's Idea, has its
existence only in fancy, and is Ens rationis, more properly then Ens reale: If
this be liberty say many thousands in England, would we had been subjects
still; and he that thanked God that he was borne a freeman and not a slave, had
as little reason for it, as he that blessed God, that he was born a vassal to
the Crown of England.

Barrabas was committed for sedition and murder; Those two are not easily
separated. Yet oh, the misery of popular tumults, how easily are they moved to
put to death the holy one, and the just, and to require a murderer to be given
unto them.

Seditions against Princes, and government established are not very many in
Scripture, yet some we read of, as that of insinuating Absalom (who saved the
executioner a labor, and was hanged in a halter of his own spinning) That of
Sheba; the Son of Bieri, (whose head soon after ransomed the whole body of his
Army) both against David. The best Princes have many times the worst subjects;
their pliable natures are easiest abused, and turbulent spirits having (as the
man in the fable) by some concessions gained a handle for his ax in requital
cut down the Tree.

But of all seditions in holy writ that which the Apostle calls The gainsaying
of Corah, seems to be (take it in all parts, and under all considerations) the
most dangerous and desperate. Numb. 16. -- The Ringleader is Corah, an eminent
person in the Tribe of Levi, with whom Dathan and Abiram two of the sons of
Ruben, who gain into their confederacy two hundred and fifty men, Captains of
the assembly, famous men in the congregation and men of renown, these gather
together against Moses and Aaron, and in plain terms tell them, That they take
too much upon them, all the congregation is holy, yea every one of them; why
then should they (seeing the Lord was amongst them) lift up themselves above
the congregation of the Lord. Was not this recorded in sacred writ, I could
scarcely receive it for a truth being a faction made up of pretended religion,
and intended ambition; Specious pretenses countenanced by men famous both in
Church and state, so colored and covered over with dissembled sanctity, that
even Moses and Aaron, the King and the Priest must suffer in their reputation,
and honor, and in the Vulgar account pass for Tyrannical and Antichristian.
But true it is, for truth it self has recorded it, and in as much as it is
written for our learning. We may learn from it,

First, That innocence it self is no guard against impudent and slanderous
tongues; Moses though the meekest of men, must pass for a Tyrant, if seditious
souls will dare to say, others will be ready to believe it, though there be no
cause for it.

Secondly, Moses and Aaron, the Magistrate and the Minister are equally
levelled by factions, and as instituted at first by God to comfort and support
one another, as Saul and Jonathan lovely in their lives, so in their deaths,
they are not separated.

Thirdly, That blasphemy, hypocrisy and counterfeit holiness, ever ushers in
sedition and rebellion. All the Congregation is holy, every one, and the Lord
is with us, etc.

Fourthly, That the grand abetters and maintainers of faction, are not only
bred, but often eminent in Church and State; Their enemies being usually those
of their own household.

I shall descant no longer on this seditious subject, may those that read it
consider what has been said, and the Lord give us grace to prevent that woe
which is threatened against them, that followed the ways of Cain (who slew
righteous Abel) and are lead away like Balaam with the wages of deceit, (ready
to do any thing for money) and have perished in the gainsaying of Corah, Jude
v. 11.

And this leads me by the hand from the Doctrine, the word of Command, My son,
fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with the seditious, to the
Reason, a word of terror, for their destruction shall come suddenly, and who
knows how speedy may be the ruin of them both?

What Daniel said of the Dream, let me say of this for the certainty of it, it
is doubled; first, by way of assertion; secondly, of expostulation: of these in
order.

In the assertion observe; first, The judgment threatened; Destruction.

When Separation and Confusion is the work; what fitter wages then ruin and
destruction. Is not destruction to the wicked, and strange punishment to the
workers of iniquity, Job 31.3. Is it not Gods solemn protestation, Ezekiel.
35.6. As I live, says the Lord, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood
shall pursue thee: except thou hate blood, blood shall pursue thee. Are not the
threatenings of this nature many? Is not the vision plain? Though it tarry for
an appointed time, yet he that shall come will come. Have not the children of
affliction comforted themselves with these meditations in their worst
conditions? It is David's Counsel, Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord,
and he shall nourish thee, and will not suffer the Righteous to fall for ever.
But for the implacable enemies and treacherous friends of his Church, such as
maintain cruelty, and strife, in the City; such as lay their hands upon
those that be at peace; and break the Covenant; Whose words are softer then
butter, but war is in their hearts; whose expressions are smooth as oil, yet
are they swords: Such God will bring down into the pit of destruction: bloody
and deceitful men, shall not live out half their days, v. 23.

But this is not all, not only a destruction, but theirs is threatened: observe.

Secondly, A destruction appropriated as it were to the nature of the Crime,
seasonable to the time, and suitable to the occasion, in the punishment God
writes the sin, and in the penalty proclaims; Lo this is the Man, and this
was his Fault. Adonibezecks confession, may be their superscription; As I have
done, so God has rewarded me, Judge. 1.7. They either suffer with a (...), or
(...), as we call them, either God casts them into the same pit that they have
dug for others, or into another like it; either he hangs them with Hamman
upon the same gallows, or makes another very like it. There is ever some
conformity either of the subject, or some remarkable Circumstance of time or
place. Their destruction is mighty, bitter, strange, great, deadly, compared
to, illustrated by, and often joined with hell it self; Briefly, it may be
said of the seditious what is recorded of Corah, and his companions; The Lord
creates a new thing in the earth, they are not visited as others are, neither
do they die the death of other men. God usually pleads the Cause of his
servants before the sons of men, bringing (without any desire or endeavor of
theirs) the mischievous designs of their enemies upon their own heads, and
their violent dealings upon their own pates. Which leads me to a

Third Observation, It comes, unexpected, uncontriv'd; No secret plots are
needful to contrive that which God has designed publicly to bring about in
the sight of Heaven, and before the Sun. Man's device cannot further, but may at
least seemingly obstruct Gods resolution. It comes many ways, how often is the
Candle of the wicked put out, and their destruction comes upon them when God
divides their lives, in his wrath, Job 21.17. When their day comes as a
destroyer from the Almighty. When they least expect it, fear and a snare is
upon them, with desolation and destruction; yea usually it marches so
furiculsly, that when it comes they sue and seek for peace, but cannot find
it, Ezekiel. 7.25. And this leads us to the fourth Observation.

Fourthly, Suddenly. Sudden death never passes without observation, it is at
least a mercy to be sorewarned of our misery, and not to stand upon such
slippery places as suddenly to go down into hell. It is a sad condition to be
surrounded with snares, to be suddenly troubled with ^eares, and yet such is
the condition of those that cast out Widows empty, and that have broken the
arms of the fatherless, Job 22.9, 10. What greater calamity then for
destruction to come speedily, and suddenly to be destroyed without recovery;
yet this is the portion of him that devises lewd things, and that stirs up
contentions, Prove. 6.15. Would a man paint out misery to the life; What can be
more said to lay out the lines of it? then Evil shall come upon thee, and thou
shall not know the morning thereof: destruction shall fall upon thee which thou
shall not be able to put away: destruction shall come upon thee suddenly or
ever thou be aware, and yet this is the lot of them, who trust in their
wickedness, and say, None sees it, whose wisdom and knowledge have caused
them to rebel: who have said in their hearts, I am, and none else, vid. Esa.
47.10, 11. It is the Lords Threatening against those that have increased that
which is not theirs; that they shall rise up suddenly, that shall bite them,
and awake that shall stir them up, and make them their prey, Hab. 2.7, 8.

But to add the Expostulation, Who knows the ruin of them both? Who knows
how sudden or in what manner? The Scripture compares it to the pangs of a
woman. When they say, peace and safety, sudden destruction shall come, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. The Prophet Esa. 29.6. Sets it out by thunder, shaking, a terrible
noise, a whirlwind, tempest, and a flame of devouring fire. Who can comment
upon these comparisons without amazement, or think of them without terror? The
danger is past before the report come, in thunders, earthquakes and
lightnings. Tempests are ushered in by Halcion days or fairer weather; and
sire (though moderated the best of servants, yet) if become devouring, the
worst of masters. It is also compared, to a breach in a high wall, whose
breaking ^ut comes suddenly even in a moment, Isa. 30.13. Which puts me in mind
of the house built upon sand, which when the storms beat upon it it fell, and
the fall of it was great.

But the Genius of the time admits not of long discourses. This concerns the
wise, and great men whose office it is, not only to stand in, but to make up
the breach, and a word to the wise is sufficient. I shall therefore briefly
from Scripture lay down, the sudden and observable destructions of the
seditious, and then apply it, that others may hear and fear.

In as much as we spoke of two sorts of seditious persons, and that distinctly
in the doctrinall part, I shall follow the like method in the Rational, and
speak first to the advancers of Tyranny, either by evil counsel, or wicked
practices. Such has ever been fatal both to Prince and people, and have in
some suitable and remarkable way found this true, That their destruction came
suddenly.

I shall begin with the mother of a King, Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah, 2 Chronicles. 22.3. She counseled him to do wickedly, in so much as he did evil in
the sight of the Lord to his destruction: And observable it is, That it is
said, v. 7. The destruction of Amaziah came of God, i.e. was in a singular
manner appointed and ordered of God. For his perishing together with the house
of Ahab was the reward of his unhappy compliance. And for Athaliah she was
slain at the command of Jehoiada the Priest, a strange and severe example, the
mother and grandmother of a King, slain at the appointment of the high Priest;
She had broke up the house of the Lord, and bestowed upon Baalim whatsoever was
dedicated to the house of the Lord. When wicked counselors violate Gods glory,
Priests have sometimes the honor to execute upon them the judgments that are
written. Though this we may admire, not imitate.

The next we shall take notice of is a Treasurer, Adoram, the receiver of the
tribute, 1 Kings 12.18. Near in name, and perhaps in relation to Adoniram, who
in Solomon's time was over the tribute, he is sent by Rehoboam to pacisie, and
lo he perishes by the tumult; they stone him to death: well may their hands
be ready to break him, whose faces he had before ground to powder by needless
and unnatural taxes; it may be he was such a one as made himself rich, and his
master poor, and therefore judged a fit treasurer for the devil, in the
meantime know this, that as cruel tax-masdters are unwarrantable, so the
punishing of them by popular tumults is unsufferable. God is just, though the
instruments be unjust, and perhaps ordered in the providence of God to deter
men from such cruel practices, when they see revenge taken without, yea and
against Law, by them upon whom usually the law gets little satisfaction,

But to come from Counselors to Kings themselves. Adonibezek, Judge. 1.8.
Though he had his toes, and his singers cut off, yet could point at his own
cruelty, in Gods severity, as I have done, so the Lord has rewarded me. And
Agag the King of the Amalekites (happy in nothing but that he dyed by the hand
of Samuel) had not only the execution, but the sentence of justice passed upon
him. As thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy mother be childlesse
amongst women, 1 Samuel 15.33. Pharaoh who had ordered the male children of
Israel to be drowned, did in the sight of Israel sink like a stone to the
bottom of the Sea, Exodus 15.5. He, whose hand had been so heavy upon the poor
Israelites in the house of bondage, he with his instruments of tyranny sanke as
led in the mighty waters; He who showed no mercy to men, when they labored in
the very fire, found no compassion from God when he tumbled in the mighty
waters. Jehoiakim who had slain Vriah the Prophet with the sword, and with
contempt had cast out his dead body, ( Jer. 26.23.) was himself buried with the
burial of an ass, drawn, and cast forth out of the gates of Jerusalem, Chap.
22.19. Thus those that walk in the counsels of the ungodly, and stand in the
way of sinners are never able to appear in judgment, or stand in the
congregation of the righteous.

This place would be convenient to handle the question, whether it be lawful
to kill a tyrant or no; of all that I have seen upon the affirmative, none
says less to more purpose then a late piece called, Killing no murder; If
reason alone were predominant, the man seems unanswerable, but with Christians,
what is not of Faith is sin; and for our parts our doctrine allows no such
practice, neither the Church (reformed) of Christ; For him that writ it may he
live to recant it, and those that did abet and countenance it (some late active
men know what I mean) let them take heed that the same destruction leveld at
another, light not upon themselves, and that they fall not into the same net
that was spread for another. God has sometimes by an extraordinary hand taken
vengeance, as Phineas upon Zamri and Cozby, Samuel upon Agag, and Johoiada upon
Athaliah; yet are none of these warrantable for our example; these being the
extraordinary actings of Gods justice, not allowable in the common course of
his providence. No positive command there is, and pity indeed that there
should be, seeing virtue it self is often by the envious blasted as vicious,
and wholesome severitie, is by some branded for Tyranny; But let Kings and the
Great ones of the earth know this, that if they be not accountable to men, yet
God by man often takes vengeance; nor is it much comfort for a malefactor, to
have his executioners company to another world. Let Princes employ faithful
and godly Counselors, grave, and experienced, and above all let them beg of
God, to guide them with his Counsel, and then doubtless he will bring them to
glory.

Least any mistaking what has been said, should condemn the generation of the
just, and conclude all Princes to have been tyrannical, that have dyed by
sudden or violent death, I have thought it convenient to enter this Caution
against it; God is ever just, but often unsearchable, he does not ever by
external mercies or punishments put a difference betwixt those that fear God,
and those that fear him not: Where Justice is apparent it is good to say
little; but when the matter is secret, it is best to be silent: The same God
takes away by the same stroke, an evil King, for the evils committed, and a
good King from the evils to come.

Now to the second sort of seditious persons which despise Government, such
Wildings and Medlers as the last and perilous times must bring forth; Lovers
of themselves; Covetous, etc. Covenant-breakers, false accusers, Traitors,
heady, high-minded, etc. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4. Their destruction also comes
suddenly.

To begin with Abimeleck, that shrub of Honor, fitter ^o make a fire of then a
King, who attended by a Company of light and vain fellows, ready for hire to
side with any party, or do any thing that he shall command, Lords it over the
lives and fortunnes of his brethren; The men of Sychem accommodate him with a
little money; (none so imperious as a mounted beggar) and then who but
Abimeleck; till God sent an evil Spirit (could it be worse then that of pride,
covetousness and murder that possessed him before) to effect what was
determined, and a fire from Abimeleck devoured the men of Sichem, and a fire
from them devoured Abimelech. Treacherous factious though they hold together
for a time, yet usually they dissipate and destory one another. So must thy
enemies perish O Lord.

The next is Achitophel, a wise Counselor, whoreadvice was like the Oracle of
God, as long as piety toward God, and loyalty toward his Sovereign are
joined together in him; but convinced of his folly, and confounded by reason of
his treachery, He thinks it safer to go on, (the greater politician the worse
convert) though to the ruin of him and his for ever, then to make an honorable
retreat, He sets all in order but himself, and to save the Law and the
executioner a labor, he hangs thimselfe. His sin not being prosperous, had he
proved penitent, he might with Shimei, and others have procured his pardon. But
of all rebellions that is the worst that hates to be reformed, and refuses to
return, yet seeing it was so ill, it is well it was no worse, he hanged alone,
and had no other Company.

Though the question was asked by one of the worst of women; Had Zimri peace who
slew his Master? 2 Kings 9.31. Yet the best of men must acknowledge that he had
neither peace, nor prosperous success in that horrid treason. What his treason
was the 1 Kings 16.10. will tell you, and what conclusion it had you may see in
the 18 verse; He burnt himself and the Kings house with fire; Fires of that
nature kindled by treason, and increased by covetousness and ambition, usually
succeed accordingly, and consumes as well the Traitor as the object of the
Treason. Jehu seems to slight the president, but for all his confidence, and
commission, a few years did convince his heirs and successors of the
infallibility of it, when God himself did avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the
house of Jehu. It is neither honor, nor advantage to be Gods ax, especially
when the ax boasts it self against him that hews with it. Gods rods are usually
made of combustible matter, as appears when the time of correction and
visitation is over. It was Aarons rod, the rod of peace that was laid up in the
Sanctuary before the Lord; the rods of Jannes and Jambres that withstood Moses,
were devoured by it, though by enchantments turned into formidable Serpents.
Peace must prosper, and will prevail, when the authors of confusions and
delusions shall perish. The office of a hangman was never sued for by an
ingenuous spirit; nor have I heard of any that lived with credit or died with
comfort; The Justice of God is often executed upon the persons and families of
Princes, but far be it from a pious soul to strive to be the executioner, or
once to boast of or rejoice in such execution. I have examined the Scripture,
(which is my rule and ought to be every christians) and I do not find one that
ever lift up his hand in this nature against his master, that ever had the
peace of a good conscience to gratify him in, or real comfort to crown such
actions. Would you find the vipers nest of nation and
kingdome-destroying-tenents, as Idolatry, Schism, Heresy, you may find them
nourished in the skirts of such as have shakt off both piety, and loyalty, and
though none boast more of upright hearts then they yet few but give a better
account of them in their conversations. It is sad to observe, that the deposers
of Tyrants have exceeded the deposed in tyranny, and oppression, and who did
more advance the honor of Baal then he, who but a little before had offered so
many of his Priests as a solemn sacrifice to his fury; but contemplations and
experiences of this nature are endless: To conclude this part of our
discourse; What became of Absalom, we have showed already; The fatal farewell
of Corah and his companions is well known; What popular tumult ever produced
good, or did not end in its own evil; What bloody beginnings (though with
intentions of reforming church and state) ever brought forth happy conclusions,
unless a miracle of mercy, the effect of true and lively repentance did create
life out of death, light out of darkness, and good out of evil.

And now I have touched upon that center to which all the lines of my discourse
tend, and in which they rest. Repentance and godly sorrow for our grand
transgressions and impieties against God and disloyalties against our King, is
the only haven into which the weather-beaten ship of this commonwealth of
England must be put, if she that has been so long afflicted and tossed with
tempests would ever find safety or comfort. We have sought the Lord, stretched
out our hands, made many and long prayers, and God has not heard us, and why?
our hands are full of blood; we have fasted and humbled our selves, and yet the
alseeing eye of God takes no notice of it, alas the reason is evident, we have
fasted to strife, and debate, and to strike with the fist of wickedness. Oh that
every wise man in this nation would seriously lay to heart the saying of that
wise woman, 2 Samuel 14.14. We must all die, and we are all as water spilt upon
the ground, which cannot be gathered up again: Neither does God (when he
executes justice) spare any persons, yet he has appointed means, that he that
is cast out may not be (utterly) expelled. I cannot look at the miseries of our
days without grief of heart and sorrow of mind. I cannot remember the days of
bypast slaughter, nor eye our present distractions, but I must wish with
Jeremy, that my head was full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night, for the slain of the daughter of my people.
Did David beg of God to deliver him from blood-guiltinesse, with so much
earnestness, for one man's blood, and are we senseless of the blood of
thousands slain in these uncivil civil wars, (the price of whose blood is
confusion and misery) nay which is worse, after a trial of our own ways
(which we see to be evil, and to have no less then a national death, and
destruction for their issue) yet we repent not to give glory to God; Oh
England, England! has not God given thee a time of repentance, and thou have
not repented, what do thou expect but that God should cast thee into a bed of
sorrow, and punish thy vain presumtions with unsufferable torments. If what
has been delivered in the doctrinal part of the text be truth, (and he deserves
to be stoned for blasphemy that denies it) thou have erred and have been
deceived, God has hitherto pitied thy wanderings, and looked upon thee as sheep
scattered upon the mountains without a shepherd: Oh return, return O Shulamite
seek the Lord by repentance, and fear; and your King with submission and
reverence; Remember the oath of God, and your most solemn national covenant,
the pursuance of that was the Good Cause, but since we broke Covenant with God
in falsifying, evading, coloring and covering of oaths, swearing falsely,
methinks God has sworn in his wrath, that we shall never enter into rest, in
government we have had none and in consciences I fear but little; now by a deep
humiliation and an acknowledgment of your sins committed against God and man,
repent, and return, and fear the Lord and his goodness in these latter days.
But what is said to all, few take notice of, as relating to themselves; I must
therefore more particularly apply my discourse to the Parliament, City, and
Army.

To the Parliament; Gentlemen you look upon your selves as the Keepers of our
Liberty: for your own souls sake consider seriously how you have kept it, and
what a liberty we are brought to, is it not just such another as that which
God proclaimed against rebellious Israel? Jer. 34.17. A liberty, to the sword,
to the pestilence, and to the famine; Such a liberty, as is likely to make us
a terror and an astonishment to the whole world. I am for my own part a man of
many bodily infirmities, I know not what a day may bring forth in order to my
dissolution, let me be arraigned before the severest of your Commissioners for
a malignant, rather then at the bar of Gods justice for an hypocrite. I have
ever been, I bless God, a plain spirited man, and such you must expect, and
suffer me to be. If you be not able to bear my speech, your friend, your
familiar, what will you do when God shall reprove you, and set all in order
before you. Two things you owe an account of to God, and to the Country; First,
of the authority by virtue of which you act; and secondly, of the aim and
end, yea of the manner and method of your actings.

For the first, many thousands in England, do deny that ever they entrusted
you, in any such authority as you assume; For my part; I do look upon you, as
the Remnant of a venerable Parliament, in order to which I have been ready to
vindicate in what I might, your proceedings, not as the best that may, or such
as ought to be for ever our rule, or guide, but such as necessity has imposed
upon us for a time, till better might be established; in order to which, I took
heinously the last defection, and rebellion of the Soldery against you, did
declare, to the receivers of the tax, that I would pay no tax toward the
armies maintenance. When some of Lamberts Officers lay at my house in their
march into the North, I did expostulate the Case with them, told them how
hainously the Country took it, etc. To which they made this answer, The Country
had no Cause to take ill the dissolving of this Parliament, for it was their
Parliament, not the Countries; settled by them, not by the Country, and to do
their work, not the Countries. This they did say, and besides giving of you
hateful and ridiculous names, did render you the objects of contempt and
scorn, but you have pardoned them, and I shall be silent. I beseech you
examine your Call and Commission to the exercise of this authority; We are a
free people, and you your selves have declared, That it is Tyranny, and Treason
for any to impose upon us in point of government, but by the legal and just
choice of the people. For the power that you have, I profess, I do not envy
it to you, I rather pity you; You stand, in all men's apprehensions, upon
slippery places; It is not for the honor nor safety of these Nations to submit
to such a decimation in State-matters, That scarce the tenth part of a
Parliament, should pass for a Free and Full Parliament: look upon your selves
(you that have seen the Majesty of a full Parliament in the days of Monarchy,
some of you have not) when assembled in the House, and tell me if you look like
such an Honorable Assembly as that used to be; That should render this Nation
so happy at home, and so formidable abroad. Who would not rather be the Turnkay
of such a Parliament, then the Speaker in this. The present condition is
intolerable, neither safe nor comely. Have you not purged your selves, and been
purged by one or other til you are a shadow, rather then a substance? and is
this our Honor, Happiness, Freedom; or, the glory, privilege, and interest
of our English Parliament?

For the second, your aim, ends, method, and manner of actings: Was there ever
such a thought in those that elected you to be Parliament men, that you should
destroy King and kingly Government? Did you declare any such thing, when you
raised your Army, oh look over your own Declarations, Remonstrances,
Protestations, Covenants, Orders and Ordinances; If there was just cause (which
few that fear God will say, and not one of a thousand do believe) to remove
the person, yet what had the office done? Kingly government is of divine
institution, no other (unless in subordination to that) commanded or commended
to us, you have made trial of your own ways, you see how suddenly they came
to nothing, and how speedily they are likely to bring us to worse then nothing.
Remember the vast disbursements of this Nation, The loanes upon public faith,
the Free Will offerings, the taxes, assessments, the excise, the Customs, the
Crown and Church Lands, would they not very near have purchased such a
Kingdom. Was it ever intended to exhaust these treasures, and alienate these
lands to no other purpose but to build an imaginary Babel, or if you will A
Castle in the air, is this to make a glorious King and Kingdom, etc.

In the Name and Fear of God, and for the Lords sake, remember from whence you
are fallen, and do your first works. Setle a free and full Parliament, free both
in choice, and votes, without factious bandings in the choice, or force upon
their actings: Let us hear of no oaths, to bind up men's consciences, It is
dangerous dallying with a consuming fire and everlasting burning; others have
found it, you will find it, if timely repentance prevent not. Our condition is
not yet desperate, nor yours: not ours, For I do verily believe, our miseries
may be improved to such advantages, and our trials, to such experiences, as
may render us, the wiser for this folly, the calmer, for these Hiricanes for
ever hereafter. For yours, though good intentions will never justify evil
actions, nor can ignorance excuse totally; yet in as much as it may be
supposed, that you have but attempted to try experiments, which failing in, you
are sorry for; I doubt not, but that both with God and man, you may find that
mercy, that you can implore, and be the objects of pity, rather then
punishment, yea was the government well settled as formerly, your experiences
may fit you for employments, and none so likely to be faithful and
serviceable; They that are Conscious of bypast wanderings, must needs be
Cautious to avoid, and the best Counselors to prevent them ever after.
Wherefore let my Counsel be acceptable, Fear the Lord, and the King, repent
of the former seditions, and meddle no more with them, least destruction come
upon you and us at unawares, and misery like an armed man.

As for the City, our great and once famous Metrapolis; Can you without sorrow
remember those sad tumults, begun in you, if not raised and countenane't by
you? What fruit have you now of those storms, of which you have cause to be
ashamed? or do you not read your sin in your punishment? Have not you your
selves judged them your very Tormentors, that you cried up as your only
Patrons, and Protectors? Have you not found that, an obstruction to your
Estates, Freedoms, Tradings, yea Consciences, which you sometimes with
animated and armed tumults maintained, magnified, yea almost adored? I shall
exasperate no further, but advise; if there be any piety, any power to prevail
with God, or interest improvable with men, in a peaceable and sober way,
declare your dislikes of former exorbitancies; That confessing, forsaking, and
redressing your former faults, you may find mercy proportionable to your
miseries, and a seasonable healing of your selfe-destroying errors. I shall not
charge blood upon you, and God of his infinite mercy, never lay that to your
charge, which has been shed within your walls and jurisdictions. Wherein you
have at least contracted so much guilt as to stand by, and look on, while men
devoured him that was more righteous then themselves; stand not thus halting
betwixt two opinions, if God be God worship him, and if Monarchy be your aim,
declare for it: The same courage, with a better Conscience, will build that up
to your honor and safety, which your inconsiderate wantonness has to your
great prejudice demolished. The decree is not I hope passed upon you, but that
your conviction and conversion to piety, and loyalty, may yet speak you in
the ages to come, a City of Righteousness, and a faithful City. Ponder the
text well, and the discourse upon it, Fear the Lord, and the King, least a
destruction from the Lord come upon you at unaware, and an irrecoverable ruin
be your Reward.

Now Soldiers a word to you; I know it is dangerous meddling with edg tools,
but a good Conscience is an iron sinew, and a brow of brass. You have been
esteemed as a righteous Army; Some say your prayers and tears prevailed more
then your strength or valor, and I acknowledge it while you did pursue the
Good old Cause for The King, and his great Council the Parliament; your
undertakings were honorable, your valor incomparable, and your victories not
to be paraleld; But after you deserted that, and contrary to your solemn
appeals and protestations, you destroyed him whose glory and safety you
pretended to fight for, how have you been restless in your spirits, seduced in
your judgments, and carried headlong into most dangerous and desperate
undertakings.

After the Kings death, you leveld them that had raised you, and exercised that
obstructing and dissolving faculty, upon them who had taught you to do it
before to their fellow members. You set up a single person, whose only right
was might, and title, power: what you were in so doing, let that petition
signed by Alured, Okey, Saunders, and others, tell you; Nay, let your own
papers of recantation tell you (after you had pulld down the Protector, and
dissolved a Free, and an ingenuous Parliament,) that you were deluded,
deceived, misled, yea bewitched (it is your own expression) etc. and how was
it with you when you obstructed That Remnant that your selves set up, and
undertook to pull down whatever displeased you, and to set up the imaginary
idols of your own fancies, which yet proved formlesse and senseless vanities;
I know the greatest part of the Northern Army disclamed this last act, but are
you not all at this time unsettled in your resolutions, tossed to and fro, with
uncertain and unconstant purposes. There is a center which you have forsaken,
and expect no rest till you find it again. For the King, and his great Council
the Parliament, let that be your word, and your work for ever; Your words may
spare your swords the labor; make it your request, who dares deny it? fear not
a concurrence of City, and Country; this is the way to repair our breaches, to
delude the devices of our close and implacable enemies, to render you for ever
a famous, and faithful Army, to procure you those Arrears, which otherwise
with justice you cannot demand, nor without cruelty exact; This will be the
best service you ever performed, the most acceptable to God and your Country;
This will be the only remedy against your fears, and the only course to procure
love. To conclude, An honorable retreat, in a case of disadvantage, is the
highest point of military prudence: Come off now at last with credit, declare
for God in the unity of your spirits, and piety of your conversations, for tke
King and his great Council the Parliament, in your addresses and valiant
undertakings: It is safer, and more honorable to make a King, then to be all
Kings. You have been Gods rod to correct this kingdom, be now his staff to
uphold it from ruin, that the God, working wonders, may be admired in the
passages of his providence, while he employes the same instruments to kill, and
to make alive, that the Nations may say, this is the Lords doing, and it is
wonderful in our eyes; To which God immortal, eternal, and infinite I
ascribe the honor, and return the praise of these undertakings, humbly
presenting my Petition, and entering my appeal.

My God, my God, thou that have made my heart, and know it, and art well
acquainted with the revolutions and windings of it, unto thee do I come; If I
have aimed at man, or made the son of man my confidence; if I have been courted
by any but constrained by thee; if preferment has been my hopes, or I have
sought my self in this design, level my life with the grave, and lay mine
honor in the dust; but if the advancement of thy glory, and the kingdoms
safety; if the peace of our Sion, and prosperity of our Jerusalem; If the
prevention of our inevitable ruins, and the restoring of our just and happy
liberties, have been and are my desires, in this work, let thy blessings O
Lord, be upon it, and prosper it as thine own; as for thy servant, preserve him
in thy goodness, and let him not be ashamed, because he has a respect to thy
Commandment. Amen, Amen. FINIS.

