The Process, and Pleadings In the Court of Spain upon the death of ANTHONY
ASCHAM Resident for the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, And of John Baptista Riva his
Interpreter, who were killed by John Guillim, William Spark, Valentine Progers,
Jo. Halsal, William Arnet, Henry Progers.



Who are all in close prison in Madrid for the said fact, except Henry Progers,
who fled to the Venetian Ambassador's House, and so escaped.

Sent from Madrid from a person of quality and made English.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM DU-GARD, Printer to the Council of STATE. 1651.

To his truly honored friend Sr W. Butler Knight.
SIR!
YOur Desires to me are equivalent to Decrees, which I shall be always
ready to put in execution, as far as I can, and never be found in a contempt;
Therefore, according to the contents of your last, I have sent you by this Post
the Plea, concerning the English Gentlemen that are under close restraint here
in the King's Prison, for the death of Mr Ascham, and your old acquaintance
John Baptista Riva his Interpreter; we cannot conjecture yet what will become
of them, for the Church stand's firm for them; and you well know what
predominant influences the Church has in this Clime.

The Lord Cottington, and sir Edward Hide are parted, and departed from this
Court, the first to Vallodolid, the other for Flanders, and since that time Mr
Fisher appears abroad in some luster with his Coach and Lackies, whereas before
he kept retired and invisible. Catalunia is like to be reduced this summer,
for there are mighty forces both by Land and Sea to that purpose.

No more now, but that I am always

Your ready and most real servant
Madrid this 8th of May, 1651.
The whole discourse analys'd.
This Plea does partition it self into sundry particulars. 1. THe manner and
circumstance of the Fact is punctually related, with the names and distinction
of the Actors. 2. The atrocitie and hainousness of the Fact is aggravated,
being committed upon the person of a public Minister of State, viz. the
Ambassador or Resident of England, whose person should merit more particular
respect in the Catholic Court in regard of the precedencies which were always
given in England to the Spanish Ambassadors. 3. Diverse testimonies are produced
how that the persons and office of Ambassadors are sacred, etc. 4. It is proved
that this public Minister had the safe conduct, and consequently the
protection of his Catholic Majesty, which make's the offense reflect upon
him, and is punishable by his own royal Justice, and so the Delinquents are not
to be transmitted elsewhere for their punishment. 5. A parallel twixt the death
of Ascham and Abner, who had King David's safe conduct. 6. The Holy Church
cannot protect so proditorious a murder, as it is proved by forcible reasons.
7. Important arguments for a sudden execution of Justice upon the offenders,
etc.

The learned and elaborate CHARGE of Doctor Don Augustine de Hierro, Knight of
the order of Calatrava, and Fiscal (or Attorney General) of the Council Roial
AGAINST Don John Guillim, William Spark, Valentine Progers, and William Arnet,
Jo. Halsal, Englishmen, who say they are, and are detained in the Roial prison
of this Court, For having traitorously, and upon propens malice killed ANTHONY
ASCHAM Ambassador, or Resident of the Parliament of England, who came and entered
into this Court by virtue of the safe conduct of the King our Lord (whom God
preserv) and John Baptista Riva a Genues, being Interpreter, or Secretary of
the said Resident. The Immunitie of the Church, which they pretend, cannot
avail them, Nor ought the Plea of that Immunitie hinder the imposing and
executing upon the said Delinquents the punishment that correspond's with their
offenses, as will be proved in the ensuing Charge.

The Accusation or Charge.
THe disaster and death of Charles Stuart Stylo Novo.
King of England happened the 9. of Febr. 1649. The Parliament of England
governing the Kingdom afterward, sent an Embassage to the King our Lord (whom
God guard) And Besoldus says, that qui a belli Ducibus, Gubernatoribusque
provinciarum liberis mittuntur, sunt Legati. Those who from Generals of war,
and free Governors of Provinces are sent any where, are Ambassadors. I could
produce a cloud of Authors upon this argument, who treat of and declare, who
have capacity to send Ambassadors, as the Earl of Fontanar Don Christoval de
Benevente in his Advertencies to Princes and Ambassadors, the Dissertations of
Don John Vella, Conrado Bruno, and the Count Don Juan Antonio de Vera in his
Book, called The Ambassador, do amply aver: But whether the Person sent lately
by the Parliament of England was an Ambassador or Agent, or Resident, as the
Delinquents term him, or most properly an Orator (for he came to deprecate
peace) whether he was all these, or any of these it matter's not; for any of
these may style him a Legate, and make him deserv that title; and the same
security is due to all those titles, as Hotoman upon this theme resolv's the
point, with others.

2. This Ambassador, or Resident sent by the Parliament of England, called
Anthony Ascham, arrived at the bay of Calis the 24 of March, 1650. with an
Interpreter, and three or four servants, and not meeting there with the Duke of
Medina Celi, he went in quest of him to the Port Santa Maria, and did let him
know that he was sent by the Parliament of England in quality of an Agent to
the Court of Spain. The Duke lodged him thereupon, and according to his
accustomed attention and prudence, by which he always operate's, sent to tell
him, that in regard it was the first negotiation between Spain and the
Parliament of England, he could do nothing in the business, till he had first
given an account to his Majesty, as he did the 27 of March, which came to
Madrid the second of April, and the same day the King referred the letter to
his Council; and the fourth of April there was order sent to the Duke, to treat
him as Resident, and see him convoi'd to the Court accordingly in safety. The
twentieth of April the Resident (having been sick before) began his journey,
being accompanied by the Camp-Master D. Diego de Moreda, and the second of
June they came to Toledo, whence the Camp-Master sent to the Court for further
Order, and Order was sent that he should pursue his journey, and that the
Resident might take a House where he pleased in the Court: so they arrived at
Court Sundaie following at five in the evening, and Monday next after, at six
in the morning John Baptista Riva, who was (he said a Genues went in Company
of a Servant of the Campmaster, to Hieronymo de la Torre Knight of the Order of
Calatrava, and Secretary of State, the said Riva complained of the illness and
incommoditie of the lodging: But when the Resident and his train lighted at
their lodging, 'twas observed there passed by some that went muffled,
thereabouts, who were overheard to say, Essos son, these are they: so Riva
delivered the Secretary two letters from the Parliament, saying that the
Resident came under the protection of his Majesty. The Secretary answered,
they had don ill not to have given account at the very point of their arrival,
the Resident being the person he was, and being in the Catholic Court he
was secure enough; and he would advertis his Majesty of his coming
accordingly, which he did within a quarter of an hour, charging the
Camp-Master's Servant, that he should tell his Master, to continue in
assisting the Resident; but an hour and half before this, the forementioned
Delinquents, did proditoriously, out of propens malice, murder the said
Resident, and the said John Baptista Riva, according to the circumstances which
shall follow. Now these men well knew, that the said Resident came to treat of
peace, and they spontaneously confess they knew it, and that he entered into
this Court, by order from his Majesty, and with his passport; so that
besides, the treachery and malice of the Act, they committed capital treason,
Crimen laesae majestatis in primo capite: now for every offense, there is a
corresponding punishment, and for this certainly there is undoubted pain of
death; therefore they have made themselves unworthy of the immunitie of the
Church, which they pretend.

The business briefly does branch it self into two Articles.

First, The grievousness of the delict is to be considered, and the quality of
the person upon whom it was committed, one, who had a safe conduct from his
Majesty, therefore it is crimen laesae majestatis, and perpetrated in a most
treacherous and malicious manner.

Secondly, The Church cannot give them Sanctuary, therefore the pain of death
is to be executed upon them according to the merit of the delict; in declaring
the circumstances, whereof I will leav all curiosities, and go to the pitch of
the business, without extending my self to any extravagant impertinencies.

The first Article.
TOuching the necessity and utilite of Embassies, Besoldus prosecut's this
subject at large, together with Pascalio Benavente, and Marsellaert, in their
learned dissertations. But Pedro Erodo may be said to comprehend all, in these
elegant words. Legatorum munus perquam utile est, ac perquam necessarium, nam
sine iis nec foedera iniri possunt, nec belli leges, pacisque dici, inimicitiae
essent immortales, insidiae, caedes, incendiaque ubique essent. The function of
Ambassadors is most profitable and necessary, for without them, there can no
confederation be made, nor any Laws of peace or war enacted, enmities would
prove immortal, slaughterings, perfidiousness; deceit and combustions would
be every where. This so necessary and profitable a Ministry, was justly
called Santo officio y ministerio de los Angeles, The holy Office, and
ministry of Angels; and the persons of those, who did exercise it, were held
for sacred in all men's opinions. Sancti habebantur Legati, eorumque corpora
sancta sunt. Ambassadors were held holy, and their bodies are holy, says
Marcus Varro; therefore they should be protected from all humane injury.
Cicero also says, Sentio jus Legatorum tum hominum praesidio munitum esse,
tum etiam divino jure vallatum: I hold the right of Ambassadors not only to be
fortified with humane safeguard, but entrenched with divine safety; I could
muster up a whole squadron of autors, both modern and ancient upon this
Subject, specially King Don Alonso, who mak's this security of Ambassadors his
own, and defend's it so; and this security is due to any Ambassador, though
he be suspected and falls, as Friar Don Goncalez resolve's the point in his
history of China, and Besoldus also, and although the said Ambassador com to
deceiv and collude, or that he be an Enemy, yet having a safe conduct, he is
to be protected, as the Count de la Roca says, Fides enim quando promittitur,
etiam hosti servanda est contra quem hellum geritur, quanto magis Amico pro quo
pugnatur. And if this security be due to an Ambassador, that com's to entrap,
yea, to an Enemy, how much more to an English Friend, in whose Country the
Ambassador of Spain has, and always has had the pre-eminence of the
Ambassadors of all other Princes.

Now that England should still be our friend, in statu quo nunc, and that peace
should be continued with her, proceed's from right, for peace is not only made
with the King, but with the Kingdom also, and although the first exspire's, the
last remain's. For, put case that a peace be concluded with a Country, without
including the King, either by carelessness, or some other accident, yet the peace
stand's good, for so the Polish Magistates answered the Emperor Ferdinand the
2. Faltando el Rey, se conservan con el reyno, the King failing, yet peace is
to be conserved with the Kingdom. So Bodin hold's, and urges a pregnant
example to this purpose, lib. de Repub. cap. 4. fol. 63. where he allegeth the
answer, which the Ambassadors of France made to Edward the fourth, King of
England, desiring aid from France against some rising Subjects of his, by virtue
of the league between them, which answer was, that the King of France could not
help him; for confederations twixt France and England, were made twixt the
Kings and Kingdoms, so that though King Edward was dispossessed thereof, yet
the league and amity remained still with the Kingdom, and with the King
regnant. Just so the peace twixt the Kings and Kingdoms of Spain with England,
though Charles Stuart, the King, be wanting, yet it may be kept entire with the
Kingdom: And his Majesty himself insinuat's so much unto us, continuing still
his Ambassador in England; for when a peace is established twixt Kings and
Kingdoms, people, persons, and vassals, though the King fail, and the Kingdom
receiv a differing form of government, yet the peace hold's good still, because
it aimed principally at the people and persons of both Nations, and upon these
terms, the peace was renewed twixt Spain and England, 1630. as the French
Mercury relate's.

Therefore these Delinquents failed much in the foresaid reverence, due to the
sacred persons of Ambassadors, as also to the safe conduct of his Matie, by
laying violent hands upon his person much more by murdering him: Joab did
treacherously kill Abner who came with David's safe conduct, whereupon David
said to all the people that were about him, Scindite vestimenta vestra, and
reinforcing his sorrow, levavit David vocem suam, and flevit super tumulum
Abner, flevit autem and omnis populus; David lifted up his voice upon Abner's
tomb, and wept, yea, all the people wept: Moreover David erected a tomb for
Abner, being so treacherously killed, notwithstanding that he had his safe
conduct, and the privilege of an Ambassador. The Romans raised Statues to
Ambassadors that were killed. Interfecto Legato Statua debetur, says Besoldus,
through all his Chapter of Legations.

Moreover it is observable that David did not only weep, but he burst out
into this deprecation, si ante occasum solis gustavero panem vel aliud
quidquam, If before the setting of the Sun, I taste bread or any thing else,
etc. Now, this sorrow of David did much pleas the people, Populus audivit, and
placuerunt iis cuncta quae secerat Rex in conspectu totius populi: as the holy
text has it, The people heard, and were pleased with every thing that David
did.

Here it is to be observed, that the people were to be satisfied herein; nor
was a bare sorrow only satisfactorie for this murder, but a due punishment
must expiate the offense, which in regard that David himself could not do it in
his life time, he left it in charge to his son Solomon in these words, Facies
ergo juxta sapientiam tuam, and effudit sanguinem belli in pace; Thou shall do
according to thy own wisdom (exaggerating his speech with a reason) and he
shed the blood of war in peace.

So his Catholic Majesty (God guard him) has don out of a resentment he had
of this treacherous murder, by recommending the business to so great a
tribunal; Facietis ergo juxta sapientiam vestram, effudit sanguinem belli in
pace; proceed according to your own high prudence, by punishing these
Delinquents, who have murtherd the Ambassador of the Parliament of England,
though he came with a Roial Pasport, and so shed the blood of war in time of
peace.

Moreover this death of the Ambassador, by hindering the procedure of his
Embassy is no single offense, but it reflect's upon many. As the great
Civilian says; Si quis autem legationem impedit, non unius, sed multornm
profectum avertit, and sicut multis nocet, a multis arguendus est. Whosoever
shall impede an Embassy, he avert's not the benefit of one man, but of many,
and as he hurt's many, so he is to be argued by many. Now many are the
accusers of these men, many are interressed in the business, and most
especially the King, our Liege Lord, who gave a Passport, and allowed of the
Ambassador, and of the Parliament of England that sent him: Therefore these men
had need to have many lives to lose, for to satisfy so many whom the
business concern's; so Magalotti has it, that the punishment is to be double,
in regard of the persons concerned.

But hence may result a question, whether the punishment be to be inflicted
where the Delict was perpetrated, and the King's security violated, or whether
the murderers be to be sent to the Ambassador's Master, whom he
represent's: This was an old difference twixt Romulus and Tacius, who reigned
together as Pedro Aerodo relate's the business briefly, yet elegantly. Romulus
was of opinion that the Offenders were to be sent to the Ambassador's Master.
But this transferring of the Offender to the party offended, was always held
to proceed rather from Vrbanitie then justice, as it appears in the case of
Rincon and Fregoso, which is amply related in the Annals of the Emperor Charles
the fifth, it was a loud clamorous business, whereof all the corners of
Christendom did ring, and every Chronicler has it, therefore I will not
molest you with so trite a thing.

Tacius was of differing sentiment; for he would have the delict to be
punished where it was perpetrated, and the reasons which the Doctors give, is,
because the Lord of the Territory is the more interressed, and obliged to
punish the offense on the party, to vindicate his own wrongs, as in this cause
his Catholic Majesty is most injured, because his roial Passport is violated,
and why should he have recours to a foreign power, to desire Justice, when by
the Law of Nations he may avenge the affront at home by his own. And it is
most fitting they should receiv punishment in this Court, rather then any where
else, where in regard of the greatness of our King, there are continually so
many Ambassadors residing, whose security may be much confirmed by the
exemplarie punishment of these Delinquents, and in particular, the very
Ambassadors of England themselves who are sojourning here now, though opposites
to the dead Ambassador, in regard of the dissentions now in England, all which
must be don by a just infliction of punishment.

But the Delinquents think to escape by the immunities of the Church, where they
fled, and sheltered themselves from so grievous and atrocious a crime,
aggravated by so many circumstances, by so many Accusers and interessed
persons; nor according to their defense, do they confess to have committed any
offense or sin at all; but they vaunt to have performed an heroic act. Now
it is a rule that Jactantia aggravat peccatum; boasting of mischief, make's the
sin the wors. St Augustine in defineing sin, says, that it is Dictum, factum
vel concupitum contra legem aeternam, a thing spoken, don, or wished against
the eternal Law; Him followed Thomas Aquinas, and citing Gregorio de Valentia,
Father Granados pursues the opinion, and Vasquez. Sin also is defined
Transgressio legis, a transgression of the Law, now the delict of murder is
opposite to all Laws, both divine and humane; as also to violate the security
of an Ambassador, much more to murder him, is condemned by all Laws of Heaven
and Earth; therefore this can be no other then a delict, and much more
precisely a sin, and a sin non nominandum, an infandous sin, much less an
heroic action, or exploit of gallantrie.

The second Article.
THat these Delinquents cannot make themselves capable of the protection of any
Sanctuary, will be justified by two Mediums, in form of a syllogizing
Argument.

He who commit's Crimen laesae Majestatis, a Crime of high treason, cannot
have the protection of the Church;

But these Delinquents have committed a Crime of high treason;

Ergo, they cannot have the protection of the Church.

The second Argument is of no less force.

He who commit's a treacherous murder cannot have the protection of the
Church;

But these Delinquents have committed a treacherous murder;

Ergo they cannot have the benefit of the Church.

For proof of the first, Ambrosinus, Bosius, and Julius Clarus their opinions
are clear, Gambacarta, Diana and others concur with them; among other high
Treasons they instance in killing the Kings eldest Son, his brother, or any of
the race roial, or the King's wife (because she is the one half of him) or a
Privy Counselor of his, etc. as also he who violate's the King's salvo
conducto, whereon they insist much. Now touching that large Bull of Gregory the
14th touching the immunities of the Church, it is the opinion of all the Civil
Doctors on this side the Alps, that it is not available in all Provinces, nay,
it has been petitioned against by diverse, and to this day, it is not put
generally in practice, they are the words of Evia de Bolanos in his Curia
Filippica, It was petitioned against in Portugal, nor could this Bull take
footing in Spain, which never had such exorbitant Privileges, but observed the
common Canonical Right, which make's more for the reverence of the Church. And
whereas it may be alleged that the said safe Conduct was not to be observed
by the said Delinquents, because it was not published and that it binde's only
from that time; whereas it may be alleged also that the King's safe Conduct is
only by roial Letters, or some public Instrument; All this is of little or no
validity at all; for the Delinquents voluntarily confess, that they had notice
by Letters from England, that this Resident was to com to treat of Peace; and
correspond with Spain. The Delinquents besides may aver, that the observation
of this Salvo Conducto did not aim at them being no Vassals here; but this
Argument is of little vigor likewise, for all people, whether vassals or no
vassals are obliged to observe the Laws in the Territories of that Prince where
they sojourn; And if this Law take's hold on the natural Vassals of any
Country, much more on strangers, who must not be encouraged by any immunitie
to com, and offend in another Country, without incurring the same severitie of
Law.

Nor will it will serve their turn, to say that all treasons are either in
odium or contemptum Regis, neither whereof could induce them to that act,
because they were militant in his Majesty's Army, and served him with all
exact fidelity, for all this concurred in Joab, for he was ever faithful, and
a confident of King David's, and son to his sister Serviah.

For proof of the second Argument of our discourse, viz. that he who commit's a
treacherous, or proditorious murder, cannot have the protection of the Church;
the determination of his Holiness Clement the 8th shall serve, who says, that
not only he who kill's one proditoriously, but he who kill's a reconciled
enemy, is deprived of the benefit of Sanctuary; Now these Delinquents
destroi'd this Public Minister of State per insidias, appensate, animo
deliberato, and proditorie, fraudulently, by forecast, with a deliberate mind,
and proditoriously, therefore they are far from deserving the shelter of the
holy Church.

The sacred Scripture take's us out of all doubt by the act of holy and
religious Solomon, when in execution of the just commandment of David his
father he consulted how to punish Joab for having slain Abner, who had David's
safe Conduct, for which he fled to the Church and to the altar, fugit ergo
Joab in tabernaculum Domini and apprehendit cornu altaris, and Banaias, who had
the charge of executing him, returning with this news to Solomon, he answered
vade interfice eum, Go and kill him; Banaias going again to Joab, told him the
King's command, and bid him com out, Joab replied, I will not com out, but I
will die here; thereupon Banaias going back to Solomon to inform him what Joab
had said, the King rejoined: Fac sicut locutus est and interfice eum, do as he
has said and kill him. So Banaias the son of Jehoida went up to the altar, and
assaulting Joab, he killed him; Now it is a great question among the Theologues
whether Solomon sinned in doing this: Abulensis excuses him giving this
reason; Quia non illi profecit tenuisse aram, quia nullum homicida insidiator
habet praesidium, because the altar could not profit him, in regard that no
treacherous manslayer has any protection; Add hereunto what Gaspar Sanchez
and Ruperto allege touching the same fact, nihil debet illi fides Altaris, qui
per dolum occidendo proximum omnem fidem perdidit; The faith of the Altar owes
him nothing, who lost all faith in slaying his neighbor feloniously. But
Cajetan with others find no way how to excuse Solomon touching this business,
in regard that he might by his praetorian troops, and veterane Soldiers have
taken him both from the Altar and the Tabernacle, and so without any note of
violating Religion, he might have dispatched him in some profane place, as the
Priest Joiada commanded Athalia to be taken out of the Temple, and killed
without. This is a great and precise lesson for the Lords Alcaldes, for they
need not fear to put these men to death; in regard they are not now materially
in the Church.

To prove the minor of the second Syllogism, viz. that these men did
fraudulently, of set purpose, with a deliberate mind, and proditoriously
murder the Ambassador of the Parliament of England shall be thus proved.

Certain men espied the said Ambassador, lighting at his lodging the same night
he came, the next day William Spark, and Henry Progers (who is fled) spoke
with John Baptista Riva the Ambassador's servant, and Henry going down, said to
William, let us go here below (where the other three Delinquents were) and said,
let us kill the Resident for a destroier of our Nation; so they swore among
themselves, that if one died, all would die with him in so heroic an act:
whence this circumstance may be drawn, that this murder was committed by
former consultation, and with a deliberate mind: what is formerly related, is
confessed by the Delinquents themselves, and that they came to perform this
exploit two by two; for being com to the lodging, two remained at the foot of
the stairs, two on the top, and two entered. William Spark went in first, seeing
two sitting at the Table, he pulld off his hat, and said, I kiss your hands,
which is the Resident? and when they knew who he was, Don John Guillim came,
and snatching him by the hair, with a naked dagger he gave him a thrust that
overthrew him; then came William Sparks, and gave him another, so that they
gave him five stabs in all, John Baptista Riva thinking to retire to his
chamber, there went four of them after him, and gave him four wounds, whereof
he presently expired, whereby it appears most evidently, that the murder of
the Ambassador was committed, per insidias, appensate, animo deliberato, and
proditorie, therefore the Church cannot protect them. It was don
proditoriously; in regard that prodere est unum actibus ostendere, and aliud in
mente gerere, unde homicidium proditorium est caedes hominis nibil tale
suspicantis, as Augustine Barbosa affirm's. Just so was Abner killed by Joab,
according to the Text, he killed Abner in a dishonorable way, viz.
fraudulently, when he spoke to him peaceably, therefore Joab deserved to be
deprived of the immunitie of the Temple; and just so was this Ambassador
killed, and it may well be thought, they deserv not the shelter of the
Sanctuary, as Joab did not.

But me think's I here the Delinquents, to extenuate their delict, whisper that
they killed the said Ambassador for an Heretic, for a disturber of the public
peace, who particularly fomented the death of the King, and the change of
government, and they did operate this to vindicate the death of their King,
upon a Regicide, an enemy to his Country, and on an Impostor. Moreover, one
of the Delinquents says, that in this rebellion he killed a brother of his,
with whom he had particular enmity, to these arguments I may say, as John
Garcia said in his Gloss. Nobilit. Adducuntar Leviuscula quaedam argumenta quae
merito subtaceri poterant, sed satisfaciendum est doctis pariter ac indoctis.
Certain light arguments are alleged, which might have been spared, but we must
satisfy the unlearned, as well as the learned, and concerning the first,

They say, they killed the Ambassador for an Heritick, so was their King, who
they pretend he had helped to murder; but the Catholic Church never held
yet, that it was lawful to kill a man, only for his Religion; besides this
Ambassador had a royal passport, and was attended all the way from the
Seaside by his Majesty's Servant; And Ministers of any religion may have
pass-ports for their safety as John Huss had, and as Charles the Emperor gave
Luther.

They say, this Ambassador came to seduce and deceiv by a book of his which was
found among his papers, and a medall which he had, which had on the one side
Nebart, and on the other XII. and the word Obstricti, and they say it
signifie's those XII. which gained Nebart, and occasioned the wars: Hence they
infer, that he came to deceiv, there was also found a Crown stabbed with a
poniard. This same argument Joab propounded to David, when he said, Ignoras
Abner filium Ner, quoniam ad hoc venit ad te, ut deciperet te, ut sciret exitum
tuum, and introitum tuum, and nosse omnia quae agis, Thou know not Abner the
son of Ner, for he is com hither to deceiv thee, to know thy going out, and
thy coming in, and to pry into all things thou do, as the sacred Text
tell's, but this could not excuse Joab for killing Abner, who came hither all
the way with a safe conduct, and it is the prerogative only of that Prince who
gave him the safe conduct, to know the cause of his coming.

To com now to a conclusive point, and final period of this plea, the
punishment of these men for having fraudulently, by propense malice, with a
deliberate mind, and proditoriously murdered the Ambassador of the Parliament
of England, according to the foregoing circumstances, and by their own
spontaneous confessions, I say the speedy chastisement of these men to death
(notwithstanding the depending process, touching the immunitie of the Church)
is required by six parties that are interessed therein. Viz.

1. By God himself. 2. By the King. 3. By his Subjects. 4. By the public
cause. 5. By the Fiscall of the Council.
First, God require's it, who watches over all crimes specially those of
blood, which cry out for vengeance more then any, therefore the
procrastination hereof would be offensive to his divine Majesty.

Secondly, The King (whom God preserve) require's speedy execution, in regard
some grave Doctors do doubt whither it was a sin in David to delay the
punishment of Joab till after his death, by bequeathing the execution of
Justice to his Son Solomon, as a legacy.

Thirdly, The Subjects of the King, our Liege Lord, require a hastening of the
punishment, because it trouble's them to see hard before the King's eyes, and in
his Catholic Court, so horrid and sudden a murder committed. Quando accidunt
aliqua mala and horrenda quae sunt penitus inopinata, solent homines nimium
turbati, etiamsi ad illos mala illa non pertineant, quia ergo mors Abner erat
malum quoddam rarum and inopinatum, subito illo audito turbati sunt omnes
Israelitae, When some horrid, unexpected, and unusual mischiefs happen, people
use to be strangely troubled, though it nothing belong's unto them, therefore
because Abner's death was a kind of extraordinary sudden mischief, all Israel
was troubled at it, as Abulensis speake's upon the 2 of Kings.

Fourthly, The public cause requir's a sudden execution of justice upon these
Delinquents, because they murdered two men by fraud; quorum opera utilis
videbatur futura Reipublicae, whose negotiation was to be profitable to the
Commonwealth, as Gaspar Sanchez says.

Lastly, The Fiscal require's justice for God, for the King, for his
Fellow Subjects, for the publick-caus, and for himself, who conclude's with
Cokier in his Treaty de Legato.

Ac Perde has animas, patriam bonus eripe noxa.
To shut up all, the justified* an^ cries out for speedy justice, in regard
that these Delinquents murdered an Ambassador of the Parliament of England, now
to every Ambassador, there is owing an extraordinary respect, specially to
the Ambassadors of England; they slew him, though they knew that he had his
Majesty's safe conduct, they slew him in the Catholic Court, where the right
of Nations uses to be kept inviolable, and more solemnly then any where else,
whereby they committed not only a soul treacherous murder, but treason in a
high degree against his Majesty; they surprised the Ambassador and his
Secretary at dinner, a harmless hour, they came in like Friends; wherefore it
may justly be inferred, that this murder was committed, por insidias* animo
deliberato, appensate and proditories by fraud, with a deliberate mind, by
forecast, and trecherously; touching the circumstances, their own spontaneous
confessions make them good; Therefore both God, the King, all the vassals of
this Court, the publick-caus, and the Fiscal of the Council, demand a speedy
and actual execution of justice upon them, notwithstanding the depending
process, and pretentions touching the immunities of the Church.

Salva in omnibus, etc.
Such was the Charge in the Court of Spain, which was delivered, with much
aggravation, by the said Doctor Hieronymo Hierro, Knight of the Order of
Calatrava, against John Guillim, William Spark, Valentin Progers, Jo. Halsal,
William Arnet, and Henry Progers, who are detained still in prison, for
killing Anthony Ascham, Resident for the Parliament of England, and John
Baptista Riva his Interpreter, all except Henry Progers, who being formerly
known to the Venetian Ambassador, fled to his house for protection, and so made
an escape; the suit is still depending, and no resolution taken, in regard the
Church stand's so earnestly for them, in so much that it is not known when it
will be determined.

FINIS.

