THE MANNER of holding PARLIAMENTS IN ENGLAND. Collected forth of our Ancient
Records. Whereunto is added.

Certain Ancient Customs of this Kingdom.

The Prerogative and power of Parliaments.

The order and form of the placing and sitting of the Kings Majesty and Peers
in the upper House of Parliament.

The order and course of passing of Bills in Parliament.

With The Stately and magnificent order, of proceeding to Parliament, of the
most High and Mighty Prince, King CHARLES, on Monday the 13th. of April 1640.
in the 16th. year of his Majesty's reign, first on Horse back from White
Hall to Westminster-Abby-Church, and from thence on foot to the Parliament
house.

Printed in the year, 1641.

DIEV ET MON DROIT



THE MANNER OF HOLDING A PARLIAMENT in the second of Edward the Confessor,
Son of K. Etheldred.
HERE is described, the Manner after which the Parliament of the King of
England, and of his English People was kept in the times of King Edward, the
Son of Etheldred the King; which manner was rehearsed, by the discreet sort
of the Kingdom, before William Duke of Normandy the Conqueror, and King of
England; the Conqueror himself commanding this; and by himself approved and
used in his times, and in the times of his successors Kings of England.

Of the Summons of Parliament.
The Summons of Parliament ought to go forty days before the first day of the
Parliament.

Concerning the Clergy.
The Parliament ought to be summoned and come, the Archbishops, Bishops, and
other chief of the Clergy, who come thither by holding of some County or
Barony, Per Comitatum et Baron summoneri debent. Minores ^erisi non summoneri
debent, sed si eorum presenia necessariafuerit. Rexsolibat talibus brevia
suamittere, re^ans quod Parliomosuo inseressens.
and because of such tenure, and not otherwise, and none of the less degree of
the Clergy, unless their presence or coming thither may be required in some
other respect then by their tenures; or, unless they be of the Kings Counsel;
or their presence may be deemed necessary, or accounted profitable for the
Parliament: and the King is bound to minister unto them their costs and
expenses in coming and tarrying at the Parliament. Neither ought such of the
lower degree of the Clergy men to be summoned to the Parliament, but the King
was wont to gether to send out his Writs to such men, requiring them that they
should be present at his Parliament.

Also the King was wont to give Summons to the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
exempted persons; or to Abbots, Priors, and other Ecclesiastical persons, that
have by such exemptions and privileges their several jurisdictions, according
to their several Deaneries, and Arch-deaneries of England, through their
Deaneries, and Archdeaneries aforesaid, should cause to be chosen two skillful
and fit Proctors or Clerks of the Convocation house out of the same
Arch-deanery to come and to be present at, to answer, to undergo, to allege
and to do there, that which all and every Parson of their Deaneries, and
Arch-deaneries should, if they, and all, and every of them were personally
present there. And that such Proctors or Clerks of the Convocation house come
with their two Warrants, sealed with the seals of their superiors, because
they are chosen and sent to such a Proctorship; The one of which Letters should
be delivered to the Clarke of the Parliament to be enrolled, and the other
remain in the Proctors and Clerks themselves: and so under these two kinds of
Summons, the whole Clergy ought to be Summoned to the Kings Parliament.

Concerning the Laity.
Also all and every Earl, Summoneri debentomnes et singuli comiter, Barons et
eor. pares, Qui tenent ad valentunius Comitat vel. Baron. integra.
and Baron, and their Peers ought to be summoned, and come to the Parliament,
to wit, those that have Lands, and Revenues to the value of a whole County,
which makes four hundred pounds in the whole; or to the value of one whole
Barony: to wit, Thirteen fees, and the third part of one Knights fee, every
fee being reckoned at twenty pounds, makes in the whole, four hundred
marks, and no lower Laymen ought to be summoned to come to the Parliament by
reason of of their tenure, Minores laici summoneri non debent.
unless their presence for other causes be profitable, and necessary to the
Parliament, and then they ought to be dealt withal, as is said of them of Ae
Lower degree of the Clergy, men who are not bound by reason of their tenure to
come to the Parliament; Also the King was wont to send his writs to the Warden
of the Cinque Ports, that he might cause to be chosen to come and be present
at the Parliament to answer, undergo, and do there that which their Buroughs
themselves should do, if all and every one of them were personally present
there, and such Barrons should come with their two Warrants, sealed with the
common seals of their Ports, to show that they were orderly chosen, and sent
from the Barronies to that end; the one whereof shall be delivered to the
Clarke of the Parliament, and the other to remain with the Barrons themselves:
And when such Barrons of the Ports, having obtaind Lycense should depart from
the Parliament, then they were wont to have a writ under the great seal of the
Warden of the Cinque Ports, that they might have their reasonable costs, and
expenses, meet for such Barrons out of the County of the Port from whence they
came toward the Parliament until the day wherein they returned home, to their
own houses, there being express mention made in the writ of the stay they
made at the Parliament, and of the day wherein to return. Yea there was wont
sometimes mention to be made in the writ, how much such Barrons should take of
the Counties from whence they came for a day, to wit, some had more, some had
less, according to the ability, and honesty of the persons themselves; neither
were they wont to put down for two Barrons above twenty shillings by the day,
and yet therein had they respect to their charges of their stayings, labor,
and expense, neither were such uncertain expenses to be put down, and allowed
by the Court, for all and every one so chosen and sent for their Counties,
unless the persons themselves were honest, and behaved themselves well in the
Parliament.

Touching the Knights of the Shire.
Also the King was wont to send his writs to all the Sheriffs of England, that
every one might cause to be chosen out of his own County, through the Country
it self, two Knights, fit, honest, and skillfull, to come to his Parliament,
after the same manner which is spoken of the Barons of the Ports, and for their
warrants they should come after the same manner.

But for the expenses out of one County for two Knights, there was not wont to
be set down and allowed above one Mark a day, and now eight shillings a day,
to wit, for every one of them four shillings.

Touching the Citizens.
After the same manner Commandment was wont to be given to the Major and
Sheriff of London, the Major and Bayliffes to the Major and Citizens of York,
and of other Cities, that they for the County of their City should choose two
fit honest and skillful Citizens to come to the Parliament, after the same
manner which is spoken of the Barons of the Cinque Ports, and the Knights of
the Shires: and the Citizens were wont to be Peers and equals with the
Knights of the Shires in expenses, all the while they came, tarryed, and
returned from the Parliament.

Touching the Burgesses.
After the same manner commandment was wont to be given to the Bayliffes and
honest men of Burrowes and Towns Corporate, that they ought of themselves and
by themselves to choose two fit honest and skillful Burgesses to come and be
present at the Kings Parliament after the same manner as is spoken concerning
Citizens: but two Burgesses were not wont to receive by the day for their
expenses above ten shillings, and sometimes not above a noble, which was wont to
be taxed by the Court, according to the greatness of the Buroughs, and the
persons sent: hitherto has been declared, the form, quality, and persons, how
long a time before the Summons of the Parliament ought to be made; and who are
those that ought to come by the Summons, and who not.

Now secondly, we must show who they are which by reason of their Offices ought
to come, and are bound to be present at the Parliament time without Summon:
whereupon we must make the two principal Clerks of the Parliament elected by
the King and his Council; and other secondary and undertakers, of whom, and
whose Offices we will speak more specially afterward: and the principal Crier
of England, with their under-Cryers; and the principal Porter of England with
two Offices, were wont to belong to one person: These two Officers are bound to
be present the First day.

The Chancellor of England, the Treasurer and Chamberlaines, and Barons of the
Exchequer, Justices, and all the Clerks, and the Kings Knights, together with
them, that sue for the Kings Pleas, who are of the Kings Counsel, are bound to
be present the second day, unless by Order they be excused.

Touching the beginning of Parliament.
The Lord the King shall sit in the midst of the great Bench, and is bound to
be present in the First and Last day of Parliament. And the Chancellor,
Treasurer, Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices were wont to Record the
defaults made in Parliament, according to the Order following.

In the First day the Burgesses and Citizens of al England shall be called, at
which day, if they do not come, the Shires shall be amerced at an hundred
pounds.

In the Third day of the Parliament, the Barons of the Cinque Ports shall be
called; and afterward the Barons of England; after them the Earls: whereupon
if the Barons of the Cinque Ports do not come, the Barony from whence they are
shall be amerced at an hundred Marks, and an Earl at an hundred pounds. And
after the same mannerit must be done with those that are equal to Earls and
Barons, namely, which have Lands and Revenews, to the value of an Earldome, or
of one Barony, as before said.

In the Fourth day, the Proctors of the Clergy or Clerks of the Convocation
house shall be called; if they come not, their Bishops shall be amerced for
every Archdeanery one hundred pounds.

In the First day, the Deanes, Priors, Abbots, Bishops, and at length the
Archbishops shall becalled, who if they do not come, every Archbishop shall be
fined at an hundred pounds; and every one holding a whole Barony or Abbots,
Doctors at an hundred Marks.

In the First day Proclamation ought to be made in the Hall, or in the
Monastery, or in some public place, where the Parliament is to be held, and
afterward publicly in the City or Town, That all those who would deliver
Petitions or Bills to the Parliament, that they may deliver them the First day,
and soother five days next following.

Touching the Preaching at the Parliament.
An Archbishop or Bishop, or some great Clerk discreet and eloquent, chosen by
the Archbishop in whose Province the Parliament is held, ought to preach one of
the said five days of Parliament, and in the presence of the King: and this
must be done when the Parliament for the greater part shall be joined and
gathered together. In his Sermon, he shall admonish and exhort the whole
Parliament, that they with him humbly pray God, and worship him, for the peace
and tranquillity of the King and Kingdom, as shall be said in the Title
following.

Touching the Speech for the Parliament.
After the preaching, the Chancellor of England, or the Lord Chief Justice of
England, or some other fit, honest, and eloquent Justice, or Clerk chosen by
the Chancellor, or Chief Justice themselves ought, standing to pronounce the
causes of the Parliament. Whosoever they be, whilst they speak, shall stand
(except the King) so that all of the Parliament might hear him that speaks,
or if he speak something darkly, or in a talk low voice, let him speak
again, and speak louder also, or let another speak for him.

Touching the Speech of the King after the Speech before mentioned.
The King (after the Speech before mentioned)ought to require the Clergy and
Laity, naming them after their degrees, as Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots,
etc. Earls, Barons, Knights, Citizens, etc. that they carefully, diligently,
and heartily labor thoroughly to handle, labor, and deliberate in the
business of the Parliament, even as they shall understand and perceive that
this shall be first according to the will and pleasure of God; and afterward
for his and their honors and commodities.

Touching the Absence of the King in the Parliament.
The King is bound by all means possible to be present at the Parliament,
unless he be detained or let therefrom by bodily sickness, and then he may
keep his Chamber, yet so as he ly not without the manor or Town at the
least, where the Parliament is held, and then he ought to send for twelve
persons of the greatest and best of them, that are summoned to the Parliament.
That is, two Bishops, two Earls, two Barons, two Knights of the Shire, two
Burgesses, and two Citizens to look upon his person, to testify and witness
his Estate, and in their presence he ought to make a Commission, and give
authority to the Archbishop of the place, the Steward of England, and chief
Justice, that they jointly, and severally, should begin the Parliament, and
continue the same in his name, express mention being made in that Commission
of the cause of his absence then, which ought to suffice, and admonish the
other Nobles, and chief men in the Parliament, together with the evident
Testimony of the aforesaid twelve Peers of theirs, the reason is because there
was wont to be a cry or murmur in the Parliament for the Kings absence, because
his absence is hurtful and dangerous to the whole Commonalty of the
Parliament, and Kingdom, when the King shall be absent from his Parliament,
neither indeed, ought he or may be absent but only in the case aforesaid.

Touching the places and sitting in the Parliament.
First as I before said, the King shall sit in the mid place of the great
Bench, and at his right side shall sit the Archbishop of Canterbury the
Bishops of London, and of Winchester, and after them in order and course, the
other Bishops, Abbots and Priors, and on the left side the King, the
Archbishop of York, the Bishops of Durham, and Carlisle, and after them, the
Earls, Barons, etc. making always a division of place, between the foresaid
degrees, and their places, that none sit but amongst Peers and his equals;
and the Steward of England too look to this, unless the King will assign
some other to it. At the Kings foot, at the right side shall sit the Chancellor
of England, and the chief Justice of England and their fellows, and their
Clarks who are of the Parliament, and at his foot on the left side shall sit
the Treasurer and Chamberlain and Barons of the Exchequer, the Justices of the
Bench, and their Clerks who are of the Parliament.

Touching the principal Clerks of the Parliament.
There are two principal Clerks of the Parliament, who shall sit in the midst
of the Justices, who shall enrole all the pleas and business of the
Parliament, and we must know, that these two Clarks are not subject to every
Justice, neither is every Justice in England Justice in the Parliament, neither
have they of themselves Record in the Parliament, unless so far forth as new
power shall be assigned and given to them in the Parliament by the King and
the Peers of the Parliament, and when they are assigned with other choice men
of the Parliament, to hear and determine diverse petitions and complaints,
offered in Parliament;but these two Clerks are immediately subject to the King
and his Parliament in common, unless perhaps one Justice or two, be
assignedto examine and amend their Inrolements: And when the Peers of the
Parliament; to hear and examine some Petitions by themselves, then when they
shall be of one mind and agreeing in rendering their judgments to such
Petitions, and the process made concerning the same, and they shall give their
judgment in full Parliament, so that the other two Clerks principally Inrole
all the pleas, and all the Judgments in the principal role of the Parliament,
and shall deliver these roles to the Treasurer before the going away of the
Parliament, referring, yet notwithstanding to the same Clerks one transcript
and count er-role thereof if they will have it.

These two Clerks unless they be in other office under the King, and take of
him such fees as whereby they may live honestly, and well, shall receive of the
King every day a mark for their expenses, to be divided between them by
equal portions, unless they be at the Kings board, otherwise half a mark a
day, during all the Parliament.

Touching the five Clerks of the Parliament.
The King shall assign or appoint five skillful Clerks: the first whereof
shall be Minister to, and serve the Bishops. The second, the Proctors of the
Clergy, or the Clerks of the Convocation house. The third, the Earls and
Barons. The fourth, the Knights of the Shire. The fifth the Citizens and
Burgesses: and every one of them unless he be with the King, and take of him
such a fee, or such Revenews that he may thereupon live honestly, he may take
by the day two shillings of the King, unless he be of the Kings board, if he
be, then to have but twelve pence; which Clerks shall write the doubts and
answers, that they which shall be present at the Parliament, make to the King,
and at the Parliament, and communicate their Counsels unto them, whenever
they will have them; and when they shall be at leisure, they will send the
principal Clerks to inroll them.

Concerning Cases and Judgments which are heard. DEcasibus et Iudicus
difficilibus.

When a cause of Truce, Cum dubltat et difficilis Casus, pacis vel guerne
emergat, etc.
doubt, or hard case of peace or war does break forth, or otherwise, the case
be referred in writing in full Parliament, and left it to be handled and
disputed there between the Peers or equals; and if it be needful, let it be
enjoined by the King, or on the Kings part, if the King be not present to every
degree of Peers or equals, that every degree it self may go there to it
self, and let that case be delivered to their Clerk in writing, and let them
cause the case to be recited before them, so that they do ordain, and
consider among themselves how, and after what sort they may better proceed, and
more justly in that case, as they for the person of the King, and their own
persons, and the persons also of those whom they represent will answer before
God; let them bring their answer and advise in writing, and let them proceed in
all their Answers, Councels and advises heard of either side, or to and fro (as
we said) according to better and more sound counsel and judgment; and when at
the least the greater part of the Parliament does agree. And if by the discord
between the King and some Noblemen themselves, either the people may be
weakened, or the Country may be troubled;so that it seem to the King his
Council, that it were expedient the business be handled and amended by
consideration of all the Peers of the Kingdom. Or if through war the King
or Kingdom might be troubled; or if a hard case do come before the
Chancellor of England, or a matter hard to be judged of shall be brought
before the Justices, or such like: or if perhaps in such deliberations all, or
at least the greater part cannot agree, then the Earl that is Steward, the
Earl that is Constable, and the Earl Marshall, or two of them, shall choose
five and twenty persons of all the Peers of the Kingdom; and three Proctors
or Clerks of the Convocation house, for the whole Clergy: two Earls and three
Barons: five Knights of the Shire; five Citizens and Burgesses, who make five
and twenty; and those five and twenty may choose, if they will, twelve of them,
and condescend to them; and those twelve choose six, and condescend no fewer,
unless license be obtained from the Lord the King. And if the King consent to
three, these three may condescend to two, and may descend to another, and so at
length his Ordinance shall stand above the whole Parliament, and so condescend
from twenty and five persons to one only person, unless the greater number
will agree and ordain, at the length, one person, as is said, shall agree for
all, who cannot disagree from himself. This being observed, and also reserved,
the King and his Council, that they may examine and amend such Ordinance after
them which shall be written, if they know how to do it, and will perform it;
yet so, as they do it there in full Parliament, and by the consent of the
Parliament, and not contrary to the Parliament.

Touching the Order of deliberating business in the Parliament.
The business for which the Parliament ought to be deliberated on, according
to the Calendar of the Parliament, and according to the Petitions, and affiled,
no respect being had to any person; let him first handle his cause that first
propounded it. In the Calendar of the Parliament, there ought to be rehearsed,
all the businesses of the Parliament, and that after this order:

First, concerning War (if there be any War) and concerning the other
businesses, touching the persons of the King, of the Queen, and of their
Children.

Secondly, concerning the commonbusinesses of the Kingdom, as of making Laws,
when there shall be lack of Law original, judicial, or executory of particular
persons.

Thirdly, the business of particular persons, and that according to the
Petitions offered, as is aforesaid.

Touching the days and hours of the Parliament.
The Parliament ought not to be held on the Lords day, but on the other days
following; that day always excepted, and three other, to wit, of All Saints,
of All Souls, and of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist. It may be held, and
ought every day to begin at one of the clock in the afternoon, at which hour
the King is to be present at the Parliment, and all the Peers of the Kingdom.
The Parliament ought to be held in a public place, and not in a private or
secret place. In the Holy days the Parliament ought to begin at one of the
clock, because of divine service.

Touching the Porters of the Parliament.
The principal Porter of the Parliament shall stand beneath the great Gate of
the Monastery, Hall, or other place, where the Parliament is held, and must
keep the door, so that none come into the Parliament: but he which ought to
come to the Parliament, or shall be called for the business which he follows
in Parliament; and it behooveth that the party have knowledge of the persons
which should come in, so that none at all be denied entrance, which is bound to
be present at the Parliament. And the Porter ought, if it be needful, to have
more Porters under him.

Touching the Crier of the Parliament.
The Crier of the Parliament shall stand without the door of the Parliament,
and the Porter shall declare to him their Cryers.

The King was wont to assign Sergeants at Arms, to stand a great while
together without the door of the Parliament, to make the door, so that none
should make thrusting or tumults about the door, by which the Parliament might
be hindered, upon pain of taking of their bodies, because of right the door of
the Parliament ought not to be shut, but to be kept by Porters, or Kings
Sergeants at Arms.

Touching the standing of them that speak in the Parliament.
All the Peers of the Parliament shall sit, and none shall stand, but when he
speaks; so that every one of the Parli^ment may hear him. None shall enter
into Parliament, nor go out o^ Parliament, but by one door: and whenever he
speaks any thing which ought to be deliberated on by the Parliament, All they
that speak shall stand, the cause is that he may be heard of the Peers; all
which Peers are judges and Justices, etc.

Touching the help and aid appointed for the King.
The King was not wont to require help or aid of his Kingdom, unless it were
for War at hand, or for making his Sons Knights, or for marriages of his
Daughters; and then he ought to require such help in full Parliament, and to
deliver it in writing to every degree of the Peers of the Parliament, and to
answer the same in writing. And we must know that for the granting of such
helps and aid, it behooveth that all the Peers of the Parliament agree. And we
must understand that two Knights which come to the Parliament for the Shires
and County out of which they come, have a greater yoyce in Parliament to grant,
then the greatest Earl in England: and after the same manner the Proctors for
the Clergy, or Clerks of the Convocation house: for one Bishopric have a
greater voice in Parliament, if they all agree, then the Bishop himself. And
this is true in all things which ought to be granted or denied to the party or
are to be done therein. And this is manifest because the King may hold
Parliament with the Communalty and Commons of the King some without Bishops,
Earls, and Barons, yet so, as they be summoned to the Parliament. Although no
Bishop, Earl or Baron, come according to their Summons, because in times past,
neither was there Bishop, Earl nor Baron; and yet even then Kings kept their
Parliament: but it is far otherwise, on the other side; for though the
Communalty, to wit, Laity and Clergy were summoned to the Parliament, (as of
right they ought to be) yet for some certain causes they would not come, as if
they would pretend that the King did not govern them as he ought, and would in
speciality point out the Articles in which he misgoverned them, as he ought:
not that then that Parliament is utterly none at al, though the Archbishops,
Bishops, Earls, Barons, and all their Peers and equals were there with the
King present at it: and therefore all things which are to be affirmed or
informed; granted or denied, or to be done by the Parliament, must be granted
by the Communalty of the Parliament, which stands upon three degrees or sorts
gathered together in Parliament, that is to say, the Procters of the Clergy,
the Knights of the Shires, the Citizens and Burgesses; who indeed represent the
whole Communalty of England; and next upon the Noble men, because every one of
them is at the Parliament, in his own proper person, and non other.

Tonching the departure, or breaking up of the Parliament.
The Parliament should not depart so long as any Petition made thereto hangs
undiscussed, or undecided, or at the least to which there is not made a
determinate answer: The Kings Majesty being desirous of his Grace and favor
to give the Subject redress of any injury and not to suffer his people to go
unsatisfied. None of all the Peers or equals of the Parliament may or ought
to depart alone from the Parliament, unless he have obtained (and that in full
Parliament) leave of the King, and of all his Peers or equals, so to do, and
that withal there be a remembrance kept in the Parliament roll of such leave
and liberty granted. And if any of the Peers or equals, during the time of
the Parliament, shall be sick or weak, so as he is not able to come to the
Parliament, then he must three days together send such as may excuse him to
the Parliament: but if they come not, then let there be sent from the
Parliament, two of his Peers or equals to go, and to certify of his
infirmity. And if there be any suspicion, let these two Peers or equals be
sworn, that they shall speak the truth concerning the same: and if it be found
out that he did feign or counterfeit, let him attorney or appoint some
sufficient man before them to be present at the Parliament his stead, if he
will: neither can he be further excused if he be of sound memory.

Departing of the Parliament
Ought to be in such a manner: first it ought to be demanded, yea and publikly
proclaimed in the Parliament, and within the Palace of the Parliament, whether
there be any that has delivered a petition to the Parliament, and has not
received answer thereto; If there be none such, it is to be supposed, that
every one is satisfied, or else answered unto all the least, so far forth as by
law he may be.

Touching the Transcript or writing out of Records, and Process made in
Parliament.
The Clarke of the Parliament shall not deny to any man a Transcript or Copy of
his Process, or Process in Parliament, if he do desire it, and the Clarke
shall take always for ten lines but one penny, unless happily that he that
requires the transcript will give his faith, that he is not able to give it,
and in that case he shall take nothing. The Role of the Parliament should
contain in breadth ten Inches; and the Parliament shall be held in what place
it shall please the King.

Of the degrees of the Peers or equals of the Parliament.
The King is the head, the beginning and the ending, and so he has not any
Peer or equal.

The second degree is of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots etc. holding by Baroniet.

The third is of Proctors of the Clergy, or Clerks of the Convocation.

The fourth is of Earls, Barons, and others, great and noble personages, as
aforesaid.

The fifth degree is of the Knights of the Shire.

The sixth degree is of Citizens and Burgesses, and so the whole Parliament
stands of six degrees; But we must know that though any of the five degrees
besides the King, shall be absent, yet premonished by summons, the Parliament
is taken for full.

Thus have I declared unto you the ancient manner and custom of holding
Parliaments in England, to clear the objection of some that say, Parliaments
are not of that antiquity. I shall in the next place, think it not amiss, in
regard I have begun to speak of ancient days, to give you some satisfaction
concerning some old customs of England.

ANCIENT CUSTOMS OF ENGLAND.
BEING desirous for my own particular satisfaction to search and inquire after
reverenced Antiquity, it was my hap to light on an old manuscript, which
although in sound is Saxon-like, yet in some thing it savours of the Danish
matters, and of the ancient British Laws under the rule and government of the
Danes: which writing writ in the Saxon tongue, I have translated into English
word for word, according to the true sense and meaning thereof.

IT was sometimes in the English Laws, that the People and the Laws were in
Reputation: and then were the wisest of the People Worship-worthy, each in his
degree, Lorle and Chorle, Theyn and underthem. And if a Chorle so thriued that
he had full five hides of his own Land, a Church and a Kitchen, a Bell-house
and a Gate, a seat and several offices in the Kings Hall; then was he
thenceforth the Theyns right worthy. And if a Theyn so thrived that he served
the King, and on his message, or journey rod in his household; if then he had a
Theyne that him followed, who to the Kings expedition five hide had, and in the
Kings Pallac his Lord served, and there with his errand had gone to the King,
he might after ward with his fore Dath his Lords part play at any need. And if
an Theyn so thriued, that he became an Earl, then was he right forth an Earl
right worthy. And if a Merchant so thriued that he passed thrice over the wide
Sea of his own craft, he was thenceforth the Theyns right worthy: And if a
Scholar so thriued through learning, that he had degree, and served Christ, he
was thenceforth of dignity and peace so much worthy as there to belonged,
unless he torfeited so, that he the use of his dignity might be taken from him.

These ruins of Antiquity make show of a perpetuity of Nobility, even from the
beginning of this Island: but times are changed, and we in them also. For King
Edward the Confessor, last of the Saxon blood, coming out of Normandy, bringing
in then the title of Baron, the Thayne from that time began to grow out of use;
so at this day men remember not so much as the names of them. And in process
of time, the name of Baronage began be both in dignity and power so magnificent
above the rest; as that in the name of the Baronage of England, all the
Nobility of the Land seemed to be comprehended. As for Dukes, they were (as it
were) fetched from long exile, and again renewed by K. Edward the third. And
Marquesses and Vicounts were altogether brought in by K. Richard the second,
and K. Henry the sixth.

But our Kings descended of the Norman blood, together with the Crown of the
Kingdom, granted an hereditary and successory perpetuity unto honorable
titles; such I mean as are the titles of Earldome, and Baronies, without any
difference of Sex at all, which thing I thought good to make manifest by the
examples of the more ancient times. In the reckoningup whereof that I may the
better acquit and discharge my self, I shall in the First place desire the
Reader to observe three things. First, concerning the disposition and
inclination of our King in the creating of the Nobility. Second, of the Custom
of transferring of Honors and dignities by Families. And Thirdly of the force
of time, and the change and alteration of things. For why, our Kings (who in
their Kingdoms bear alone the absolute rule and sway) are with us the
efficient causes of al Political Nobility. The titles of named Nobility by our
Custom, have this natural and common, together with the Crown it self, that
the Heirs Males failing, they devolve unto the Women except in the first
Charters it be in express words otherwise provided; and yet so that regard is
always to be had of the time, which is every where wont to bear sway in the
formality of things.

In this manner ( Harold being overcome) William the first King, and
Conqueror, having obtained the Sovereignty according to his pleasure, bestowed
dignities and Honors upon his Companions and others; some of them so connext
and conjoynd unto the Fees themselves, that yet to this day, the possessors
thereof may seem to be innobled even with the possession of the Places only: as
our Bishops at this day, by reason of the Baronies joynd unto their
Bishoprics, enjoy the title and pre-eminence of Barons in highest Assemblies
of the Kingdom in Parliament: he gave and granted to others Dignities and
Honors, together with the Lands, and fees themselves. He gave to Hugh Lupus
his Kinsman (a Norman) the Earldome of Chester. Ad conquirendum et tenendum
sibi and Haeredibus, adeolibere per gladium, sicut ipse Rex tenuit Angliam per
Coronam. To Hanus Rufus (then Earl of Brettaine in France) and his Heirs the
Earledom of Richmond. It a libere et honorifice, uteundem Edwinus. Comes
anteatenuerat. And the Earldom of Arundell (which Harald poessessed) he
granted, with a fee unto Roger of Montgomery. The first two of which Honors
(the Heirs male failing) by Women passed unto other Families: But the latter
Earldome, Robert the Son of Roger being attainted of Treason, returned unto
King Henry the First, who gave the same in Dowry unto Queen Adeliza his wife.
But the succeeding Kings, more sparingly bestowed such dignities, to be holden
of them in Fee, granting for the better and more honorable maintenance of
their stock add honor, the third part of the pleas of the County (as they
term it) which they in their Charters call Tertium denarium, or the third penny:
so that he that received the third penny of any province, was called Earl of
the same; and so by custom the Women, the Heirs male failing.

And if any Earl or Baron dying without Sons, had many Women his heirs,
howsoever order was taken either by way of Covenant, or partition, concerning
the Lands and possessions, according to the Common Laws of the Kingdom, yet
the dignity and Honor (a thing of it self indivisable) was still left to be
disposed of, according to the Kings pleasure, who in bestowing there of usually
respected the prerogative of birth: by which right, K. Henry the third after
the death of John the Scot, dead without issue (other Lands and revenews being
by agreement given to his three Sisters) united the Earldom of Chester with the
honor thereof unto the Crown. This is manifest in the Earldome of Arundell,
which (after Robert Be lisme Son to the aforesaid Roger Mountgomery driven out
by Henry the first) K. Henry the second bestowed upon william of Albine. Q.
Adeliza his Mothers husband, and by a new Charter, confirmd it in fee, together
with the Inheritance to him and his Heirs, with the third pleas of Sussex,
whereof he created him Earl. But Hugh the great, Nephew of this william the
first being dead without issue, all the Earldome was divided among his four
Sisters, whose dignity and honor for all that, together with the Castle of
Arundel, was by Edward the first, at length given to Richard Fitz-Alan (the
Nephews Son to John Fitz-Alan, and Isabell the second of the aforesaid
Sisters.

I will now pass from Henry the third to Edward the first his Son, there
being for a time great dissension betwixt him and certain of his Nobility,
viz. Gilbert of Clare Earl of Hartford and of Gloucester: Humphrey of Bohun
Earl of Hereford and Sussex, and Constable of England; and Roger Bigod Earl
of Norfolk, Marshall of the Kingdom: and that all those Noblemen at length,
had lost their Earldoms and Offices, they being reconciled to the King;
afterward they again by new Charters received the same in this manner. The
first of them to himself and Ioane his Wife, the same K. Daughter, his second
wife, for term of both their lives; and to the children to be by both of them
begoten (his two Daughters by his first wife being excluded.) This Ioane
(called Ioane of Acon) bare unto h^ thusand Gilbert a Son called also
Gilbert; but she the second time secretly married unto one Ridulph, of Mont
Hermeri (without the King her Fathers knowledge) and in her own right, made the
same Radulph Earl so long as she lived: but she being dead, Gilbert her Son
by the aforesaid Gilbert succeeded again into the Earldome, Radulph his Father
in Law being yet alive. In the same mannner he restored to the aforesaid
Humphrey of Bohun his Earldome and Constableship, unto whom he also gave in
Marriage Elizabeth another of his Daughters, Widow, to John Earl of Holland:
and to the third he restored the Earldome of Norfolk, and the Office of
Marshal, with the yearly increase of a thousand marks, upon condition if the
heirs male of his body to be begotten failing, both should return again to
the King. At length this Roger dyed without issue, in the xxxv. year of him,
the said Edward the first, viz. in the last year of his reign: and K. Edward
his Son, the second of that name, both by a new Creation and Charter, gave
the Earldome and the Marshallship to Thomas of Brotherton, and his heir male.

These things I have thus propounded, thereby to show how according to the
diverse dispositions of Princes, and change of times, it has by little and
little varied in the first bestowing of dignities and honors: Of which thing
(that new Law) and to them of ancient time unknown, made by King Edward the
first, seems afterward to be of no small moment, whereby, he favoring
certain private men, more careful of their own surname, then of their
posterity, it was thought good by him to decree to make Fees to belong to men
only. That Law which I would in latin call Gentilitium Municipale, and which
the Lawyers commonly call Mis taliatum, and Talliabile; or the Law of cutting
off: for that it cutteth off Successions before general, and restrains them
to the particular heirs of Families, which seems to have given an occasion
of change in the giving and bestowing of dignities and honors. For ever since
that time, in the Creating of any new Earl, it is begun to be altered by
express words in all Charters, provided, that it shall be but for term of life
only, or descend unto the heirs males alone, the women being quite excluded.
And for this I need not examples to prove; for why, the thing it self proves
the same. But the force and efficacy of this Law of Entaile (or of cutting
off) I have thought good thus in few words to declare.

And what I have said concerning Earls, the same may be said also of Barons,
created by Charters, but in Barons created by Rescripts, or writs of summons,
yet resting upon most ancient custom not so.

For in them (one only excepted, sent forth to Henry Bromflet, wherein it was
provided him, that same Henry and his heirs Male of his Body, lawfully
begotten, only to be Barons of Vesey) women the heirs Male failing, were not
in ancient time forbidden, orimbarred, but that they might be accounted, and by
name styled Honorable, with the preeminence of the dignity, and calling of
Barons: and after they had borne a Child, according to the ancient favor of
our Laws, (and the custom of the Kingdom) graced their Husbands also with the
same honor, and with the same by Inheritance, ennobled their Children, yea
without the possessions of those places, from whence the name of such dignities
and honors may seem first to have risen. For fees and Local possessions
circumscribed by the Law, are translated and carried from one family unto
another, and usually enrich their Lords, and owners, the possessors thereof,
but yet of themselves neither being, nor take away nobility, either dative or
native; by example to maifest these things, were but needless, and of little
consequence, for why, all the most ancient Baronies, and the more ancient sort
of the Barons at this day, are in this point on my side, and if any shall
object against me in this point, unto him I will oppose, either the force of
time, or the carelessness and lack of looking unto. But customs are still like
themselves, nor must we detract from the authority of Kings, who although they
have such supereminent, and undeterminate prerogative, as that they may seem
sometimes to have of favor granted some things beside the Law, yet it shall
nor appear them, requested to have done, or yet suffered to have been done,
any thing contrary to the custom of Stocks, and Families, so sometimes they,
not regarding the solemnities of Ceremonies, and Charters, have only by their
becks (that I may so say) suffered dignities, and honors, to be tranferred, as
in Ranulph Blundevill Earl of Chester, and of Lincoln, to be seen for the
Earldome of chester, he permitted after the manner, to disceud to John the Scot
his Nephew, by Maude the elder of his Sisters: But the Earldom of Lincoln
(the King thereunto consenting) he yet alive, delivered unto Hawisia another of
his Sisters, then married to Robert Quincy, by his Deed in the 7th. year of
Henry the third.

These things I say, were of old and ancient time, but at this day not so, for
such is the force of time, and change in altering the forms of things, as that
in eating out of the old, brings still in new: so unto Earls, whom we said
in ancient time to have been rewarded with the third penny of the province,
whereof they were Earls, to maintain their honor, and dignity; a certain
some of money is at this day, yearly paid them out of the Exchequer, and they
the titles of such places, as wherein they have no jurisdiction,
administration, or profit at all. Barons also who as the Fathers and Senators
in ancient times among the Romans were chosen by their Sestercia, were in like
manner wont to be esteemed and valued by Knights fees, for why he which had and
possessed thirteen Knights fees, and a little more, was to be accounted among
the Barons, are now more seldom times chosen for their virtue, their great
wealth, and large possessions.

Neither is there any let, but that a man may hold and still retain the name
and title of a Barony, the head of which Barony, (as they term it) he has
afterward sold or alienated to some other common person.

In brief, our Kings Royal Majesty is always like it self, constant, and
the same, which having regard to the virtue, stock, wealth, and substance, of
any man (whereby he may with his counsels service, profit the Commonwealth)
may in every place freely give and bestow dignities and honors, sometimes
choosing no more Barons then one, out of one and the same Family, The custom of
the succession of the former and more ancient Baron, being still kept whole, and
not in any hurt, as we see, Edward the sixth, wisely to have done in the family
of the Willobies of Ersby, brought forth also another Barony of Parham,
wherefore we acknowledge our Kings to be the fountains of Political
Nobility, and unto whom we may with thanks refer all the degrees of honors,
and dignities, wherefore I may not without cause seem to rejoice, on the
behalf of our Nobility of great Britain which has had always Kings
themselves Authors, Patrons, Governors, and Defenders thereof, that when Lands,
Fees, and Possessions, subjects to Covenants, or agreements, are still tossed
and turmoyl'd with the storms of the judicial Courts, and of the Common Law,
it is only unto the Kings themselves, beholding, and rests upon Heroical
orders, and institutions proper and familiar, unto it self, so that, Per
Titulos numerentur avi, semper que renat
Nobilitate virent, et prolem fata sequantur:
Continuum propria servantia lege tenorem.


By Titles great-mens Ancestors are known, the posterity of whom, enjoy the
same to their flourishing and everlasting fame.

William the Conqueror after the death of Herold, having confined the Kingdom
to himself, laid these foundations of ancient and worthy Nobility, which
afterward by his successors, according to the diverse occurrants, and
occasions, by little and little, became at length in the reign of King Henry
the third, and Edward the first, to appear a Godly, and stately building, who
having vanquished the Welsh-men; and contending with the Scots bordering upon
them, for Principality and Soveraignety, entreating of all things concerning
the Commonweal, with the three States of the Kingdom (with consists of the
Nobility, the Clergy, and Communaltie) they themselves in their Royal
majesty sitting in Parliaments, appointed unto every man a pre-eminence,
according to the place of his dignity, from whom especially all the Nobility of
our age, may seem to derive the diverse and appointed degrees of dignities,
and honors.

Now to abreviate much that might be writ in the continuance of this discourse,
I shall desire to straighten my purpose to some handsome conclusion, by the
observation of the degrees and sitting of our English Nobility, in the
Parliament Chamber, out of the Statute of the 31. of K. Henry the 8. who of his
Princely wisdom, with the full assent of the whole Parliament, caused a
particular Act to be made, for the placing of the Nobility, in the upper house
of Parliament, the effect whereof I have here recited.

That forasmuch as in all great Assemblies and Congregations of men, having
degrees and offices in the Commonwealth, it was thought fit and convenient,
that order should be taken for the placing and sitting of such persons as are
bound to resort to the same, to the intent that they knowing their places,
might use the same without displeasure; the places of which. great offices
deserve respect and admiration: and though merely officiarie and depending on
life, and the Kings gracious election, without any hereditary title or
perfection; yet are they of such high dignity, that all hereditary honor
whatsoever, under the degree of Royalty (may at all times) without
disparagement give them place and precedencie. The placing of these most Noble
and great Officers both in the Parliament house, and other Assemblies, is after
this worthy and distinct order.

That is to say, the Lord Chancellor or L. Keeper, the L. Treasurer, the L.
President of the Kings Privy Council, and the L. Privy Seal, being of the
degree of Barons of the Parliament or above to sit on the highest part of the
form, on the left side in the Parliament Chamber; and above al Dukes, except
those which. are the Kings Sons; the Kings Brothers, his Uncles, his Nephews, or
his Brothers or Sisters Sons: but if any of these four great Officers
aforesaid shall be under the degree of a Baron, then he or they to sit on the
uppermost part of the Sackes in the midst of the Parliament Chamber, in such
order as is aforeshewed.

As touching the other, it was enacted that the I. great Chamberlain, the L.
Constable, the L. Marshall, the L. Admiral, the L. Steward, and the L.
Chamberlain of the Kings household, shall be placed next to the L. Privy
Seal, each of them above all other personages, being of their own estates or
degrees; and holding the same precedence, as they are formerly named.

Lastly, the principal Secretary being of the degree of a Baron, shall be
ranged above all Barons, (not having any of the former offices also) and this
range and precedencie to continue to all the great Officers in general, which
are before named; both in Parliament, in Council Chamber, in the Star
Chamber, at the trial of Peers; and in all other Assemblies whatsoever.

This in brief is the effect of the Statute, expressing the dignity and place
of our most principal and supremest Temporal Officers, of which the first and
chiefest is the L. Chancellor, or L. Keeper, who is said to be the Kings
Conscience, his mouth, and confirmation, for by him all the rigours of the law
are bridled: the Kingswil in grace consultations revealed, and his gifts and
prerogatives confirmed; before him all the great business of the Commonwealth
is dispatched, either at Council Table, in Star Chamber, or in the Chancery,
where he has a principal voice, and precedence: and lastly, he has the
keeping of the great Scale of the Kingdom, in which is expressed a reputation so
serious, that all Subjects life's and Estates depending on the same.

The next in place is the L. high Treasurer of England, to whose trust the
Kings Treasure is committed, who is a man of that noble, worthy, sweet and
generous disposition, of important confidence, of noble estimation, excellent
in wisdom and high in estimation, and to his wisdom and excellent judgment,
is referred the whole manage of the Kings entire Estate, and the provident
regard of the wealth and flourishing prosperity of all the K. Subjects: He is
the prime Officer Judicature, between the King and his Tenants, and has
dependence on the Council Table, the Exchequer and the Kings Royal House and
Family.

The next to these is the L. President, of the Kings most honorable Privy
Counsel, and is the chief man (next the King) belonging to the high and
honorable Assembly, and has in his power, under the Kings Majesty, the
manage of the privileges of that Honorable Table.

The next is the L. Privy Scale, an especial Ensign of credit belonging to
this Kingdom, having custody and charge of the Kings lesser Seal, which gives
testimony of the Kings favors and bounty, but also making the way clear and
accessable to the great Seal, in which consists the strength of his Majesty's
confirmations; These first four great Officers are civil, and judicature, as
depending on the public State: after whom follow six other which are as well
Military as Civil, having the managing of all matters of Honor, and Warlike
proceedings.

The first of which is the L. Chamberlain of the Kingdom, whose Office is of
the greatest employment, in all public Assemblies, as Coronations,
Parliaments, Tryumphs, or any Solemnity, where the King himself rides in
person: which Office is not Officiary, but Honorarie, depending by a feudall
right, unto the Noble house of the Earls of Oxenford.

After this is the L. Constable of the kingdom, who was the first and
principal General under the King? of all the Land forces, and in all
occasions of Martial affairs, had the principal nomination of Officers, and
ordering of Munition for such employment.

Then is the L. Marshall of the Land, a great and renowned Officer, in whom
consist the solutions of all differences in Honor, and dispensation of al
things appertaining to the great or lesser Nobility. Next follows the Office
of the L. Admiral of the Land, who is the Kings General, and chief Commander
at Sea, and has care and charge of all his Majesty's Royal Navy, and the
censuring of all Marine causes whatsoever.

The next following is the L. Steward of the Kings Household, in whose trust
and government is reposed the ordering of all the great and Noble Families, the
discussion of all controversies, the placing and removing of Officers, and the
disposing of all things therein, for his Majesty's renown and dignity.

The last of these great Officers, is the L. Chamberlain of the Kings Royal
Household, unto whose great trust, faith, and integrity, is committed, the
guard of the Kings Royal person, he has the control, and commandment, of
all Officers and others, whose dependence is on the Kings person; and howsoever
some would limit his rule above the Sayters, yet it is over the whole Court,
and in all places wheresoever the King is present: with many other priveledges
which at this time cannot be fully recited.

After all these great Offices, and Officers, I must necessarily add one great
Officer more, namely the Kings chief and principal Secretary of Estate, who
deserves a due respect by his high and Honorable Place, in regard he is so
intimate and nigh to all affairs, of his Majesty, either private or
particular.

THE FORM OF THE KINGS MAJESTY'S WRIT TO THE PEERS TO ASSEMBLE IN PARLIAMENT.
CAROLUS etc. Charissimo consanguineo suo E. Commit. D. salutem. Quia de
advisamento et assensu consilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis urgentibus negotiis
nos, statum et defensionem regni nostri Anglie et Ecclesie Anglicane concernent
quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram Westmonasterium tertio die
Novembris prox^futur: teneri ordinavimus, et ibid. vobiscum ac cum Prelat.
magnatibus et proceribus dict. Regni nostri colloquium habere, tractare, vobis
sub fide et ligeanciis, quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter injungend. mandamus,
quod consider at. dictorum negotiorum arduitate et periculis imminentibus,
cessante excusatione quacunque, dict. die et loco personaliter intersitis
nobiscum, ac cum prelatis, magnatibus et proceribus predictis, super dictis
negotiis tractatur. vestrumque consilium impensur. et hoc sicut nos et honorem
nostrum ac salvationem et difensionem Regni et Ecclesie predictorum
expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Test me
apud West. decimo octavo die Septembris, Anno Regni nostri 16.

THE FORM OF THE Writ to the Sheriff etc. for the election of the Knights and
Burgesses to assemble in Parliament.
REX Vic. N. etc. Salut. quia de advisamento et assensu consilii nostri pro
quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis nos, statum, defensionem Regni nostri
Anglie et Ecclesie, Anglicane concernen: quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud
Civitatem nostram West, tertio die Novembris, prox: futur. teneri ordinavimus,
et ibid. cum prelatis magnatibus et proceribus dicti Regni nostri colloquium
habere et tract.

Tibi precipimus firmiter injungentes quod facta proclamation. in prox.
Comitat. tuo post receptionem huius brev. nostritenend. die et loco predict.
duos milit. gladijs cinct. magis idoneos et discretos Commit. predict. et de
qualib. Civitate com. illius duos Cives, et de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de
discretior. et magis sufficientibus libere et indifferenter per illos qui
proclam: hujusmodi interfuer. juxta formam statutorum inde edit. et provis
eligi, et nomina eorundem milit. Civium et Burgensium, sic Electorum, in
quibusdam Indentur. inter te et illos qui huiusmodi Electionis interfuerit,
inde conficiendum, sive hujusmodi electi praesentes fuerint vel absentes,
inseri, eosque ad dict. diem et locum venire fac. Ita quad ijdem milites plenam
et sufficientem potestatem pro se et communitate Commit. predict, ac dict. C^ves
et Burgenses pro se et communitate Civitatum et Burgorum predictorum divisim ab
ipsis habeant ad faciendum et consentiendum his quae tunc ibid. de communi
consilio dicti regni nostri (favente Deo) contigerint ordinari super negotijs
^ntedictis; Ita quod pro defectu potestatis huiusmodi, seu propter improvidam
Electionem milit. Civium, aut Burgensium predictorum, dicta negotia infect a
non remaneant quovis modo. Nolumus autem, quod tu nec aliquis alius vic. dicti
Regni nostri aliqualiter sit electus. Et electionem illam in pleno Comitatu
factam, distinct et aperte sub sigillo tuo et sigillis eorum qui electioni
illi interfuerint nobis in Cancellar. nostr dict. diem et locum certifices
indilate, remittens nobis alteram partem Jndentur. predict a rum presentibus
consuet. una cum hoc breve. Test meipso apud West. 18. die Septembris, anno
Regni nostri 16.

The order of the proceeding to Parliament, of the most high and mighty Prince
King CHARLES, on monday the 13. of April 1640. In the 16. year of his
Majesty's reign, first on Horseback from White Hall to
Westminster-Abby-Church, and from thence on foot to the Parliament house. viz.
Messengers of the Chamber 2. and 2. Trumpets.
The Master of the Chancery, The Kings Puisne Sergeants at Law, The Kings
Solicitor, The Kings Attourny General. The Kings 2 Ancient Sergeants at Law.
Masters of the Request 2. and 2.
Barons of the Exchequer. of the degree of the Coyfe of the said Courts.
Justices of the Common Pleas. of the degree of the Coyfe of the said Courts.
Justices of the King's Bench. of the degree of the Coyfe of the said Courts.
together.
The Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer The Master of the Roles
together. The two Lord chief Justices of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas
Pursevants at Arms. Privy Counselors. Heralds 2. Barons in their Parliament
Robes 2 and 2. being all in number 53. Lord Bishops 2 and 2 according to their
consecrations. Bishop of Winchester. Bishop of Duresme. Bishop of London, now
being Lord Treasurer in another place.
Two Heralds. Viscounts in their Robes 2 and 2.
Viscount Camden. Viscount Conway. Viscount Say, and Seal. Viscount Purbeck.
Viscount Mountague.
Two Heralds. Earls in their Robes 2 and 2. being in number 62.
together.
The Lord Chamberlain The Lord Steward of the K. Household And the Lord
Admiral
The Marquis of Winchester. The Duke of Buckingham, under age.
Norroy and Clarencieux.
The Lord Privy Seal. The Lord Treasurer of England. The Archbishop of York.
Lord Keeper of the great Seal. The Archbishop of Canterbury. Sergeant at
Arms from the Sword forward.
Gent. Usher black rod on the right han. Garter in the middle uncovered.
Another G. Usher all bare.
The Prince in his Crimson Velvet Robes, Hood, and Cap of Estate, thereon his
Coronet, his Trayn borne by. The Sword borne by The great Chamberlain on the
right hand The Sword borne by The Earl Marshall on the left hand.
The Cap of Estate borne by. Footmen. Pentioners on foot with their Axes.
Esquires. The Kings Majesty in his Parliament Robes and Crown, his Majesty's
Train borne by three Earls or Lords eldest Sons, assisted by the Gentlemen
of the Robes all on foo.
The Mr. of the Horse leading the Horse of honor. together.
The Captain of the Pentioners The Captain of the Guard
The Guard 2 and 2 on foot.
All the time the King is in the Church, the Prebends carry the Canopy of the
Church over him: but when he comes out of the Church, the Gent. of the Privy
Chamber carry another Canopy over him to the Parliament House.

The Church delivers a Scepter to the King at his coming in, which is
delivered back at his going out.

The proceeding to the Parliament of the most high and mighty Prince, King
CHARLES, on Tuesday the third day of November, being in the 16th. year of his
Majesty's reign Anno Dom. 1640. from White Hall by water to Westminster, and
from thence on foot to the Parliament house.

All things in manner and for me as before particularized was observed in this
stately going of the Kings Majesty the Prince and Peers to Parliament, only
in some things different from the former.

Norroy and Clarenciux.
Sergeant at Arms. Lord Privy Seal. Sergeant at Arms. Sergeant at Arms.
Lord Treasurer of England. Sergeant at Arms. Sergeant at Arms. Lord
Archbishop of York. Sergeant at Arms. Sergeant at Arms. Lord Keeper of the
great Seal. Sergeant at Arms. Sergeant at Arms. Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. Sergeant at Arms.
Garter bare headed. A Gentleman Usher bareheaded. A Gentleman Usher of the
black Rod bareheaded.
The Prince his highness in his Parliament Robes with Cap and Coronet, his
highness Train borne by the Lord Francis Villars, second Son to the Duke of
Buckingham, and the Lord Ogle. The Cap of Estate borne by the Earl of Essex.
The Earl Marshal on the left hand. The Sword borne by the Earl of Bath. The
Lord great Chamberlain on the right hand.


The Kings Majesty in his Parliament Robes, and his Crown on; His Majesty's
Train, borne by the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Oxford, Lord Herbert of
Cardiff, Lord Cecill of Essendon and Lord Lisle, assisted by the Gentlemen of
the Robes.

Gentlemen Pensioners on each side with their Axes. The Captain of the Guard.
The Guard.


The Prerogative of the high Court of Parliament.
OF all the Courts of Judicature in England, the Court of Parliament is the
chiefest and greatest Council of Estate, called and appointed by the Kings
Majesty, the Lords of the upper House, by personal writs of summons; And for
the Commons House a general writ is sent to the Sheriff, of every Shire, or
County, to call together all such freeholders, (which can dispend forty
shillings yearly out of their own free Lands, at least) for the electing two
Gent. for Knights of the Shire: the like is directed to the Cinque Ports, for
choice of their Barons, to each City, Borough Town, and University, for
choice of two Burgesses, for every of them, to represent their several bodies
in Parliament.

The time and place of meeting.
This honorable Assemblies meeting is noticed by the Kings Majesty, to all his
Subjects by Proclamation.

The end of calling this great Assembly, is either the disturbance of the
Church, by Heresy or Schism, danger of the Kingdom, by War offensive or
defensive, or for the relief of the Subject, disturbed in the Courts of
Justice by ill customs, undue execution of the Laws, oppression etc.

From this high Court lies no appeal, the determination there of being
presumed to be the act of every particular Subject, who is either present
personally, or consenting by his Assignee, suffraged by himself.

This honorable Assembly consists of two houses, Upper and Lower. The upper is
made up by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, no member of that house being under the
degree of a Baron, all which await the writ of Summons, without which, no
place, no vote there, and none may absent themselves after Summons, without
special proxy from his Majesty, whence he has power to depute, one of the
said members to give his voice for him in absence.

His Majesty who by his Prerogative Royal, has the Sole power, as of calling,
so dissolving his honorable Assembly, sits in a Throne in the upper end of the
house; on his right hand the Prince of Wales, on the left the Duke of York. The
greatest officers of the Kingdom, as the Lord Keeper, (who is the Speaker or
mouth of the House) Treasurer, Privy Seal, etc. have places some on the right
some on the left hand of the Throne the form where of is recited in the
Statute of, 31 Henry the 8.

The manner of giving voices in the upper house, is thus.
The Lords Spiritual and Temporal in their Parliamentary Robes, they youngest
Bishop reads prayers, those being ended, the Clarke of the House, reads the
Bills, (being first writ in paper,) which being once read, he that pleases may
speak either for or against it.

The manner of the Lower house is in this sort.
The first day each member is called by his name every one answering for what
place he serves, that done they are willed to choose their Speaker, who,
(though nominated by the Kings Majesty,) is to be a member of that house, their
election being made, he is presented by them to the King sitting in Parliament,
where after his Oration or Speech, (the Lord keeper approving in behalf of the
King) he Petitions his Majesty in behalf of the House: First, for their
priveledges, from all molestations during the the time of sitting. Secondly,
that they may enjoy freedom of speech. Thirdly, that they may have power to
correct any of their own members that are offenders. Fourthly, to have
favorable access to his Majesty upon all occasions. The Speaker, (in behalf
of the House of Commons) promising regard full respect, as befitting loyal,
and dutiful Subjects.

The use of the Parliament
Consists in abrogating old, or making new Laws, reforming all grievances in
the Common wealth, whether in Religion or intemporal affairs settling succession
to the Crown, grants, Subsidies, etc. and in Sum may be called the great
Physician of the Kingdom or Republique.

The Speakers place in the House of Commons.
The Speaker sits in a Chair, placed somewhat high to be seen and heard the
better of all, the Clerks of the House sits before him in a lower seat, who
reads such Bills as are first propounded in their House, or sent down from
the Lords, for in that point, each House has equal authority to propound what
they think meet.

All Bills be thrice in three several days read, and disputed on, before put
to question, and so good order is used in the House, that he that intends to
speak to any Bill, stands up bare-headed (for no more hen one speaks at a
time) speaking to the Speaker, not one to another, being against the rule of
the House: and he that speaks is to speak no more that day, to the Bill he
has spoken to, to avoid spinning needlessly out of time, and their speeches
must be free from Taunts of their fellow members, that are of contrary opinions.

The Speakers Office is, when a Bill is read, as briefly as he may to declare
the effect thereof to the House; and to Bills first agreed on by the Lords, and
sent to the Commons for assent: if they do assent, then are they returned,
subscribed thus; Les Communs ont assentus: So likewise if the Lords agree, to
what is sent to them from the House of Commons, they subscribe. Les Seigneurs
ont assentus: If the two Houses cannot agree (every Bill being therice read, in
each House) then sometimes the Lords, sometimes the Commons, require a meeting
of some of each House, whereby information may be had of each others mind, for
the preservation of a good correspondency between them, after which meeting,
for the most part, (though not always) either part agrees to the Bill in
question.

The assent or dissent of the upper House, is each man severally by himself,
and then for so many as he has by proxy, they saying only; content or not
content, and by the Major part it is agreed to, or dashed. But in the Lower
House, no member can give his voice to another by Proxy; the Major part being
present only, makes the assent, or dissent. After a Bill is twice read there,
and engrossed, (being disputed on enough, as conceived) the Speaker asks if
they will go to question, and if agreed to, holding the Bill up in his band
says, As many as will have this Bill pass concerning such a matter say yea,
and those that against it no: and if it be a doubt which cry is bigger, the
House is divided, the one part that agrees not to the Bill, being bid to sit
still, those that do to go down with the Bill, so plurality of voices,
allows or dashes. But no Bill is an Act of Parliament, Ordinance or Edict of
Law, though both the Houses unanimously agree in it, till it has the Royal
Assent.

Touching the Royal Assent.
When Bills are passed by both the Houses, they ought to have for approbation
the Royal Assent, which usually is deferred till the last day of the Sessions,
but may be given at any time during the Parliament, touching which, it has
been a question much debated, whether the Royal Assent given to any one Bill
does not ipso facto, conclude that present Session, the question is of great
consequence, for if thereby the Session be at an end, then ought every other
Bill, although passed both the Houses to be read again, three times in either
House, and to have the same proceeding as it had at first, as if nothing had
been formerly done therein, so must it be done of all other Acts of the House:
But the first Session of the first Parliament, of King James, the House being
then desirous to have a Bill passed forthwith by the Royal Assent, which
should be security to the Warden of the Fleet, touching the delivery of Sir
Thomas Sherly, out of execution, (for it was then questionable whether he was
subject to an action of escape) did agree that the giving of the Royal assent
to one Bill or more did not dissolve the Sessions without some special
declaration of his Majesty's pleasure to that purpose 18. April 1604. And
likewise in the Journall Anno. 1 and 2. phil. and Mariae. 21 Novem. that the
King and Queen came on purpose into the Parliament House to give their Assent
to Cardinal Pooles Bill, and upon question made it was then resolved by the
whole House, that the Session was not thereby concluded, but that they might
proceed in their business notwithstanding the Royal Assent given.

At the giving of the Royal assent it is not requisite the King should be
present in person, for by the express word of the Statute of 33 Henry the 8
Cap. 21. that the Kings Royal assent by his Letters Patents, under his great
Seal signed by his hand, and declared and in notified in his absence to the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and to the Commons assembled in Parliament, is,
and ever was of as good strength and force, as if the King had been there in
person personally present, and had assented openly and publicly to the same,
according to which Statnte the Royal assent was given by Commission Anno 38.
H. 8. unto the Bill for the attainder for the Duke of Norfolk.

The manner of giving the Royal assent
The Royal assent is given in this sort: after some solemnities ended, the
Clark of the Crown reads the Titles of the Bills in such order as they are
in consequence: as the Title of every Bill is read, the Clearke of the
Parliament pronounces the Royal assent according to his instructions given
him by his Majesty in that behalf, if it be a public Bill to which the King
assenteth, he answers, Le Roy Le voet, If a private Bill be allowed by the
King, the answer is, Soit fait come il est desire. If a public Bill which
the King forbeareth to allow, Le Roy se amsera. To the Subsidy Bill, Le Roy
remercie ses Loyaulx, Subjects accept benevolence et ausi le voult.

To the general Pardon.
Les Prelates Seigneurs et Commonsen cest present Parliament assemblies en nom
de touts voue autres subjects remercient tres humblement vestre Majesty, et
preut dieu vous donere eu suite been vie et long.

FINIS.

