Glory sometimes afar off, Now stepping in; OR, The great Gospel-Mysterie OF
THE SPIRIT, OR Divine Nature in Saints: Not in that Philosophical and humane
sense, by effects and habits of Grace, but after a more Evangelical, Divine,
and Mysterious manner of in-being.

Opened, affirmed and cleared, and gloriously breaking forth through a cloud of
subtle pervertings, carnal objections, and dreadful condemnings cast upon it;

And closed up with an account of some principles, practices and ways which
have sealed up this Mystery, and thereby held down the Saints in weakness, and
shut up the world in darkness for so long a time.

Administered through the hand of a Babe in the knowledge and fellowship of the
Mystery of Christ in us.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the black spread-
Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1653.

GLORY sometimes afar off, Now stepping in.
SECT. I.
IT begins to appear plainly to all men, that light and darkness are the two
great principles which have formed and given life and being to all the true and
false Religions, Opinions and Worships; the two great Powers which have ruled
and acted in all the turnings and overturning of Nations, States, and
Interests; and the wombs of all the Apostacies and Reformation, Bondage and
Liberty, Arbitrary and Regular ways which have been since the beginning of the
world.

It does not so plainly appear, Job 38.19.
but may be as truly affirmed what is said in one place, that Light has a way
where or whence it is, and darkness a place where it dwells; that is, all
Scripture, Faith, Knowledge, Gifts, Administrations and Operations, which are
so many pieces or sparkles of Light, do all come from an higher fullness,
fountain and Sun of Light; and as Faith, Knowledge, and Gifts are to be
accounted Light, only as they flow from the true Light, and have the true Light
hid within them, so they are no more Light, if they fall short of God; in like
manner all Spirits, Doctrines, Principles, and works of darkness, do all come
out of some root or first Principle, which is the Serpents head, the bruising
whereof is the confusion of all the rest.

God in Christ, and Christ in us, the two fountains of all Gospel Truths.
Gospel Truths are many and various, but may all be reduced under two great and
supreme truths, as the foundation, ground, and cause of all the Grace and Truth
that is revealed and administered by the Gospel; they are either the Mystery of
God manifest in the flesh of Christ, or the Mystery of Christ by Spirit
dwelling in Saints; the first of these is the producing cause of redemption,
justification, reconciliation, and of the whole work of Grace administered by
Christ in his flesh; the other is the operating cause of Union, regeneration,
sanctification, new creature, and of all the gifts of Grace administered by
Christ, or Spirit in Saints.

As all promises, truths and gifts of God in the Gospel, do come unto us out of
one of these fountains of Grace: so our Knowledge and Faith of these many and
various truths of the Gospel, do come from our Knowledge and Faith, in these
two mysteries or fountains of Grace: truths are either supreme or subordinate,
higher or lower; truths in the Cause, or truths in the Effect; as subordinate
and lower truths have their rise, ground, cause, and reason, in their supreme
and higher, so they cannot be fully believed nor understood, Gospel Truths best
known in Christ.

Christ best known in the Father.


but in their supreme and higher truth or Cause: first, we see Christ more
darkly and imperfectly; then through him we see the Father, and the love of the
Father to be the only cause and reason of Christ's coming forth; then from
thence we look back again, and see more clearly Christ, and his coming forth,
and the work he came upon to be more and more precious and glorious; Christ is
known but darkly at first, till the Divine mercies, out of which he came be
seen in him; then both Christ and every work of Christ, his obedience and
sufferings, life and death, are seen and known in more lengths and breadths, to
be blessed and full of glory; the Promises are all in Christ: Christ is in the
Father; Christ is greater then the promises; they cannot be known, nor enjoyed
but in Christ; the Father is greater then Christ, he cannot be known nor
enjoyed but in the Father: in like manner, the fountain and cause of all
spiritual light, life, and sanctification in the Saints, is the Spirit dwelling
in them; those Saints that know not this in-being of the Spirit himself in
them, know little of that more glorious power, those more rare and spiritual
gifts, and more Divine and ravishing enjoyments which some Saints are led forth
into; the actings, state, calling, and fellowship of Saints, are not known nor
discerned by the world, and very little discerned by most of themselves,
because they know not the Spirit of Christ to be in them.

So that if any were so spiritually knowing, and would undertake a work so high
and desirable, as to make search into the Cause and Grounds of the little
Light, and much darkness that has been for so long a time in the world, and
that in the days of the Gospel; I humbly judge (whatsoever other lesser
reasons might be found) that the highest reason and cause of all the humane
inventions, The cause of all the darkness that has been, and yet is upon the
world.
and perverse disputings amongst all sorts of men; of all the carnal Doctrines
and Gospel-worships of Antichrist, of all that Confusion of Law with Gospel,
letter with Spirit, Jewish bondage with Christian Liberty, Paganish morality
with Gospel-holiness, by our own Teachers; of all the legality, Childishness,
and weakness of gifts and grace in Saints, fearing where no fear is, unstable
where they should be as mount Sion, conflicting instead of conquering, in
mournings and complainings in stead of garments of praise, and a Spirit of joy;
the greatest reason of all these, I judge would be found to be the darkness
that has been upon these two great fountains of all Gospel truths, (viz.) God
manifest in the flesh of Christ, and Christ by Spirit dwelling in Saints, which
as they are the great reasons of all other truths, so they are the Light and
Key into all the truths and riches of grace in the Gospel.

And for this cause I do here humbly offer what I have in my measure received
from the Lord, of my understanding and knowledge of this mystery, which is
Christ himself in us, as the Father is in Christ: which as my natural reason,
and the disputings of flesh and blood could not see nor lead me into it, but
resisted and gainsaid me in it; and that Spirit that is mightier then I, did
by his own drawing, and strengthening hand upon me, raise me up above the
reasonings of my flesh and this world, in the conceiving and declaring of it;
so if any look into the things here presented, in the light of his own natural
reason, tradition of men, or pre-resolved obstinacy of an unresigned mind, and
judge against these things, let such a one know he cannot dootherwise; but
these things cannot be judged of him, nor of any natural man: and as for those
who are spiritual, if they be Fathers (not in years I mean, but in knowledge)
they need not these things; I only commend these things to them, to give them
occasion to instruct me and others more perfectly herein; if they be children,
and are dying to all the proud reason and wisdom of Man, and do wait in Love
and Peace for the day of the Lord, and the Life and Glory of Christ to break
forth, and be all in them, they are they to whom I ow the Ministration of these
things, that we may all sit at one table in our Lord Jesus, and eat all of the
fat things of our Father, in our Fathers Kingdom.

SECT. II.
IN the first place then the Spirits dwelling in us, as it is the earnest of
our inheritance of glory, Ephesians. 1.14. 2 Cor. 5.5.
and the first fruits of that perfect heavenly state that shall spring forth in
us: and therefore is of the same nature, Romans 8.23.
and one very kind with that glory whereof it is an earnest and first fruits,
so the unfathomableness, hiddenness, and consequently darkness, which is in the
perfection and consummation of heavenly glory, as to our minds and
understandings, is also found in some proportion upon the Spirits in-being in
us, as being the beginning, inchoation, and first entry of after-glory into us.

Upon this ground, I hope, I may not be hardly judged, if I declare my self
straightened and unsatisfied in the inlargedst and fullest discovery of this
Mystery presented by any, how excelling soever in the wisdom and knowledge of
the truth:

For as much as the wisest man, learned Assembly, Job 37.19.23. and 26.9.14.
and 11.7, 8, 9. Eccles. 7, 24. 1 Cor. 13.12.
and clearest Age that has yet been, after they have pierced deepest,
discovered highest into this, or any other Gospel-mysterie, have still infinite
reason to say, how little, yea, nothing is that we know, to that we know not,
yet to be known!

And things being wisely laid together, the height and depth of all truth, the
lowness and shortness of our knowledge of truth; the brightness and purity of
truth, the darkness and dimness of our eyes to look upon it; these do show the
clear reason and ground of those Scriptures, Hos. 6.3. Phil. 3.13, 14. Ephesians.
1.17, 18, 19. Heb 6 1. Joh. 16.12, 13.
which I desire to have always present with me.

As the child knows and calls him that begat him Father, from a seed or
instinct, rather then from understanding; so I would be conceived in this to
speak rather the sense, tastes, and breathings I have received of the thing,
then from any perfect form or Idea of knowledge I can pretend unto.

Now whereas the judgments of the Saints in this do agree in one, that the
Spirit dwells in believers; the truth of this thing being no more, nor no other
then the plain testimony and naked letter of Scriptures, and an experience felt
and tasted in all Saints, cannot be gainstood, nor so much as stumbled at by
any; but in what sense we are to conceive of it, or what manner of in-being it
is, whether essential, formal, and immediate, as in the Man Christ; or only
energetical, virtual, and by infusions of powers, habits, and created gifts of
grace; as the mind of Scriptures is to some not so clear herein, so herein the
Saints do divide in judgment one from another.

Therefore I propound the thing which is differently judged of them by way of
Question;

What kind or manner of in-dwelling has the Spirit in Believers?

I humbly affirm, essential and personal; In-being of the Spirit in Saints, is
essential and personal.
I shall clear in what sense I so affirm:

First, negatively; by ejecting the sense wherein I affirm not; I affirm not
the essential presence of the Spirit to be more, as essential, in Saints, then
in other creatures; the eternal Spirit is infinitely in Saints, infinitely in
all creatures.

I deny the essential presence of the Spirit to be no more eminently essential
in Saints, then in other creatures; the Spirit is essential in all creatures;
but more eminently essential in Saints.

I deny this eminency of essential presence in Saints, above other men or
creatures, to be only, or no more then an infusion of created gifts, habits,
and powers of grace, and his acting of them, as is the sense generally declared.

Secondly, positively; I own and believe the essential presence of the spirit
in Saints, to be not only that essential presence general to all creatures,
which gives them natural gifts, life, powers, and virtues after their kind; nor
only in that half and limited, but commonly declared and received sense of
presence in Saints, which is only by supernatural and Divine gifts of spiritual
life, powers and actings; But over and above these, in that full, plain, and
complete Gospel-sense, wherein the spirit communicates not gifts only; natural,
as in all creatures; spiritual, as in Saints; but himself the Original any
Fountain of all spiritual Life and Light; these may clear the sense of my
judgment in this truth, and prevent any misunderstanding or perverting of it.

The principles and grounds guiding, or rather drawing me into this more
untroden path of judgment, are the Scriptures of the Gospel which I shall
propound, and in the light of the spirit open:

First testimony to the Spirits in-being in us.
1 Cor. 15.45. The first man Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam was made
a quickening spirit. The extent and sum of this Scripture may be gathered up,
and conceived in the four conceptions following.

First, Man is here declared to be brought forth by God, under a twofold
state; A first and second, an earthly and heavenly, a lower and higher, a
living soul, and a quickening spirit; the former state corrupts, decays, and
dies: the latter lives for ever and cannot see death.

Secondly, the first, earthly and lower state of Man consists in a perfection
and full measure of light, The perfection of the first Man, what it is.
holiness, and conformity to the whole will of God revealed under that present
administration; no error clouding his understanding, no pravity tainting his
will; knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness irradiating, filling and
beautifying his whole Man; yet all these make up but an earthly, lower state of
the first Adam made a living soul.

Thirdly, the state of the second spiritual Man (which is the state of all in
Christ) as being the second, heavenly, and higher state, must consist in the
advancement unto, and participation of something more, and more excellent then
the perfection of created gifts of light, holiness, and conformity; that being
no more then the fullness and stature of the first Adam, in his earthly and
lower state.

Fourthly, that which constitutes, perfects, and denominates the first Adam,
and all in him, is no more but a spark of light, a Divine breathing, a created
inspiration, called a living soul; that which perfects, constitutes, and
denominates the second Adam, and all in him, is the Fountain of light, the
increated inspiration; therefore called a quickening spirit: Christ and Saints
in him; wherein excelling Adam, and all natural men in him.
The sum of all is, herein is the second Adam (which is Christ and all Saints
in him) differing from, and excelling the first Man, (which is Adam and all
natural men in him) that the first Man has no more, but a communication of
gifts; the second of the quickening spirit himself; This is the first testimony
to this truth, that the spirit himself dwells in Saints.

SECT. III.
THE second testimony to this truth follows from Gal. The second testimony to
the spirits in-being in us.
2.20. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ
lives in me. Romans 8.13. If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, etc.

The Truth flowing from these Scriptures linked together, may be presented
under the ensuing Conclusions.

1. A Saint is both a dead and a living thing; as he came forth in the state
and nature of old Adam, which is earthly, and after the flesh, and so stands
up, and lives, and does all in a spirit, mind and principle contrary to God, as
a man under no government nor command of God, nor of any but his own will and
fleshly lusts; and so is out of God in nature, selfishness, and flesh: As thus,
he is dead, being crucified with Christ, who in the body of his flesh condemned
the state, nature, law, will and works of old Adam in all his Saints, and
abolished it in his death. Again, he is a living thing, as the heavenly and
divine life of Christ is revealed in him: So that now it is no more he, man or
creature, but Christ the son of God who lives, and acts, and rules him
whither and how he pleases.

Sins crucified perfectly and at once to faith; imperfectly and gradually to
sense. 1 Cor. 15.31.
2. Sins and the works of old Adam are crucified and slain two ways; in the
head, and in the members; in Christ they were perfectly slain once, and for
ever; in the flesh of Saints they are slain by a gradual mortification: He that
said, I am dead with Christ, said also, I dye daily; they are perfectly dead,
as in faith having put off the flesh, and put on Christ; they have yet somewhat
to kill, as in sense having flesh and a body of death to put off. This is clear
from Col. 3.3, 5. Romans 6.6, 12.

3. The same divine principle of life and righteousness which did slay and
abolish sins and death in the flesh of Christ, does slay and abolish sins and
death in the flesh of Saints; head and members, vine and branches having but
one life; as they live in and by one common principle, law or spirit of life,
so they have one death; and that which slays the one, slays the other.

But lest there may be obscurity or offense in words, I offer this explication
of my sense upon those expressions of abolishing sins and death in the flesh of
Christ, and in the flesh of Saints.

1. Hereunto does agree the witness of the Apostle, Romans 8.3. Ephesians. 2.15.

2. The son of God, or Christ manifest in flesh, must be considered to have put
on a twofold state.

Romans 8.3.
1. As he descended and came forth in the form and likeness of sinful flesh,
that is, in the name, nature, comprehension and reckoning of sinners; so he was
reckoned both by the Father and himself, to have put upon him the spirit and
life, mind and will, flesh and body of sinners; and so offered and resigned up
his life, will and body as the life, will and body of sinners to the eternal
will, to be delivered unto death. As we were in Christ under this state, Saints
how perfectly crucified and freed from the guilt and filth of sin.
so though in the life of flesh or sense we feel the body of sin yet to live in
us, as if it were not dead and crucified: yet in the life of faith, or in a
mystery, we reckon our natural man, life, flesh, sin, and the whole old Adam,
root and branch, Romans 6.4, 6, 11.
to be indeed and perfectly dead and buried, Col. 2.11, 12.
and abolished for ever out of the sight of God.

The second state of Christ was, as he ascended and left the world in the
reality and truth of a justified man. 1 Timothy 3.16. Heb. 7.26. Having taken up
not his own single person only, but in his person our nature, the nature of all
Saints into a sinless, justified and heavenly state of divine life and glory in
union with the Father: So while in flesh, sense or old man we are and live in
this world, Saints how raised up into a spotless state.
we reckon our selves in faith, mystery or new creature, to live no more in
this world, but to be raised up together with him, and freed from sin in the
filth as well as the guilt of it; Col. 2.12.20. Romans 6.7. Ephesians. 2.6. Joh. 14.20.
and to be set in the heavenly places, in a spotless, justified and heavenly
state, in union with the Father in Christ Jesus: This digression holds forth my
sense of abolishing sins in the flesh of Christ and Saints.

4. The Divine Nature dwelling in Christ was that principle which crucified our
sins in his flesh, which I do with submission conceive is thus to be
understood; That the Divine Nature in Christ crucified the spirit, life,
understanding, The Divine Nature crucified our sins in Christ.
reason, will and affections of the man Christ to it self; his reason as a man,
was not the light of his created mind and spirit, but the Eternal Wisdom in
him; his own will ceased and was not, but the Fathers will in him; he gave up
his whole man, and therein our earthly man, which as in us was active,
arbitrary, lordly and selfish, to be a mere passive thing unto the Divine
Nature: so that the Eternal Wisdom and Will revealed and taught all, commanded
and acted all in Christ; his created, humane wisdom, will and reason was
s^^owed up of the eternal wisdom and will in him, as ^rop of the great Ocean.
If then (as the third Conclusion depones) the same principle which abolished
our sins in the flesh of Christ, The Divine Nature crucifies sin in Saints.
does crucify sin in us: then the Divine Nature, or the same spirit of Christ,
does mortify or crucify sin in us, by his dwelling and manifesting himself in
us; and is daily abolishing our wisdom, reason, light, will and affections, by
the nearer approachings and clearer revealings of the eternal wisdom, light,
will and fullness in us, until Christ and Saints be made one complete, living,
holy Temple for the everlasting and blessed God to dwell in: Upon this ground I
must thankfully and gladly own and affirm, that the spirit himself dwells in
Saints, and is daily subduing them by dyings to themselves, to the flesh and
world, to be a Temple for the Divine Nature in his admirable and blessed Being
to dwell in.

SECT. IV.
The third testimony to the spirits in-being in Saints.
ANother witness to this truth is from Gal. 4.6. And because ye are sons, God
has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.
Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch then as Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same.

These Scriptures spiritually weighed together, do cast a mutual reflection each
upon other, and send forth this high and blessed truth.

Union of Christ and Saints is in substance.
1. That the union of Christ and Saints, stands in, or is by a mutual
participation each of others substance, or substantial natures, and not only
each of others qualifications or habits: And that this participation is twofold.

Of Christ's partaking of the nature and flesh of Saints.
One of Christ's partaking of the humane nature and flesh of Saints, marrying it,
and taking it into union with his Divine Nature; and in it, as in the root,
head and firstborn from the dead, sanctifying all Saints to be a Virgin,
Spouse and Bride for himself, of whom he says in a figure, Thou shall be
called Hephzibah, Isal. 62.4. Psalm. 132.14.
for the Lord delights in thee; and here will I ^^ell, for I have desired it.
And thus Christ and Saints are become one flesh, and one body, Ephesians. 5.30, 31,
32.

The other is of Saints partaking of the Divine Nature and Spirit of Christ, Of
Saints partaking of the nature and spirit of Christ. Isai. 54.5.
through faith taking it into union with their own nature, and in it receiving
God their Maker, the Lord of Hoasts, to be their Husband and everlasting
Bridegroom, to dwell in them: Therefore it is said, He that is joined unto the
Lord, is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.

2. That the ground and reason of both these participations of Christ with
Saints, and Saints with Christ, is one and the same in him and in them, viz. in
Christ, who partook of the flesh of Children, because one of the Children; in
Saints who partake of the spirit of the Son, because they are sons: Which
relation of Christ to Saints,
as it was truly and really perfected in that kindly and natural product of his
clothing himself upon with our flesh the seed of Abraham, without which he had
neither really been in himself, nor could have been truly manifest, nor
declared to be our Brother, or one of the Children: so the relation of Saints
to Christ being the same, and so of equal force and virtue, and so has like
effect and operation, is therefore truly and really perfected in that congenial
and natural product of their clothing themselves upon with his spirit, the
seed of God; without which Saints neither really are in themselves, nor can be
truly manifest or declared to be the Brethren, or the Sons of God. I do
therefore humbly affirm the Divine Subsistence of the spirit to dwell himself
in Saints; and not only by infused qualifications or habits; and this partaking
of the Divine Nature, to be that which only makes Saints truly to be, and
principally denominates and declares them to be the Sons of God.

SECT. V.
The fourth testimony to the spirit in Saints.
THE fourth witness to this truth is from 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are
the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? Ephesians. 2.21. In
whom all the building, etc. grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord.

1. All the Temples expressed and found in Scripture, are either Idol-Temples,
1 Chr. 10.10. 2 Chr. 36.7. Ier. 50.2. Acts 19.26, 27. Ioh. 2.19, 21. Ezekiel. 41.1.
which are three; the Temple of Dagon, the god of the Philistines; the Temple
of Bell and Merodach, at Babylon; the Temple of the goddess Diana, at Ephesus in
Asia: Or Temples for the true God; which are these; the Temple at Jerusalem
made with hands; the Temple of Christ's body; the Temple of Saints, 1 Cor. 3.16.
the Temple opened in Heaven, Rev. 11.19. the Temple revealed to Ezekiel in
visions, Rev. 21.10.
being the same with the Temple opened in Heaven; and is the new Jerusalem
descending out of Heaven from God.

The Temple at Jerusalem fulfilled in Christ and Saints.
2. The Temples of the true God carry this account in them; the Temple at
Jerusalem was the type, held forth God dwelling in flesh, as the invisible
mystery of the Gospel in a dead shadow, or external figure, as the visible
rudiment; the shadow or rudiment was to cease, and the mystery to be truly
fulfilled in him that was to come. The Temple of Christ's body, and Temple of
Saints, or flesh of Christ and Saints, was the antitype. The mystery of God
dwelling in flesh, typed and prefigured in the first Temple, is truly fulfilled
and brought forth in these second and third Temples: The Temple of Christ and
Saints perfected in the last Temple opened in Heaven.
But so, as in the flesh of Christ it is already manifest, revealed and
consummate; but in the flesh of Saints it is as yet covered, obscure and
inchoate. The Temple seen in vision by Ezekiel, and the Temple opened in
Heaven, or the new Jerusalem, which are the last Temples, and both one, are the
perfection and full growing up of the second and third Temples into one living
holy Temple for the Lord; or the mystery of God manifest in the flesh, now in
Saints, yet covered and inchoate, shall be in that last Temple revealed and
consummate: so that the first Temple had or held forth the Mystery in shadow
or letter; the second and third had it in spirit and truth, yet dark and
covered as in Saints; the last Temple takes off the darkness and covering from
off the third, and holds it forth revealed and consummate; the first had the
Mystery but in shadow, and so darkest; the second and third had it in truth,
and more clear; the last shall have it in perfection, and so in the brightness
of the perfect day.

Thirdly, the Idol-temples and true Temples do agree in this; those had in them
their god, their oracle, and their graven image, to whom all the Nations flowed
together, as to a god, Jer. 51.44. The true Temples have their Oracle, their
Glory, the true Divine nature and spirit dwelling in them, without which they
are not Temples, and so are common and unholy; the indwelling of the holy
Spirit being that only, which makes them Temples, and sanctifies them to be an
habitation for God: even as the body of Christ could not be called a Temple,
but from the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in it; so the Saints are not, nor
cannot be called Temples, but from the fullness of God filling them, and
dwelling in them; Ephesians. 3.19.
all which does hold forth a clear account of this truth, as worthy of all
acceptance, that the spirit or Divine nature it self dwells in Saints.

SECT. VI.
A Further witness to this truth, is from 1 Cor. 6.17. But he that is joined
unto the Lord is one spirit. Ephesians. 4.4. The fifth testimony to the spirit in
Saints.
There is one body and one spirit.

First, members of the natural body being many, are but one body, because
united together, and living in one common principle or spirit of life dwelling
in them; so Christ and Saints, being many members, are but one mystical body,
because united together, and living in one eternal spirit dwelling in them;
Christ is to the soul, what the soul is to the body.
the one being as real an union in spirit and Mystery, as the other is in
nature and reason; yea and much more real, for what the natural spirit is to
the body natural: that and far more is the Spirit of Christ to Saints, 1 Cor.
12.12, 13.

Union of Christ and Saints by created inspirations, only brings forth two
conclusions which destroy the reality of that union.

First conclusion


Secondly, he that brings down this union of Christ and Saints in one body by
one spirit, to be no more then an union of the created inspirations and habits
of one spirit, he must unavoidably affirm the conclusions following, both which
do debase, weaken, and quite disanul the reality of the union between Christ
and Saints, or Saints and Saints.

First, that the highest principle of life in Saints, as one body, is some
created gift, or habit of grace, or something below the spirit; for as in the
natural body, so it is in the body spiritual, the highest principle of life is
that only which unites many members into one body, and denominates them one
body; so that if it be not the Spirit himself, but some infused habit, which
unites Christ and Saints into one body, then that infused habit is the highest
principle of life in Saints, as one body of Christ; which assertion, besides
the irrationality of it, in making an habit or quality a principle of life, may
be judged the highest wrong and dishonor that can be to the body of Christ;
that the Body of bodies, the body of the Son of God, the Temple and City of
Jehovah, the eternal Spouse of Christ, the Lambs wife, the joy and praise of
all the earth, that body which shall be comprehensive of such stupendous
masses and eternal weight of glory, should have no higher, larger, no more
substantial principle of life, then a bundle of created habits; how does this
strip the glorious body of Christ Mystical of its glory and perfection, and
brings it into a condition below the very natural body of a man, whose highest
perfection of natural life consists in something more substantial and noble,
then any such thing as a mere habit or quality?

Second conclusion.
Secondly, if the union of Saints with Christ in one body, be only by infused
habits, then the Mysticalness and reality of the union comes to no more then a
moral union; the union of man with God, no more then the union of man with man,
or two lovers or friends; that is, of one heart, mind, or thought, in a moral
conjunction; and so the riches of the glory of that Mystery, which was hid
from Ages and Generations under the whole Law, and not made manifest until the
days of the New Testament, which is, Christ is in us, are no more but that
which has been common, Col. 1.26, 27.
and known amongst all men in Ages and Generations, Union of Christ in Saints,
was a Mystery hid until the days of the Gospel.
that is a moral union; wherefore this union of Christ and Saints, being a
Mystery so full of glory, and hid from the Prophets and Fathers under the Law,
must be something unseen, unknown to the world before; something more hi^h,
Divine, and perfect then moral union, that having been well known unto the
Saints before; and therefore it is Christ himself in Saints, that is, not only
an heart, will, or mind, like to Christ in Saints, but Christ himself, his
Divine nature and spirit in Saints; a Mystery so deep and glorious, that the
Disciples of Christ understood it not all the while he was with them in the
days of his flesh until some time after he was gone unto his Father, and in
that day they should know that he was in the Father, and they in him, and he in
them, Joh, 14.20. All which do give their witness to this glorious Mystery of
truth, that the spirit himself dwells in Saints.

SECT. VII.
ANother convincing witness to the spirits in-being in Saints, is from Joh.
14.16, 17. I will pray the Father, The sixth testimony to the spirit in Saints.
and he shall give you another Comforter, which shall be in you. Joh. 16.7. It
is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will
not come unto you, etc. God in Christ the great promise under the Law.


First, two great promises have been made and revealed to the world; one by the
Father under the Law, of sending the Messiah, or Emanuel, or God manifest in
the flesh of Christ, whose coming forth in the flesh, should put an end and
consummation to that administration of him under the Law; the other by Christ,
of sending his spirit into the flesh of Saints, God in Saints the great promise
under the Gospel.
whose first coming forth should put an end to Christ's dwelling among us in the
flesh, which accordingly came to pass; and his second approach, or coming
forth, should finish the Mystery of God, or the witness of Christ, under the
Letter and external administration of the Gospel, which yet is not come to
pass, but is that we wait for, until it be revealed in us.

Both these promises pass through the same states, conditions and changes.
Secondly, both these promises may be observed in their several succeeding
reasons, and proper day of their comings forth, to have trodden the same path
of Occurrences, and to have passed through the same states, conditions, and
changes, each after other; They are as follows.

The first promise, or God in flesh, and his threefold state.
The first Promise, or God coming forth in flesh, had his appearance,
disappearance, and reappearance; or had his time of witnessing, his time of
being cut off from witnessing, his time of finishing or sealing his witness by
his rising again, and ascending up into glory; in the first state or time God
was in Christ, yet veiled and hid in his weak flesh, obscure estate, and
uncomely form, from the wise and prudent Princes, Scribes, and Disputers of
this world, but known and manifest to a few Babes, and despised ones; which
state prepared him for his second state or time, wherein he was cut off, and
for a little while removed from the living; as if God had left him, or were not
in him; which captivity upon his flesh was light and joy to his enemies, but
darkness of sorrow and fear to his Disciples, insomuch that they doubted
whether the witness which he bore, while he was alive, that God was in him,
whether it was so or no, Luke 24.11.21. out of this state he hastened into his
third state or time, wherein he opened the vision, revealed the Mystery, and
gave a signal demonstration of the truth of all he had spoken or done, and
confirmed by spirit what he had affirmed by word; he made it clear, that God
came down in flesh, by his going up to God in flesh; that all Power and
Dominion both in heaven and earth was his, by going to his Father, sitting down
with him in his throne, and being seen no more.

The second Promise, or the spirits coming forth, and dwelling in the flesh of
Saints, treads in the very same footsteps with the other; The second promise,
or Christ in Saints, and his threefold state.
and in like manner, has his time of witnessing in Saints, his time of being
slain, or cut off from witnessing in Saints; his time of rising again in
Saints, and finishing his witness, by bringing forth in them the glory and
beauty of the new Jerusalem, which shall put an end to the external Ordinances
and Administrations of the Gospel; Revel. 21.22.
in the first state or time the spirit was in Saints, yet veiled and covered
under the low estate of earthen vessels, unlettered and simple fishermen, from
the High, Noble, and Prudent ones of this world; but known and manifest to a
few Churches and Saints of despised Gentiles: Joh. 14.20.
This first time or state expired upon the falling away from the faith, and
revealing of the Man of sin, 2 These. 2.3. Out of whose Throne and Kingdom of
the bottomless pit, came forth that smoke of powers, signs, and lying wonders,
as darkened the Day and Light of the Mystery of Christ in Saints, corrupted the
pure Doctrine, carried faith, Christ, and the spirit into captivity, in
spiritual Babylon; 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
and there exalted it self as the Queen of Nations, holding forth her golden
cup of fornications to all the Princes and Kings of the earth, whereby they
were enticed to give their power unto her, and do use their scepters and
authorities, to suppress, persecute, and slay Christ, or the eternal spirit in
Saints: this time or state now is, and is not yet expired: and as the Captivity
which was upon the flesh of Christ in the grave, caused in his Disciples
darkness, and mourning, and fear, that God was not in him; so the Captivity
that now is upon the spirit of Christ in Saints, causes all this darkness, and
fear in Believers, that the spirit himself is not in them.

The third state or time of the spirit in Saints shall open the vision, reveal
the Mystery, consume that wicked, the Queen of Nations, demonstrate to Saints,
and to all the world, that the spirit or Divine nature dwells in Saints, by
revealing the Divine glory of Christ in them, Revel. 21.11.23. Isa. 60.1, 2.
when he himself shall be admired in us, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. of all the world, Rev.
21.24. Isa. 60.9. Insomuch, that the Nations shall bow to the name and glory of
God himself in Saints, Isa. 60.14. And if any will not serve the Lord in them,
and them in the Lord, they shall perish, Isa. 60.12. This time or day of the
spirit is yet to come, and is called the brightness of his coming or day of
Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2.8.
which day of Christ I would not have understood to be of the time of the end,
when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God the Father, 1 Cor.
15.24.28. The day of Christ to come, is not the last end of all. Dan. 7.14.
Revel. 1.7.
and the Son himself be subject to the Father, and God all in all; but of the
time when the Son of man shall be brought to the ancient of days, and come
forth in the clouds of heaven, and shall receive Dominion, and Glory, and a
Kingdom that all People, Nations, and Languages shall serve him; which will be
when he comes forth out of the womb of the invisible light and love of God, and
shall receiv as it were a visible inauguration and anointing upon his head, and
shall come forth into the Kings galleries of the clouds of heaven, and the high
places over all the earth; Zach. 14.9.
and all the Saints shall come forth with him, Zach. 14.9. 1 Cor. 15.23. and
shall with him receive from the ancient of days, judgment, and authority; and
the Kingdom, and Dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven,
Dan. 7.7, 8, 23, 24, 25, 26. Revel. 13.1, 5, 6, 7. Revel. 17.12, 13, 17.
shall be given unto the Saints, Dan. 7.22.27. And this is the Kingdom that
shall consume and destroy the fourth great kingdom, or Monarchy of the fourth
beast, which is Mystery, Babylon; and shall redeem the Saints out of spiritual
captivity, and drive away, and scatter all ignorant disputes, strife, erring
spirits, different judgings, and bitternesses of men, which are the smoke in
the Temple, that the Lord cannot be seen, and a thick cloud to this day upon
all, or most Saints, that they cannot read nor understand the Mystery of God
written in their own hearts, which is Christ, the spirit, the Divine nature
dwelling in them.

Thirdly, Christ's promise to his Disciples of sending the Comforter, the spirit
to dwell in them; as it had an higher and further end and sense, then that the
spirit should be sent only to fill up the place, and supply the absence of
Christ gone away to the Father; The sending of the Spirit upon Christ's
withdrawing, an higher enjoyment then his presence with them in flesh,
therefore more then in gifts and graces.
so it calls for a deeper, and further interpretation.

The coming forth of the spirit into Saints, and dwelling in them, is promised
as a more high, rich, and perfect enjoyment, then the presence of Christ with
them, in that present state of flesh unglorified, which appears in that he
said, he must withdraw in flesh, to make way for his coming in spirit; wherein
he did not only intend to put away their sorrows for his departure from them,
but to fill them with joy and desires for his going away; because I have said
these things, does sorrow fill your heart? I tell you, though I my self should
desire to continue with you, I should herein do you wrong; for it is expedient
and better for you, not for me only, but for you, that I go away, then abide
with you; because if I go, the Comforter will come; but if I go not away, he
will not come; and so my stay will serve to nothing but to keep off and shut
the door against a more perfect and divine enjoyment; as much as an enjoyment
of me in spirit is more perfect and excellent then an enjoyment of me in flesh,
Ioh. 16.6, 7.

The sending therefore of this spirit, was somewhat an higher thing then only
in gifts and graces; and it is yet more manifest, when Christ said, Joh. 16.22.
I have many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now: Christ in
Saints, a truth that could not be born in the day of Christ's presence in flesh
What some of those things were which could not be born, he touches upon, Joh.
14.26. which words in a full sense are as if he had said, While I am with you
in this state of flesh, if I should tell you, that as I am now, I am in my
Father, and you in me, and I in you, you would not believe me, nor bear such
things; howbeit when the spirit is come unto you, he will reveal the truth unto
you; and then in that day ye shall both know and believe it, that I am in you,
and you in me; though now this knowledge of me being a knowing of me after the
spirit, is too high for you, who yet know me only after the flesh, and so
cannot conceive, while you see and know me only in and after the flesh, how I
should be in you, or you in me, or I in my Father: Therefore the time being at
hand appointed of my Father, that this carnal and low estate you are in shall
pass away, and a more high and spiritual come forth; for this cause I must
withdraw in flesh, that you may know and enjoy me in more glory and spirit;
Christ's presence in flesh gives place to his presence in spirit. God glorifies
himself in man, to glorify man in himself.
for now you gaze upon my external form, and love, and know, and converse with
me as a man without you: but then you shall know and converse with me as a
spirit in you: And now you see me alone, as away from my Father; and you look
upon your selves, and I, and the Father, as separate and divided Beings; but
then you shall know that my Father, and I, and you are one, and perfect in one;
and that I am not alone, but I and my Father in me; and that you are not by
your selves, but I and the Father in you: Which though all this blessedness and
union be already so in you and in me, yet you neither know it to be so, nor is
it manifest that it is so; nor are you able to bear my words, should I tell you
more of it: therefore I must withdraw, that he may come into you, who will let
you see all this to be so, and more then I shall now tell you of, or you will
believe.

And now what is the sum of all? Are all these things the withdrawing of Christ
in flesh, to make way for his appearance in spirit; his taking them off from
desires to enjoy him in flesh, and drawing them up to desire his coming in
spirit; his laying forth the unprofitableness and lowness of the one, and the
expediency and glory of the other; his showing their enjoyment of him in flesh
to be carnal, their knowledge and light carnal, Joh. 16.22.
and many things, that is, the whole volume of the heavenly mysteries of the
Father in Christ, of Christ in Saints, and Saints in Christ, was too high for
them; And on the contrary, the enjoyment of him in spirit so high and clear,
that they should know all mysteries, and all truth, which in the time of his
presence in flesh they could not bear; I say again, are all these things no
more? do they come to no more then the sending and dwelling of the spirit only
in gifts and graces? Or rather do they not all make up this truth, and present
it to us with open face, that Christ sends the Comforter, the Spirit himself,
to dwell in Saints in his own Divine Nature?

SECT. VIII.
The seventh testimony to the spirit in Saints.
A Further testimony to this truth, is from Romans 8.17, 18, 19. And if Children,
then heirs; heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ.

1. That which the Father has of old ordained and prepared for them whom he
loves, is to glorify man in himself, that is, to raise him up into a state of
the highest happiness and perfection that the Creature can be capable of, or
that can be communicated from God to the Creature: which is for a man to
possess the glory of God within him, so as the Eternal Fullness of the Divine
Nature and Love does manifest it self, and flow into him in such a divine
manner of full glory and perfect brightness, All objects and appearances dye
out of us, as God appears in us.
that all objects and appearances of other things, knowledge, thoughts and
imaginations, are all done away, and swallowed up by the appearance of him who
is all, even as the light of a dying spark is swallowed up of the burning
flame, and the Lord alone is the only thing seen, felt and embraced by them;
any sight or vision, taste or possessing below God himself, cannot stand with
the glory laid up for us; because there the light of Eternity, or of the
eternal Godhead, will open it self in us, through us, and over us, as the
eyelids of the morning; and then he shall no longer be hid, for we shall see
him as he is: It were not glory nor happiness, if there were any covering to
obscure or hide God from us, that we could not see him surpassing, and
gloriously reigning over all. And this seeing of God as he is, Seeing God as he
is, how to be understood.
which is the glory laid up for us, must not be conceived nor understood after
an humane manner, or after the vain Philosophy of this world, to be a
contemplation of God, as of some glorious appearance or show of him without us:
but it is the Divine Nature it self dwelling in us, and filling our seeings,
tastings and knowings with nothing below, besides or less then himself; he will
set his own glory in us, and love it in us, and us in it, and will always
behold himself in us; not his image only, as something distinct, but himself;
and so as he will be our joy, we shall be his joy; he will be our Husband, we
shall be his beloved Spouse; he will give us nothing but himself, and we shall
taste of nothing but himself; his love unto us is like a fire, it will burn up
whatsoever has ever separated between himself and us; we shall be so in one
another, that he will be in us as a burning fire, and we shall be in him as a
fire of love; his delights to Eternity will be spent upon us, and the great
deep shall be opened unto us; and we shall be a Temple for God, and he will be
a Temple for us: Such things as these are some of that glory which is laid up
for them that love him; which is now in this present state held forth to our
weakness under earthly similitudes of Kingdom, Inheritance, Crown of Glory,
purchased Possession; and in like manner we are called Kings and Heirs of the
Kingdom prepared of the Father.

2. The way wherethrough God would bring up man into this state, as to glorify
man in himself, was by first glorifying himself in man, Ioh. 13.32. that God
might glorify man in Heaven, in his own life and spirit, and in the things
above, he would first glorify himself in Earth, in the flesh and death of man,
and in the things below. God would first come down, be seen and known, and be
all in man in this state of things below, which is earthly, weak and dying,
before man should come up, be seen and known to have all in the state of things
above, which is Heavenly, Divine and Everlasting: God would first appear, and
tread upon, and reign in our Land, which is nothing but briars and thorns,
before we must tread upon and reign in his Land which flows with milk and
honey; the crucifyings, wastings, weaknesses and nothingness of man were as a
clothing wherewith God covered himself in Christ, wherein God was Priest and
King, that he might cloth us upon with his eternal perfections, and
transcendent excellencies, and in them make us Priests and Kings. Man must
first become a covering of weakness upon God for a short time, that God might
become a covering of glory upon man for ever; the Eternal spirit came forth
clothed upon with the likeness of sinful flesh, an uncomely despised form,
with death and the grave, which were our old Egyptian vile habit; that they
being found upon him, he might rent them all to pieces as a veil; which was
signified by his Grave-cloaths left behind him in the grave; Luke 24.12.
and cloth us upon with the garments of Sion, the righteousness of Saints, his
own Glory: All this God brought to pass first in the man Christ, who was moved
and led to and fro, as the Divine Nature acted and guided him; Love in God from
Eternity, but cleared up to the world by Christ.
who was made as a weaned Child, that in all things he suffered the will of God
in his flesh: Which Will I humbly conceive to be this; God had loved mankind
with an everlasting love; but through sin, bondage, a condemning Law; and death
breaking into the world through one man: this shut up and concealed these
everlasting affections from us, insomuch that we hid our selves from God, as
from one who burned with anger against us; therefore that the loving Father
might clear up his love unto us, to be such a love as could not be changed, he
comes forth, and visits, and speaks with us in the Man Christ, and in him
slayes the Leviathan, breaks the serpents head, How it was done.
abolisheth sin, death, this world, and all flesh; and rides in triumph over
all principalities, and powers, and enemies of man's glory; and in him, burns up
with the fire of his love to man, all partitions, veils, Law of commandments,
sin, and whatsoever might seem to separate him and us asunder; and after all,
takes us up into the chariot of his spirit, and carries us away into his
infinite Mansions of eternal Love; and all this he did in the Man Christ in our
sight: Further bidding us, that whatsoever we have seen him do, in and upon
Christ, that we reckon it all done for us and in us; and telling us, that
though he has done all this in the person of Christ, yet it is not for Christ,
but for man; and that what we see or behold in Christ, whether dyings in the
flesh, or glory in the Father, that we bring all into our selves, and possess
in our selves the same dyings in the flesh that he did, and the same glory of
the Father that he does possess; for as he came down not for himself but for
us, so he ascended and sat down in the Fathers bosom, not for himself alone,
but for us; so that whosoever would know what is laid up for Saints; yea, what
is in Saints already, though to most of them yet unknown; let them look within
the veil, that is the flesh of Christ what he has, what is in him; for all
that spirit, love and glory, which is now in and upon Christ manifest, revealed
and enjoyed, the same is already in Saints, yet invisible, and hid up in their
faith and union: and in this respect is Christ called the Head and Conduct of
our salvation, and our forerunner into the heavenly places; and in like manner
Saints are called heirs and fellow-heirs with Christ in the same kingdom and
glory.

Thirdly, Saints being fellow-heirs with Christ of God, that is of the same
Divine nature, as he came to the inheritance, after the same manner shall they
come to it; the steps he did tread, Divine Nature as in Christ first veiled,
then manifest; so is it in Saints.
they shall go in the same; the Divine nature did not withdraw, but as it were
retired it self, as to the perfect enjoyment of it from Christ, until he had
passed through the death of his flesh: then the glory of the Divine nature,
with which he was glorified before the world was, did break forth in him; it
was always in him, and now and then sent out some sharp glances through him,
for the convincing of the world, and he always enjoyed it in such an
enjoyment, as enabled him to fulfill the will of his Father on earth; but the
clearer and higher breakings forth of it in him, was not until the dyings of
his flesh were ended; so it is, and so shall it be in Saints; they are heirs
with Christ of the Divine nature, wherewith they shall be glorified together
with him, and they are already Partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and
are filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. but it is as it were
retired, and much under concealment from Saints, until they have fulfilled the
sufferings which are behind in their flesh; and if now and then some
unspeakable light and ravishing vision spring forth in a Saint; yet it is but
as in a glance, or God passing by and tarrying not; but the openings of this
book, and the manifestation of this inheritance, whereof we are heirs with
Christ, that is of the spirit, the Divine nature in us; this is reserved for a
while in the Fathers power, until the revealing of the sons of God; which will
be, Manifestation of the sons of God is the Divine Nature revealed in us.
when the Divine nature, which is now in Christ openly, in Saints covertly,
shall flow forth and be revealed in us; then Saints shall be manifest to be
what now indeed they are, but in faith only, not in manifestation, truly and
verily the sons of God; that is, when they shall appear with him in the same
glory of the Divine nature; and the glory of Christ the Son shall be the glory
of all the sons; 1 Cor. 15.28.
one Father, one God all in all.

From all which it is clear to him that loves to see the truth, not through the
mists, veils or disguises of subtle chaffy distinctions, of science falsely so
called, of glosses received by tradition, of prepossessed principles, rudiments
or opinions; of bitterness, passion, rash prejudicacy, and overhasty
censoriousness, but as a child wained from all these breasts, desires to see
the truth in the simplicity, purity, and undefiledness of it; to him it is
clear with no other arguments, then its own beams of light, that the same
glory, or spirit, or Divine nature which is in Christ, is also in Saints; he
being not heir alone, but they fellow-heirs with him.

SECT. IX.
A Further testimony to the truth of this Mystery is gathered from Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13. Eighth testimony to the spirit in Saints.
And he gave some Apostles, etc. for the perfecting of Saints, etc. till we all
come in the unity of the faith, etc. Col. 1.28. That we may present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus, which perfection is Christ in us, v. 27. Revel. 21.3.
Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, God
himself shall be with them.

First, Truth is, that Mystery that is to be made manifest, that of God that
is to be revealed, Col. 2.2, 3.
the deep things of God that are to be brought to light, In-dwelling of God
himself in man, is the end of all truth, and administrations of truth.
called also the Mystery hid in God, the Mystery of God, and of the Father,
and of Christ; treasures of wisdom and knowledge: the end and perfection of
which truth, and of all light, science, knowledge, administrations, spiritual
gifts, and powers, is the revealing and in-dwelling of God himself in them.

Secondly, the way and manner how this truth is brought forth into the world,
is, through various ways of administration; through doctrine, divine worship,
revelation, letter, and spiritual gifts; all which serve to administer truth,
and things in heaven to men on earth; and as truth is brought forth at sundry
times, in diverse manners, in different degrees of light, and is sometimes more
dark, shadowed, and legal; after more clear, naked, and Evangelical; so is the
administration varied and changed from one degree of light to another.

Thirdly, the spirit bringing forth truth through the administration, gives
unto men light and knowledge, The end of spiritual gifts.
spiritual gifts and powers (otherwise called illuminating and sanctifying
graces) which are given to this end, that through them men may become changed,
sanctified, and made capable to know, believe, glorify and own that light, and
truth which is brought forth under that particular administration; and as the
administration carries in it more or less light, grace, and holiness; so is the
illumination and sanctification of Saints, under that administration differing
in the measure of light, grace, and holiness.

Measuring line of all administrations without, and gifts within, what it is.
Fourthly, administrations do differ from, and exceed one another in glory, as
they carry in them more or less of that highest end, whereunto they do subserve
and administer, which is the completing of Saints to one, living, holy Temple
for the Lord, and God himself dwelling in them; in like manner the Saints do
exceed one another in light, love, and holiness, as their union and communion
in and with God, and God in and with them, is in some more then others, more
complete and perfected: the Ministry of the Prophets, had more glory then that
of Moses; the Ministry of John more then the Prophets; he that is least in the
kingdom of heaven more then all; one excelled another, as they had in them the
nearer approachings, and clearer dawnings of the Day, and Sun of righteousness
upon the world.

The end of all administrations and gifts.
Fifthly, so that the end of all administrations without us, and all spiritual
gifts within us, is to bring the Lamb and the Bride together, the spirit and
the Spouse into one; to perfect and finish up the Mystery which is already in
Saints, yet hid, Ioh. 14.20.
which is Christ in the Father, Saints in Christ, and Christ in Saints: the
present time is a time wherein Christ is gone to the Father, hid in God, as it
were at a distance from Saints, and therefore a time of darkness and of the
shadows of the Night, 2 Pet. 1.19.
stretched upon the world; administrations and letter without, and gifts of
grace within, are as lesser lights or stars shining in this dark Night or
world, until the Lord himself come into Saints and swallow them up; as an
imperfect, lesser, and weaker glory is swallowed up of a greater and more
perfect; or the Morning Star of the Sun: so that faith, hope, knowledge,
prophesies, etc. can no more abide, when that which is perfect is come, then
the stars can abide in the clearest day, 1 Cor. 13.8, 9, 10. These things thus
considered, do contribute their illustration to the further clearing of this
Truth, that the spirits in-dwelling in Saints which is now in them, and shall
abide in them for ever, is somewhat higher then gifts and graces; for these
must be done away; and if something higher, it can be no less then the spirit
and God himself dwelling in them.

SECT. X.
THE spirits in-being in Saints is further manifestly held forth in 2 Cor.
13.5. Know you not your own selves, The ninth testimony to the spirit in Saints.
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates? Romans 8.9. Now if
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

First, no Creature, no good, God makes not happiness, sin makes not misery,
unless within us.
no not the highest good it self, which is God, does make man or his soul
endued with virtue, good or blessed, so long as it is without the soul: in like
manner no sin, nor unbelief, nor spot defiles a man, or makes him reprobate or
miserable, except it be within him; if there be no light in the eye, the body
is darkness, though the light shine round about; the enjoyment of a thing is
perfected in oneness with the thing; God is Light, Love and Blessedness: yet as
he is withomt me, or separate from me, so I neither see his Light, taste his
Love, nor am blessed with his blessedness: but as he is within me, and is
known, loved, felt and perceived by me; darkness within makes darkness without;
the whole earth is full of his glory; yet most men see not this glory in the
earth without, because they see not his glory within them: the glory of nature
men can behold, because they have the eye of Nature, Eccl. 3.11.
or the light of Reason planted in them: but the glory of God in nature they
cannot see, because they have not the light of God, the spirit dwelling in them.

Secondly, Gospel Truths, as they are Doctrines preached by the voice of man,
or as Scriptures written upon a Book without; as so, they neither enlighten,
sanctify nor save, being or coming in words, sound or letter only; but as they
are preached and written by the spirit of the living God in the heart, so they
give life and blessedness, being now become spirit and life in a man. True
knowledge of Christ, what. Joh. 6.63.
The obedience of Christ in the flesh, and his sufferings at Jerusalem, if I
know them only as acted and fulfilled in flesh without me; as the flesh alone
of Christ without the spirit profits me not, Not as without or after the flesh:

But as within or after the spirit.


so this external knowledge of Christ being but a knowledge of him after the
flesh, will not profit me to redemption or justification: but if I know his
obedience, death and resurrection in that power and spirit which wrought in
him, and do know that the same power and spirit is in me, and in all those that
do believe; then I come to have, Ephesians. 1.19.
and see, and know the obedience and death of Christ as things within me,
having in me the same spirit which wrought them in Christ; which spirit can
make that which in Christ was wrought afar off, to be near, yea present within
us; and so I come to have the very power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings working in my flesh, being made conformable unto
his death, Phil. 3.10. that is, his death working death in my flesh after the
same manner as death wrought in his flesh.

Thirdly, God declared himself to be the omnipotent Creator, by the Creation, a
work of Omnipotency; to be Lord and King, by acts of Dominion and Sovereignty;
Christ declared himself to be the son of God, Romans 1.4.
by his resurrection from the dead, a work of power: so he declares himself to
be spirit and life, by crucifying flesh, and abolishing death in Saints; a work
of the quickening spirit. Now that whereby God or Christ declares or manifests
himself to us to be what he is, by and through that manifestation only he is to
be truly seen and known of us to be what he is: God, or any glory or excellency
of God, is not known of the world, God not known by a form of knowledge, but by
spirit in us.
but by the comings forth of glory and majesty into the world: so neither the
Father nor Christ are known of Saints, but by the comings forth of the spirit
into Saints; so that God may be better tasted then known, felt and enjoyed then
conceived of, for he passes all knowledge; and that is true spiritual
knowledge of God and Christ, which is not so much a conceiving of him in a form
of knowledge, or notion of the mind, as when the Divine Nature it self is
manifest, felt and perceived in us.

Divine spiritual knowledge is not so much a work of the understanding, as the
thing it self known living in us. And therefore in natural things the
Understanding is active; the Object, or thing known, passive; because the
Understanding is more noble then the Object: but in spiritual things the
Understanding is passive, the Object active, because the Object is more noble
then the Understanding: Man in knowing Creatures is active, in knowing God is
passive.
So I account that knowledge of God to have least of nature or man in it, to be
the purest, highest and most spiritual knowledge, wherein a man's mind is most
resigned, child-like and passive; and God, Christ or Spirit altogether active
in him. It is said therefore in one place, After that ye knew God, Gal. 4.9.
or rather are known of God; the Son only can reveal the Father, the Spirit
only can reveal the Son; In thy light we shall see light; the Light whereby we
see God, Grace, Love, the deep things of God, is not the eye of man, for that
cannot see; nor the ear, for that cannot hear; nor the heart, reason or spirit
of a man, for that cannot conceive it: but the Spirit himself dwelling in us is
our eye, our light, whereby we search, know, discern and judge all things, 1
Cor. 2.9, 10, etc.

I read the Letter, I hear the Word of Truth in the outward testimony, that
Christ is Lord, that God is Father, that the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts; that we dwell in him, and he in us: but I cannot as a man call Christ
Lord, but by the spirit, 1 Cor. 12.3. nor God Father, but by the spirit, Romans
8.15. Nor can I say, that the love of God is shed abroad in my heart, but by
the spirit given into me, Romans 5.5. Nor do I know that he dwells in me, or I in
him, but hereby, because he has given me of his spirit, 1 Ioh. 4.13. And so I
come to know all these things, and all Truth, and all Gospel-mysteries which
appertain to life and godliness, by having the spirit dwelling in me; that is,
1 Ioh. 2.20, 27.
by having that dwelling in me, which is the substance, life, activity,
fullness, glory and power of all Truth, and all Gospelmysteries; for the Spirit,
Father, Son and Truth, and our knowing of them, are all one; and where truth
is, there is the Spirit; and where the Spirit is, there is truth.

True knowledge of God is by God his dwelling in us.
Fourthly, What then is true knowledge of God, and true blessedness, but to
enjoy him whom we know, and to have him to be in us, in our soul, what our soul
is in and to our body? and he is then truly known and apprehended by us, when
he is that in us, and through us, and over us, what we know and apprehend him
to be; Joh. 8.32.
and then we know Truth, when the Truth sets us free; that is, as Truth in it
self is liberty, and largeness, and blessedness; and there are no bonds nor
sorrow in it: So we then come to know Truth to be so, when it brings in its own
liberty and blessedness into us, setting us free from the bonds of sin and
sorrows, flesh and death: And so Gospel-mysteries are then truly known of us,
when the substance, glory and life of the heavenly things themselves are
presented to us, and revealed in us. And as our truest knowing and seeing of a
thing, is the manifestation of the thing it self unto us; as of Light, which is
best seen and perceived by its own beams piercing the eye; so our truest
knowing, and perfectest seeing of God, as Light, Fullness, Wisdom and Power, is
by the out-shining of the Light it self, and Glory of God into us, 1 Cor. 4.6.
for we know not God as the everlasting Light, unless we know him to be Light in
Darkness, Light in Heaven, Light on Earth, Light in all the World, Light in us
and through us: Nor do we know him as perfect fullness, if we know him as here
and there, in Christ and not in Saints: but as in Heaven, in Earth, in us, and
through, and over and beyond all things, most eminently in Christ and Saints.
These are a further account and reason of my faith, joy and hope, That the
spirit himself in his own glorious power and Divine Nature dwells in Saints,
however as yet not acknowledged by many of themselves.

SECT. XI.
THE last record to the spirits in being in Saints, Tenth testimony to the
spirit in Saints.
that I shall present, is the sweet and heavenly testimony which is in Gal.
2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Col. 3, 4. When Christ who is
our life shall appear.

The Divine life of Christ, or the life of God in Christ, is not the life of
Christ alone as one single person, but the life of Christ's mystical body of
Saints, Christ and Saints have but one life, the eternal spirit.
whereby he and they live in one: All that Christ received was given to him,
not as single and alone, but as Head of a spiritual Body; and so his life and
fullness is not the life and fullness of one, but of many in one. The Father
revealed his fullness in Christ, not that it should stop and be confined or
restrained there, that is, in the flesh of Christ as one man; but that through
him it should proceed, flow out and be poured forth upon all the Children: And
so as the Father in Christ is the life of Christ, or he by whom Christ lives;
Joh. 6.57.
so Christ's in Saints is the life of Saints; not the flesh of Christ, but God
manifest in his flesh, or the Father in Christ, by whom Saints live: And so
Christ is the way through which God comes down into Saints, not in created
influences or graces only, but in the spring of influences, in the fountain of
graces; in his own essential love, nature and fullness, filling them in a divine
and incomprehensible manner; even as the natural spirit or soul of man is in
the head, and not there only, but diffused in and through all the members, and
is the life of all; in which the members being many, become and conspire into
one body: So is the spirit of God in Christ the Head, and thence and
therethrough shed abroad, not by infusions only, as some distinct effects, but
by himself into all the members, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.
and is the life of all, in and for which they being many become one spiritual
body: And if it be not so, is not the union between the head and members of a
body natural more real and substantial then the union of Christ and Saints? or
is not Christ the head of all things less to his Church then the head of an
earthly Creature to its body? and if Christ be in Saints by created workings
only, and not by spirit, then all those figures, allegories, and parabolical
similitudes of Vine and Branches, Husband and Wife, Head and Members, chosen
and expressed by the spirit in Scriptures to shadow out the union of Christ and
Saints, have much more in them then is in the mystery or truth typed and
shadowed by them.

If Christ himself be not in Saints, no life in Saints.
Secondly, if Christ himself be not in Saints, there is no life in them; graces
separate from Christ are dead things; faith, love, humility, zeal, if they have
not Christ in spirit wrapped up in them, are no more faith nor love, then the
body of man without the soul is a man: Graces are to Christ what the chanel is
to the river; cut off the stream that runs in the chanel from the river, and
the chanel becomes as the parched land, full of weeds and briars: So graces are
the passage through which Christ lets out himself; if he shuts up, they are
dried up and wither: The graces of a moral man have glory and beauty in
appearance; but having nothing above man, that is, not having Christ living and
flowing in them, they are clouds without water, wandering stars, trees without
fruit, whited walls; their faith is the dead faith of Pharisees; their holiness
the holiness of Hypocrites; their beauty in the flesh is the beauty of Harlots;
graces without Christ in them, leave a man dead, his soul empty, all his
worship carnal, until Christ awake, and bring in himself in spirit and glory;
and then my soul makes me like the Chariots of Amminadab, and my feet are
become like Hinds feet, and I shall tread upon all high places, and nothing
shall be able to hurt us, because of the Anointing which dwells in us.

Thirdly, it is worthy of consideration, whether the state of the new Creature
in Christ be no more nor higher then the state of the first man in his pure
Paradisical nature, before the transgression; if no more, then the
administration of light and glory from God upon Adam, and Adams union with that
light, was as high and spiritual as is the light and union which by the Gospel
is administered to a man in Christ; and the first man who was made but a living
soul, had as much glory in him as the second man who is made a quickening
spirit: Second Adam and all in him, wherein excelling the first Adam, and all
in him.
but if the new Creature does excel the first Adam, then the pre-eminence must
consist both in internals and externals, that is, in perfections within him,
and privileges without him: And this is manifest that the new Creature excels
first in privilege, in that Adam was under a Law of works, a Covenant that
might be broken; the new Creature is under a Law of grace, a Covenant that
cannot be broken, a better and surer Covenant; better in this, that it was
established upon better promises, Heb. 8.6. This new and better Covenant is the
excellency of a man in Christ above Adam under the old faulty Covenant, as to
external privilege: the better promises of this new and better Covenant, are
the excellency of the new Creature above Adam, as to internals or perfections
within him; which promises are, I will put my spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my judgments, and do them, Ezekiel. 36.27. Isa. 59.21. Heb. 8.10. 2
Cor. 3.6.
The excellency and dignity of the new Covenant above the old, is, in that the
old Covenant ministered the letter only, and could not cause man to walk in
righteousness; the new Covenant ministers the spirit into Saints, (...) so
causes them to walk in righteousness, and that the Covenant cannot be broken:
New Covenant ministers spirit into us, therefore cannot be broken; the Law the
letter only, therefore broken.
by all which it appears, that the first man broke the Covenant he was under,
because it put not the spirit into him; and also the new Covenant cannot be
broken, because it is the ministration of the spirit, and puts it into Saints:
so that whosoever takes the spirit himself out of Saints, either brings the
Saints back again into the old Covenant, or he makes the new Gospel Covenant
into which they are redeemed, to be the ministration, not of the spirit, but of
the letter only: And as the glory of the new Covenant above the old is in this,
2 Cor. 3.7,8.
that it is the ministration of the spirit, the Law but of the letter only; so
the new Creature has in him more glory and perfection then the first man, in
this, that the spirit himself is put into him; created gifts only, which might
be depraved and lost, were all that was put into the first Adam: And this shall
finish and close up this cloud of witnesses, which do all give testimony, and
set their seal unto this Truth; not in the sense of any carnal distinction,
whereunto it is by the infirmity of the Saints unwarily, by the disputers and
wisdom of this world wrongfully perverted: but in the simple and Gospel-sense
of the plain and sound words wherein it is expressed, That the spirit of
Christ, which is the Divine Nature, dwells in Saints, though covered and yet
undiscerned by most of them.

SECT. XII.
THE in-dwelling of the spirit in Saints in this simple and plain sense,
carries in it a nearness and union between God and the Creature, so mysterious,
high and inconceivable to flesh and blood, that the man of sin, who sees by no
higher light then Nature, and therefore not able to judge of spiritual things,
least of all of the highest of spiritual things, God dwelling in Saints, and
Saints in God, is not able to bear it, that is, this union; the truth that is
in it being a light so clear, that it takes off the veil, discovers the
mystery of iniquity which (...) at veil, stains and shames the pride and glory
of his Kingdom, and utterly strips, shakes and undoes all flesh: Spirit himself
in Saints, why so sentenced and excommunicated out of the world.
Wherefore that he may quench a light so glorious, and keep all the world under
the cloud of thick, spiritual darkness, and the yoke of bondage unto humane
inventions, commandments of men, will-worships, pharisaical, legal
righteousness, which are the arm and glory of his Kingdom, and horn of his
power; he judges, sentenceth and excommunicates it out of the world under the
most odious notions and imputations of blasphemy, damnable doctrine, This truth
why so dreaded of Saints.
making the Creature God, equal with Christ; and under these black and
abominable disguises that which is the beauty of all Gospel Truths is so
deformed, that it looks terrible and dreadful unto most Saints, being but weak,
and Children in the faith and knowledge of the mystery; insomuch that we are
ready to say of it, It is a spirit; and to fly from it, though it be the nearer
approachings of our dear Savior: Wherefore for the sake of such, that they may
see out of obscurity, and the cause of Truth, that it may shine out of
darkness, and scatter all those veils and lying imputations that have made it
dreadful to all men: I shall enquire into the strongest reasons that I know to
be against this Truth, and I hope, give some account, that they are false
accusations, and lying words against the Truth; at the best but shadows of
Reason, to blind the eyes of the weak from seeing their own liberty and glory.

SECT. XIII.
THEY are these which follow:

If the Spirit or Divine Nature it self dwells in Saints, First counter-reason
against the spirit in us.
then every Saint is God, and so to be worshipped as God: even as the Divine
Nature dwelling in Christ, he is therefore God, and so is and ought to be
worshipped as God.



1. That the in being of God in Saints does not make them become God, no more
then the in-being of God in other Creatures makes them God; his glory fills both
Heaven and Earth; he only knows and comprehends himself fully and perfectly;
the lengths, depths and bredths of this stupendous Being cannot be seen or
comprehended by the Creature: Therefore he comes forth in the Creation, as it
were clothed upon with a garment; the whole world is but as his vesture or
raiment, that shall be changed; and he that is Eternal Light, Love and Wisdom,
clothes himself with it, as within an house or tabernacle wherein he will dwell
for a time; that through it, as through a little Orb or Globe, he may let out
some pieces and portions of the external excellencies of his incomprehensible
Godhead; he stretches forth the Heavens as a Curtain, and spreads out the
Earth as a Tent to dwell in, and the depths are his Pavilion; and thus all
Nature is filled with the glory and majesty of the Lord, and he is in it and
through it; yet is not the world God, but he that is in the world is God; and
the world of Nature is no more but the place of the soles of his feet, or his
lower Tabernacle wherein he sets his dwelling place for a time, until he awake,
and make all things new, and come forth in that higher glory which the old
Heavens and Earth shall be too narrow to receive, too short to contain.

2. The in-being of God, or the Divine Nature, made not the man Christ, or the
flesh of Christ become God; God and man became one in a mutual in-dwelling,
enjoyment and embracement each of other in Christ, yet continued infinitely
distinct in Nature, and several in being one from the other: God came forth in
Nature, or the things that are made, and dwells in it as in an house or
Tabernacle that waxes old, and shall be taken down; and therefore he shines
forth in it in fewer beams, and at a greater distance, and so more darkly; yet
so, as that the invisible things of him, even the Eternal Power and Godhead,
may be clearly seen and understood of all the world, as a testimony to leave
them without excuse: so God came forth in Christ, God in Christ, yet the man
Christ is not God, but Christ is God.
and dwells in him, but as in a living, higher and eternal Tabernacle; and
therefore he shines forth in him in many beams of everlasting mercies, grace
and reconciling love, and in much more nearness, and so more clearly; yet so,
as known and manifest only to Saints: Therefore to this end was Christ born,
and came into the world, that he might be a Mercy-seat, a Throne of grace, and
a living Mansion for the fullness and glory of God to dwell in; and through him
to come near, reveal himself, and commune with us; and in and by him to do all
our works of obedience, death and life for us: So that the will and mind of
Christ as man, became wholly passive and self-resigned; and the mind and will
of the Divine Nature altogether active, to enlighten, teach, command and do all
in him: The highest honor and happiness that the flesh of Christ was capable
of, or was advanced unto, was not to become God, but to be glorified in God,
and God to be glorified in him: Christ is both God and son of man, both Lord
and son of David.

3. So God dwells in all Saints, God in Saints; yet Saints are not God, but his
Temple.
who being fitly joined and compacted together, do grow up into one living
Temple for the Lord, which is that beautiful Sion, that Mountain of the House
of the Lord, the Lambs Wife, that near City Jerusalem above, that Tabernacle of
God with men, wherein God himself dwells; and the Father and Lamb himself will
be the light and glory in it, and the Tree of Life, and the pure River of the
water of Life in the midst of her, and the glory of God himself in her shall be
joy and praise, the terror and astonishment of all Nations. Thus God is in
Saints, and will glorify himself in Saints, yet they are not God; even as he
is in Christ, yet the flesh of Christ is not God.

SECT. XIV.
THE union of God and Man in Christ gives this honor to Christ to be called
God: Second reason against the spirit in Saints.
If Saints partake in this union to have God dwelling in them, why do they not
partake in the honor to be called God?

Immanuel, the Anointed, or God manifest in the flesh: In like manner Saints
are not God, nor are called God; but he who is in Saints, is and is called the
true God: So that if it be asked, who is a Saint? or what is his name? he is an
inspired man, an anointed one, or Christ or the spirit in man.

2. Christ so perfectly denied himself of all that was man, and resigned it up
to the Divine Nature, that of himself he did nothing, but the Father did work
all his works in him and by him; The several actings, motions and performings
of Christ were not from the will of man, but were the streams and flowings
forth of the Eternal Fullness in him; so that God became manifest through
Christ, the ways and works of Christ as through a Crystal or transparent
glass; and therefore came it to pass, that God alone was and did all in Christ,
because he would be known, worshipped and approached unto only in Christ; and
no man should seek, or find, or come near unto any God, but that God which is
in Christ. Under the Law God filled Heaven and Earth, yet he would be known and
worshipped only in the Temple at Jerusalem. Under the Gospel he dwells in all
Saints, yet he is with open face beheld, and will be worshipped as the true God
only in his living Temple or Sanctuary, the flesh of Christ; so because we come
to God and the Father by Christ, and worship God in faith and hope through
Christ, and not through Saints; therefore is Christ called God, the Saints not.

SECT. XV.
Third reason against the spirit in Saints.
IF Saints partake with Christ in union with God, so that the same Divine Nature
which dwells in Christ dwells also in Saints; then what pre-eminence has Christ
above Saints?

Much every way; chiefly in these things.

Dan. 9.25. Heb. 2.10. Col. 1.18.
in Heaven and in Earth, in him. And in this work he has the honor above
Saints, of being Messiah, the Prince, the High Priest and Captain of our
salvation, the beginning and firstborn from the dead, who was the Head of the
Heasts of the living God, and the only Instrument in the everlasting hand and
arm of God, to cut off the Dragons head, to slay the Leviathan in the deeps in
his death, and drive all the enemies of man out of the world.

2. All those things, and all that Love that God has prepared for them whom he
loves, he has laid it up in Christ, in the Eternal Fullness of the blessed
Godhead, and to him alone has committed the administration of all things that
the Father has given unto him for us: All things that the Father has, are
ours; but they are first Christ's, and given unto him; the Father loves the Son,
and has given all things into his hand; he loves Saints through and for the
Son, with the same love wherewith he loves the Son, Joh. 17.26. and so he gives
them the same glory in himself which he gave the Son, yet by and for the Son,
Joh. 17.22. The Father as himself without Christ judges no man, saves no man,
does nothing in the world, but has committed all judgment to the Son, and
has committed the authority of executing all judgment both of life and death
unto the Son of man: God does all, and all things are of God; Joh. 5.22.27.
yet so as by Christ, nothing at all without him: The glory, fullness, light and
power of God comes forth upon Saints; yet so, as through the hands, scepter and
face of Jesus Christ. And in this work he has honor above Saints, to be the
Head of the Body the Church, the fullness of grace and truth, the Mediator of
the New Testament, the King upon the holy hill of Sion, anointed by the Father.

Therefore this pre-eminence and honor of Christ above Saints, Pre-eminence of
Christ above Saints destroys not, but confirms spirits in-being in Saints.
that he has received the fullness of all the wisdom and power of God; that all
dominion, power and authority is given into his hand; and that not for himself
alone, for his own private and singular enjoyment, but to be all administered
and shed abroad upon the Saints for their enjoyment and everlasting happiness:
All this pre-eminence whereunto Christ is exalted above Saints and Angels, and
every other name, does instead of casting a cloud upon it, bring clear light
and reason for the further confirming us in the truth, that Saints are
partakers with Christ of the Divine Nature, it self dwelling in them: For as
Christ received fullness, glory and spirit immediately from the Father, so we
receive of that very fullness, glory and spirit from Christ; Christ is one with
God through the spirit of the Father, Saints are one with God through the
spirit of Christ; 1 Timothy 3.16. Romans 15.7. Joh. 17.22.
Christ was received up into the glory of God by the Father, Saints are
received into that glory of God by Christ: God dwells in Christ gloriously, in a
first, higher and clearer manifestation; God dwells in Saints as truly and
verily, but covertly, and as yet in a second, lower and darker manifestation,
through Christ in a spirit dwelling in them; yet daily leading them up into
more and more glory by clearer revealings of himself in us, until he fully
appear, having done away all veils from off his face; then shall we be like
him, that is, we shall then be filled with the glory he is filled with, for we
shall see him as he is; that is, the same glory which is in him, shall come
forth in us, 1 John 3.2.
and we shall see him by having that which dwells in him manifest in us. Thus in
all things has Christ the pre-eminence over Saints, and yet Saints are
partakers with Christ of the same Divine Nature and spirit dwelling in them.

SECT. XVI.
The fourth reason against the spirit in us.
OUR Fathers nor our Fathers Fathers knew not, nor understood not this Mystery;
how could the union of Christ and Saints, being a Mystery of so high and
Divine a nature, be hid and shut up from them through so many ages and
generations, if there be such a union as Christ himself by Spirit or Divine
Nature dwelling in Saints?



The first veil which has been upon the truth of spirit in Saints.
1. Besides the holy and unsearchable reasons in the secret counsel and will of
God; the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, or of God the
Father in Christ, being but darkly and weakly seen and apprehended by them who
have been Fathers and Lights in their day in former times, has also much
darkened, if not quite hid out of sight, this Mystery of God, or Christ
dwelling in Saints: For as the union of God and Man in the person of Christ, is
the cause or fountain from whence flows the union of God or Christ in Saints;
so the true knowledge of the union of God and Man in Christ, Union of God and
Christ darkened, darkens the union of Christ and Saints.
is the key for the true understanding of the union of Christ and Saints. Now
the Guides and Leaders of the Church in former times, looking upon this great
Mystery, as upon all other Gospel-mysteries, in a faith mingled with the
unbelief, ignorance and humane Philosophy of those times; they have conceived
God and the Man Christ to be one in an hypostatical union, or a personal union,
so and in such manner, as that the Man Christ, as Man, has no personality at
all, that is, has no proper personal subsistence of Person, but only of
Nature; under which dark and involved description, favoring more of
Metaphysical subtilty, then of the simplicity of Christ, they locked up the
true state and nature of the union of God and Christ, and so commended it to
the world, and by Tradition through succeeding generations down to our present
times, to be such an union as the Saints could not be partakers with him in the
same union; whereas the account that the spirit gives in the Gospel of this
union, is plain and simple, and full of glory; 2 Cor. 5.19. Col. 2.9. 1 Timothy
3.16.
God was in Christ reconciling the world; The fullness of the Godhead dwells in
him bodily; My Father that dwells in me does these works; God was manifest in
flesh: and such as does bring this union down to Saints, Joh. 14.20.
and joins them in the fellowship and community of the same union with Christ;
At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you;
That they all may be one in us, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that
they all may be one in us, as thou Father art in me, Joh. 17.21.23.
and I in thee; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one. And that the world may know that God has loved Saints as he loved Christ,
the glory which the Father gave to Christ, which was union with God, the same
glory Christ gives to Saints, that they may be one with the Father, as he and
the Father are one, Joh. 17.22, 23. And upon this very account that Christ has
union, glory and spirit, and all the riches of Divine fullness; not for himself
alone, but to extend and shed forth the same upon Saints, is he, as I humbly
judge, called the root of David, the true Vine, the second Adam, the firstborn
amongst many Brethren. And now which of these Accounts does most clear the
union of God and Christ: that of the Schools, or this of the Scriptures; and
whether of these does darken and abolish, and whether of these does clear and
establish the union of Christ and Saints, let all that are spiritual and meek
in heart discern and judge.

SECT. XVII.
Second veil which has been upon the truth of spirit in Saints.
SEcondly, The framing and composing the whole knowledge of God, Speculative and
Practical, otherwise called the Systeme and Body of Divinity, according to the
pattern of Natural Reason; thus moulding and fashioning the spirit and things
of the spirit into the perishing models and narrow platforms of Nature; this
has been another seal to seal up the Mystery of the spirit in us. In those
Books I find God and the Attributes of God first discussed and opened in a
poor, natural way, before Christ be named; whereas God never did any thing
either in making the world, or redeeming of sinners without the Son: Nor can
God, nor any thing of God be clearly seen and known, but first through the
knowledge of the Son. The greatest truths how corrupted and perverted formerly,
and as yet.
I find in those writings the justification of sinners by Jesus Christ, to be
an absolution only from the guilt, condemnation and punishment of sin, but not
from the filth and spot of sin, after the way and manner of earthly
Judicatures, who do pardon or remit the guilty person upon a price or ransom,
from the guilt and punishment of his offense, though he be in mind and heart as
much as before; this is to bring down the glorious and free grace of God in
imputing our sins to Christ, and his righteousness unto us, to the low and
imperfect administrations of Justice amongst men, and to restrain the
Omnipotent virtue and power of the righteousness of Christ, which is able to
make us become the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.
that is, holy, and without all spot of sin in the sight of God, to restrain it
to the weakness and imperfection of humane Laws and Justice. Further, those
Books do present unto me the Covenant of the Gospel under conditions to be
performed by the Creature before the grace and riches of glory in the Covenant
become his, after the form and example of man's Covenant; whereas the whole and
every part of the Covenant is free and perfected by God alone; first in
forgiving sins, and remembering iniquities no more; and then in putting the
spirit into them, which brings forth in them faith, love and obedience.

Again, they bind up the free spirit of grace to one way, that he reveals not
the love of God, and reconciliation by Christ to any but whom the Law has
first wounded and sore bruised into repentance and sorrow for sin; after the
custom and manner of men, who forgive not the Offender until he ask pardon, and
confess his Offense: thus binding up the everlasting kindnesses of the Lord to
the narrow kindnesses of man, whereas some are melted with Love, as others are
bruised by the Law. Moreover, they confine and restrain the office and power of
prophesying or teaching, to certain measures and seize of humane wit, and
worldly wisdom; the anointing alone which teaches all truth, not giving a
sufficiency of light and knowledge for the work of ministering without natural
Learning, without running for help to flesh and blood. They invest the
General-Church-Assembly of a Nation with a commanding and coercive Authority
over the conscience in matters of faith and Divine worship, which lie up as
high as in the hands of the spirit, they bring down into the hands and power of
man; herein proudly affecting or aemulating the image and greatness of the
civil power, they do command over the spirit, as he does over the bodies of
men. They affirm faith, love, humility, patience, temperance, etc. to be
several habits, principles or graces in a Saint; whereas the Scripture affirms,
1 Cor. 12.11. Gal. 5.22.
they are not many, but one, and are but the different effects and actings of
the same grace which is one in all; and fruits of the same spirit, who is one
in all.

Lastly, those Books do deny any other coming of Christ until the last
Resurrection, and so by this Doctrine shut out the Kingdom of the fifth
Monarch, the Son of God, and Saints, and the new Jerusalem out of the world;
and also hereby quenching all that light and glory which shall arise upon Sion,
Isa. 60.1.
and that spirit which shall be poured upon sons and daughters in the last
days. And thus in all these instances it is to be clearly seen, that God has
been set at a great distance from Saints by these carnal, misty and corrupt
doctrines of men; so that grace and truth, the righteousness and spirit of
Christ, could not appear in their heights and bredths, fullness and glory, as
near unto us and within us; being described, and as it were engraven after some
similitude in nature, and conceived and drawn out (as here appears) by the
short measure and imperfect rule of natural Reason; the boundless things of the
spirit folded up within the limits and streits of Nature.

SECT. XVIII.
The third veil which has been upon the truth of the spirit in Saints
THese Systems and Models of Divinity, or Canons and Articles of Faith, have
been the pattern and platform of all the faith and worship, the Judge of all
differences and controversies, the Touchstone of all opinions, the Measure of
all light and spiritual knowledge, beyond which the spirit might not teach, nor
they profess; the key of all Mysteries, and the sum and substance of all
Doctrines, Interpretations and Expositions upon Scripture-truth caught or
written in former times. And thus the Church of Christ in those days, being
rather under the rudiments of men, then the clearer teachings of the anointing
in them, could not see in any other light then through the principles and
traditions received from their Teachers: Which principles, as they had in them
some light, much smoke; some Divine truth, much carnal reason; Reason of the
low seize of Saints in former times.
so they begat in the believers of those times like faith, like knowledge, like
communion, like spirit of bondage and of liberty, of flesh and of spirit: so
that their faith was more adherence) which is coupled with some darkness of
fear) then assurance which is the clear sight of love scattering all fear;
their strength was the strength of Babes, not of strong Men; their Communion
with God stood more in bitter complaints and beggings, then in quiet faith,
joy, and praises; their knowledge and beholding of the glory of the Lord was by
reflection, rather then through direct beams; through the shadowy and imperfect
illustrations of worldly similitudes, and humane eloquence, rather then the
pure irradiations of the spirit in them; And in present times.
and from hence does proceed all that darkness, which is yet in the temple of
the Lord, that dimness and legality in Teachers, that unstableness and dullness
in people, ever Learning, and never able at least to find the clear knowledge
of the truth; and all those carnal, childish, and confining apprehensions,
principles and practices, wherein Saints do know and approach to God as a
blessed Being indeed, but as one without them, and at a distance from them;
judging and likening the spiritual knowledge of God, to the natural knowledge
of a creature; and that the fruition, or enjoyment of God, is in contemplation
of his glory as without us; that Saints are perfectly justified from the Law,
guilt, and condemnation, by the death of Christ, but not from the spot and
stain of sin; so as to be perfectly holy in the sight of God, by the pure and
spotless righteousness of Christ; that believers after every falling into sin,
are brought again under the Law until repenting, whereas the spirit says, Romans
6.14. Romans 8.15.
ye are no more under the Law, but under grace; that Christ is here or there,
in this form of fellowship, order of gathering, and way of worship, and not in
any other; these and many other low and dark Principles formerly were, and
still are as a veil upon the face of truth, and upon the hearts of most Saints;
not so thick a veil, as to hide all Light, knowledge, and grace from them: yet
so thick, as to hide deeper Mysteries, higher communion, a greater glory of
light and love from them; the sum of all is, Seize of most in former
and in present times, what.
Gospel Truths are either for regeneration into the faith, and such are some
true discoveries of free love and righteousness by Christ, etc. or they are for
edification from faith to faith, and such are deeper discoveries, nearer union,
sweeter and choicer embraces, richer understanding of more heavenly Mysteries,
as of Saints presented perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1.28, of Christ or spirit
in Saints, Col. 1.27. of shadows flying away, and the breaking of the day, etc.
Cant. 2.17. The first sort of truths belong to children, and were all the light
and knowledge former days attained unto, and they saw God and Christ but as it
were at a distance, and they tasted of the spirit, and were refreshed and made
glad with him; yet they knew not that that spirit and fullness which they felt,
and tasted, was within them; that more spiritual and deeper knowledge God hid
from them, Seize of a few in present times, what.
because they could not then bear it; the other truths belong to them of riper
age, and as yet they are the light and understanding but of some; known and
enjoyed only by a few of the wiser children in Sion, who have been children,
and have spoken and done as children, but now are putting away childish things;
and the righteousness, grace, and salvation, which sometimes they only knew and
kissed, as without them, they watch that they may embrace and see it spring
forth within them.

SECT. XIX.
The fourth veil which has been upon the truth of the spirit in Saints
THe Ecclesiastical or Church State through the favor, fear, or superstitious
zeal of Princes has been oftentimes promoted to great worldly honor, and has
increased and grown up unto the greatness, power, and glory of a kingdom, and
has twisted and intermingled its power with the power of the Civil state, and
so became a National Church; Civil and Church State twisted together have
veiled up truth.
and sometimes has enlarged it self by Royal Edicts, Imperial decrees, Forces
of armies, as upon wings, over many Nations, and has become a Catholic, or
Ecumenical Church: These great Churches, whether National, over one Nation
only, or Catholic, over the whole world, looking liker Babel, then Temples for
the Lord; it may be observed of them, when they came to this greatness, they
fell in love with their own Image and worldly greatness; and that they might
establish and confirm the same for ever, they call together the wisest and
learned Doctors of every Country or Nation; these gathered up truth under
such forms of Profession and worship, and doctrines of faith, as would preserve
them in their lordly pre-eminence over the people, and keep the people in blind
subjection under them, and these they declared and sent abroad, as their
Decrees, Laws, and Ordinances, to be the Rule of faith, National Church State
has kept light of truth out of the world.
and conscience, pattern of all worships, and the measuring line of the
Sanctuary; and that the union of Saints, liberty of worship, highest degree of
holiness, the door to the power of Ministering should be in conformity unto
their commandments as the doctrines of Christ; in these things was the
interest, power and practice of a National or Catholic Church State in times
past. Now the people of those times, and under that government, were of three
sorts; One was of them who delighted to see the Church come forth in this
carnal glory and domination, that they might be great in her Greatness; such
magnified her National constitution, as most invincible and secure from
heretical innovation, affirmed her authority sacred and indispensable, her
decrees and Laws unquestionable, and watched against more spiritual worships
and worshippers; and so all the teachings and writings of these men, were no
better then Idolatrous and Antichristian, admiring of a Babel-church-state.
Another sort was of Saints and true Believers, yet having no further light then
the reformation of doctrines, and worships established, and commanded by that
present Church Power they were under; they magnified the Church in its National
supremacy, were zealous for all her rules and prescribed forms, as the highest
discoveries, and only ways of God; did not seek for, nor think that there was
any other further or more excellent truths to be found out, then was prescribed
by the Churches; these were in the faith; yet having their eyes with the carnal
glory, outward greatness; and worldly wisdom of a National Church, they opposed
present reformation, principles against further reformation and knowledge,
lesser light against greater light; and so through their ignorant and
inordinate zeal it came to pass, that Saints themselves gave their helping
hand to the man of sin, the Antichrist, in suppressing and keeping down all
springings and risings of more glorious truth into the world.

The last sort was of Saints, yet such as had passed from under that
administration of impurer principles and doctrines established by the National
Church, and gone on toward more perfection of light and knowledge; such could
not come back from spirit to flesh, nor return again from liberty to bondage;
they could not bless an Idol, nor defile the bed of Christ their conscience, by
prostituting it to a stranger, the commands and force of a National Church or
Synodical Council; the Church not bearing the light of these Saints, nor the
word of their Testimony, nor their separating themselves from her obedience,
suppressed their light, restrained their liberty, and excommunicated their
persons, and after all, gave up their bodies to the Iron-rod of worldly powers,
to be corrected with chastisements, and instructed with sufferings; and thus
the wisdom of the wise Disposer of all things saw it good, that the powers both
of Church and State should for many ages down to these last times, join and
unite themselves into one interest, force, and counsel, against the entrance,
growth, and spreading of deeper Mysteries of clearer Gospel-glory into the
world.

SECT. XX.
The fifth veil upon the truth of the spirit in Saints.
THe Church of Christ under the New Testament has her several states,
vicissitudes and changes, through which she passes to come to the Land of
Promise; and under every state has been given unto her, spirit, light and
nourishment necessary for, The Church passes through three eminent changes of
state to Sion.
and becoming her under that present state, there are times wherein the Temple
of God; or Church of Christ is under curtains, then her tent is set up and took
down, and removed from place to place: Three eminent changes of state she has
and is to pass through, which are as so many outer courts leading her to the
Kings Palace, or as lodging-places provided to receive the Kings daughter
before she be brought in to the King: The first step or change.
The first step or change of state was, when the Lord took down his spiritual
Temple, and sent it into caprivity, under spiritual Babylon, that she should be
there for a time, times, and half a time, or 1260 days, which came to pass,
when the Mystery of iniquity entered into the Temple of the Lord, and many did
fall away from the pure faith and truth, as it is in Jesus; in the morning or
first times of the Gospel, the Lord Jesus did by his own, and the Ministry of
his Apostles, espouse many from amongst Jews and Gentiles, as a chaste virgin to
himself; he put beauty and comeliness upon her, which stood in gifts and graces,
and powers, purity of administrations, forms, and fellowships; and these were
as so many ornaments and jewels, which he gave to her, as to an espoused
virgin, or wife of youth; and now while her glory and beauty was but fresh and
new upon her, she is carried away into captivity, under the yoke and power of
Mystical Babel; thus the Church was figured under the Law, by Israel in Egypt
and Babylon; by Jacob serving Laban, by the heir of all in the house of
servants, by the free-womans barrenness, despised by the fruitful bondwoman;
and as the wisdom of the Father appointed that this state of Sions captivity,
should be the time of Sions widdow-hood, so he gave her light, spirit,
communion and other qualifications, as suited with that desolate state, that is
dark, servile, and carnal principles; carnal in respect of more spiritual;
under this state the heavens were covered with a cloud, the world lay as
forsaken of God, and given into the hands of blind guides, cruel shepherds, and
beasts of prey; all the earth dry, and no dew upon it; no voice of God, no
vision, no lightning from God to amuse, aw, or awake the world; all things, all
men, all the world were as if no God, no Lord, no Redeemer; only there was a
silent whispering of the spirit in Saints, some few beams of true light, some
seed and life of God lay hid in their faith; God in tender love gave them so
much as preserved them in life; but for any high, choice, or sublime
discoveries of more spirit and glory, such he reserved for her next and better
state, as knowing them not proper to a state of widowhood, wherein the worship
and communion of Saints was most in bitter complaints, conflicting, weak faith,
strengthening of graces, little in visions and high enjoyments of God: This is
the state that not long since was.

Second step or change.
The second change of state upon the Church, is her coming forth out of this
spiritual captivity: This comes to pass when Jesus Christ arises as it were
from sleep, and stirs up himself in the faith and spirits of Saints, and opens
the Book of the vision of God, and pours out a vial of light upon the Kingdom
of the man of sin, which stains and confounds all his humane Inventions,
Pharisaical justification, and fair fleshly shows wherewith the Saints were
enticed; and calls up the Saints into more Evangelical ways, principles and
worships. As thus, The Church was figured under the Law by Isreal's coming out
of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from the land of Babylon; by the freewoman
having in her womb a son of promise; by one coming out of the wilderness,
leaning upon her beloved. In this second state God administers more grace,
brings forth some better things, raises up into clearer light, into a more
excellent, refined, potent spirit, puts upon them a new habit, and takes off
the old, and clothes them with change of raiment, finer faith, sweeter spirits,
clearer rays of light, and other qualifications as do agree unto, and sent
with this their better state. Now the Heavens begin to be opened, the shadows
long stretched upon all the earth do fly away; the Kingdom of God begins now to
appear on Earth as well as in Heaven; the Skies drop down righteousness, the
Earth springs forth and buds; The spirit says, come; the Spouse says, come; and
all that hear, say, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Now the Lord reveals deeper
secrets, deeper counsels, nearer embraces, imparts things that could not be
born before; old things are forgotten, all things begin to be new; the Church
is now upon her way to Sion: Whilst she dwelt with the Daughter of Babylon,
that Mother of Whoredoms, her strength then was to sit still; now she is come
forth, she sits still no more; every step she treads is on toward the heavenly
land, into more light, more faith, more glory; and this seems to be the present
state of the Church in our day, and in this generation: Wherein I conceive the
present estate of Saints is such as answers that holy figure under the Law, of
the Cluster of Grapes brought out of Canaan into the Camp of Israel; and of
Moses seeing the Land at some distance from Mount Pisgah: so the Saints in this
day are at some distance from the Land of the Sabbath, yet are come within view
of it, and so near unto the borders of it as to pluck some Grapes from the Tree
of Life, and to look into the lengths and bredths of it; our Fathers saw the
day afar off, but we see it nearer; they saw heavenly things much in images,
letter and teachings without; we begin to see them by their springing forth
within us; all their faith, knowledge of Mysteries, understanding of
Scriptures, opinions of Light, did but represent Christ, his righteousness and
spirit at a distance, as without them: yet there was a substance, a seed in
all, which was the blessing; the faith, knowledge and spirit which God is now
putting into Saints, presents things more at hand in union and within us; yet
there are things more excellent then these reserved for the third state of the
Church; this second state is the state that now is.

The third is to come, Third step or change.
and it is a state wherein the Lord himself comes into his Temple, and consumes
quite out of it the Mystery of Iniquity by the brightness of his appearing in
it, and gathers together on an heap all humane Inventions, curious Arts, the
wisdom and disputings of this world wheresoever he finds them; in Sion, or
Babel; in the Temple of God, or Synagogue of Antichrist; in the faith and
worships of Saints, or in the blind Idolatries of the world; he burns them all
up as hay and stubble, and scatters them out of the earth as chaff before the
wind; and now the faith, knowledge and gifts of the two former states do pass
away, as being proper for Saints in weakness, at a distance; seeing and knowing
love, righteousness and spirit afar off, and love and union perfecteth,
finisheth and swalloweth up all; Communion of Saints with Christ in gifts and
graces, is now changed into communion with him in spirit; it is so now, but
will then appear to all, though denied of many; Ordinances, Temples, Teachings,
Governments, which all held forth a prospect of Heaven and Glory without us,
shall now give place, when he comes himself into us, who is the end of all Law
and Gospel-ministrations. So what the first state saw afar off, through thick
veils, weak faith, carnal rudiments, conflicting graces, the second sees to be
at the door, through purer faith, increases of spirit, clearer beams from the
East, opening of prophesies and promises; the third shall see, feel, taste,
handle and enjoy within them; and this is the Kings Daughter coming into the
Kings Chamber in garments of wrought gold. All things are now in motion, the
Lord is in motion to Sion; Knowledge, light, discerning, which are but beams
from the Lord, are in motion from less to more glory and perfection, as the
Lord approaches and draws nigh. External administrations, governments,
worships and interests, whether Civil or Spiritual, Divine or Antichristian,
are all in motion from more to less, from something to nothing, as he who is
the end and putting away of them all steps on. Princes are flying into holes;
Antichrist running from form to form, from Temple to Temple, out of common ways
into more refined ways, out of gross water baptism into reformed water baptism,
out of that into spirit-baptism, and so is running on toward this last. Sense
is withdrawing up into Reason, Reason into Faith, Faith into enjoyment of God
dwelling in Man, Spirit in Saints, and the life of God revealed in us. This
concludes the account and reasons of the darkness that has been so long upon
the Church of Christ; wherein as other Mysteries, so this great Gospel-Mysterie
has been hid from us; that is, That the Spirit or Divine Nature of Christ it
self dwells in Saints.

FINIS.
One word to the Reader.
FRIEND,
WHAT I have here presented will find acceptance, or unpleasedness with thee,
according as thou art: If it seem dreadful to thee, it is not because it is so,
but because thou know it not as it is. The life that acts all the world is
twofold, either true, or false; one is rooted in the Truth and Being of God,
and is something above and beyond the highest reach of Reason, the purest form
of knowledge, the most raised and spiritual gifts; all these being but of this
Creation which must cease and perish away: The false life is rooted in the
invention and flesh of man; yet form and appearance comes forth habited like
the true life, with fair shows in the flesh, outward holiness, goodly words,
concerning zeal, for forms of godliness, for the letter of Scripture, for
conformity to a rule without, none like unto it, none had in more admiration of
their undiscerning and carnal Disciples: yet all this may have no more but
flesh in it, that is, the spirit of a man only elevated and drawn up through
the sharpness and vigor of his own reason, and the letter of the Scriptures,
into no more but the dead image of spiritual things, that is, into the
knowledge, profession and worship of God in a natural way. What thou have here
read, presents thee with that which is the true difference and note of
distinction, whereby this twofold life is distinguished and known one from the
other; and whereby the life, state and profession of some Professors stands
separate and divided from others, as far as spirit is above flesh, or the life
of Christ above the life of Reason. Knowledge, gifts, a form of godliness,
reformation of many things, the life of a Saint, is not in these; these are
things external and obvious to the generation of this world; a Saints life is a
secret, hidden and inaccessible thing, that natural reason and all the wisdom
of this world cannot find it out, nor come where it is; it is something more
then word, letter or knowledge; better believed and felt, then reasoned out or
expressed. Therefore before thou give judgment upon what has been here
offered, I do entreat thee call in for thy direction the rule of Christ; judge
not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment; wherein thou art
minded of a twofold Judge; one that judges of persons, of things, of the truth
of God, and of the God of truth, according to appearance, or after the flesh,
that is, after the sight of his eyes, or after the hearing of his ears, Isa.
11.3. that is, in thy judging or respecting of these, and all spiritual things,
set not up as Judge, either thy present frame of spirit, or the light of thy
learned reason; for so thou judge after the sight of thine eyes: Neither let
the Traditions of thy Fathers, the cry of many Pastors, the Learning of the
Schools, nor the Doctrines and Commandments of men, have authority to judge for
thee in these things; for so thou judge after the hearing of thine ears; but
look upon, weigh and try every spirit, work and doctrine here or abroad,
according to the truth as it is in Jesus: And whatsoever has been said of Old
Man and New Man, of crucifying to the flesh, of justification in Christ, of
living to God, of union with Christ, or in-being of spirit, etc. let these or
any other things first have a fair trial, how far they are rooted in God, how
far not; how much he is all in them, or how much he is denied by them either in
his Nature or his Grace; and then judge them, and me for their sake, to be true
or false, precious or vile accordingly. And as for my self, if these things
were only opinion, or result of my own spirit, then they were mine or man's, and
I should reserve them to my self: but being given unto me, and withdrawn at the
pleasure of an higher hand, I do only serve to administer them to whosoever
they are appointed for.

THOMAS HIGGENSON.

FINIS.

