A New-Years-Gift FOR WOMEN. Being a true Looking-Glass Which they seldom have
in their own Closets, where (for the most part) are none but flattering ones:
But hereby, and herein, they may truly, plainly, and directly, see their
duties, both toward God, and their own Husbands.

With an Epistle Dedicatory, directed to the Feminine Gender (never done
before) nor the like extant in no Printed Book. However, many have dedicated to
one or two virtuous Ladies, upon some good Reasons moving the Author thereunto.
But never any (as this is) to the whole Sex of Women, of what rank or quality
soever they be.

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for the Author, 1666.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY being made for, and directed only to those of the
Feminine Gender.
GEntlewomen, of what degree or condition soever, whether high or low, rich or
poor, nobly descended, or sprung out of the Beggars Cottage, I beseeeh you call
to remembrance (be some of you never so great and eminent) That ye are all the
Daughters of Eve, who was the Author of much more evil to mankind, in seducing
her Husband to eat of the forbidden Fruit, then Judas was in betraying our
Savior; for thereby, not only Adam, and all his Posterity became accursed, as
ever since, to eat their Bread in the sweat of their Brows; but also the very
Earth was cursed for his sake to bring forth Thorns and Thistles; and all
Creatures ever since, even to this present day, have, do, and will to the end
of the World, groan under the burden thereof; which I have thought fit to
premise to work in you poverty of spirit, and that excellent and adorning Grace
of Humility, which is the first, second, and third step to Heaven (yet does not
abound in most Women:) But however, that foundation being laid, ye will be the
better fitted and prepared, patiently, and without prejudice to read the
ensuing Treatise, especially if ye call to remembrance, that intolerable Pride,
that high and transcendent Presumption, and that unparalled Disobedience
against the Mighty God, committed by Eve in eating of the forbidden Fruit;
whereas in very few days before (if not the same day) she was made but of one
of the crooked Ribs of her Husband, and he himself but of the dust of the
Earth: And not to be content to live in that pleasant Garden, and to eat of all
the rare Fruits therein (one Tree only excepted) but to aspire to be as God
himself, knowing good and evil; and yet she was expressly forbidden by her
Eternal Creator not to eat thereof, telling her, That the same day she did eat,
she should die; yet she harkned to a lie told her by the Serpent, that old
deceiver, who was a lier from the beginning, being the ruthless enemy of
mankind: And thereupon seeing that the Tree was good for meat, and pleasant to
the eye, did eat and gave to her Husband; preferring the voice of the Devil,
before the voice of Almighty God.

And good Women, let me humbly entreat you to search your hearts, Whether from
that accursed example, ye are not to this day more prone to give admission and
entertainment to the dictates, and cunning insinuations of Satan, then to the
blessed Motions of Gods holy Spirit.

I have often read over the whole Book of God, and taken several Notes, and
many Collections out of the same, and thereby am as well prepared to express
the duties of Husbands toward Wives, as of Wives toward Husbands, for the
Scripture is full of both; which service I will readily do for any of your Sex,
who shall desire it, and will be pleased to signify so much unto the Printer
hereof, who will soon give me notice accordingly.

But I am loath to leave you sad and melancholy, for notwithstanding this great
transgression, committed by your Grandmother, there remains comfort to your
self, and to your Offspring: To your selves in that thorow-bearing of
Children, ye shall be saved: to your offspring, in that God tells the Devil
thus, Thou shall break his head, and he shall bruise thy heel.

Moreover, Cornelius Agrippa writing in commendation of Women, has four
notable Arguments to prove the nobleness of Women.

1. From the more excellent Name which God (who knew all Creatures before he
named them) gave to the first Woman thus. Adam had his name from Earth, but Eve
hers from Life.

2. From the order of time, for God made Woman last, and with her finished his
work, leaving off at his best, and most perfected piece.

3. From the place of her Creation, Man was made without, and was afterward
brought into the Garden of Eden, but Eve was created even within Paradise it
self.

4. From the Matter, Adam was formed out of Matter inanimate (vile Clay) but
his Wife of a Matter purified and animated.

But I will draw to a conclusion, and humbly entreat a favorable, and
charitable construction to be made of what I have here conceived; and that I
may not be so unhappy as to be styled (or so much as thought) to be an enemy
unto Women, whom I love and honor, and from whom I had my beginning, sucking
the Paps of my own Natural Mother; and having been the Husband of two Wives,
and the Father of many Children, both Sons and Daughters yet living.

Lastly, I must acknowledge that I entered into the consideration of these
things, upon observation of the lives, disposition, and conversation of two
Gentlewomen nearly related to me, and both of my intimate acquaintance for
diverse years last past.

And therefore as some Almanack-makers write thus, That their Book was
calculated for the Meridian of such a place, but may serve generally for all
Great Britain, so I hope, and pray, That this poor work of mine (being
principally intended only for the good of the two particular Gentlewomen before
mentioned) may speed as well, and be useful in all places; and then this Widows
mite being accepted, and having that operation, will encourage me to publish
another Work of a far higher concernment (almost ready for the Press.) So
commending it, and all of you to Gods blessing, I take leave and rest

Your much devoted Servant WILLIAM HILL.
From Gray's Inn, 20 Dec. 1659.
THE WOMAN'S Looking-Glass.
I Must crave leave (for method sake) to rank Women into three sorts, and to
discourse of them in order, one after another.

1. Good and virtuous Women, those I admire and adore, confessing their price
is above Solomon's Rubies; as being loving and obedient to their Husbands, and
being as fruitful Vines on the Walls of their Houses; and their Children as
Olive Plants round about their Tables; and such who do their Husbands good and
not evil, all the days of their lives.

2. Marthaes, who cumber themselves about many things, and forget that (unum
necessarium) that one thing which is necessary, and are only for the things of
this World; and by Worldlings deemed and accounted the best Wives.

3. Lewd and vicious Women, who are neither good for this World, nor for the
World to come.

To these of the first and best rank, I have little to say more, then to
commend their Virtues, and to pray for their Perseverance, that God will be
pleased to perfect that good work which he has begun in them.

Yet for their comfort, encouragement and imitation, I will mention some good
Women whom we find recorded in holy Scripture, and will begin with Sarah,
Sarah.
the Wife of faithful Abraham (who is styled the Friend of God, and of her
great love and obedience to her Husband, in calling him Lord: And what was her
reward? God opened her womb when she was old, and she conceived, and brought
forth a Son, in whom all the Families of the earth were blessed.

Next in order comes Rebecca thus; Rebecca.
when Abraham had sent his servant to seek out a Wife for his Son Isaac,
charging him to take one of his kindred, and of his Fathers house, by special
providence, Rebecca came accidently to water her Fathers Cattle, and she was so
kind, that she drew water, to make Abraham's servant drink, and his Camels
also; so she brought him home to her Fathers house, where he was most kindly
entertained, (her Father being brother to his Master Abraham) to whom he
revealed his message, saying unto them; If ye will deal mercifully and kindly
with my Master, tell me, and if not, tell me, that I may turn me to the right
hand or to the left; To which they made this divine answer, saying; This thing
is proceeded of the Lord, we cannot therefore say unto thee, neither evil or
good; but thus conclude; Behold, Rebecca is before thee, take her and go, that
she may be thy Masters sons Wife, even as the Lord has said; Then the Servant
took forth Jewels of silver and Jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave to
Rebecca, also unto her brother, and to her Mother he gave gifts, and they did
both eat and drink, and he tarried there all night, and when he rose in the
morning, he said let me depart unto my Master but her mother, and her brother
answered, let the maid abide with us at least ten days, and then shall she go,
which was referred unto Rebecca her self, who made choice to go presently,
whereby she became a notable pattern, and worthy example to all Women, to
prefer their Husbands, before Mother or Brother, or any friends or near
relations whatever.

Now when she came near to Abraham's house, she showed abundance of humility,
for seeing Isaac coming forth to meet her, she took a vail, and covered her,
and so they became man and wife, and Isaac loved her, and thus he was comforted
after his mothers death.

Next you may take notice of her singular wisdom, for she loving Jacob her son,
better then his brother Esau, and so did Almighty God, who said, Jacob have I
loved, and Esau have I hated, and when her husband Isack was old, and his sight
dim (for he could not see) she heard him call for his Son Esau to him, telling
him that he was old and knew not the day of his death, and so desired him to
take his Bow, and go into the field and take him some Venison, and to make him
savory meat thereof, and bring it to him, that he might eat, and that his soul
might bless him before he died, wherewith Rebecca acquainted Jacob and charged
him to go to the flocks, and bring her thence two good Kids of the Goats, that
she might make pleasant meat of them for his Father, such as he loved; telling
him, that then he should bring it to his Father, whereof he should eat, to the
intent that he might bless him before his death, which he did accordingly. Then
Rebecca took some clothes of her eldest son Esau, and put them upon Jacob, and
she covered his hands, and the smooth of his neck with the skins of the Kids,
afterward she put the pleasant meat which she had prepared, into the hands of
her Son Jacob, who brought the same unto his Father, and told him that he was
Esau his first born, and had done as he had bid him, desiring him to eat, that
his Soul might bless him. But Jsaac being somewhat jealous and suspicious, bid
him come near him, that he might feel him, and there by know whether he was his
son Esau or not; and when he had felt him, he said, the voice is Jacobs voice,
but the hands are the hands of Esau. Afterward he bid him again come near him,
and kiss him, and he did so, then he smelled the savor of his garment and
blessed him; therefore Esau hated Jacob, and thought in his mind, The days of
mourning for my Father will come shortly, then will I stay my brother Jacob,
which words were told to Rebecca, and there, with she acquainted her Son Jacob,
advising him to flee to Haran, to her brother Laban, and to tarry with him a
while, until his Brothers fierceness were swaged, and till his wrath were
turned away from him, and he had forgot those things which Jacob had done unto
him, promising, that she would send and fetch him from thence, so soon as it
was covenient.

Next I come to Hannah the Mother Hannah.
of Samuel, who had the like success and reward as Sarah, and brought forth her
Son, and gave him suck, and after he was weaned (according to a vow which she
had made) when she prayed earnestly for him with many tears, yet her voice was
not heard, only her lips moved, she brought him and offered him to the Lord, in
whose service he continued all the days of his life.

Widow of Sareptath
Then we come to the good Widow of Sareptath, who though she had only but a
handful of meal, and a little oil, and she was gathering, a few sticks to
dress it for her, and her Son that they might eat it, and die, for the famine
was sore, and all their victuals spent. And yet when Elias the Prophet came
unto her (being very hungry) and desired her first of all to make him a little
cake, which she did accordingly; and what was her reward, the meal in the
barrels wasted not, neither was the oil in the cruse diminished, but both
lasted and continued, and thereby they lived and subsisted even miraculously,
until God sent plenty upon the earth.

Also her only Son being dead, was by the Prophet restored unto life.

Next follows the good Shunamite, Shunamite.
who was one of the Wives of the Sons of the Prophets, and came to Elisha,
saying, Thy Servant mine Husband is dead, and thou know that thy Servant did
fear the Lord, and the Creditors are come to take my two Sons, and to make them
Bondmen, and what did the Propher for her; thus, she having in her house a
pitcher of Oil, he bid her get empty Vessels and borrow some, which she did,
and shut the doors upon her and her two sons, and poured the oil from Vessel
to Vessel, till all were full, and called to her Sons for another Vessel, they
answered, there was none left, and then and not before the oil ceased running:
Then she came, and told the man of God, and he said, Go and sell the oil, and
pay them that thou art in debt unto, and live thou, and thy children of the
reft. Also in the same Chapter, ye may read of a Woman (whose name we find not)
but she is described to be of great estimation, who was so kind to the Prophet
Elisha, that when he passed by that way she constrained him to come in, and eat
bread; and she said unto her husband; Behold, I know now that this is a holy
man of God, let us make him a little chamber with walls, and let us set him
there a Bed, and a Table, and a Stool, and a Candle-stick, that he may turn in
thither, when he comes to us; which the Prophet took so kindly, that he said
unto her, Behold, thou have had all this care for us, what shall we do for
thee, is there any thing to be spoken for thee to the King, or to the Captain
of the Host, To which she answered, I dwell amongst my own people. Then
Gehazi, the Prophets Servant, told his Master, That she had no son, and that
her Husband was old. So the Prophet called her, and told her, saying, At the
time appointed, and according to the course of life thou shall embrace a son:
And she conceived and bear a son at that same season, according to the time of
life that Elisha had told her.

And in process of time, when the Child was grown up, he went out to his
Father, and to the Reapers; and he complained to his Father, saying, Mine head,
mine head; who commanded one of his servants to carry him to his Mother, and
she sat him on her knees till noon, and then he died.

Now follows a most remarkable story, and all both precedent and subsequent
springs from the good disposition of a virtuous, godly, and most faithful Woman.

And what did she, she went up, and laid her dead Child upon the Bed of the
Man of God, and shut the door upon him, and desired her Husband (not telling
him the Child was dead) to send one of his young men with an Ass with her,
telling him, She would haste to the Man of God; and her Husband answered,
Wherefore will thou go to him this day, it is neither new Moon, nor Sabbath
day: Yet she went presently, and came to him to Mount Carmel; and when she was
near him, for joy she had met him, and in token of humility, she caught him by
the feet, and his servant Gehazi went to thrust her away; but the Man of God
said, Let her alone, for her Soul is vexed within her, and the Lord has hid it
from me, and has not told it me. Then perceiving by her that her Child was
dead, he said to Gehazi, Gird thy loins, and take my staff in thy hand, and go
thy way: If thou meet any, salute him not; and if any salute thee, answer him
not, and lay my staff upon the face of the child: To which his Mother thus
replied, saying, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave
thee; therefore he arose, and followed her, but Gehazi was gone before, and had
laid his staff upon the face of the Child, but it neither spoke nor heard;
whereupon he went back to meet them, telling them, That the Child was not
waked. Then came Elisha into the Chamber, and behold the Child was dead; then
he shut the door, and prayed unto the Lord: And after went up, and lay upon the
Child, putting his mouth on his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his
hands upon his hands, and stretched himself upon him, and the flesh of the
Child waxed warm. Then the Child sneezed seven times, and opened his eyes;
then the Mother being called, came in, and fell at his feet, and bowed her self
to the ground and took up her son.

Next I come to the story of Abigail, Abigail
unequally yoked to Churlish Nabal, yet a man exceeding mighty, for he had
Three thousand Sheep, and a Thousand Goats: But Abigail was a Woman of singular
wisdom, and beautiful, whereby ye may by the way observe by the sequel of the
business, That it is better to be wise, then to be rich: For David hearing that
Nabal did that day shear his Sheep, he sent ten of his young men unto him to
visit him; and for salutation, to ask, Whether he and his house, and all that
he had, were in Peace, Wealth, and Prosperity; and to put him in mind, That
when his Shepherds were with David, they did them no hurt, neither did they
miss any thing; and so desired some of his good cheer. But Churlish Nabal
answered and said, Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse? there be many
servants now adays that run away from their Masters: Shall I then take my
Bread, and my Water, and my Flesh that I have killed for my Shearers, and give
it unto men, whom I know not whence they be? Which answer David's Servants told
him, whereupon David grew angry, and commanded them to gird their Swords about
them, and he himself also girded on his Sword, and about Four hundred men went
up with him to be revenged upon Nabal: But now behold a miracle, the wit of a
Woman; for Abigail being told of all passages, by one of her servants, she made
haste and took with her Two hundred Cakes, and two Bottles of Wine; five Sheep
ready dressed, and five measures of Parched Corn, a hundred Frails of Raisins,
and two hundred of Figs, (all unknown to her Husband) and went with it to meet
David; and meeting with him, she lighted off her Ass, and fell before him on
her face, and bowed her self to the ground, and fell at his feet; and thus
said, Let not my Lord, I pray thee, regard this wicked man Nabal; for as his
name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: But I thine
Handmaid saw not the young men of my Lord, whom thou sentest. Then David said
to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; and blessed be thy Counsel; and
blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from coming to shed blood: For as
the Lord of Israel lives, except thou had hasted, and met me, furely, here
had not been lest unto Nabal, by the dawning of the day, any that pisseth
against the Wall. And then David received her presents, and bad her go in peace
to her house. So Abigail came to Nabal, and behold he made in his house a
feast, like the feast of a King, and his heart was merry within him, for he was
very drunken: Wherefore she told him nothing, neither less nor more, until the
morning arose; and then when the Wine was gone out of Nabal, his wife told him
all passages, and his heart died within him, and he was like a stone; and about
ten days after the Lord smote Nabal, that he died. Now when David heard that
Nabal was dead, and that the Lord had recompensed his wickedness upon his own
head. Then David sent to commune with Abigail touching being his wife; and when
David's servants came, and acquainted her with it, she arose, and bowed her self
on her face to the earth, saying, Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to
wash the feet of the servants of my Lord; and she went with her five Maids, and
shortly after became his Wife.

Next I think fit to speak of Michal the Daughter of King Saul, Michal.
and David's wife; who though she were a Woman bad enough of all conscience; for
she mocked David, being both her King and Husband, for dancing before the Ark
of the Lord, etc. Yet it is pity to omit any good done by a Woman. And thus
much I find recorded of her, That Saul intending to kill David, thrust at him
with his Spear, but he turning aside, it missed him, and fell into the Wall:
Then Saul sent. Messengers to David's house to watch him, and to stay him in the
morning; whereof Michal gave him notice, and so she let him down through a
Window, whereby he escaped and fled: And she took an Image and laid it in his
Bed, and put a Pillow stufft with Goats hair under the head of it, and covered
it with a cloth, and then told Saul's Messengers (who failed not to come) That
her Husband was sick; who returned with this answer: But Saul (full of malice)
sent them again, charging them to bring him in the Bed, that he might slay him.
So God made this wicked Woman the instrument to preserve David's life, who
otherwise had undoubtedly perished.

And now I come to the Noble Queen of Sheba, Queen of Sheba.
who came from far, hearing the fame of Solomon, concerning the name of the
Lord, and to prove him with hard questions, and brought with her abundance of
very rich presents; as Gold, precious Stones, sweet Oders, etc. Then when she
saw Solomon's Wisdom, and the House which he had builded, and the Meat of his
Table, and the sitting of his Servants, she told the King, That it was a true
Record which she heard in her own Lands; howbeit, she believed not the report,
until she came and saw it; and then she confessed, That the one half was not
told her, proclaiming, That happy were his men, and happy were his servants,
who stood before him to hear his wisdom: And blessed God who had set him on the
Throne of Israel to do Equity and Righteousness. And Solomon gave her very
great gifts, and she departed.

Next, Ruth.
most memorable is the kindness of Ruth toward Naomi, being only her
Mother-in-Law, yet she would not leave her, but travel with her into a far
Country, saying thus unto her, Whither thou go, I will go; and where thou
dwelest, there will I dwell: Thy people shall be my people; and thy God, my
God. Where thou die, will I die, and there will I be buried: The Lord do so
to me, and more also, if ought but death do part thee, and me.

And upon this resolution, they travel together, and Ruth came in the Harvest
time, to gleane Corn in the field of Boaz, who took notice of her, and used her
kindly) and shortly after married her (she being then a Widow) and her
Mother-in-law Naomi became Nurse unto it, of whom according to the flesh came
Christ, for the Text says that Boaz begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse,
and Jesse begat David.

Then follows the story of the thrice noble Queen Esther, Esther.
who was so happy that she found favor in the sight of all that looked upon
her; and King Ahashuerus loved Esther above all the Women, and she found grace
and favor in his sight more then all the Virgins, and when all the people of
the Jews, were in apparent danger of utter destruction, she commanded all the
Jews to fast three nights and three days, promising that she and her maids
would also fast, which they did, and she put on this heroic disposition and
resolution; saying, I will go into the King, though it be contrary to the Law,
and if I perish I perish, and so she preserved all the Nation (being her own
people) and caused Haman their enemy, and the Plotter of all mischief, to be
hanged upon the same gallows, which he had prepared for Mordecai her Uncle.

Now Gentlewomen of the first and best rank, give me leave, before we depart,
and before I bid you farewell, to take you by the hand, and lead you to the 31.
Chapter of the Proverbs, for I would have you (and so would God) to be as well
good Hus-wives, as good Wives, and there ye are taught your duty thus, taking
notice of the preamble before it, which runs thus; What my son, and what the
Son of my womb, and what O son of my desires; Give not thy strength unto Women,
etc. Then she comes to a virtuous Woman, confessing her price is far above the
Pearls, and that the heart of her husband trusts in her, and that she will
do him good and not evil all the days of her life, and that she will seek for
Wool and Flax, and labor cheerfully with her hands; and how she, like the ships
of Merchants brings her food from afar, and how she rises when it is yet
night, and gives the portion to her Household, and the ordinary to her maids;
and how with the fruit of her hands, she planteth a Vineard, and how her Candle
is not put out by night, and how she puts her hands to the Wheel, and her
singers to the spindle; and how she fears not the snow to her Family, for
they are clothed in Scarlet; and how she makes ber self Carpets, and fine
Linen and Purple, also Sheets and Girdles, and how she overseeth the walls of
her Household, and eats not the bread of idleness; and how her Children rise
up, and call her blessed; and her Husband does daily praise her, saying, Many
Daughters have done virtuously, but thou surmountest them all: Concluding, that
Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vanity; but a Woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised. And that the fruit of her hands shall be given her, and
her own works praise her in the Gates; for she so adorneth her Husband, that
she makes him to be known in the Gates, and when he sits with the Elders of
the Land.

Neither dare I leave out of my Catalogue (...) Elizabeth, Elizabeth.
the Wife of Zacharias, and both esteemed just before God: And she was the
Mother of John the Baptist, who was great in the sight of the Lord, and so
highly honored, as to Baptize our Savior in his own person in the River of
Jordan, when he was Thirty years of age. A man that neither drank Wine, nor
strong drink; his Raiment being made of Camels Hair, and his diet being Locusts
and wild Honey. And I shall desire of you (by way of parenthesis) to observe
with me, what a wicked and perverse people the Jews were, and no way to be
pleased: For our Savior came Eating and drinking, and they said of him,
Behold, a Wine bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners: And this John came
neither eating nor drinking, and they said, Behold he has a Devil.

Now to proceed in the story, Anna.
At the Dedication of our Savior, there was in the Temple a Prophetess one
Anna, who was of a great age, and had lived seven years with an Husband from
her Virginity; and she was a Widow of about Eighty four years, and went not out
of the Temple, but served God with Fastings and Prayers night and day; who
confessed likewise the Lord, and spoke of him to all that looked for redemption
in Jerusalem.

And presently follows, That as he came to a City called Naim, Behold, there
was a dead man carried out, the only son of his Mother, and Jesus had
compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not; and he only touched the Beer,
and said unto the young man, Arise, and he rose up and began to speak, and he
delivered him to his Mother.

Also our Savior so tendered the poor Widow, That he over ruled the wicked
heart of the unrighteous judge, who neither feared God, nor reverenced Man, to
do her right to avoid her importunity.

Christ beheld the rich men which cast their gifts into the Treasury, and
withal took notice of a poor Widow, who cast in there two Mites, and he said
thus of her: Of a truth this poor Widow has cast in more then they all; for
they out of their superfluity cast into the offerings of God, but she of her
penury has cast in all the living that she had.

As our Savior was going to be crucified, there followed him a great multitude
of Women, who bewailed and lamented him, and he took notice of them, and said
unto them, Daughter of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves and
your Children, for the days will come, when men shall say, Blessed are the
Barren, and the Wombs that never bare, and the Paps that never gave suck.

Now I come to the good Woman of Canaan, Good Woman of Cannan.
who had a very great measure of Faith; for, her Daughter being miserably vexed
with a Devil, she came unto Jesus and cried, saying unto him: Have mercy on me
O Lord, thou Son of David, but he answered her not a word: Then came his
Disciples to him, and besought him saying, send her away for she cries after
us, (whereby it is apparent that her faith wrought this importunity) to which
our Savior answered, that he was not sent, but unto the lost Sheep of the
House of Israel; yet she came and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me; and he
answered and said, It is not good to take the Childrens bread and cast it to
dogs, to which she (being fu^l of Faith) replied thus; Truth Lord, yet indeed
the dogs eat of the crumbs, which fall from their Masters table; Then Jesus
answered and said unto her. O Woman great is thy Faith, be it unto thee as thou
beleevest, and her daughter, was made whole at that hour.

But for examples of good Women, Mary Magdalen.
I will conclude with Mary Magdalen, out of whom Christ had cast seven Devils,
for in her youth, she was a most lewd and vicious woman, but afterward proved
an exemplary Convert, who a little before our Saviors Passion, having a Box of
very costly ointment powered it on his head as he sat at the Table; at which
his Disciples took exceptions, Why (being so costly) it was not sold and given
to the poor. To which our Savior made this answer, saying, Why trouble ye the
Woman, for she has wrought a good work upon me; for ye have the poor always
with you, but me shall ye not have always. Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever
this Gospel shall be preached throughout all the World, there shall also this
that she has done, be spoken of for a remembrance of her.

How then durst I leave it out. Also ye know how she washed his feet with her
tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head.

Lastly and chiefly, consider her zeal and devotion, how upon the first day of
the week early, while it was yet dark (for she came to seek when there was no
light to find) yet she came unto the Sepulcher; and seeing the stone taken
away from the Tom be what haste she made; for she ran to call Peter and John,
and albeit both these Disciples (after a search by them made) and not finding,
returned to their own home, yet she stood without at the Sepulcher weeping,
whereupon a great Divine noted and collected four observations worthy of
Memory. Thus, 1. Mary, that is her Appellation or Nomination. 2. Stood, that is
her station. 3. Without at the Sepulcher, that is her desolation. 4. Weeping,
that is her lamentation.


And she sees Gods love unto her being thus alone, for two Angels appeared to
her in white, the one sitting at the head, the other at the feet, where the
body of Jesus was laid, to whom she spoke thus, saying, They have taken away
the body of my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. And immediately
Jesus himself appeared to her, but she thought he had been the Gardner; and so
communed with her: But then Jesus spoke unto her, saying, Mary. Then she knew
his voice, and turned her self, and said unto him, Rabboni, which is to say,
Master. Jesus says unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
Father, but go to my Brethren and acquaint them. So she went and told the
Disciples, that she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken these things unto
her.

The last Cordial I have to give unto virtuous Women, is a good one, and very
comfortable, and that is to show you, That the Lord has made choice of your
weak Sex, to be instrumental in these particular eminent and remarkable things
following.

1. As when he was pleased to see forth the excellent grace of Love, he
compares it far surpassing the love, not of Men but of Women, who are most apt
and prone to abound therein. 2. Likewise, when he would express matter of
Sorrow and Lamentation, he also compares that to Women, thus, As a Woman
mourning for the Husband of her youth; as if there were no greater mourning. 3.
But lastly and chiefly to your Immortal Glory and Everlasting Honor, Take
notice that Women were made the Witnesses, and the first and only Witnesses of
our Saviors Resurrection, and therein preferred before Peter and John, who was
that beloved Disciple.
Thus much touching good and andvertuous Women, for their Direction,
Encouragement, Imitation, and Consolation.

Now concerning the Marthaes of the world, or the worldly Marthaes, I could
wish them with Mary, to choose the better part, and not cumber themselves about
many things, and neglect that unum necessariums, That one thing which is
necessary. And that they would be wise to think of their latter end, and to
provide for eternity, knowing, that they dwell here in Houses made of Clay,
whose foundation is the Dust. And so labor to attain the peace of a good
Conscience, to be unto them a continual feast, and to believe that god liness
is great gain; for it has the promise, both of this life, and of the life to
come: And to be able to distinguish between things terrene, momentary, and
transitory, and things durable, eternal, and celestial; and to consider, that
the body is but a base Country Churl, but the Soul is a very great Lord; and
if they had two such guests to entertain in their Houses, they would blush and
be ashamed to provide for the Churl all fitting accommodations, and to neglect
the great Lord, making little or slow provision for him.

Also to consider, That the World it self must Wax old, as does a Garment, and
a time will come, and that shortly, when the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon
shall not give her light; when the stars shall fall from Heaven, and the powers
of Heaven shall be shaken; and when ye shall hear the sound of the Trumpet in
your ears, saying, Arise ye dead, and some to judgment; and then the Graves
shall be opened, and the dead shall arise; the Sea also shall yield up her
dead, and all flesh shall appear naked before Gods triou^^ seat, then and there
to receive a recompense and reward (not for, but) according to the works which
they have done, be they good (...).

And these things being so, as most certainly they are, what manner of persons
ought ye to be in holy Conversations, and in Godliness. How ought ye to give
all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; that ye be in the number
of Christ's little flock, for whom he has prepared a Kingdom before the
foundation of the world was laid, that so whenever it shall please him to
summon you to appear before him, whether in the morning, or in the eveving, the
Cock crowing, or the dawning of the day, ye may with the wise Virgins, have
your Oil burning in your Lamps (even the fruit of a pure Conversation) and so
may enter into your Masters joy: And having been found faithful in little, ye
may be made ruler, and over much, and then ye must be content to make your Bed
in the darkness, and to say to Corruption, Thou art my Mother; and to the
Worms, Ye are our sisters, and our brethren.

Therefore it is high time for you to give over reading the 31 Chapter of the
Proverbs, which teaches only matter of good Houswivery, and be more careful
to read and study other places of the Scripture, which do put you in mind of
the Immortality of the Soul, that so ye may make timely provision for it, and
cry out with the Jailer in the Acts, saying, Men and Brethren, what shall we do
to be saved.

By this time, I doubt not, but ye have a desire to go to Heaven; and for your
furtherance in so happy a journey, I will be bold to acquaint you with three
ways leading thereunto.

First, there be some that steal into Heaven, by works of Mercy, and deeds of
Charity, when they feed the hungary, and clothe the naked, and suffer none to
perish for want of clothing, nor no poor to be without covering, but rather
that their Loins may bless them, being warned with the Fleece of their sheep;
and yet all this to be so performed, that the right hand shall not know what
the left hand does.

Secondly, there be some who are driven and beaten as 'twere into Heaven; as by
trouble, affliction, persecution, poverty, sickness or the like, for then you
know what is spoken in the Psalmist; In their affiction they will seek me
diligently.

Thirdly, there are others who take or seize the Kingdom of Heaven, by force
and violence, as it is spoken in the Scripture, the Kindom of Heaven suffers
violence; as when it is gotten by earnest importunity; as the poor importunate
Widow, who overcame the unrighteous Judge, and even forced him to grant her
request; or as Jacob contending all night with Christ himself, telling him,
that unless he blessed him, he would not let him go.

So if it please God to make you so happy as to find out either of these three
ways, ye will then attain the end of your hopes, which is the salvation of
your Souls; which is of far greater price and value then all the things in the
World, nay, then ten thousand Worlds; for then ye shall come to live and reign
with the Eternal God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and with his glorious Quire
of Heavenly Angels, and of the Spirits of just and holy men, who have departed
this life in the fear of his blessed name; and there shall ye enjoy fullness of
joy, and that for evermore.

Now I come to my last and worst sort of Women, namely, lewd and vicious women,
who as I told you in the beginning, are neither good for this World, nor for
the World to come; and therefore I take the least care of them, and will bestow
the least pains upon them, and the book of God makes mention of too many of
them.

For there we read of the monstrous impiety and horrid lust of Potiphars Wife,
so often assaulted the chastity of virtuous Joseph, and that with impudency
after denial.

Ye read also of the intolerable pride of Queen Vasthi, in not obeying the
command of the King her husband, and what became of her.

And of painted Jezabel, whose blood the very Dogs licked up.

Also of Jobs Wife, who gave her husband no better council, then to curse God
and die; and afterward in his greatest misery, how her breath was strange unto
him, though he entreated her for the fruit of her body.

And here I may not omit what experience almost every Assizes brings forth,
both in our days and the days of our Forefathers, that seldom any notable
Robberies or cruel Murders have been committed, but a woman or more had a hand
in it, and were the chief Contrivers and Actors thereof, destroying the Mother
with her sucking Babe, and that without any pity, compassion or remorse; and
seldom any Assizes pass, but some of them are indicted, convicted, and justly
condemned and executed for killing and most unnaturally destroying the fruit of
their own bodies.

But I call to remembrance a Book heretofore written by one Green, to teach
men to beware of Cutpurses, and discovering all their cunning secrets, and
underhand practices, where, by in the judgment of wise men, he did much more
harm then good, and taught diverse to become Cutpurses, who before had no thought
to bend their studies that way: Therefore I will forbear diverse particular most
wicked and barbarious actions (which I could mention) done and committed by
Women, which notwithstanding condemns not the generality of that Sex (God
forbid) but shows that Passion and Affection in them, either in love or hatred,
is much more extreme and violent then in Men, according to the verse of the
Poet.

Aut te vehementer amat vel te capitaliter odit.

Either they will love entirely, or hate deadly.

Lastly, Taking notice that almost in every particular County of the Nation,
where there are Husbands and Wives who live a sunder, and do not cohabite yet
not for the act of Adultery, which is the (and the only) cause of Separation;
but for other sinister respects, whereby it is evident, that they live in sin,
and provoke God to wrath and indignation against them, and their posterity.

Therefore I much pitying their cases, and having therein in some measure, my
self, been a suffer, I shall endeavor by the assistance of Almighty God to open
their eyes, and convince their judgments of the unlawfulness thereof, and
manifold inconveniences arising thereby; for it had been better they had never
one seen another. But I come to my proofs, and that out of the Word of God,
which are both satisfactory and unanswerable.

First, We are to call to mind the solemn promises and engagements they made
to their Husbands at the time of their marriage, for then the Minister asked
them thus.

Will thou have this man to thy weded Husband, to live together in the holy
estate of Matrimony. Will thou obey him, and serve him, love, honor, and keep
him in sickness and in health, and forsaking all other, keeping thee only unto
him so long as ye both shall live.

To which the Woman answered, I will.

Here is an absolute, not a conditional promise, and that for term of life to
live together, else there is no obedience, nor love, etc.

Next they took their Husbands by the right hand, saying after the Minister
these words.

J. A. take thee B. to my wedded Husband: To have and to hold from this day
forward, for better for worse, for richer for poorer; in sickness and in
health: To love, cherish and to obey, till death us depart according to Gods
holy Ordinance, and thereto I give thee my troth. A sacred Obligation and a
Knot inviolable, during life, though sickness or poverty should intervene, or
any other disaster.

Moreover, the Minister did join their right hands together, using these words.
Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

If no man can do it, then they themselves cannot, much less one of them.

Also the Minister gave them this Blessing.

God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost bless you, etc. and so
fill you with all spiritual benediction and grace, that ye may so live together
in this life, that in the world to come, ye may have life everlasting. No
benediction nor grace, unless they live together, not asunder.

Then observe the Prayer afterward, one running thus.

O eternal God, Creator and Preserver of all mankind, send thy blessing upon
this Man and this Woman, that as Isaac and Rebecca lived faithfully together so
these persons may surely perform the Vow and Covenant-between them made. The
Scripture declares, That cursed is he or she, who makes a Vow, and performs
it not.

Another Prayer is thus.

O God, who did appoint, that out of Man, Woman should take her beginning; and
by knitting them together, did teach, That it should never be lawful to put
asunder those, whom thou by Matrimony haste made one. Grant that this Woman may
be loving and amiable to her Husband (...) Rachel, wise as Rebecca, faithful
and obedient as Sarah, and in all quietness, sobriety, and peace, be a follower
of holy and godly Matrons. Here is likewise a living together, and not putting
asunder, and obedience prayed for on the Wives behalf, as likeliest to Rebecca.

More out of the Holy Scripture.

Genesis, Chap. 3. It was part of the punishment which God imposed upon you for
the transgression of your Grandmother Eve, (...) re^^ing you, that your desire
shall be subject to your Husband, and they shall reign over you.

If God has so appointed, and that justly, who dare disobey.

Genesis 24. Chap. verse 55. Rebeccaes Mother and Brother desired that she might
stay with them at least ten days, before she went to Isaac, and the matter
being referred unto her, she made choice to go presently.

Whereby, it is apparent that the company of a Husband, is to be preferred
before Mother or Brother, or any Friends or Relations whatsoever.

Numb. 13.8. The husband has power to disallow the vow of the Wife, and make
it of none effect.

Whereby it is manifest that his power is very great, and much more to entreat
or command her Company.

Deuteronomy. 28.56. The delicate Woman who could not set the sole of her foot to the
ground for tenderness, the Text says, her eye shall be evil toward the husband
of her Bosom.

So that an evil eye toward the Husband is peculiar to a proud wife.

Job 19.17. Holy Job complained, that his breath was strange to his Wife
though he entreated, etc.

Job would not have complained for nothing, therefore it was a great Judgment.

Prove. 31.10, 12. Who can find a virtuous Woman, for her price is above Rubies;
the heart of her husband does safely trust in her; she will do him good, and
not evil all the days of her life.

This cannot be done if they live asunder, for then there is doing neither of
good nor evil in relation each to other.

Jer. 3.20. A woman treacherously departs from her husband; so have ye deabt
treacherously with me, O house of Israel, says the Lord.

So that no departing can be without being guilty of Treachery.

New Testament.

Mat. 19.6. Our Savior speaking of Man and Wife, says, They are no more
twain, but one flesh; what therefore God has joined together, let not man put
asunder.

A fearful thing to untie Gods knot, and them impossible for one to have, and
the other to want.

Romans 7.2. The Woman which has a Husband, is bound by the Law to her Husband
so long as he lives.

So that it is as lawful for an Apprentice to run away from his Master, as for
a Wife to depart from her Husband without his consent.

1 Cor. 7.4. The Wife has not power of her own body, but the Husband.

How then can the Wife dispose of any thing which is not her own.

Verse 16. What know thou O Wife, whether thou shall save thy Husband.

A strange Salvation likely to be wrought when they live many miles asunder.

Verse 34. The married Woman cares for the things of the World, how she may
please her Husband.

Which is done in nothing more, then to live with him if he desire it.

Verse 10. The Apostle says, I command, and yet not I, but the Lord: Let not
the Wife depart from her Husband.

If the high God command, who dare disobey.

Verse 13. The Woman which has an Husband that believes not, if he be pleased
to dwell with her, let her not leave him.

If unbelief be not a cause of separation, what then can be (except
Fornication) I am sure neither poverty, sickness, etc.

1 Cor. 9.5. St. Paul says, Have we not power to lead about a Wife, as well as
other Apostles.

It seems in those days, that good Wives should follow their Husbands where
ever they went.

1 Cor. 11.3. The Head of the Woman is the Man.

A strange thing to have the Head and the Body many miles asunder.

Verse 8, 9. The Man is not of the Woman, but the Woman of the Man; neither was
the Man created for the Man.

A fearful thing for the Wife to separate, not regarding the end of her
Creation, for whom she was made.

Verse 12. The Woman is of the Man, but the Man is by the Woman.

If of the Man, how can they part stakes and withdraw?

Col. 3.18. The Apostle commands Wives to submit to their own husbands.

Then certainly must dwell with them, if they desire it, else it is not
submission but rebellion, the Wife not having power of her own body.

Ephesians. 5.23. The Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head of
the Church: Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let Wives be
unto their Husbands in every thing.

Oh that the great God of Heaven and Earth, should compare the tie between
Husband and Wife, to the Mystical Union between Christ and his Church!

1 Pet. 3.1. Wives, be in subjection to your own Husbands; that if any obey not
the Word, they may without the Word be wone by the conversation of the Wives.

Conversation and Cohabitation, are inseparable companions: For how can they
converse, unless they cohabite.

FINIS.

