His Majesty's Gracious SPEECH to both Houses of Parliament, at their
Prorogation.
Wherein you may be pleased to observe, That the Words in the Black Letter are
left out in Thompsons Pamphlet.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WHen I declared in Council My intention of putting off the Parliament to a
time so remote as November, it was not without having very well weighed and
considered the Grounds and Reasons that induced Me to it; Nor can I be
prevailed upon by any thing that has happened since (in reference to Affairs with
in the kingdom) to alter or repent of that Resolution, but am rather confirmed
and settled in it. When I have said this, I must tell you at the same time,
That considering the present danger which threatens some of Our Neighbors and
Allies, in whose Interests and Safety We are so nearly concerned, it may be of
very ill consequence to make a Prorogation for so long a time as should in the
least dishearten Our Friends that rely upon Us; for this single Reason
therefore, I think fit to appoint a Day for your Meeting again in April; and
having thus let you see My care of you, in relation to Affairs abroad, I must
observe to you, That the Distractions and Jealousies at Home are of such a
nature, and so heightened and improved by the Malice and Industry of Ill men,
that I am unalterably of Opinion, that a longer interval of Parliament will be
absolutely necessary for composing and quieting of Men's minds; in order to
which, I am afraid, the most proper Remedies would prove ineffectual, without
the assistance of some farther time.

I do therefore Resolve, That from the Day whereon you are to Meet in April,
there shall be a farther Prorogation, unless the Condition of Our Allies abroad
do then require Our immediate Assistance.

His Majesty's SPEECH as Printed in Thompsons Domestic.
Wherein you may please to observe, That what is Printed in the Black Letter,
are Alterations from the Kings Speech.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WHen I did declare in Council my intention to Prorogue this Parliament to so
remote a time as November, it was not without having very well considered the
Grounds and Reasons that induced Me to it, nor can I be prevailed with in any
thing that has since happened in relation to the Affairs in the kingdom to alter
that My Relolution, but am rather confirmed and settled in it. And when I have
said this, I must tell you at the same time, that upon consideration of the
present danger that threatens some of Our Neighbors and Allies abroad, in
whose Interest and Safety We are so nearly concerned, it may be of very ill
consequence to defer the sitting of the Parliament for so long a time, as
should dishearten Our Friends that rely upon Us: For which single Reason
therefore I think fit to appoint a Day for your Meeting in April. And having
thus let you see My care for our Affairs and Neighbors abroad, I must observe
to you the dissatisfactions and Jealousies at home, are of such a nature, and
so heightened and improved by the malice and industry of ill men, that I am of
opinion, that a longer Interval of Parliament will be necessary * to purge them
out. In order to which, as the most proper remedy, I intend to defer your
Sessions to a longer time. And I do therefore resolve, that from the day of
your Prorogation in April, there shall be a further Prorogation, unless the
condition of Our Affairs abroad seem to require it otherwise.


