THE DECLARATION OF Captain JAMES HIND (close Prisoner in Newgate) and his
Acknowledgment, Protestation, and full Confession at his Examination before the
Council of State, on the 10. of this instant November. 1651. Together with a
perfect Narrative, (written by his advice) of all his strange proceedings and
Travels; setting forth the great difficulties and dangers he escaped in
several Countries, upon his adventuring to the King of Scots at Sterling.
With his Letter to the said King; and his Resolution to suffer any kind of
death, rather then to impeach or betray any Man.

The true Portraicture of Captain James Hind.
portrait of James Hind

London, Printed for G. HORTON, 1651.

The Declaration of Captian James Hind, together with his Acknowledgment, and
full Confession, at his Examination before the Council of State: And a perfect
Narrative of all his Travels; setting forth the great difficulties and dangers
he escaped in several countries, in his adventuring to the King of Scots at
Sterling, etc.
Indeared Contrymen,
WHereas there has been sundry and various Relations of the proceedings of
Capt. James Hind, fraught with impertinent stories, and new-invented fictions;
I am (in order thereunto) desired by the said Mr. Hind, to publish this ensuing
Declaration, for sattisfaction, and true information of the People; together
with a Narrative of his Travels, which I shall (here) impartially represent, as
follows:

The Declaration of Captain James Hind, etc.
WHereas the Heavens are doomers of men's deeds, and God holds a balance in his
hand, to reward with favor, all those that walk uprightly; and to revenge with
justice, all those that steers their ways to the contrary; even so may the
life of man well be compared to the Ocean Seas, that for every calm has a
thousand storms; for a little pleasure much pain; and for high desire, much
discontent: For as folly persuaded me to lead a sinful life, so at length
Justice may bring me to a sorrowful end; (but God requires mercy in the midst
thereof) Yet notwithstanding, I am confident, the wrongs which I have committed
does not cry aloud for vengeance; but rather the Mercy that I showed in all my
Designs and Actions, may plead an acquitment of all punishment: However, Gods
Will be done; for while I live my heart shall not faint me: I sorrow not to
die; neither shall I grieve at the manner of my death, though it be never so
untimely. Yet could I have but that happiness, as to fight for my life, and to
encounter an Enemy in the field, it would be an infinite comfort, and joy of
spirit to me. But blessed be the Name of the Lord, that he has given me an
humble spirit in these my days of Tribulation, and a heart of repentance to
bewail my former course of life: For every wrong I have done (called now to
remembrance) wrings drops of blood from my heart; although I never shed one:
Neither did I ever take the worth of a penny from a poor man; but at what time
soever I met with any such person, it was my constant custom, to ask, Who he
was for? if he replied, For the King, I gave him 20 shillings: but if he
answered, For the Parliament, I left him, as I found him. As for any other
Exploits since 1649. I am guiltless of: For in the same year, May 2. I departed
England (as appears by my Confession to the Council at White-Hal on the 10
instant, 1651.) and went to the Hague; But after I had been there three days,
I departed for Ireland, in the Vessel that carried the Kings Goods, and landed
at Galloway: in which Kingdom I staid three quarters of a year; part of which
time I was Corporal to the Marquess of Ormond's Lifeguard: And being at
Yonghall, when that was surprised by the Parliaments Forces, was there wounded
in the right Arm and Hand with Halberts. After which (making a narrow escape) I
went to Duncannon; but because of the sickness, came thence to Scilly, staid
there eight months; and from thence I came to the Isle of MAN, staid there 13
weeks; and went thence to Scotland, arrived at Sterling, where I sent a Letter
to his Majesty, acquainting his Highness of my arrival; and represented my
service, etc. Which was favorably accepted of; for no sooner had the King
notice of my coming; but immediately I had admittance into his chamber, and kissed
his hand; and after some discourse, his Majesty commended me to the D. of
Buck^ngham then present, to ride in his troop because his Lifeguard was full.
I came to England with the said Troop, was in the Engagement at Warrington,
also at Worcester, where I kept the field, till the King was fled, and in the
evening, the Gates being full of flying persons, I leapt over the Wall on foot
by my self only, traveled the Country, and lay three days under Bushes and
hedges, because of the Soldiery, till I came to Sir John Packington's Woods,
where I lay five days; and afterward came on foot to London, by the name of
James Brown, lodged five weeks in London, and was taken 9 November. at Denzy's
the Barber near Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.

This is all that was declared and confessed by him, who remains captivated in
close Prison in the Gaol of Newgate. JAMES HIND.
Novem. 15. 1651.
On Monday being the 10 instant, by Order from the Right Honorable the Council
of State; the said Captain Hind was brought to White Hall, where he was
examined before a Committee; and diverse questions put to him, in relation to
his late Engagement with Charles Stuart; and whether he was the man that
accompanied the Scots King, for the furtherance of his escape.

To which Hind answered, That he never saw the King, since the fight at
Worcester; neither did he know of his getting off the field; but he was now
glad to hear that he had made so happy an escape, etc.

After some time spent in taking of his Examination, it was ordered by the
Committee, that he should be sent prisoner to the Gate House, till the further
pleasure of the Council of State was known therein; which accordingly was done,
and the said Hind was guarded from White Hall, to the aforesaid prison: with 4.
files of Musketeers, where he remained in safe custody that night.

The next day being Tuesday he was remanded back from thence (by special Order
and Authority from the Council of State) to Newgate; and accordingly was
brought in a Coach with iron Bolts on his Legs; and Cap. Compton, and two other
Messengers belonging to the Council to guard them: And about two of the clock
in the Afternoon they brought him to the said place, where Capt. Compton showed
the Master of the prison an Order of the Council for his commitment; and also
close imprisonment, and to let no persons whatsoever to have access to him.
This Order was accordingly observed: But during the time that the Hole was
preparing for him, and the three soldiers removed to another place, that were
in it before, for misdemeanors of great concernment; diverse persons frequented
the place to see him, asking him several questions: To whom he returned very
civil and mild answers: And amongst the rest, a Gentleman came to him, born in
the same Town that he was, viz. Chipping-Norton; who took acquaintance of him,
and saluting him, said; Truly Countryman I am sorry to see you in this place.
He answered, That imprisonment was a comfort to him, in suffering for so good
and just a Cause, as adhering to the KING. His Country man replied, That to
morrow (being Wednesday) he was to return home, and that if he had any thing to
recommend to his wife, or friends, he would communicate it: I thank you Sir
(said Hind) Pray remember my love to them all, and certify them, that although
I shall never see them more in this world; yet in the world to come, I hope we
shall meet in glory. Then the Gentleman took a Glass of Beer, and drank to him;
which he pledged about half; And filling up his Glass, said; Come, (taking the
Gentleman by the hand) here is a good health to my Master the King; and God
bless and preserve his Majesty: But the Gentleman refusing to drink the same
upon such an account, moved Hind to passion, who said; The Devil take all
Traitors: Had I a thousand lives, and at liberty, I would adventure them all
for King Charles; and pox take all Turn-coats. Forbear Sir, replied one of the
Keepers, and be not in passion.

Not in the least, I am free from it; but I could wish more love and loyalty
amongst you all: As for my own part, should I live a hundred years, I would not
flinch from my principles; and then immediately (his time being short) he again
spoke as follows:

Well Gentlemen! This is all that I have to say to you before I go to my
captivity: I desire all men to be true to their Trust, and to stand firm and
unmovable to their principles; and those that have laid a foundation for their
King (moving his hat) let them endeavor to raise it; and those that are on the
contrary party, let them strive to level it: As for my part, I had not been
here now, if there had not been a Judas abroad. Then one of the Keepers called
him from the fireside to the Window, and looked upon the Irons about his legs,
to see whether they fitted him. Well! (said Mr. Hind) all this I value no more
then a three pence; I owe a debt to God, and a debt I must pay; blessed be his
Name, that he has kept me from shedding os innocent blood, which is now a
great comsort to me: And indeed, this likewlse is a supportment to me, that I
have taken from the rich, and given to the poor; for nothing does more
impoverish the Cottage-keeper, then the rich Farmer, and full-fed Lawyer: Eut
truly I could wish, that thing was as little used in England amongst Lawyers,
as the eating of Swines-flesh was amongst the Jews: They were the men I chiefly
aimed at.

On Friday last a Gentleman came to him, importuning him to petition the
Parliament for life, and to impeach and make a discovery of his Associates,
persuading him in so doing, the Parliament would be merciful to him. No, no,
Sir! I defy such treachery and persidiousness: no man living shall be by me
impeached; if I die, I Will die alone; I am resolved to keep my Conscience clear
and untainted of that bloody Fact, or guilt of Sin. He stands accused of
High Treason; and has two men to watch every night with him: They burn candle
night and day. Since his commitment, he has sent a Letter to his wife,
inserting many comfortable expressions; Which Letter bears this inscription;

From my close imprisonment, and Captivity in Newgate. JAMES HIND.

FINIS.

