THE VNDECEIVING OF THE PEOPLE In the point of TITHES: Wherein is showed, I.
That never any Clergy in the Church of God has been, or is maintained with
less charge to the Subject, then the established Clergy of the Church of
England. II. That there is no Subject in the Realm of England, who gives any
thing of his own, toward the maintenance of his Parish-Minister, but his
Easter-Offering. III. That the change of Tithes into Stipends, will bring
greater trouble to the Clergy, then is yet considered; and far less profit to
the Country, then is now pretended.


By P. H. TRELEINIE Gent.

1 COR. 9. 7. Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? Who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock?

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Clark, and are to be sold at his shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1648.

THE UNDECEIVING OF THE PEOPLE In the point of TITHES.
AMongst those popular deceits which have been set abroad of late to abuse the
people, there is not any one which has been cherished with more endeerments,
then a persuasion put into them of not paying Tithes: partly, because it
carries no small show of profit with it, but principally as it seems a
conducible means to make the Clergy more obnoxious to them, and to stand more
at their devotion then they have done formerly. Upon these hopes, it has been
the endeavors of some leading men to represent it to the rest as a public
grievance, that the Clergy being but an handful of men in comparison of all
the rest of the kingdom, should go away with the tenth (or as some say, the
sixth part) of the fruits of the earth; and that the Minister sitting still in
his contemplations, should live upon the sweat of other men's brows, and taking
pains amongst the people but one day in seven, should have the tenth part of
their estates allotted to them for their maintenance. And it is no marvel if
some few, on these mis-perswasions, have importuned the high Court of
Parliament from time to time with troublesome and clamorous Petitions to
redress this wrong; and put them up also in the name of whole Counties
(although the generality of those Counties had no hand therein) to add the
greater credit and authority to them. In which design, although they have
prevailed no further on the two houses of Parliament, then to be sent away with
this general promise, that in due time their Petitions should be taken into
consideration; As in the answer to those of Hartford, Kent, etc.
and that it was the pleasure of the several and respective Houses, that in the
mean season they should take care that Tithes be duly paid according to Law:
yet they which have espoused the quarrel, will not so be satisfied. For when
it pleased the Lords and Commons to set out an Ordinance bearing date November.
8. 1644. for the true payment of Tithes and other duties according to the Laws
and Customs of this Realm; there came out presently a pamphlet entitled, The
Dismounting of the Ordinance for Tithes; followed and backed by many a
scandalous paper of the self-same strain. And when it seemed good to the said
Lords and Commons, on the precipitancy of some of the Clergy under
sequestration, to set out their additionall Ordinance of the 9th of August,
anno 1647. it was encountered presently with a scurrilous pamphlet, entitled, A
Preparation for a day of thanksgiving to the Parliament for their late
Ordinance for Tithes, newly mounted and well charged with treble damages, for
the peoples not giving the tenth part of their estates to the Clergy or
Impropriators. And this, according to the style of those Petitions, is said to
be the result of the Parliaments friends in Hartfordshire; though I am verily
persuaded that few, if any of the Gentry and men of quality in the County, were
acquainted with it. But be it the result of few or many of the Parliaments
friends (though I conceive they are but backfriends to the Parliament, who set
so slight a value on their Constitutions) the Title does afford two things
worthy consideration: First, that the maintenance of the Clergy here by Law
established, is said to be by giving to them the tenth part of every man's
estate: and secondly, that the blow goes higher then before it did, and aims
not only at the devesting of the Church of her ancient Patrimony, but at the
depriving of the Gentry of their Impropriations, which many of them hold by
lease, many by inheritance, all by as good a title as the Law can make them. I
know there has been great pains taken by some learned men, to state the
Institution and Right of Tithes, and several judicious Tractates have been
writ about it: which notwithstanding have not found such entertainment as they
did deserve: partly, because being written in an Argumentative way, they were
above the reach of the vulgar Reader; but principally, because written by men
engaged in the cause, and such as might be by assed with their own interesse in
it. For my part, I am free from all those engagements which may incline me to
write any thing for my private ends, being one that pays Tithes and such
other duties as the Laws and Ordinances do enjoin. And though I sit far off
from the fountain of business, and cannot possibly see at so great a distance,
what might best satisfy the doubts and clamours of unquiet men: yet I shall
venture to say somewhat in a modest way toward the Vndeceiving of the People
in this point of Tithes, whose judgments have been captivated by those
mis-perswasions, which cunningly have been communicated and infused into them.
And I shall do it in a way, (if I guess aright) which has not yet been
traveled in this present point; such as I hope will satisfy all them of the
adverse party, but those who are resolved beforehand, that they will not be
satisfied. For whereas the whole controversy turns on these three hinges:
first, that the maintenance allowed the Clergy is too great for their calling,
especially considering the small number of them: secondly, that it is made up
out of the tenth part of each man's estate; and thirdly, that the changing of
this way by the payment of Tithes into that of Stipends, would be more
grateful to the Country, and more ease to the Clergy: I shall accordingly
reduce this small discourse unto these three heads. First, I will show, that
never any Clergy in the Church of God has been, or is maintained with less
charge to the Subject, then the established Clergy of the Church of England.
Secondly, that there is no man in the Realm of England, who pays any thing of
his own toward the maintenance of his Parish-Minister, but his Easter
Offering. And thirdly, that the changing of Tithes into Stipends, would bring
greater trouble to the Clergy, then is yet considered, and far less profit to
the Country, then is now pretended. These Propositions being proved, (which I
doubt not of) I hope I shall receive no check for my undertaking, considering
that I do it of a good intent to free the Parliament from the trouble of the
like Petitions, and that the common people being disabused, may quietly and
cheerfully discharge their duties according to the Laws established; and live
together with that unity and godly love which ought to be between a Minister
and his Congregation. This is the sum of my design, which if I can effect, it
is all I aim at: And with this Declaration of my mind and meaning, I trust
this short discourse of mine will be, if not applauded, yet at least excused.
First then I am to prove this point:

I. That never any Clergy in the Church of God, has been, or is maintained
with less charge to the Subject, then the established Clergy of the Church of
England.
For proof of this, we must behold the Church of God, as it stood under the Law
in the Land of Canaan, and as it now stands under the Gospel in the most
flourishing parts of Christendom. Under the Law, the Tribe of Levi was
possessed of 48 Cities, and the Territories round about them, extending every
way for the space of 2000 cubits, which in so small a Country was a greater
proportion, then the rents received by the Clergy for all the Bishopric and
Chapter lands in the Realm of England. Then had they besides Tithes (whereof
more anon) the firstborn of mankind, and all unclean beasts, which were
redeemed at the rate of five shekels apeece, amounting in one month to 12 s. 6
d. and of the firstlings of clean beasts, their blood being sprinkled on the
Altar, and the fat offered for a burnt-offering, the flesh remained unto the
Priests. Of which, see Number. 18. v. 15, 16, 17, 18. They had also the
first fruits of Wine, Oil, and Wool, Deuteronomy. 18. v. 4. yea, and of all things
else which the earth brought forth for the use of man; the first fruits of the
dough, Numb. 15. v. 20, 21. the meat offerings, the sin offerings, the
trespasse-offerings Levit. 2. 3. and 7. 5. 7.
, the shake-offerings, the heave-offerings, and the shewbread: as also of all
Eucharisticall sacrifices, the breast and the shoulder; of others, the
shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw Lev. 7. 33, 34.
; and of the whole burnt-offering, they received the skin Ib. v. 8.
. Then add, that all the males of the Tribes of Israel, were to appear thrice
yearly before the Lord, and none of them came empty-handed: and that if any had
detained any thing in part or in whole, which was due by law, he was to bring a
Ram for an offering, to make good that which was detained, and to add a fifth
part to it in the way of recompense. Besides, these duties were brought in to
the Priests and Levites without charge or trouble. And if any for their own
ease desired not to pay in kind, but to redeem the same for a sum of money;
the estimation of the due was to be made by the Priest Lev. 27. 12, 13.
; and a fifth part added, as before, for full satisfaction. In a word, such and
so many allowances had the Priests and Levites, that setting by the Tithes of
their corn and cattle and of all manner of increase; their maintenance had far
exceeded that of the English Clergy; and adding unto these the Tithes of all
creatures tithable, it does more then double it. For in the payment of their
Tithes by the Lords appointment, there was not only a full tenth of all kinds
of increase, but such an imposition laid on all kinds of grain, as came to more
then a sixth part of the crop it self: insomuch that of 6000 bushels, 1121
accrued unto the Priests and Levites; 4779. remaining only to the Husbandman.
For first, out of 6000 bushels (and so accordingly in all after that
proportion) a sixtieth part at least, (and that they termed the Therumah of
the evil eye, or the niggards first fruits) was to be set apart for the
first fruits of the threshing floor; which was one hundred in the total. Out
of the residue, being 5900 bushels, the first Tithe payable to the Levites,
which lived dispersed and intermingled in the rest of the Tribes, came to 590
bushels; and of the residue being 5310 bushels, 531 were paid for the second
Tithe unto the Priests, which ministered before the Lord in his holy Temple; yet
so, that such as would decline the trouble of carrying it in kind unto
Jerusalem, might pay the price thereof in money according to the estimate
which the Priests made of it. To which a fifth part being added (as in other
cases) did so improve this Tithe to the Priests advantage; as that which being
paid in kind, was but ten in the hundred, being thus altered into money, made
no less then threescore. Now lay these several sums together, and of 6000
bushels, as before was said, there will accrue 1121 to the Priest and Levite,
and but 4779 to the Lord or Tenant. By which account the Priests and Levites in
the tithing of 6000 bushels, received twice as much within a little, as is
possessed or claimed by the English Clergy, even where the Tithes are best
paid, without any exemptions, which are so frequent in this Kingdom.

But then perhaps it will be said, that the Levites made up one of the twelve
Tribes of Israel, and having no inheritance amongst the rest but the Tithes and
Offerings, besides the 48 Cities before mentioned, were to be settled in way
of maintenance correspondent unto that proportion. But so it is not in the case
of the English Clergy, who are so far from being one in twelve or thirteen at
most, that they are hardly one for an hundred; or as a late pamphlet does
infer, not one for five hundred; Tithegatherers no Gospel Ministers.
who on this supposition, that there are 500 men and women in a Country
parish, the lands whereof are worth 2000 l. per annum, and that the Minister
goes away with 400 l. a year of the said two thousand: concludes, that he
has as much for his own particular, as any sixscore of the parish, supposing
them to be all poor or all rich alike: and then cries out against it as the
greatest cheat and robbery that was ever practiced. But the answer unto this
is easy, I would there were no greater difficulties to perplexe the Church.
First, for the Tribe of Levi, it is plain and evident, that though it pass
commonly by the name of a Tribe, yet was it none of the twelve Tribes of
Israel, the house of Joseph being sub-divided into two whole Tribes, those
namely of Ephraim and Manasses, which made up the twelve. And secondly, it is
as evident, that it fell so short of the proportion of the other tribes, as not
to make a sixtieth part of the house of Jacob. For in the general muster which
was made of the other tribes, of men of 20 years and upwards, such only as
were fit for arms and such public services, the number of them came unto 63550
fighting men; to which if we should add all those which were under 20 years
and unfit for service, the number would at least be doubled. But the Levites
being all reckoned from a month old and above, their number was but 22000 in
all, (of which see Number. 1. 46. and 3. 39.) which came not to so many by 273 as
the only firstborn of the other Tribes: and therefore when the Lord took the
Levites for the firstborn of Israel, the odd 273 were redeemed according to
the Law, at five shekels a man, and the money which amounted to 1365 shekels
was given to Aaron and his sons, Number. 7. 47, 48. Which ground so laid according
to the holy Scriptures, let us next take a view of the English Clergy, and
allowing but one for every parish, there must be 9725, according to the number
of the parish Churches; or say ten thousand in the total, the residue being
made up of Curates officiating in the Chapels of Ease throughout the Kingdom:
and reckoning in all their male children from a month old and upwards, the
number must be more then trebled. For although many of the dignified and
beneficed Clergy do lead single lives, yet that defect is liberally supplied
by such married Curates, as do officiate under them in their several Churches.
And then, as to the disproportion which is said to be between the Clergy and
the rest of the people, one to five hundred at the least: the computation is
ill grounded, the collection worse. For first, the computation ought not to be
made between the Minister and all the rest of the parish, men, women, and
children, Masters, and Dames, menservants, and maidservants, and the stranger
which is within the gates; but between him and such whose estates are
Titheable, and they in most parishes are the smallest number. For setting by
all children which live under their parents, servants, apprentices, artificers,
day-labourers, and poor indigent people: none of all which have any interest in
the Titheable lands: the number of the residue will be found so small, that
probably the Minister may make one of the ten, and so possess no more then his
own share comes to. And then how miserably weak is the Collection which is made
from thence, that this one man should have as much as any sixscore of the rest
of the parish, (supposing that the parish did contain 500 persons) or that his
having of so much were a cheat and robbery? And as for that objection which I
find much stood on, that the Levites had no other inheritance but the Tithes
and offerings, Numb. 18. 23. whereas the English Clergy are permitted to
purchase lands, and to inherit such as descend unto them; the answer is so
easy, it will make it self. For let the Tithes enjoyed by the English Clergy
descend from them to their posterity, from one generation to another, as did
the Tithes and Offerings on the Tribe of Levi: and I persuade my self, that
none of them will be busied about purchasing lands, or be an eyesore to the
people in having more to live on then their Tithes and Offerings. Til that be
done, excuse them if they do provide for their wives and children, according
to the Laws both of God and Nature. And so much for the parallel in point of
maintenance, between the Clergy of this Church and the Tribe of Levi.

Proceed we next unto the Ministers of the Gospel at the first plantation,
during the lives of the Apostles, and the times next following; and we shall
find, that though they did not actually receive Tithes of the people, yet they
still kept on foot their right; and in the mean time, till they could enjoy
them in a peaceable way, were so provided for of all kind of necessaries, that
there was nothing wanting to their contentation. First, that they kept on foot
their Right, and thought that Tithes belonged as properly to the Evangelicall
Priesthood, as unto the Legal: seems evident unto me by S. Paul's discourse:
who proves Melchisedeks Priesthood by these two arguments: first, that he
blessed Abraham; and secondly, that he tithed him, or received Tithes of him.
For though in our English translation it be only said, that he received Tithes
of Abraham, which might imply that Abraham gave them as a gift, or a
free-will-offering, and that Melchisedek received them in no other sense: yet
in the Greek it is (...), which in plain English is, that he tithed Abraham,
and took them of him as his due, Heb. 7. 6. If then our Savior be a Priest
after the order of Melchisedek, as no doubt he is, he must have power to tithe
the people as well as to bless them, or else he comes not home to the type or
figure: which power of Tithing of the people, or receiving Tithes of them,
since he exercises not in person; it seems to me to follow upon very good
consequence, that he has devolved this part of his power on those whom he
has called and authorized for to bless the people. Certain I am, the Fathers
of the Primitive times, though they enjoyed not Tithes in specie, by reason
that the Church was then unsettled, and as it were in motion to the land of
rest, (in which condition those of Israel paid no Tithes to Levi) yet they
still kept their claim unto them, as appears clearly out of Origin, and some
other Ancients. And of this truth I think no question need be made amongst
knowing men. The only question will be this, Whether the maintenance which they
had till the Tithes were paid, were not as chargeable to the people as the
Tithes now are (supposing that the Tithes were the subjects own). For my part I
conceive it was, the people of those plous times not thinking any thing too
much to bestow on God, for the encouragement of his Ministers, and the reward
of his Prophets. They had not else sold off their lands and houses, and brought
the prices of the things which were sold, and laid them at the Apostles feet,
as we know they did, Acts 4. 34, 35. but that they meant that the Apostles
should supply their own wants out of those oblations, as well as the
necessities of their poorer brethren. I trow, the selling of all, and trusting
it to the dispensing of their Teachers, was matter of more charge to such as
had lands and houses, then paying the tenth part of their house-rent, or the
Tithe of their lands. And when this custom was laid by, (as possibly it might
end with the Apostles themselves) the offerings which succeeded in the place
thereof, and are required or enjoined by the Apostolical Canons, were so great
and manifold, that there was nothing necessary to the life of man, as honey,
milk, fowl, flesh, grapes, corn, oil, frankincense, fruits of the season, yea
strong drink, and sweet mears, which was not liberally offered on the Altars,
or oblation-Tables: insomuch as the Author of the Book called the Holy Table,
name, and thing, etc. according to his scornful manner, says of them, that
they were rather Panteries, Larders, or Storehouses, then so many consecrated
Altars. And though he make those Canons but as so many Pot-guns, yet as great
Critics as himself esteem otherwise of them, as his Antagonist in that
quarrel proves sufficiently. And as for that particular Canon which requires
these offerings, it is but an exemplification or particularizing of that which
is more generally prescribed by S. Paul, Gal. 6. 6. where he enjoyneth him that
is taught to communicate to him that teaches him, in omnibus bonis, in all his
goods, as the Rhemists read it very rightly, and not in all good things, as our
late translation. Now this Injunction reaches to all sorts of people, to the
poor as well as to the rich, as appears plainly by a passage in S. Cyprians
works, where he upbraids a wealthy widow for coming empty-handed, and without
her offering to the Altar of God, and eating of that part of the sacrifice
which the poor had offered Locuples and dives in dominicum sine sacrificio
venis, and partem sacrificii quod pauper obtulit sumis. Cypde piet. and Eleemos.
. To the improvement of the maintenance of him that teaches, not only the rich
men were to offer out of their abundance, but the poor woman also was to bring
her Mite. They had not else come home to Saint Paul's commandment, which
reaches unto all sorts of people without any exception; to every one according
to that measure of fortune which God has given him: Which clearly shows,
that though the payment of Tithes fall heavier upon landed men, then possibly
it might do in the Primitive times, before the Church was in a condition to
demand her rights: yet speaking generally of the people of a Church or parish,
the charge was greater to them then, then it has been since; the greatest
numbers of the people being freed from Tithes, (because they have no lands from
whence Tithes are payable) who could not be discharged from the communication
of their goods and substance without a manifest neglect of Saint Paul's
Injunction. More then this yet, besides what was communicated in a private way,
for the encouragement and support of him that taught; which we may well
conceive to be no small matter: the public offerings of the people were of so
great consequence, as did not only serve to maintain the Bishop, according to
his place and calling, and to provide also for the Priests or Ministers which
served under him; but also to relieve the poor and repair their Churches Beda
in histor Eccles. l. 1.
. And therefore certainly the faithful of those times were generally at more
charge to maintain their Ministry, then the Subject is with us in England; the
greatest part of which by far pay no Tithes at all to the Parish-Minister, and
no man any thing at all toward the maintenance of the Bishop, as in former
days.

Follow we our design through several Countries, and we shall find the
Clergy of most parts in Christendom, either more plentifully endowed, or else
maintained with greater charge unto the Subject, then the Clergy of the Church
of England. In France, the Author of the Cabinet computes the Tithes and
temporal Revenues of the Clergy, besides provisions of all sorts, to 80
millions of Crowns; but his account is disallowed by all knowing men. Bodin
reports from the mouth of Monfieur d' Alemant, one of the Presidents of
Accounts in Paris, that they amount to 12 millions, and 300000 of their Livres,
which is 1230000 l. of our English money; and he himself conceives that they
possess seven parts of twelve of the whole Revenues of that kingdom. The book
inscribed Comment d' Estat gives a lower estimate, and reckoning that there are
in France 200 millions of Arpens, which is a measure somewhat bigger then our
Acre, assigns 47 millions, which is near a fourth part of the whole, to the
Gallican Clergy. But which of these soever it be we think fit to stand to, it
is resolved by them all that the Baise many, which consists of offerings,
Churchings, Burials, Diriges, and such other casualties, amounts to as much
per annum, as their standing rents: upon which ground, Sir Edwin Sandys
computeth their Revenue at six millions yearly. In Italy, besides the temporal
estate of the Popes of Rome, the Clergy are conceived to have in some places a
third part of the whole; but in most a moyetie. In Spain, the certain rents of
the Archbishopric of Toledo, are said to be no less then 300000 Crowns per
annum; which is far more then all the Bishops, Deans, and Prebendaries, do
possess in England. In Germany, the Bishops for the most part are powerful
Princes; and the Canons of some Churches of so fair an Intrado, and of such
estimation amongst the people, that the Emperors have thought it no
disparagement to them, to have a Canons place in some of their churches. And as
for the Parochial Clergy in these three last countries, especially in Spain and
Italy, where the people are more superstitious then they be in Germany, there
is no question but that the Vailes and Casualties are as beneficial to them,
as the Baise many to the French.

But here perhaps it will be said that this is nothing unto us of the Realm of
England, who have shook off the superstitions of the Church of Rome, and that
our pains is spent but to little purpose, unless we can make good our Thesis in
the Churches Protestant. We must therefore cast about again: and first,
beginning with France, as before we did, we shall find that those of the
Reformed party there, not only pay their Tithes to the Beneficiary, who is
presented by the Patron to the Cure or title; or to the Church or Monastery to,
which the Tithes are settled by Appropriations; but over and above do raise an
yearly maintenance for those that minister amongst them. Just as the Irish
Papists pay their Tithes and duties unto the Protestant Incumbent, and yet
maintain their own Priests too by their gifts and offerings; or as the people
in some places with us in England, do pay their Tithes unto the Parson* or
Vicar whom the Law sets over them, and raise a contribution also for their
Lecturer, whom they set over themselves. In other Countries where the supreme
Governors are Reformed or Protestant, the case is somewhat better with the
common people, although not generally so easy as with us in England. For there
the Tithes are taken up by the Prince or State, and yearly pensions assigned
out of them to maintain the Ministers; which for the most part are so small,
and so far short of a competency (though by that name they love to call it)
that the Subject having paid his Tithes to the Prince or State, is fain to add
something out of his purse, toward the mending of the Stipend. Besides, there
being for the most part in every Church two distinct sorts of Ministers, that
is to say, a Pastor who has Cure of souls, and performs all Ministerial
offices in his congregation; and a Doctor (like our English Lectures, which
took hint from hence) who only medleth with the Word. The Pastor only has
his Stipend from the public Treasurer, the Doctor being maintained wholly (as
I am credibly informed) at the charge of the people: and that not only by the
bounty or benevolence of landed men, but in the way of Contribution, from which
no sort of people of what rank soever, but such as live on alms or the poor
man's box, is to be exempted. But this is only in the churches of Calvin's
platform, those of the Lutheran party in Denmark, Swethland, and high Germany,
having their Tithes and Glebe they had before; and so much more in offerings
then with us in England, by how much they come nearer to the church of Rome,
both in their practice and opinions, (especially in the point of the holy
Sacrament) then the English do. And as for our dear brethren of the Kirk of
Scotland, who cannot be so soon forgotten by a true born English man, the
Tithes being settled for the most part on Religious houses, came in their fall,
unto the Crown, and out of them a third was granted to maintain their Minister:
but so ill paid while the Tithes remained in the Crown, and worse when
alienated to the use of private Gentlemen, that the greatest part of the burden
for support of the Ministry, lay in the way of contribution, on the backs of
the people. And as one ill example does beget another, such Lords and Gentlemen
as had right to present to churches, following the steps of those who held the
Tithes from the Crown, soon made lay-fees of all the Tithes of their own
demesnes, and left the presentee such a sorry pittance, as made him burdensome
to his neighbors for his better maintenance. How it stands with them now since
these late alterations, those who have took the National covenant, and I
presume are well acquainted with the Discipline and estate of the Scottish Kirk
(which they have bound themselves to defend and keep) are better able to
resolve us. And so much for the proof of the first proposition, namely, That
never any Clergy in the church of God, has been, or is maintained with less
charge of the Subject, then the established Clergy of the church of England.
And yet the proof hereof will be more convincing, if we can bring good evidence
for the second also: which is,

II. That there is no man in the Kingdom of England, who pays any thing of
his own toward the maintenance and support of his Parish-Minister, but his
Easter-offering.
And that is a Paradox indeed, will the Reader say. Is it not visible to the
eye, that the Clergy have the tenth part of our corn and cattle, and of others
the increase and fruits of the earth? Do not the people give them the tenth
part of their estates, says one of my pamphlets? have they not all their
livelihoods out of our purses, says another of them? Assuredly neither so, nor
so. All that the Clergy does receive from the purse of the Subject, for all the
pains he takes amongst them, is two pence at Easter. He claims no more then
this as due, unless the custom of the place, (as I think in some parts it is)
bring it up to six pence. If any thing be given him over this by some
bountiful hand, he takes it for a favor, and is thankful for it. Such
profits as come in by marriages, churchings, and funeral Sermons, as they are
generally small, and but accidental: so he is bound unto some special
service and attendance for it. His constant standing fee, which properly may be
said to come out of the Subjects purse for the administration of the Word and
Sacraments, is nothing but the Easter-offering. The Tithes are legally his own,
not given unto him by the Subject, as is now pretended, but paid unto him as a
rentcharge laid upon the land; and that before the Subject, either Lord or
Tenant, had any thing to do in the land at all. For as I am informed by Sir
Edw: Coke in his Comment upon Littletons Tenures, li. 1. cap. 9. Sect. 73. fo.
58. It appears by the Laws and Ordinances of ancient Kings, and specially of
King Alfred, that the first King of this Realm had all the lands of England in
Demesne and les grands manours and royalties, they reserved to themselves, and
with the remnant they for the defense of the Realm enfeoffed the Barons of the
Realm with such jurisdiction as the court Baron now has. So he, the professed
Champion of the Common laws. And at this time it was, when all the lands in
England were the Kings Demesne, that Ethelwolph, the second Monarch of the
Saxon race (his father Egbert being the first which brought the former
Heptarchie under one sole Prince) conferred the Tithes of all the kingdom upon
the Church, by his royal Charter. Of which, thus Ingulph Abbot of Crowland an
old Saxon writer. Anno 855. Rex Ethelwulfus, omnium Praelatorum and Principum
suorum qui sub ipso variis Provinciis totius Anglia praeerant gratuito
Consensu, tunc primo cum decim^s terrarum and bonorum aliorum sive Catallorum,
universam dotavit Ecclesiam per suum Regium Chirographum. Ingulph.
An. 855. (which was the 18 of his reign) King Ethelwulph with the consent of
his Prelates and Princes which ruled in England under him in their several
Provinces, did first enrich the church of England with the tithes of all his
lands and goods, by his Charter Royal. Ethelward, an old Saxon, and of the
blood royal, does express it thus Decimavit de omni possessione sua in partem
Domini, and in universo regimine Principatus sui sit constituit. Ethelward.
: He gave the tithe of his possessions for the Lords own portion, and ordered
it to be so in all the parts of the Kingdom under his command. Florence of
Worcester in these words, Aethelwulphus Rex decimam totius Regni sui partem, ab
omni Regali servitio and tribut^ liberavit, and in sempiterno Graphio in Cruce
Christi, pro Redemptione Animae suae and Praedecessorum suorum uni and trino
Deo immolavit. Florent. Wigorn.
King Ethelwolfe for the redemption of his own soul, and the souls of his
Predecessors, discharged the tenth part of his Realm of all tributes and
services due unto the Crown, and by his perpetual Charter signed with the
sign of the Cross offered it to the three-one God. Roger of Hovenden has it
in the selfsame words; and Huntingdon more briefly thus, Totam terram suam
propter amorem Dei and redemptionem ad opes Ecclesiarum decimavit. Henr.
Huntingd.
that for the love of God and the redemption of his soul, he tithed his whole
dominions to the use of the Church. But what need search be made into so many
Authors, when the Charter it self is extant in old Abbot Ingulph, and in
Matthew of Westminster, and in the Leiger book of the Abbey of Abingdon? Which
Charter being offered by the King on the Altar at Winchester, in the presence
of his Barons, was received by the Bishops, and by them sent to be published in
all the Churches of their several Diocesses: a clause being added by the King
(says the book of Abingdon) that whosoever added to the gift, Qui augere voluerit
nostra^ donationem, augeat omnipotens Deus dies ejus prosperos; siquis vero
mutare vel minuere praesumpsert, noscat se ad Tribunal Christi reddituru^
ration^, nisi prius satisfactione emendaverit.
God would please to prosper and increase his days; but that if any did presume
to diminish the same, he should be called to an account for it at Christ's
judgment seat, unless he made amends by full satisfaction. In which as in some
other of the former passages, as there is somewhat savouring of the error of
those darker times, touching the merit of good works; yet the authorities are
strong and most convincing for confirmation of the point which we have in hand.

Now that the King charged all the lands of the Kingdom with the payment of
tithes, and not that only which he held in his own possession, is evident both
by that which was said before from Sir Edw: Coke, and by the several passages
of the former Authors. For if all the lands in the kingdom were the Kings
Demesnes, and the King conferred the tithes of all his lands on the church of
God, it must follow thereupon that all the lands of the Realm were charged with
tithes before they were distributed amongst the Barons for defense of the
kingdom. And that the lands of the whole Realm were thus charged with tithes,
as well that which was parted in the hands of tenants, as that which was in the
occupancy of the King himself; the words before alleged do most plainly
evidence; where it is said that he gave the tenth of all his lands, as Ingulph;
the tithe of his whole land, as Henry of Huntingdon; the tenth part of his
whole kingdom, as in Florence of Worcester; the tenth part of the lands
throughout the kingdom, in the Charter it self. And finally, in the book of
Abingdon, the Charter is ushered in with this following title; viz. Quomodo
Ethelwolfus Rex dedit decimam partem regni sui Ecclesiis, that is to say, how
Ethelwolf gave unto the church the tenth part of his kingdom. This makes it
evident, that the King did not only give de facto, the tithe or tenth part of
his whole Realm to the use of the Clergy; but that he had a right and a power
to do it; as being not only the Lord Paramount, but the Proprietary of the
whole lands; the Lords and great men of the Realm not having then a property or
estates of permanency, but as accomptants to the King, whose the whole land
was. And though it seems by Ingulph their consents were asked, and that they
gave a free consent to the Kings Donation; yet was this but a matter of form,
and not simply necessary: their approbation and consent being only asked,
either because the King was not willing to do any thing to the disherison of
his Crown, without the liking and consent of his Peers; or that having their
consent and approbation, they should be barred from pleading any Tenant-right,
and be obliged to stand in maintenance and defense thereof against all
pretenders. And this appears yet further by a Law of King Athelstanes, made in
the year 930, about which time not only the Prelates of the church, as
formerly, but the great men of the Realm, began to be settled in estates of
permanency, and to claim a property in those lands which they held of the
Crown; and claiming, to make bold to subduct their tithes. For remedy whereof,
the King made this Law, commanding all his Ministers throughout the kingdom,
that in the first place they should pay the tithes Vt imprimis de meo proprio
reddant Deo decimas; and Episcopi mei similiter faciant de suo proprio, and
Aldermanni mei and Praepofiti mei.
of his own estate, (that is to say, that which he held in his own hands, and
had not estated out to his Lords and Barons) and that the Bishops did the like
of that which they held in right of their churches; and his Nobles and Officers
of that which they held in property, as their own possessions or inheritance.
By which we find that tithes were granted to the Clergy out of all the lands
in the kingdom, and the perpetual payment of them laid as a rentcharge on
the fame, by the bounty and munificence of the first Monarchs of this Realm,
before any part thereof was demised to others. And if perhaps some of the great
men of the Realm had estates in property (as certainly there were but few, if
any, which had any such estates in the times we speak of) they charged the same
with tithes by their own consent, before they did transmit them to the hands of
the Gentry, or any who now claim to lay hold under them.

So then, the land being charged thus with the payment of tithes, came with
this clog unto the Lords and great men of the Realm; and being so charged with
tithes by the Kings and Nobles, have been transmitted and passed over from one
hand to another, until they came to the possession of the present owners. Who
whatsoever right they have to the other nine parts, either of fee-simple,
lease, or copy, have certainly none at all in the tithe or tenth, which is no
more theirs, or to be thought of, then the other nine parts are the Clergies.
For whether they hold their lands at an yearly rent, or have them in fee, or
for term of life, or in any other tenure whatsoever it be they hold them, and
they purchased them on this tacit condition, that besides the rents and
services which they pay to the Lord, they are to pay unto the Clergy, or unto
them who do succeed in the Clergies right, a tenth of all the fruits of the
earth, and of the fruits of their cattle, and all creatures tithable, unless
some ancient custom or prescription do discharge them of it. And more then
so, whether they hold by yearly rent, or by right of purchase, they held it at
less rent by far, and buy it at far cheaper rates, because the land it self
and the stock upon it is chargeable with tithes, as before was said, then they
would do, or could in reason think to do, were the land free from tithes, as
in some places of this Realm it is. To make this clearer by example of an house
in London, where, according to the rent which the house is set at, the Minister
has 2 s. 9 d. out of every pound in the name of a tithe. Suppose we that the
rent of the house be 50 l. the Ministers due according unto that proportion,
comes to 6 l. 17 s. 6 d. yearly; which were it not paid, and to be paid by law
to the Parish-Minister, there is no question to be made, but that the Landlord
of the house would have raised his rent, and not content himself with the 50 l.
but look for 56 l. 17 s. 6 d. which is the whole rent paid, though to diverse
hands. And if this house were to be sold at 16 years purchase, the Grantee
could expect no more then 800 l. because there is a rent of 6 l. 17 s. 6 d.
reserved to the Minister by Law, which is to be considered in the sale thereof;
whereas if no such rent or tithe were to issue out of it, he would have as many
years purchase for the sum remaining, which would inhaunce the price 110 l.
higher then before it was. Now by this standard we may judge of the case of
lands, though by reason of the difference of the soil, the well or ill
husbanding of grounds, and the greatness or smalness of the stock, which is
kept upon them, it cannot be reduced to so clear a certainty. But whatsoever
the full tithe of all be worth to the Minister, we may undoubtedly conclude,
that if so much as the tithe comes to yearly, were not paid to him, the
Landlord would gain it in his rent, and the Grantee get it in the sale: no
benefit at all redounding to the Tenant by it, nor any unto him that buyeth it.
Or if we will suppose with one of my pamphlets, and let it be supposed this
once for our better proceeding, that he who officiates in a parish where tithes
are paid in kind without any substractions, has the fifth part of every landed
man's estate, that is to say, four pounds in every 20 l. per annum: the
Purchaser or Tenant, be he which he will, may positively build on this in his
better thoughts, that if four pounds in twenty were not paid to the Minister,
the Tenant must pay to his Landlord, and the Purchaser must buy it at the same
rates, as he did the rest of the land. But being that neither the Tenant pays
rent for it, nor the Purchaser has it in his grant for him that sells the
land unto him, the tithe of the increase of their land and stock, and other
creatures tithable in their possession can be none of their own, but must be
his, and only his, whom the munificence of Kings and Princes, confirmed by so
many Laws and Statutes, have conferred it on. His part indeed it is, not ours,
(not the tenth part of our estates, as my pamphlet says) and he receives it of
us as a rent or duty, transmitted to us with the land from one hand to another;
not as a matter of gift, or an act of courtesy.

If then we pay not any thing of our own to the Parish-Minister, which arises
to him from the increase of corn and cattle, and other creatures tithable by
the law of the Land; I think it cannot be affirmed by discerning men, who are
not led aside by prejudice and prepossessions, that we give any thing at all of
our own unto them, more then our Easter-offering, be it more or less. It Is
true, some Statutes have been made about the payment of personal tithes, out
of the gains arising in the way of trade: and I remember Dr Burgess writ a
book about it, for which he stands as highly censured by the Independent As in
the Book called Tithegatherers no Gospel-officers.
, as for other things by those of the Prelaticall party. But then I think it is
as true, that either those Statutes were drawn up with such reservations, or
men of trades have been so backward to conform unto them; that little or no
benefit has redounded by them to the Parish-Minister, more then to show the
good affections which the Parliaments of those times had unto the Clergy. And
if we pay nothing of our own toward the maintenance of the Clergy out of the
increase of our grounds and stock, as I have plainly proved we do not; and
that no benefit come unto them from the gains of trading, as I think there
comes not: if those small vailes and casualties which redound unto him from
Marriages, Churchings, and the like occasions, be given unto him for some
special service which he does perform, and not for his administration of the
Word and Sacraments; I hope my second Proposition has been proved
sufficiently, namely, that there is no man in the kingdom of England who
pays any thing of his own toward the maintenance of his Parish-Minister, but
his Easter-offering; if so, as so it is for certain, there has been little
ground for so great a clamor as has been lately raised about this particular:
less reason to subduct or to change that maintenance which the piety of our
Kings have given, and the indulgence of succeeding Princes have confirmed in
Parliament, without any charge unto the subject. Which change, though possibly
some specious colors may be put unto it, will neither be really beneficial to
the Clergy or Laity. And that conducts me on to my last Proposition, viz.

III. That the change of Tithes into Stipends will bring greater trouble to the
Clergy, then is yet considered; and far less profit to the Country, then is
now pretended.
This is a double Proposition, and therefore must be looked on in its several
parts: first, in relation to the Clergy, whose ease is very much pretended, and
next in reference to the Occupant, whose profit only is intended in the change
desired. It is pretended for the Clergy As in the Kentish Petition and other
projects of that kind.
to be a very difficult thing to know the dues demandable in their several
parishes, that it makes them too much given unto worldly things, by looking
after the inning and threshing out of their corn; and does occasion many
scandalous and vexatious suits betwixt them and their neighbors: all which,
they think will be avoided, in case the Ministers were reduced to some annual
stipend. And to this end it is propounded by the Army in their late Proposals,
that the unequal, troublesome, and contentious way of Ministers maintenance by
Tithes, may be considered of, (in Parliament) and a remedy applied unto it. But
under favor of the Army, and of all those who have contrived the late Petitions
to that purpose; I cannot see but that the way of maintenance by annual
stipends will be as troublesome, unequal, and contentious too, as that of
Tithes by Law established; especially if those annual stipends be raised
according to the platform which is now in hand. For, as far as I am able to
judge by that which I have seen and heard from the chief contrivers, the design
is this. A valuation to be made of every benefice over all the kingdom,
according to the worth thereof one year with another; a yearly sum according
to that valuation to be raised upon the lands of every parish, which now stand
chargeable with Tithes; the money so assessed and levied, to be brought into one
common treasury in each several County, and committed to the hands of special
Trustees hereunto appointed; and finally, that those Trustees do issue out
each half year such allowances to the Ministers of the several parishes,
respect being had unto the deserts of the person and the charge of his family:
yet so, that the Impropriatours be first fully satisfied according to the
estimate of their Tithes and Glebe. This is the substance of the project. And
if the moneys be assessed in the way proposed, only upon the landed men,
whether Lords or Tenants, and not upon Artificers handicrafts, and men of
mysterious trades, who receive equal benefit by the Ministers labors; the way
of maintenance by stipends will be as unequal altogether, as by that of
tithes. And if it be but as unequal, I am sure it will be far more
troublesome. For now the Minister or Incumbent has no more to do, but to see
his corn brought in and housed (being to be cut and cocked to his hand both by
law and custom) and being brought in, either to spend it in his house, or sell
the residue thereof to buy other provisions. Which if he think too great an
avocation from his studies, he may put over to his wife, or some trusty
servant, as Gentlemen of greater fortunes do unto their Bailifs. And I my self
know diverse Clergy men of good note and quality, to whom the taking up of
Tithes brings no greater trouble, then once a month to look over the accounts
of their servants: besides, that many of them, keeping no more in their hands,
then what will serve for the necessary expense of household, let out the rest
unto some neighbor at an yearly rent. But when the Tithes are turned to money,
and that the Minister has neither corn nor hay, nor any other provision for
expense of household, but what he buyeth by the penny: what an unreasonable
trouble must it needs prove to him to trudge from one market to another, for
every bit of bread he eats, and every handful of malt which he is to spend?
And if corn happen to be dear, (as it is at this present) one quarter of a
years provisions bought at the price of the market, may eat out his whole years
allowance. Besides, I would fain learn, for I know not yet, whether the
valuation be to be made yearly, and to hold no longer then that year, or being
once agreed on to endure for ever. If it be made from year to year, either the
Minister must be at a certain trouble in driving a new bargain every year, with
each several and respective Occupant within the parishes; or at a greater
trouble in attending the Trustees of the County, till they have list and
leisure to conclude it for him. But if the valuation once made be to hold for
ever, which is I think, the true intent of the design; I would fain know, in
case the price of all commodities should rise as much by the end of the next
hundred years, as it has done in the last, and so the next hundreds after
that; how scant a pittance the poor Minister will have in time for the
subsistence of himself and his family-charge. For since the 26 of King Henry
the 8th when a survay was taken of all the spiritual promotions in this
kingdom, and the clear yearly value of each returned into the Court of the
Exchequer, the prices of commodities have been so inhaunced, that had not
Benefices been improved proportionably, but held unto the valuation which is
there recorded, the Ministry in general had been so poor, so utterly unable
to have gone to the price of the markets, that many must have dug or begged
for an hungry livelihood.

And yet we do not see an end of the mischief neither; for when the Tithes are
changed to a sum of money, and the money brought into a common bank or Treasury,
he will be sure to undergo a certain loss, and be vexed with more uncertain
troubles. For when this Clergy-office is once erected and settled in a constant
course or method, as all offices be; there must be Treasurers, Receivers,
Tellers, Auditors, besides under-offices, in each several County: every of
which will look to have some benefit by his place and office, if not his whole
subsistence by it. And I would fain know of these grand Projectors, by that
time every one of these Cooks has licked his fingers, and each Cerberus has
had his mouth full; how pitifully short the Commons must needs prove to the
hungry Clergy, who are to live on the remainder. Now as the loss is more then
certain, so will the trouble be as great as the loss, and no less certain
too, though it be uncertain. For when the poor Clergyman hackneyeth to receive
his Stipend, how many put-offs shall he find, ere he speed of his business.
For either Mr Treasurer is not at leisure, or the money is not yet come in, or
better men then he must be sped before him: and having danced a fortnight in
this attendance, may possibly be forced to a composition, and take eggs for his
money, or else pay very dearly for his expedition. Such courses have been
formerly complained of in the Kings Exchequer; Committees in the Country are
not free from the like complaints: and much I fear, lest this new Office prove
as full of delays and trouble (for the best of us are but men, and subject to
corrupt affections) as either of the others have been found to be. But then, if
Mr Treasurer have a further power either of augmentation or of diminution,
according as he judges of the Ministers diligence, or looks upon him in
respect of his charge and family: what a base vassallage and thraldom must the
poor Clergyman be brought to, in having such a Super-Intendent to judge of
his parts and diligence, or to assign him an allowance for his wife and
children? How punctually must Mr Treasurer be attended and crouched unto,
gifted, and bribed from time to time, either in hope to have the yearly Stipend
mended, or else for fear to have it lessned? The Chancellors were thought to
Lord it with too high an insolency, when the poor Country- Minister did appear
before them. But these who are to bear the bag, and upon whom the Clergy must
depend for a poor subsistence, will be sure to Lord it over them with contempt
enough; more then the Chancellor or Bishop in the worst times of their
Government: in case at last they do not think all wast which is given to
Christ, under pretense of keeping it for more pious uses. And what a trouble
and vexation to ingenuous minds this must needs be thought, let the Reader
judge.

So then, the way of Ministers maintenance by yearly Stipends being as
unequal, and more troublesome then that of Tithes; let us next see whether it
may not prove as contentious also. It Is true indeed, there have been many suits
in the Courts of Westminster, between some Incumbents and their neighbors
about matter of Tithes; but if it be examined where the fault lies most, I
doubt it will be rather found to proceed out of covetousness in some
parishioners, then any difficulty in discovering the demandable dues, or any
contentiousness in the Ministers. For many Country people reckoning all good
gains of which they can defraud the Parson, are apt enough on all occasions to
subduct their Tithes, and either to pretend customs, or plead prescriptions,
to decline the payment. And though they commonly attempt it first in such
trifling matters, as are not considerable in themselves, and would bring a
scandal on the Minister, should he be too strict, and trouble them for matters
of so slight a nature: yet when he looks upon the consequent, and that the
withholding or subducting of those petit Tithes, is but to make a way for the
rest to follow; he finds more reason to insist on a punctual payment, then
otherwise the nature of the thing would bear. And if a suit ensue upon it, I
see not why it should be charged upon the Minister, who is accomptable to God,
the Church, and his whole succession, from any diminution of the Churches
rights, by his remissness or connivence. But wheresoever the fault lies,
contentious suits do sometimes happen, there is no question of it. And can we
think contentions will not also rise about the payment of the Stipends? Some
men conceive themselves to be over-rated, others are apt enough to think that
the Tradesma^ who gets more by his shop, then they do by the Plough, should be
as liable as themselves to this common burden; and some believing that no
Tithes are due at all, will neither pay in kind or money. Some course must
then be taken to enforce a payment, where payment is denied upon these
pretentions: and there is no compulsive course without some contention. And
then supposing that some course must be taken to enforce a payment, (as I can
see no hope how it will be avoided) I would next know by whom this course must
be pursued. If by the Trustees for the County, they will be like to prove but
ill solicitors in another man's business, as being to get nothing but their
pains for their labor; besides that, spending, as they must, on the common
stock (and men we know, are very apt to cut large thongs out of another man's
leather) the bill of charges for one suit, may possibly devour the fruits of
the whole Benefice. If by the Minister himself, as it is most likely, we are
but where we were before, and by avoiding one contention for Tithes in kind,
the Minister must be engaged in another for Tithes in money, which comes all to
one. For that such suits will follow on this alteration, I look on as a matter
unavoidable; considering especially, how infinitely the Countryman, who aims
at nothing in the change but his gain or profit, will find himself deceived of
his expectation, and consequently will be more stubborn and untractable when he
sees his error.

For that the change of Tithes into annual Stipends, will not be so much unto
his profit as he does expect, and has been intimated to him by some leading
men, who have the ha^mering of the plot, will be no hard matter to demonstrate.
I know that nothing is pretended openly in the alteration, but that the
Occupant may have his Tithes at a certain rent; and not be troubled to expect
till the Parson comes to set out his dues. But I know too, that generally they
have been fed with a secret hope, that if the Parliament prevailed in the
present war, they then should pay no Tithes at all, but every man of what
estate or trade soever, should be contributory to the charge of the Ministers
maintenance. Just so the Prince of Orange dealt with the Boors of Holland:
assuring them, that if they prospered in the war against the King of Spain
(which was then in hand) they should pay no Tithes unto their Ministers; and in
the mean time that the Tithes should be taken up toward the maintenance of the
war for the common liberty. But when the war was brought to so fair an issue,
that the Boor thought to be exempted from the payment of Tithes: Answer was
made, that they should pay none to the Minister as they had done formerly,
whereby their Ministers in effect were become their Masters, but that the
Tithes were so considerable a Revenue, that the State could not possibly
subsist without them; that therefore they must be content to pay them to the
States Commissioners, as they had done hitherto, and that the State would take
due care to maintain a Ministry. By means whereof they do not only pay their
Tithes, as in former times: but seeing how short the public allowance made
their Ministers, does come of that which some are pleased to call a competency,
they are constrained (as it were) out of common charity, if not compelled
thereto by Order, to contribute over and above, with the rest of the people,
for the improvement and increase of the Ministers pension. And so it was in
Scotland also, after the Lords of new erection had engrossed the Tithes. I
cannot say that there is any such design as to annex the Tithes to the Crown,
(though if they be taken from the Clergy they ought of common right to return
again unto the Crown, from whence they came.) But I dare say the Landholder
will conceive himself as much defrauded of his expectation, as if there was:
and when he finds, that in stead of paying no Tithes at all, he is to pay a
valuable consideration in money for them, will think himself so far from being
beholding to the Undertakers of this project, that he will think the old way
better, and more easy to him. His money he accounts his own, and parts as
sadly from it as from so much of his blood. The Tithes he looks upon as another
man's, which never were in his possession, or to be reckoned of as a part of
himself; and therefore lets them go without grief and trouble. And I have
marked it commonly amongst my neighbors (who I believe are of the same temper
with other Occupants) that the same men who took no thought for parting with
their Tithes in kinds, having compounded for them at a rate in money, invented
more delays, and made more excuses to put the payment off for a week or two,
and so from one day to another, then for the payment of their Tithes in all
their life time. So dear a thing is money to us Country people, that he who
shall persuade us to redeem a supposed inconvenience with a real and a
constant expense of treasure, will be counted but an evil Counselor. A
visible evidence whereof we have now amongst us. For though the quartering of
Soldiers be the heaviest bondage that ever a freeborn people did languish
under, and such as men of means and quality would buy out upon any terms: yet
generally the Country man had rather make himself a slave, and his wife a
drudge, and let them spend upon his victuals, then part with money to remove
them to some other place. My inference hereupon is this; either the valuation
of each several Benefice will be true and real to the worth, or not. If not,
it may redound indeed to the Ploughmans profit, but then it comes accompanied
with a public fraud, which I believe no Christian State will be guilty of. And
on the other side, if the rates be made according to the full worth of the
Benefice, it will be little to the profit of the Husbandman; who might have
farmed his tithes as cheap of the Parson or Vicar; besides the hearts-grief it
will be unto many of them to part with ready money for a thing of convenience,
without which they might live as happily as their fathers did.

And if it be not to the profit of the Ploughman this way, I am sure that in
another way it will not be to his content, or his profit either. For taking it
for granted, as I think I may, that I have hit on the design which is now on
foot, that is to say, that the yearly profits of each Benefice in every County
be brought into one common bank or treasury within the County, and then
disposed of by Trustees, according as they judge of the deserts of the person,
and take into consideration his family-charge: it may so happen, (and will
doubtless) that in a parish where the tax or sessement comes to 400 l. per
annum, the Minister may not be allowed above an hundred. The residue will be
wholly in Mr Treasurers power, either to feast it with his friends, or lay up
for his children; or at the best to settle it on such who relate unto him, or
can make means and friends to enlarge their pensions, though such perhaps as
were never seen nor heard of by the parish, whence the money comes. And if men
think it, as it is, an ill piece of husbandry, to have the soil carried off
their own land, and laid on another, to the impoverishing of their own, and
enriching of his, I cannot see but that it will be thought a worse piece of
husbandry, and prove of very ill digestion to most Country stomachs; to have
the fat of their livings carried to another place, and given unto a man whom
they never saw, and who is never like to feed their souls with the bread of
life, or their bodies with the life of bread: their own poor Minister mean
while, from whom they have reason to expect it, being so discouraged and
impoverished that he can do neither. For whereas those who were possessed of
the richer benefices, did use to keep good hospitality, to entertain their
neighbors, and relieve their poor, and do many other good offices amongst
them as occasion served, both to the benefit and comfort of all sorts of
parishioners; it may so happen, and it will (as before I said) that the
Minister may be so ill befriended by Mr Treasurer, and the rest of the Trustees
for the County, that in stead of being either a benefit or a comfort to them,
in the way proposed, he may prove a burden, and a charge. And though I doubt
not but as great care will be taken, as can be desired in the choice of those
who are to have the disposing of the public moneys: yet to suppose that men
once settled in an office of such trust and power, may not be subject unto
partialities and corrupt affections, were an imagination fitter for the Lord
Chancelour Verulams new Atlantis, or Sr Thomas More his predecessors old
Vtopia, or a Platonic Commonwealth, then the besttempered government in the
Christian world. For my part, looking into the design with the best eyes I
have, and judging of it by the clearest light of understanding, which God has
given me, I am not able to discern but that the change of Tithes into Stipends
(in the way propounded) will bring greater trouble to the Clergy then is yet
considered; and far less profit to the country then is now pretended: which
is the third and last of my Propositions; and is, I hope, sufficiently and
fully proved, or at the least made probable, if not demonstrative.

I have said nothing in this Tract of the right of Tithes, or on what motive or
considerations of preceding claim, the Kings of England did confer them upon
the Clergy: contenting my self at this time with the matter of fact, as namely,
that they were settled on the Church by the Kings of this Realm, before they
granted out estates to the Lords and Gentry, and that the land thus charged
with the payment of Tithes, they passed from one man to another, until it came
unto the hands of the present Occupant; which cuts off all that claim or title
which the misperswaded subject can pretend unto them. I know it cannot be
denied, but that notwithstanding the said Grants and Charters of those ancient
Kings, many of the great men of the Realm, and some also of the inferior
Gentry possessed of Manours, before the Lateran Council, Ante Concilium
Lateranense, been poterant Laici decimas sibi in feudum retinere, vel aliis
quibuscunque Ecclesiis dare. Lindwood in Provine. cap. de decimis.
did either keep their Tithes in their own hands, or make infeodations of them
to Religious houses, or give them to such Priests or Parishes, as they best
affected. But after the decree of Pope Innocent the 3d, (which you may find at
large in Sr Edw: Cokes Comment upon Magna Charta, and other old Statutes of
this Realm, in the Chapter of Tithes) had been confirmed in that Council, (
Anno 1215) and incorporated into the Canons and conclusions of it, the payment
of them to the Minister or Parochial Priest, came to be settled universally
over all the kingdom: save that the Templars, the Hospitalers, and Monks of
Cisteaux held their ancient privileges of being excepted for those lands which
they held in occupancy from this general rule. Nor have I said any thing of
Impropriations; partly, because I am persuaded that the Lords and Gentry, who
have either Votes or Friends in Parliament, will look well enough to the saving
of their own stakes; but principally, because coming from the same original
grant from the King to the Subjects, and by them settled upon Monasteries and
Religious houses, they fell in the ruin of those houses to the Crown again,
(as of due right the Tithes should do, if they be taken from the Clergy;) and
by the Crown were alienated in due form of law, and came by many mean
conveyances to the present Owners. Only I shall desire that the Lords and
Commons would take a special care of the Churches Patrimony, for fear lest
that the prevalency of this evil humor which gapes so greedily after the
Clergies Tithes, do in the end devour theirs also. And it concerns them also
in relation to their right of Patronage, which if this plot go on, will be
utterly lost: and Churches will no longer be presentative at the choice of the
Patron; but either made Elective at the will of the People, or else Collated by
the Trustees of the several Counties (succeeding as they do in the power of
Bishops) as now Committee Men dispose of the preferments of the sequestered
Clergy. If either by their power and wisdom, or by the Arguments and Reasons
which are here produced, the peoples eyes are opened to discern the truth, and
that they be deceived no longer by this popular error, it is all I am at: who
have no other ends herein but only to undeceive them in this point of Tithes;
which has been represented to them as a public grievance conducing manifestly
to the diminution of their gain and profit. If notwithstanding all this care
for their information, they will run headlong in the ways of spoil and
sacrilege, and shut their eyes against the light of the truth, shine it never
so brightly: let them take heed they fall not into that infatuation which the
Scripture denounces, that* seeing they shall see, but shall not perceive; and
that the stealing of this Coal from the Altars of God, burn not down their
houses. And so I shut up this discourse with the words of our Savior, saying,
that no man tastes new wine, but presently he says, that the old is the
better.

FINIS.

