HIS HIGHNESS PRJNCE RVPERTS Raising of the Siege at Newarke upon TRENT, March
21. 1643.
Written by an eye Witness to a Person of Honor.
Right Honorable and my very good Lord,
HIs Highness Prince Rupert being at West-Chester upon Tuesday night, March
the 12. received first of all his Majesty's Commands to march with all speed to
the relief of Newark, as then besieged by Sir John Meldrum. The Rebels Forces
were supposed to be about four thousand Foot, under five Regiments and four
Colors, with well toward two thousand Horse and Dragooners. Upon these
summons his Highness next morning made have to Shrewsbury, speeding away Major
Leg (our General of the Ordinance) before, to choose out so many commanded
Musketeers of the English of late come out of Ireland, as might well be spared
out of that Garrison: these were 1000 Musketeers of Colonel Broughtons and
Colonel Tilliers Regiments, with 120 of Colonel Sir Fulke Hunkes; all these
sent down the Severne met the Prince at Bridgenorth on Friday: of Horse his
Highness took along his own Troop and Regiment, with 150 of Major General
Sir John Hurries; with these Forces we drew along three small field Pieces. At
Woolverhampton next day was our little Army recruited by 100 Horse, and 200
Foot of Colonel Levesons. On Monday night had we notice at Ashbey de la Zouch,
of 2200 Rebels under Sir Edward Hartop, sent out by Meldrum to pass and bridge
over the Sore, a mile from Loughborough in Leichestershire: their purpose was
either to intercept General Major George Porter, or to prevent his joining
with my Lord of Loughborough; for thither with four Regiments of Horse, and a
thousand commanded Musketeers of my Lord of Newcastles men was M. Porter now
come from about Newark, to hinder the Rebels further inrodes into
Leicestershire; daily slight skirmishes here passed; and had the Major Generals
people been as valiant as himself, Meldrum had had occasion to chide his party
for doing nothing. For not able to force the Pass, and hearing of my Lord of
Loughboroughs drawing out, they stole away by moonlight. Master Porter thus
disingaged, was the next day (being Tuesday, March the 19, together with my
Lord Loughboroughs Forces,) conjoined with the Princes; that night we all
quartered in a Close by Bingham, some eight miles short of Newarke: about two
of the clock (the Moon then well up) our Drums beat, and we marched:
hitherto had our Marches been so speedy, as same it self was prevented; for
by Meldrums own Letters, which (together with these two) the Prince
intercepted the night before, your Lordship may perceive the Rebels had no more
but an uncredited rumor of Prince Ruperts coming: on this days march, his
Highness had notice by his Espials, how the Rebels were busied all the
morning in sending away their Cannons, which proved no other then their drawing
them off their Batteries into their chief Work at the Spittle, or Excester
house, a little more then Musket shot from the Town for into that one quarter
had they that morning drawn all their Regiments and Ammunition. His Highness,
having intelligence of their amassing themselves into one Body, which he
supposed a preparation to march off suddenly, advanced his Van of Horse upon
the spur, to overtake them: the rest of our Horse had order to keep along
with the Foot, Cannon and Ammunition: coming near the Beacon hill, a mile
short of Newarke, we perceived some Horse of the Enemies, who upon our approach
drew down the other side to their own gross; ours thus easy gaining the
Hill increased his Highness natural courage, upon his apprehension besides of
having many advantages upon a retreating Enemy; whereupon, Courage, says he,
Let Us charge on Gods name with the Horse we have, and engage them till our
Rear and Foot be marched up to us; trooping thus to the edge of the Hill, we
perceived the most of the Enemies in Battalia (Horse and Foot) near the
Spittle; all, I mean, except four great Bodies of Horse, who expected us at
the descent of the Hill: the Prince thus ordered his own few Forces; first
himself and his own Troop of Lifeguard, undertook to attaque that Body on
the left hand, appointing my Lord Loughboroughs Troop to second him, and
Colonel Charles Gerards Troop to be as a Reserve: a little on my Lords right
hand the Prince his Regiment was cast out into five Divisions, two Troops to
each Division: in the first and very right hand of all were Captain Gardener
and Captain Richardson, and next them Captain Cob and Captain Martyn, then my
Lord Grandison and Sir Thomas Dallison, next them the Troops of Sir Lewis Dives
and my Lord Dillon, Major Legs and Lievtenant-colonell O-nelles Troops being
next unto the Life-guards: this Regiment was seconded by Major General Porters
Regiment. Our Field word was King and Queen, theirs Religion. The fight began
about nine of the clock; and after a while grew sturdy, especially on our right
Wing; the Rebels doubling their Files from three to six deep, and charged our
two utmost Troops upon the Flanks so hard, that Captain Martine came timely in
to help to beat off the Rebels. The Prince himself having pierced deep into the
Enemies, and being observed for his valor, was dangerously at once assaulted
by three sturdy Rebels, whereof one fell by his Highnesses own sword, a second
being pistolled by M. Mortaine one of his own Gentlemen: the third now ready to
lay hand on the Princes collar, had it almost chopped off by Sir William Neale:
his Highness thus disingaged, with a shot only in his Gantlet, with Sir
Richard Crane and his own Troop, charged quite thorough that Body of Rebels;
pursuing them in Rout home to their very works at the Spittle. Presently after
this, his Highnesses Regiment with their seconds, likewise routed the three
other Bodies; four of the Troops charging even into the work, and bringing
away a Captain prisoner: my Lord Loughborough also deported himself
honorably, and when some of his shrunk, at the second charge himself rode
back to Rally and bring them up again: Major General Porter charged with
bravery enough in his own person, though some of his retired up the Hill in
some have and disorder. Colonel Charles Gerard (who never carried himself but
gallantly) did here like himself: but by the fall of his horse, was bruised,
shot in the arm, and taken prisoner.

After a while both sides began to rallie, and make ready for a second charge;
ours to make the Impression, and theirs to receive it: and though for a good
while they disputed it toughly, yet by fine force were they and all the rest
driven quite out of the Field; not half of our Horse charging: for our Rear
was not yet come up. Now fled the Enemy quite beyond their own Work, Foot and
cannon, at the Spittle, diverse of them hasting by a Bridge of Boats over that
branch of the Trent, into the Island: four other Troops. with as many Foot
Captains, hasted up to Muskam Bridge upon the other side the Island, and main
stream of the River about three quarters of a mile, both from Newarke and the
Spittle, here being out of Gunshot, they staid till toward Evening, when
breaking the Bridge behind them, and throwing one piece of Cannon into the
Trent, they then run home to Nottingham. In both these stiff bouts, took we
five Cornets, and about 90. Prisoners, whereof three Captains, some Gentlemen,
three Cornets, besides other Officers, and two Cannoneers, one Cornet was taken
by Sir Richar Byron.

And now, as if an universal Truce had bin agreed upon, there was some half
hours silence; excepting that the Enemies Canonadoes (though with very little
effect) disturbd it; for the Rebels Foot had not yet advanced; and their
Horse, by this time had enough of it. As for the Prince he now staid for his
Foot, and Rear of Horse, both left full two Miles behind, when our Van began to
double their March to overtake the Enemy. Anon came up our Foot, all that day
commanded by Colonel Tillier: these resting themselves a while upon the Hill,
the first Division, being part of those that came from Shrewesbury, were led
only by the Colonel. These marched down bravely in the face of the Enemy,
hooting at their Cannon. These flancked with some Horse, were wheeled to the
right, by and by, into a Meadow. At their coming, the Rebels drew all their
Horse and Foot within their Spittle work; whom when our men came against, both
sides saluted one another at too far a distance, with a short Vollye. But
Colonel Tillier was not to stay here; as being, by his Orders to March up to
the very River side, to recover the Boat-bridge from the Enemy: But this being
too well guarded, ours drew off quietly, making a stand without reach of Canon.
In this time were diverse more Bodies of Foot brought down into the Field, who
charged up to the Enemies Works, and killed many, my Lord Loughboroughs being
left upon the Hill for a Reserve.

Thus was the Valley bespread with our Battaglions: and in this posture stood
the Princes Army. Sir Richard Byron Governor of Newarke, likewise before this,
had sent part of his Garrison (both Horse and Foot) into another ground on the
Southeast side of the Town. And by this time had the Prince notice given him
by a Prisoner, and by one of theirs that came over to us, how the Rebels were
so distressed for want of Victuals, that they were not able to live there two
days: Whereupon His Highness began to resolve upon other counsels;
esteeming it cheaper to block up their Trenches, then to storm them. And blockt
up they were already, as being coopt up in a very narrow room, no more then
the backside of the Spittle, toward the River, besides which they were on all
sides surrounded by our Forces: On the Southside by the Town, on the East by
the Prince, and on the North by Colonel Tilliar: Into the Island on the West
had the Prince sent 500 Horse, besides 200 of the Newarke Troopers. Thus the
late Blockers found themselves now besieged, yea without much hope of sudden
relief, or safe means to salley: for so well had the Prince ordered them, that
had they sallied forwards, we had then fallen upon their first issuing out,
both in From and Flanks with our Army, and the Town had charged them upon
their Rear: Had they offered to escape over their Boat-Bridge, ours in the Isle
had disturbed their passing, and we entertaind their coming over, yea which
part soever had first divided, we had bin able to beat the other. By this time
too had the Prince commanded Sir Richard Byron with his own, and Sir Gervase
Eyres Horse Regiments, with 800 of Sir John Digbies Foot to advance so high
into the Island as to put in betwixt the Rebels two Bridges, by which
interposition was all intercourse cut off, betwixt the Rebels their great body
at the Spittle, and those at Muskam Bridge: Upon this, those eight Colors at
the Bridge retreated, as is aforesaid. Under favor of these Town-forces too,
was His Highness resolved to cast up a Redoubt that night betwixt the Bridges.
But going now to view the Ground, the Rebels sent out a Trumpet to desire a
Parlee. To make way for this, and the more to sweeten and oblige the Prince,
had Sir John Meldrum, some hours before, sent home Colonel Gerard, yet upon
the parole of a Soldier and a Gentleman, to return himself a Prisoner, when
ever he should be called. The Rebels having sent out to Parlee, quit their
Bridge; which his Highness presently possessed by a hundred Musketeers.

For the Parlee, His Highness appointed Sir Richard Crane, Captain of his
Life-guards, with Sir William Neale Scout-Master General: the Rebels sending
Sir Miles Hobard, and Sir John Palgrave, into the Town. Now true though it be
that the Enemies were distressed, yet very wise Generals have not thought it
safe to make such men desperate: besides which being now in the midst of their
own Garrisons, they might possibly be relieved. And to confess the truth, our
Horses were so over-matcht, and our foot so beaten off Legs, that we found our
selves less able for the present for them. In very truth too, the Rebels were
more then we believed: for these reasons, and for that (as by these intercepted
Letters it appears) My Lord Fairfax, and his Son Sir Thomas, being both
commanded by the Close Committee to march, other places might ere long have
need of His presence. His Highness (at length) condescended to these Articles,
which besides they be both honorable and safe, were the same (for the
general) as our side had before gone out upon, when the Rebels took
Lincoln. Of the Articles this (My Lord) is the Original Copy.

Articles agreed upon 22. Martii by Sir RICHARD CRANE and Sir WILLIAM NEALE,
Knights, on the part of His Highness Prince RVPERY: And Sir Miles Hobert, and
Sir John Palgrave, on the part of Sir John Meldrum, as follows.
1 That all Match, Bullet, Powder, Canon, and all other fire Arms belong-to
the Artillery be delivered. 2 That all Soldiers march away with their Swords
by their sides, and Colors, and Drums. 3 That all Officers March out without
molestation, with their Arms and Horses for themselves and Servants, and Bag
and Baggage, Money, and whatsoever else does truly belong to themselves. 4 That
all Troopers and Dragooners March away with their Swords, Horse, and Colors. 5
That His Highness send a Convoy to protect us from any Injury two Miles from
His utmost Quarters toward Lincoln.
Richard Crane. William Neale. Miles Hobart. Io. Palgrave.


But Besides these Conditions, His Highness, gave by Instructions to His
Commissioners, to insist upon a demand of some Prisoners before taken; which
was also granted. Hereupon next morning the Rebels marched out: but for the
Horsemens carrying away their Arms, and others their Pikes, with more then was
conditioned, our unruly Soldiers (especially those that had been so before
used (...) Lincoln by the Parliamentiers) taking this occasion to quarrel with
the Rebels, took more from them then by the Articles they should have done.
But for this were diverse of them slashed by the Prince, and the Rebels Colors
sent back unto them.

The Rebels thus gone, we had leisure to carry off their Arms and Ammunition,
consisting of betwixt three and four thousand Muskets, and a great quantity
of Pikes and Pistolls, with the Cannon they left behind them: of these we found
Eleven fair Brass Pieces: one a Basiliske of Hull, four yards long, shooting
32. Ball: one of their Ordnance was found at Muskam Bridge, and the Carriage of
the other. Two goodly Mortar-pieces were also left us, the least shooting 80.
pound Granado, and the other twelve stone and eight pound, and all their
Ammunition. The number of the slain we know not; but we think they lost
toward ninescore or two hundred, and we about half so many slain and wounded.
Thus after just three weeks Siege, was Newarke happily relieved. Your Honor
knows the high consequence of this Service. Several particulars more, I leave
to this bearer, who very commendably sustained his part in it. His Highness
has appointed a Thanksgiving for this on Sunday; by which the World may see
Him to be as Devout as Valiant.

FINIS.

