Die Iovis 29. Ianuar. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That this House gives thanks to
M. Hicks for his great pains taken in the Sermon he preached yesterday in the
Abbey Church, Westminster, before the Lords of Parliament, it being the day of
the public Fast. And he is hereby desired to print and publish the same; which
is not to be printed by any, but by authority under his own hand.

John Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

I Appoint Christopher Meredith to print my Sermon.

Gaspar Hicks.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IT is a great Question, whether is the highest and hardest exercise of faith,
to flee to God, and rest on him in misery, or to keep close with him, and
ascribe all to him in prosperity: Some give the precedence to the last named,
because in this we are drawn and bound to God by his own goodness; in the
other we are thrust upon him by our necessity. Indeed afflictions have a
singular usefulness in them to acute and enlarge the desires of Saints after
God, to render him more sweet and satisfactory to them. Good men are bettered
by afflictions: It Is hard for the best to keep their spirits so humble, so
intent without them, as under them: but it is slavish and hypocritical to have
little or no sense, nor care of God, longer then his hand is heavy on the skin,
or on the spirit, like those that seldom mind or mention heaven, but on their
sick-beds. We have had wonderful experiences of late, both of Gods smitings
and smilings: We have put forth high strains, strong pursutes after him when
affrighted and pressed by his terrors; we should most unworthily requite him,
if the returns of his favors should make us remiss or wanton. It is one great
drift of the ensuing Discourse to mind us of our recesse from God, since he
has been returning to us, and to give warning of the possibility, yea, the
certainty of greater evils to come upon us then ever we felt, if we forget God
in our prosperity. For your parts (Right Honorable) as you have had a deep
share in the common sufferings, and have shown forth exemplary forwardnes in
seeking God in times of extremity: so in times of refreshing (if you hold fast
your integrity) you shall reap the richest advantage of common success. That
you who are our greater Luminaries may keep your station, and your motion may
shine more and more brightly unto the perfect day of our deliverance and
salvation, may hold real weight and worth, according to the dignity of your
places, that every one of you may be worth thousands, and in the true
precedence of honor and grace may out-number your inferiors, to the glory of
God, and in despite of suspicion and obloquy, is the prayer of

Your Honors humble Servant Gaspar Hicks.

A SERMON PREACHED at the Monethly-Fast, to the Right Honorable House of
Lords, January 28. 1645.
HOSEA 5.15. In their affliction they will seek me early.


THe Prophet Hosea, a most severe preacher of judgment, was one of the last
messengers, that the Lord sent to that degenerated depraved people, the ten
tribes, or the Kingdom of Israel: to them was his Ministry properly and
immediately directed. And for the season of it, it fell upon their last and
worst times; when they were confirmed and obstinated in sinfulnes, and were
falling headlong into deserved ruin. Most conjecture that he overlived their
final desolation; and saw the execution of the judgments upon them, which
himself had foretold. The Lord will not leave himself without witness against
the vilest sinners; but will leave them without excuse, if they persist and
perish in their sins: And there are none that sink more justly and deeply into
destruction, then they that go down to the pit laden with warnings from
Heaven, as it were in despite of the means that God uses to reclaim and save
them. This Prophet having to deal with such a people, at such a time, suits his
Ministry to their state; his sermons contain large catalogues, high
aggravations, home convictions of their sins; plain detections, impartial
arraignments of all sorts of sinners; none are spared, neither Princes,
priests, nor people: he proclaims against them all from God stern
controversies, shameful divorces, fatal and irrecoverable overthrowes. Yet
amongst these dreadful thunderclaps, he intermixes and sprinkles some sweet
drops: he lets fall some refreshing mentions of Christ, of Gospel Grace and
privileges, of Gods favor to his own portion: Amongst this forlorn lost
people, the Lord has a selected saved remnant; Indeed he loves to save
remnants: All his are peculiar precious parcells or relics, which he snatches
out of the burnings of Sodom, rescues from the present evil world.

In the words that I have read unto you, and the context wherein they stand,
you may observe a strange method or way used for the deliverance of Gods dear
ones out of the midst of ruin.

1. Consider what God does: that is expressed in the beginning of this 15th
verse, I will go and return to my place (says he) Humanitus dictum, God
speaks like a man, threatens a departure, a withdrawing of himself, of his
presence, his influence for good, both in ways of mercy and judgment: and
better it were that the heart were torn out of the body, that the Sun should
drop out of heaven, then God should be so lost or hid. A like expression we
have, Deuteronomy. 32.20. I will hide my face from them (says God) I will see what
their end shall be: Deuteronomy. 32.10.
I will take no more cognizance nor care of them, but leave them under their
own evils.

2. We have here set down what Gods people are to do in such a case: this we
have in my text: In their affliction they will seek me early.

Herein we may notice, 1. An act, They seek. 2. The object, Me, i. e. God. 3.
The manner, early. 4. The season, which has the force of an incentive, In
their affliction.


1. They seek, and that is a large term, very comprehensive; it contains the
task, the drift, the sum of all graces and duties: It is as much as to sue by
prayer, to pursue by holy desires and endeavors, to turn the heart and course
by repentance, to apprehend by faith, to prize and embrace by love.

2. God must be so sought; and what of God? It is not enough to grope after him
in the creatures, or in the works of providence or common mercy; to gain some
rude, general notions of him, or interesses in him. There is a phrase in the
verse to explain this: They will seek my face. The face is the distinct, clear,
sure discovery of God: 2 Cor. 4.6.
The light of the knowledge of the glory of God shines to us in the face of
Jesus Christ. The face is Index animi, the outlet or manifestation of the
affections. The gracious soul strains after intimate acquaintance, close
communion with God: nothing will satisfy but the discovery and participation
of his open smiling face, his mysterious depths, his bosom counsels, his
special favor, his heart love.

3. This most eligible and desirable good is sought early, i. e, timely and
studiously, singly and superlatively, with the first and freshest intentions of
spirit. When the soul has gained a true taste or sight of this blessed object,
it will pursue it with earnestness and force in some measure proportionable to
the worth of it.

4. This is many times done with most strength and efficacy in affliction: What
is to be understood by affliction here, we may gather from another expression
in the verse, I will hide my face till they acknowledge their offense; donec
delinquant, is the proper reading, till they yield themselves guilty, they are
convinced of the sinfulness, and sensible of the mischief of sin: Donec
deficiants, or dispereant, as others render it, till they are undone, reduced
to extremities, till they find all other helps and hopes failing them, and are
so driven in to God by inevitable and insuperable necessity.

And so you have the brief explication of the words. No doubt but in their
literal and proper sense they are intended, and to be referred to the
Israelites and Jews in those times, whom the Lord for their provocations cast
out of his sight, and left them broken with misery in an undone State: in the
midst of whom he reserved to himself an afflicted and poor people that should
trust in the name of the Lord, Zeph. 3.12, 13.
a remnant that should forsake iniquity, groan after God our of their prisons,
and be received into favor. Yet by way of analogy and consequence this
Scripture is applicable to the Churches and Saints of God in all ages, when
fallen under the cloud of his displeasure, and overwhelmed with pressures and
calamities.

Only a Question may be moved, whether the Prophet speaks this by way of
upbraiding the people with perverseness and falsehood, who in their prosperity
were regardlesse of God, but in their affliction were beaten to an enforced and
pretended seeking of him: or, by way of encouragement, to animate and persuade
the godly to flee to the Lord with importunity and confidence in their heaviest
straits and distresses. Which may be thus resolved: Though it be the guarb and
course of hypocrites or carnallists, who relish and regard little or nothing of
God in calm weather; to make fair pretenses and seemingly earnest assaies after
him, when they are frighted and hunted with the storms of his indignation (as
in due place we shall endeavor to charge upon them) yet here I conceive the
Spirit of God sets forth the genuine strains, the sincere motions of believers
toward God, when pinched and pressed by Afflictions. Which may be cleared from
the coherence: In the words immediately ensuing we shall find them take the
direct and through course to come up to God: Indeed the Septuagint and some
other Translatours and Expositours place the clause which I have taken for my
text, in the beginning of the sixth Chapter, thus; In their affliction they
will seek me early, saying, Come, and let us return unto the Lord, for he has
torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up, etc. And
what are these but the true and proper breathings forth of conversion and
faith? It is not unusual with God to set himself at a distance from his own,
to cover his face with a vail or a frown, to cause them to possess the guilt,
and feel the smart of their sins, to exercise them with fiery trials, sharp
tribulations, to leave them, as it were, at a loss: and then are the godly
most early in seeking the Lord; they wait and long more importunately for the
light of his countenance, the return of his favor, then they that watch for
the morning; then their cries are loud, their groans deep, their prizings high,
their apprehensions strong, their pursutes eager and restless, till satisfied.
So that the way is open to this plain observation.

Gods people seek him early and earnestly in

I might abound in instances for proof of this truth. When the Israelites were
even consumed in the iron furnance, tired, worn cut, ground to pieces under
cruel bondage in Egypt; then they sighed, they groaned, they cried in the
distress, Exodus 2.23, 24, 25.
they remembered their God to purpose; and God remembered them and his Covenant,
looked upon them with respect and pity. When the Lord had hewed a way of escape
for them through the bowels of their oppressors, and had brought them to the
utmost brinke of deliverance; there they encounter the most hideous strait, are
shut up into seemingly inextricable danger: The sea is before them, an armed,
enraged multitude behind them, on both hands unpassable mountains; all this,
that they might be the more intent and importunate in seeking God: then, they
cry out to him. Afterward, Exodus 14.10.
when in times of ease, and peace, and prosperity they revolt from God, how
often do we find them reduced, brought home by scourges and miseries? They
that in their fullness and fatness, wantonly kick against God, Deuteronomy. 32.14.
and lightly esteem the rock of their salvation; in their extremities are made
to know and prize the necessity and worth of him, and accordingly to tender and
pursue him. The heaviest calamity that ever befell them was the Babylonish
captivity, and their deliverance thence the grand wonder of mercy, a lively
resemblance of our glorious redemption: when after their tedious and sharp
slavety, the Lord would accomplish his goodness, his gracious thoughts in
their return; see how he prepares them for the mercy: Ier. 29.10.140.
Ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your
hearts. David was a man much in converse and communion with God; yet most eager
upon him, and close with him in afflictions: O God, thou art my God (says he)
early will I seek thee; he owns and appropriates God, and is up betimes to get
him into possession: My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee; all
his parts, and powers, and faculties were greedily intent upon him: and this
was in a dry and barren land where there was no water; Psalm. 63.1.
when he was parched with drought, and could not gain a drop of refreshing, but
what he fetched from the fountain. The Disciples walked with Christ, heard his
words, and saw his miracles; yet do we not find them at any time so instantly
and vehemently pressing upon him, as in the storm, when they are ready to be
cast away: Mat. 8.25.
They come unto him, and awake him, saying, Lord, save us, we perish. The
gracious soul will not suffer Christ to sleep, whiles it self drowns; it will
rather put forth a holy impetuousnesse or unmannerlinesse; though it seem rude,
it will, as it were, rouse up Christ, and call him in to help and save. When
Christ was crucified, dead, laid in his grave (the saddest of all seasons) his
most faithful, zealous, Mat. 28.1.
loving followers are up betimes to look after him; As it began to dawn (says
one Evangelist) Very early in the morning (says another) When it was yet dark
(says a third) they run to the Sepulcher. Mark 16.2.
Indeed they thought to find a carcass only, and behold, the unexpected
ravishing news of his resurrection. Ioh. 20.1.
When Christ seems to be under ground (then all our joys must needs be buried
with him) let us hie to him, seek after him, and we shall meet with admirable
unexpressible revivings. The Saints we see are up betimes, early at it in
seeking Christ in their deepest distresses, their most dismal dismaies.

To these instances I might add many arguments or reasons for the further
confirmation of the truth.

1. Our God whom we seek is most high: of his creatures. 1 Samuel 2.8.
He that frames and owns the pillars of the earth, and has set the world upon
them; is most of all magnified in raising the poor out of the dust, and lifting
up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes. His wonders are in
the deep; his transcendent excellency appears in stooping to the necessity and
misery of his people. The most dejected down-cast state and heart, are best
suited to Gods dearest embraces. Afflictions meeting with a gracious temper
cannot but melt it and humble it, and make it tender; and the lowest humility
is nearest to the highest majesty. Aristippus the Cynique being derided for
falling on the ground before Dionysius the tyrant, and kissing his feet in
presenting a suit to him; answers thus, He has his ears in his feet, Aures
habet in pedibus.
this is the way to prevail with him. Never does a poor prostrate sold,
brought down to the dust under the mighty hand of God, seek his face in vain,
nor go away from him without gracious answers, large achievements.

2. Our God is a consuming fire, a dreadful majesty; Heb. 12.29.
who can stand in his sight, when he is angry? Yet whither shall we go from
his presence? They that know the power of his wrath, and fear his displeasure
more then hell, Psalm. 90.11.
dare not stand off or keep a distance from him, no not for a moment: They have
no rest in their bones, nor quiet in their spirits, till they have found him
whom their soul loves: No want appears so destructive to them, as the want of
Gods favor; no misery so unsufferable, as his absence, his frowns. The way to
evade Gods stroke is not to flee from him, but to get within him: he has long
hands which can reach to the bottom of hell, to the foundations of the
mountains, to the uttermost parts of the sea. Then only are we out of danger of
his smiting hand, when we get into his bosom, clasp him in our arms, hold firm
and close possession of him by faith. This brings in afflicted Saints a main to
God, in that there is no remedy nor refuge to be had from him, but in him.

3. Our God is a tenderhearted Father: Lam. 3.33, 34.
He does not afflict willingly; he does not afflict to afflict, to grieve the
children of men, to crush under his feet the prisoners whom he has taken in
his net, to cause their spirits to fail before him. Toward his own his ends
are gracious, Lam. 3.33, 34.
when his dealings seem grievous; Isai. 57.16.
his heart is full of love to them, when his hand is heavy in inflictions upon
them. When he hedges in our ways with thorns, he leaves one gap open, and that
leads us home to himself. The language of the rod is directive, as well as
corrective: And what does God intend in our trials, but to curb and check our
extravagancies, to awaken our languishing faculties, to excite and exercise our
graces, to inflame our desires, to enlarge our longings after himself, and so
to put us into a better capacity of himself? When by some sharp passages he
has acuted our appetites, and raised up our estimations of himself, then he
flows in with heavenly sweets, and satifies his seeking servants above all that
we can ask or think. The truth is clear then: Our God is high in glory and
excellency, and must be sought in humility: He is dreadful in displeasure, and
must be approached with trembling: He is gracious in his intentions and
dealings with his own, even when he smites them, and must be apprehended with
greedines and satisfaction. And seeing afflictions in their sanctified use and
fruit render God such a God to us, they set us on to seek him early and
earnestly.

The Doctrine is useful for our present time and occasion.

1. That are become insensible and hardened under miseries. Untowardly children
are dulled by whipping; the rod makes them hate their master and their book,
and run away from both. It is an ill temper that grows hard and dead under Gods
strokes. Oh the strange stupour that is fallen upon the spirits of many! The
first onset of judgments possessed them with affrightments and sad thoughts,
perhaps with some hankerings after God; the continuance and multiplicity of
evils make them disregard or shun him. It Is brutish boldness, yea little
less then devilish obstinacy to cut-face Gods fury: Nay, those miserable
spirits believe and tremble: Iam. 1.12.
What shall we think of them then that have almost lost all fear and feeling
of misery? They bid defiance to God that go down securely and delicately to
destruction, that can say, the bitterness of death is past, let God do his
worst. 1 Samuel 15.32.
Of all judgments tremble at a heart that cannot tremble under judgments.

2. This uncases their falsehood that fling off from God in despair, and let
fall their minds to a base despondency when heavy things come upon them. In a
fair morning they will be early up, and forward in their addresses to God; but
when storms arise, and the heavens are covered with clouds, they shrink in
their spirits, and give up God as lost, Job 27.8, 9, 10
What is the hope of the hypocrite (says Job) though he has gained, when God
takes away his soul? Let him gain a fair guarb of formality, a repute of
piety, a self-deluding shape of goodness and happiness; yet, when he is
surprised with killing flesh-confounding extremities, and so beaten out of his
own holds, his hopes will perish, and be as the giving up of the ghost, as
pangs of death. Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? Will he
delight himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon God? He cannot make
God his refuge in troubles, his delight in discomforts, his sanctuary in the
worst of times and exigencies. The veryest hypocrites or carnal men living may
have strong presumption of favor, and hold a fair correspondency with God,
whiles he feeds, and sustains them; nay, so long as he does not undo or crush
them with inward terrors, or outward inflictions; whiles all goes well with
the, or no heavier things befall them, then what they can bear by their
ordinary succors, or break through by their own strength: But can thy heart
endure, Ezekiel. 22.14.
or thy hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee? says the Lord.
When the Almighty comes upon thee like an armed man, strips thee of thy simple
scales and covertures, and drives thee from all thy dependances, can thou
then stay thy self upon God? There Is nothing dishonorable or displeasing to
God then to slinke from him, and seek sinister helps in necessities; to go
along with him in the ordinary current, the smooth way of his providence; but
when any eminent obstacle or cross, any paslage of extreme weight or
difficulty interposes, to cast away confidence, and seek refuge else where.

3. This meets with the sluvish disposition of them that seldom or never come
in to God, till they are scourged or pressed to it by misery. This we find
condemned in the Israelites by the Pasalmist: When God show them then they
sought him, they returned and enquired early after God, they remembered that God
was their rock, Pasa. 78.34.37
and the high God their redeemer: Nevertheless they did slatter him with their
mouths, they lied to him with their tongues; for their heart was not right with
him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. They prove treacherous in
seeking God, that are merely dragged or forced to him by extremities. And oh
that this were in no respects nor measure applicable to us! Give me leave to
bring it home to our present state. It Is observed of the Athenians that they
gave the best counsel, managed their affairs with most wisdom and dexterity,
when they were in mourning, brought low by some disaster; When our condition
has been low, our counsels perplexed, our armies hazarded or lost, our affairs
dangerous or declining, how humble and forward were we in looking after God?
It Is a sad thing that success pressed by Gods hand? It Is more ingenuons, more
filial to be wone, then to be whipped to duty. Indeed children will sometimes
need the rod; but they are not sons that are good for nothing longer they are
disciplined, like dogs, or eudgelled like slaves. Let it not be said of us,
that our righteousness is like the morning dew; Hos 6.4.
succulent and fresh in the cool of the day, but exhaled or dried up by the
Sunshine of success. I cannot but point out to you some apparent abatements,
some decays of our first love, since God has lightened our burdens, and flown
in upon us with favor.

1. We cannot but acknowledge the languishing of our zeal in these very duties
of humiliation and devotion which we have now in hand. How are we degenerated
into vanity, levity, formality, fastidiousnesse in them? Oh the flames, the
meltings, the instancy we have put forth in them heretofore; the flockings of
all sorts of people to them I Now (to say nothing of the lewd tenants, that
give them out as legal) the very vitals of them, the practical part of them
is fallen into a consumption. Times were (and they were the times of our
straits, our fears, our losses) when Hezekiahs meslage was sent to Gods
Prophets: a King. 1964.
Lift up your prayer for the remnant that is left: Professions made that their
prayers were more looked upon and regarded, then armies. Gal. 4.15.
But where is now that blessidnesse? How many are there now that think them
fit to be laid aside as useless, yea, cast off as burdens?

2. As in our afflictions we were more early in seeking God in our
supplications, so were we more inquisitive also after his counsels in his word,
more ready and resolute to do all for which the Lord should send to us. The
most plain-dealing, heart-searching, sin-discovering Ministers and Sermons were
best approved. But now the Land cannot bear rough words; Ministers must be
tutoured to a mannerly moderation; or if they speak home they are in danger of
disdeign, or of a frown. I have heard of a dispute at Rome, whether the Pope
might be admonished or no; he denies it, some of his Cardinals affirm it, and
that upon this ground, because he was a brother; he disclaims the relation,
would not acknowledge himself a brother; they prove him to be so, in that he
said, Our Father: he being prested by the argument, renounced his Pater noster,
and resolved to say it no more. They do in earnest renounce all religion, and
fear of God, that think themselves too high for the admonitions and directions
of the word. Oh never let that of the Prophet be verified of us; I spoke unto
thee in thy prosperity, but thou said, I will not hear. Ier. 22.21.


3. In our afflictions we were so serious and forward in seeking God, that we
were willing to bring our selves up, and bind our selves to him in a Covenant,
the most solemn and strict engagement of all. We saw a necessity then, found
the benefit of taking the vows of God upon us: But are we as careful now to
pay them? Surely to many the Covenant is like mariners vows in a storm, as
sickbed promises, quite forgotten now we are safe and sound. Others use it as
a Leshian rule, turn it any way to their own sense and ends. Many interpret it
a stratagem, or trick of stare, useful only for politic respects. So that
it is become little less then a disgrace, a crime consciouably to urge to
assert to keep our Covenant. Oh the strange, the woeful recesse we have made
made from God in this behalf I Except we speedily and thoroughly recover our
selves, what can we expect, but that the Lord should certainly and severely
avenge upon us the quarrel of his Covenant?

4. In our afflictions we were early and earnest in seeking God, and turning to
him by actual Reformation. Then the public professions, protestations,
overtures were mainly for reformation: that they carried in their front, and in
their bowels: the breathings and strainings of the godly in their disires,
their hopes, their prayers, their endeavors were hearty and unanimous for
Reformation. Why then is it now almost laid by, or handled only by the by,
coldly, slackly, cursorily? It is almost grown to an unsatisfiable doubt, what
it is, or whether it be feasible. And are these the sweet fruits of our
successes? Miserable success, that makes us incapable of our greatest mercy!
We fight and overcome abroad, and shall we indulge profaneness, looseness,
blasphemy, heresy, confusion in our own bowels? It Is a heavy disadvantage to
conquer enemies, and intharall our selves to pride, or passion, or humor,
Sueton. in vird Calig.
or insolency. It Is storied of Caligula, that pretending to come against this
Island, he leavied a great Army at the vast expenses of the State, and leading
them to some place on the Belgique shore, he commanded them to charge the
Britains, by brandishing their weapons, and casting their piles into the sea,
and afterward to gather up the shells on the sand, and so returned in triumph,
bearing away the spoils of the Ocean. Such an expedition, such a victory, such
a triumph should I esteem it, where Religion, Reformation ride not in the chief
Chariot. I speak not this to undervalue our victories: I desire to magnify
them with my soul, and to magnify God for them; and I doubt not but the issue
of them will be glorious to them that keep close to God in this hour of
temptation, I mean temptation on the right hand by prosperity: only I would set
forth and aggravate our ingratitude and sinfulness, if we thus pervent and
poison to our selves such eminent mercies. I might multiply particulars of this
nature, but that I fear I should transgress the bounds of time. This may serve
to convince us in part how much of our fervor in seeking God we have abated,
that we expressed in times of our deep affliction. And needful it is that we
be directed and excited to re-inflame our spirits, to recover our first love,
to better and go through with our beginnings.

To this purpose suffer the word of Exhortation. 1. Let us seek God. 2. Let us
seek him early. 3. Let us seek him early in affliction.


1. We must seek God; and we seek aright, Romans 12.2.
I. when we study his mind, when we prove what is the good, the acceptable,
the perfect will of God. Strive to be intimately acquainted with his solid,
saving truths. There is in these our days sprung up a refined, sublimated
sect of Seekers, who look after that which can never be found, as the Jews set
open their windows to the East, in expectation of their imaginary Messiah; so
many light up the candle of their own conceits at noon, to look after that
which is clearly discovered by the Sun of the Word, Ioh. 5.39.
Search the Scripture (says Christ) for they are they that testify of me. As
diamonds are fittest to cut diamonds: so Gods light only can manifest himself:
Scripture-evidence works Scripture-knowledge. The word is open, the way is
plain, they never meet God that wander in the labarinth of errous, in the wild
uncouth path of self-opinion. The humble, simple, spitituall enquiry into the
word, brings the soul into Gods fecrets.

2. Dive into the heart of God, Psalm. 105.4.
Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face evermore. What will it benefit
to know Christ in the flesh only? The gracious soul has not eenough, till it
get into his bosom, The Spirit searches and discloseth all things, (...) I
Cor. 2.10.
even the deep things of God: The reconciled mind, the saving purposes, the
heart-love of God.

3. Seek the glory of God. Seek him for himself; seek him to give up our selves
to him, to live to him, to serve him, to love him, to delight in him. It Is
basely mercenary to hunt God as a prey, to follow Christ for the belly. Paul
follaws hard after Christ, Phil. 3.10.
presses and reaches after him that he might Win him; and withal that he
might know and feel the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
suffering, being made conformable to his death. In the pursure of God the
Saints aim at his holiness, his work upon themselves, as well as at mercy and
privileges from him.

4. Seek God to find him. Our seeking must amount to a pervestigation, an
acquisition. God is the portion, the propriety of his own; and they labor to
have their title clear, their interesse firm in him; and the more they have of
him, the more they are enlarged after him. The Apostle did not account himself
to have apprehended all, when he had gained much; Phil. 3.12, 13.
I have not already attained (says he) I am not already perfect: This
advantage he took from what he had gained, to be the more intent and confident
in grasping all In seeking God, desire and satisfaction, and satisfaction
enflames desire, and this course they hold till the soul be filled up with all
the fullness of God.

2. We must seek God early. I. That is first and above all, with the highest
intention, the freshest vigor of our renewed faculties and abilities. Paul
has three words to set forth this in the forecited Scripture, (...) Phil.
3.12, 13, 14.
I follow after, in propriety of speeth, I persecute; he that breathed out
cruelty before against Christ, with the like and more heat now breathes out
love after him, Ireach after, he extends or stretehes himself to the utmost; I
press toward the mark, as in a race or bat-tell, when it is toward the end,
and the goal or victory is in the eye, men gather together, and put forth all
their might, Faint velleities, fleshly wishings never reach God; as soon may we
cleave a rock with a rool of wood, grasp the wind in our hand, as good woo
conjugall love between a man and brute, as draw carnal, dead affections ot
close with the living God. Water runs most swiftily and strongly, when it swells
over it is banks, and is mounted above it is channel; so must our souls move and
apprehend with most eagerness, when they-are listed on high, and tend to God.

2. Early, that is, tempestive, seasonably. Isa. 55 6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. While the
Spirit strives lovingly, while the Angel moves the water, while God calls and
waits, while grace is dispensed, while the door is open, while the day
continues; Isa. 21.12.
after that comes eternity; The morning comes, and then the night, Ioh. 9.14.
wherein no man can work nor seek. The loss of opportunity is an irrecoverable
damning loss; the apprehension of it certainly gains the mercy which it
tenders.

3. Early, that is, instantly, without delays, deliberations, Gal. 1.11.
or reservations; Immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood (says Paul)
not a word more with flesh and blood. Consultation it unseasonable and
dangerous, when action is requisite: Satan and corruption will never want
arguments, whiles we lend an care, whiles we will hearken to their cross
reasonings; we do but animate them, baffle God, and indispose our selves,
while we linger or protract our seeking.

3. We must seek most early and earnostly in afflictions. I. It Were good we set
our selves a seeking at the first on set or entrance of trials upon us. A
besieged place, if it stands out till it be battered, and mined, and starved,
runs a great hazard, and comes of with harder terms of capitulation. It were a
desperate adventure to fight against God to the last man. Oh come in, yield to
him at the first summons, or discharge he makes against thee: If whips will not
serve turn, Scorpions will be added; if gentle strokea prevail not, severity
may break us in pieces in a dreadful manner.

2. If our continuance be long, our measures deep in afflictions, we have need
to be the more urgent in seeking remedy and shelter with God. A man that is
dangerously falling, cries out for help, and lays fast hold on something to
stay him up: if our perils are extreme, we should earnestly and resolutely
fasten the apprehensive strength of faith on God, Ont of the depths have I
cried unto thee, Psalm. 130.1.
O Lord, says David; deep afflictions should raise up strong affections, loud
cries to heaven. The Ark was nearest heaven, when the waters of the flood were
at the highest. Our afflictions prove advantages, when they heighten and
strengthen our pursuit and apprehension of God.

Some scruples may here arise, which must be taken out of the way.

Ob. 1. It may be demanded, whether all the godly are in the depths, and are
thus brought in by afflictions?

Sol. 1. To this I answer: 1. That God does not confine himself to one method
or way of working. He can, and does sometimes draw home his own by a calm and
gentle tracture, without any hideous or violent breakings: he overcomes,
constrains them by love, carries them up on the wings of faith, leads them
forth with joy. Yet know withal, what he spoke of learning, Isa. 55.12.
may be verified of our spiritual state; If thou will apply thy self to study,
thou must be a poor man, or like to a poor man; Si animo vacare velis, vel
pauperent, vel pauperi similent tresse oportet. Seneca.
like him in sustaining labors, in restraining sensuality and licentiousness;
So if thou will seek God in earnest, thou must be brought to it by suffering or
sense of misery; or else be reduced to such a pass as they are in that have
been so exercised: Thou must be brought to an utter distrust, and displicency
of thy self, convinced of the absolute necessity, all sufficiency and
excellency of God: And whether the discovery of Gods surpassing,
soul-satisfying goodness, or the manifestation of his displeasure against our
sinful vileness be most prevalent to effect this, it matters not, so it be done.

2. It Is hard, nay impossible to find any of the Saints that are altogether
without a share of sufferings, which they may improve to the more earnest and
effectual seeking of God. Petrus mereltur, etc.
Peter sinkes (says an Ancient) and is in danger of drowning, which makes him
hastily cry out for help to his Master. If thou meetest not with fiery trials,
some flashes at least expect: If as yet the sum of thy sufferings is not great,
happily there is the more to come, Ye have not yet resisted unto blond, Heb. 12.4.
striving against sin. Soldiers to not fight all at once, but every one in his
order; thou know not how soon thou may be set in the front.

3. Saints are of a tender constitution, they are sensible of every stroke from
God: a little noise from heaven awakens them. The illiterate vulgar are apt to
think that the Sun goes down on the other side of the next mountain, at
farthest, that he is dipped in the Ocean. The learned know by good
demonstration that that great lightsome body is at a vast distance from them.
The godly are quickly and deeply sensible of Gods departure and distance from
them: In every affliction they tremble a thousand times more at Gods
displeasure, or withdrawing himself, then at the weight or pain of the
suffering: In their trials they look first how the case stands between God and
them, and seek him in them as their only support and remedy.

Ob. 2. Another scruple offers it self here. It is the complaint of Gods dear
ones deserted, so overwhelmed with spiritual afflictions, so fast bound in
misery and irons, that they think it impossible for them to move toward God:
They have sought long, but cannot find him, fished all night, and taken
nothing, strained hard, yet still they come short.

Sol. Suffer me here a little to insist; the satisfying of one such soul were
worth many Sermons, many days of humiliation. If there be any such here,
'twere pity that the spirit of one of them should be out of tune, not able to
hold harmony with us this day. For such I have matter, 1. Of Conviction, 2. Of
Counsel. 3. Of Corroboration.


1. It will be for their benefit that I discover to them the cause of their
distemper. It Is true that God does sometimes of very faith fullness cause his
dear ones thus to be afflicted; the reason of his own acts of denial and
desertion are known only to himself: It Is their part then to submit and
tremble, to wait and supplicate. But yet 'twere much if upon due search you
should not in your selves find cause enough of the dejections you complain of.

1. And let me demand, Is it not sin that separates between you and your God,
that hides his face from you, that he will not hear, nor be found of you? Sin
is the great makebate, and all sins are apt to work the soul to a distance from
God, but most of all these. 1. Foul fins committed against light and
conscience, which, like a great blow on the head, hurt the faculties, and cause
stupefaction or astonishment. 2. Close customary evils, which wind themselves
our of the reach of the Word, are not shaken by ordinary trials; so that God
must hunt them out by an immediate work upon the Spirit, substracting comforts,
and casting in anguish, which will not suffer them to lurk, or lie quiet: When
fair warnings prevail not, God frowns and withdrawes. What is it then that
overwhelms thy spirits and drowns thy comforts? Is it fluctus irruens, August.
the violent irruption of a huge wave, a hideous, monstrous lust or sin? No
wonder that it staggers and confound thee, till thou art recovered. Is it
sentina neglecta, a secret evil, like a leak in the bottom of a ship, hard to
be found or long neglected? 'Twill certainly work thee continual cumber,
peril and perplexity, till it be discovered and remedied.

2. Is it not thy spiritual pride which causes contention between God and
thee? Tumors are seldom without Atrophies, without witherings or wastings in
other parts of the body. If thou have a swelling conceit of thy own abilities
and archievements, thou will have a shrivelled heart that will hold but little
comfort. It Is remarkable to this purpose what Lather writes to Spalatinus
touching Melancthou: Melancthou was a man of excellent parts, very servicealbe
for Christ's cause; but of a timorous disposition, apt to be overmuch dejected
in difficulties: and at that time extremely pensive he was for fear of some sad
issues of the great meeting at Auspurg: Luth. in Epist. ad. Spalat.
Whereupon Luther wishes his friend to exhort and charge him in his name, Ne
fiat Deus, that he make not himself a God: he might seem to be far enough
from aspiring to be a God, who was cast down below the ordinary pitch of a man.
But here was his pride, his projects must like the counsels of God unerringly
and unchangeably stand, or the cause (as he thinks) was lost, and his spirit
sunk. And is it not even so with thee? Thou must have thine own mind, and
thine own will in all things (whhich is Gods peculiar) or thou art undone. If
thou have not as quick and clear returns of thy prayers, as much victory over
thy lusts, as much sweetness of grace, as much ability for duty, etc. as thou
have fancied or promised to thy self, thou have nothing at all: if the simple
gourd of thine own projects or conceits be smitten and wither, Iona. 4 ^.
Thou do well to be angry, to be disconsolate even unto death. This pride of
thine will keep thee low, and cost thee dear, till it be truly brought down and
mortified.

3. Is not thy distance from God occasioned by spiritual decaies? They will
certainly bring the soul into distressing languishments or faintness, as the
actual abatements of natural vigor by age or sickness take off the
appetites and senses from their edge and delight somenesse about their objects.
Thou that have had thy tender meltings and breakings for sin, and can now
look upon it, and think of it, and act it with dry eyes, yea almost with an
unrelenting spirit; will God (think thou) apply healings to thee, and pour
in refreshments as heretofore? Thou that have been on fire in holy zeal,
desires and affections, but now thy flames are reduced to a few sparks, raked
up in the ashes; will the spirit breathe so sweetly and strongly into thee as
formerly? Thou that have bin constant, and in earnest in holy duties, but art
now grown formal, remiss, neglective in them; can thou expect that the Lord
should meet thee in them with wonted answers and impressions? Briefly, thou
that have lost thy first love in any degree or exercise of it, though the Lord
retain his everlasting love to thee in his own purpose, yet how can thou
hope, but that thy unkindness will interrupt the expressions, and blur the
evidences of it exceedingly to thy apprehension? Remember therefore from whence
thou art fallen recover thy self, and go on in thy former strength, lest the
Lord yet depart farther from thee, and refuse to be found of thee.

4. Have I not yet hit upon thy disease, nor discovered the right grounds of
it? Perhaps it is nothing. Melancholic persons we find are sad they know not
why; and some Christians (I grieve to name them) do affect a querulous sullen
humor: whereas there is nothing that does better become or beautify Religion;
nothing that more encourages weak ones, confounds insolent ones; nothing that
does more damp temptations, and cherish graces, then a sweet serenity and
composedness of spirit, expressed in cheerful walking with God. Strange it is
then, that when God tenders peace to men, beseeches to reconciliation, opens
his counsels, his compassions, his heart to them should refuse or suspect all,
and make it their art to stave off their own mercies, to argue against their
own good. Great cares, and great fears, and great distractions they pretend;
when indeed it is not the greatness of the cause, but the greatness of unbelief
that makes them great. Non magnitude cause, sed in credulitatis. Luther.
Away with such mannerly infidelity, such wilful winking at the light, if ever
thou will find God upon thy seeking of him.

2. To conviction let me add counsel to the sad doubting soul.

1. I would advise such an one to be very exact and open in discovering the
proper grounds of his distemper. If we meet with a friend, and find his
countenance changed toward us, if we read displeasure in his looks, we think
thus with our selves, Why, what is the matter? How have I offended him? Surely
there is something amiss; we cast up in our thoughts what cause of distaste we
have given him: So when we perceive the, Lord looking strange upon us in any of
our approaches or seckings of him, should we not ransack our hearts, sum up our
accounts; pry narrowly into our passages, till we have found out what offensive
thing has set us at a distance from him? When Joshua lay upon his face, Josh.
7.10.
lift up his cry for the people when they fell before their enemies, the Lord
told him that that was not the way; he must search out the causer of the evil,
if he would have him to be with them any more. I tell thee likewise, though
thou bury thy soul in the dust of self-afflicting dejections, though thou weep
out thine eyes, torture thy self with continual anguish, 'twill be to small
purpose, till the thief, the troubler of thy peace be found out and executed.
An unskilful Physician making applications without discerning the cause, of
the disease, does but irritate the humors that were quiet, and leaves that
which was peccant untouched, whereby the distemper is increased: And though
thou feed upon thine own flesh, drink down the most bitter potions, and yet
do regard lessely or willingly spare the praedominant peccant, the
ill-affected humor, thou do hereby engender more stirs within, and art the
farther off from health and soundness. Oh deal heartily with thy poor soul in
this case; it is in vain to dally or dissemble with an awakened, working
conscience.

2. If thy distempers arise rather from conceited then real, grounds, when the
flesh hatches scruples of it is own, or Satan spitefully injects them to
disquier thee; it is the best way to repel them resolutely and speedily. I have
met with some pertinacious cavillers, who have held it honor enough to them,
if a, man of judgment will design to dispute with them, they thereupon harden
themselves in their error, and glory in their victory, though they be never so
soundly confuted. Some cavils or distrusts are best solved by a sharp
rejection, whereas gentle or long debates make them more obstinate. We find
David angerly expostulating with his spirit, in the like case, Psalm. 42 11.
Why are thou cast down, o my soul? Why art thou disquieted with in me? 'Twere
good for thee to chide thy self our of spiritual frowardness, and to shake
off groundless discontentments with indignation. Why will thou afflict thy
self without a cause, and stand of from thy comforts when they are warranted to
thee, In tantum opus est fide, ne causa fidei sit sine fide.
and pressed upon thee? True it is (as a pious Divine well notes) that many
times the main Want or defect of faith is, that the heart is kept off from
believing according to the grounds of faith.

3. Endeavor to esteem worthily, and make much of that which thou have already
found of God. Be not alwaics poring upon thy wants and distresses, but have
respect likewise to thy receipts and advancements. Is it nothing that the Lord
has unfetled thee from thy self, and from the dreggs of nature? that he has
given thee sight, compunction, hatred of sin? That he has turned thee about
from thy old course, implanted in thee principles of grace, and enkindled in
thee longings after more grace? That though for present thou can not find,
and clearly obtain, yet thy soul thirsts and pants after God, and will not be
satisfied without him? Do not belie the Lord, nor bear false witness against
him in denying his goodness and truth toward thee. Thou have often times said,
Surely I shall one day, even shortly perish and sink under my burdens: Had
thine own thoughts been fit to have been credited, thou had been in hell long
ere this. Bless the Lord, that though he has hid himself, yet he has not
cast thee off as far as thou deservest.

4. Be very heedfull and scrupulous, as to avoid all sin, so those especially
which are most apt to cast in the greatest jarrs and distastes between God and
thy soul, Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30.
whereby you are sealed to the day of redemption. How can you expect that the
Spirit should seal and comfort you, when you sad and vex him? Men of crazy
bodies are temperate and dietical, they abridge themselves of much liberty,
which they of more composed healthfulnes makeuse of. You me thinks should dread
the fire, who have felt how it can burn. You should flee from sin, as from a
Serpent, who have had it is invenomed stings fixed in your tender spirits. Psalm
119.8
I will keep thy Statutes (says David) O for sake me not utterly: He was then
at a distance from God, but he beseeches the Lord not to east him off for ever;
and he backs his petition with a rosolution, I will keep thy Statutes, how ever
it fares with me, I will be conscionable and constant in obedience.

3. The soul that cannot find God upon seeking, needs supportment. Plentiful
and strong grounds whereof we may draw out of Gods treasury.

1. Presidents we may propose of many, eminent in grace, dear to God, who have
been thus kept often. We may not omit that transcendent one; where shall we begin
but at our head, The Prince of our salvation made perfect in sufferings? Who
among all his passions was not quit of this: what else wrung from him those
bloody drops, those loud cries? My God, my God, why have thou for saken me?
From him we may descend to many of his choice members: whence were Johs
complaints, David's roarings, Hezekiahs chattering, etc? Not from out ward
extremities only, but mainly from inward anguish, under the sense of Gods
absence. Luther seldom fell into any bodily disease, without the addition of
some spirituali temptation: For is a tolo mundo, intus a diabalo and omnibus
angelis, ejus patior, Melch. Adam. in vita Luther.
When the world is most furious against me (says he) then the devil puts in
his claw, and sets awork all his crew to aggravate my disturbance. We read of
one of our own Martyrs, who to the miseries of imprisonment, the expectation of
a cruel death, had added more bitter conflicts with the doubts of Gods love;
and he hardly met with Christ in the clear evidence of favor till he was on
his way to the stake. See then thou art not alone: Enquire of the former and
later days, converse with Gods interpreters and Saints, and they can parallel
thy case with examples, in whose consortship thou may exceedingly rejoice.

2. Consider Gods care and strength in holding thee up when he hides himself
from thee. Though thou have not seen nor felt his presence, yet thou may be
sure that nothing else could have kept thy soul in such distress. Who but the
Lord has delivered thee from thy former fears, and preserved thee alive in the
days of famine? And will thou not trust him then for as much as Elias promised
the widow? Thus says the Lord, 1 King, 17.14.
the barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail,
until the day that the Lord send rain upon the earth. Thy poor pittance of
grace (as thou valuest it) thy small, yea imperceptible drops of comfort shall
not fail thee in the main, till the Lord send a plentiful influence and
increase of both. It Is most exceedingly desirable to get into Christ's arms, to
enjoy his dearest and closest embraces, yet withal it is a noble act of our
faith, and an infinite expression of his goodness and strength, Mat. 9.11.
when a touch of the hem of his garment makes us whole, when his aid is craved,
and his hand stretched forth to catch us when we are sinking. Mit. 14.30.31.


3. Consider for thy supportment, that according to thy capacity and fitness
thou shall be sure to have God come nearer to thee. The Sun is always equally
full of light, able at all times to illuminate the whole body of the Moon; but
the Moon receives more or less light, according as she is disposed for it in
her own course: So the light of Gods countenance is able to fill thee with
unspeakable and glorious joys, were thou apted for them. And know it withal,
though Gods favor be immense, yet the most gracious heart, like a narrow
mouthed vessel, takes in the sense of it by drops or degrees. When Christ had
been long with his Diseiples, and was ready to depart from them; Non admittit
fidei nostrae angustia tam effusam ejus bonitatem, sed necesse est ut paulatim
distillet. Calv. in Ps. 51.
he tells them, that he had many things to say to them, which they could not
then bear; howbeit the Spirit of truth in the process should inform them in
more truths, and enlarge them to more apprehensions: He (says Christ) shall
glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. There be
many that have received Christ in truth, that have not yet received him in his
glory; they must wait longer on the Spirits workings for such blessed discover
ries. Ioh. 16.11, 13.14.
Perhaps thou will be craving with Moses, Exodus 33.18, 19, 20.
I beseech thee show me thy glory; be satisfied likewise with Gods answer to
Moses, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, but thou can not see
my face and live. It may be as impossible for thee in thy present temper,
though gracious, to enjoy clear and full evidences, as it is to see the glory
of heaven, whiles thou live on earth. Sudden or excessive joy has sometimes
occasioned sudden death. The Lord will not pour out the precious liquour of his
favor, but where it is taken in to the greatest benefit of the Christian; and
when he has made thee an apt vessel for it, thou shall have as much of it as
thy heart can hold.

4. Add hereunto, that it is very hope full that God does intend, and will use
thy dejections of preparatives to dispose thee to largest exhibitions of
himself to thee? Parisiensis does fitly term a broken, depressed heart, a
spiritual vacuity, Vacuum spirituale. Isa. 57.15.
a subject emptied, hollowed, made capable of all the good that flows down from
heaven. Certain it is that when the lofty God chooses a mansion Wherein he will
place his dearest delights; it is a spirit shivered to pieces by hamiliation, and
made up again by his own tender and strong hand: When he will susten his open
and fair looks upon a most lovely object, it is upon a poor trembling soul lying
at his feet, Isa 66. ^. Pames omnia reddit suavia prater seipsam.
Hunger makes every thing sweet but it self, says the wise Heathen. Thy
distempers, though they are not joy ous in themselves, but above all other
afflictions grievous, yet how do they set thee on to desire, to prize, to
welcome God when he comes? Thou that have sat in most horrid darkness, how
sweet will that light to be thee that shall shine from Gods reconeded face? How
sweet will the Ordinances be to thee, when thou shall feel their impression?
How sweet will promises be to thee, when thou shall? experience their strength?
How sweet will the Lord be to thee, when thou have found him after so much sad
and sollicitous seeking?

Ob. 3. It may be farther objected, that the subject. which I now handle is
unsuitable to our present time and state. It might have bin seasonable for us a
while since, in our deep afflictions, our losses and overthrows: now the worst
is past, we are even escaped, prosperity flows in upon us. You may say to me,
Surely your doctrine is misdated, miscalculated for our Meridian.

Sol. 1. I shall answer this as Jeremiah did the prophecy of Hanaiah, Who told
the Jews that their yoke was broken, that the vessule of the Lords house should
he speedtly restored. Ier, 28.6, 15.
AMEN, the Lord dose as you say, the Lord put a period to our miseries, restore
and establish our peace. But yet this conceit of yours may be (like that),
deluding vision, you may trust malia.

2. For the world at best is an Ocean, deep When cum, but the storm is yet upon
us, and we know nor how high the winds and waters may again arise. We know the
nature and have had the experience of our troubles: our war is like fire, one
blast from God may make the sparks of it (if there were no more left) flee
abroad and re-inflame all.

3. Our treasure is not yet safe on shore! Oh what fluctuations and perils is
our Religion yet obnoxious to! What is it to save our lumber, while our jewels,
our coin, our evidenced are in danger? Grapt our externals in as good a case as
we can wish them, I am sure our spirituals are in a perplexed state. I need not
mind you how it is with us in Church Government. And surely me thinks there
should be some such thing as Church government, and that estentiall to
Church-constitution; even the hedge about the vineyard, the polity of Christ's
Kingdom, the order in his household. For doctrine, it is outbraved, baffled with
blasphemies, heresies and strange opinions, Nay, the very life of Religion, the
power and practice of godliness, how is it even evaporated into vain janglings
crude disputes?

4. If we are so early evaded our afflictions, we should therefore put forth
the more earnestnes and activity to come clearly off. It Is miserably shameful
to miscarry in the last act. The Israe lites were within view of Canaan, upon
the very borders, yet even then were they wheeled about by their own
provocations, put back forty years in the date of their entrance, and the
carcases of that whole generation fell in the wilderness. Perditur in puncto,
quod non speratur in anno.
We may lose that in a day, which we have been many years, seeking and hoping
for. I knew a ship worth thousands returned richly laden from the East Indies,
which was cast away in an harbor in the west parts of this Kingdom. Surely our
very shore, our landing place is full or rocks, And because they are now under
the smooth water of our success, and therefore not discirned; or nor so well
heeded as they should be when apparent, I shall point out some few of them to
you.

1. Our incorrigiblenes under judgments. How fitly does that grave passage of
Salvian sutems? We that are corrupted by prosperity (says he) should be
corrected by misery; and if long peace swell us with intemperance, troubles
should purge out those redundant humors. But see the contrary; Italy is wasted
with ruin but abounding as much in vices and villainies as ever: Romo is
befieged and taken, yet as full of blasphemies and abominations as ever:
Barbarous Nations have overrun France, yet the French have not exterminated
their homebred evils: The Vandals possess Spain, Mutate quidem sore est, sed
non mutate vitlosites. Salv. l. ^. de Gubern. Dei.
Spainyards hold on their wickedness as before: Here Is a change from happinesss,
but no change from sinfulness. As face answers face in the water, so does this
resemble and docipher our times. Is it not strange that the terrors and
strokes of the Almighty should not fire men out of the excess and impudence of
sin? They are prodigies, monsters of men, Novum mousirl genus esse aliquot
etiam in morte vitieses. Idem. l. 7. de Gub: Dei.
who for all the dangers and distresses that are upon us, will not above an
hair of their pride, a drop of their drunkenvesse, a look of their uncleannes,
any thing of their extremity in evil, but so far only as they are enforcedly
cut off from fuel for their lust. And is it not so with us for the general?

2. Our unsutablenesse to mercies. Our mercies sit about us like Saul's armor
on David: we know not how to manage them. When that which we desire, pray fow
fight for, is put into our hands, we know not what to do with it, or how to
improve it. Too like we are to him, who had valor enough to win, but not
wisdom enough to use what he had gotten. We are apt to be discontented at, and
afraid of out mercies. Some amongst us look sour and pale on our victories,
because they are archieved by them whom they disaffect or envy: Others are
troubled at peace, lest it should take down their rule, or cut short their
gain: Others, abhor Reformation, because it would curb their vices, or cross
their opinions. Our very mercies do not please nor suit us.

3. The pretended professed impossibility of a through reformation. It Is a
taking, spreading conceit, hatched and vented by some that would seem wise, and
are so for their own ends, that our age is not capable of it: and therefore
they project and propose as fitter for our temper, a toleration, under the
less odious name of a forbearance. And have we expended so many cries and
tears; so much creature and blood for a toleration? Why, should we not have
Christ's rule? I beseech you let nothing satisfy us but the rule of Christ, and
that with greatest exactness and obligation. If unoblique or defective rule
should be obtruded on us, with an indulgence from it, what would be so
intolerable as such a rule? And who would really need so much forbearance as
they that should practice it? I am ignorane of State-mysteries; but holy
prudence prompts to us, that the way to facilitate and succeed all affairs, is
to carry on religion and Gods glory in the first place. It Is observable that the
Israelites in their journey to Canaan moved no further nor faster then the Ark
moved; when that went, the Congregation went; when that rested, they rested:
Except the Ark be advanced Religion carried on, all our motions though
seemingly succesfull, are but irregular ^sions, not orderly progressions to our
desired promised rest. When the people returned from captivity, weak and few in
number, in the midst of potent, spightfull enemies, they are set upon it to
build the Temple. The wall was built many years after: first the Temple, then
the wall, this is Gods method: And shall we be first for the wall, and then for
the Temple? Yea, all for the wall, und nothing for the Temple? It Is better to
enjoy Religion in purity in the mouth of danger, then to have it maimed or
mired in greatest outward security. If the Temple were re-edified, no doubt
Salvation would be for walls and but warks about it: If that be irreparable,
what beauty, what strength, what blessing can we expect? I will be bold to
affirm, If we are irreformable, we are unsaveable.

4. Another mischief naturally springing from want of Reformation and
Discipline, is error. Errors in variety, in swarms enough, if they were but
flies, to darken our Sun, we shall find them toads and serpents enough to
poison our air, if not crushed. A fat soil and a warm Sun produce multitudes of
such vile to some creatures; If errors must pass uncontrolled, if they are
warmed in our bosom, not only suffered, but patronized, it is no wonder that
they grow many and monstrous. These frogs do not only cover the face of the
Land, but are gotten into our Kings Chambers, into our high rooms and places a
Oh the abundance, the impudence of them, both in City and Country! If ever
Egypt felt a plague, this is one, and a dreadful one upon us.

5. As a necessary consequence of loosnesse and error, Divisions break in upon
us amain: Dangerous, destructive divisions, scarcely a society free of them;
Countries, Cities, Congregations, Families torn in pieces by them Much a do to
hold the two confederated, covenanted Nations togethess. And in all; every one
widening the differences to the utmost, prosecuting each other with animosity
and bitterness; and doing what they can to bend and engage the Public (though
to the breaking and undoing of it) to their own humors and interesses. So that
if the common enemy were torally suppressed, we might Justly fear, that like
Cadnius bis brood, or, the Monsters heads, the cutting off of one division
would be the production of many. I might enlarge my self on these particulars,
and add many more of the like kind, but for the time. By these hints we may
perceive that we are not so clear from dangers, as we are apt to promise our
selves: yea, were it never so well with us, what do we but invite and challenge
God to bring us back into deeper miseries then ever we felt, to whip us in to
more serious, hearty, unanimous seeking of him. But I hesten to a conclusion.

Only give me leave (Right Honorable) to close up your thoughts, and my
discourse with a few words immediately to your selves. I will not prescribe or
press any upon you, touching your personal duties: you hear much and often of
that, and I pray it be to good purpose. I shall say before you something that
concerns you in common with all Christians; Indeed the height of your condition
should put you on to a speciality and precedence in the manner. Julian the
Apostate made a constitution, that his Presidents and Governors of Cities or
Armies, when they entered their Temples, should lay aside their state, their
ensigns of honor, and mingle themselves with the rest in their Idol-service.
Indeed civil respects and differences are fit and needful: Religion equals and
binds all in the things of God. If I were to speak to the; King and to the
Queen on such a day as this, Icr. 13.18.
I must say to them as the Propher, Humble your selves, sit dowm in that dust.
All that I have to say to you, is what my text speaks, Seek the Lord, seek him
early, early in affictions, whether presonall or public. To stir you up to
this, consider, 1. You should be most earnest in seeking, because you may be
most successful in atchieving. You have the largest adventure in the common
bottom, and may expect the richest returns. The greater the luminary, the more
the light, the larger the vessel is, the more liquour will it contain. How much
of God will your noble spirits hold, when they are heightened and made capacious
by grace? And if you put forth your selves as you ought in obtaining God for
the Kingdom, your shares of blessings and privileges in him will be eminent,
far above the ordinary. 2. As you may gain most of God, so you have most to
lose, if we should miss him, or be deprived of him. Creatures that live with
least pleasure, die with least pain. The Insect, the Worm, the poor creeping
thing lives a feeble, faint life, and dies without much ado. They that have
strong hearts commonly have stiff pangs, and are long a dying. Afflictions must
needs be very sensible to you, very impressive upon you: therefore they should
send you early, earnestly, mightily to God. 3. You should be forward, yea,
foremost in seeking God, that you may lead and draw on others to do the like;
like the great wheel in the watch, that puts the lesser into motion. I may say
as Paul in another case, 2 Cor. 9.2.
Your zeal will provoke many. Eminent grace in eminent persons is like light in
the Admiral, fit for the fleet to follow; like beanty in the face, open and
conspicuous, apt to attract admiration and love. Birds in their flight, beasts
in the wilderness put the strongest foremost, to break the way and facilitate
the passage to the rest. 'Twould be a blessed improvement of your strength,
your superiority above others, to go before them, and help them onwards in the
ways of holiness, an higher honor then to lead Armies, or govern Kingdoms.
It even broke David's heart in his banishment, Psalm. 42.4.
that he could not be with the multitude to go with them, before them, to the
house of God. Oh that every one of you would speak and do according to that of
the Prophet I Come, Zech. 8.21.
and let us go speedily to seek the Lord, I will go also.


And let all of us (Beloved) turn Seekers in good earnest; I mean in the old,
the good, the tight way. We that are now before the face of our God, to humble
cour souls, to pour out our requests, to renew our vows to God, our peace with
God; let it be our great resolution, our main design to seek him, to get into
his mind, his bosom, his heart; and to get him into the possession of our
faith: in this, let us raise up our spirits to an higher strain then ever; lets
do it early, instantly, from this very moment set about it with fresh and
renewed intentions and endeavors. And let all our afflictions present or
possible, personal or public, with more vehement desires, more importunate
longings and strivings put us upon this great task of seeking our God. So
seeking him we shall be sure to find him; and find him we shall to be the joy
of our hearts, our invaluable treasure, our strong salvation, our exceeding
great reward.

FINIS.
Erratum. Page 5.1.35. for goodness, r. goodwed.


