A wonderful And Strange Miracle OR GODS Just Vengeance against the Cavaliers
Declaring how Mr. Andrew Stonsby, a Cavalier under the Command of the Lord
Mohone at Listelleth in Cornwall, at the Sign of the Dolphin, drank a health
to the Devil.

Daring him to come and pledge him, with many blasphemmous imprecations.

Also how the Devil appeared to him at that instant, so that he was
distracted, and died raving and blaspheming, to the terror and amazement of
all the behoulders.

Attested by Mr. Adam Nicholson, Cler. P. and Co. Mr. Dudley Silvester,
Clericus. Mr. William Holsonford, master of the Jnne,
And many other sufficient and well-affected Gentlemen.

From Listelleth, Octobar the 30th. 1642.

LONDON Printed for HENRY HVTTON 1642.

A Wonderful And strange Miracle OR GODS Vengeance against the Cavaliers.
Sir,
IN return of your last News, J shall make bold to inform you of some
unusual passages that lately happened in our Town of Listelleth, it was our
fortune, ill fortune J may call it, to have some two hundred of the Cavaliers
billited in our Town, those sons of Beliall, whose wickedness is so great
that words cannot ex press it, these inhuman Catterpillers for better
epithet thy deserve not being billited in our town, the chief unbrideled
Rorers, to the number of thirty five were billited in the chief Jnne of the
town, in a very honest religious man's house, for such is our misery we dare
deny them nothing, ney and glad they will be pleased to take it, that so we may
save our houses from being fired and our bodies unmaslacred, it being indeed
their whole delight to exercise cruelty upon those that are well-affected to the
King and Parliament, to be brief, in this man's House the roysters were calling
(as is their customary use) for what even the House could afford, so they had
indeed was not sit only to satisfy, but also to superfluity, having sild
their ungodly paunches, upon the goods of this honest man, they began withal
those horrid imprecations they are used to utter, to call him Rogue and
Rascal,, and Roundhead, telling him that he went about to starve them because
they were Cavaliers, the man of a good honest patient spirit, entreated them to
be quiet, and told them nothing should be wanting that he could procure for
their content, then flew out oaths as thick as Haile-stones like an impetuous
storm from the mouth of the most deboyst Cavalier that he would have a Sea of
drink, a Wilderness of Tobacko, and ten Legions of Whores, what Company if
this wretch might have had his wish, had he provided for his own destruction,
a Sea of Drink, that Leviathan-like he might swill himself to death in his
own Ellement, J cannot choose but comment on his detestable Phrases, A
Wilderness of Tobacko, that he might loose his soul in those misty vapors of
that Jndian Devil, ten Legions of Whores, that luld in the lap of Sensuallity,
he might dally himself into damnation, oh most intemperate wretch, Sollomon
the wisest and richest King that ever was, had but a thousand yet they made him
become an Jdollater.

And J believe, might I appeal to the conscience of the most luxurious man now
living, he would ingeniously confess the truth of this assertion, that one
Strumpet by her wiles and false allurements, has unmanned him of his best part,
his reason and left him to the mercy of her devouring appetite; J doubt J have
exceeded the customary bounds of a Letter, but J hope not the limits of your
patience, for though the subject be bad, yet in some part to defect those vices
is not amiss, that that advice may serve as a Bouy, to give warning to the
approaching Mariner, that so he may avoid the danger, J have extended this
discourse, and now must fall upon that which is most fearful to the
apprehension of you or any other Christian. Some volleys of unaccustomed oaths
being shot up to heaven, that they might the sooner pull down vengeance on his
own head, he begun to advance his horrid voice among them, craving attention
and silence, that he might be heard my masters quoth he. J begin a health to
the Devil, and I would fain see who dare pledge me, but the rest of his
company though they were steeped in Wine, began to shrink back, and look one
upon another, as fearing the even, when he redoubling his damnable resolution,
cried out, if none dare pledge me, let the Devil come and do it himself, the
word was no sooner spoken, but a damp faint Air begun to move in the room,
and an unacquainted person stood in the midst of them,, who said with a
terrible and hideous voice, Andrew Stonesby J am here, immediately all his
Company fled from him and the misserable man was left alone, where after some
quarter of an hour of an hour of terrible noise, the man of the House, Master
Silvester our Minister, and the other persons here mentioned, adventured into
the room, where they found the miserable wretch laid grovelling on the ground,
raving and blaspheming, and so he continued for the space of a day and a night,
and afterward died raging and blaspheming against God, and cursing the
Roundheads. Let this serve as a warning to the rest of that Crew, that they
mend their manners, for fear Gods Vengeance fall in like manner upon them, so
having troubled you to long I take leave to rest,

Your loving Friend John Hadfred
Listelleth, October, the 30th. 1642. We whose names are here subscrbed were
eye witnesses of this fearful spectacle.

Adam Nicholson. Cler. P. Dudley Silvester, Clericus. William Holtonford,
Master of the said House




FINIS.

