AN ALARM FOR LONDON Partly delivered in a Sermon the last Fast, near by
BISHOPSGATE in LONDON. By JOHN HACKLUYT, a Well-wisher to the Peace of ENGLANDS
ISRAEL.

Awake thou that sleep. EPHESIANS. 5.14. LONDON Printed by I. Coe, 1647.

To the truly Christian Reader.
THe title may strike terror, but in whom.
Those, by Heavens finger marked out for doom?
Caelestiall powers are just; and therefore will
Never destroy the good men, with the ill.
Though storms fall fierce, and floods over Mountains roar,
Noah shall have an Arc; what would he more?
The Corn must now be fannd; strive then t'appeare,
Good seed not mixed with either Chafe, or Tare.
To the City.
Nor think him for, who now so rudely roares,
And beats Alarums at thy tainted doors.
Cease thou to sin; and then his Pen shall say,
Thy fable night shall be a Summers day.
And those strecht Clouds of wrath, all wrath shall bury,
And drop with fatness then, as now with fury.
Praemonitus Praemunitus.
VIewing with a serious, (but a sad) eye; into what a sabarinth of woes, the
Kingdom in general, and the City in particular, is like unavoidably to
plunge, unless those two grand Compurgators of a sin-desiled Nation;
Repentance and Reformation do make a speedy and forcible step into the gap,
made wide for judgment. I am constrained, by the great engagements of nature,
and Religion, thus in public, to unmaske my ne^rest thoughts, and with the
strong (echoes of a troubled spirit, to unbosome my sad complaynts:

What is become of those quondam days, those harmless times, which well may
be accounted happy; for though they were ignorantly zealous, yet they were not
learnedly, knowingly, vicious! O Sodom and Gomorah, and ye Cities of
Pentaepolis, now the ruinous monuments of celestial vengeance, had those
things been heard of you, done in you, that have been done, and heard of in
thee, O Englands Jerusalem! ye had remained until this day.

O City of harlots, though now thou sit like a Queen, among the virgin
Daughters of Sion, and by thy sorceries art become mighty; thou, that have
subdued that terrible enemy conquered Princes; at last, have lost thy self, by
thy self; shall the blood of Goats and Calves propitiate? no, not the
obl^^ion of many thousand souls, where is the prin^ of all thy faults? where
is the returns of all thy tears? thou fasted, but not to the Lord; thou wept,
but not for sin: they were but the lowings of beasts for want of Fodder;
howling for supplies of nature, not mournings for defects of grace.

Abating of sin, is the allaying of Judgment, unfined humiliation: the only
Antidote against destruction; balance thy sorrows with thy sins, thy
repentance with the true effects, then tell me, are not thy transgressions
sealed, thy days numbered.

O City of Stirrs! is not thy hand drunk with the blood of innocents? has not
thy arm laid wast the dwelling places of thy sisters, and art thou better then
they, no, it is thou have sinned, is for those sheep, those lambs, what have
they committed? Heaven made thee the word of his fury; when the Children
bleedes, shall not the world be burnt? Though Babel was that fatal Engine to
level Israel with the earth; yet as she has done, so shall it be done unto
her, the hammer shall be broken, Babel shall become desolate among the Nations.
Jer:50.15.23. And why? because she has been a golden cup in the Lords hand (by
whom he powered out his vengeance) that made all the earth drunken; the Nations
have drank of her wine; therefore do the people rage (because of the great
afflictions they sustained by her) therefore will the Lord render unto Babel,
all the evil she has done to Zion, A Post shall run to meet the Post, and a
Messenger to meet the Messenger, to show the King of Babel, the passages are
stopped, the City is taken, come therefore, and let us go every one to his own
Country; for her Judgment is come up to heaven, and is lifted up unto the
Clouds. Ier. 51.7.9 31.

O City of blood! how have thou slain the Priests of the Lord; and cast them
out, (like Dung) from the Inheritance of the God of Jacob, how have thou
exalted in their rooms, Prophets that prophecy falsely; because the people
love to have it so: thy adulterate Palate loathed Manna, choosing rather
Egiption morsells, stinking garlic before the bread of Heaven. Thou have pull
down Ceremony, and set up heresy, cast out innovation, and brought in
confusion, the basest of thy people winged with thy shelter, have exchanged
stalles for Pulpits; as if no Rabby so seraphicall as an ambitious Mechannick
(under the false gloss of illumination) to make the Proselite. Rotten sticks
do yield a light, but not profitable, if stars appear by day, it is no less
then ominous; and what influence these Glo-wormes have on thy diviner part, to
act thy soul for heaven, to the judicious eye is held miraculus; shall not
these things be required of thee.

O City of pride, has England trembled, and art thou exalted, what a miseable
solecisme is this humilem deum, and superbum hominem, to have a humble God in
heaven, and a proud man on Earth! Oh blush for shame, if yet be left one drop
of grace within thy veins, should one of our forefathers arise from his bed of
earth, behold our garbes, and take a strict survey of all our vain attire;
would he not stand amazed, and disacknowledge us his generation, being so
divercified in mood and figure from our quondam days? what a monstrous birth
flows from thy fruitful womb? what prodigious meteors, apparitions of men
and women, se we daily in our streets? what? the glorious Queen become so
base a whore, to prostitute under every hedge, to open her quiver to every
arrow, to act every new invented sin, to embrace lovers of all sorts, of all
fashions, know thou not that Pride goes before destruction, Prove.16.18.
Therefore because the Daughters of Zion, yea and persons too, are haughty,
walking with stretched out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking and minsing as
they go, etc. the Lord shall make their heads bald, and discover their secret
parts, Esa.3.16.17. and because thy wantonness is so exceeding great, as to
act thy shame in public, with such brazen impudency; instead of sweet savor,
there shall be a stinck, and instead of a girdle, a rent; instead of dressing
(frizlig podering) the hare baldnes instead of a stomach, sackcloth, and
burning instead of beauty; yea thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy
strength in the battle; then shall thy gates mourn, and thou being desolate
shall sit upon the ground. Esa.3.24,25,26.

O City of sin! how do thy streets ring with oaths? and thy houses with such
hydeous blasphemies, enough to blast the universe, and make it crack into a
dissolution: The very Pagan Gods (whereof the Devil was one) durst never
(without death) be so blasphemed, as is (by thee) that glorious Diety whose
Character thou bear, by whose name thou art called Christian; do not thy
horrid oaths, thy hellish execrations Peale lower then the thunder, though
those elementall jarrs makes the earth to quake, and the very roof of heaven to
tremble. To slay a man is death; but to murder the Son of God, a twelve-penny
fine is a sufficient expiation; nay it were well if that were done; our
iniquity intolerable! good laws; bad executioners.

In a word, what cries, what cruelties, what yellings of the poor, what
clamours of distressed souls, what roaring of the bruised bones, what crashing
of broken limbs, proclames thy ruin? what drunkenness and open vomitings,
what whoredoms and unheard of filthiness? (the nomination whereof would
sparkles blushes in a heathen cheek) what prophanations of the Lords day, what
tragical tyrannies and bloody expressions, what unmercifull extortions infects
the very air, and like so many shrill Alarmes, trumpets forth thy desolation.
Niniveth had bnt forty days to breath repentance in, thou have had many
thousands; but she repented, go to sinners school O City of abomination; copy
out, practice Niniveth. Art thou sure of her privileges have thou forty days
to turn thee in? General sorrow may beget a general safety; but without a
speedy humiliation, expect a speedy desolation; what is thy Beloved more then
other Beloveds? this City more then other Cities? The Lord is just, and his
spirit will not always strive: when the Lion roares, all the Beasts of the
Forest tremble, when the Lord shall utter his voice, and the Almighty
Thunderer blow upon a people, is then the time, to sit down to eat and drink,
for to morrow they must dye? the great Belteshazars joints uncymented, his
whole frame fell into an Earthquke, when the finger of heaven was penning out
his doom, Dan. 5. Oh that thou had an eye to see, an ear to hear, a heart
to consider, thy grievous sin, thy great reproach, thy approahing ruin, shall
the Lord whistle for an executioner from far; behold the Son eut of thy
bowels, longs for thy days of mourning, and the Lord will reinforse that Arm,
thon have strengthened, exalted, to destroy thee.

Therefore if any room for sighs, if any way for tears be left unto the
throne of grace, step into the gap, quench the wrath gone forth, make an
atonement for the people; if but tenn faithful ones, be found within thy
specious walls, cry aloud, spare not; the Lord will do great things for the
tenns sake, And the everlasting God gracious and merciful, who forgiveth
iniquity, transgression and sin, pardon thy rebellions, and grant thee favor
in his sight, that thou may live to laugh thine enemies in the face; to be
the joy and comfort of this dejected Nation, and the glory of the world; for
his sake, that bought thee with his own hearts blood, Jesus Christ true, God
blessed for ever. Amen.

Discite justitiam moniti. Prudentia non exigua, alieno sapere periculo. FJNJS.

