A SERMON Preached at the COLLEGIATE CHURCH AT MANCHESTER On Tuesday the 23. of
April 1661.

Being the CORONATION-DAY OF HIS Royal Majesty CHARLES II.

By RICHARD HEYRICK Warden of the said College.

LONDON, Printed for RALPH SHELMERDINE Bookseller in Manchester. 1661.

To the Reverend RICHARD HEYRICK Warden of Christ's College in Manchester.
REVEREND SIR,
OF those Truths you have frequently delivered to us, this one, which you
preached to our ears upon that happy and joyous day of his MAJESTY'S
Coronation, which is not of the smallest concernment, a Truth, which with the
KING has been an Exile, and banished both the Pulpit and the Press in this
Land for many years together; but since both are returned together home; the
one to the Throne, the other to the Pulpit; the one Crowned, the other
preached, both on a day; we judged it worthy the Press, whereby it might better
manifest it self to the world, that as at the Presence and Sight of his
Majesty's Sacred Person, all his enemies fly and fall before him, so at the
approach of this light, the gross mists of errors and contrary tenants, which
have possessed this Island of late years, might be dispelled and utterly
confounded. Necessary also we judged it, in respect of us sons of the Church
of England, to vindicate our selves, that though darkness might cover the
surface of our Church, and seize upon some persons, yet we still kept this
light within us unextinct, the doctrine of our Church we still retain, and we
who are soldiers will fight for his Majesty, in defense thereof to the last
drop of our blood, nor was it fit the Herald and Proclaimer of this doctrine
should be concealed and unknown, therefore passes it under your name, Pardon
us wherein we have acted without full directions from you, it was our love and
zeal to the Truth, and to you the Preacher of it, that caused this forwardness
in us. Sir, the Town ingeneral, we more particularly who were further Actors in
the solemnization of the day, are obliged to you for your great pains: And to
testify our gratitude for so great a favor, thought good to send them both
together abroad into the World, your pains, with our unfeined thanks affixed
thereto, who in the name of our selves, and the rest of our soldiers under our
Command, do subscribe ourselves

SIR, Your affectionate Neighbors and well-Wishers John Byrom, Major of the
Trained Band. John Cawsey Lieut. Hugh Johnson Ensign. Nicholas Mosley Captain
of the Auxiliaries. William Heawood Lieut. William Byrom Ensign.

Manchester May 11. 1661.
2 KINGS 11.12. And he brought forth the Kings Son, and put the Crown upon
him, and gave him the testimony, and they made him KING, and anointed him, and
they clapped their hands, and said, God save the KING.


HE that reads the Text, and knows the occasion of this great and solemn
assembly; and he is a stranger in our Israel, that knows it not, will
presently acknowledge the suitableness and fitness of it. The Text speaks of
the Coronation of a King, of a King the Son of a King; of a Kings Son, whose
Father was treacherously and traitorously murdered; of a King, who by force and
violence was kept from the exercise of his Kingly Office, his Royalty and
Dignity; of a King, who for several years lay hid in darkness and obscurity,
yet afterward beyond all expectation, probability, by divine Providence, yea,
almost possibility, restored to his Crown and Dignity without the sheding of
blood, but of the Usurper, the grand Conspirator and Traitor.

The History is briefly thus; Ahaziah the Kings Father, King of Judah, was by
the hand of Jehu a furious Zealot, yet a great Politician, a notorious close
Hypocrite, yet a gallant Commander shot to death. He being dead, Athaliah his
mother like a Bear robbed of her whelps, like a she Tiger full of rage and
madness, a fury and friend of hell destroyed all the Seed Royal. Jehosaba
sister to Athaliah stole Joash the Son of Ahaziah from amongst the Kings Sons
that were slain, she hid him in the house of the Lord six years. Jehoiada in
the seventh year brings him forth to the people, puts the Crown upon him, gave
him the testimony, they made him King, and anointed him, they clapped their
hands, and said, God save the KING.

There is no difficulty in the words, he that runs may read, and he that reads
will understand, there is no diversity nor variety in them. In the Text there
are three parties, and the parts they performed in this restoration. Jehoiada
the high Priest; Joash the King; and the People. I name them not according to
their excellency and worth, but as they are presented in the Text. 1. Jehoiada
he shows himself upon this great and glorious Theater, and he acts four things,
1. He brings forth the Kings Son. 2. He puts the Crown upon him. 3. He gives
him the testimony. 4. He anointed him. The second Person is Joash the King, and
the parts that he performs, answerable to the parts of Jehoiada, are likewise
four. 1. He publicly shows himself to the people in his Royalty and Majesty.
2. He wears the Crown on his Head. 3. He takes the testimony in his Hand. 4.
He has the sacred Oil on his breast. The third party that appears, the
People; the parts that they perform are three. 1. They made him King. 2. They
clapped their hands. 3. They said, God save the KING: these are the parts and
parcells of the text. Of these in their order, briefly and plainly: and first
of the First;

Jehoiada brought forth the Kings Son.

In the book of Judges, it is four several times recorded there was no King in
Israel, and it is very observable, that every time it is recorded, is
occasioned by some notorious villainy, some horrid impiety, that was then
committed. The first time we read these words, that there was no King in
Israel, Judge. 17.16.
is -- Micah had a house of gods, and made an Ephod and Teraphim, and
consecrated one of his Sons to be his Priest, Idols were erected, Idolatry was
committed, an abomination that Gods soul hates. The second time we read the
words is -- and then we read of robing and spoiling, Judge. 18.1.
plundring and rifling of houses, murdering and massacring man, woman and
child, and burning the City. The tribe of Dan every one with their sword girt
about them, marched to Laish unto a people that were quiet and secure, with a
rage reaching up to heaven they destroyed all before them; a wickedness not to
be paralleld. The third time we read the words in -- the men of Gibeon offered
force and violence to a Levite a wafareing man; they ravished his wife; Judge.
19.1.
they forced her to death: a greater wickedness they attempted, a wickedness
not once to be named. Judge. 21.25.
The fourth time we read the words Judge. 21.25. And there we read of an
unnatural war, a civil uncivil war, a bloody and cruel war amongst the Tribes
themselves, thousands were slain, and almost a whole Tribe destroyed in Israel:
the Book of Judges closes it with these words, In those days there was no
King in Israel; intimating and implying, that all the impieties, the
wickednesses, the villainies that were then committed was upon this account,
because there was no King in Israel Alas what a woeful Commonwealth there was
when there was no King in Israel, then Idols were erected, Idolatry committed,
Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, false Religion, false Worship connived at,
tolerated: robbing, rifeling and plundering of houses, rapes and murders,
bloody and cruel wars, all was out of course, in State, in Church. Micah was
a private man; Gibeon a City. Dan a Tribe. Tribes, Cities, Families, all in
disorder and confusion: Nor was this in secret corners, but all the Land of
Israel over. Micah dwelt at Mount Ephraim, in the midst of Canaan; Gibeah was
at one end, Dan at the other, so, in the midst and both ends, all were wraped
up in darkness and blackness. You see what misery comes by want of a King, what
a mass of mischief, disorder upon disorder; the holy Ghost does not charge
them with a flat Anarchy, that there was no Estate, no kind of Government
among them; there were both Priests and Judges; there was a millitary
Government, but there wanted a King; and God has assigned this for the only
cause, and we will not be wiser then God, to search for other reasons. I could
easily parallel all that I have said in our English- Israel; but the King and
Parliament has made it forbiden fruit, and have passed an Act of free and
general pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, may God, and all the people of the
Land seal to it. You see what the want of a King is, and by that you will the
better judge of the blessedness of happiness of that people, that have a King.

Kingly Government is the best Government, for order, peace, strength; so says
the Philosopher, and he proves them all one by one; the best without
controversy, for had there been a better, God would not at last have resolved
on this for his own people. This is the most perfect, most like the Government
of Heaven, God changed the Government, from Joshua the Captain, to the Judges;
from the Judges to Eli and Samuel, Priests; but when he set a King over his
people, he changed that Government no more. Jehotada did a great and glorious
work, when he brought forth the King, a work pleasing to God, and acceptable
to the people, this was the first work Jehoiada did; He brought forth the King.
2. He put the Crown upon him, He, Jehoiada, not the people. Chr 23.11
Consult -- The Crown does not make the King, it shows him to be King; it
adds nothing to the truth and being, though much to the honor and glory: the
putting the Crown upon him is an external right and ceremony, nothing
intrinsecal, essential to the constitution of a King. The Crown is an ornament
of renown and glory, proper and peculiar to the wearing of Kings alone. The
Crown crowns the head, the head the highest member of the body natural; the
Crown on the head of the King speaks the King the highest member of the body
politic; honor, glory, dignity is originally from the Crown; where there is
no Crown, there honors are not conferred, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts,
Barons, Knights, they have their dignity derived from the Crown; stream
greater and less flowing from this Fountain, rivers rivolets coming from this
Sea, and returning to this Sea again.

Jehoiada he puts the Crown upon him, but it is God, that reaches the Crown to
Jehoiada, to put it upon the head of the King. Ps. 21.3.
Thou set a Crown of pure gold on his head, as David acknowledges on the
triumphant day of victory: yea, not King David only, but King Jesus, the King
of Saints, the King of Nations, the king of kings has said it, Pro. 8.15.
by me Kings reign: we have Gods word for it, his deed, his best deed, his
gift, I have given you a King; kings are placed in their thrones by God,
vested with their Robes by God, girt with their Swords by God, anointed by God,
crowned by God, so says the Scripture, had I time to quote the texts. God has
imparted his Name to kings, I have said you are Gods, Sons of the most high;
Kings have their descent from God; king of kings is upon his thigh, and
Melchizedeck his first king and his tipe, is brought in without father and
mother, to show that Kings are the generation of God. This made the Emperors
to stamp their coin with an hand coming out of the Clouds, houlding a Crown,
and putting it on their heads, and accordingly to style themselves crowned of
God.

3. He gave him the testimony, a Book wherein the Law of God was registered, the
Book of Deutronomy, says the Greek; the five Books of Moses, says the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.
And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall
write him a copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the Priests
the Levites; and it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days
of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words
of this Law, and these Statutes, to do them. The Hebrews record it thus, when
the king sits upon the Throne of his kingdom, he has a Book of the Law,
that his Father had, given unto him, and he was to write with his own hand a
second Book of the Law, and ever to carry this Book about with him; the
original Book was kept in the Sanctuary, and out of that Book was the kings
copy written, that it might be most exact and perfect. This testimony was given
to him, that he might know what the Law required of him in reference to God, to
himself, to his people; and what he might expect from God and the people. At
this day Christian Kings have the Bible put into their hands, which requires
wisdom, understanding, integrity, courage, the fear of God, love of the
truth, hating of covetousness, having no respect of persons; the two last
properties Heathens themselves required, whence the Thebans painted Justice
without hands, without eyes, to intimate they should receive no gifts, nor be
swayed with sight of persons.

He gave him the testimony, that he might be the keeper, the revenger of both
Tables. The king is a mixed person, he has the Crown upon his head, and the
testimony in his hand, which speaks him in all causes, and over all persons
within his Dominions supreme Head and Governor; they steal from the kings
Crown the most precious jewel, that exempt persons and causes from him; whilst
the king has a Crown upon his head, and the testimony in his hand, God and the
people will love and honor him: the Crown honors him in the sight of the
people, and the testimony in the sight of God, and may the king have ever this
honor and love, and let all the people say Amen.

4. He anointed him, all kings were not anointed; such kings as imediatly
succeeded their parents, as Heirs apparent, their titles being no way
questioned, are upon the royal Throne without any such anointing: but such as
were immediately chosen of God, as Saul, David, Jehu, were anointed: so also
when the younger Brother was preferred before the elder, as Solomon and they,
who were made kings in troublesome times, when the Land was in great danger
and fears, the former king being slain, as Jehoahaz, and who had their right
interrupted by an Usurper, as Joash in the text: kings were anointed to
signify the collation of gifts and graces by the Spirit unto that place and
function to which God called them, as it follovved, the anointing of Saul.
Again, kings were anointed to set them apart, and to advance them above others
in authority and eminency, in which oil has some resemblance, which mixeth
not with other liquors, but seperateth from them, and floateth above them. Once
more, Kings were anointed to give evidence to the true title, and to make them
depend on Gods protection and blessing. Lastly, Kings were anointed, to secure
them from the force and violence of men and devils. Ps. 105.15. 1 Samuel 26.9.
Touch not mine anointed. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
anointed, and be guiltless? Thus Jehoiada, he brought forth the King, he put
the Crown upon him, gave him the testimony, he anointed him; he did not one of
these, but all; had he only brought him forth, and not crowned him, he had
appeared as one of the people; had he crowned him, and not given him the
testimony, he might have been a Pagan, a Heathen, had he brought him forth,
crowned him, given him the testimony, he might have been King, but not fitted,
nor qualified; but being brought forth, crowned, having the testimony, and
anointed, these speak him a King indeed, a glorious, a religious, a King chosen
and given by God unto the people. He brought him forth, he, who? Jehoiada: and
why Jehoiada? he was of the blood Royal, a kinsman to the King, he was the
High Priest, the second in the kingdom, a great Statesman, a prudent
Counselor, a Loyal Subject, a Religious and a Holy man, who so fit as
Jehoiada? Princes may be Priests, and Priests may be Princes, Aaron and Moses
joining together make a glorious Government. And thus much for the first
party, and the four parts performed by him.

The second party that appears upon this public Theater and makes it more
glorious, is Joash the King. The parts that he performs: First he shows
himself to the people without blushing, He stands upright, with boldness and
confidence, innocence and justice supporting Him, not as an Usurper, not as an
Intruder, not as one elected by the people; but as the next, the right, the
lawful Heir to the kingdom, tacitly claiming the Royalty, the Sovereignty as
due to him: He shows himself to the people, as a Star of the first magnitude,
as a light shining out of darkness, as the Sun conquering and triumphing over
mists and clouds, overcoming a dreadful Eclipse, that interrupted his
influence.

2. He wears the Crown upon his Head, not because set on by Jehoiada, but
because given Him of God, the Heir and Inheritour to it: His Head fitteth the
Crown, and the Crown His Head: Had any other had the Crown upon his Head, it
would have been a Crown of Thorns, a vexatious Crown, a Crown, a talent of
Lead, that neither he, nor his heir should have been able to bear, a Crown
not steady, not fixed, but ever shakeing and tottering, loose and burdensome. It
is a remarkable observation, that I have read in our English History, though
the Crown has been some times misplaced, though sometimes Usurped, though
often interrupted; yet at last it returned to the right heir, and now is seated
upon the head of the heir of our English Kings before the Conquest. Josephus
tells us of Moses, when an infant, Pharaoh King of Egypt to pleas his daughter,
who had adopted Moses to be her Son, takes the Crown from his own head and sets
it upon the head of Moses; but he takes the Crown from his head, and throws it
upon the ground. Once a Crown falling into a River, one dives for it, and
having recovered it, sets it upon his head and swims to the Land with it: the
King takes his Crown, rewards the man but cuts off his head. That Citizen that
said he would make his Son heir to the Crown, meaning his house, that known
by the Sign of the Crown, lost his life for it. Joash wears the Crown,
Athaliah is crushed to pieces by it.

3. The King takes the testimony into his hand. David accounted more of the
testimony then of the Crown: the Crown was on David's head, the testimony was
engraven on his heart; he found an end of crowns, but the testimony was
exceeding broad. Oh! how do I love thy Law. It was sweeter to him then the
honey and the honey comb, dearer to him than thousands of gold and silver: he
made it his counselor, his friend, his companion. Great Alexander in all his
wars and travels he carried Homer's works about with him, and lodged them in
the Persian Cabinet. Queen Elizabeth highly prized Seneca de Clementia.
Ahasuerus commanded the Books of the Records of the Chronicles to be read to
him: It was not Homers's works, no Poetical fable, no Romance, It was not
Seneca de Clementia, no moral philosophy; It was not the History, the Annals,
the Chronicles that King Joash took into his hand; it was the testimony, the
Book of God, the royal Law; so the Apostle James calls it, the royal Law,
because royally given with Majesty and power, because a standard to all Laws,
because it reaches to all times, Nations, tongues and languages, because Kings
are to keep it and protect it. It was not the Scepter that he took into his
hand, the emblem, which shows his power to give laws; but the testimony,
according to which he was to frame he Laws. It is a fundamental Law of this
Nation, that if any Law be enacted contrary to the Law of God, there needs no
repeal of it, but is null of it self, and people are not bound to the
obedience of it, Joash took the testimony in his hand, and this was the third
part he performed.

4. He had the sacred, the anointing oil upon him. It was not the Crown on his
head, nor the testimony in his hand; but this anointing that qualified and
fitted him to be a King. King Jesus he was anointed, no King anointed as he: he
had not the Spirit in measure, the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily in him,
Zach. 4.12.
and of his fulness Kings receive grace for grace. It is said of that oil
wherewith the Kings of France are anointed, that it was first given from
Heaven. In the Scripture we read of two Olive branches, which through the two
golden pipes empty the golden Oil out of themselves. Some Kings were anointed
with oil out of the Violl, some out of the Cruse. The Lord Jesus had this oil
naturally flowing from the Olive tree Those Kings, whose succession was long to
continue, were anointed with oil out of the Viol: those Kings, whose heirs
presently failed, were anointed out of the Cruse. Kings bear this sacred oil
upon their breast, to show that they are to have grace in their hearts: While
Kings have this oil on their breasts; the testimony in their hand, the Crown on
their head, and live amongst their people, that King cannot but be glorious,
that people a blessed, a happy people. Once it was said to one of our Kings by
a voice from Heaven, in deep thoughts, who should succeed him, the kingdom is
the Lords and he will take care of it. Joash was anointed, and this is the
second party, and the fourth and last part he performed.

The third party was the people, and of them it is said, they made him King,
they clapped their hands, they said, God save the King, let the King live. First
they made him King; he was King before, but they acknowledge him then to be
King: he had the right before, but now they give him the possession. In
kingdoms where Kings are by succession, there is no Interregnum, but no sooner
is the King dead, but his heir is immediately King, the King never dies. The
Proclamations that are proclaimed throughout the Kingdom, and the Coronation
of him, do but publish him King, and make it known to the people. It is not the
representative of the people, not in Senates, nor Parliaments: it is not in the
collective body to make Kings: Kings are Kings, though the whole people oppose
it; but it adds much to the honor, to the glory, to the renown, to the peace,
to the strength, to the comfort of the King, when all the people owns him,
acknowledges him, submits, swears obedience to him. This was the first part,
they made him King.

2. They clapped their hands, this was a visible expression of their great joy.
See Ps. 47.1. Oh clap your hands all ye people, shout unto God with the voice
of a triumph. So Ezekiel. 25.6 It is said of the Jews at this day, that as often
as they read the Book of Hester, and mention is made of Haman, his name is so
much in detestation and execration amongst them, that they suddenly start up
as it were in a rage and fury, they bend their brow^, they spit on the ground,
they hiss, they stamp with their feet. Every Nation has their several Rites
and Ceremonies, their external and outward expression of joy. Yea, they did not
only clap their hands, when the Crown was put upon him, they sounded the
Trumpets, they had singing men and instruments of Music. Consult 2 Chro.
23.13. Nor was this the act of a party, of a faction, but of all the people of
the Land. But the Captains of hundreds, the Nobles and the Governors of the
people, and all the people of the Land. In Ezekiel. 8.14. We read of women weeping
for Tammuz. Interpreters say, by Tammuz is understood the Sun, who for some
months departed from them; but when the Sun returned again, and they had his
light, his heart, his influence, they rejoiced with great joy. When the wise
men recovered the sight of the Star, that they had lost before, they rejoiced
with exceeding great joy. Some say it was no new Star then created, but a Star
not appearing before, but then showing it self. Joash the King was as the Sun
departed, as the bright morning Star eclipsed and darkened, when he appeared,
the Sun returned, the Star showed it self. The people rejoiced, they clapped
their hands, this was the second thing.

3. They said, God save the King In other places we read they shouted, they
shouted with a great shout, they shouted with a loud shout, they shouted that
the Earth rang again. God sometimes calls upon his people to shout. The Jews
upon several occasions of joy, they expressed their joy by shouting; but when
ever they shouted, they gave the greatest shout at the Coronation of a King:
hence it is said, by way of eminency, Numb. 23.21. The shout of a King is
amongst them; and what did they shout? these words, God save the King, or as it
is in the Hebrew, let the King live. As they praised God for their King before,
so now they pray to God for their King: according to the Canon of Scripture, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: for Kings, and for all
that are in authority, that we may lead a godly and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. They prayed, let the King live, maugre all the
opposition and contradiction of men and devils Let the King live, that the sons
of violence may not prevail against Him, that conspiracies, confederacies,
treacheries, treasons may never prosper. Let the King live in Gods love and his
peoples, that he may live gloriously and prosperously: that he may live long
here, and eternally hereafter. In their greatest joy and triumph they prayed,
God save the king. They do not drink healths to the life of the king, or to the
confusion of his enemies. Hest. 1.8. Great Ahasuerus the Heathen king in his
greatest festivalls expressly forbad it; nor has the Church of God any such
custom; yea, they did not only pray, let the king live, but they took out of
the way what might shorten the life of the king, that might make God an
adversary to Him; they rooted out Idolatry, they brake down the Altars and
Image of Baal in pieces, they slew Mattan the chief Priest of Baal; yea more,
Jehoiada made a Covenant before the Lord, and the king, and the people, that
they should be the Lords people, that the king should give protection to them,
and they obedience to Him: I have done with the parts and parcels of the Text I
have consid^red them severally by themselves, they all join their forces
together, and commend unto us this reasonabe Observation. The Restoration and
Coronation of a king is matter of great joy and rejoicing to a Loyal and
Religious people. or thus, The kings Restoration and Coronation is the Peoples
Triumph and Glory.

I shall not spend time in the confirmation and illustration of this Doctrine,
I shall make some application, and that in one Use of Exhortation: not to Joash
the king; not to Jehoiada the Priest; but to the People: you have heard what
the People did, when the king was restored and crowned, they clapped their hands,
and said, God save the king: besides what is said in the Text, I find two
things more the people did, they praised God for the kings Restoration and
Coronation; and they praised the king. 1. They praised God. Be exhorted on this
day of the Kings Coronation to praise God, to give God the honor and glory of
it, 1. Bless God that we have a king, the shout of a king is a joyful shout;
better any than an Anarchy, better any one a king, than every one a king, I
remember the cry of the Beasts in the Fable, when they were in consultation to
submit themselves to the Lion, as to their king, some alleged, he would do
what he pleased; they all cried, better one Lion do so, than all the Bears,
and Wolves, and wild Beasts of the Forest.

2. Bless God that our King is not by Election, but by Succession, no Invader,
no Usurper, no Conqueror, no Alien or Stranger; not one, whose speech we
understand not; but a king lineally descended from kings of the race Royal for
many hundreds of years, who has an undoubted right to be king, Ec. 10.17
Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy king is the Son of Nobles, the Son of
kings.

3. Bless God that our king is peaceably restored to us, that the people
generally and universally receive him for King. There were great thoughts of
heart, because of the division of king and subjects. It was given out
concerning Queen Elizabeth, when she should die, clouds of blood did hang in
the air; but God brought in king James peaceably, and made him a peace maker.
It was above our faith, above our hopes, yet in duty we prayed, that our king
might peaceably be restored unto us. It is observed no less then miraculous
when God brought his people Israel out of Egypt, that no dog opened his mouth.
It was in the dark time of night, there was great noise and tumult, yet no dog
barked. When the king was restored unto us, it was as it was in Heaven for a
time, great silence, all men's mouths were stopped, and the king peaceably and
joyfully restored.

4. Bless God that we have not only a king, but a race and succession of
kings: God preserved the Royal Family, as the three children in the fiery
furnace, so that no hair of their head was singed: you see what great cause we
have to praise God: Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be the
glory. Not by might, not by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts.

5. They praised the king: give the king the praisses due unto him; praise him
for his invincible patience and forbearance: praise him for his Act of
Indemnity and Pardon: praise him for restoring the rights, the liberties of
the Church: praise him for establishing truth and judgment: never had king
greater provocation, greater temptation; yet he has conquered himself, which
is more than if with Alexander he had conquered the whole world: He is more
then a conqueror, a triumpher, not over men's bodies, but over their hearts,
their souls, their spirits. Shout and cry aloud, let Heaven and Earth Echo it
back again, God save the king: Let the king live: God save the king: they are
the last words of my Text, and they shall be the last of my Sermon, and let all
the People shout it out with a loud shout, GOD SAVE THE KING.

FINIS.

