THE Glory and Beauty OF GODS PORTION: SET FORTH In a SERMON preached before
the Honorable House of COMMONS at the Public Fast, June 26. 1644.

BY GASPAR HICKES, Pastor of Lanracke in Cornwall, a Member of the Assembly of
DIVINES.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

Die Mercurii, 26o Iunii, 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Master
Rous, Master Salwey and Master Nicoll, do from this House give thanks unto
Master Hardwick and Master Hickes for the great pains they took in the
Sermons they preached this day, at the entreaty of this House, at St Margarets
Westminster, it being the day of public Humiliation, and to desire them to
print their Sermons. And it is ordered that none shall presume to print their
Sermons, but whom they shall license under their hands writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Christopher Meredith to print my Sermon, Gasp. Hickes.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS now assembled in Parliament.
IT is the commendation and glory of great works to be carried through
difficulties, to be borne up and brought to pass in despite of oppositions.
The street and wall of Jerusalem were built in troublous times. The Church
commonly passes thorough fire and water to her highest advancements and
inlargements. So it comes to pass, partly thorough the malice of adversaries,
who strain their rage higher according to the Churches risings; if we could
empty hell and the world of enmity, we might perhaps) steal quietly to Heaven,
and enjoy spiritual privileges with outward ease; principally, thorough the
wisdom of God in the dispensation of mercies; he raises the value of them by
putting them off upon hard terms. We should be apt to surfeit of privileges,
to kick against him that feeds us, and lightly to esteem the rock of our
Salvation, if the Lord did not diet and physic us, if he did not acute our
appetites by some sharp mixtures, some bitter ingredients in our sweetest and
fullest cup; if he did not keep our souls in a longing temper by holding forth
blessings to us, after which we must reach and strain, and press even through
a piece of hell, through a world of dangers and hardships before we attain
them. And if good things dearly come by are to be highly prized, I do not see
how we can over-rate those we are now pursuing. All our gold in full weight
cannot satisfy our enemies, their sword is cast into the balance, they hunt
after our precious souls. Yea, the Lord calls upon us to expend not only tears
and cries, but blood and life and all: Rich mercies they are which he holds at
such a rate, indeed more worth then our all. The ensuing discourse shows forth
a little glimpse of their excellency, which in all humility I present to your
view. It is your high preferment in Gods favor (Honorable Patriots) that he
conveyes our blessings to us through your hands that you are made the
chieftaines, the leaders among and above your brethren. And although the heat,
the brunt lie mainly upon you, yet are your protections strong, your reward
sure. I need not tell you that the eyes of men and Angels are upon you; that
the Christian world is at agaze, filled with expectation of the glorious
results of your high and difficult endeavors. We all rise or fall, in all
probability) as you stand faithful and united in the work you have in hand.
Your employments are eminent, your interesses deep; the concernment is public,
reaching all that have a share in Zions prosperity. The Lord fasten you as
nails in a sure place, that we may be an habitation of justice, and a mountain
of holiness, and the blessings of the Lord may be upon us. So prays

Your humble Servant in Soul-affaires GASPAR HICKES.

THE Glory and Beauty OF GODS PORTION.
ISAI. 28.5, 6. In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory,
and for a diadem of beauty unto the residue of his people:

And for a spirit of judgment to him that sits in judgment, and for
strength to them that turn the battle in the gate.


THere is an evil among all things that are done under the Sun (says
Solomon) that in respect of outward occurrences, Eccles. 9.2, 3.
there is one event to all, to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the clean,
and to the unclean; to the pious, and to the profane; whence the hearts of
the sons of men are filled with evil, and madness possesses their minds
till it bring them to destruction. That which makes desperate ones run mad in
sinning is their presumption of Gods connivence at their courses, their damned
inference of his approbation of their evils from their present impunity and
prospering in them; because they have no changes, Psalm. 55.19.
therefore they fear not God. And that which drives the sager and better
tempered sort of Naturalists out of their wits is their conceit of carelessness
or confusion in the dispensations of providence, or of unequal compensations
of meedes or punishments to men according to deservings. Hence Brutus that
wonder of magnanimity and constancy, that stour stickler for the liberty of
his country, a great admirer and practitioner of virtue, and an able assertour
of the divine providence, such as he knew; when he was finally vanquished by
Antonius, and saw such bad success in his cause which he took to be so good;
he disclaimes all his virtues as trifles, and derides endeavors to live well
as vain and bootlesse. But though reason be puzzled, yea confounded at that
which is above its reach, yet faith can fathom these depths, and so far
satisfy its self in them, as to see the Lords hand, and to justify his
proceedings. And that which bears up the believing heart from faintings or
fluctuations amidst the various and strange vicissitudes of things below, is
the consideration and assurance of an overruling and unerring concurrence,
discerning, directing, disposing all, in a most free, wise, and equal course,
even in those passages and exigents which seem to be most disordered or
uncertain. Then when bad men are crowned with pride, fatted with luxury,
mounted on horse back in unworthy advancements, whence they overlook with
disdain, and trample upon with insolency Gods humble, holy, innocent ones: or
then when the Lord arises to shake the earth terribly, and to work dreadful
desolations in the midst thereof, he has always a selected parcel, which
is his dear charge, to whose safety and honor he bears tender and
unalterable respects in the most doubtful or dangerous times.

In that day] whether it be the short day of the wickeds prosperity, or the
determined day of vengeance upon them, shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown
of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, for truest advancement and ornament, to
the residue of his people, to that precious portion which is his own according
to the election of grace; He shall be for a spirit of judgment to him that
sits in judgment: He will raise up instruments, and fit them with
faithfulness and activitie for the administration of Justice: He shall be for
strength to them that turn the battle in the gate: He will infuse courage,
and add wonderful success to their attempts that fight his battles, and
jeopard their lives for his cause.

The words read unto you are a prophetical Promise, let it not seem unsuitable
to the day for me to handle a Promise. It is our work to day to humble our
souls and pour them out in prayer; and what so proper and prevailing to melt
a gracious soul as the goodness of a Promise? and where but in the Promises
shall we look for grounds and matter of our requests? and what one single
Promise in Scripture can more directly and fully answer our desires than this?
we groan after Reformation, this Promise holds it forth to us in the
honorable and amiable notions, of glory and beauty: Our supreme Council, our
Kingdoms Worthies are this day on their knees before the Lord, and what
blessing would they beg of God, or we for them rather then the spirit of
judgment here promised? Our Armies are in the field, and if we were put to the
option to find out and beseech an advantage to them, we cannot bethink a
better than is here expressed, that the Lord would be their strength. If I had
a spirit and a tongue to set forth, and you hearts rightly disposed to ask
what is here contained, I might impart, and you obtain the fullness of the
blessing of God.

That we all may do our duties the better, I beseech you look over the
Promise again, wherein you may find remarkable: 1. The seasonablenesse of it,
intimated in the circumstance of time when it shall be accomplished, In that
day. 2. The pretiousnesse, expressed in the substance of good things assured,
the Lord himself undertakes to be for a crown of glory and for a diadem of
beauty, rich, and sure, and honorable advantages these. 3. The peculiaritie of
the Privileges, appropriated they are to Gods residue or remnant, the persons
with whom alone he stipulates. 4. The specification of two choice excellencies
wherewith he honors and beautifies his covenant people: 1. The spirit of
judgment, for Civil Government. 2. Holy valor and strength for military
exploits. In that day, etc.



The parts I shall handle in the same order as they lie disposed in the Text,
beginning with the seasonable accomplishment of this precious Promise set down
in the circumstance of time, of which a word only, because I may not spend much
of the little time allotted me about a circumstance.

In that day] If you considerately calculate the time here noted by a view of
the context, you will find it to be a time of foul degeneration, when the
greatest part was swollen in pride, slimed with sensuality, grown to an
height of insolency and universality in sinning, and therefore ripe for a
judgment, yea indeed it was the very day of wrath, when destruction like a
violent storm, a deluge of mighty waters did dash and overwhelme the flower of
their beauty, when like a greedy devourer it consumed most of their visible
strength and excellency: In such a day it is much if the Lord affords shelter to
his dear ones, an hiding place till the indignation be overpast: yet more it
is which he here undertakes for them, even then to keep them up in their
honor, to raise them higher in happiness, when his severity is most sharp,
and his judgments are most heavy round about them. It Is a clear truth, That
in the worst and most dangerous times the Lord does certainly provide for the
glory and the beauty, the advancement and the ornament of his chosen people.

If you look for the literal or historical accomplishment of this truth, you
will find it in the blessed reigns of Hezekiah and Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 29. and 34.
wherein after the Lord had removed the ten tribes out of his sight, and cut
short Judah for their high provocations, yet some glorious respites he affords
to his remnant, wherein Religion and Justice recovered their flourish, and the
ruined honor of that Church and state revived and got strength. But if you
consider the Promise in its general drift, in its extent or amplitude, as it
reaches and belongs to all the faithful, then might I by a plain and
plentiful induction show how from time to time it has been performed: but I
shall not multiply instances, rather I shall single out some few that are most
eminent and remarkable. And where should I begin but at the most glorious
advantage that ever befell the Church, the sum of saving Privileges so much
desired, so long looked for, to which its probable this Promise mainly points?
I mean, the exhibition of Christ in the flesh: upon what times fell that? even
upon the most degenerate and deplorable that might be: when the glory of the
Scepter was departed, and the beauty of truth and worship foully blemished and
razed, when the Church was even at the lowest ebb. Afterward, when Christ had
gathered a people for himself, and suffered Satan to vent his malice against
them in bloody opposition, when the rage of persecutours was at the achme,
Eusebius E^cles Histor. 1^ 8 c. 4.
at the height. When Dioclesian and Maximianus had vowed the extirpation of the
Christian Name, when their savage cruelty had more exhausted the world, then
ever any wars had done (as the Historian observes) even then on the sudden
does the Lord chain up the grand enemy, Su^p^^ius.
check and over-turne his fell agents in their fiercest careere, and introduce
glorious liberty, a flourishing calm on his heritage. In succeeding ages, when
the weeds of heresy sprang apace in the fat and well manured soil of the
Church, and at last grew together into popery as into one stem, all errors
and villainies falling into that as into a common confluence or sink, when that
man of sin was swollen up to such monstrous insolency, Melchior Adam. in
vita Lutheri.
that he set his feet upon the neck of all authority, when he was waxen
impudent in blasphemies, insomuch that Tecelius the foule-mouthed publisher of
his indulgences blushed not to affirm that by the Popes power ( interventu
pecuniae, money he must have too) he could pardon him that had defiled the
blessed Virgin the mother of Christ; even then did the glorious Sun of truth
break forth in the preaching of the Gospel, many Nations threw off the yoke of
Antichrist, and subjected themselves to a beautiful Reformation. But whether
do we wander from our selves? what need we look for foreign or far
fetched instances? never was this truth more evidently exemplified in any Nation
or Church under Heaven then in ours. When did the Lord advance us to the
dignity of his people, and establish his truth and worship amongst us in a
peaceable and beautiful manner? even immediately after that cloud of blood
which fell in our Marian days had besmeared our land, when whosoever would
keep conscience, and get Heaven at last, must look to be transported thither
in a fiery convoy. Why then run thorough all ages, inquire of the former and
latter days, and you will find that in the saddest and most sinful times the
Lord provides, most certainly and gloriously for the security and honor of his
people.

And indeed what fitter opportunities can be found out, It is time for thee
Lord to work (says David) for they have made void thy law, Psalm. 119.126.
when men have violated all bonds both sacred and civil, cut in two the sinews
of the laws authority, and let themselves loose to all exorbitancies; high
time then for the Lord to take the matter into his own hand, to stir up
himself for the vindication of his honor. A remedy applied rebus confuses
and perditis, Calvin in loc.
when things seem desperate and past cure, how wonderful and welcome must it
needs be? Then does the glory of a deliverance appear, when the Almighty hand
has broken those knots and difficulties, laid open those streights which
otherwise were altogether inextricable; and then does the beauty of a Church
shine most conspicuously, when she has recovered her purity, and escaped
pestilentiall contagion in bad times, when she is quitted from those blemishes
that threatened to overspread her by a seasonable and thorough Reformation. But
I have promised brevity in this point.

Let us see a little only how the truth will suit with our times. That
perilous days were upon us before the flames of public wrath and misery
brake forth, none will deny, except such as are stupid under any mischiefs, or
are actours or abettours of ours. I will not so much as mention in what case
our Laws and Liberties, Lives and Liberties stood. I desire to limit my self
within mine own verge, and I believe men are sensible and querulous enough of
the evils that touch their skins, James 2.19.
Devils tremble at the sense of misery, Christians should search out the cause,
and take that to heart. And if the sins of men corrupt the times and make them
dangerous and troublesome, think sadly then upon what a generation we are
fallen (oh that I might say) what dismal days we have escaped. For Religion
(which is the main) how has the power of it been denied and cried down in a
despightfull and furious way of opposition, the purity sophisticated and
defaced by base mixtures, rotten formalities? Oh 'twas enough to cause any
tender and truly affected soul to feel pangs of spirit, to hold his loins, to
fall into travel, and bring forth an Ichabod, an issue of consternation, or
doubtful astonishment, to see those uncircumcised Philistines, Popery and
profaneness, irreligion and willworship seizing on the Arc, and driving away
the glory of the Lord. For truth how has it been silenced, perverted, mangled?
the day would fail me almost to reckon up the exploded, monstrous, licentious
errors that have been raked up out of hell published and patronized among us.
For manners, I think the Sun never looked upon a people nor measured an age
more conspurcate or corrupt then ours, 'twere easier and fitter to bewail with
tears, then express in words the excessive height of our pride and
oppression, injustice and blood, luxury and sensuality. And as sin hold
possession, so did judgment lie at the door, which has since fallen upon us
as a devouring beast: how could it be but that so much filth must send up
vapors to darken the face of Heaven with indignation against us? Oh the
dreadful cloud that still hangs over us, showring down an horrible tempest of
wrath! a vial is poured out that turns all into blood. Now if at this point
the Lord be pleased to turn again the captivity of our Zion, to clear up
all, and shine upon us with favor, what will this be less then a Resurrection
from death? how will our glory and beauty (as that rare bird) revive from the
very ashes of a ruinous decay? But if as yet we are not brought low enough for
such an exaltation, if the times are not yet at the worst, if sharper seasons
must be expected, if our present hopes should be strangled in the birth, or
nipped in the bud, which the Lord avert; here is the comfort, that in such a day
when the wickedness of the enemies is fully ripe, and Christ's Spouse has sat
long enough in the dust, when things are brought to such a pass that the Lord
may be most magnified in the confusion of insolent adversaries, and the
advancement of his dejected depressed people, even then will he certainly be
for a crown of glory and for a diadem of beauty unto them, which is the second
particular, the high and honorable advantages here promised to the Church.

Glory is the luster or splendor that results from dignity, and a crown is the
highest ensign of honor, the principal token of Majesty. Beauty is the
impression of sweetness or loveliness, and a diadem is the most stately
ornament to set forth beauty, and make it more amiable. And a composure of
glory and beauty makes up a piece of most absolute and exact symmetry,
consisting of all the parts and lineaments of perfection. To such complete
excellency does the Lord raise his covenant people. In the verses preceding my
Text we find mention of a crown, but it is the crown of pride, of glorious
beauty, but it is fading like a flower: by which the Prophet expresses the
usurped domineering of the wicked, which shall be trodden in the dirt, or (as
some think) he alludes to their festival garlands, the impudent badges of
luxury and lasciviousness; to which he threatens a terrible blast, a
shameful withering. And continuing the Allegory, by the same terms used in a
different sense, he sets forth the true honor and excellency of the Godly.
The Lord of hosts himself undertakes to be their glory, by interessing them in
all sublime and saving Privileges, He is their beauty by impressing on them
the sweet and comely Properties of grace; and in both crowns and diadems are
gifts well befitting the bounty of the highest Majesty to his beloved Ones:
Indeed

The presence or the favor of God is the only glorious advancement and
ornament of a people or person.

What is it else that makes the Church an eternal excellency, Isai. 60.15-19.
a joy of generations? Isai. 60.15. then does she suck the milk of nations,
and the breasts of Kings, when found and eminent members are added to her; her
brass becomes gold, her iron silver, when she is stored with precious graces,
edified with pure ordinances; her walls are salvation, and her gates praise,
when she is guarded externally by good Government; internally by the
everlasting arms, the watchful eye of Heaven: her brightness surpasses sun
and moon, when the direct and unclouded beams of divine favors shine upon
her, when her God is her glory, verse. 19.

This is the truth, the top of excellency, if we consider: 1. Who it is that
dignifies and adornes: even the Lord of ho^ts the King of glory, able to bring
low and to lift up, who ownes the pillars of the earth, and has set the world
upon them, who in the most glorious exercise of his Sovereignty raises his
poor ones out of the dust, and sets them among Princes, I Sam. 2.7, 8. 2. How:
he puts some of his own honor upon them, imparts his own nature to them,
beautifies them with his own comeliness, Ezekiel. 16.14. for what is true grace
but particula D^i, something of God, a piece of Heaven? 3. What manner of glory
and beauty is thus impressed, viz. that which is spiritual and internal,
which though it be invisible and inconspicuous to carnal view, which can see
nothing in the Saints, but their burdensome task, their heavy pressures,
their bitter incounters, their sad dejections; yet this sets majesty and
sweetness on the inner man, so that under a clouded and calamitous outside
that is full of serenity, in a mean and despised condition that is truly
heroique and magnanimous, that wants no worth nor loveliness, though naked of
all external dresses and contributions. 4. To what purpose this is conferred:
to wit, that the great God may take up his residence, and fasten his dearest
delights on his poor creatures; hereby he works them to sutablenesse, and so
to communion with himself, who is all glory and beauty; he makes his sanctuary
glorious, because it is the place of his feet, Isai. 60.13, where he walks, and
converses, and discovers himself graciously: he clothes the Kings daughter in
wrought gold, that he may desire her beauty, Psalm. 45.11. that he may impart
his heart love, his bosom counsels, his blessed embraces to her as to his
Spouse. Think seriously what a preferment it is to be a Favorite of Heaven,
in Covenant and Communion with God.


Suffer me here a little more distinctly to show how and in what respects
especially the Lord does advance and adorn a Church or people.

1. This is effected when the ignominious naeves or stains of abuses are wiped
off by Reformation: this is the repairing of the breaches of Gods house, the
purging the body from peccant humors; this is sweeping the floor, weeding the
garden, fining the silver from its dross. And that is glorious and beautiful
Reformation

1. Which is hearty; when a people upon deep conviction of their decays and
degenerations set themselves in earnest to recover their spiritual losses:
Turn ye even unto me with all your hearts (says the Lord, Joel 2.12.) with
fasting weeping, and mourning, an overly paint of emendation, a necessitated
laying down of some grosser evils will be to no purpose. There is nothing that
so much dissolves communion with God as the estranging of the affections, and
they will be most forward and forcible in reclosing with him, when we get up to
a good pitch of honor and happiness in his favor.

2. Reformation must be entire of thorough. 'Twill admit no suits for a little
Zoar, nor spare a delicate Agag nor keep alive cursed fatlings under pretext of
sacrificing, nor leave the high places standing, because they are fair
structures; but it strikes at every evil little and great, plausible and
profitable, that is destined and devoted to destruction. Ex pessimo genere ne
catulus quidem habendus.
When the soldiers slew Maximinus the tyrant and his son, they cried out,
Keep not one whelp alive of so bad a litter. It Is in vain to lop off the
monsters head except it be feared; mischiefs attempted and not extirpated will
certainly repullulate or multiply; Quicaquid non est peractum, pro non
inchoa^oest. Plin.
here that saying holds true, Better never to begin then not to accomplish: To
irritate ill humors and not expel them will increase distempers in the body,
whereas a thorough cure frames it to a more firm habitude of health then ever.

3. Reformation should be general and thorough, as in respect of parts, so of
persons also: all of all sorts should come under it. Materials must be prepared
before the building can go up; there must be hewing and squaring, and apting of
each part and parcel before the whole can be set together in a comely
composure. We put our reformers upon an unreasonable an impossible task, when
we expect and cry upon them for accomplishment of the work, and we retard and
dash their endeavors by our unsutablenesse. Many would have all well in the
lump, and every thing bettered but themselves; but how can a handsome
structure be made up of rough stones and unwrought timber? how can a pure
Church be (...) of impure members? assure we our selves the total sum of
Reformation will amount no higher th^^ we find it improved upon particular
accounts, and the only way to have good times is for every one of us to amend
our selves.

2. The Lord dignifies and beautifies a people as by removing corruptions and
blemishes, so also by erecting and establishing among them the choice
Privileges and Ornaments of his truth, his Worship, his Ordinances. The Jews
gloried of their three crowns, one of the Kingdom, another of the Priesthood,
a third of the Law; that of the Law they preferred, because it regulates and
flourishes the rest; and then is that crown truly glorious

1. When it retains and exercises its sovereignty or power, when it is
glorified and prevails in men's consciences. I plead here for Christ's
spiritual regiment in the heart by the Scepter of his Word, not for the
Pope-like and undue Prelation of persons, which is not the honor, but the
greatest scandal and mischief of a Church: It Is a blessed and an eternal
truth, The Kingdom of God is not in word but in power, 1 Cor. 4.20. The
majesty of Christ's gracious presence is not personated by external pomp, but
declared and magnified by spiritual energy. Vain therefore are their fears,
and frivolous their objections, who suggest that a Church looses all her glory
when her Ministers are limited in the excessive additionals of earthly honor
and abundance; and I am ashamed to think that so sordid an argument should be
urged by Scholars, whose ingenuity (that I name not conscience) should exceed
all others: Oh noble and liberal learning, that ever thou should be
prostituted to such base uses and respects as now thou art! Bernard in his dark
times complains of this vile humor in Churchmen: Sermon. 10. super Cantic.
In the offices and dignities of the Church (says he) men seek the
advancememt of their estates, and not the Salvation of souls; It Is for
Bishoprics, Archdeaconries, Abbacies, etc. that they beat their breasts in
devotion, and their brains in study; The mockings, scourgings, spittings, yea
the cross of Christ, are cast off as disgraceful burdens, and new fashioned
ornaments forged and worn with much bravery; high titles, rich revenues,
popular adoration: after these they gape greedily, stretch largely, climb
ambitiously; let souls sink or swim they care not, so they may lift up
their heads, and build their nests on high: and he concludes that herein the
spirit of Antichrist was discovered even as a noon-day-devill. Sermon. 33.
For those amongst us that will not follow the son of less except they may
be sure of Vineyards and olive-yards, and may be made captains of thousands,
and captains of hundreds; that can shape their designs to no lower a pitch
then a lordly dignity, or a fat plurality; that mind the University and the
Ministry only as a stirrup to ambition or a stale to covetousness; 'twere
well if their aims were frustrated by plucking the prey out of their teeth,
that they were discouraged, yea rated off from the holy function, wherein there
is no hope they should demean themselves conscionably, seeing they enter upon
it with such impure intentions. And doubt not but when these offae Cerberi
these bewitching baits be removed, the Lord will stir up and qualify better
spirits for his own work. See this in one instance only: Those blessed
Reformers of Germany did not only drive the Popes doctrine out of their
country, but his tyrannical Prelacie, his whole rabble of full bellied
Clergy, whose large incomes were all put into the hands of Princes and States:
whom I cannot commend for dispensing them to right uses, perhaps their
unfaithfulness therein has been one provocation to pluck down the
judgments which have since ruined them; yet then were their Schools and
Academies most frequent and flourishing; and I dare challenge any age within
the like compass of time and ground (reserving always due honor to Christ's
Worthies that have since abounded) to parallel that in number and eminency of
learned men, who did not only vindicate the truth from Antichristianisme, but
all humane literature from blind barbarism, wherein it had long lien buried.

Let me not be mistaken here, as if I thought there were too much dignity and
maintenance for Ministers amongst us, if it were duly conferred and
distributed. We need not employ our own help so to betray our honor; there are
two sorts of engineeres that are now plotting against us: Some in a profane
policy would keep us in a slavish inferiority to themselves, and therefore they
like Ieroboams way best, they would choose Priests of the lowest of the people,
or make them so; these hold a base condition, a poor pittance fittest for us.
Others again are for an eleem^sunary salary, that Ministers being engaged to
their benevolence, they may by the same bond be tied to their conceits and
errors. But I speak to wise Physicians, who know how to purge
peccant-luxuriant humors, without impairing those that are vital and benign.
And I beseech you, (the searcher of hearts knows, I plead not for my own
belly, but for your honor, yea the honor of Christ whose work you have in
hand) I beseech you let it appear by some speedy and clear course that you
intend not the diminution or unsettlement of the double honor of Christ's
servants, but the establishment and enlargement thereof. Isai. 46.6.
Idolaters lavish gold out of the bag; superstition casts excess upon its
instruments; let not Religion starve nor pinch them that wait upon her, let
exorbitancies be pared away, but let Christ's due be preserved, and then I will
not doubt to resume what I had in hand, that his royalty is not advanced by the
worldly height and state of his nearest attendants, his throne is not supported
by such painted props, his Kingdom is spiritual, and his Government most full
of glory, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
when thoughts are captivated and consciences awed by the mighty weapons of his
own Ordinances and Discipline, when they have free course, 2 These. 3.1.
due honor and kindly workings in the hearts of men.

2. Truth, Worship, Ordinances are glorious and beautiful when they hold their
simplicity and purity: Mixtures to these are not only superfluous but
poisonous; histrionicall and gaudy dresses of men's putting on are to these as a
whorish paint to a good complexion, or like that unnatural burden of hair,
worn in pretense of ornament, whereas there is nothing to sober judgments that
can render men more uncomely or ugly. Yet how do men dote upon mixtures? how
have we seen the pure streams of truth mudded with humane placites and
traditions? Mat. 15.9. Gal. 1.8.
the Commandments of men cried up and obtruded upon the conscience for
doctrines? another Gospel preached and entertained, though vented by persons of
less credit beyond comparison, then an Apostle or an Angel from Heaven*
accursed persons for their labor. Wanton wits have been lavish in broaching,
and silly souls have been greedy in snatching up any errors. Well the words
of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in the furnace, purified seven
times, Psalm. 12.6. as it is hellish chymestry for sublimated wits to extractor
cast out the least scruple hereof as refuse, so it is damnable imposture for any
cheating compounders to put tin among this silver, dross among this pure
metal. The complete body of faith was once delivered to the Saints, (...)
simul and semel, Jude 3.
fully and wholly entrusted with them: they that wilfully or remissely loose
the least minute thereof hazard thereby the eternal loss of their precious
fowls; and they that make or admit the least addition to it, shall have added
to them all the plagues written in Gods Book, Rev. 22.18, 19. no less
dangerous are mixtures in point of worship, yet do multitudes run a madding
after them. That good old fashion of worship in Spirit and in truth is censured
and hissed at as a jejune raw humor, or as a fanaticall rash undertaking;
nothing pleases without a pompous outside, a visible bravery, though never so
fond and newfangled. Yea, have we not some who think themselves as much
injured by paring their nails and polling their hair, as if their hands and
heads were cut off? that hold themselves spoiled of the very heart and brain
of Religion, if any of their burdensome and excrementitious superfluities, (the
blemish and bane of Religion,) be purged out, or lopped off? And no wonder that
men are in love with such trifles; they affect a way of worship which pleases
the eye, fills the belly, arrides the sensuality. Those Adiaphorists or
middlemen of Germany appointed by Charles the fifth to compose the Interim,
that monstrous miscellany wherewith he thought to please all parties, did
together with some shreds of truth, some patches of Reformation mingle almost
the whole lumber or garbage of popish rites and superstitions: amongst the rest
they would retain extreme Unction; and it was wittily objected to them that
they did it, that they might sleeke their own skin, Vt ipsi proceder^nt
unctiores.
and provide for their own panch. Questionless such a worship as breaks no
bones, extracts no sweat from the people, that costs little pains, and brings
in much profit and secular advancement to the chief actours and upholders of
it, shall have stiff fautours and abettours every where. But hear what the
Lord says of such mixtures to the Prophet, Ezekiel. 43.7, 8, 9. Son of man, the
place of my throne, and the place of, the soles of my feet, where I will dwell
in the midst of my people, shall not be defiled by their whoredoms, and their
carcasses, in their setting their threshold by my threshold, and their posts by
my posts, and the wall between me and them: It Is as the filthiness of
whoredom, as the stink of a carcass to the Lord to have humane inventions
erected or interposed as parts or props of his worship. Pompey once in an
audacious humor would would needs enter into the most holy place, and seeing
nothing but a cloud there, in derision he termed the Jews Nubicolas,
cloud-worshippers: before the Romans thought that Apis, or Jupiter Hamon, or
some such soul idol had been enclosed there; how do men seek after and rest
upon the garnished outside, the specious paint of worship, without which they
contemn its spiritual simplicity as a vaporous or crude conceit? whereas the
excellency, the vigor, the soul of it lies in its internal truth, its
primitive and native purity.

3. The Lord puts glory and beauty upon a people by setting up godliness and
godly men amongst them; by increasing the number, enlarging the graces,
advancing the persons of his Saints and Servants. When the vilest men are
exalted the wicked ruffle and riot at pleasure, all things are tumultuous and
squalid, Psalm. 12.8. but when the righteous are up, there is change of cheer,
things are in a joyous and fair state, Prove. 29.2. Godly men are the choicest
things upon earth, (...). Cle^. Alex.
the honor, the beauty, the blessing of the places that hold them: such
ornaments, yea and more glorious are they to the earth, then the Luminaries are
to the Heavens: and when they are fitly placed in the Horoscope of a Church or
State, in Houses of Dominion, oh what an happy aspect, what a flourishing
influence do they afford. Why then should men of parts and place, perhaps well
affected to the public good, stand, aloof from Religion for fear of
contracting disgrace from it? Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. li. 6. c. 18.
Perhaps the devil tells them as Perph^cy did Origin, that it will turn their
learning into barbarism, their acuteness into sottishness, that it will
spoil all their gifts and sufficiencies. Or else he frights them as Cajetan
did the Electour of Saxony, wishing him to beware that he did not blemish his
noble house by giving credit and countenance to Luther. Caveret nemaculam
illus^^is. (...) aspergat. M^len. Adam in vita Luther. Profecto inde^^ta venit
praepropere af^ectatur, periculose captatur. B^za. 2 Chro. 9.21.
Satan buzzes it into their ears, that if they favor those frantique
fellows, adhere to those strict truths and ways, they will stain their
blood, emasculate their spirits, and lose the garb and repute of gallants. But
harken rather to the Counsels of God, to the Words of truth and soberness. To
you great ones I speak: Think sadly how poor, vain, false the glory is, that
is without God and godliness: truly if you have it it is more then is do to
you, you seek it sinfully, and buy it dearly. Sum up all your sumptuous
store, your birth, breeding, bravery, possessions, titles, and best it is but
like Salomons freight; gold, and silver, and Ivory, and apes, and peacocks,
strong mixtures of pride and vanity, enough to poison your excellencies, to
sink your ship, to damn your souls. Whereas if you sincerely affect and
honor Religion, it will honor you, yea it will make you the glory of your
God, the dignity and beauty of your country, otherwise the greater you are the
more unworthy burdens and blemishes you prove to the earth that bears you.

To bring that which has been said home to our selves, 1. The necessity: 2.
The blessing of a present Reformation:
The necessity grounded on the dishonorable and odious degenerations
whereinto we were fallen; the blessing commended and amplified from the
glorious and beautiful excellencies to which it would advance us.

them, though I should say nothing of them: Methinks we were even come to that
pass wherein the ten Tribes lay after their defection: For a long season they
were without the true God, without teaching Priests, and without Law, 2 Chro.
15.3. Popery, atheism, profaneness were shouldering out our God, our
faithful teachers were crushed, silenced or discouraged, and Idol sheepheards
promoted that starved souls, or edified them to damnation; the justice and
power of our Laws nullified, force and will carrying all before them. We may
gather what should generally have been done, by considering what is done where
the mischief prevails. Many dark places of the Land are still the habitations
of such cruelties. I speak it in the grief of my soul, the parts to which I
stand most nearly related are overwhelmed with all the branches and
extremities of the misery: and I mention it not to inform you of what you know
not, but now in the day of your humiliation (seeing the Lord has made me your
remembrancer) to inkindle pity in you and move you to speedy and thorough
helpefullnesse to them. If any misinformed, or partial, or angry fellows ask
us what ailes us, when we lift up our eyes, and put forth our endeavors for
remedy? Let Us answer them thus, they would take away our God, and what have we
more? they would bereave us of our teaching Ministers, and it would be worse to
want them then to feed upon the bread of adversity and the water of
affliction, Isa. 30.20. they would spoil us of our Laws, divine and civil,
and twere better the Sun should drop out of Heaven, Act. 11.28.
that our hearts should be torn out of our bodies, then we loose them.
Honorable and beloved, The Jews when they conceived their Law, and place and
Temple, endangered by Paul's preaching, with a joint and vehement vociferation
they cried out, Men of Israel help. Let me with a better spirit and upon
better grounds bespeake you in the name of the Lord, Men of Israel, ye that are
Israel, Israelites indeed, help, help every one of you, you by your advise
and authority; you that can do nothing else, by your supplications,
humiliations, reformations; we by our instructions, intercessions, actions,
passions; others by their estates and lives; every one in Gods way, every one
in his own way, help to gain, to hold these things, so absolutely necessary:
In the day that we let go our holdfast, we loose our God and our good, our
safety, and our subsistence, our glory and our beauty.

blessing of Gods return to a Church or people; This my Text expresses in
fullest terms, it is glory heightened to a crown, beauty decked with a diadem.

We have heard loud bragges of a glorious state, a flourishing Church in our
Land, and that from the mouths of them who did what they could to ruin both.
Indeed we have had multitudes of eminent Saints brought forth, nourished,
perfected amongst us, but no thanks to them, who would not willingly have
afforded them a being on the face of the earth, these blessed Palms sprang and
spread in despite of their pressures. Of late God has offered in a gracious
way to wipe away the stains from our glory, the blemishes from our beauty,
which were many and foul. But how is this mercy entertained? do men look
upon the welcome, and admire Reformation as the rising sun, dispelling our
hellish darkness? rather they startle and storm at it as a formidable thing,
one solicitous for his ill gotten goods, another for ill administered office, a
third for his undue promotion, some for their self opinions, which they will
hold to the hazard of all; most for their beloved lusts, which they prefer
to the glory of God, the safety of the State, yea and their own souls to: most
would withdraw their shoulder and stiffen their necks against Christ yoke as
intollerably rigorous; nothing so much frights them as the erection and
exercise of an exact discipline. Do men thirst after the pure fountain of
truth, the clear and spiritual ways of worship? or rather content themselves
with the broken cisternes of humane inventions, and delight to wallow in the
puddles of profaneness and formality? Is it the joy of men's hearts that the
righteous are in authority? Whence then that grating of spirit, that gnashing
of teeth at their advancement and good success in Gods work? Men of honor
are so tender of their reputation, that they will not bear a word of disgrace
without a quarrel, a revenge; and how wary of their beauty are the fondlings
of our age? or if they want that which is genuine and proper, they add paints
and spots and attires, too often such as are monstrous and meretricious: yet
how wilfully do men degrade themselves of the glory to which God would exalt
them? how madly do they tear off the ornaments which he would put upon them?
Well though base spirited, narrow hearted creatures are unsuteable and
uncapeable of honor, though sordid clownes neglect and besmeare their
comeliness they care not how; yet let us whose hearts the Lord has touched,
whose eyes he has opened, prize and pursue these blessings according to their
worth: And if we were but provident, wise for our selves, we should not account
them dearly gained at any rate, no thought it were an age of fasting and
prayer, an eternity of angelical obedience, the expense of our largest
livelihoods, our heart blood.

Ob. But alas (say many) when shall we see the accomplishment of this promise,
such glory and beauty should be more conspicuous.

Sol. 1. And do you not see the every days wonders the Lord is working: it is
for want of illightned eyes and thankful hearts then: could we rightly cast up
our receipts, we might find glorious advantages already upon account.

2. Are you offended at the seeming slownesse and difficulty of the progress?
it is because you mistake the nature of the work. One way whereby the Lord
commends the worth of his best blessing to us, is sometimes our hard coming by
them; The Jews have a tradition, that God sucked Moses soul out of his mouth
with a kiss, that so his dissolution might be without all pain: such an
easy, lazy, goodcheape way of reformation do most men affect: they would
have all the fatness and sweetness of Heaven drop into their mouths
sleeping; on take heed, wake not the men, fright them not with difficulties,
for then they will fling off in discontent, or give up all as lost. It Is
remarkable what Luther writes to Spalatinus touching Melancthon; In Epist. ^d
Spalat.
Melancthon was a man of excellent parts, very serviceable for Christ's cause;
but of a timorous disposition, apt to be overmuch dejected in difficulties: and
at that time extremely pensive he was for fear of some sad issues of the great
meeting at Auspurge: Whereupon Luther wishes his friend to exhort and charge
him in his name. Ne fiat Deus, that he make not himself a god, he might seem
to be far enough from aspiring to be a god, who was cast down below the
common pitch of a man. But here was his fault, his projects must be like the
counsels of God, unerringly and unchangeably stand and be effected both in
respect of time and manner, or the cause (he thinks) was lost, and his spirit
utterly sunk. So it is with many amongst us, they must have their own mind and
their own will in all things (which is Gods peculiar) or they are undone: If
they have not all that they have promised or fancied to themselves, they have
nothing at all: If the simple gourde of their projects of conceits be smitten
and wither, they think they do well to be angry, to be disconsolate even to
the death. But it is no disparagement nor diminution to the worth or comfort of
faithful and blessed instruments that the Lord over works them, brings to
pass something, yea the maine in the most glorious undertakings by himself.
Have we not seen rich blessings, eminent achievements effected by the bare
and immediate hand of God, when councels have been crossed, endeavors tired,
yea hope it self worn out and ready to give up the ghost? can we but
acknowledge it to be the Lords doing, to bring down insolent adversaries to
truth and peace and holiness, when they have been trapped and confounded by
snares of their own setting, mischiefs of their own hatching, who were
impregnable by all humane attempts? like to the Nemean Lion, which when
Hercules had slain, he knew not how to get off his skin, that was so hard
that nothing could pierce it, neither wood, nor stone, nor steel; only the
Lions own nails where sharp enough to do it. So has the Lord turned the
pride and madness of wicked men upon their own heads to their ruin, that
otherwise were too tough or strong to be dealt with. In great works God will be
eminently seen and acknowledged, yea, and he carries them thorough insuperable
difficulties and impossibilities to us, that we may set him up and trust in him
only.

3. Why will you dislike the work for its hardship, or tho instruments for
their slacknesse; and not consider rather and stand amazed at the opposition
that is made against them? I think the devil never played the devil more
outragiously and apparently then now: all his sleights and all his furies, and
all his confederacies are now on foot: Hell and earth, and Rome openly
combined, strongly armed, professedly fighting against the honor and
happiness of our Kingdoms: and shall we not have something to do to fetch
our privileges out of the fire? to win them at the sharpes?

4. Be not too bitter in quarrelling or casting blame upon opposites; but
reflect and look into your own indisposition to the glorious and beautiful
work now in hand. Is it a matter of nothing think you to resuscitate and
animate dry bones, Ezekiel. 37.3
to put flesh, and finewes, and skin, and beauty upon them, to infuse spirit
and vigor into them? Indeed the Lord is able to do it with a breath, with the
turn of an hand; yet he uses to proceed in a wise method by little and little,
striving as it were with the averseness of the object. And we shall always
find degenerated creatures woefully averse to Gods rectifying and reforming
work. Iehoshaphat stretched his sinews, and put forth all his endeavors about
the business of reformation, but he could not bring to pass all he intended,
because the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers,
2 Chronicles. 20.33. Such crooked pieces, such untameable monsters do our reformers
find the multitude of men amongst us. Hezekiah made a fair progress in that
blessed way, and when he had brought things almost to the upshot, the Priests
were too few, they that should have been most forward were unsanctified and
unhearty in their duties. Oh the miserable scarcity, the cursed untowardlinesse
we are like to find in our Sanctuary men for the work of God! 2 Chronicles. 29.34.
Josiah began betimes, and went far in the best paths of his fathers, yet all
could not prevent the overthrowing vengeance to which the guilt and blood of
Manasses provocations had made the whole obnoxious, 2 King. 23.26. now if we
lay all these and more obstacles and blocks in the way, it is no wonder if the
motions of our reformers be slow; nay, it is well if ever we gain any sound
recovery, it is well if the definitive irreversible doom be not past upon us,
and we be not left to confusion as an incurable people. I speak not this as if
I were ignorant or inobservant of the cursed art of some, whose drift it is to
wear out and bring to nothing the blessed work begun by delays, which they
dare not oppose by open force, nor yet in favor of their backwardness and
benummednesse, by whose slacknesse it is kept so long between the knees, and is
in danger of strangling: but only to still and check their impatiencie, who by
their precipitous hastiness and fleshly discontent, manifest little skill in
discerning Gods method and manner of working, and less faith in waiting upon
his wise and gracious dispensations under clouds of difficulties and seeming
protractions, He that believes makes not haste. Isai. 28.16.

Obj. It Is farther objected that we seem to be far enough from recoveing
glory and beauty, seeing the dishonorable blemishes of errors break out so
much upon us.

Sol. To this I answer, 1. It Is not to be denied nor dissembled, that errors
have seemed to grow upon us whiles we have been contending for the truth. And
we shall find more then once that upon the most eminent changes in the Church
for the better, Satan's malice and men's corruptions have cast in such
mischiefs. Constantine the great was the Angel that bound Satan, the heathen
power; Rev. 12.5.
he was that man-child at whose birth and by whose victory, the dragon, the
persecuting Emperors were cast down and vanquished; yet in his days Arrius
hatched and vented his venom which infected the world. In Germany upon the
very dawning of reformation the hellish fogs of Anabaptisme rose up and flew
abroad like clouds spread upon the mountains. It Is no new thing we see for
error to confront the truth most petulantly and peremptorily when it is
springing up to greatest purity and luster.

2. This false not out without some advantage to the truth, There must be
heresies (says the Apostle) that they that are approved may be made manifest,
1 Cor. 11.19. Many Champions for Christ show their valor by incountring and
quelling such monsters; Ephesians. 4.14.
much chafe is whiffled away by the blasts of false doctrine, and the sleights
of men, which before lay heaped up with the grain; and many truths are rendered
more clear and glorious, by ventilations and debates with error.

3. Do any impute the cause and charge the blame of this evil upon
Reformation? why do they not as well quarrel the Sun for discovering bogs
and precipices in their way; or fall out with their Physicians for making them
the more sick for the present, when they attempt a cure upon their foul
bodies? When I would have healed Israel (says the Lord) then the iniquity of
Ephraim was discovered, and the sin of Samaria, Hos. 7.1. Many latent maladies
that have both root and stuff in the body show not their apparent symptoms
till remedies be applied. I Will be bold to affirm that the serpentine brood of
errors which now crawle abroad were spawned in the muddy times that of late
passed over us; and how grievous and odious they are to our reformers, Pulpits
and Presses have in part declared and will do more by a just and full
Confutation of them: and I doubt not but authority will provide that that
shall not impudently and impunely exspatiate, but will use its power in a
timely and thorough crushing of them.

If there be any yet unsatisfied, either the timorous that startle at
difficulties, or the contentious that cavil at some partial and yet remaining
blemishes; I must plainly tell you, I dare not promise you nor my self such
golden days wherein no wind shall blow, no cloud shall rise: I cannot fancy
such an Idea, such an exact constitution of a Church, wherein there shall be no
naeve or wrinkle, no discrasy or distemper. Can the creature here be capable of
glory that has no defect or stain? of beauty; to which there is nothing
wanting or redundant?

Well whosoever you are that thorough fear, impatiencie, or unreasonable
dislike of these invaluable blessings now tendered to us, judge your selves
unworthy of them, and thrust them from you; let me tell you that you have
neither part nor lot in this matter. Act. 8.21. and 13.46.
I must turn my self to them to whom it belongs, for to them is this
Salvation sent, and they will hear it; and they are Gods residue. The Lord of
hosts well be, etc. to the residue of his people. The third particular, the
persons to whom these advantages are appropriated.

All glorious privileges, all beautiful ornaments belong to Gods selected
portion, and to that only.

Even to that chosen generation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
that holy nation, that peculiar people, which the Lord singles out for
himself in his free and eternal purpose, Mal. 3.17.
makes up for his jewels by actual and effectual calling; hypocrites and
formalists may partake of general and external privileges, the men of the
world have large shares of common mercies, Psa. 17.14.
even their bellies full of Gods hid treasures; but all saving favors, yea all
favors in a saving manner are conferred only on the remnant. A man may be
hospitable and beneficent to his eighbours, gentle to his servants, merciful
to his enemies; but his affection and usage of another strain which he bears
and expresses to his towardly children, his faithful spouse, it is not for a
stranger to intermeddle here. Let graceless men prattle of I know not what
figment of universal grace; let the bondslaves of Satan pride themselves in
the imaginary faculty of their freewill. Our God is infinitely bountiful, but
not so lavish as some would make him, to cast away his high honors, his dear
delights promiscuously, these are the propriety of the elect, the portion of
sons and daughters; these are peculiarized to Gods residue.

Quest. But who are this residue?

Resp. I cannot stay upon a discovery of them. Briefly take notice of them
thus, 1. Negative, by their distinction. They are not men of the multitude nor
of the world, nor of the times; they dare not sin of the fashion, not go to
hell for company; their care is to be at a real and wide difference from all
ungodly and unsound ones; to be saved from the untoward generation. Act. 2.^0.
2. Positive, by their qualification. Jer. 2.3.
They are holiness to the Lord, the first fruits of his increase, prime
parcels entirely dedicated and vowed to his service, consecrated vessels of the
best metal and making, new framed by Gods blessed workmanship in the most
delicate artifice of grace, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Iosus, cast into his mould, and so prepared for honorable
designs, 2 Timothy 2.^1.
made meet for the masters use. Their holiness is hearty, their maine drift
the honor and service of their God. 3. Collective, by their consociation. They
all live by the same Spirit, walk by the same rule, mind the same Heaven, and
therefore they are of one heart, and of one soul. Act. 4.32.
Pearls are accounted more precious and fitter for ornament, when they are of
equal bigness or sorted into Unions: (...) Plato
Gold and Diamonds (said the Naturalist) are nothing in price or luster to the
consent of good minds. And although there may be some petty difference between
them in judgment, some small and temporary distance or interruption in
affection; yet they accord in the maine, they are shaken together in times of
trial and separation; and as Christ's cause and their own greatest good
requires, they strengthen their union by all warrantable and worthy ways of
mutual engagement and helpfulnesse.


Use 1. This may show us then that when the Lord does great works and
conferreth great blessings he distinguishes and selecteth both instruments and
objects. Times of the Churches exaltation are times of widest and most thorough
distinction. Multitudes would press in for a share of her privileges, when
she is rising, that must be shaken off as burdens and blemishes before she can
recover her honor. When favorable edicts were published for the Jews, their
adversaries claim acquaintance with them and offer them assistance, they would
needs have a finger in the temple-work: but their help is refused, and their
officiousness suspected as more dangerous then their professed opposition,
Ezra 4.1, 2, 3. If there be a Judas among the twelve he must be uncased before
Christ have finished his work* and what have devils to do to fit in the
assembly of the Gods? devils in treachery, in malice, in impuritie: The mixed
multitude, the mungrell crew that came up with the Israelites out of Egypt,
were touched with a stupid admiration of the wonders which God wrought for his
people, and promised themselves much happiness in their company; but when they
met with streights and wants, and found not things answerable to their sensual
humor, then they fell a murmuring and a lusting; and the Lord swept them away
in his displeasure, so that none of them reached Canaan, Numb. 11.4. One great
cause of the streights and miseries that have befallen us in our passage from
Egypt to Canaan has been the discovery and distinction of those loose rotten
adherents to Gods cause and people. And oh that they were all shaken off, while
they are unsound at heart, we may take more comfort in their falling away then
in their access. If yet a sword pierce deeper into Christ's soul, if heavier
things befall his members, it is that the thoughts of many more hearts may be
revealed, Luke 2.35.
that a clearer and more thorough difference may be put between the precious
and the vile.

2. Has the Lord a special precious portion (such as we have heard
decyphered) upon which he heaps such honor, fastens such favor, impresses
such beauty? Fearful it is then, that it should be the butt of men's
opposition, Act. 28.22
the sect-every where spoken against, in common account the vile refuse rather
then the glorious residue. Histor. of France.
The Marshall Biron of France was a man impudently and insatiably ambitious,
yet above all his titles of honor he affected to be styled the scourge of the
Huguenots. And how have men of power and policy thought no foundation sure
enough for their security, their glory, their contentment, but that which is
laid on the ruins of the estates or consciences of Gods precious ones? Oh the
deep and cursed machinations or contrivances that have been plotted and urged
to cast them down from their excellency, Psalm. 62.4.
to root them out from having a name under Heaven, to embitter their beings to
them, to make them crouch under unreasonable and impious burdens. When the
Arrian Bishops swayed in the Church under Valens an Emperor of their heresy;
Liberty was given to Jews, heathens, heretical Christians of all sorts to
exercise their Idolatry, false worship, mad festivals, what not? only the
Orthodox were expelled their Churches: and in one place being assembled for
holy performances at the foot of a mountain, under the injury of all weathers,
they were thence driven by force of soldiers, Theod. lib. 4. ca. 24. Is it not
lamentable that in the repute of many amongst us, Papists, Atheists,
Monopolists, sensualists, drunkards, any the basest society or sort of men
should be held more tolerable then the holy brotherhood, the members of Christ,
the Saints of the most High, who alone are dear to God, and linked together in
the only gracious and blessed Communion? How many for conscience and quietness
sake in the reign of our Prelates did leave their dear country, their
rightful possessions? yet there are not wanting some that malign a
wilderness to them. It Is a common wish, Oh that we were rid of them all! and
why are you greedy of your own ruin? Should not the Lord of hosts leave his
remnant among you, ye would soon be turned into a Sodom, Isai. 1.9. Their
presence and prayers are the pillars of a Kingdoms safety, the procurers of
its happiness. And if malice has not utterly blinded men, let them rub their
eyes and see two choice excellencies amongst many here annexed to them and
those most profitable for humane society; even the spirit of judgment, for
Civil Administration; and holy valor and strength for military exploits: for
so it follows, The Lord will be for a spirit of judgment to him that, etc.

First of the first, the spirit of judgment, which is the gift of governing
well, faithfulness and ability in executing justice.

The Lord does highly dignifie and bless a people by setting over them
religious and righteous Magistrates and Rulers.

It Is a good argument of Gods favor to Israel which Huram deduces from the
choice and qualification of Solomon: because the Lord loved his people, he has
placed such a King over them, 2 Chronicles. 2.11. And when the Lord undertakes the
glorious and happy reparation of that state after an woeful decay, he promises
to restore their Judges as at the first, and their Counselors as at the
beginning, to reduce them to primitive purity and integrity, Isai. 1.26. This
blessing will shine the more by setting against it the misery and mischief of
its opposite injustice. As a roaring lion and a ranging bear, such an one is a
wicked ruler over a poor people, Prove. 28.15. Cedren.
In the days of Phocas that bloody usurper, (he was the first sworn slave to
Antichrist that wore a crown) a holy Monk was so bold as to expostulate or
enter dispute with God: he asked him why he had set such an impious wretch over
Christians; and he was answered by a voice from Heaven (if you will believe the
story, it is related by Cedrenus) because a worse could not be found, and the
sins of men deserved such a mischief. Magistrates are either the common good,
or the common evil of them to whom they have relation. In Epist. ad Spalat.
That passage of Luther is memorable: he was in great danger of death, and he
wishes that the Pope and his crew might be the only instruments of it, he would
not have Caesar involved in the cause, he would not have his royal hands
stained with his blood: for (says he) I know how it fared with Sigismund after
the burning of Huss, nothing prospered with him, besides his domestique
infamies and calamities, the weale-publique suffered exceedingly with him and
under him. The most exemplary judgments are upon the most eminent persons,
yea; and they fall not alone, the poor sheep smart for their dotages and
delinquencies: whereas the Magistrates virtues are the peoples blessings,
Eccles. 10.17. and their virtues are comprised under this expression, The
spirit of judgment.

Quest. But what is this spirit of judgment?

Resp. 1. It is a renewed sanctified faculty, says David with some of his last
words that savor most strongly of Heaven: He that rules ever men, must be
just, ruling in the fear of God, 2. Sam. 23.3. It Is true there are functionall
abilities enlarged to men, which are profitable to others though not saving to
themselves. You may be deep Statists, learned Lawyers, exact in the
disquisition of truth, the deciding causes, etc. yet all this does not amount
to the blessed property in my Text. Industry, experience, ingenuity, moral
honesty, nobleness of mind may make men dexterous in the art of judging, the
Lord infuses the spirit, and that seasons all with supernatural excellency.
Plainly he is a good Ruler indeed that is a gracious Christian to.

2. The spirit of judgment is regular; as it is framed by Gods finger, so it is
guided by Gods rule. We explode the Popes Canon law, Luther. Ridiculum plane
est Constantium. Imperatorem aeternum nominare, etc. S^^om. Eccles Histor. lib.
4. cap. 16. V^s Itali vultis ha here Deum in ^ane, (...) non creditu esse Deum
in calis.
and that justly, the sum whereof is this. The Pope is god on earth, above
all things heavenly, earthly, spiritual, secular, he has the propriety of all
things, and no man must dare to say to him, what do thou? This we dislike not
only because it is the Popes, but because it is most lavishly irregular, making
up a model of government fitter for old Persians, or modern Iurks then for
Christ's freed men. Strange then it is that men of learning, that would be
called Divines, should so much cry up the Law of the will. Athanasius held it
absurd and ridiculous in the Arrians at the Council of Ariwinum to prefixe
this title to their form of Faith. Praesente Constantio ^^^crno, magno etc. to
give the style of eternal to the Emperor, and yet to deny the eternity of the
Son of God. And very acute is that of Melancton disputing about the Eucharist^:
You Italians will needs have God to be in the bread, when you do not, believe
that there is a God in Heaven. And are not they worthier of derision then
confutation, who make men omnipotent and absolute, and yet spoil God of his
freedom in decreeing and working, raze or abrogate his perpetual commands,
yea and live as if there were no God in Heaven? Let mortals tremble to imitate
the thunder of the Almighty by the storms of their exorbitant lusts and
passions; to take absoluteness upon them, which is the incommunicable
prerogative of him whose throne is in the Heavens.

3. The spirit of judgment is active. The spirit we know is the vigorous
principle of motion and action; contrary hereunto is that distemper mentioned,
Hab. 1.4. The Law is slacked, defluit lex, it is fallen into a swoune: The
Metaphor is taken from the slow, yea, imperceptible motion of the pulse in the
failing of spirits. And alas for us for want of activity! we have expected,
desired, magnified, blessed, fasted and prayed for a Parliament; and we know
how much time, substance, parts, spirits, blood our Worthies have expended for
the public good: what dangers and difficulties they have incountred:
heretofore and now they have framed for us the best Laws humane under Heaven.
Would it not be a sad thing if this wonderful power when it comes to execution
should be put into paralyticall hands, either quite benumbed, or so shaking,
that they can do nothing evenly or steddily? that it should be like a gunne in
the keeping of an Indian, a rare and forcible Engine in its self, but made
useless for want of good managing? Oh that ever there should be any advanced
to place and armed with authority, who thorough the vile timorousness of his
own spirit, or the treacherous compliancy of his own evil heart with sin or
the times, should not dare to act that good for which he is sure to have
assistance and acceptance with the most High, without the conscionable
performance whereof he can never stand acquitted before the supreme Tribunal!
Upon whomsoever the spirit of judgment which is the Spirit of the Lord has
fallen, let them go in this their might, let them put forth their strength,
and exercise their faculty, the Lord calls and sends them, and will do great
things by them.

4. The spirit of judgment is impartial. As the soul in the body it diffuses
it self in a just proportion thorough the whole into each part according to its
several need and capability. Who so small or inconsiderable, who so high or
uncontroleable as to be without it influence or reach? by it rulers must
govern, by it the governed must be ruled. The Lord gives a charge and
prescribes a method to the executioners of his justice, Ezekiel. 9.5, 6. he
commands them to strike home, and to spare none that bore not his own caracter
or mark, and to begin at his Sanctuary at the ancient men before the house.
It Was the Popes old trick to exempt his Clergy from the Civil, which
detractingly he calls the Secular power: but the Popes patronage now I hope will
nothing help our bad Ministers. Oh that they might feel the most speedy and
heavy hand of justice, as they have had the deepest hand in occasioning our
decay and misery. Charles the fifth was wont to say wittily, If the shavelings
had been good, Si Sacrificuli frugi essent, non indige^ent Luthere.
there had been no need of Luther. Let the guilty hang the head, they that are
faithful and conscionable need not fear nor decline the decisions of a
Parliament; the censures of righteous Magistrates. If any say that I seek the
ruin and publish the shame of men of mine own calling: I answer no: they are
the proud, the persecuting, the profane, the popish, the temporizing, the
insufficient, the lazy, the drunken, the scandalous Prelates and Ministers that
disgrace the holy function, and make us ashamed of them, as Gentlemen are of
their beggarly kindred, or rather as an honest man is to see his brother go to
the gallows. And as they have troubled our Israel, so let the Lord trouble
them: Let their own dung be spread upon their own faces, but let Gods
Sanctuary be purged of them. Moreover, why should the spirit of judgment
shrink or be abashed at the stout looks of any overgrowne great one,
Criminosior cu^pa est, ubi honestior status. Salvian, li. q. de. Guber. Dei
any blustering Belialist? let such feel the force, the omnipotency of justice.
It Is a true saying, The higher the condition of the sinner, the baser always
is the sin. What! will men steal, murder, oppress, commit adultery swear
falsely or blasphemously, drink drunk, live dissolutely and debauchedly, and
think they are delivered to do these abominations, Jer. 7.9, 10.
because they are great in the world? Methinks noble spirits should hold it
more base to deserve then to suffer sharp and shameful penalties of just
laws which they break. If you improve your greatness to quit your selves
from them; your privilege is no other then theirs, who run mad unchained, and
post to perdition without control.

5. The spirit of judgment is uniforme. It casts men's minds, and aims, and
actions into one mould or fashion. Jam. 4.5.
The spirit that is in the world lusts to envy, a distorting, distracting
evil. Corrupt men differ as much in minds as faces, or if they accord they meet
only in evil. Great spirits are liable to great impulsions, violent
concussions; when they are whirled by excentrique passions, or wheeled by
biased and self respects, their motions must needs be disordered and
turbulent. But when this blessed principle in my text is the Primum mobile the
first mover, then all the spheres, whether superior or inferior in place,
swifter or slower in motion, hold on their own course evenly and constantly,
and accord with others in an exact correspondence; and the harmony is really by
far more sweet, then the imaginary music of the heavens was fained to be.
There are diversities of gifts, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 7.
and differences of administrations, but one and the same spirit, and the
manifestation of that spirit is given to every man to profit withal: all tends
to mutual helpfulnesse, to the common good of all, and every one that partake
of that Spirit: hence all gifts become serviceable and contributary each to
other: and it is a most blessed and beneficial intercourse or trade that passes
between sanctified abilities. It has ever been a rich blessing to good
Magistrates to be instructed and abetted in their most glorious acts by
faithful Ministers. David had his Seers, so had Solomon, Asa his Azariah, 2
Chr^ 15.1. and 19.2. 2 Ki. 19.2. and ^2.14.
Iehoshaphat his Iehu, besides a number of teaching Priests and Levites, whose
Catalogue we find registered, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8. Hezekiah had his Isaiah, Josiah
his Huldah, Zorobabel his Joshua, the Elders of the Jews brought out of
captivity to reedifie the City and Temple, built and prospered thorough the
prophesying of Haggai and Zachariah the son of Iddo. Temple-work, Church-work
never goes up without such hands. I should be sorry that any here present
should judge the Prophets useless, or burdensome, or intermedling without
their verge in weighty holy affairs. A Reformation pretended without the
Council and Consociation of men of God would be like Adonijahs feast, 1 King.
1. ^, ^, 9, 10.
to which Abiathar the temporizing Priest, and bloody Ioab, and other such like
were called, Courtiers (perhaps) and Soldiers, and Politicians enough, but
faithful Zadok and Nathan the Prophet, and Solomon the Kings son, and
true-hearted Benaiah being left out, the meeting proved both sinful and sad,
it began in conspiracy, and ended-in confusion. But oh happy meetings-where
all sorts of gifts are met together and jointly improved to mutual and
public good! It Is the good Spirit of God that joins and keeps men unanimous
in and for that with good: and whatsoever tends to the setting of good men or
good gifts at odds, though it be never so covertly or speciously carried,
suspect it as proceeding from the envious one, the evil spirit of confusion.

I need not add any thing for application of this point. It Is the spirit of
judgment (which has been described) that fits every man for the weighty
affairs of Civil Administration, that is entrusted and employed in the same.
You see hence (Noble Patriots) what it is that you should mainly strive for and
cherish in your selves; and we find what we should most importunately beg for
you of Heaven. The work before you is glorious, the power in your hands
ordinate, the way of dispensing it the best in the world, most suitable to
equity and to our spirits; wherein as just Sovereignty is not bounded
unworthily, so community has some stroke according to its rank in matters of
highest public concernment. Oh then let this spirit of judgment animate and
sway all your consultations and proceedings; let it season them with sanctity,
order them with regularity, manage them with activity, carry them thorough with
impartiality, corroborate and crown them with unanimity; and the issue will be
(if it be not cut off by sinfulness and ingratitude) a heap of blessings upon
us, and upon many generations.

So much of the spirit of judgment, the first excellency here specified.

The second follows, which is strength to order the battle in the gate,
valor and abilities for the war.

This is a choice gift or blessing of God, the honor and ornament of a State
or people.

A useful seasonable subject had I time to prosecute it. I shall now handle it
very briefly.

The Lord is a man of war. Exodus 15.3. and he makes some of his servants brave
warriors; he girds them with strength, teaches them the use of their arms,
covers them with the shield of Salvation, gives them undauntednesse to
encounter, and swiftness to pursuit their enemies, Psalm. 18.32-40. till they
have their necks under their feet.

Such were the Israelites under Joshua's command, nothing could stand before
them. Such were the Judges, men wonderfully inspired and enabled to rescue Gods
people from oppression; 2 Samuel 23.8.
such Worthies had David, who was called and qualified to cut short the enemies
of God, and to erect his Worship in purity and peaceablenesse; and with this
blessing has the Lord honored pious Princes and States, whom he has set up
and established in all ages.

This holy valor will appear a choice honorable blessing if we consider it,
1. In the habit. 2. In the exercise. Fit it is to be employed in great
matters, high exploits, the maintenance of Gods cause and truth, the
vindication of his honor, the relief of his Saints, It ingages strength and
life, and all upon such noble designs and services. Unholy courage makes men
more able to do hurt, it degenerates into rage, becomes lusts champion, and
breaks out into injuriousnesse, revenge, murder, etc. 3. In the Usefulness
of it. Man's sin filled the world with Antipathies, and enmities, and God has
armed many of the irrational creatures to make defense and opposition against
their Antipathists. And who have so many implacable fierce enemies as the
Saints? as they have need of patience to bear their injuries, so valor is
very useful and advantageous to repel them, when they find a warrant or call?


Use 1. Miserable then and ruinating to a state is the want of this gift, this
blessing. And would you know what it is that melts the spirits, dissolves the
nerves, enfeebles the manhood and magnanimity of a nation? let me present it to
your view in a home president, even of the generations that have passed over
us, the people that have formerly possessed our places. The Britains the
ancient inhabitants of this land were a warlike nation, the made stout
resistance against the Romans, bore their yoke with much reluctancie, and threw
it off upon all occasions: English Chronic.
yet when their Nobles degenerated into lust, luxury, and cruelty; when
falsehood and faithlesnesse both toward God and man abounded in all sorts, when
plenty brought forth the cursed fruits of loose and wanton living: when they
were generally addicted to hate of truth and love of lying, insomuch that if
any were gentler and more given to truth then other, the rest would work him
all the hurt and spite they could; and this did not only the seculars, but
also the Clergy, and the heads thereof, giving themselves over to
drunkenness, pride, contention, envy, etc. casting from them the yoke of
Christ (they are the very words of our story) then they became a spectacle of
reproach and misery, a prey to barbarous nations. Gens Saxonum sera. Salvian.
The Saxons that succeeded them were the Imps of Mars, a terror to this part
of the world, they lived by their sword and were victorious almost
whithersoever they went: yet when they grew cold and heartlesse in the Religion
which they had zealously professed, English Chronic.
when treachery, injustice, shedding innocent blood, impiety, sensuality did
overspread them, they were woefully wasted by intestine broiles and foreign
incursions, and at last swallowed up by the Norman Conquest. The application of
these histories be to the enemies of God, and of his people. Sins, such sins as
these weaken men's sinews, emasculate their spirits, devour their excellency,
and cause the hearts of the valiant utterly to melt. Cowardice and baseness
are the proper and certain effects of sin. And although wicked men may be
stout and sturdy, and mighty to do mischief, either for the scourging of Gods
people, or the breaking each other in pieces; yet is this in them but bestiall
hellish fury, no true valor; and the more directly and impetuously it is set
against God and goodness, the sooner and more fatally shall it bring
themselves to ruin.

2. This gives us great occasion to magnify the Lord for this choice
honorable blessing conferred upon us. Our bow has of late recovered its
strength: God has stirred up and fitted courageous spirits, excellent
instruments for military affairs. And although the nature of the war amongst
us be calamitous, and many events of it very sad; yet the maine comfort is, the
quarrel is apparently betwixt Christ and Antichrist, he that sees not so much
now is wilfully maliciously blind. Now the prophecies in the Revelation seem
to foreshew that the ruin of Antichrist shall in a good part be brought to
pass by the sword: Rev 16 6. and 1^.14, 15, 16,17.
They that gave their kingdoms to the beast shall recover them by force, they
shall hate the whore, make her desolate and naked, eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire. They that make war with the Lamb, shed the blood of Saints
and Prophets, they shall have blood given them to drink, as they are worthy:
Methinks the Lord is breeding and apting a generation of men amongst us that
shall make the throne of the beast shake. If any censure me for cherishing and
blowing up the sparks of valor in men's spirits, 1 Cor. 4.3.
With me it is a very small thing to be judged of them, or of man's judgment.
LUTHER was called a Trumpet of sedition; Tu^a Seditionis.
they said of BEZA when he accompanied the Protestant forces in France fighting
for their Religion, Evangelium flammeu^n and (...)
that he preached a Gospel composed of fire and brimstone. But we that are
Ministers need not fear nor shame to carry the Trumpets of the Sanctuary
before the Lords armies. All ye whose hearts the Lord has touched Go on in
this your might, Judge. 6.14 Josh. 1.7. Isai. 26.4
be strong and of a good courage, be not afraid nor dismayed, for the Lord your
God is with you whithersoever ye go in his way, Jehovah who is everlasting
strength, is strength in an eminent glorious manner to them that turn the
battle in the gate.

Let me close your thoughts with one brief consideration from the whole. In
all that has been said you see verified that great Position of the Apostle
(indeed a Paradox to the world) That Godliness is profitable for all things. 1 Timothy 4.8
Perhaps you have accounted it needful and helpful for the worship of God,
the ordering of the conversation, Peace of Conscience, etc. Yet further take
notice here how it conduces to the flourishing and good government of a state,
to the managing and blessing of all affairs, not Religion only, but civil and
military to. It Is the fear, the favor, the gracious presence of God that
crown a people with most glorious advantages, that adorn them with most
precious privileges, that prosper them both in peace and war.

As therefore we tender and desire the safety and honor of our state, the
public and mutual welfare of Rulers and Subjects, the good and glorious
success of our greatest designs; let all of us together, and every one of us
in our stations, with our heartiest intentions and endeavors do what we may
to get and keep the Lord amongst us in the power and purity of Religion. Let
this be practiced, promoted, prayed for above all by all. So will it dignifie
and beautify us with all honorable and amiable excellencies; it will burnish
the crown and stablish the throne; it will enoble our spirits and deck our
heads; it will strengthen our laws with authority and justice, and sharpen our
swords against the faces of our enemies; it will make us a blessing and a
praise above all the nations under Heaven.

FINIS.

