Die Mercurii 27. July. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons now Assembled in Parliament,
That Sir Christoper Yelverton do return thanks to Mr. Hill from this House,
for the great pains he took in his Sermon this Day, Preached at the Entreaty
of this House, being the Day of Public Fast, at Saint Margarets Westminster;
And that he do likewise entreat him from this House to print his Sermon And
that no man presume to print it, till the House shall take further Order, but
whom he shall appoint.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.
I appoint John Bellamie, Philemon Stephens, and Ralph Smith, to Print my
Sermon.

THOMAS HILL.



THE TRADE OF TRUTH ADVANCED. IN A SERMON PREACHED to the Honorable House of
COMMONS, at their Solemn Fast, July 27. 1642. By THOMAS HILL, B. D. Pastor of
the Church at Tychmersh in the County of Northampton. Published by Order of
that House.

JOHN 17. 17. Sanctify them through thy Truth; thy word is Truth. 2 COR. 13.
8. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. LONDON, Printed
by I. L. for John Bellamie, Philemon Stephens, and Ralph Smith. 1642.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, NOW ASSEMBLED in PARLIAMENT.
WHen I first heard that I was designed for this solemn service, being
conscious of my own insufficiency to Preach to so awful an Assembly, I
couldnot entertain it without trouble; yet resolved with Luther, rather to
undergo others Inveniar sane suberbus etc. modo impit silcutii non arguar dum
Dominus patititur. Luth. Ep. ad Staup.
censures, then to be reproved for ungodly silence, in such times when the Lord
suffers. And now I have as much reason to be full of blushings, to think
that this plain Discourse should be exposed to more public view; but herein
I must resign up my self unto your disposings, to whom I owe, and quod possum,
and quod non possum, much more then my meandness can perform.

This Sermon, such an one as it is, I humbly tender to your Gracious
Acceptance, who have adopted it; I put it into your Honorable Protection, who
have listed it; I commend it to your Practical observation, for whom I
intended it; heartily desiring Gods Blessing upon your spirits in the perusal
of it; that you may read and act it, turning words into works, that you may
repeat it over in your lives, which is the best repetition of Sermons.

Our present breaches, call for a contribution from every one, for the
repairing of them; but much is expected from you, who are called to be public
Counselors, and thereby obliged to express a public frame of spirit (which
is the beauty and strength of a Great Council), swallowing up your private
interests, in the public Welfare. Not with Baruch, seeking great things for
your selves, which is most incongruous to Stormy times, but rather resembling
Melancthon, who Ier. 45* 5.
professed, though he had many Domestical troubles, yet the public wounds of
the Church most deeply afflicted him. England is more bemoaned, by many with
that language in Austin over the poor man. Quomodo huc cecidisti? Alas how
came thou into these distractions? She may answer as Aug. Ep. 129.
the poor man there, standing in more need of relief then discourse. Obsecro
cogita quomodo hinc me liberes. Think how I may be rescued out of th^se
troubles. Toward this blessed Work, I have cast in my two mites, moving in
the proper sphaere of a Divine, as an Agent for the Truth, persuading you, who
are betrusted by others, and have far engaged your selves in the Reformation
of Religion, that with all your might, you would promote The Trade of Truth.

It is not for me to suggest a Method in the execution of your counsels. He
whose name is Counselor guide you; yet I shall still pray that in your
Intention, the purging, the settling, Isa. 9. 6.
the advancing of True Religion may be most Dear unto you. It is one maine end,
and a precious fruit of government, that we may lead peaceable and quiet lives
in All Godliness and honesty. This is well worth peoples wrestling prayers,
and your most active endeavors. The stabillity 1 Timothy 2. 2.
of all our blessings must come by the True Religion, Gods presence is the best
security, who is most powerfully present where there is most power and purity
of Religion. Would you have a flourishing Kingdom, advance the Kingdom of
Christ in it. Let the State maintain Religion, and Religion will bless the
State, could you settle all our State liberties, yet if the Arc of Truth be
taken from us, Our glory is departed, we may write these mourning characters
upon all our Comforts, ICHABOD, where is the glory? 1 Samuel 4. 21, 22.


It is too high a complement in the Lord Cords, a French Commander, who often
said, that he would willingly lie Hollinsh. in Hen. 7.
seven years in Hell, so that Callice were in the possession of the French
again. We bless God for that real selfe-deny all and activity ye have
expressed, abating so many personal and family contentments, in your long
attendance upon public affairs. Be not weary of well doing, in due season ye
shall reap if you faint not. Gal. 6. 9.


Never had any PARLIAMENT more work to do; Ireland still bleeds, the affairs
thereof find unhappy obstructions. To subdue Rebellion, to plant Religion
there, are great matters. England is very much out of frame. The Church calls
for Truth; the State cries for Peace, they who sowed in hope, reap in fear,
out sickles are turning into swords. Now to effect an happy correspondence
betwixt our Sovereign and his people, a blessed compliance betwixt England and
Religion, here is work for the strongest shoulders.

Never had any PARLIAMENT greater opposition. As Nehem. 4. 17. our builders
work with one hand, and hold a weapon with the other. Achitophels plot,
Rabshekahs rail, Sanballats mock. Yea since councels of Reformation, there is
a more malignant antipathy appears against truth in many places. As 2 Timothy 3.
13. evil men and seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.
Yet be encouraged Worthy Sirs. Never had any PARLIAMENT so many Thundering
Legions of praying Christians, to assist them. when others insult and
blaspheme, Jacobs posterity are wrestling with God for you, resolving not to
let him go till he bless you. And whilst you are pursuing peace, allow this
plain Sermon that humble boldness as to whisper you in the ear, beseeching
you still to maintain your former zeal in the cause of Truth. When did your
counsels prosper more, then when you were most active about religion. When you
were building the Lords House. For he builded yours as Hag. 2. 19. from this
day I will bless you.

Be pleased therefore more and more to engage your selves for the Truth, so shall
you engage God for you; let your cause be His cause then his Attributes will be
yours, his providence will work for you, his spirit will work in you; then will
you 2 King. 6. 16.
have more with you then against you, though the Devil and the Pope combine.
Do your own work, trust God with his; duty is ours, Events, success are his.
Commit the keeping of your souls, of the Church, of the state, to him in well
doing as unto a faithful creator. Truth will yet Triumph, Babylon 1 Pet. 4.
19.
and all her Crutches must down; the fight of faith is a good fight, because
such soldiers are sure of the victory. 1 Timothy 6. 12.
The kingdom of Christ shall prevail, though second causes be impotent, yet
the zeal of the Lord of Hoasts will perform this. Isa. 9. 7.

When Jerusalem is restored it will be a city of Truth Zach. 8. 3. O that all
our Parliament worthyes, might be so valiant for the Truth that England might
become a kingdom of Truth; following Chronicles will then give you a share in
that Honor of being the Churches Saviors, as Obad. v. 21. and God will put
Zerubbabels high dignity upon you, making you as Signets. Hag. 2. 23.

The Good Lord guide, unite, act and bless your counsels, And think upon you
for good, according to all you have done, or shall do for his people.

So prays He who desires to be found, Your faithful servant for the Truth:
THOMAS HILL.

A SERMON PREACHED AT the Fast before the Honorable House of Commons.
PROVERBS 23. 23. Buy the truth, and sell it not.
THE eternal Happiness of our immortal souls is to be found only in union
and communion with Jesus Christ; Religion is that which gathers and binds up
the spirit to close fellowship with Him; This bond is twisted out of those
materials, which the several penmen of Holy Scriptures have prepared; Wise
Solomon has contributed a good share to this blessed work in his three Books,
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles.

I will not confidently with Hierome and others, entitle Salomons three books,
to his three Names; Hierom. in Eccles. Cornel. a L^p. in Prove. Argum.
As he was Solomon peaceable (say they) he scattered Proverbiall sentences
among young men, to discipline them in ways of righteousness and peace; As he
was (...), Ecclesiastes, the Preacher, he wrote the book of Ecclesiastes, a
pithy Sermon, teaching men of riper years, the vanity of vanities in all
worldly excellencies. As he was Iedidiah, 2 Samuel 12. 25. Beloved of the Lord,
he acquainted greatest proficients, with the sweet communion betwixt Christ and
his Spouse in the Song of Songs.

But of this I am sure; The book of Proverbs is suitable to its Title, worthy of
Wise Solomon the son of David king of Israel, Prove. 1. 1. In the first book
of Kings, Chap. 3. verse. 9. 11. Solomon was an earnest suitor unto God for
understanding; and because he sought it from God and for God, (so much does the
Lord love to see a public spirit in our private prayers.) He gave him a large
portion of wisdom, with an overplus of other rich advantages; he obtained both
the wisdom of a Prophet and of a King, whereby he spoke both Prophetical and
Kingly sentences. So much the Original word (...) rendered, Proverbs seems to
import; raiguing commanding sentences, being so full of wisdom gravity and
authority; and that style of being Master of the (...), sive dignitates, hae
doctrinae quae suo merito vitae nostrae veluti dominae and moderatrices esse
debent, Cartwr.
Sentences, may well be translated from Peter Lumbard, unto King Solomon, who
was the Author of so many Master-sentences.

Much of the wisdom of a Nation, is often found in their Proverbs; and much of
Salomons in this book of his Proverbs, it being a cabinet of such Jewels, as is
fit for the closet, of so wise a King, full of short and pithy sentences, like
Jewels indeed, containing magnum in parvo, much value, virtue, and luster in a
little room.

And for the better discovery of their excellency, it is observable, that
herein they differ from most other Scripture; Their Harmony is in discord,
their beauty in a kind of contrariety. If you would understand our Saviors
parables, mind the scope; if you would reach many other places of Scripture,
attend the dependence, but if you desire distinctly to apprehend the Proverbs
in them, consider the opposition; which though it appear not so full in this
my Text, as in many other of these Proverbiall sentences, yet here you may
find two disagreeing parts.

First an Injunction, Buy the Truth. Parts of the Text.
Secondly, a Prohibition, Sell it not.
This opposition, such as it is, begets two Propositions.

1. All the sons of wisdom, must be careful to buy the Truth. 2. Though all
must be buying, yet none may sell the Truth.
I will follow the method of the words, beginning with the first proposition.

All the sons of wisdom, must be careful to buy the 1. Proposition.
Truth.

Herein by Gods gracious assistance, I will take a view of several branches,
enquiring by way of explication and confirmation.

1. What is the commodity it self, this Truth that must be bought? 2. Into the
nature of the purchase, with the price of it. 3. What Reasons may engage us to
trade in this commodity.
And then jointly shake them altogether in the application, trying what
seasonable fruit they will afford this grave Assembly on this solemn Day.

Every one will be euquisitive concerning the commodity Explication.
it self: What is this Truth? I answer, Not a Metaphysicall Truth, that's for
Speculation only, not a Logical Truth, that's chiefly for disputation; nor a
Moral Ethicall Truth, that's but one sprig of speaking; [veracitas rather then
veritas] Salomons Truth here must needs be Theological. And that not veritas
1o prima, God himself, no creature can compass so great a purchase, if God
were willing to sell it, but veritas 2o prima, derived from that first Truth,
this may, and must be bought. This is veritas objectiva, as it lies in the
Scriptures, both in the principles of it, and conclusions deduced from it;
Truth Original and Truth Derived. And veritas subjectiva seated in us, which
we suck from the word of Truth. Indeed Truth of Religion in us, grounded upon
the Holy Scriptures the Rule of Truth; which comprizeth Truth in our
Judgments, when soundly informed; Truth in our wills and affections, when
obedientially conformed; Truth in our conversation, when seriously reformed
according to the word of Truth.

There are things in Truth well worth our Buying, first liberty of Truth, that
the True Religion may have 1. Liberty of Truth must be bought.
free passage, and not be imprisoned in corners or clogged with difficulties.
Veritas nihil erubescit praeterquam abscondi. Truth blusheth at nothing so much
as to be concealed. Paul desires the Thessalonians to pray for him, Sylvanus
and Timotheus, that the word of God may run and be glorified. It is a
disparagement 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1.
to Christ and his Gospel, when that has so much ado to creep, which should
run and ride in triumph from congregation to congregation, from kingdom to
kingdom. But a most beautiful and honorable sight to see Christ at the
opening of the first Seal, Revel. 6. 2.
with a bow and a crown, going forth conquering and to conquer, subduing the
Heathenish world to the obedience of his Gospel by the preaching of the
Apostles. What though a river be full of good water, yet if frozen, if not an
open passage, men may die for thirst.

It is the motion of the Sun of righteousness, that disperses both light and
heat. Liberty of the Gospel makes it a Gospel to us. The Church in the Acts
Acts 12. 5.
knew how to value this liberty of Truth, and therefore when Peter was
imprisoned instant and earnest prayer was made; the answer was as effectual.
Peter released, Herod confounded, and truth set at liberty. Of all famines,
the Soul-famine, Gospel-famine is the most grievous, threatened as an heavy
Judgment, Amos 8. 11, 12. But a most sweet mercy to feel and taste the
accomplishment of that promise, Isa. 30. 20. Though the Lord give you the bread
of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be
removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers.

Secondly, Purity of true Religion, is a good purchase as well as liberty.
That we may have an incorrupt 2. Purity of Truth must be bought.
Religion, without sinful, without guilefull mixtures; not a linsey-woolsey
Religion. All newborn babes will desire (...), 1 Pet. 2. 2. Word-milke, Purum
est plenum sui and immixtum alieni.
Sermon-milke without guile, without adulterating Sophistication of it, of
which Paul glories, 2 Cor. 2. 17. For we are not as many, which corrupt the
word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we
in Christ. Whose zealous care it was, 2 Cor. 11. 2. to espouse the Church of
Corinth to one Husband (no polygamy in the second marriage) that he might
present them as a chaste virgin unto Christ. This he endeavored by pure Gospel
means, and by persuading to purity and singleness of heart in the use of
those means. The Devil is as busy verse. 3. to corrupt peoples minds from the
simplicity that is in Christ; well knowing the simplicity that is in Christ,
is the best Rule for the Churches conformity, to this we may subscribe without
any check of conscience. Quot supererunt mixturae ex hominum ingenio prolatae,
toridem extabunt pollutiones quae homines distrabant a certo eorum usu, quae
Dominus in little salutem instituerat. Calv. Ep. Prot. Angl. Totalis and
adaequata regula est scriptura and traditio simul. Traditio parem habet
autoritatem scripturae, Becan.


And indeed, what are false Religions, but Humane compositions. The Alcoran
compounds Mahomets fond devices with some fragments of Gods word.

Popery compounds unwritten Traditions most presumptuously with Holy Scripture;
yea it rakes up Heathenish customs, revives old Jewish Ceremonies which are
now mortuae and mortiferae dead and deadly, compounding them with the
institutions of Christ.

You may discern such mixtures in many errors, about the great mysteries of
the Gospel, even in every link of the golden chain of Salvation, Romans 8. 30.
Arminians in the Decree of Election compound foreseen faith, with the
Soveraigntie of Gods will. In vocation, so compounding man's Free Will with Gods
Free Grace, that with them in the act of conversion prima causa depends upon
secunda, the power of Gods grace must wait upon the concurrence of our good
nature.

Popish Doctors do strangely compound works with faith in the act of
justification; and in glorification, so compound the merits of the Saints with
the merits of Christ, that by a condignitie they become meritorious of eternal
life* let the Devil affect vain compositions; the whore of Babylon must paint
her wrinckled face with some borrowed beauty, to cover her inward deformities;
Christ and his Truth, will glory in no vernish so much as native simplicity
and purity.

Thirdly, Truth must be purchased as well in the 3. Power of Truth must be
bought.
power, as in the liberty and purity of it. There should be such a stream as
runs purely without mud, and that in a strong torrent. Hypocrites will swarve
in the last age, when most Gospel Light breaks out, many painted professions
will borrow some luster from it; This Paul foretells, 2 Timothy 3. 5. In the last
days together with many streams of wickedness, there will be a generation of
men having a form of Godliness, but denying the power of it; a good
description of hypocrisy. Hypocrisis est signum sine signato.
But the Lord bespeaks power, both in the dispensing and the professing of
Truth. Paul desired to preach in the demonstration of the spirit, and of power,
1 Cor. 2. 4. as well knowing that the kingdom of God is not in word, but in
power, 1 Cor. 4. 20. It is not wording, but working the power, that will
evidence to speaker or hearers, that they are subjects in the kingdom of Grace
and heirs to the kingdom of glory. This Paul made an argument of their
election, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. that the Gospel came not to them in word only, but in
power and in the Holy Ghost; much power appearing in the dispensation of it,
and the Thessalonians hearts so fully possessed with the power of the Truth,
that their carnal principles were confuted, their passions moderated, their
lusts mortified, and their self ends confounded.

Most men affect in Religion, either a dull moderation, or an outside pomp,
both enemies to the power of Truth. Moderation does better in other things,
then in the practice of Religion, where there cannot be a nimium. God requires
totum cor and totum cordis, the whole heart, and the totalitie of it; that we
should love him with all our heart, with all our soul, and with our strength,
Luke 10. 27. Indeed moderation has its season, but with Calvin's caution; I
confess (says he) there ought to be moderation, yet this I constantly
affirm, Fateor quidem moderation ^ocum esse oportere, sed non mi^us constanter
offirmo videndum esse ne sub illo praetextu toleretur q^^cquam quod a Satana
vel Antichristo prefectum sit. Calv. ep. Prot. Angl.
care must be had, that under pretense of moderation, nothing be tolerated,
which proceeds from the Devil or Antichrist.

Neither must we so affect the outward pomp of Religion, as to neglect the
power of it. Hilary his counsel was good, who writing against Auxentius Bishop
of Millaine, complained that the Arrian faction had confounded all, and
therefore admonished all men to take heed, how they suffered themselves to be
led with outward appearances. It is not well (says he) that Hilarious contra
Aux^ntium. Male vos parietum amor cepit; male ecclesiam Dei in tectis
aedificusque veneramini; male sub his pacis nomen ingeatur; anne ambiguum est
in iis Antichristum Sessurum?
you are in love with walls, that you esteem the Church in respect of houses
and buildings, and in, and under those shows and appearances pretend and urge
the name of peace. Is there any doubt of Antichrists sitting in these places?
This makes Popery such a Religion as pleases men's eyes, and humors their
ears, rather then rectify their minds, and heal their hearts, because they
seek not so much to purchase the power, as the pomp of Religion.

Having laid open before you the Commodity it self to be purchased; Truth in
the liberty, purity, and power of it; Its necessary further to enquire into
the nature of the purchase, with its price.

As all other markets, ordinarily begin at home; so indeed our trading for
Truth. The spirit of Purchase of Truth. 1. Begins in Desires after it.
God, having convinced the heart, how far it is come short of the glory of
God by sin, Romans 3. 23. and that men are alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, Ephesians. 4. 18. withal, giving the soul
an hint and taste of the excellency and sweetness of Divine Truth, the only
Sovereign Scientia visut, and gustus.
means of its recovery, it groans most seriously, and pants most
affectionately after acquaintance with the truth and possession of it. And that
not only by some cold velleitie, by some dull wishing and woulding; but by a
peremptory Isa. 55. 1.. Luke 18. 1. 7. Prove. 26. 15.
choice; not by wandering and flashy, but constant and fixed desires; not by
lazy and slothful, but operative and busy desires; Truth I would have, yea
Truth I must have, else I am everlastingly undone.

Affectionate desires, as they live and move in opinions; so they produce
actions, inclining 2. Promoted by Diligence.
us to take pains for the obtaining of that we would possess. They add wings
to the soul, making us to fly like busy Bees from flower to flower, from
ordinance to ordinance, that we may suck the sweetness of Truth, which is
sweeter then honey, and the droppings of honey combs. Psalm. 19. 10.
The purchase of Truth, is carried on by such an active disposition, as the
Spouse in the Canticles had to enjoy her Beloved; I will rise now and go Cant.
3. 2.
about the streets, and in the broad ways, I will seek him whom my soul
loves. Every buyer of truth, must be willing with little Zacheus to get up
into Luke 19. 3, 4.
any Sycomare tree, to take all Gospel advantages, to gain a sight of his
Savior, to behold Christ who is Truth it self. Truth is an hidden treasure,
Matthew. 13. 44. sometimes hidden from us by the difficulty of Scripture wherein
it is contained, God thereby putting a value upon it, and an edge upon our
studies and prayers; sometimes hidden by differences amongst learned men. Law
may be clouded by a multitude of book Cases; and Divinity obscured by a
multitude of School utrums.

Many times truth is hidden by the scandalous lives of such as profess it.
Carnal spectators being much more quick-sighted to apprehend the deformity of
Religious men, then the beauty of Religion it self. And too often hidden under
great disgrace in the world, being styled, Heresy, Schism, Faction. Yea
Religion it self accounted C. Sej^s Bonus vir, sed Christianus.
the greatest Crime. This Treasure lies often so deep, you must be content to
sweat in digging for it before you can obtain it.

All they who would purchase Truth, must not only be like Merchant men seeking
goodly 3. Managed by Prudence.
Pearls; Matthew. 13. 45. but withal, be able to discern when they have found
a pearl of great price, verse. 46. to know whether it be a pearl or pibble;
that it is not dross, but gold bearing the stamp of truth.

There is much doubtless in that of the Apostle Paul, Col. 4. 5. Walk in
wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time. All good Merchants
must be redeeming time, improving all hints of doing good, of enjoying Gods
ordinances, wherein you may trade for truth. Observe the connection; walk
wisely toward them that are without, redeeming the time. The Church was then
under persecuting Governors, and vexed with bad neighbors, both enemies to the
trade of truth; yet you must be purchasing; only wherein walk so wisely
toward them without. 1. That you violate not the peace and purity of your
own conscience. 2. That you deface not the stamp of Divinity upon
Authothoritie. 3. That by a rigid austeritie you alienate not others from
truth. 4. Nor by a complying familiarity with them in their sins, harden them
against the truth.

The Soul that thirsts after Truth, having taken 4. Transacted by paction.
pains, how according to the rules of godly providence, it may be possessed of
that it so dearly loves, is now willing to conclude the bargain by paying the
price. Solomon here mentions no price, Haec optima commutatio, da res tuas ut
acquiras veritatem; non alienabis a te veritatem, ut acquiras res altas. Cajet.
because he would have us buy it at any price. Sometimes it may cost us credit,
and liberty, as it did the Apostles, Acts 5. 41. Sometimes it may cost us the
loss of goods, as it did those Christians, Hebr. 10. 34. Yea, sometimes life
it self, must be the price of Truth. We must be content to follow that cloud of
witnesses, which appears in that little book of Martyrs, the 11th Chapter to
the Hebrews, we must write after that heroical copy which our own Worthies
have set us, who sacrificed their dearest lives, to the cruelty of Bonners
flames, that they might possess the Truth.

Truth is so precious a Jewel, you must never Truth seldom bought upon cheap
terms.
expect to have the markets cheap. The Devil at first laid siege against the
Truths, which were most Fundamental, that so he might have ruined all the
buildings; he would by the subtlety of ancient Heretics have huckstered up
those Truths, which concerned the Natures and Person of Christ, this cost very
dear, before the four first Counsels could settle Truth against the
Heretics of those times. Afterward, when Popery invaded all the Offices of
Christ (such a dangerous gangreen is it) undermining him, as the Prophet, as
the Priest, and as the King of his Church, it cost no little blood in England
and Germany, to vindicate the Doctrine of Divine worship, and of the Holy
Sacraments, from such errors as opposed the Prophetical and Priestly Office of
Christ. That branch of Truth about Church Government and Discipline, so much
concerning the Kingly Office of Christ, is of rich value, if the Markets should
rise, we must drive on the bargain what ever it cost. No price too great for
the obtaining such a Purchase, to see our Dear Savior advanced in all his
Offices; as the Churches Prophet, without being beholden to unwritten
traditions; as the Priest of his Church, without the satisfactions of any
Meritmangers, without any Purgatory, any Bridewell of the Popes making; as the
King of his Church, above Miters, above Canon-laws, or any Church usurpations
whatsoever.

After the discovery of the nature of this purchase and the price of Truth, its
fit to consider Confirmation.
what Reasons may engage you all to trade herein; which are diverse, according
to the various reference* Truth has to things of high concernment.

Never expect to have the spiritual and eternal good of your own immortal
souls effectually 1. Reason.
promoted, unless you buy and be possessed of Truth.

1. The Word of Truth, is the seed by which we are begotten again, Iam. 1. 18.
Yea incorruptible Seed, which lives and abides for ever, 1 Peter 1. 23.
until the Truth has delivered us, what are we poor sinners, but an heap of
dry bones, so many dead carkases rotting in the grave of corruption.

2. It is the Milk, by which newborn babes are nourished, 1 Peter 2. 2. by
this they grow in the habits, in the degrees, in the exercise of Grace.
Strangers to the Truth, like the Prodigal, live upon husks, and lay out their
money for that which is not bread, Isa. 55. 2.

3. Naturally, as the sons and daughters of Adam, we are stained with many
spots, steeped in corruption, polluted with filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Corinthians. 7. 1. Truth is the water by which we are cleansed, Ioh. 15. 3.

4. When we go groping up and down in in the dark, exposed to errors,
besieged with terrors, Truth affoords us direction and consolation, Psalm. 119.
105.

5. Truth is the Armor, by which you are defended against your spiritual
Enemies, and enabled for offensive war. Amongst the six pieces of our
spiritual Armor, three of these have special dependence upon the Truth. You
must have the girdle of Truth, Ephesians. 6. verse. 14. beshod with the preparation
of the Gospel of peace, verse. 15. and take the sword of the spirit, verse. 17.

6. And indeed the word of Truth, is the Gospel of your Salvation, Ephesians
1. 13. The Charter by which the Corporation of Saints, challenges such rich
privileges; the Articles of that Covenant, which does entitle them to such
blessed hopes.

You cannot hope to find Gods gracious acceptance 2. Reason.
of your service, nor enjoy any Soule-refreshing communion with him in the
duties of his worship, unless Truth direct and animate your spirits therein.
When David was engaged in a pious and plausible service, in fetching the Arc
from Kiriath-jearim, 1 Chronicles 13. he consulted, verse. 1, 2. the people
consented, verse. 3, 4. there was much confluence and triumph, verse. 8. The Oxen
stumbling, Vzzah upon a fair pretense, put forth his hand to uphold the Arc,
yet God would not accept of his fair intention, but smote him that he dyed,
verse. 10. the reason is rendered, 1 Chronicles 15. verse. 13. because God was not
sought after the due order, his Truth was not observed, in the carrying of the
Arc, as verse. 14. with reference to this Story, Peter Martyr commends it, to
the care of Queen ELIZABETH, that Church Governors P. Martyr. Ep. 36. Regni.
Eliz.
endeavor not to carry the Arc of the Gospel into England, upon the Cart of
needless Ceremonies.

There are two flies which mar the most precious pots of ointment. Hypocrisy
and Superstition, as Isaiah 29. 13. Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch as this
people draw near to me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me,
but have remooved their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is
taught by the precept of men. In both a great defect of Truth. Hypocrisy is
lip-labor, and lip-labor is lost labor; no duty acceptable without truth of
heart in it; Superstitious worship, taught by men's precepts, may be devout
enough, yet because it wants the Authority of Gods Truth to Steer it, how
marvellously does God curse it, verse. 14. Therefore behold, I proceed to do a
mavelous work amongst this people, a mavelous work and a wonder: the
wisdom of their Wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their Prudent
men shall be hid. When the Devil has made men Superstitious, God will make
them foolish, he takes no pleasure in them.

The best of our Practical Christianity, even our most solemn addresses to
God (upon such a day as this) Ioose their vigor and blessing, if custom only
or formality act us herein, and not conscience to Gods Truth. What are good
Christians, but Rules of Truth, become examples, yea living, walking pictures
of Divine Truth. When the wantonness of humane wisdom, will multiply
Will Worship, and Wit-worship, thinking to please God with better devises then
his own, it turns to gross folly, and ends in much mischief, rather then
acceptance. Witness Gideons Ephod, Judges 8. verse. 27. Yea, such men take
much pains to loose their labor, and Matthew 15. verse. 9. In vain do they
worship God, teaching for Doctrine, the commandments of men.

Never expect the gracious presence of Christ in his Churches, unless you
purchase Truth, 3. Reason.
and set it upon the Throne, Revel. 2. 1. He walks in the midst of the
golden Candlesticks, whose office it is to hold forth the Truth.

The beauty and efficacy of Church Government and Discipline, depend upon
their Conformity unto Divine Truth. It must Regulate Church Power, and
Discipline Church Administrations, else they will soon loose their Luster and
Authority; Degenerating either into empty Formalitie, or into Church Tyranny,
which of all other is most grievous, because so oppressive to the Conscience.
Hence such uncouth Catalogues of Church Officers amongst the Papists: Pope,
Cardinals, etc. Hence such swelling Volumes of their Canon Law, because not
Divine Truth, but carnal wisdom drew the platform. Hence so many of our
Temples, made houses of Merchandise, wherein, as in the darkness of Popery,
Indulgences were, Absolutions are bought and sold. Yea, hence the sword of
excommunication which was wont to be formidable, Gladius Ecclesiae veneranda
raritate formidabilis. Petr. de Alliaco.
because drawn with so much solemnity, is now made contemptible, because so
familiarly abused upon trifles; and all this, because Divine Truth has had no
more power in our Consistories. And this doubtless does much foment the
present distractions of the Church, that either fancy or affection should put
such high claims upon things, as suddenly to style them Institutions of
Christ, or usurpations of Antichrist, not sufficiently consulting with Divine
Truth. If our Prelaticall Power, and Cathedral Pomp, be of Divine Right, let
us see a Divine word for it; what need we such violent arguments to maintain
them, oath upon oath, subscription upon subscription?

Let Christ himself be acknowledged as King in his Church, as Lord in his
house, let the word of Truth be our Book of Canons, our Books of Discipline,
and then if. Paul were our visitour, he would rejoice to behold our order, as
Colossians 2. verse. 5.

Yea, then we shall undoubtedly find the Broad-Seale of Heaven, confirming what
is done, when we follow the guidance of Christ in his own Truth, Matthew. 18.
15, 16, 17, 18.

The best way to promote the most public good of all the Churches, is by
advancing the 4. Reason.
trade of Truth. This public counsel should move in the most public
sphaere, seeking good for themselves and others, both at home and abroad. The
eyes of all the three Kingdoms, yea, of the Protestant world are now upon you,
expecting much from your influence. You can never contribute fully to the
work, of Reformation here, unless you set Truth at liberty; neither shall
you be so effectually helpful to all the Protestant Churches, though you
should recover their lands and regaine their territories, unless you
re-establish their Religion, by opening a free trade of Truth amongst them.

Truths advancement is one of Gods great designs; Kingdoms are for Churches,
and Churches golden Candlesticks to hold forth Truth, that therein Christ may
appear in his most glorious luster; when the banners of Truth are universally
and victoriously displayed, The Kingdoms of this world shall become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and
ever, Revel. 11. 15.

How came Popery to be advanced to so great height, but by suppressing Truth;
The mystery of 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
iniquity wrought in the Apostles times; It went on by steps; the Pope was
first Antichrist nascent, then Antichrist crescent, after Antichrist regnant,
but when he was made Lord of the Catholic Faith, so that none must believe
more, nor less, nor otherwise then he prescribed, he became Autichrist
triumphant. The Pope is guilty of the grossest theevery, he robs the Sea
Crakanthorp of the fifth General Council, chap. 13.
Sacrament of the Cup, the Scriptures of their Authority, and the Church of
the Scriptures; as thieves blow out the candles, the better to conceal
themselves, and carry on their designs; so He suppresseth, as much as he can,
the light of Truth, that with more advantage, he may play his pranks, and
creep undiscerned in the dark.

If you would lay siege to the Devil or Popes kingdom, and undermine all the
crutches and supporters of it, set Truth at liberty. Zachary 4. verse. 6. the
great mountain of opposition must be moved, not by humane power and might, but
by the spirit of the Lord of Hoasts, not only by his power but by his spirit,
because Church works must be carried on in a way of enlightening and revealing
the Truth. Thus the wise providence of God wrought formerly, when a General
Council (though by many groaned after) could not be obtained with the consent
of the Clergy and Court of Rome, to whom Reformation would be a certain Ruin,
He stirred up diverse Heroical Worthies, Waldus in France, Wickliffe in
England, Luther in Germany, Knoxe in Scotland, to despise the light of Truth;
And Revel. 14. verse. 6. After the flying Angel, having the everlasting Gospel
to preach unto all that dwell on the earth, then verse. 8. there follows another
Angel saying, Babylon is fallen. Doubtless the Pope must fall not only by the
Sword of Princes, but by the Sword of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians 2. verse. 8.
That wicked One must be revealed, and consumed with the Spirit of the Lords
mouth. If you would have the mystery of iniquity unmasked, see the Popes
Triple Crown tumble, and the thick mist of Popery vanish, help forward the
bright Sunshine of Gods Word, promote the liberty, purity, and power of
Truth.

You have had a discovery of some few sprigs, growing upon this first
Proposition, let us in the Application.
Application, gather the wholesome fruit which hangs upon them.

It is the good hand of God upon us, when so many of our brethren in Ireland,
are still 1. Use. Self-examination.
bleeding under their enemies cruelty, that we are at liberty in this solemn
Ordinance, to plead with our God for mercy. Oh that this day of Self-humbling,
might be to us in the use of it, according to its nature, a self-searching, or
soul-purging day.

My Commission is, to hold forth the Glass of Gods Truth before your eyes,
that you may may discover your spots and defects. Let it be your work, to
read over your selves, as well as your Bibles; to speak and write
retractations of your former errors, and confessions of your miscarriages (I
wish we could all be Augustines herein.) The Lord knows what Volumes many of
us might fill, if we were but well studied in our selves. And together with the
long Catalogue of all our other sins, our neglect of Truth must come in, as
having a great influence into the rest: for this we may blush and bleed, yea
rivers of tears are too little to bewail this, that in all our designs, we
have so little minded to purchase the Liberty, the Purity and Power of true
Religion.

Adam and Eve began to make very bad markets, to sell themselves and
posterity, for the forbidden fruit. Profane Esau, sold his Birthright for a
Mess of pottage, Heb. 12. 16. How many with Absalom, to humor their
vainglory, will set the Peace of a Kingdom to sale? How many with Haman, to
gratify proud revenge, will set a whole Church to sale? Some with Judas, will
set up their Savior to sale for thirty pieces. Others with Diotrephes (the
first Cock of the game) that they may fill their sails with Church-pompe, and
Church Power, will set the Keys of Church and Ordinances of Christ to sale.
Lay your hands upon your hearts. To be purveyours for your lusts, as the
profane, Romans 13. verse. 14. To be Merchants for the Pope, as the
superstitious Innovators. To be Proctors for the Devil, as Gospell-opposers,
what says conscience? Is this to buy the Truth.

Give me leave (Honorable and beloved) to come nearer you, with three plain
Queres. I study not alta but apta proferre.

Have you gotten your own hearts possessed 1. Quere. Concerning the persons.
with the power of the Truth? Has Gods word a throne in your Consciences,
Colossians 3. 16. Let the word of God dwell richly in you. If it dwell there.
First, it must intrare, then residere: it must dwell and abide there,
exercising a soveraigntie over you, ever drawing open into an humble
familiarity with it. What fruitful knowledge have you gotten in the mystery
of Doctrinall and Practical Godliness. They who know the Grace of God in
Truth, will bring forth fruit, Colossians 1. verse. 6. Does the Truth of your
Religion appear in your relations, in the uniformitie of a Gospel
conversation? as Phil. 1. verse. 27. Ask your hearts, whether in all your
undertakings you move upon Religious grounds, and for Religious ends. God does
not only number, but weigh our actions, and observes not only what is done,
but why it is done. The The word of Truth must be our judge; therefore now let
it be our Counselor. It is Philpots Gloss upon John 12. verse. 48 (The word
that I have spoken shall judge him in the last day) if the word shall judge us,
then much more ought it to be a judge of our doings now.

Have you set up Truth in your own families? 2. Quere. Concerning your
Families.
It is most odious for a Minister of Christ to flatter, to dawbe with
untempered mortar at any time; but most abominable upon a Day of Humiliation.
You reckon your house, your little Commonwealth; by what law is it governed?
Does the word of Truth, the Scepter of righteousness bear sway there? Whence
then so much licentiousness tolerated in the servants? so much dissoluteness
in the children? so much oppression, tyranny, and (too often) other wickedness
in your selves, and such distempers in family relations? Psalm. 101. verse. 2.
David would walk in his house with a perfect heart. Such as served him, he
would either find them, or make them Gods servants. You would have others
think your houses are Churches. What thy house a Church to God, and thou a
covetous idolater? Thy house a Church to God, and thou Ephesians. 5. 5.
an unclean son of Belial? What concord has Christ with Belial? what
agreement has the Temple of God with idols? The argument is as strong 2 Cor.
6. 15, 16.
for Magistrates as for Ministers, 1 Timothy 3. 5. If a man know not how to rule
his own house, how shall he take care of the Church of God? How can you be
good Reformers both of State and Church, unless you be first Reformers of your
selves, and your own Families? Light is a great advantage to an house,
especially the light of Truth. The Father of Lights, is not pleased to dwell in
a dark habitation, such a corner is fitter Delicata res est spiritus Dei.
for Satan, the Prince of darkness. It was a very honorable report, which
Melancthon gives of Prince Anhalt, Cubiculum ejus erat, Academia, curia,
Templum; His Bedchamber was an Academie, a Court, a Temple. The Lord gives you
a share in this honor. Let not your Chambers be Academies only, for the
advanocment of learning; or Courts, for the daily dispatch of public
affairs; but Temples for the worship of God, and calling upon his name. Give
the people not only Rules, but examples of Reformation. Let Religion be first
advanced in you, it will the sooner be settled by you.

Have you employed and improved your public 3. Quaere. Concerning the
public.
interests to help forward the trade of Truth, to promote Religion in the
Liberty, Purity, and Power of it? Never was any Parliament the son of so
many prayers and tears. Never had any a larger share in that blessing of the
Lord upon Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33. verse. 16. feeling the good will of Him that dwelt
in the bush, so often burning, yet not consumed. What reciprocal real love
have you expressed unto God, and the Cause of his Truth.

When Moses proposed that question, Exodus 32. verse. 26. Who is on the Lords
side? The sons of Levi gathered themselves together, verse. 27. and by their
zeal, obtained a blessing in Moses his Catalogue, when their brother Simeon
was left out, Deuteronomy. 33. verse. 9. We live in shedding, discriminating times, it
is a frequent question, quarum partium? On what side are you? If this be the
question, who is on Truths side, what echo, what answer will you return, oh
you great Counselors? Suppose this day, God and thy Conscience held a Closet
Committee, the Lord says, I have put such a rich price into thy hand; I have
betrusted thee with an influence in the Grand Affairs of the Church? what
says Conscience? What have thou done? what will thou do, by speaking, voting,
by hand, heart, purse, for the Truth? David's question is most seasonable, 1 Chronicles. 29. verse. 5. Who is willing to consecrate his service this day unto the
Lord? Oh that you might return the same pious answer, with the chief of the
Fathers, and Princes of the Tribes; who all offered willingly, verse. 6. Could
you find this fruit upon your Self-examination, Doubtless though you may
serve this day in sorrow (as you ought to do upon a Soul-afflicting day (in
sighs, in groans, in tears) yet you shall reap in joy.

To engage and quicken your utmost endeavors for the happy purchase of truth.
Use 2. Exhortation.


You may please to look upon your selves (Honorable and Beloved) in a double
capacity.

First, as Merchants, trading for your own everlasting good.

Then as Public Factors, betrusted with the best good of many hundred
thousands.

In a Merchant or Factor there are some special Requisites, 1. Wisdom. Three
Requisites in a Factor
2. Activity. 3. Resolution.


First, Wisdom, to discern both the Commodities 1 Requisite, Wisdom.
themselves, and opportunities of trading.

The first use of Wisdom is to discern the Commodities themselves. Religion
must not be taken 1.
upon trust. Faith is Gods way to save us, credulity the devils method to undo
us. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Try all things, hold fast that which is good. And by sound
knowledge possess your selves most carefully of such truths, as are most
necessary. Those that are Fundamentalia in fide, or in Praxi, buy them at any
rate, but sell them at no rate. There are Magnalia, and minutula legis. It will
argue much hypocrisy to be substantial in circumstantiall truths, and
circumstantiall in the substantials of Faith and Repentance. Maximis dissidiis
non sunt minores istae redimendae veritates. Acontius de St. Sat.
Let us wisely proportion our zeal, according to the nature of the truths
themselves. This Counsel Paul gives his Titus. Matters of consequence, he
must affirm constantly, but, avoid needless questions, Tit. 3. 8.

It were a seasonable improvement of your Wisdom and Power, to hinder the
Devils or Popes Chapmen, from opening their packes of adulterate wares, and to
put an high value upon such precious parcels of Truth, as have a great
influence both into Doctrinall and practical Religion. Give me leave here in
the behalf of Truth, to suggest some brief hints.

First, Put in caveats against Arminian errors, 1.
which do so extenuate original sin, and magnify the power of nature, that
they feed our hereditary disease of pride, and eclipse the glory of Gods grace.
Oh trade for the doctrine of free grace. Maintain the King of Heavens
Prerogative. In the spiritual building, grace laid the first foundation, in
Gods free, eternal purpose. Grace erecteth the walls, yea and adds the
top-stone. Eternity will be little enough to admire, to adore, to cry grace,
grace; Therefore carefully possess your selves of this truth against the
enemies of grace.

Secondly, Mind the promoting of those Truths which justify The purity of
Divine Worship, according 2.
to Gods own will, against Popish and superstitious innovators. There is a
bewitching pomp in the out side of popery, which intangleth some. Ancient
Writers used many wanton Metaphors, and such a liberty of expression, before
the mystery of iniquity was discovered, which deluded others. There is a
disposition in all corrupt natures, no less to spiritual then bodily
fornication. Vindicate therefore the second Commandment, which Papists have
expunged, and others so much clouded. Where God has professed himself
jealous, let us be zealous, of trading for such Truths.

Thirdly, Put a value upon such Truths as discover the dangerous errors of
Socinianisme, which is 3.
no better then a Complication of many ancient heresies, condemned by ancient
Councels. A Doctrine that undermineth the merit and satisfaction of our
Saviors death; that will scarce allow faith to swim, where reason cannot
wade; that will so far bring down Religion to reason, that we must believe
little more in Divinity, then we can see in reason. Arminianisme gratifieth the
pride of will; Popery the pride of outward sense, and Socinianisme the pride of
carnal reason.

Fourthly, Let Truths for the sanctification of the Lords day, be precious
truths. Gods institution 4.
of that day, brings with it a special Character of holiness, and an
influence of a peculiar blessing, God has sanctified and blessed it. Yea, in
the primitive times it was a badge of Christianity. When the Exodus 20. 11.
question was propounded, Servasti Dominicum? Have thou kept the Lords day? The
answer was, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum; I am a Christian, I
cannot neglect it. There was no little danger in the Anti-sabbatarian doctrine;
seeing upon Gods own day, we profess publicly our communion with God in his
Ordinances. Then we expect to enjoy the richest influence from him. And if men
could dispute away our Christian Sabbath, we should soon lose the vigor of
our practical Religion. God having Ezekiel. 20. 10.
made it holy by Institution, by Ordination, let us keep it holy by
Observation.

The second use of Wisdom in Factors, is to know and consider their
opportunities. Ephesians. 5. 15, 2.
Opportunitas est maximum talentum.
16. See that ye walk circumspectly not as fools but as wise, redeeming the
time. Jerusalem in this was, as unwise, as unhappy, that she knew not the day
of her visitation, Luke 19. 41, 42. Who did expect such nutus providentiae,
hints of divine providence, as God has afforded to unworthy England in these
two last years, to repossesse her of that Truth which many thought departing?
The Philistines had almost taken our Arc. Our friends, our enemies, our selves,
our own guiltiness passed a sentence of death upon us. We discovered so many
leakes in ships of Church and State, as if both were sinking. The tempest was
great, our Savior seemed to be asleep, our only refuge was to cry, Lord save
us, we perish, Mat. 8. 25. The sword has rid circuit for above twenty years
in Germany; many Candlestickes of Truth thence removed; that Paradise almost
turned into a Wilderness. Poor Ireland is in danger to lose that Religion
they had, with their estates and lives, Preachers hanged, Professors murdered,
Bibles burnt, and all with prodigious cruelty and blasphemy, etc. Yet sinful
England, like Gideons fleece, dry in comparison, when others sleeped in their
own blood. Observe, I beseech you, like wise Factors, the seasons to trade for
the settling true Religion. It Judge. 6. 40.
is true, we are now full of sad distractions; black and bloody clouds begin
to gather; yet, may not Faith (through them) spy out the Sun of
righteousness shining graciously upon unworthy England? As Hag. 2. 7. I will
shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come; and I will fill
this House with glory, says the Lord of Hosts. Historians report, that about
the year 1517. when Leo the tenth was making some thirty Cardinals, there was
such a terrible tempest in the Church, that shaked the Babe out of the Virgin
Mary's arms, and the Keys out of Saint Peter's hands, which they interpreted
as ominous, and indeed so it proved; shortly after Luther arose, who so much
battered the Popes power. The sword is already shaken out of our great
Church-mens hand, by Parliamentall power, the keys do not hang so fast under
their girdle, as they did, etc. We dare not but hope, these are engaging
providence of God, earnest-pennies of some great payment yet behind. Oh
therefore know, and redeem your Opportunities to Trade for Truth.

Activity, to pursue occasions, and follow all advantages. 2 Requisite,
Activity.
If you would be fully possessed of the knowledge of the Truth; you must seek
for her as for Silver, and search for her as for hid Treasure, Prove. 2. 4. By a
most unwearyed industry, search every Mine. Plato calls Merchants, Planets,
that wander from City to City. You will never trade for Truth in good earnest,
till you express an inquisitive, active disposition, in the cause of Religion,
knocking at every door, plying every M^^ket, where you may purchase any
acquaintance with the Truth.

First, Go not only to the shop of Nature, or the School of Philosophy. The
candle which Nature affords us, is good; but it will be burnt out before we
come to our journeyes end. Philosophy may seek Truth, Theology finds it,
Religion does Veritatem Philosophia quaerit, Theologia invenit, Religio
possidet. P. Mirand.
possess it. Philosophy is not the field wherein the pearl of Truth lies,
but rather a hedge and ditch about the field, to defend it, from the invasion
of subtle Disputants. Clem. Alexand. Licet Christus post caenam institue rit
and suis Discipulis administraverit sub utraque specie panis et vini hoc
venerabile Sacramentum; tamen hoc non obstante Sacrorum canonum autoritas, and
approbata consuetudo Ecclesiae servavit and servat. Caranza sum. Council. Sess.
13.


Secondly, Neither must we seek Truth, only in the decrees of Counsels, in
the Traditions and testimonies of the Church. Counsels are like Rivers of
water, very profitable, so long as they hold themselves within the compass of
the banckes, but if they swell and overflow (as too often they have done) they
prove very hurtful to the field of the Church, even to Truth it self. The
Council of Constance comes in with a non obstante against Christ's
institution, withholding the Cup from the Sacrament.

Our Faith and Truth was at first delivered to the Saints, Jude ver. 3. And we
hold it still per Ecclesiam, though not propter Ecclesiam; by the Ministry of
the Church, though not for the Authority of the Autoritas Ecclesiae est
autoritas numeris, non jurisdictionis. Camer.
Church, John 4. 42. All they who are genuine children of the Church, not only
by the Mothers side, but by the Fathers also, will not only believe as the
Church believes, but as their Heavenly Father teaches them, and because he
teaches them.

Thirdly, But in searching out for the Truth, go to Christ himself, who is
Truth it self, John 14. 6. Ego sum via, quae ad veritatem duco; ego sum
veritas, quae vitam promitto; ego sum vita, quam do. Bernard.
Jesus says unto him, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Attend upon
Christ in the use of his Word, which is a Word of Truth, Prove. 8. 34. Blessed
is the man that heaneth me, watching daily at my gates, Waiting at the posts of
my doors.

If ever God ripen your Counsels about a Synod, we hope to receive the same
direction from you, that Constantine the Great gave the Council of Nice. Take
(...)
the Resolution of things in question, out of Divinely inspired writings. Do
not only bid us enquire what Reformation was in our* Josiahs time, King Edward
the sixth; nor what in our Deborahs days, Queen Elizabeth's, (though we must
for ever bless God for the light that appeared in those times) Do not only
put us upon inquiry what Ignatius said, or what Cyprian did; they must be very
wise Children who know their Fathers faces and writings, after so many of their
adversaries scratches. Rather bid us give you an account, what Luke holds
forth in his story of the Acts of the Apostles, what Paul intimates in his
Epistles, that so divine Truth may triumph, and we enjoy a Scripture
Reformation. In divine things we may attribute somewhat to antiquity, yet in
matters that concern Church pomp, and Church power, we must be jealous how we
trust the Ancient Fathers, because (good men) they saw the mystery of iniquity
but darkely, and at a distance, which wrought strongly, not only in corrupting
Doctrine with errors, but Divine Worship with Ceremonies and Church Government
with tyrannical usurpations. Then, and then only, is Truth like to triumph in
Church Assemblies, when Gods Word is there advanced. Cyrill says, in a Synod
at Ephesus, upon a high Throne in the Temple, there lay, Sanctum Evangelium,
the holy Gospel, to show that Christ was both present and president there.

Resolution, to back a public Factors wise Activity* 3 Requisite, Resolution.
This would make you willing to grapple with difficulties, to expose your
selves to troubles and hazzards, and to be at any cost and charges, that you
may possess your selves and the Kingdom of the true Religion.

Poor England has long been in a traveling condition, felt many
bitterpangs, finds now twins in her womb, Jacobs and Esaus, wrestling for
the birthright, high contestations betwixt Eliah and Baalls Priests; now it is
a day of trouble and astonishment: 2 Chronicles. 29. 8.
Great things are come to the birth, only there wants strength to bring
forth. What will you resolve to lay out to possess this dis-joynted Kingdom
of the Truth? Imagine the casting of the balance, the composing of all Church
difference depended upon thee alone, what would thou contribute to purchase
Truth? Nazianzen put this price upon his Athenian, learning (wherein he was
very famous) that he had something of value to part withal for Christ; Oh that
you could say the same of your Honors and Estates, reckoning this the
goodness of all your good things, that you are enabled to do good with them
in the cause of Christ and his Truth. It was Heroical zeal in Basil, who for
his constant and bold defending of the Truth against the Arian heresy, being
threatened death by Valens the Emperor, answered, (...), Oh that I might dye
for the truth!

I beseech you (Noble Worthies) by the many Petitions you have had from men, by
the solemn Protestations you have made to God, by his wonderworking Providence
about you, and by the dependence the Protestant cause abroad has upon you,
stir up your Resolution in the behalf of Truth. Would you have the name of
this Parliament embalmed with everlasting perfume? Improve your power for the
true Religion. Justify our Magna Charta, the grand Charter of Scripture
truths, that does entitle us to Salvation. Confirm unto us our Petition of
Right, establish upon Pastors and Churches, so much interest in the power and
use of the Keys, as the Word of Truth does allow them. Maintain amongst us a
free course of trading for eternal happiness, set and keep open those shops,
such Pulpits, such mouths, as any Prelaticall usurpations have, or would have,
shut up. Secure to us not only liberty of person and estate, but also liberty
of Conscience from Church tyranny, that we be not pinched with ensnaring
oaths, clogged with multiplied subscriptions, or needless impositions, which
will rather increase then compose distractions. Together with Privileges of
Parliament, let us have Church Priviledges vindicated, help us to purge out
that old leaven, whether of Doctrine, of Disposition, or Persons, that we may
have Sacraments more purely administered, according to the rule of Truth; let us
be sure of this Militia, inviolably settled, the sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God, Ephesians. 6. 17. Guard that Magazine, wherein are laid up the
weapons of our warfare, that are mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. So shall we be put into a good posture for
Reformation.

Act undaunted resolution, in the prosecution of these religious Designs, then
may you confidently expect Christ's glorious and gracious presence amongst you.
Luther would assure you thereof, Where the Word of Christ does reign, says
he, there are the eyes Lu^her de abrog. miss. private.
of Christ fixed on the holy Professors of Truth, but where the Word of man
reigns, although there were as many Popes, as there be leaves in the wood,
and as many Card^nals, as grains of Corn, etc. As many Bishops, as drops of
water in the Sea, and all of them glittering in Gold and Jewels, Gemmati,
purpurati, mulati, and asinati, to maintain their own Laws, yet are Christ's
eyes turned away from them.

Truth, though it must be bought; yet it may not be 2 Proposition.
sold.

The Wisdom of Scripture directs us to several purchases, Isai. 55. 1. Every
thirsty soul is invited to Come and buy Waters, Wine, and Milk; Seek to
Christ upon his terms, for variety of sweet Soulemercies; Rev. 3. 18. We are
counseled to buy of Christ, Gold tried in the fire, the pure graces of Gods
Spirit, and the purity of Ordinances; Ephesians. 5. 16. We must be redeeming the
time, not only taking opportunities of doing and receiving good when they are
offered, and seeking them when they are wanting, but buying them at any price.
And indeed Christians should be Chapmen to buy, rather then Salemen to sell. We
are commanded to buy, that we may possess, the end of this possession is use;
what Spiritual commodities we have purchased, we must Improve for God and our
Souls, but not alienate them from our selves.

There are three sorts of Hucksters will be ready to Three sorts of of
Hucksters.
engrosse the Truth from you, if you be willing to sell it.

Malignant persecutors, are engrossing Huckesters, 1. Sort of hucksters of
Truth.
who watch to interrupt the liberty of the Truth. These, even as Jannes and
Jambres withstood Moses, resist the Truth, men of corrupt minds, Reprobates
concerning the Faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8. And indeed, therefore resist the Truth,
because their minds are so corrupt. Such the Apostle calls (...), absurd, men,
Qui (...) faciunt, quae minime conventunt. Pisc.
2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. Men compact of mere incongruities, solaecising in opinion,
speeches, actions, and whole life, yea unreasonable men, For all men have not
Faith, ver. 2. Religion is the highest Reason, nothing more irrational then
irreligion. From such spirits arose those conspiracies against the Apostle,
endeavoring Acts 4. and 5. chapter
to scotch the Charriot-wheeles of Truth, when they began first to move. No
sooner did Steven plead for Truth, but some were suborned against him* Act. 6.
11. No sooner did Saul begin to Preach the Truth, but opposers began to
consult to kill him, Act. 9. 23. Though not long before he had been a busy
Apparitor and Pursevant, to Arrest the Saints, and dragge them to their
High Commission, Act. 9. 1. [A strange and sudden change in them, as well
Origin, Number. hom. 27. in hoc little omnis flamma est, in hoc uruntur incendio.
as in him.] Origin says of the Devils; No greater torment to them, then to
see men addicted to the Scriptures. The same temper of spirit appears in the
devils agents upon the killing of the witnesses, Rev. 11. 10. They that dwelt
upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts
one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them that dwell on the
earth; And therefore they will adventure peace of Conscience, and hope of
Heaven, yea, the whole stock upon it, that they may buy up Truth out of the
Churches hands; and sometimes malice rises to such an height, that even in
England the Bible must be burnt, as strange Doctrine. Tanquan Doctrina
peregrina.


Seducing Heretics, whose endeavor is to corrupt the purity of Truth. The
great Apostasy from the 2 Sort of Hucksters of Truth.
Faith, 1 Timothy 4. 1. is brought about by giving heed to seducing spirits. The
Pope has many Emissaries abroad, who join with the Devil, studying a method
of Soule-deceiving, and Truth-betraying. Compare Ephe. 4. 14. (...), with
Ephesians. 6. 11. (...), you shall find the devil and deceivers artificially
methodizing their snares to draw us from the Truth, 2 Pet. 2. 1* False teachers
have always practiced to bring in damnable heresies. The beginnings of gross
errors may be modest; yea, the foulest Heresies may at first appear with
fair faces. The Serpent creepes into the Paradise of the Church by degrees: as
2 Cor. 11. 3. his plot is to corrupt peoples minds, From the simplicity that
is in Christ; First, he will puzzle them with a question, as he did Eve, put a
command of God, a known Truth to be disputed, then help them to mint some
distinctions, (which are not always so happy in Divinity as in Philosophy)
thereby to relieve and help in an error.

And here it may be observed, though these men have the same design with
malignant persecutors, to engrosse the Truth, yet cunningly they will buy it up
by parcels, that they may be the less discerned. They will trade first in
names, then in things, first habituate us to call our Ministers Priests, our
Communion Tables, Altars, before they impose superstitious gestures. This was
the Rhemists strain of policy. Rhem. Test. 1 Timothy 6. 20.
Let us keep our old words, and we shall easily keep our old Faith.

This graduall Huckstering up the purity of truth, is most clear in Image
worship. At first, Images and pictures of Saints were used in private, for
Memory, History, or Ornament only; Afterward with like color of pretense
brought into the Church in Gregory's days, yet with express prohibition of
worshipping them; Afterward the second Synod of Nice enjoynes it, though more
modestly, and respectively only in regard of that which they represent; But
since the council of Trent, it is risen to gross Idolatry. Bellarm. de Imag.
Sanct. l. 2. c. 21.


Neutrall Politicians, who will be buying Truth out of our hands, by
formalizing and enervating 3 Sort of Hucksters of Truth. Plut. in vita Solon
the power of it, till at last they leave us an heartlesse and saplesse
Religion. Among the Laws of Solon, there was one which thundered against such,
who in a civil uproare amongst the Citizens, sit still as neutrall spectators.
It were happy for the Church, if there were a more strict course taken against
all lukewarm Machivillians, who by their neutrality undermine Religion; of
this strain was Jeroboam, that grand Politician, who created to himself a
State Religion; out of Love to his Crown, he set up golden Calves, he hindered
the people from going to worship God at Jerusalem, lest they should turn
again unto their Lord, unto Rehoboam King of Judah. 1 King. 12. 27 28.
Worldly wise men, as they are time-servers, so they are selfe-servers, and
whatsoever become of Christ and his truth, self shall be advanced into the
Throne; such men's heads over-match their hearts, their policy out-runneth their
Religion; when the glory of Christ and his Gospel come in competition with
their self ends, self shall first be gratifyed; most unlike to Paul, who
Phil. 1. 20. (...), stood as it were on up-to, looking earnestly after the
magnifying of Christ, whatever became of himself, Whether in his life, or in
(...) death.

I may produce three Reasons to fortify you against felling Truth to any
Hucksters.

Truth is in it self a precious Jewel, of most incomparable worth, gained
into the possession of the 1. Reason.
Churches, not without much difficulty; and therefore cannot without great
disparagement to its excellency, and to the zeal of others, be alienated and
chaffered away.

Gospel Truth at first cost the blood of Christ, then watered with the blood
of many Martyrs, which made it throng up so plentifully. It is observeable, the
Church has been seldom fully possessed of any Grand Truth, without much
debate, Niltam certum quam quod post dubium certum.
without some bloody sufferings. How dear did it cost Athanasius to justify
the Divinity of Christ, against the Arians? and shall we suffer any of that
kindred to buy it again out of our hands* How courageously did Augustine
rescue the Doctrine of Grace, from the Pelagians hands, whom he calls the
Enemies of Grace? and shall we suffer it to be betrayed to their Brethren the
Arminians!

How far did Luther hazard himself, to advance Justification by Faith in
Christ? It is a gross shame that sweet Truth should be lost in the language
of any Innovators, who will have works to concur in eodem genere cause, to
share equally with Faith in the very act of justifying.

Many of our ancient Worthies, like Wisdoms Children, Matthew. 11. 19. set
themselves to justify Wisdom; they have endeavored with much sweat, and many
tears, yea, with their dearest lives, to settle the Churches Land-markes by
evidence of Scripture Arguments, and to bound the Truth by Decrees of Councels;
we must not prodigally dispossess our selves of such a Treasure.

We reap the fruit of our Reformers zeal, who bestirred themselves so much
against Popish Altars, and other Church usurpations for the purging of Religion
in England.

God forbid, that we should sell for trifles, what they possessed us of with so
much difficulty. It concerns us rather to concur with them, yea, to promote
their beginnings with all our might, that we may have such Churches, such
Officers, such election and ordination, such jurisdiction, such exercise of
Church power, and all such administrations as are most agreeable to the Truth.

Truth is the Churches Talent; committed to her trust, and therefore must not
be sold. Trust being a strong obligation to fidelity. Upon this ground 2
Reason. Romans 3. 2.
the Apostle, Jude ver. 3. Exhorts Christians to Contend earnestly for the
Faith, once delivered to the Saints. You must never expect another edition of
the Faith, (God reserved that solemn change from Jewish to Evangelicall
worship, for the Inauguration of his Son) zealously strive for this Faith you
have, against all opposition. In that known place, so much abused by Papists,
1 Timothy 3. 15. The Church of Ephesus (this cannot be appropriated to the Church
of Rome) is the pillar and ground of Truth. Not a pillar (...) not sensu
architectonico but forensi.
to uphold, but to hold forth Truth, not so much (...), the seat of Truth;
every pure Church being a depository of Truth, where it is to be found, as the
candle in the Candlestick. All the fonnes of Wisdom have a share in that of
Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 20. O Timothy keep that which is committed to thy
Trust.

This made the primitive Worthies so conscientiously zealous in the cause of
Truth; and that not only of many Truths, but even of forms of speeches, of
syllables, yea of Letters. The difference betwixt the Council of Nice and
Arius, was but in a Letter, whether (...). The controversy whereupon the
Greek and Latin Churches broke, touching the proceeding of the Holy Ghost,
depended upon two prepositions, (...) and (...). The monstrous heresy of
Nestorius lay but in one poor letter, (...), when he would not gratify the
Church therein, as Cyrill desired him, many Bishops rose up against him, so
religious were they, that that they would not exchange a letter, or syllable of
the Faith, wherewith their Savior had betrusted them.

Selling Truth is the worst, the most undoing 3 Reason. Selling Truth opens a
door,
Trade; it sets to sale both Gods glory, and your own Salvation, being it
opens a door to both extremes in Religion, to Profaneness, and to
Superstition.

The School of Christ is indeed a School of affection, 1 To Profaneness.
and of action, but first of knowledge; we must have science before we shall
make conscience of our ways. This makes the god of this world, the Devil,
bestirre himself to blind peoples minds, Lest the Light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ should shine into them: he well knew that darkness of mind,
betrays us to works of darkness. When men walk in the dark, They know not
at what they stumble, Prove. 4. 19. They will stumble at Christ himself, at the
strictness and purity of his ways, and soon plunge themselves into the
grossest wickedness.

In a Synod at London Anselme forbad Priests Marriage Alsted. A^n^. 1102.
in England, and in the next year were discovered a great company of Sodomites
amongst them. Such is the woeful fruit of selling Truth, which would be a spur,
quickening to good, and a bridle restraining from evil. It is no wonder to find
such treacherous practices amongst the Papists, their erroneous doctrines open
the sluices unto them. Upon a slight confession of sin, they may receive a
cheap absolution, and thereby are emboldned to renew the commission of it.
That Taxa poenitentiaria, amongst the Papists, that low rate which is put upon
the greatest sins in the Popes Custom house; so contrary to the word of
Truth, Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is Death, encourages people to the
greatest prophannesse.

Ignorance of the Truth is a fruitful mother and helpefull nurse, both to
profaneness of practice, 2 To Superstition.
and to superstition in devotion. See it at Athens, Act. 17. 22, 23. There they
were fondly superstitious, where their Altar had this inscription, To the
unknown God. Aquinas attributes the inchoation of Idolatry it self, To the
inordi^acy of our affection, and our Ignorance of the true God. Whence came
superstition so much to swarm in the dark ages of the Traditiones
pontificiorum sunt pandectae errorum et Superstitionum. Chemnit.
Church? because they neglected the word of Truth, and followed Tradi^ions.
Hence it is observed that Learning and Religion have fallen and risen together.
When the light of Truth has been eclipsed, by the decay of learning; the
heat of Religion has much declined. The weeds of superstition, sponte
nascuntur, will grow of their own accord in dark corners; as having advantage
of the soil, so much connaturallnesse to peoples corrupt hearts. The Popes
Chaplains need not take much pains to teach ignorant souls to be
superstitious; If Orthodoxe Preachers of the Truth be but suspended, we shall
soon have reason to complain with that great man in the Council of Lateran;
Piety is almost sunk into Superstition.

Beware of expressing any indulgence unto such, or 1 U^e of caution.
holding any compliance with them that sell the Truth. The whole Tribe of
Benjamin came to be extinguished, except about six hundred, only for
countenancing a few sons of Beliall in Gibeah, who had abused a Levites Wife,
Judge. 19. and 20. chap. Christ was angry with some of the Churches, not only
for being active in evil, but passive of evil, Rev. 2. 14. 20. The Wisdom
of this great Council has been inquisitive after monopolists, or any that
encroach upon the Commonwealth. Give me leave to discover an unhappy
Church-confederacy, whereby Truth has been shamefully sold in many places.

There are four sorts of persons, herein deeply engaged. 4 Sorts accessory to
the selling of Truth. 1 Scandalous professors.


First, Scandalous apostate Professors of the Truth, who alienate the Truth
from themselves, and alienate the minds of others from the Truth. They make
the word of God blasphemed, Tit. 3. 5. Such are described with black
Characters by Jude verse 12, 13. These are spots in your feasts of Charity,
when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear; clouds they are
without water, carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withers, without
fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots; Raging waves of the Sea, foming
out their own shame, wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever. They are employed in evil works, and they receive
answerable wages. What unhappy markets such carnal Gospellers make for the
Truth, you may read in many stories; amongst the rest, an American Nobleman,
being persuaded to embrace the Christian Religion, demanded, First, what place
was ordained for such as were Baptized? Answer was made, Heaven, and its joys.
Secondly, what place for them who were not Baptized; Answer was returned, Hell,
and its torments. Thirdly, which of these places was allotted for the
Spaniards, it was answered Heaven; whereupon he renounced his intended
Baptism, protesting he would rather go to Hell with the unbaptized, then be
in Heaven with the Spaniards. Many fall out implacably with the Truth, because
they find many professors such unsavory salt.

Secondly, Ignorant and vicious Ministers. Some 2 Ignorant and vicious Ministe^
even idol Priests, like the Idols of the heathen, The work of men's hands,
they have mouths but they speak not; eyes have they but they see not; they
have ears but they hear not, neither is there any breath in their mouths;
they that make them are like unto them, so is every one that trusts in them,
Psalm. 135. 15, 16, 17, 18. And indeed it is too often true, like Priest, like
People, Ier. 5. 31. Such a creature is not to be found in Christ's catalogue,
who gave some Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers. No Prince
ever sent dumb Ambassadors. Bernard reckons Ephe. 4. 11. Bernard.
up these four as strange things, Speculator caecus, praecursor claudus,
praeco mutus, doctor inscius; a blind Watchman, a lame Harbinger, a dumb
Crier, an ignorant Teacher; And indeed a Minister of a vicious life, though not
grossly ignorant, is as dangerous an enemy to true Religion, if not sometimes
worse, as not barely withholding, but corrupting and perverting Truth, like
Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13. 10. Yea like Eli his Sons, 1 Samuel 2. 17. who
made the Offerings of the Lord to be abhorred; their ungodly lives are often
such confutations of their own and other men's Sermons, that many thereby are
hardened against the Truth, Ezekiel. 9. 6. the destroying Angel was to begin at
the Sanctuary, and there, too often, begins profaneness. There has been
long expectation, as there is indeed great need, of a Parliament visitation; to
find out those Chapmen, who will sell Gods Truth, peoples souls,
Church-purity with State-liberty, for the satisfaction of their lusts.

Thirdly, Such Prelates as ordain or support these 3 Prelates supporting
Ignorant and vicious Ministers.
ignorant and vicious Ministers, I appeal to you, what gross betrayers of
Truth they are. How happy had it been for the Church in England, if they who
pretend to succeed Timothy, had walked by that rule which Paul commended to
him, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man? but alas! many are aposcopi,
rather then Episcopi, as Espencaeas, by-seers, rather then overseers; hence
such swarms in the Church of backe-friends unto truth.

If you enquire when so many gross deformities crept into the Church, Damasus
will tell you; even Field. on chap. l. 5. c. ^9.
then when the Bishops put over the care and performance of Church affairs to
others, that they might take their own ease; like Harlots that put out their
own children to be nursed by others, that themselves in the mean time might
satisfy their lusts; by such remissness Truth was much smothered, with a
multitude of weeds, that overgrew the Church.

Fourthly, Selfe-seeking Patrons are many times 4 Selfe-seeking Pations.
deeply accessory to the betraying of Truth, in presenting most unworthy
Ministers. The Lord knows how many are so far from considering the
concurring consent of judicious Christians (which was much valued in primitive
times) that they neglect Plebs ipsa maxim habet potestatem, vel eligendi
dignos Sacerdotes, vel recusandi indignos: quod and ipsum videmus de divina
autoritate descendere. Cyp. ep. 63
their trust for the good of others, and their own souls. They will obtrude,
too often, one of Jeroboams Priests, one of the lowest of the people, 1 Kings
13. 33. They would not choose a Cook to dress their meat, that were like to
poison them; nor a Physician (though a Kinsman) which would probably kill them;
but, too often, prefer a dawbing Chaplain, that will comply with their
covetous, or licentious humor, though in the mean time the people be
betrayed, and the Truth be sold. Will you please to consider what a sad meeting
this unhappy fraternity will have at the day of Judgment, if still they persist
in truth-betraying. Scandalous professors, will curse their wicked Ministers,
whose examples poisoned them. Wicked Ministers, will cry woe, woe upon such
Prelates, who were indulgent to their unworthiness; and doubtless the
Prelates will be as ready to complain of many Patrons, who first made the
livings scandalous by withholding maintenance, and then by importunity thrust a
scandalous Minister upon them.

Oh let it now appear, that you will not suffer Religion to be betrayed by the
least indulgence to any of these evils. Consider what Sigismond the Emperor
said in the Council of Constance, where the Council pretended to make a
Reformation; one stood up and said the Reformation must begin at the Friar
Minorites; No, said the Emperor, Non a Minoritis, sed a Majoritis incipiendum
est, Let Reformation reach Patron, and Prelate, as well as Minister and People.

If you would discourage scandalous livers, suppress scandalous Ministers; if
you would prevent a succession of them, regulate the power of the keys, took
to ordination and jurisdiction: though your Bill against scandalons Ministers
were ripened and executed, yet if the door of admission into the Church,
continue as large as now it is, the next age will swarm again with the like
Drones. And for the Truths sake, that you may silence all clamours, as if
Reformation would discourage learning, and undo the Church, make good your
own Orders. For the support of an able Ministry; let Patrons and others deny
themselves, to raise a sufficient and certain maintenance, at least open a
vent to others Piety and Charity, who will concur with you, to afford oil
for burning and shining lamps, by reviving the hopeful design of the
Feoff^es, or what other ways, your zealous wisdom shall suggest. A great
Civilian tells us how Churchmaintenance Sir Tho. Rid. View of Civil Law.
part 3. c. 4. Sect. 3.
came to be appropriated to the Cloisters of Monks, and how such lands as they
held, in sundry Parishes, were freed from the payment of tithes to the
Ministers thereof; namely, it sprang from this root, they insinuated that
Preaching was not so necessary for the salvation of men's souls, as their
Praying, in their Religious Houses; Preaching, they said, breeds Schism,
Disputes in Religion, etc. It lies as a blot upon them, That by their
undervaluing Preaching, many Congregations were robbed of their Ministers
maintenance, Let it be Your Honor, who have expressed such a high esteem of
Preaching, to endeavor the re-endowing those places with such means, as may
encourage faithful witnesses unto the Truth.

To awaken Your compassionate affection toward many persons and places, where
truth is chaffered away; 2 Use of direction.
Religion is a riddle, a paradox, yea, a reproach among them. We should appear
this day, as public mourners, laying to heart, not only personal, but State
evils, even Parliament sins. Is not this just matter of grief, that in so
many former Parliaments, the liberty, the purity, and the power of Religion
has been so much neglected? Ancient Laws have established Church pomp,
Power, Dignity, and Revenues; these are twisted into the several Statutes, as
if they would put in a politic caveat against after alterations, without
shaking the very Foundation, which is now one of the great objections against
Reformation. Yea, how much has Truth suffered by the indulgence that Old
Parliament Laws have expressed to Non-residency, Pluralities, and
Insufficiency of Ministers. It has been enough if Legit ut, Clericus; if he
can say the Confession in Latin, he must be betrusted with souls. Allow
something to the necessity of these darker times; yet now the very reason of
such being altered, God forbid that truth should any longer be betrayed by an
unwarrantable latitude. Oh pity your many thousands of expecting Petitioners,
who have had many years of sad Sabbaths, and sit down still in much sorrow,
complaining for want of Truth. You may hear their groanings in the words of
the Prophet Jeremiah, chap. 8. 22. Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no
Physician there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people
recovered? What? cannot, will not, the Parliament heal us?

It was a strange and doleful vision that Ezekiel had from God at Jerusalem,
when he saw so many sinful spectacles; an image of jealousy, Baals Idol,
Ezekiel. 8. v. 5. then, a company of grave ancient men, every one in the Chamber
of his Imagery, ver. 11, 12. Ezekiel. ^.
the Jewish High Commission, according to some, in those times deeply
corrupted; poor Women weeping for Tammuz, ver. 14. weeping for the death of
Polan in locum.
Osiris, King of Egypt, and idolatrously adoring his image, which Isis his wife
had advanced; and worships toward the Sun, ver. 16. Would it please you in
your serious thoughts, to run over this Church, this Kingdom, you might see
in many places such objects, that Your eyes would much affect your hearts.
Though in all abominations, we do not run parallel with Jerusalem, in
Ezekiels Vision, yet such woeful fruits of truth-selling, and truth-betraying,
as may stir up your affection, and awaken your Parliament actions.

First, Cast your compassionate eyes upon the Schools of the Prophets, the
Churches Nurseries. Do 1.
not petitions inform you that diverse have there chaffered away Truth for
errors; were Whitaker and Reinolds then in vivis, doubtless they would blush
to see Bellarmine and Arminius justified by many, rather then confuted. If no
Chambers of imagery be there, yet are there not some Chapels, polluted rather
then adorned with Images, Altars, and Crucifixes. If no worshipping of the
Sun there, yet do not too many plead for, and practice, an ungrounded
worshipping toward the East? It cannot be thought unnaturalness in a Son to
represent the distempers of his Mother, to a College of Physicians especially
when the experience of the deep infection, which some of your beloved Sons
got there, of the corruption of judgments, profaneness and superstition of
practice, which many of your Ministers brought thence, will witness the same,
that Truth has been shamefully betrayed, by too many in the Universities.

Munster reports, That the Jews were banished out of many Countries of
Christendom, principally for poisoning Springs and Fountains. All Friends to
Truth had need pray that God would either remove or heal such as have poisoned
the Schools of the Prophets, the Fountains of the Land. Our hopes are that
God will put upon you (Noble Senators) the spirit of Elisha, and help you to
cast into those waters, such salt, that the Waters be healed, that there be not
from thence any more barrenness, or causing to miscarry, 2 King. 2. 19, 20. In
Exodus 15. 23, 24, 25. when the people were come to Marah, They could not drink
the waters, for they were bitter, and murmured against Moses, saying, what
shall we drink? ver. 25. The Lord showed him a tree, which when he had cast
into the waters, the waters were made sweet, Plant, and uphold wholesome
Lectures, in the Pulpit, as well as in the Chair, (A Service worthy of the
Wisdom and Power of a Parliament.) Such Trees will sweeten the waters there,
and drop such fruit, as will much promote the trade of Truth abroad. How many
living stones, yea how many Builders did famous Perkins hew, by Preaching a
Lecture in Cambridge? many Children and Fathers begotten by his Ministry in a
few years, to the great advancement of the Truth.

Secondly, Behold with the same compassion, Cathedral Churches, and the woeful
effects of selling the Truth in too many of them; The strange Vestures and
Gestures, Images, etc. in some of their Quires, intimating too much affinity
with those Chambers of Imagery, in their abominations, mentioned Ezekiel. 8. 10,
11, 12. Former Reformations left such nettles growing there, that have since
unhappily seeded many other Churches; yea, left so much dust, not only behind
the door, but even in the very Quire, as has been easily blown about into
many corners. They glory in being called the Mother Churches, but they have too
often proved Stepdames to their Daughters, engrossing the maintenance, that
should provide the word of Truth for their Souls. What pity is it that
Cathedral Societies, which might have been Colleges of learned Presbyters,
for the feeding and ruling City Churches, and petty Academies, to prepare
Pastors for neighbor places, should be so often Sanctuaries for
non-residents, and be made Nurceries to many such Multitudine levissimarum
seremoniarum pene est extincta pietas et vis spiritus Sancti. Gerson.
Drones, who can neither Preach nor Pray, otherwise then read, say, or sing
their Prayers; and in the mean time Truth much obscured in a Non-edifying
pomp of ceremonious service. It was a notable design of those Bishops at
Bononia, that gave Pope Julius the third this very Counsel, how to establish
the Roman Religion; Let the people (say they) have pompous Prayers, Images,
Tapers, Organs, and diverse musical instruments in their Temples; These are
things with which the people are much delighted, and being taken up with these,
they almost forget that doctrine Hae^ ^uus quibus vulgus praecipue del^ctatus,
et quo^^^ gratia doctrinam ^llam quae ^ol^s (...) est fere obliv^^itu^. p. 4.
which is so destructive to us. Let your compassion move you to counter-worke
all such plots; as Church-deformers sought to corrupt Cities, and places of
confluence; so let those that profess themselves Church-Reformers, when the
Harvest is greatest, express the greatest care to send forth most faithful
Laborers for the Truth, Matthew. 9. 36, 37. This were to resemble your Savior.

Thirdly, Behold with weeping eyes the many hundreds of Congregations, in the
Kingdom, where 3.
millions of Souls are like to perish for want of Vision; Truth is sold from
amongst them, either by Soule-betraying-non-residents,
Soule-poysoning-innovators, or Soule-pining-dry-nurses. In too many places the
very Image of jealousy, the Idol of the Mass is set up, yea, the Comedy of
the Mass acted, because there Missae Comoedia in P. Martyr.
wants the light of Truth to discover the wickedness and folly of it.

Do not some of you that live on the Welsh coasts; cry out with your
Neighbors, Woe is me that I sojourne in Meseck, and that I dwell in the tents
of Kedar, Psalm. 120. 5. Do not some of you inhabit the North parts, where you
may complain (in the word of Nicholas Clemang. page 15.) How many Priests came
to their Benefices, not from the Schools, and their study, but from the
Ploughes, and servile Occupations, which could neither Read, nor Understand
Latin? Where in many miles, not a Minister that can (...), and (...), Preach,
and live, Sermons. I wish every Parliament Man had a map of the Soule-misery of
the most of the Ten thousand Churches and Chapels in England; I hope it would
draw forth your compassions, and stir up your endeavors to rescue Truth out
of their hands, who would sell it, and set up the trade of Truth in poor dark
Countries.

Had I the favor to prefer a Petition unto You in the name of Universities,
Chief Cities, Country Congregations, yea, the whole Kingdom, and were sure of
a propitious ear from you, I would sum up all in this clause, in this one
breath: Improve Your Power to help forward the Word of Truth, that it may 2
These. 3. 1.
run and be glorified. This would maintain love and loyalty to our
Sovereign. Where has he most hearty Prayers, but where Truth most prevails?
This would teach men to justify the power, and comply with the Authority of
Parliaments. Who have more undermined and maligned Parliaments, then such
Ministers as first betrayed Truth? This is the way (if any) to reduce seduced
Papists. Humane Contra Pontificies pa^um ^^gibus aut libris profici, quousque
firmum etidoneum ministerium in ecclesiis constitutum fuerit. Whitak.
Laws will pinch their purses. Send divine Truth amongst them, that may
satisfy their consciences. This is the most Sovereign means to compose
Church-differences. Why do we contend? (says Augustine) are we not Brethren?
Our Father dyed not intestate, let his Will be publicly produced, and all men
will be quiet. This is the best way to make the Reformation through and lasting,
because this would engage the peoples hearts. 2 Chronicles. 20. 32, 33. Jehosaphat
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord; Howbeit the high places were
not taken away; for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the
God of their Fathers. Josiah, a good King, did much, yet because the peoples
spirits were not wrought to concur with him, the work soon vanished, and
Gods Judgments brake in upon them. Go on, therefore (Honorable Worthies)
improving your influence to prevent the selling of Truth.

First, Provide that every Congregation may have an able Trumpet of Truth. 1.


Secondly, Especially let great Towns, places of confluence, have Lectures,
Markets of Truth. 2.


Thirdly, Afford any faithful Paul and Barnabas encouragement, yea, Power, if
Sergius Paulus desire 3.
to hear the Word of God, to go and Preach, Act. 13. 7. 8
though Elymas the Sorcerer should be unwilling; such ambulatory exercises have
brought both light and heat into dark and cold corners.

Fourthly, What if there were some Evangelicall, Itinerant Preachers, sent
abroad upon a public 4.
stock to enlighten dark Countries? Thus might you reap glorious fruits of
all your Counsels, tears, prayers, and pains, in seeing Dagon fall down
before the Arc of truth.

I have endeavored, (though in much weakness) 3 Use of Dehortation.
with words of Truth and soberness, to plead the cause of Truth. I must end as
an importunate Solicitor: O sell not the true Religion upon any terms. Much
of my Rhetoric to persuade you is within you. I speak to your self-love, as
you are Men; to your conscience, as you are Christians; to your Wisdom, as
you are Statesmen; to your Honors, as you are Noble: Be always buying, but
never selling the Truth. England has had an happy taste of your zeal for
Truth, and against the corrupters and betrayers of the true Religion. The Lord
from Heaven has appeared mightily for you, when you appeared much for him in
the cause of Truth. God forbid that ever this Parliament should lose any of
it is first love to Religion, and the Reformation of it, then may you expect to
drink of Solomon's bitter cup, The Lord was angry with Solomon, because his
heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared to him twice.
God forbid that Rhehum the Chancellor and Shimshai the Scribe, should outstrip
Zerubbabel; That 1 Kings. 11 9
Tobiah and Sanballat, should outbid Nehemiah in any cause of God. Rather let
the malignancy of malignant opposers inflame your zeal for the Truth. O that
we could now all close this day of humiliation, with the proper work of the
day, covenanting with our God, making it our sealing day; Nehem. 9. 38. At a
solemn Fast, Princes, Priests and Levites, did make a sure covenant, write and
seal unto it. Let us this Day, not only give earnest, for the purchasing of
Truth, by the fixed purposes of our hearts, but even give as it were hands and
seals, that we will never sell the liberty, purity, or power, of Religion upon
any terms.

W^ll you please to these particulars?

First, That you will not sell Truth out of carnal fears; you have a good
(...) it, Rev. 21. 7, 8. (...), he that is over-comming, not he that has
overcome, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my
son, But the fearful and unbeleeving shall have their part in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone. Read over the story of Francis Spira with
trembling, who out of such fear betrayed the Truth. After he had gone to Venice
to the Popes Legate, with whom, out of carnal fear, he complied, craving
pardon of him, and yielding to recant that religion he had publickely
prosessed; when he returned to his house, he could not rest an hour, no not a
minute, nor feel any ease of his continual anguish; from that night he was
much terrifyed with horror, and as he confesses, He saw plainly before his
eyes all the torments of hell and the damned; and in his foul did hear the
fearful sentence, being drawn before the Judgment seat of Christ. Hold
fast the Truth, let faith triumph over fears. If Peter will deny and forswear
his Master, at best he must return by weeping cross: many are irrecoverably
smitten with that Thunderbolt Matthew. 26. 74,
from the Lord, Heb. 10. 38. If any one draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him.

Secondly, That you will not sell Truth for your own private advantages. It was
a wretched carriage in Demetrius, and his fraternity, who out of love to Act.
19. 24, 25.
their own gain, did combine and consult how they might undermine and betray
the Truth. Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth; This made them
so zealous for their Diana; and so fierce against the Gospel; If Truth do
prevail, Diana must down, and then farewell their profit. Resolve rather to
resemble Moses then Demetrius, who, Heb. 11. 25. Chose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, then enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season. His Faith did so rightly inform his Judgment, that he counted the
Reproaches of Christ, (which seem the bitterest thing in Christianity) greater
riches then the treasures in Egypt, ver. 26. How much did he then prefer the
Consolations, which come by Religion, before all worldly excellencies? Such a
spirit was in Luther, who when he was offered to be Cardinal, if he would be
quiet, replied, no, Not if I might be Pope. He had an holy scorn to be put off
from his Religious designs, by such withering petty things.

Thirdly, Sell not Truth for politic State ends.

When you come to settle Religion do not deal only like politicians, but
like Christians. Worldly wisdom in the things of God is a rule too short, too
1 Cor. 3. 19.
crooked, too partial, yea foolishness with God. Jeroboam would play the
politician in Religion, he sold the true worship of God for his State ends, and
for ever inherits this as a blot upon his name, 1 King. 15. 30. Because of the
sins of Jerohoam which he sinned, and which he made Israel to sin, by his
provocation wherewith he provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger. Most renowned
was the zeal of King Edward the sixth for the Truth, when upon reasons of
State he was pressed by Cranmer and Ridley, to give way to the Mass; he
refused it with so much resolution, with so many tears, that they acknowledged
he had more divinity in his little finger then both they. In things about meum
and tuum, that concern our own interest, we may be more liberal, but in
Church affairs the word of truth must guide us. It is not in our power
quicquam hic aliis dare, aut in aliorum gratiam Calv. Epist. prot. Angl.
deflectere; we may not therein gratify one another.

Fourthly, Sell not Truth for pretenses of Church peace* I confess the name of
peace smells very sweet; and now especially (in the midst of such Church
distractions and such wantonness of opinions) were to be purchased at any
rate, except with the loss of Ephesians 4 3. 13.
Truth; It is a most lovely sight to see unity of peace embrace unity of faith;
to behold the household of faith, the family of love; O that we could all
observe the present breaches with the same affectons He^ ^nth^, qui vos (...)
simul inventre non possum. Aug. Ep. 15.
that Augustine did the differences betwixt Hierome and Ruffine. Woe is me that
I cannot find you both together, I would fall down at your feet, with much
love and many tears I would beseech you for your selves, and for one another,
and for weak Christians for whom Christ dyed, that you suffer not these
dissentions 2 King. 17 33.
to spread, etc. But, in the mean time, we must not be such reconcilers, as to
bring in a Samaritan Religion, an Interim, an uncomfortable mixture. We must
not receive Babylonish inmates into the Lords House. Light and darkness, Truth
and error, will never long dwell quietly together.

Fifthly, Sell not Truth for the pomp of humane Ceremonies. Admit that
Ceremonies were first let into the Church, with the fair intention of the
guiders and leaders; and entertained by the credulity of well-meaning people,
before the mystery of iniquity was much known; yet since, being so
superstitiously abused by the Pope and his party, and so rigidly pressed, for
the upholding the pomp of Prelacy, with no small disadvantage to the Truth;
let us part with them, rather then sell any spark of Truth for them.

Never say they are ancient. Jesus Christ is my antiquity, (...). Ignat. epi.
ad Philad.
says Ignatius. We must look for antiquity of Institution not only of
Custom. Never say, they are indifferent. If indifferent only, and not
expedient, they may the better be spared. Others will say, our Doctrine takes
off the Scandal of the Ceremonies. However, better have the stumbling block
removed Quid si vel pigri vel non satis attenti sint monitores, vel frustra
plerosque moneant? Beza, ep. 8. Grindal. Anno 1548.
out of the way, then to have a monitor appointed to give you warning of it, he
may fall asleep, and then you are in danger. Many tender consciences wish the
same success about our Ceremonies, that was in King Edward the sixth his
days, about the Images. Some people contending for one Image, others for
another, gave occasion, that the King took down all. Who knows whether God
has called Ester 4. 14*
you to this Parliament to accomplish this amongst other services?

If you do fully come off, to give in your hands, your hearts, yoursealing
actions, that you will not upon any terms sell the Truth, as you tread in good
Hezekiahs steps, I doubt not but the Lord will Crown your piety and pains
with his Diadem, 2 Chronicles. 31. 20, 21. Thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah,
and wrought that which was good and right, and Truth before the Lord his God,
and in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the
Law, and in the commandments to seek his God, he did it with all his heart
and prospered.

FINIS.

