A strange Prophecy, AGAINST BISHOPS PRELATES, AND ALL other Priests, which
have not kept the faithful Order of Priesthood; And also against the
Transgressors of Righteousness in these Times.

Together with the Downe-fall and destruction of Popery, and the Ruin of
Romes Monarchall and Tyrannical Government.

Prophetically declared, that in the years 1641, 1642, and 1643. The reformed
Churches in these Western Islands, should (both King and People) join with a
religious consent to abolish them out of the Church.

Written by HILGARD a Nun, 1558. and since preserved by an Antiquary in this
Kingdom, and now published for the instruction of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. 1641.

The Preface to the Reader.
Whether these or such like Prophecies be of God, and proceed from the Holy
Ghost or no, let the godly judge. But surely it is commonly seen, when God
will show his displeasure and indignation, and intends to bring to pass some
great act, that all creatures do Prophecy before, and give warning, although
it help but little. Eve^ so ^ouching the subversion of Jerusalem, his
Prophets, and ^^ophecy it before but it availed not. Christ himself had
breathed it unto them. The Apostles had warned them thereof. They heard voices
in the Temple. They saw signs in the Element. They heard battles in the
clouds. Mad men, and such as were out of their wits, did prophecy it unto them,
but all these signs prevailed not, they saw it in act and yet it prevailed
not. They might have remedied it, if they would have suffered the Emperor to
rule over them, but all prevailed nothing, for they were destroyed because they
despised Gods word.

Even so shall it happen unto the Papists also. It is prophesied unto them by
Daniel in the 7. and 8. chap. It is prophesied unto them by Zachariah in the
11. chap. It is prophesied by St. John in the Revel. It is prophesied unto them
by Christ himself, Matthew. 24. It is prophesied unto them by St. Paul. 2 These.
2. and 1. Tim. 4. It is prophesied unto them by St. Pet. 2. It prevails not
Their own Bishops, Abbots, Monks and Nuns prophecy unto them, but it
prevails not. It is prophesied unto them by Astronomers. It is prophesied
unto them by the common rumor with certain Proverbes. It is prophesied unto
them by visions and signs in the Element, but all prevails not, they might
turn it, if they would not presume to be above Gods Word and men's consciences,
but would suffer God and his truth to reign over them and all men's
consciences, but all prevails nothing, Therefore must they be destroyed,
there is no remedy, and that which they will not now, they must not see to
their grief at last, when all help is past.

Wherefore let no good Christian grieve himself with them, but rather suffer
and take patience, and pray to God that it would please him to revenge the
blood of his Saints, and speedily to deliver us from these cruel Tyrants, and
all their mischievous or rather hellish enchantments. Thereby shall a man get a
greater conquest over them, then by Sword and Armor. God knows well where
such a Titus is, as shall be the final destruction of these arrogant Rabbis,
or contemptuous Jews also. To whom be all honor, praise, and glory, for ever
and ever. Amen.

The Prophecy of HILGARD.
ALl worldly Princes and the common people also, shall fiercely fall upon you
Priests, which hitherto have abused me. They will turn you away from them, and
put you to flight. They shall take away your substance and riches, because that
in your time, you have not kept the order of your Priesthood well. These words
will they speak by you. Let us cast these Oath-breakers, robbers, and people
replenished with all kind of iniquity, forth of the holy Catholic Church: for
the holy Church is contaminated and polluted by them. And therefore will God
suffer also such things to come over you. Yea, the Kings of the world, shall
assist them with their earthly power and might that shall withstand you. Your
Priestly dignity and anointing, they will esteem as nothing worth, and to
that purpose will they gather together in Council, that they may drive you out
of their Dominions, because you have driven away the most holy and innocent
Lamb from you, with your ungodly and abominable works. Then shall the
Heavens rain down diverse Plagues, which shall be as a revenge of God upon
men. The miste shall cover the whole Earth, so that all your grass shall dry
up, and your ornaments become pale. The deep shall suffer Earthquakes, and
then shall appear the very anger of God, and the rage both of Heaven and
Earth. God will send a righteous and straight judgment against the
transgressors of Righteousness. And then shall we say altogether. How long
shall we forbear and suffer these ravening Wolves? they ought to have bin
feeders of the souls, but they be destroyers of them. They bind and unbind at
their own pleasure (yet such power belongs not unto them) and as most
fearful beasts they utterly cast us away. And thus remain we still in our
misery and they in their sins, insomuch that all Christendom perisherh through
them. And whatsoever is right that write they not, but wrest, and only do
that which is contrary to the Law of God. They devour us, as the Wolf
devoureth the sheep, they live continually in lust and gluttony, they be very
robbers of the Church, and whatsoever they can catch or come by, they take and
devour it. They make us also with their occupation poor and beggarly. They
damn themselves and desire to destroy us also. Therefore will we judge them
righteously, anb separate them from us, for they be rather seducers then
teachers, etc. Yet care they not for it, but remain so still, seeking to make
all Kingdoms subject unto them. Nevertheless, for all this they must away,
and leave behind them all that they have, neither shall they afterward rule any
more over the people again, with Lands, Possessions, Vineyards, and other
temporal goods, which worldly Princes be appointed for. A Pope should be a
Pope, a Knight a Knight, a Gentleman a Gentleman, wherefore all such things as
they possess unrighteously, shall be taken away from them. etc. But against
the same will the spirituality as heads of this world repine and rebel: to
wit, the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbats, and other Prelates. First with
their curse, and with shutting up of the Heavens, but the same will not serve,
neither shall men fear it any whit. After that, they will get them to their
Armor and weapons, thinking therewith to defend themselves, but against the
judgment of God they can do nothing, for their time is come, etc. Thus much
prophesied the Nun Hillgard.

So ^o^ must the bloody whore drink of her own Challice, and the beast with
the false Prophets be cast down into the bottomless pit, where as is no rest
night nor day, there to suffer pains eternally. And then will Christ raise up
faithful shepherds to feed his flock.

What these shall be, we find in the Scriptures plainly enough declared, as
they that came from him, and how may it fail, or what defect can be in such as
God sends? God is Righteous, and also sends good shepherds when he sees
his time. They do righteously, and as they teach, even so they live.

These be the true servants which Christ speaks of, which in due time set
forth the gifts and glory or the Father of the household, and not their own
traditions, whereof as yet the whole world is full. But the Lord (at his good
pleasure) for his son Jesus Christ's sake, will scomme away all filthiness
and make his glory appear. So be it

The Conclusion.
Diverse other like Prophecies there are no whit necessary to be written,
because I hope there will amendment follow after this, except the Readers be
found to want the chief effects of their eyes and ears: for whom would not
this ancient, true, and faithful declaration of the Romish and Babilonish
strumpet, bring to conversion and knowledge? She is here so clearly set forth
and painted with all her falsehood and colors, that it cannot be done more
lively. Has she not with her Challice made drunk, and with her subtilty and
deceit overcome Emperors, Kings, Princes, Lords? and with her snares
overthrown all Christendom? Let every man mark it well. When did they any
other thing but Pole and shave, lie and deceive, burn, and banne, continually
increasing wars and murder? until such time as they were become heads of all
Kingdoms. etc. The same (as above mentioned) has endured many years, but now
will take an end. For the time of the Whore is come about, and he comes that
speaks in the Apocalips, saying: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending, the first and the last. Blessed be they that follow his Commandments,
to the end that they may come to the tree of life, and and enter in at those
straight gates of the celestial Jerusalem, out of which shall be secluded all
Unbelievers, Enchaunters, Whores, murderers, Idolators, and all such as love
and follow after lies, whose portion is in the unquenchable Lake that burns
with fire and Brimstone.

Now has Jesus Christ sent his Angel again, to show the people that he is
the very root of David, and the clear morning Star, and in none other is
there any salvation, but in him only, for it is written. There is no other
name under heaven whereby we may be saved, but this only. etc. Now he that is
faithful still, he that is holy, let him become more holy, and continue to the
end. and let him not long for the time approaches. And thus let every man be
warned, for when he knocks, happy are they that open, but to those that do
not so, the danger is apparent: for unto such, both Baptism and all holy Rites
are ministered in vain. Wherefore let us beware of being Christians only in
name, and let us pray God to bless us, and to grant us his grace, and that he
would vouchsafe to guide us aright by his holy Spirit. Amen.

FINIS.

