The History of the Life and Death of Hugh Peter's that Arch-traytor, from his
Cradell to the Gallows.

WITH A Map of his profane Jests, cruel Actions, and wicked Counsels.

Published as a Warning piece to all Traitors.

[At the time of our late Sacred Kings trial, this was the villains Text to
animate their Roman president and the Jeshish Court for the speedy horrid
Murder.]

Bind your Kings in chains of Iron and your Nobles in fetters. Behold his
Reward

the hanging of Hugh Peter's

Jan: 3d. LONDON, Printed for Fr. Coals, at the Lamb in the Old Bailey, 1661.
Jan. 3. 1660

The History of the Life and Death of Hugh Peter's that Arch-Traytor, with a Map
of his erroneous Actions, etc.
CHAP. 1. Of Hugh Peter's his Birth and Education.
HVgh Peter's was borne in Cornwall, in a little Village named Sudbury, not
far from Launson; his Fathers name was Edward Peeters, by trade a Dyer of
Stuffes, but counted a man of good repute and civell behavior, and gave his
Son Hugh what Education he could, as did belong to a Father; he was as the
ancientry of the Country does report, bred up six years in the free School
of Launson, after which being fourd very prone and pregnant to Learning.

CHAP. 2. Of Hugh Peter's going to Oxford, and Invested in Brazen-Nos'd
College, and all his Prancks played there during his time.
He was from thence transferred to Oxford, and there invested in Brazen-Nos'd
College, during which time he was always given to Scoffs, Jests and jeering;
yet he took Learning in abundance, for all that he was not much respected; for
the Scholars despised him, the Proctors did not care for him, none very well
loved him, he carried the fairest Tongue of most men, but the dissemblingest
heart of all men; he would promise as fair as any one should, and perform as
little as any one alive; he was a man never given to the vice of Swearing, yet
he would Lie most intolerable, he was never of no Magnanimous Spirit, he
would fight with no one in open arms, but they must beware of him of a private
mischief; As to instance, he once seduced a company of Scholars to go four
miles out of the Town to a Park of the Kings intending to steal some Dear,
and there he began first to be a Thief and a Traitor against his King and
Sovereign, but mark the story and you shall hear what a notorious piece of
Villainy this young Judas did invent being but tender like a Cockatrice Egg,
even to betray the innocent Beasts of the Park; It chanced the Moon did shine
when he and his gang were with drawn over into the Park, and the Keepers
walking the Round and ranging about, perceived them armed with Gunnes and
Cros-bowes, and they with Forest Bills encountered with them and defeated them,
pursuing them quite to the Towns end, but then fearing some other assistance
retired back to the Park again till next morning, and then came to Oxford
and enquired after these Dear killers; faith those of his Company were feign
to absent the College, quit the Town and be gone; So there he wrought their
Ruin and destruction in the first place; for in regard they durst not make
appearance in the College; some took to the High way by which means they were
Hanged; but accoding to the old Proverb, The veriest Thief scapes best. For
the crafty Fox and Ringleader himself, was neither discovered, taxed, nor
suspected, yet observe the malice and treachery of this Judas, a week after
following he goes and buys a pecke of Apples, and cuts off the top next the
stalk of every one, picks out the Core, put in Ratsbane and stopped them up
again with the same pieces; observing that Dear does love Apples excessively,
he caries one evening to the same Park, and throws them about for the Innocent
beasts, whereby several of them were poisoned to death. Thus did he vent his
Mallicious poison against man and Beast; You Will say 'twas enough to deserve
hanging but his time was not come.

But a Thief and a Traitor he was from the beginning: But to proceed he had
not been passing the space of three years in this College; Tell this
unparalleld fact was Committed; for by his craft and close concealing mind, he
kept it private and unknown two years longer; which time being expired, it
thus came out. He and some others being in a Tavern: The Wind wrought strong
began a discourse in this manner. Said one, as I was once coming over a Park
being rutting time I was like to be spoiled with a Bucke; But I think I met
with him: For I broke his Heape-bone with a Pistall bullet. Why in troth said
Peeters, and I received and abuse once by two Keepers, but I think his Sweet
meat had but Sour sauce: For in eating the Fruit which I presented there fell
more in one Night, then in the Garden of Eden in a whole Year.

Why said the other, Adam was not there, said Peeters again, that does not
argue the Serpent was not there.

Whereupon Notice being taken by one who was not his Cordial friend: So that
the College came to hear of it.

CHAP. 3. How Peeters was called before the Proctors of the School with his
Accusation, for killing and poisoning Dear; For which he was expelled the
College.
HOw Peeters was called before the Bench, taxt upon it, but stoutly denied it;
Insomuch that one of the Proctors told him he was a Brazen-fac'-Fellow: He
answered then he learned it in Brazen nosed College, upon which he was
presently expelled, Oxford then being too hot for him, he hasted away to
Woodstock, at which place there lay a Bishop; to whom he made his Address for
an Ordination to Preach, but went away without his Errand.

Thus having not obtained his Request, rather then stand Idly He made bold of
himself; And thereupon insinuated with one Person then another Person, one
Sermon here and another there: Telling the Ignorant people, Doomes day was
come, and the Days they lived in were the Later days.

Hovering up and down the Country am^ngst the Lay Committee: So that he was
taken for a little small Prophet: But all this while Oxford remained his
Antagonest and durst not come there, which caused Him to his Power, to spit his
Venom at that Town as formerly he did to the D^ere: For at Enstone in
Oxfordshire he preached the Unniversitie a profane place, and ought to be
refined and purged.

But that would not prevail, he was feign to quit the Town and repair to
London, where at Bishopsgate Church, he preached down the Bishops, raised
Sectory, which too many were to prone for to follow.

But presently then he met with able Devines, which scorned to dispute with
such a Quicksilver'd brain Fellow; Yet to please the People, and the ignorant
multitude were feign to argue, cross him, and thwart him, to beat down
Rising sedition.

CHAP. 4. How Peter's being Confuted in London by some able Divines for his
erroneous Errors, did marry a wife and sent her to Virginia and himself to New
England.
WEll then this contentious Hypocrite Seduc't a young Gentleman's daughter to
Marry with him: And not long he lived with her, but the Spirit of Cavalation
struck in betwixt them.

Then did he act Richard the 3.d, It Is true he did not break her Neck, but he
sent her to Virginiae to be made a Slave on.

And went himself to New England, wherein he continued three years, till the
very Natives were feign to give him Money to be rid of him.

Then to England he came again, as the Proverb is, An Ill herb grows any
where.

And just as the Warr's was broke out in Flames: this Atheist came again to lay
more Fuel to the fire.

Presently struck into the Army, got preferment Chaplin to the Lord Brooks
his Regiment: At which time News was Novelties, and none could declare more in
a private Alehouse then He could in a public Pulpit: The ignotant did praise
him, the learned despise him: So that he was like the Fox, when once he was
well known He was feign to quit his Burough.

Even so he qickly departed from Brooks, and fell into Fairfax Army, and
there he preached, the Soldiers into so much obedience, that they were ready
to stone him away: Then he bethought himself whose Pallat he could please
best, that if any Devil was on Earth he would find him.

For Towns nor Cities would not entertain him, he knew the Sea (or A^my) must
so stricke into Oliver Cromwell, then Lieutenants General, where now we will
hunt him, like a Fox by the Smell.

CHAP. 5. How Peter's got his Preferment with his Master Noll, and his going
with him into Ireland.
NOw Reader observe, that no sooner had his Master and he disputed, but they
were Haile-Fellow well met: trim tram, like Master like Man.

Now Oliver was subtle, and of the same kind Peter's was, for in a Months
time, he found out what Peeters was, and Peeters what he was, so they became
unto one another, as pliable as a clacke to a Mill-Wheele.

And Oliver made him not only his Chaplin but his privy Counselor Varsooth.

Took him over to Ireland with him: For Oliver knew he was a Servant fit for
his turn, and Peeters knew, he was a Master for his: So a little before
Tredath fight, Peter's preached to Oliver in the Camp, and quoted his Text in the
45. Psalm, and part of the sixth verse, Thy arrows are very sharp and the
People shall be subdued unto thee: For truly said he Ichu destroyed the house
of Ahab King of Israel even to that, which pist against the Wall, for it was
the work of the Lord, and thou which art going to do this mighty work, behave
thy self like Maccabees, who slew of the Philistines in one day threescore and
ten thousand.

Therefore smite them to the Earth and leave not one alive.

The Tyrant did as the Traitor had said, and turned the City into streams of
blood: So this was his seventh horrid Act of Villainy: From thence to England
came again: Because many men to loose their Estates, and this Hypocritical
Peeters was the first that transformed the Word from Malignant to Delinquent.

So after a great deal of Mischief, the Parliament were willing to be rid
of them sent them to Scotland; In which Travel two Soldiers being short of
money knocked a Goose in the Head, besides having done some small affront to
Peeters before; Saying, he was their holy divine Prophet: Which in troth they
wronged him; He caused them to be hanged for it, But Dunbar in Scotland,
Edenborough, Fife and Sterling: For all his good deeds there, we will give him in
to the Bargain.

And discourse of their horrid and detestable Plots in Counsel at the Castle
of Windsor, lastly at Ware.

In which we will show the very essence of his Roguery, Villainy, Jests and
Mischief.

CHAP. 6. How Peter's and his Master Noll sat in Counsel at Windsor and Ware,
to contrive the Murder of the King, and dissolution of the Parliament, thereby
to assume the Power.
IN Windsor, he and his Master sat three Nights together up, to contrive for
and how to usurp the Government: The King being then at Holmby, by Peeters
advice they pitched upon a perfidious il-borne brat, one Joyce to secure the
King. Who did accordingly, after which they withdrew to Ware, where at
distance from the Army in a Field by their selves Concluded, the King to be
Murdered, the Parliament interupted, and Oliver to reign Potentate, as he
confessed when he lay sick at Plymouth.

Which was all accordingly done, but when the House was interrupted, so many as
were Secluded were put in Hell at Westminster, in which place Peter's stood with
his Pen and Ink to take a list how many they were; after preached a Sermon at
St. Albones stouping in the Pulpit like an Actor in a play, which a great one
in m^schiefe, said he had been in Hell, and there had seen a great many
Parliament men; still blinding the people, only to advance his Masters interest.

Which being done, and all things accomplished, he was invested in his throne
of wickedness, yet he would flout his Master, jeere his Competitors, object to
all.

For in the Pulpit at White Hall some persons being in the Chapel he did not
affect, Heason was under the Gallery, Peter's said there sat a blind Cobbler had
more grace in his face then any of them all.

At another time his Master asked him, what College he received his Education
in, he said in Brazen-Nos'd College.

His Master supposed he had jeered him of his Nose, said he was a Brazen nosed
fellow to answer him so;

At another time in St. James his Park being his Master in a Coach and he on
Horseback, it chanced to rain, whereby his Master sent him his own Coat to
preserve him from the shower; Peter's sent him word again, he would not be in
his Coat for 500. l.

See how the Traitor himself did hint at the unworthiness of his Masters cause.

Another time his Masters Son Richard himself and another Gentleman to the
number of three, were at the Devil Tavern at Temple bar, fifteen Shillings
being to pay, faith Richard would pay but his club, what but your club said
Peter's. -- Come hang it I Will pay my 3. Crowns, that's more spent in an hour
then your Father could get easily in seven years; but suddenly after Noll
posted away, Richard defeated, and Peter's feign to shift for himself.

CHAP. 7. How Peter's after the Decease of his wretched Master, and the total
Defeat of all his wicked Rabble was feign to shift for himself, his narrow
Escapes and Apprehension, with his going to Trial and from thence to the
Gallows.
NOw this miserable Catiffe was in a worse condition then ever was Caine for
sleying his Brother Abell, then was he feign to shuffle and cut, and try his
wits to the purpose, for he knew the Game stood upon his Life, but perceiving
the game to be dangerous, resolved the best way to play least in sight which
he did for a certain while, but being closely pursued and chased, he was
constrained to take hold in South-warke, his dables being discovered, a
Messenger was sent to apprehend him; but he like a Fox did soon quit his
Borough, and so mist for that time; but not long after he was taken and
secured, though strongly denied he was not Peter's; questionless a Fox if that
he could speak, to quit himself from Death would swear he was a Lamb; But
Peter's guilt and erroneous actions could not appear in the coat of Innocence,
so forthwith was brought to the Tower, and a while after to Newgate and at the
Old Baily took fair trial before the Judges, who gave him Sentence to be
drawn from thence on a Sledge to Charing-Crosse to be Hanged, drawn and
Quartered, which was done: and now his quarters hangs on the Gates, and his
Head on London Bridge, where we will leave them to the Readers judgment,
whether he was more honored in a Tyrants counsel, or on the Gibbet at
Charing-crosse.

So farewell to an unparalled Traitor never to be forgotten in the rolls of
Infamy.

Good Sir forbear who ere you are that laugh,
J needs must write Hugh Peter's Epitaph:
J cannot say the Body lies here,
But point unto the Gates his Limbs are there.

The Epitaph.
IN stead of saying, in this place does Lie,
I now must say upon the Gates on high
There hangs Hugh Peter's Limbs, a Traitor that
Rebellion it self did stand amazed at:
To see such Confidence in mortal Man,
Hard Natured, like unto a Flinty stone
Tuter'd in Cruel barbarous Tyranny.
Like to the Imps in Hell are wont to be
Hot seared Conscience to himself alone,
Sprung from Mount Aetna's horrid burning Zone.
High piece of baseness that presumed to tell
Newses in Pulpits, as if he would come from Hell,
No question of it, for it is Certainly
None trod such steps, none knew it so well as he.
He being Pluto's Chaplin needs could bring
Tidings from Hell to act against his King;
Grand piece of Impudence, that durst to be
Plunged in that barbarons horrid Villainy.
Like to an Impious base profane relector.
When he was Chaplin to his Lord Protector.
Numerous more l^ke this J should rela^e,
Which he did act against the Church and State;
For which the Ground did think him far unfit,
His Dusty relics should compare with it.
The Earth did scorn his Corpse though in a tomb
Should have a burying place within her womb*
Hold Muse be silent, for thou have done fair
And leave him on the Gates to Fowls of the air,
Who scorn for to approach his filthy Tomb,
But what the Traitor -- he have done.
T. H.


