THE LIFE and DEATH OF DAVID.

A SERMON Preached at the Funerals of that Worthy Member of the Honorable
House of COMMONS, William Strode Esquire, In the Abbey Church in Westminster,
September. 22o. 1645.

By GASPAR HICKES, a member of the Assembly of Divines.

LONDON, Printed by G. Miller for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the
Crane in Paul's Churchyard, 1645.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sr EDWARD BARKHAM Knight and Baronet, and to his
truly religious Lady, the Lady FRANCES BARKHAM.
Right Worshipful,
AMong the many comforts I have met with in your family, where I found the
first safe and quiet harbor after my wanderings and tossings in the common
storm, I cannot but prize it as an eminent one, that there I enjoyed the sweet
company of that worthy Gentleman, our dear friend, whose name this paper bears;
by whose favors I have been really helped and refreshed, and from whose
wisdom and goodness (if I prove not defective to my self) I might learn
much. When I was called to perform that last sad office for him, I could
heartily have desired that it had rather been put into the hands of some one of
the most able and famous of my brethren, whose parts and credit might have
better reached the worth, and set forth the renown of a person so worthy of the
highest honor. Yet that which animated me to the task, as a duty something
fit for me, was the consideration of my intimate converse with him in the last
and best acted part of his time; whereby I had this advantage, that as
affection stirred me to speak freely of him, so conscience prompted me, and
experience enabled me to speak the known truth, and that only. My hopes are,
that my obscurity or weakness, shall not leave any blemish on his
excellencies, which deserve to be drawn and flourished by the most curious
pencill; which will shine forth in despite of obloquie and ill will, either of
open enemies, or of those at home, whose ill-affected eyes could not brook the
clear and lightsome beams of his unmasked and unmixed integrity. Indeed I doubt
not but when all such shall be parables of the dust written in the earth,
rotting in infamy, his memory shall be blessed, and his name dear; yea so long
as the name of Parliament shall be precious to England: And precious may that
great name be, preserved and blessed that society, so long as we continue a
people.

This incult piece, such as it is, I humbly present to you, and that as your
due; not only in regard of my manifold and deep engagements to you, but
principally in respect of your interesses in him that is gone to God; between
whom and you there passed and continued an intercourse of hearty, real, and
scarcely to be parallelled friendship. Besides, the subject matter of the
Sermon is proper and pertinent to you; it sets forth the serviceablenesse of
the godly to their generation. For your part, Sir, your cordial, useful,
unwearied activity for the public, is well known to all that know you aright.
And you, Madame, are every day casting in your contributions, laying out your
interesses in Heaven for the common good. I know you both desire to act rather
then to hear of what you do. Go on to do as you do, and still more abundantly.
And the choicest blessings of Heaven and earth be multiplied upon you, and upon
your hopeful progeny. So prays.

Your most obliged faithful servant, GASP. HICKES.

Errata Page 3. lin. 10 for beartlesse, r. but less. p 4 l. 2. for will, r-
well.

A SERMON PREACHED in the Abbey Church at Westminster, at the Funerals of that
Worthy Member of the Honorable House of Commons, WILLIAM STRODE Esquire,
September. 22o. 1645.
ACTS 13.36. For David after be had served his own generation by the will of
God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption.


IT will not suit with our present purpose to stay long upon the discovery of
the occasion and coherence of these words. Let it suffice to show that they are
part of a Sermon preached by Paul at Antioch in Pisidia; wherein he proves, by
many invincible arguments, that grand assertion or principle of faith, that
Jesus is the Christ, the promised Savior. His arguments may be reduced to two
heads, testimony and events: testimony of John and the Prophets, and events
suitable to their testimonies and predictions. The events foretold and
accomplished in Jesus, and here specified are four; production of the seed of
David, sufferings from the Jews, burial, resurrection. The last, his
resurrection from the dead, whereby he was mightily declared to be the Son of
God, (...) Romans 1.4.
according to the spirit of holiness, the power of his Godhead being therein
expressed most apparently, and beyond contradiction: this (I say) is evidenced
to have been foretold by many express and concluding authorities of Scripture,
viz. Psalm. 2.7. Isa. 55.3. Psalm. 16.10. and which are applicable to Christ, and
to him mainly: And if any should question whether David speaks personally of
himself, or prophetically of Christ in the last mentioned authority, which
runs thus, Thou shall not suffer thy holy one to see corruption: Psalm. 26.10.
the Apostle meets with the doubt by way of Prolepsis; showing that the place
cannot be competent to David properly or directly, but only as he was a type of
Christ, or by way of participation, as he should, with the rest of the godly,
be raised up with Christ: for David himself was a mortal man, whose time was
limited by the determination of God within the bounds of his generation, who
expired according to the common exigence of mankind; whose outward man saw
and suffered some kind of corruption. He, after he had served his own
generation, by them will of God, fell on sleep etc.

Which words (if I would set a title on them) might be aptly styled, the life
and death of David. Neither need I strain them into a division, they
voluntarily fall asunder into these two parts, 1. The course. 2. The issue of a
godly man.


Consider we must that the Apostles principall-drift here is to set David below
Christ, and therefore to describe him in his humane finitenesse and frailty.
Yet is the mention of him honorable, discovering the integrity of his course,
and the happiness of his issue. He served, but it was his honor and
uprightness to be faithful and profitable in his service, to do good to them
that came within his relation and reach. He died, but death to him was a sweet
sleep, a rest from his labors, a lying down in peace: therein he was gathered
to his fathers, nothing befell him but that which was incident to those
glorious Ancients the Patriarchs and holy men of God; and though his perishable
part, his dust was liable to a temporary heartlesse corruption, yet is that
deposited, reserved entire and safe to an happy reunion with his soul; and his
immortal precious spirit is lodged in the arms of glory.

The very order of nature prompts to me a method fit to be followed in handling
my text. David served, and died: and needful it is that I first endeavor to
teach, and to learn how to live, before death come. I shall therefore now
terminate or stint my speech to the godly man's course. David served his own
generation by the will of God.

Wherein I might point out unto you these things considerable. 1. The person,
David. 2. His employment, he served. 3. The object on which he bestowed his
pains, his own generation. 4. The moving and ordering cause, the will of God.


David, a man whom the Lord found out and framed after his own heart, such a
one as he would have him; whom he advanced by special grace, in a wonderful
way, to be the ruler of his people; he served; not himself in an exorbitant,
arbitrary, domineering way of government; but others, by seeking their good,
and promoting their well fare in all respects: and he served his own
generation, those to whom he was bound in relation, who stood within his
compass; and that to the utmost extent of his time and abilities: and all this
he did by the will of God; which I take here to signify not so much Gods
injoyning or prescribing will (which is indeed the rule of all our obedience
and service) as his determining, disposing will; the word here used, is not
(...), but (...), which some will translate, Gods counsel; by which all our
good works and gracious passages are foreordained, the measure of our time and
strength, dispensed and bounded.

The sum of all may be laid together in such a doctrinall observation as this.

It is the integrity, the honor, the happiness of the godly, by the gracious
disposing and working of God, to be made truly serviceable to them with whom
they have converse and communion. Or thus; A godly man is a serviceable, a
useful,, a profitable man.

David, a potent and prosperous Monarch, that had the necks of his enemies
under his feet, and the hearts of his people at his beck, has this left uopn
record, as a most honorable memorial, that he served them whom he ruled. By a
special choice, a clear call he was taken from the sheep-folds, from following
the ewes great with young, from the low and laborious employment of a shepherd,
to royal dignity: his advancement did not exempt him from his pains, but only
altered the object of them; before, he fed, and watched, and attended sheep,
and now he must do the like for men; Psalm. 78 79. 71, 7.
and so he did with integrity of heart and skilfullnesse of hands: the more
sublime and noble the employment is, the greater care and industry, dexterity
and parts are requisite for the managing of it. The most eminent Saints,
whether in respect of function or graces, have the highest and hardest taskes
to accomplish. Paul more then once pleads the warrant of his call, 2 Cor.
15.10. and 1, 11, 13.
and the uprightness of his course, to, and in his Apostleship, from the
abundance and success of his labors. And the meanest Christian if sound, has
the honor and fitness to be in some way and measure profitable to the body.
It is a duty of general concernment, Gal. 5.13.
of indispensable necessity on all of us that partake of the same precious
faith, and are called to the liberty of Christ, to serve one another in love.

1 Cor. 12.1, 5, 7, 8.
yet is it the same spirit, the same Lord, the same God which works all in
all; and therefore is the manifestation of the Spirit given to every one to
profit withal: the exhibition of all spiritual sufficiencies is for mutual
helpfullnesse. Spiritual relations are more noble and strong then those that
are natural; they are more near, more engaging and endearing. Lumbard.
When the Master of the Schoolmen had discoursed largely and acutely of the
mutual love between the Father and Christ, he concludes all with a confession,
Se non possed serte explicare, that it passed his skill to enucleate the
mystery: So do you turn your bowels within you, dive to the depth of your
affections, weigh the measures, and feel the tenderness of your respects to
the wife of your bosom, the childrin of your loins, the friend that is to you
as your own soul; and if there be no more but nature in them, they are but
shadows or glaunces in comparison of gracious affections: those blessed bonds
are pure in their root and fruit, vigorous in their activity, necessary and
indissoluble in their continuance, hearty in their whole frame and drift; being
truly spiritualized, there are angelical wings and wheels added to heighten
and accelerate their motions: therefore they beget tender care, strong
endeavors for the good of the them with whom they close.

2. The truth will be clear, if we notice the qualification or aptitude of
Saints for mutual serviceablenesse. All graces are precious and useful, they
have their full task in doing good. The Apostle magnifies the work of faith, 1
These. 1 4.
the labor of love, the patience of hope in the Thessalonians. True grace
cannot be idle or inactive. When the Holy Ghost, after the assension of Christ,
was plentifully poured down on believers, there was an apparition of cloven
tongues as of fire sitting upon each of them. Acts 2.3.
The tongue is the member of communication, fire is apt to dilate and disperse
it self so far as it can reach combustibles, and the clovennesse of these
tongues, denotes not only the variety and fulness of graces and sufficiencies
issuing from our glorified head, but their aptness also to communicate
themselves. The godly man is furnished with true and rich abilities, and he is
expensive of them, willing to lay them out for the good of others.

3. He is animated hereunto by Gods acceptance. Service done to the meanest
member of Christ is interpretatively done to Christ himself, so is he pleased
to value it; God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love,
Mit. 25.45.
which ye have showed to his Name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints,
Heb. 6.10.
and do minister. Gods justice, his faithfulness is here engaged to remember
and remunerate all good offices performed in sincerity to his Saints; and that
because of his own interesses, he accounts all expressed and done to his own
Name. You see the godly have dear and binding respects, useful abilities,
effectual encouragements to make them helpefull and serviceable each to other;
therefore the truth of the doctrine is clear and firm.



1. To discover and cast shame upon the mischievous disposition of graceless
persons. Oh the strange horrid nocivous properties that are in degenerated man!
Instead of being serviceable, how pemicious is he to those of his own kind?
see this monstrous piece of his wickedness pictured, Romans 3.13, -- 17. He
imagins mischief, speaks poison, acts destruction: every member and faculty of
him is armed with hurt fulness: more savage he is then a beast, little less
dangerous then a devil. Do we not plainly read this in these our days written
in bloody characters? Paul observes so much in the Jews; they were injurious to
their countrymen, killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, 1 These. 2.14,
15.
persecuted the Apostles, pleased not God, and were contrary to all men. And is
there not now such a viperous generation amongst us, that gnaw out the bowels
of their mother, spill the blood of their brethren, trample all relations under
foot, make spoil, and ruin their occupation, and hate none so much as those
that are dear to God? It were well if this might be verified only of such as
are in professed armed opposition against Gods cause and people: I fear I speak
this day to many, who by reason of impotencie cannot draw blood: through
cowardice, or covetousness, or such like respects, are held in from doing open
mischief, yet are their hearts stuffed with rancour, and their tongues tipped
with venom against the power of godliness, and the image of Christ in his
Saints. Surely there is no trusting of a sleeping Lion, nor of a calmed sea,
nor of a carnal man muzled with restraint, or smoothed over with ingenuity and
fair carriage. Whiles you have your tuskes and talons about you, ye are unmeet
for dalliance; perilous ye are at the best, till pared and tamed by
mortification; never truly serviceable, till apted thereto by grace. 2. These.
3.2.
Of all outward mischiefs we may well pray to be delivered from unreasonable
and absurd men that have not faith.

2. This may serve to raze ex sanctorum albe, out of the catalogues of the
godly, Prove. 10 20
the fruitless, that bring forth nothing conducible to the common good. The
tongue of the just (says Solomon) is as the choice silver; every part and
faculty in him is excellent for price and use: but the heart of the wicked is
little worth, that which is best in him is vile and useless, In a humane, much
more in a Christian society, thou can not be unprofitable, but thou must be
burden some also; like to a rotten tooth, or a paralytique part, which are not
only unmeet for their functions, but also cumbersome and apt to be dolorous.
It Is diminuent or contradictory to speak thus of a Christian; He is a
harmless soul, but good for nothing: of a Minister, He is a deep scholar, but
a loose liver, or an unprofitable Preacher: of a Magistrate, He is an honest
man, but a cowardly or slack justicer: of a Parliament man, He means well, but
neither minds, nor skills, nor helps the public. And if we should take a
survey of the mass of men and women, what a hear of dross might we find for
every grain of metal? How many are there of both sexes, and those none of the
rude rabble, of the dreggs of the people, but such as look high, glitter in
external pomp, flante it in bravery, and think themselves exalted many orbs
above the ordinary; and yet have nothing to set their wits and hands to, but to
make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; that are intent or
busy about nothing, but how to trifle away themselves; that hold it base and
below them, to foul their fingers or beat their brains about any honest
employment? I might compare you to fair statues, or well limn'd pictures, but
that it is too good for you: ye are more like to bodies from which the souls are
departed, and so are become carcases, and must needs putrify and stink: so do
ye languish and rot in your delicate baseness, you stink in the nostrils of
the Almighty, and are justly and grievously offensive to all good men.

3. I cannot pass by without reprehension the regardlesse ones of our times,
that lay nothing to heart but that which concerns themselves, or touches their
own skins. Careless souls, that consult for nothing but their own ease,
interesses, security and immunity from common calamities; that contribute
nothing, no succors, no sympathy, no sense to the common cause: Let others
sink or swim, so they suffer not, or if there be no remedy, they hold it
best prudence to suffer last; though God most commonly crosses them, and meets
with them in the infliction of speedlest and haviest judgments. 'Twas a dogged
speech of Cain, Genesis 4, 9.
Am I my brothers keeper? If thou will not be thy brothers keeper, it is no
wonder if thou become his murderer. If thou carest neither for the weal nor woe
of others, thou shall never see the good of Gods chosen, nor rejoice in the
gladness of his nation, Psalm. 106.5.
nor glory with his inheritance.



1. Be sure of a well-bottomed stock of grace, let it be sound and right, and
labor the improvement of it to the utmost. True grace is singularly useful.
Indeed common gifts may do some good abroad; Cyrus was called, anointed, styled
my Shepherd, Isa. 44.28. and 45.1, 4.
and he did much toward the return of Gods people; but what was he to a David?
so what is a mere statist, a man of policy, or valor, or any the greatest
parts, if unsanctified, in comparison of one that has such abilities seasoned
with grace? God indeed may make such isntrumental for good, he may serve
himself upon them, or by them, they cannot heartily serve him nor his cause:
And the more grace we have, the more serviceable we shall be: every the least
star that appears no bigger then a scintilla, a spark, is a celestial body,
and has as much light in it as it can hold; but the greater Luminaries afford
strongest influences, and send forth most abundant, useful, comfortable light.
The least spark of grace is an immortal seed, a parcel of the divine nature,
more worth then a world but graces of prime magnitude are of most eminent
usefullnesse, and send abroad the strongest and sweetest rays, to the benefit
and refreshment of others. Covet the most and best therefore, that you may be
able to do most good.

2. Nourish and enlarge deep and tender affections. It Is a notable character of
excellency which Paul sets upon Timothy; he describes him to be a man of a
singular spirit, he naturally cared for the state of the people, and that
altogether without selfe-respects, as a son with his father, so served he
with Paul in the Gospel. Phil. 2.20, 21, 22.
Oh for such genuine sweet strains of spirit in Christians! You that are
parents of your country, should look upon and deal with the generation which
you serve, as if it were your own generation, all issuing from your own loins:
You that are spiritual parents, should tender and care for your people, as for
your dear children: All you Christians should converse and embrace as brethren
of the same womb, 1 Pet. 3.8.
of the same birth. I tremble when I consider the distance and distastes, the
heart-risings and heart-burnings that are between us that own the same name and
cause; fitter we are and more ready to tear, and afflict, and confound, then to
serve each other.

3. Be communicative; expend all that God imparts to you in this blessed
service. 2 Cor. 12.15. and 6.11.
Paul was willing to spend and to be spent for believers. His mouth was open,
his heart enlarged to them: Lay out he would not his uncessant pains only in
the work of the Gospel, but he was prodigal also of his very soul, 2 These. 2.
^;.
ready to pour out that for their good. Noble Patriots let it not seem much to
you that you forego your profits, your preferments, all the dilights of the
children of men; that you exhaust your estates, your parts, your spirits, your
blood about the great business of God and his people that is in your hands. Ye
faithful servants of Christ in the ministry, let your lamps burn and shine
continually, though you consume the sap, the oil, the very Elixar of your
precious lives in giving light to others. Dear Christians, cast in your all to
the common stock: what any of ye pinch or spare, you lose; you quench and
smother the graces that you restrain or hold in from the service of Christ's
common wealth.

4. Be receptive, take in help and supply from others. The profit of the earth
is for all (says Solomon) the King himself is served by the field. If you will
subsist in spirituals, Eccles. 5 9.
you must take your share of provisions in common with all Saints. Paul longed
to see and to converse with the Romans, not only that he might impart, but
receive, and might be comforted together with them, Romans 1.11, 12.
by the mutual faith both of himself and them. Apollos a man famous for
eloquence, mighty in the Scriptures, and fervent in spirit, a bold preacher of
the things of the Lord, deigns to hear and receive more clear and prefect
instructions in the ways of God from Aquila and Priscilla, Acts 18.24, 25.26.
persons far his inferiors in diverse respects. Sometimes you may light your
torches at a little candle, and kindle your great fires with a few coals
fetched from a poor man's chimney. And you do well and honorably, and like your
selves, that you call in Bezaleels and Aholiabs for advice and assistance about
Sanctuary work: And I hope it is not intended as a for formality, that the
advice of the Assembly might stand only on the Frontispiece of your directions
and Ordinances, but that you mean to follow the counsel which they bring you
from God, when it is indeed Gods counsel. God will have Christians beholden to
teach other; he that will give, must take, and you cannot imagine how much a
poor Saint, much more a body of Saints may help at a dead lift, when they set
to their shoulders by counsel; or compassions, or prayers, etc.

5. Be humble. Humility is a serviceable grace; it accounts nothing that is
duty to be too hard or base to be attempted and acted. There is nothing more
intolerable in a servant then petulancy or peremptorinesse. We must not stand
upon niceties or high terms, if we will be truly useful to our brethren. Yet
this is frequent, such an office is too mean, such a condescension is unworthy.
If such a mind had been in Christ, what had become of us? how low did he stoop
to do us good? he stood not upon his reputation, but emptied and humbled
himself, veiled the beams of his deity with the form, the habit of a servant;
and he did the part of a servant, he became obedient, even to the perfection of
obedience, to the extremity of sufferings, and all for us: and if we will serve
each other in earnest, Phil. 2.5. -- 9.
let this mind be in us which was in Christ Jesus.

6. Be regular. Servants must know their offices, and stick to their several
taskes; Soldiers must keep their ranks, and observe their postures: So must
Christians, otherwise they hurt, 3 These. 4.2^. Romans 12.^, 7, 8.
not help their fellows. This is the Apostles rule, Do your own business,
work with your own hands. And let every one wait on that which is proper to
him. There Is celestial harmony when every one moves in his own sphere. It was
the peoples acclamation to the Emperor Anastasius on his coronation day, S^^ut
vixisti, i^a etian impara.
As thou have lived, so reign: his private course was commendable, and they
conjectured aright, that his graces, if they were found, would shine the
brighter in a high place. Such is the man indeed, as he is in his particular
station; and I know not which is more dangerous to society, either
defectivenesse in members for that which is required, or intrusion and busy
meddling with that which is besides them. I should be sorry that either of these
should be incident to Ministers. For the former, you do well to have their
abilities and fitness examined and approved: In the later, you are very wary
in trusting them with more then you conceive due. What is due, I dare not, I
cannot now determine. Not long since you have been caught, and that satis pro
imperio, magisterially enough, though by one that professes submission even
below a slave; that not any thing of government is due to them: You give them
enough, if you give them meat and work: And so much I think you will afford
to your horses. I believe it reaches not the double honor the Holy Ghost holds
them worthy of, 1 Tin. 5.17.
and that for ruling well. And whether be more unbeseeming a Minister, either
an asse-like crouching and stupour, or a dogge-like laziness, judge ye. The
searcher of hearts knows, I speak not this for self respects; I can as truly
say as he that decryed all Ministerial authority, or as any man; that it is
more suitable and satisfactory to my spirit, to be thrust into the most obscure
retiredness, then to be up in the world especially, above my self. Let them
be held as scratching brambles that usurp over the trees; the generous vine,
the fat olive, Judge. 9 8 -15.
the sweet fig tree will decline such irregular undue promotion. Justly may
they fear to fall with Antichrist, to partake of Babylons plagues, that affect
the least particle or sippet of Antichristian papal power. I beseech you, do
us the right to believe that it is not ambition, but conscience that makes us
so instant about that which now sticks in your hands. How can we serve God, or
you, or the Churches of Christ, if we are kept or thrust from that, wherein a
great part of our usefullnesse consists? It Is strange that the power of the
Keys, of binding and loosing, that formidable sentence, 1 Cor. 5. should be
aeriall, imaginary, or only temporary and extraordinary things: that they
should signify nothing but what may be in a Roman proscription, an Imperial
Banne, or some such like civil censure. Certainly Christ has, and will have a
kingdom on earth, and therein a spiritual government; much of the managing
whereof he has trusted with his Ministers. It they should use that power to
destruction, not to edification; to domineere over the faith and consciences,
and not to serve the souls, and help the joy of Gods people, the fault would
be in the persons, not in the power. How serviceable Gods faithful Ministers
have endeavored to be, according to their call and abilities, to the present
generation, in the great affairs now on foot; I rather leave to cordial men to
judge, then report it my self. It Is a defect and blemish to the body to have a
finger amputated or disjoynted: much more hurtful it is to have a strong bone
broken, a noble part made useless.

7. Be assiduous, indefatigable in service. Serve out your time, that you may
be freemen of Heaven. So did David in my text; 2 Timothy 4.7.
so did Paul, he run out his whole course; so did a greater then them both,
Christ finished the work which the Father gave him to do. Joh. 1^.4. Plantus.
Benefacta benefactis pertegito (says the Comique) ne perpluat. Good deeds and
services are like titles on an house, betwixt which if there be too much
distance and disparity, 'twill rain through. Is it not a sad thing to see them
that have been forward and eminent in serving the public, grow rusty and
useless, through humor, emulation or discontent, and so thrown aside as
unstrung instruments, or tools whereof all the steel is worn out? Look to your
selves that you lose not those things that ye have wrought, that you suffer not
so many things in vain; hold fast that you have, that no man take your crown:
begin well, and grow better, and be faithful to the death; and you shall
receive a full reward of all your services.

To fasten and whet all that has been said on your spirits, give me leave to
add something by way of incentive.

1. Consider that it is truly noble to be serviceable to others. The Magistrate
(let him be the supreme) from the multiplicity and weightinesse of his
employment, is by way of excellency styled (...), Romans 13.4.
the Minister or servant of God. The Angels, those glorious spirits, that with
eternal satisfaction behold the face of God, and with nimble alacrity execute
his behests, are ministering spirits, also sent forth to serve them who shall be
heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.14.
It Is a title of honor frequently given by God to Christ, Isa. 53.11. and 42.1.
my servant: And himself professes that he came into the world, Mat. 20.28.
not to be ministered to, but to minister. Yea, the glorious majesty of Heaven
and earth, God blessed for ever, God in his habitation, on his throne of
excellency, styles him self a father of the fatherless, a judge of the
widows, Psalm. 68 5.
a helper in the time of need of all them that wait upon him. Who would not
then be ambitious to serve Saints? Me thinks it were an apt impresse or motto
for the greatest of you to bear; The more serviceable, the more honorable.
It Is to be doubted, there are many among you that look high, whom the Lord will
not honor so much as to let you wash the feet of his Saints, sweep the dust
out of his Temple, tugge at an oar in the ship that carries Christ and his
Church. Happy, honored is the man, that can do any good office for the Bride
the Lambs wife.

2. Consider how helpefull and behoofefull our service may be. We may stay up a
staggering brother, nay prop up a tottering kingdom: we may support a drooping
spirit, nay save a soul from death. Jam. 5.10.
Sometimes a little succor stops a fatal fall, a small assistance turns
aside a deadly stroke, a poor slight medicine is made effectual to preserve
life: but spiritual remedies are most efficacious, and serve for highest
purposes. And shall we spare our pains which may be so helpefull to our
brethren? The sufferings of the meanest single Saint must turn our bowels, and
draw out our compassions, and call in our succouring hand. Oh then, what
flames, what flowings, what meltings, what expendings of our whole selves are
requisite from us, when societies of Saints, states and Churches lie a
bleeding, and cry aloud to us for our hands, our hearts, our tears, our
prayers, our all to help them?

3. This may move us likewise that the service of the godly is relative,
reciprocal, mutual. One member cannot say to another, 1 Cor. 12 21.
I have no need of thee. Careful and tender we should be to restore a lapsed
brother in the spirit of meekness, G^l. 6 1.
considering our selves, that we also may be tempted. Heb. 13 3.
We must remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which
suffer adversity, as being our selves also in the body, and may as much need
compassion and help as the most miserable. There is an intercourse, a holy
traffic of graces among Saints; wherein (and it is a Paradox very strange)
they grow rich by disbursing: we enlarge our own comforts, by administering
consolation to others; clear up our own light, by informing others; inflame our
own zeal, by rouzing up the affections of others; fortify our own spirits, by
staying or raising up our feeble fallen brethren. We cannot do any spiritual
good to others, without benefit to our selves; neither can we perform any
service of love to the Saints, but we may need and receive the same or the like
from them.

4. Take a taste of the refreshments our faithful, painful serviceablenesse
leaves upon our spirits. Eccles. 5.1^.
The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much. The
Christian that labors hard for the honor of his master, and advantage of his
fellow servants, whatever outward exigences befall him, has inward peace, at
least in the cause for the present, and in the issue too, when the times of
refreshing shall come. Our rejoicing is this (says Paul) the testimony of our
conscience, 2 Cor. 1.1^.
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
grace of God, we have had our conversations in the world, and more abundantly
to youwards. When he was even in the mouth of death, the recognition or relish
of his faithful pains in serving God and his people, filled him with
unspeakable joy. Oh how sweet will it be when the godly man at his dissolution
can with good Hezekiah lodge his soul in Gods blessed bosom, thus? Remember
now, O Lord, I beseech thee, Isa. 38.3.
how I have walked before thee intruth, and with a perfect heart, and have done
that which is good in thy sight; that which is suitable to thy will, honorable
to thy Name, profitable to thy Church and people.



1. It is exceedingly comfortable to the godly man, that he is the most useful
serviceable creature that lives on earth. He is more truly helpefull and
beneficent, he can do more real and rich good turns then the greatest
mortal breathing that is out of Christ. If with Mordecai he be raised to
outward dignity and power, he will ingratiate and endear himself to the
multitude of his brethren, Esther ^3.
by seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed. If he
be mean in the world, yet let not the Eunuch say, I am a dry tree; he has a
special spiritual way of the helpfullnesse, above all the men of the world.
The Saints are the ornament, the blessing the safety of the places that hold
them: they are the pillars of Kingdoms, the props of Parliaments, the cement of
societies, the horsemen and charets of armies, the beauty of all things here
below. May we not affirm this now upon just experience? who as they have
advantaged the cause of God now inagitation? they consult, and act, and fight,
and pray, and that not without apparent blessed success, even many times when
all seems to be dashed and lost. Without oftentation we may boldly say, -- Si
Pergama dextra desendt possent, etian bao defensa, uissent.
If any thing under Heaven be isntrumental to keep up these shaken,
distracted, dying kingdoms from utter ruin, it is most likely it will be the
Saints service.

2. There is great reason of rejoicing to the godly, in that of all other they
are best served. They have not only immediate protection and provision from
God, the ministry of Angels, the renewed right and sanctified use of
creatures; but all their fellow Saints also to be their servants in special. 1
Cor 3.21, 22.
All things are yours (says the Apostle) whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas,
etc. you have interesse in all the faithful pains of Christ's Ministers, in all
the ordinances of life; you have a share and benefit in the whole stock of
graces and prayers, that trade and commerce between Heaven and earth. Solomon
has a Proverb to this purpose, Better is he that is despised and has a
servant, then he that exalts himself and wants bread. Alas poor rich
worldling, hungerstarved Epicures, doleful sensualists, you that think ye
have the world at will, that walk with your train of attendants, and glory in
the crouchings of your clients and slaves; you want bread, all true and
confortable helps. A time is coming upon you, when that which seems most
serviceable to you, shall prove most vexatious; Your table shall become a
snare, your friends tormentours, your pleasures poison, your wealth rust to
your wounded spirits, your very lives a burden to you, and your selves a
terror to your selves. But for you the hidden ones of God, though ye are never
so much despised and down in the world, you shall never want servants, whiles
God has Angels in Heaven, or a people on earth. Kingdoms may be overturned,
Parliaments may be dissolved, Armies may be routed and lost; men, good men, the
best of men may die, must die, do die; yet so long as that chosen generation,
that holy seed, the offspring of God continue (and continue they shall in a
constant series, till they are perfected in number and graces, and translated
to glory) you shall serve be served, and that in the dearest bonds of relation,
the sweetest intercourse of mutual help fulness, which shall be effectual
to your spiritual and eternal well fare. And so much for to Text.

Something more I have to say, and it is touching the servant of God and of his
people, whose dust is now brought back to the dust from whence 'twas taken. For
your parts, Nobles and Senators, you do your selves right by honoring his
memorial, by commanding and attending the solemnities of his interrement. You
have shown your hatred of superstitious Ceremonies, and yet have appointed and
are present at a Funeral, and a Sermon. Herein you deal with him, as they
dealt with Jchojada, and that upon like grounds; he had an honorable sepulture
afforded him, because he had done good in Israel, 2 Chro. 26.16.
both toward God and toward his house. And for my own part, I think there
are few more unapt for, or unfrequent in Panegyriques or funeral praises then
my self. I hold it most unworthy for Ministers, upon such occasions, to paint
or perfume carcases, to garnish I dols. But now why should I be silent? I need
not hyperbolize, nay, I know mine own weakness, I cannot reach this Worthies
just commendations. I purposely pass by the mention of the antiquity and
nobleness of his descent, the piety of his private course, his sweetness in
conversation, his faithfulness in friendship, etc. and shall limit my self
to the pattern in my text: and indeed the few words of my text, do limme and
decypher him better beyond comparison, then my poor dull oratory can do it. I
should say enough of him, if I sid no more but this; He served his own
generation. And this shall be the sum of all that I shall say; Surely he was
a very serviceable piece, a precious useful soul, profitable to his generation.

1. He served. And in his service we may notice these remarkable excellencies.

1. His indefatigable industry, his fervent and zealous intention upon the
businesses of state. He was none of those that peep now and then into the House
to inquire, What news? that sit there sometimes for recreation, that are
present mainly to help a friend, or promote an interesse: but he set his heart
and shoulders to the work, and stretched all his sinews about it. You know the
solid vehemency, the piercing acuteness of his speeches. It Is observed of
Erasmus, that he more punished the Monks fat bellies by his Sales, then Luther
did by his stomachation. refell the crossnesse or cunning of some, who could
not well be met with, but by such plain home dealing?

2. His unbiassed and unblemished integrity. As his principles were clear and
sound, so did he exactly prosecute them, and kept close and even to them. His
parts were commendable, his judgment good, his expressions rational and
quick, his experience long in the course of Parliamentary affairs: Yet I
believe, that honesty, which is the best Logique and Rhetorique, and
uprightness, which can never be confuted, added the most invincible force and
weight to his motions and reasons.

3. His insuperable constancy. He held on his course in all weathers; was ever
the same and like himself in all changes and events of times: He was neither
wheeled about to open state-apostacie; nor warped to covert disaffection to
this, or close implicit compliancie to the adverse party; nor flatted to a
pretended moderation, indeed a dangerous temper, made up of discontent and
selfishnesse. How many glistering Mateors have we seen blaze and look big for
a while, and at last prove falling stars, and extinguish in a stink; or if
they stick amongst us, they hang doubtfully, and yield but uncertain and
unwholesome light? He fixedly kept his orb and his motion, till he finished
his course.

4. His tedious and heavy sufferings. He was not moved by menaces, or
reproaches, or hardships: he counted not his contentments, his estate, his
liberty, his life dear unto him, that he might do his work, Acts 20.14.
and accomplish the ministry, the service which he received of God. Witness
his long imprisonment, and that in the prime of his time, when the strength and
delights of youth might have made him do much for freedom. In those worst,
most dangerous, for lorne times, like another Curtius, he cast himself in
hiatum, into the gulf, the jaws of extreme peril, for his countries good.
Witness also the accusation of late cast upon him of the highest crime: 'twas
his singular serviceablenesse that caused him to be one of the first marked and
destined to destruction.

Thus he served: But whom did he serve? I shall briefly answer this both
negatively and affirmatively.

1. He served not himself. In all that he intended or did for the public, I
could never observe (and it was my happiness to converse constantly and
intimately with him for a good space of time) I say I could never observe any
thing of self before his eyes, either for the present, or in expectation. A
great and useful hand he had in procuring treasure, the sinews of war, yet I
dare affirm in spite of malice and calumny, that none of it stuck to his
fingers. Very scrupulous he was in receiving, nay resolute in refusing the
expressions of common mean courtesies from any, especially if there were the
least appearance or suspicion of a hook in the bait. He grasped no offices,
accepted not maintenance from the public in the usual way; though he had
lost or spent all his private estate: he rather cast himself on beholdennesse
to friends, which was averse to his most generous spirit; yet so the Lord
provided for his subsistence, and he enjoyed it with all heartinesse and
respects. Oh never let it be said of men entrusted with the common cause, Phil.
2.21.
they seek their own, and not the things that are Jesus Christ's.

2. He served not men. I mean in the Apostles sense. If I pleased men I should
not be the servant of Christ. Gal. 5.10.
Great names, old acquaintance, near relations, could not sway him to men's
persons or personal respects. Did you ever know him raise party, or make a
motion, or drive a design to that purpose? He did not trudge up and down to
Committees, nor appear in them, to advocate or intercede for any in causes that
would not hold water. Not but that he was courteous and helpefull to his
friends, yea readily useful to all that came within his reach, in a way of
justice. Methinks Moses description of Levi, accords him well in this point.
Who said unto his father and to his mother, Deuteronomy. 33.9.
I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own
children.

3. He served his own generation, he served the public. Many of the great
Patriots of ancient Rome made the Common wealth their heir; In degenerated
times, Court Parasites often gave all to the Emperors. The Common wealth was
to him instead of, and as wife and children: to that (next to the immediate
service of God) he devoted his care, his skill, his parts, his pains. How
justly might he say as Chrysostom, when he was ready to be tome off from his
people by banishment, Vita mihi ad vestrum profectum tantummodo ducitur. Cum de
expulsione ipsiu^ ageretur. Hon^^.
The main drift of his life and action, was the glory of God in serving the
public.

Well, this serviceable man is come to the period of his generation; he is
fallen on sleep. Will you, can you hear any thing of his death? I should say
nothing of the manner of it, were it not to stop the black mouths of some,
that speak falsely and despitefuly of it. His disease was an Epidemicall
fever, which after some colluctations seized on his principals and spirits,
before impaired and much exhausted both by sufferings' and services. 'Twas not
the plaugue then, as many report; and it is probable the report was raised by
some, who will say of him, with as much malice and as little truth, (...) Acts.
24.5.
as Tertullus said of Paul; We have found this man the very pestilence. Neither
yet did he fall into raging distempers (as some give it out) which might have
been feared in such a disease, and in him who was of a constitution something
hot, and of a vigorous stirring spirit. Some clouds indeed were cast upon his
faculties by the violence of the disease, yet was his demeanor and his
dissolution quiet. And though the nature of his sickness hindered his
expressions, yet I doubt not but his Master found him watching, because he
found him doing. Mat. 24.46.
Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

One thing yet remains. I have a little to say to the generation that he has
left.

1. Taking it at large, for the entire body, the state and Church of which he
was a member. Oh what an impoverishment have we suffered! Is it a small matter,
that so serviceable, so useful a labourer should be called home from work in
the midst of his day, the prime of his time? does not this portend that the
season is almost spent, or that night will come sooner then we look for? I know
not how you value the loss; me thinks it should weigh heavy. We hear of the
shaking, the indangering of one of the Kingdoms, which cannot but make our
hearts shake, and bleed, and break within us: And in these distracted times we
cannot but be obnoxious to doubts, and fears, and losses: And what can more
impair us then the taking away the prudent, Isa. 3.^, 3.
the honorable, the Counselor, the pillars of state, the Atlasses of our
public fabrique? Our loss in this particular is the greater, in regard of
our present poor condition. A decayed Merchant cannot sustain a single wrack;
whereas it little hurts one of a full estate, that ventures in many bottomes.
We live in a declining, tottering, degenerated generation; and I assure you, a
few more such losses may undo us. I might bring in a long bill, but i will sum
up the total, thus: The Parliament has lost an ornament, the Common wealth a
servant, and (let me add one parcel more) the Ministry a friend: I add it
the rather, because I doubt we have few (I am sure few such) friends left. All
of all sorts may take the loss deeply to heart, I know none but must share in
it, that have interesse in, and true respects to the common cause.

2. If we understand his generation more strictly, for them that are brethren
of the same order, members of the same society with him, I shall leave a few
words with them, and conclude.

1. Let a poor unworthy servant of Jesus Christ speak a word of counsel in
your ears this day, and let it not be lightly set by. I hope your hearts are
now in a tender frame, and fit to receive impressions. You are called an House,
and that is a term of aggregation and consociation: You sit together, and I
have seen you feast together, and now you mourn together, at least in outward
semblance: I beseech you for the Lords sake, for conscience sake, for the poor
generations sake that hangs upon you, and something for the memory and respect
of him that is taken from among you; be at one among your selves, be like
minded, Phil. 2.2, 3.
have the same love, let nothing be done in managing public affairs through
strife or vain glory. Let this be the burial day of all your private
interesses and ends; cast your cross and high thoughts down into the dust, and
never let them rise again; let all your contention be for the common faith; all
your emulation, who shall do best service to his generation. You see ye are
dying, consider your selves as dead, you have something before you to provoke
you to the contemplation; and 'twere monstrous if your faner all flames should
part, if your ashes could not be made to mighle. As ever you hope to be of that
great Parliament described, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Let brotherly love be and
continue among you; let hearts and hands meet and work together in the public
service. 2. Take a word of encouragement, ye faithful, useful servants of the
most High, and of his cause and people. Imagine you heard the Lord speaking
from Heaven, as he did once. Josh. 1.13^.
Moses my servant is dead, now therefore arise, Joshua, go over this Jordan,
lead my people into their promised possession. The hardestraske was to do, when
the most eminent instrument was removed. So it may be with you; need had you
therefore to be strong and very courageous, to stir up your gifts, to quicken
your spirits, to double your diligence. It has been observed sometimes, that
the loss of one eye has increased and cleared the sight of the other. God can
pour out enlarged multiplied measures of spirit upon you, if you humble, and
pray, and believe, and use well what you have: Though he work excellent things
by choice instruments, yet he does not tie himself to them. Alexander envied
his fathers victories, looking upon them as anticipations of his own glory: You
need not do so, there is world enough left for you to conquer, work enough for
you to do and we hope, we believe the best and sweetest of the work is yet to
come, and will come ere long. Gird up therefore the loins of your minds, put
forth all the vigor of your best abilities, let the liveliness and activity
of your endeavors repair the wide and woeful breach which death has made upon
you. You that live, while ye have time and strength, work on. This worthy
Member of yours, your dear and helpefull fellow laborer, over whose ashes you
mourn, has served our his time, his task is done, he is laid down to sleep,
his dust must for a while be wrapped up in corruption, and his earthy relics
we have laid up with his fathers.
FINIS.
Published according to Order.


