A DISSERTATION WITH Dr. Heylyn: Touching The pretended SACRIFICE in the
EUCHARIST, By George Hakewill, Doctor in Divinity, and Archdeacon of Surrey.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for George Thomason, and Octavian Pullen, and are to
be sold at the Rose in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

A DISSERTATION WITH Dr HEYLYN, WHETHER THE EUCHARIST be a Sacrifice, Properly
so termed, and that according to the doctrine and practice of the Church of
England now in force.
THis the Doctor, that he may the better defend the situation of the Lords
Table Altarwise, confidently maintains in sundry places of his Antidotum
Lincolniense. Cap. 5. p. 26. cap 6. page 44. and 67.
Nay so far he goes in the maintenance hereof, as if without this nothing
else but ruin and confusion, were to be expected in the Church of God. And on
the other side I am as confident, that he is the first of the reformed Churches
who ever published this Doctrine; nay all Divines of those Churches, as well
foreign as our own (whom I have read on that Subject) with one general
consent constantly maintain the clean contrary, as I trust I shall make it
evidently appear in this ensuing Treatise, wherein I will first show the
defects, which I conceive to be in the Doctors discourse, secondly I will
endeavor to answer his arguments, and thirdly I will produce such testimonies
drawn from the writings of our Divines as make against him.

CHAP. I.
Of the defects of the Doctors discourse, of this Subject.
TWo things me thinks I find wanting in this his discourse, whereof the one is
the definition of a Sacrifice, Properly so called, the other is how it can
properly be termed a Sacrifice, and yet be only commemorative, or
representative as he calls it.

Touching the first of these, unless the thing be first defined, whereof men
dispute, all their disputation must needs prove fruitless in the end, this
then because the Doctor has omitted, I will endeavor to find out the
definition of a Sacrifice Properly so called. Saint Augustine in his 10. Book
de Civit. Dei and 6. cap. teaches that, Verum sacrificium est omne opus quod
agitur ut sancta societate inhaereamus Deo relatum scilicet ad illum finem
boni, quo veraciter beati esse possimus. Where by verum I do not believe that
he understands a truth of propriety, but of excellency, and so much I think
will easily appear by those words of his in the Chapter going before. Illud
quod ab hominibus appellatur Sacrificium, signum est very Sacrificii, where
undoubtedly by the true Sacrifice he understands either the inward Sacrifice of
the heart, or the Sacrifice of religious actions flowing from thence, which he
makes to be the true Sacrifice in regard of excellency, though improperly so
called, and the outward Sacrifice to be but a sign of this, though Properly so
called; In which regard Bellarmine in his first Book de Missa, and second
Chapter rejects this definition, or rather description, as not agreeing to a
Sacrifice Properly so called, which he proves by many reasons, and thereupon
brings another of his own which is this, Sacrificium est oblatio externa facta
soli Dea, qua ad agnitionem humanae infirmitatis and professionem divinae
majestatis a legitimo ministrores aliqua sensibilis and permanens ritu mystico
consecratur and transmutatur. The particular parts of this definition he
afterward explicates, and tells us that the last word transmutatur is therefore
added, Quia ad verum Sacrificium requiritur, ut id quod offertur Deoin
Sacrifi^ium plane destruatur, id est ita mutetur ut desinat esse id quod antea
erat. And least we should mistake him, within a while after he repeats the same
in effect again, giving us a double reason thereof, whereof the latter is quia
Sacrificium est summa protestatio Subjectionis nostrae ad Deum, summa autem
illa protestatio requirit ut non usus rei Deo offeratur sed ipsa etiam
substantia, and ideo non solum usus sed substantia consumatur. And this
condition in a Sacrifice properly so called is likewise required by our own
men, as namely by Doctor Field in his Appendix to his third Book of the Church.
Page 207.
If we will Sacrifice a thing unto God (says he) we must not only present it
unto him, but consume it also. Thus in the Leviticall law, things sacrificed
that had life were killed, things without life, if they were solid, were burnt,
if liquid, powered forth and spilt.

Now this ground being thus laid, I would willingly learn of the Doctor what
sensible thing it is in his Sacrifice, which is thus destroyed or consumed in
regard of the being or substance thereof.



Besides, the Sacrifice of Christians properly so called, being but one, and
that by many degrees more noble and excellent then any, either before Bread and
Wine were the Subject matter thereof, it would both overthrow the unity of the
Sacrifice, in as much as both these are often renewed, and in it self be of
less value and dignity then many of the Jewish Sacrifices, which I think the
Doctor will not grant. But happily he will say that those elements, though in
themselves they be of no great value, yet in regard of mystical signification,
they far excel the Sacrifices of the Jews. Whereunto I answer, that those of
the Jews besides, that they were Sacrifices indeed properly so called, in
themselves they had the same signification, and were chiefly to that end
ordained by the Author of them, the main difference being, that they looked
unto Christ to come, but we unto the same Christ already come, by means
whereof our happiness is that, that now by Gods blessing we need no Sacrifices
properly so called, but rest only and wholly upon that all-sufficient
Sacrifice which he once for all offered up for us.

It remains then that if the Bread and Wine be not the Subject matter of this
Sacrifice, the Body and Blood of Christ must be, and that not symbolically, but
properly, otherwise the Sacrifice it self cannot be proper, which assertion
will of necessity infer either the transubstantiation of the Pontisicians or
the c consubstantiation of the Ubiquitaries. Bellarmines own definition before
laid down; Neither will it suffice to say (as he does) that it is visible under
the species of Bread and Wine, for so it may be visible to the faith of those
that believe it, but to the sense (which is the thing he requires as a
necessary condition in a Sacrifice properly so called) it is not visible.
Neither can that be said properly visible, which is not so in it self, but in
another thing, for then the soul might be said to be visible, though it be
only seen in the body, and not in it self; nay, the soul might better be said
to be seen in the body, then the body of Christ in the bread, in as much as the
soul is the essential form of the body, but I trust they will not say, that
the Body of Christ is so in regard of the accidents of bread.

Lastly, how the Body and Blood of Christ may be truly, and properly said so
to be consumed, ut plane destruatur, ut desinat esse id quod ante erat, ut
substantia consumatur, (which the Cardinal likewise requires properly so
called)d for my part I must profess, I cannot possibly understand, for to say
as he does, that the Body of Christ is consumed in the Sacrifice not secundum
esse natural, but Sacramentale, cannot reach to his phrase of plane
destruitur, substantia consumitur, as any weak Scholar may easily discern, and
in truth he does in the explication of this point (touching the essence of this
Sacrifice, wherein it consists, and the manner of consuming the Body of Christ
therein) so double and stagger as a man may well see he was much perplexed
therein, Lib. 1. de Missa cap. 27.
wandering up and down in a labarynth, not knowing which way to get out, and so
e

The other defect which I find in the Doctors discourse, touching this point
is, that he does not show us how a commemorative, or representative Sacrifice
(as he every where terms it) is a Sacrifice properly so called. This
proposition that the Eucharist is a commemorative Sacrifice properly so called,
I shall easily grant if the Word properly be referred to the adjunct not to the
Subject. Commemorative it is properly called, but improperly a Sacrifice. And
herein I think do all writers agree, as well Romish as Reformed (I mean that it
is a Sacrifice Commemorative) and therefore Bellarmine disputes the point in no
less then 27. Chapters of his first Book de Missa, against the Reformed
Divines to prove that it is a Sacrifice properly so called, and yet
acknowledges that his adversaries confess it to be a Sacrifice Commemorative,
but himself and his adherents, though together with the Protestants they
acknowledge it to be a Sacrifice Commemorative, yet they rest not in that,
because they knew full well, it was not sufficient to denominate it a proper
Sacrifice. And in very truth it stands with great reason that the Commemoration
or representation of a thing should be both in nature and propriety of speech
distinct from the thing it commemorates or represents; As for the purpose, he
who represents a King upon the stagef, is commonly called properly so termed,
because they were not only prefigurative of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, but were really and absolutely so in themselves, and if this could once
be soundly demonstrated of the Eucharist, the controversy would soon be at an
end, but till then in saying we have a representative Sacrifice can no more
prove it to be a Sacrifice properly so called, then the prefiguration of the
Jewish Sacrifices without any further addition could prove them so to be, which
I presume no Divine will take upon him to maintain.

Now that which confirms me herein is that both the master of the Sentences,
and Aquinas, the two great leaders of the Schoolmen terming the Eucharist a
commemorative, withal they held it to be an improper Sacrifice, and to this
purpose they both allege the authorities of the Fathers; which makes me
believe that they conceived the Fathers, who in their writings frequently call
it a Sacrifice to be understood and interpreted in that sense; The former of
them in his 4. Book and 12. destinction makes the question, Quaeritur si quod
gerit sacerdos proprie dicatur Sacrificium vel immolatio, and si Christus
quotidie immoletur vel semel tantum immolatus sit, to which he briefly answers,
Illud quod offertur and consecratur a sacerdote vocari Sacrificium and
oblationem, quia memoria and repraesentatio very Sacrificii and sanctae
immolationis factae in ara crucis; which is as much in effect as if he had said
it is a commemoration of the true and proper Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, but in it self improperly so called, and that this is indeed his
meaning it sufficiently appears throughout that distinction.

With Lombard does Aquinas herein likewise accord, Part. 3. quaest. 73. art.
4. in conclusione Eucharistiae Sacramentum ut est dominicae passionis
commemorativum, Sacrificium nominatur. Where it is observable that he says not
Sacrificium est, but only nominatur, and what his meaning therein was, appears
of that Article which is this. Hostia videtur idem esse quod Sacrificium, sicut
ergo non proprie dicitur Sacrificium ita nec proprie dicitur hostia. Which
though it be an objection, yet he takes it as granted that it is Sacrificium
improprie dictum, at leastwise as it is commemorativum or representativum; and
therefore to that objection does he shape this answer, Ad tertium dicendum quod
hoc Sacramentum dicitur Sacrificium in quantum repraesentat ipsam passionem
Christi, etc. dicitur autem hostia in quantum continet ipsum Christum qui est
hostia salutaris.

CHAP. II.
Of the Sacrifice pretended to be due by the light of nature.
FRom the defects in the Doctors discourse, we now come to his arguments drawn
from the light of nature, from the institution of the Eucharist, from the
authority of the Fathers, from the doctrine and practice of the Church of
England, and lastly from the testimony of the Writers thereof, I will follow
him step by step, and begin first with the light of nature, with which he
begins his fifth Chapter.

It is (says he) the observation of Eusebius, that the Fathers which preceded
Moses, and were quite ignorant of his law, disposed their ways according to a
voluntary kind of piety, (...) framing their lives and actions according to
the law of nature. Which Words (says the Doctor) relate not only to their
moral conversation as good men, but to their carriage in respect of Gods
public worship as religious men. But by this gloss I doubt he corrupts the
text of the Author, sure I am, the words he alleges out of him do not reach
home to his interpretation, neither do I think it can be maintained, or that it
was the mind of Eusebius, that the Patriarchs before Moses worshipped God,
according to a voluntary kind of piety. Which is by the Apostle in express
terms condemned, Col. 2. 23. and if their worship had relation to the Messiah
that was to come (wherein all Divines I presume agree) I do not see how he can
affirm that they framed their religion according to the light of nature, which
without the help of a supernatural illumination could not direct them to the
Messiah. Ioh. 8, 56.
It is indeed said of Abraham, that he saw the day of Christ and rejoiced, no
doubt but the same might as truly be verefied of all the other believing
Patriarcks, as well before, as after him; But that either he or they saw
Christ's day by the light of nature, that shall I never believe, and I think the
Doctor cannot produce me so much as one good Author who ever affirmed it; but
on the other side with one consent they teach, that as in moral actions they
lived according to the light of nature, so in religious they were in a special
manner inspired and directed by God himself. If that of the Apostle be true.
^om 14. 23. (...). 11 6
That whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and again, that without faith it is
impossible to please God. Faith being grounded upon the Commandments, and
promises of God, it cannot be that their worship should be acceptable unto him
without special command from him.

From the worship of God in general the Doctor descends to the particular by
way of Sacrifice, affirming that it is likewise grounded upon the light of
nature; which if it be so, undoubtedly it binds all men, the law of nature
being common to all, and consequently to us Christians, as well as to the
Patriarcks before Moses. Now that some kind of Sacrifice is from all men due
unto Almighty God, I do not deny, but that outward Sacrifice, properly so
called (which is the point in controversy) should be from all men due unto him
by the light of nature; that I very much doubt. It is the conclusion of
Aqu^nas. 22. Qu. 85. a^. 3.
Omnes tenentur aliquod interius Sacrificium Deo offerre, devotam videlicet
mentem, and exterius Sacrificium eorum ad quae ex praecepto tenentur, sive sint
v^rtutum actus sive certae and d^term^natae oblationes; and farther for mine
own part I dare not go.

The Doctor instanceth in the Sacrifices of Cain and Abel, which he seems to
say were offered by the light of nature, whereas of Abel we read, that by faith
he offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice then Cain. Heb 11. 4.
Now faith there cannot be without obedience, nor true obedience without a
precept, and if perchance it be said that the excellency of the Sacrifice was
from faith, not the Sacrifice it self, for then Cain should not have offered at
all, I thereunto answer that although Cain did not offer by faith, or
inspiration from God, yet it may well be that he did it by instruction from his
Father, who was inspired from God. And besides his Sacrifices being of the
fruits of the earth might rather be called an offering (as in the Text it is)
then a Sacrifice properly so termed according to Bellarmines definition. And
for Abel it is the resolution of the same Bellarmine (which for mine own part,
Lib. 1. de M^ss. cap 2.
I take to be sound) Deus qui primus sine dubio inspiravit Abeli and aliis
sanctis viris usum Sacrificiorum voluit per ea Sacrificia, Sacrificin^ omniu^
ficiorum praestantissimum adumbrari.

The Doctors next instance is Noah's Sacrifice, touching which the same may be
said as formerly of Abels, neither indeed can we with reason imagine that God
should in other matters by divine inspiration, so particularly instruct him,
and leave him only to the light of Nature, in the worship of himself, or that
Adam in the state of incorrupt nature was instructed by God in the duties of
his service, and his posterity therein left to the light of corrupt nature.

Besides this, somethings there are by the Doctor affirmed of this Sacrifice,
not so justifiable I doubt as were to be wished; as first that it was an
Eucharisticall Sacrifice, not typical, whereas all Divines that I have seen,
make all the Sacrifices commanded by God, as well before the law, as under the
law to have been typical. That is some way significant of Christ to come, they
being all as so many visible Sermons of that all s^fficient Sacrifice, through
which God is only well pleased with those which worship him. And again, the
text making it by the Doctors own confession an Holocaust or burnt offering
which Noah offered, I see not how he can only make it Eucharisticall, in as
much as Philo the Jew (who should know what belonged to the distinction of
Sacrifices) in his Book purposely written of that Subject, thus writes of them.
Sacrificia omnia ad tria redegit legislator, Holocaustum, pacifica sive
salutare, and Sacrificium pro peccatis. Noah's Sacrifice then being a burnt
offering, it could not be merely Eucharisticall, but I rather believe it might
participate somewhat of all three kinds, and as little doubt but that it was
in all three respects significative of Christ to come.

The Doctors third instance, is in Melchisedech, who indeed is said to have
been a Priest of the most high God, and that being a Priest, he offered
Sacrifice, I make no doubt, but very much doubt whether he offered Sacrifice, or
were a Priest by the light of nature, especially considering that Christ
himself was a Priest after the order of Melchisedech.

Now whereas the Doctor confidently makes Sem to have been the eldest son of
Noah, he has therein against him, not only the learned Iunius, but Lyranus,
Tostatus, Genebrard, and the Hebrew Doctors. And again, whereas he seems to
follow the common opinion heretofore received, that Melchisedech was Sem; I
think he cannot be ignorant that both Paraeus and Pererius have proved the
contrary by so invincible arguments, as there needs no further doubt to be made
thereof.

The Doctors conclusion of this argument drawn from the light of Nature is
this, That there was never any nation, but had some religion, nor any religion
(if men civilized) but had Altars, Priests, and Sacrifices as a part thereof,
or dependents thereupon. The former part of which position I will not examine,
though our planters in Virginia and New England, can not (as they report) find
any acts of religion exercised by the natives of those Countries, but for the
latter part thereof, I know not why he should exclude the uncivilized nations,
from acts flowing from the light of nature, such as he makes the use of
Sacrificing to be, unless withal he will exclude them from the use of reason.
And surely were the use of Sacrifices grounded upon the light of nature, not
upon Divine precept; I do not see why the Jews should be tied to offer them
only at Jerusalem; nor yet why the Mahometans (who far exceed the Christians
in number, and in civility are little inferior to many of them) should use no
Sacrifice at all.

Lastly for the Grecians, Romans, and other nations, who used Sacrifices as the
principal act of their religion, it may well be that they borrowed it from the
Church of God by an apish imitation, or that they received by tradition from
their predecessors, who were sometimes of the Church of God (which are the
conjectures of the Doctor himself) either of which might serve without deriving
it from the light of nature.

CHAP. III.
Of the institution of the Eucharist, whether it imply a Sacrifice, and of the
Altar mentioned by St Paul, Hebrews 13.
THe Doctor bears us in hand, that our Savior Irenaeus, Lib. ^. ca. 32.
Novi Testamenti novam docuit oblat^onem; But that Irenaeus intended not a
Sacrifice properly so called, the learned Zanchius in his first Book de cultu
Dei externo, Cap. 16.
has made it as clear as the noonday, and to him I refer both the Doctor
and the Reader, who desires satisfaction therein.

From the testimony of Irenaeus, the Doctor comes to the words of institution
recorded by Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11. And indeed here should in all likelihood
have been the place, to lay the foundation for a new Sacrifice and Priesthood
if any such properly so called had been intended by our Savior under the
Gospel, but neither there, nor in the Evangelists do we find any mention at
all of either of these; which the Doctor perceiving well enough, goes on from
the words of institution, Verse. 23, 24, 25. and tells us that if they express
not plain enough the nature of this Sacrifice to be commemorative, we may take
those that follow by way of commentary, Verse. 26. For as often as ye cate this
bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. Which words
are doubtless directed to all the faithful in the Church of Corinth and in
them to all Christians, so as the Doctor will be forced either to prove his
Sacrificing from eating and drinking, and withal to admit all Christians to do
Sacrifice (against both which in the same leaf he solemnly protests) or to seek
out some other place to prove it.

But for the Priesthood he pretends to have found that in the words of our
Savior, Hoc faite, for the Apostles (says he) and their Successors in the
Priesthood, there is an edite and bibite as private men of no orders in the
Church, but there is an Hoc facite belonging to them only as they are Priests
under and of the Gospel. Hoc faecite is for the Priest who has power to
consecrate, Hoc edite both for the Priest and people, who are admitted to
communicate. And again, within a while after, The people being prepared may
edere and bibere, but they must not facere, that belongs only to the Priests
who claim that power from the Apostles, on them conferred by their redeemer.
Thus he, as if facere and Sacrificare were all one, which indeed some of the
Romanists endeavor to prove, but so vainly, so ridiculously, so injuriously to
the text, (as my Lord of Duresme has learnedly showed) as it appears to be a
foundation too sandy to lay such a building upon it. Of the Sacrament, lib. 6.
ca. 1.


But will the Doctor be pleased to hear Bishop Jewels opinion of these words,
whom he seems in some places to reverence. That incomparable Bishop then in
his defense of his 17^h Article thus writes thereof. Neither did Christ by
these words, Do ye this in remembrance of me, erect any new succession of
Sacrificers to offer him up really unto his Father, nor ever did any ancient
learned Father so expound it. Christ's meaning is clear by the words that
follow, for he says not only, do ye this, but he adds also in my
remembrance, which doing pertains not only to the Apostles, and their
Successors, (as Mr Harding imagines) but to the whole congregation of Corinth,
As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the
Lords death until he come. Likewise Saint Chrysostom (says he) applies the
same, not only to the Clergy, but also to the whole people of his Church at
Antioch.

And truly I think this Doctor is the first of the reformed Churches, that
ever restrained those words of our Savior to the Clergy alone, or grounded the
Priesthood upon them. Nay the Romanists themselves find this ground to be so
feeble, as by the evidence of truth it self, they are beaten from it, and even
forced to forsake it.

Iansenius Bishop of Gant in his Commentaries on the Gospels, Cap. 131. Sunt
qui Sacramentum illud esse Sacrificium ostendere conantur ex verbo Facite, quia
illud aliquando accipitur pro Sacrificare, at hoc argumentum parum est firmum.

Alanas Cardinalis lib. de Eucharistia, c. 10. p. 255. Hoc facite] pertinet ad
totam actionem Eucharisticam a Christo factam, tam a Presbyteris quam a plebe
faciendam. Hoc probat ex Cyril. lib. 12. in Ioh. ca. 58. ex Basilio. lib.
regularum moralium regul. 21. cap. 3.

Maldonatus l. 7. de Sacram. tom. 1. part. 3. de Eucharistia, Non quod
contendam illud verbum facere illo loco sign ficare idem quod Sacrificare.

Estius Comment. in 2. ad Cor. 11. v. 24. Non quod verbum facere sit idem quod
Sacrificare quomodo nonnulli interpretati sunt praeter mentem Scripturae.

And howsoever Bellarmine where it makes for his purpose, come in with his
certum est. It is certain that upon the word Facite, is grounded the Priesthood
and power of Sacrificing, yet in another place when it made not so much for his
purpose, he tells us another tale; De Sac^am. Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 25. in
sinc.
Videtur sententia Iohannis a Lovanio valde probabilis qui docet verba domini
apud Lucam ad omnia referri, id est, ad id quod fecit Christus and id quod
fecerunt Apostoli, ut sensus sit, Id quod nunc agimus, ego dum consecro and
porrigo, and vos dum accipitis and comeditis, frequentate deinceps usque ad
mundi consummationem. And within a while after, Paulum autem idem Author docet,
potissimum refer ad actionem discipulorum, id quod ex verbis sequentibus
colligitur; Quotiescunque enim manducabitis panem hunc and calicem bibetis;
mortem domini annuntiabetis. Thus far the words of Johannes a Lovanio, whose
opinion Bellarmine confesses to be very probable, that which follows in the
same place I take to be his own; Et praeterea idem planum fieri potest, ex
instituto and proposito B. Pauli, nam Apostolus eo loco emendabat errorem
Corinthiorum, Corinthii autem non errabant in consecratione sed in Sumptione,
quia non d^bita reverentia sumebant; quare accommodat ca verba ad suum usum, ac
docet Christum praecepisse ut actio caenae celebraretur in memoriam passionis,
and ideo attente and reverenter sumenda esse tanta mysteria.

By all which it appears, that neither the words of institution Hoc facite are
sufficient to ground the Priesthood, and power of Sacrificing upon them; nor
yet that they are to be restrained to the Clergy as the Doctor would have it;
Nay those words of the Apostle, which he brings as a commentary upon the words
of institution to clear the point, do indeed prove the contrary.

And if we should grant that which he demands, that Hoc facite were to be
referred only to the actions of Christ himself, and directed only to the
Apostles and their Successors, yet it must first be proved that Christ himself
in the institution of the Sacrament, did withal offer a Sacrifice properly so
called; which for any thing that appears in the text cannot be gathered from
any speech which he then uttered, or action which he did, or gesture which he
used. That he consecrated the Elements of Bread and Wine to a mystical use, as
also that he left the power of consecration only to his Apostles and their
Successors we willingly grant, but that at his last Supper he either offered
Sacrifice himself, or gave them commission so to do, that as yet rests to be
proved. Neither do I yet see what the Doctor will make to be the Subject of his
Sacrifice, either Bread and Wine, or his own Body and Blood; if the former, he
will (for any thing I know) stand single; if the latter, in a proper sense, he
will be forced to join hands with Rome, and so fall into a world of
absurdities; Lastly, whereas the Doctor disputes wholly for a commemorative
Sacrifice, that if our Savior could not be so, in as much as Commemoration
implies a calling to remembrance of a thing past, but his Sacrifice upon the
Cross, which we now commemorate, was then to come; Prefigurative it might be,
Commemorative it could not be.

The Doctor goes on, and confidently assures us that S. Paul in whom we find
both the Priest and the Sacrifice, will help us to an Altar also, and to that
purpose referres us to the last to the Hebrews, Habemus Altar: We have an
Altar, whereof they have no right to eat that serve the Tabernacle. An Altar
(says he) in relation to the Sacrifice, which is there commemorated: But his
passage of the Apostle Bellarmine himself has so little confidence in, and so
weak authority to back it, as he forbears to press it; Lib. 1. de Missi. cap.
14.
And truly I think had the Doctor himself read on, and well considered the
next verses, he would never have urged it to that purpose which here he does.

Aquinas his exposition in his commentaries upon the place, is in my judgment,
both easy, and pertinent, Istud Altar vel est crux Christi in qua Christus
immolatus est, vel ipse Christus in quo and per quem preces nostras offerimus,
and hoc est Altar aureum de quo, Apoc. 8. To him does Estius the Jesuit
strongly incline, Com. in locum.
and to him do the Divines of Collen in their Antididagma firmly adhere; De
Miss^ Sacrificio.
which notwithstanding some there are I confess, who understand the words of
the Apostle to be meant of the Lords Table, which I grant may be called an
Altar; but whether in a proper sense it be so called by the Apostle in the
passage properly so called.

CHAP. IV.
Whether the Authority of the Fathers alleged by the Doctor, prove the
Eucharist, a Sacrifice properly so called.
THe Doctor from the Scriptures (where in my poor judgment he has found very
little help for the maintenance of his cause) comes in the next place to the
authority of the Fathers, some of which are Counterfeits, and the greatest part
by him vouched (as by him they are alleged) speak only of Sacrifices,
Priests, and Altars, but in what sense it appears not, whereas the question is
not of the name, but of the nature of these. Now among those Fathers whom he
names, two there are and but two, who speak home to the nature thereof Irenaeus
and Euscbius, yet both of them speak even by the Doctors pen in such sort, as a
man may thereby discern they intended no^ a Sacrifice properly so called. I
will take them in their order.

First then for Irenaeus, Lib. 4. cap. 34.
look on him (says the Doctor, and he will tell you, that there were
Sacrifices in the Jewish Church, and Sacrifices in the Christian Church, and
that the kind or species was only altered, The kind or nature of which
Christian Sacrifice, he tells us of in the same Chapter, viz. that it is an
Eucharist, a tender of our gratitude to Almighty God for all his blessings, and
a sanctifying of the Creature to spiritual uses. Offerimus ei non quasi
indigenti, sed gratias agentes donatione e^us, and Sanctificantes Creaturam. In
this we have the several and distinct offices, which before we spoke of,
Sanctificatio Creaturae, a blessing of the Bread (for Bread it is he speaks of)
for holy uses, which is the office of the Priest, no man ever doubted it; and
then a Gratiarum actio, a giving of thanks unto the Lord for his mavelous
benefits, which is the office both of Priest and people; the sanctifying of the
Creature, and glorifying of the Creator, do both relate unto Offerimus, and
that unto the Sacrifices which are therein treated of by that holy Father.
Hitherto the Doctor in his allegation of Irenaeus; But is any man so weak as
from hence to infer a Sacrifice properly so called? The sanctifying, or
blessing, or consecrating of the Bre^d to holy uses, we all grant to be the
proper office of the Priest or Presbyter, and the giving of thanks common to
him and the people, but that either of these is a Sacrifice properly so called,
that we deny and i desire to see proved.

The other of the two before named is Eusebius upon whose testimony the Doctor
largely insists, for that we cannot take (says he) a better and more perfect
view thereof then from him, who has been more exact herein then any other of
the ancients. De demonst. Evingel. li^. 1.
And having culled out from Eusebius what he conceived most advantageous for
his own purpose in conclusion, he thus epitomizeth him. So that we see (says
he) that in this Sacrifice prescribed the Christian Church, by our Lord and
Savior, there were two proper and distinct actions, the first is to celebrate
the memorial of our Saviors Sacrifice, which he intituleth the commemoration
of his Body and Blood once offered, or the memory of that his Sacrifice, that is
(as he does clearly expound himself) that we should offer (...). This our
Commemoration for a Sacrifice; The second, that we should offer to him the
Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, which is the reasonable Sacrifice of a
Christian man, and to him most acceptable; finally he joins both together in
the conclusion of that Book, and therein does at full describe the nature of
this Sacrifice, which is this as follows. Therefore (says he) we Sacrifice
and offer, as it were with incense, the memory of that great Sacrifice,
celebrating the same according to the mysteries by him given unto us, and
giving thanks to him for our salvation, with godly Hymns and Prayers to the
Lord our God, as also offering our whole selves both soul and body, and to his
High Priest which is the Word. S^e here (says the Doctor) Eusebius does not
call it only the memory or Commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice, but makes the
very memory and Commemoration in and of it self to be a Sacrifice, which instar
omnium, for and in the place of all other Sacrifices we are to offer to our
God, and offer with the incense of our Prayers and praises.

In this discourse out of Eusebius the Doctor foreseeing that what he had
alleged, did not reach home to his purpose, endeavors to make it up by the
addition of this last clause, as if Eusebius made the memory or commemoration
of the Sacrifice of Christ to be in and of it felf a Sacrifice; and this he
would collect from these words of his (...), which he translates for, and as a
Sacrifice, whereas both Bishop Bilson, and Doctor Raynolds, and others of our
best learned Divines translate it instead of a Sacrifice. Now that which is
instead of a Sacrifice, cannot be indeed, and of it self properly so called.
And besides, how we should be said to offer up our Commemoration for a
Sacrifice, as the Doctor affirms, I cannot understand, since k Commemoration
is an action, and being so, it cannot (as I conceive) in propriety of speech be
the thing Sacrificed, which must of necessity be a substance as it stands in
opposition to accidents; so that if neither the sanctification of the Creature,
nor the Commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ, nor the offering up of our
selves, or praise, and thanksgiving can amount to a Sacrifice properly so
called, surely the Doctor has not yet found it in the Fathers, but will be
forced to make a new search for the finding of it.

CHAP. V.
Whether the Eucharist be a Sacrifice properly so called, by the Doctrine and
practice of the Church of England, and first by the Book of Ordination.
THis the Doctor undertakes to prove from the Book of Ordination, from the Book
of Articles, from the Book of Homilies, and lastly from the Common Prayer Book.

His proof from the Book of Ordination, is that he who is admitted to holy
orders, is there called a Priest, as also in the Liturgy, and Rubricks of it.
For answer whereunto, we grant that he is so called indeed, but had it been
intended that he were properly so called, no doubt but in the same Book we
should have found a power of Sacrificing conferred upon him; And in very truth
a stronger argument there cannot be, that our Church admits not of any
Sacrifice or Priesthood properly so called, for that we find not in tha^ Book
any power of sacrificing conferred upon him, who receives the order of
Priesthood, no nor so much as the name of any Sacrifice in any sense therein
once mentioned. Read t^orow the admonition, the interrogations, the prayers,
the benediction, but above all the form it self in the collation of that sacred
order, and not a word is there to be seen of Sacrificing, or Offering, or Altar,
or any such matter; The form it self of Ordination runs thus [ Receive the
holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive they are forgiven, and whose sins
thou do retain, they are retained, and be thou a faithful dispencer of the
Word of God and his holy Sacraments, In the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.] Then the Bishop shall deliver to every one
of them the Bible in his hand saying. [ Take thou authority to preach the Word
of God, and to Minister the holy Sacraments in the Congregation where thou
shall be appointed.] Here we have a power given him of forgiving and retaining
of sins, of preaching of the Word and administering the holy Sacraments, but
of any Sacrificing power, not so much as the least syllable: which had been a
very strange and unpardonable ne^lect, had the Church intended, by the form
expressed in that Book, to make them Priests, properly so called.

This indeed the Romanists quarrel at, as being a main defect in our Church;
Fr. Mason of the consecration of Bishops in the Church of England.
but the learned Champion of it, and our holy orders, has in my judgment
fully answered that crimination of theirs, and withal clearly opened the
point, in what sense we are in that Book of Ordination called Priests: If you
mean (says he) no more by Priest, then the holy Ghost does by Presbyter, that
is a Minister of the New Testament, then we profess, and are ready to prove
that we are Priests, as we are called in the Book of Common Prayer, and the
form of ordering, because we receive in our ordination authority to preach the
Word of God, and to Minister his holy Sacraments. Secondly, if by Priests you
mean Sacrificing Priests, and would expound your selves of spiritual
Sacrifices, then as this name belongs to all Christians, so it may be applied
by an excellency to the Ministers of the Gospel. Thirdly, although in this name
you have relation to bodily Sacrifices, yet even so we be called Priests by way
of allusion. For as Deacons are not of the Tribe of Levi, yet the ancient
Fathers do commonly call them Levites alluding to their office, because they
come in place of Levites, so the Ministers of the New Testament may be called
Sacrificers, because they succeed the sons of Aaron, and come in place of
Sacrificers. Fourthly, for as much as we have authority to Minister, the
Sacraments and consequently the Eucharist, which is a representation of the
Sacrifice of Christ, therefore we may be said to offer Christ in a Mystery, and
to Sacrifice him objectively, by way of Commemoration.] In all these respects
we may rightly and truly be called Priests, as also because to us it
belongs, and to us alone to consecrate the Bread and Wine to holy uses, to
offer up the prayers of the people, and to bless them, yet in all these
respects, the speech is but figurative, and consequently our Priesthood and
Sacrifices cannot be proper.

Now for the Liturgy, it is true that the Minister is there likewise sometimes
called a Priest, and as true it is that sometimes also he has the name of a
Minister there given him; but the Lords Table though it be there often named,
is never called an Altar, nor the Sacrament in which he represents, and
commemorates the death of Christ, is in that respect, so much as once called a
Sacrifice, muchlesse properly so termed, as will appear when we come to examine
the Doctors arguments for a Sacrifice drawn from that Book. In the mean time I
must profess I cannot but wonder that the Doctor should derive our Priesthood
from Melchisedech; (...). 5. p 6.
I had thought the Priesthood which we have, had been derived from the high
Priest of the New Testament, who indeed is called a Priest after the order of
Melchisedech, not because he derived it from Melchisedech (God forbid we should
so conceive) but because of the resemblances which he had to, and with
Melchisedech, as that he was not only a Priest but a King, Heb ^.
a King first of righteousness, then of peace, without Father, without Mother,
having neither beginning of days, nor end of life. Thus was our Savior a
Priest after the order of Melchisedech, as his own Apostle interprets it; Heb.
7.
so as if we will challenge to our selves a Priesthood after his order, we must
likewise be Kings as he was, without Father, without Mother, without beginning
of days, or end of life, as he was, which will prove I doubt too hard a task
for any man to make good. The Romanists indeed assume to themselves a
Priesthood after the order of Melchisedech (though from Melchisedech, I do not
find that they derive it) but that any of the reformed Churches; besides our
Doctor has done either of these, I do not yet find, nor I dare say the Doctor
himself will ever be able to find it.

I will conclude this point touching the Priesthood of our Church, with the
observable words of profound Hooker, Lib 5 cap. 78.
who was well known to be no enemy thereunto. Because (says he) the most
eminent part both of Heathenish, and Jewish service did consist in Sacrifice,
when learned men declare what the word Priest does properly signify according
to the mind of the first imposer of the name, their ordinary Scholies do well
expound it to imply Sacrifice; seeing then that Sacrifice is now no part of the
Church Ministry, how should the name of Priesthood be thereunto rightly
applied? Surely even as S. Paul applies the name of flesh, unto that very
substance of fishes, which has a proportionable correspondence to flesh;
although it be in nature another thing, whereupon when Philosophers will speak
warily they make a difference betwixt flesh in one sort of living creatures,
and that other substance in the rest, which has but a kind of Analogy to
flesh. The Apostle contrariwise having matter of greater importance whereof to
speak, names them indifferently both flesh. The Fathers of the Church with
like security of speech, call usually the Ministry of the Gospel, Priesthood
in regard of that which the Gospel has proportionable to ancient Sacrifices,
namely the Communion of the blessed Body and Blood of Christ, although it have
properly now no Sacrifice. As for the People, when they hear the name, it
draws no more their minds to any cogitation of Sacrifice, then the name of a
Senator, or of an Alderman causes them to think upon old age, or to imagine
that every one so termed, must needs be ancient because years were respected in
the first nomination of both. Wherefore to pass by the name, let them use what
dialect they will, whether we call it a Priesthood, or a Presbytership, or a
Ministry; it skilleth not, although in truth the word Presbyter does seem
more fit, and in propriety of speech more agreeable then Priest, with the drift
of the whole Gospel of Jesus Christ, for what are they that embrace the Gospel,
but Sons of God? What are Churches, but his families? Seeing then we receive
the adoption and state of Sons by their Ministry, whom God has chosen out
for that purpose, seeing also that when we are the Sons of God, our
continuance is still under their care which were our Progenitors, what better
title could there be given them, then the reverend name of Presbyters, or
fatherly guides? The holy Ghost throughout the Body of the New Testament,
making so much mention of them, does not any where call them Priests. The
Prophet Isaiah I grant does, but in such sort as the ancient Fathers by way of
Analogy. A Presbyter according to the proper meaning of the New Testament, is
he unto whom our Savior has committed the power of spiritual procreation. By
which learned discourse of this venerable man, and as the Doctor himself
somewhere calls him incomparable now a blessed Saint in Heaven, it evidently
appears that he held both a Sacrifice, and a Priesthood in the Church, but
neither of them in a proper signification, and consequently in his opinion the
Doctor has gained little to his purpose from the Book of ordination, and
surely as little I presume will he gain from that which follows, and comes now
to be examined.

CHAP. VI.
Whether the Book of Articles, the Book of Homilies, or the Common Prayer Book
afford the Doctor such proofs as he pretends.
TWo ways there are (says he) by which the Church declares her self in the
present business; first positively in the Book of Articles, and that of
Homilies, and practically in the Book of Common prayers. First, in the Book of
Articles the offering of Christ once made is that perfect redemption,
propitiation and satisfaction, for all the sins of the whole world both
original and actual, and there is no other satisfaction for sin but that
alone. This Sacrifice or oblation once for ever made, and never more to be
repeated, was by our Saviors own appointment to be commemorated and
represented to us for the better quickening of our Faith, whereof if there be
nothing said in the Book of Articles, it is because the Articles r^lated
chiefly to points in controversy, but in the Book of Homilies, etc. Thus the
Doctor.

Why, but he had told us before, that the Church declares her self positively
in the Book of Articles, touching this present business, and now when we
expected the declaration to be made good, he puts us over to the Book of
Homilies, and yet had he gone on in that very Article by him alleged, he
should there have found somewhat against Popish Sacrifices, which that Article
calls (or rather our Church by that Article) blasphemous Fables, and dangerous
deceits. Nay the very first words vouched by the Doctor out of the Article, are
in my judgment sufficient to cut the throat of any other Sacrifice of Christ,
or any Christian Sacrifice properly so called. For if the offering of Christ
once made be perfect, it cannot be again reiterated, commemorated it may be,
and must be reiterated, it cannot be; now reiteration, it is which makes it a
Sacrifice properly so called, not a bare commemoration or representation, as
has already been showed. And besides the Doctor might have found another
Article touching the Supper of the Lord, Art. 28.
where it is called a Sacrament of our redemption by Christ's death, but of any
Sacrifice not a word, though there had been the proper place to have spoken of
it, had our Church conceived that any such had been properly so termed; but on
the other side, Transubstantiation is there condemned as being repugnant to
Scriptures, overthrowing the nature of a Sacrament, giving occasion to many
superstitions; yet how a Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ properly so
termed, can be admitted without the admission of Transubstantiation together
with it, I must confess for mine own part I am yet to seek, and shall be
willing to learn from any that can farther instruct me.

But the Doctor reposing little confidence, it should seem in the Articles,
refers us to the Homilies; to them let us go, and truly, if I be not much
mistaken, he will find as little help from these, as from the Articles: That
which he alleges, is taken from the first words of the Homily Sacrament, the
words are as follows: Part. 1
The great love of our Savior Christ to mankind does not only appear in that
dear bought benefit of our redemption, and satisfaction by his death and
passion* but also, that he has kindly provided that the same most merciful
work, might be had in continual remembrance, amongst the which means is the
public celebration of the memory of his precious death at the Lords Table; our
Savior having ordained and established the remembrance of his great mercy
expressed in his passion in the institution of his heavenly Supper. Here (says
the Doctor) is a commemoration of that blessed Sacrifice which Christ once
offered, a public celebration of the memory thereof, and a continual
remembrance of it by himself ordained. Yea, but that which the Doctor from
these words (picked here and there in the Homily) should have inferred, and
concluded is a Sacrifice in it self properly so called, not a memory, a
remembrance, a commemoration of a Sacrifice. And besides, he who attentively
reads that part of the Homily, will easily find that it there speaks of the
commemoration thereof, not so much by the Priest, as by the People; neither
does it so much as once name any Sacrifice at all, save only in disavowing,
and disallowing it, as may be seen in the Page there following, Page 198.
part whereof the Doctor takes for his own purpose, as namely, That the Lords
Supper is in such sort to be done and Ministered, as our Lord and Savior did,
and commanded it to be done, as his holy Apostles used it, and the good Fathers
in the primitive Church frequented it. So that (says he) what ever has been
proved to be the purpose of institution, the practice of the holy Apostles, and
usage of the ancient Fathers, will fall within the meaning, and intention of
the Church of England. Doubtless it will, but that a Sacrifice properly so
called, has been proved to be either the purpose of the institution, or the
practice of the Apostles, or the usage of the ancient Fathers, that I utterly
deny. And surely it should seem that the Church of England denies it too, by
the words there following within a few lines; We must take heed (says the
Homily) least of the memory it be made a Sacrifice, least of a Communion it be
made a private eating, least of two parts, we have but one, least applying it
to the dead, we loose the fruit that be alive; Let us rather in these matters
follow the advice of Cyprian in like cases, that is, cleave fast to the first
beginning hold fast the Lords tradition, do that in the Lords Commemoration,
which he himself did, he himself commanded, and his Apostles confirmed. Whereby
it should seem they held the purpose of our Saviors institution, and the
practice of his Apostles to have been, not a Sacrifice properly so termed, but
only a Commemoration of his death and passion. And this to have been indeed
their meaning farther appears toward the latter end of the same part of the
Homily, where speaking of the death of Christ, and the efficacy thereof to the
worthy Receiver, they thus go on. Herein thou needst no other man's help, no
other Sacrifice, or oblation, no Sacrificing Priest, no Mass, no means
established by man's invention. By which it is evident, that they held all other
Sacrifices, beside that of Christ himself on the Cross, and all other
Sacrificing Priests, beside Christ himself to be established by man's invention,
and how the Doctor professing that he offers up a Sacrifice properly so called,
can possibly free himself from the title and office of a Sacrificing Priest, I
must profess is beyond the compass of my brain. All which considered, I think
his safer way had been not to have touched upon the Homily, specially
considering that the Lords Table is there named above or about twenty times,
but is not so much as once called an Altar. But perchance he will find some
better help from the Liturgy, which comes now to be examined.

We will next (says he) look into the agenda, the public Liturgy of this
Church* where first we find it granted, that Christ our Savior is the very
Paschall Lamb that was offered for us, and has taken away the sins of the
world, that suffering death upon the cross for our redemption, he made there
of his own oblation of himself once offered, a full, perfect and sufficient
Sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction, for the sins of the whole world; and to
the end that we should always remember the exceeding great love of our Master,
and only Savior Jesus Christ, thus dying for us, and the innumerable benefits
which by his precious bloudshedding he has obtained to us, he has instituted
and ordained holy Mysteries as pledges of his love, and continual remembrance
of his death, to our great and endless comfort instituting, and in his holy
Gospel commanding us to continue a perpetual memory of that his precious
death, till his coming again.

In which words I do not see, what it is that makes for the Doctors purpose,
but somewhat I see which makes against him; as namely, The Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross is full, perfect and sufficient in it self, which being so,
surely there needs no more Sacrifices, no more Priests, no more Altars,
properly so called; And for the memory or remembrance there mentioned (if I be
not much mistaken) he will never be able thence to infer such a Sacrifice;
and surely I think the Church never intended he should.

In the next place he instanceth in the consecration. Then follows (says he)
the consecration of the Creatures of Bread and Wine, for a remembrance of his
death and Passion, in the same words and phrases which Christ our Savior
recommended unto his Apostles, and his Apostles, unto the Fathers of the
Primitive times, which now as then is to be done only by the Priest, [Then the
Priest standing up, shall say as followeth] to whom it properly belongs, and
upon whom his ordination does confer a power of ministering the S^crament, not
given to any other order in the holy Ministry. Had the Book said, Then shall
the Priest stand up, and offer Sacrifice, it had been to the Doctors purpose;
but then shall the Priest stand up and say, makes little for him, unless he
had been enjoined to say somewhat, which had employed a Sacrifice which I do not
yet find; words indeed of consecration I find, and those proper to the
Priest, but any words of Sacrificing in that act, I find not, yet had our
Church conceived, that to have been a Sacrifice there, indeed had been the
proper place to have expressed her self. That the ordination appointed by our
Church, conferreth upon the person* so ordained, a power of ministering the
Sacrament not given to any order in the Ministry, I shall easily grant; but
that his ordination gives him, not any power of Sacrificing (which is the
point in question) has already out of the form it self established by
authority been clearly showed.

From the words of consecration, the Doctor goes on to the prayer, after the
Communion, and here indeed he finds a Sacrifice, but such a one as (all things
considered, he has very little reason to triumph therein. The memory or
Commemoration of Christ's death (says he) thus celebrated, is called a
Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, a Sacrifice representative of that one
and only expiatory Sacrifice, which Christ once offered for us, all the whole
Communicants, beseeching God to grant that by the merits and death of his Son
Jesus Christ, and through faith in his blood, they and the whole Church may
obtain remission of their sins, and all other benefits of his Passion;
Neither stay they there (says he) but forthwith offer, and present unto the
Lord themselves, their souls and bodies to be a reasonable, holy, and lively
Sacrifice unto him. And howsoever as they most humbly do acknowledge, they are
unworthy through their manifold sins, to offer to him any Sacrifice, yet they
beseech him to accept, that their bounden duty and service; In which last
words, that present service which they do to Almighty God, according to their
bounden duties, in celebrating the perpetual memory of Christ's precious death,
and the oblation of themselves, and with themselves the Sacrifice of praise,
and thanksgiving in due acknowledgement of the benefits, and comforts by him
received, is humbly offered unto God for, and as a Sacrifice, and publicly
avowed for such, as from the tenor and coherence of the words, does appear
most plainly. Hitherto the Doctor, as if now he had spoken home and full to the
point indeed; whereas if we take a review of that which has been said, we
shall soon find it to vanish into smoke.

That prayer then after the Communion, beginning in this manner. O Lord and
heavenly Father we thy humble servants, entirely desire, thy fatherly
goodness, mercifully to accept this our Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.
I would demand of the Doctor, first of what kind this Sacrifice of thanksgiving
is, and then by whom it is offered; for mine own part I never heard that the
Eucharisticall Sacrifice of Christians, was other then spiritual, improperly
termed a Sacrifice; and I presume the Doctor himself will not stick to grant as
much as he does, that the people join with the Priest in this prayer. From
whence it will infallibly follow, That either the people together with the
Priest offer unto God a S^crifice properly so called, or that the Sacrifice
thus offered by them, both ^s so called improperly; let him take which he please
of the two, and then tell me what he can make of this Sacrifice. Now that which
has been said of this Eucharisticall Sacrifice, of praise and thanksgiving, is
likewise to be understood of the obedientiall Sacrifice (if I may so call it)
which follows after, consisting in their offering to the Lord, their selves,
their souls and bodies, as a reasonable holy and lively Sacrifice unto him: And
in truth I cannot but wonder, that the Doctor should insist upon this,
considering he requires a material Altar for his Sacrifice, derives his
Priesthood from Melchisedech, appropriates it to the Apostles and their
Successors, makes it stand in commemoration or representation, and lastly,
every where with scorn enough, excludes the people from any right thereunto,
but thus we see how a weak cause is driven by all kind of means, be they never
so poor to fortify it self: And yet, as if now he had made a full, and final
conquest, he concludes this argument drawn from the authority of our Church;
Put all together (says he) which has been here delivered from the Book of
Articles, the Homilies, and public Liturgy, and tell me if you ever found a
more excellent concord then this, between Eusebius, and the Church of England,
in this present business; And then goes on to parallel the words of Eusebius
with those of our Liturgy, which I confess agree very well, but neither the
one, nor the other speak home to his purpose, or mention any Sacrifice properly
so called, to be offered in the Church of Christ, as he has been sufficiently
showed.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Testimony of some Writers of our Church alleged by the Doctor.
WIll you be pleased (says he) to look upon those worthies of the Church,
which are best able to expound, and unfold her meaning; We will begin (says
he) with Bishop Andrews, and tell you what he says, as concerning Sacrifices.

The Eucharist (says Bishop Andrews) ever was and is by us considered, Answ.
to P^rron c. 6.
both as a Sacrament, and as a Sacrifice. A Sacrifice is proper and applyable,
only to Divine worship. The Sacrifice of Christ's death, did succeed to the
Sacrifices of the Old Testament, which being prefigured in those Sacrifices
before his coming, has since his coming been celebrated per Sacramentum
memoria, by a Sacrament of memory, as Saint Augustine calls it; Thus also in
his answer to Cardinal Bellarmine. Re^p. ad Card Be^l. cap. 8.
Tollite de missa transubstantiationem vestram, nec diu nobiscum lis erit de
Sacrificio. The memory of a Sacrifice, we acknowledge willingly, and the King
grants the name of Sacrifice to have been frequent with the Fathers; for Altars
next, if we agree (says he) about the matter of the Sacrifice, Answ. to
Perron. cap. 7.
there will be no difference about the Altar. The holy Eucharist being
considered as a Sacrifice (in the representation of breaking the Bread, and
pouring forth the Cup) the same is fitly called an Altar, which again is as
fitly called a Table, the Eucharist being considered as a Sacrament, which is
nothing else but a distribution and application of the Sacrifice to the
several receivers, so that the matter of Altars make no difference in the face
of our Church. Thus far the Doctor out of Bishop Andrews.

For answer whereunto, if we take the passage at large, as it is quoted by that
truly reverend Bishop out of S. Augustine, it will suffice to show both his,
and the L De civitate Dei lib. 17. cap. 20.
Bishops judgment herein. The words then are these. Hujus Sacrificii caro and
sanguis ante adventum Christi per victimas similitudinum promittebatur, in
passione Christi per ipsam veritatem reddebatur, post adventum Christi per
Sacramentum memoriae celebratur. Now had he conceived the Eucharist to be a
Sacrifice properly so called, in all likelihood, he would have termed it
Sacrificium memoriae in relation to the Sacrifices as well before the death of
Christ, as the Sacrifice it self of his death, Sacramentum memoriae then is
that says the Bishop, which with S. Augustine we hold, and no Christian I
think will deny, nay more then so, we may safely with the Bishop grant, that it
is not only a Sacrament but a Sacrifice, but whether in a proper signification
that is the question, and this the Doctor does not clear out of the Bishop, but
rather the Bishop, the contrary out of S. Augustine.

The next passage quoted by the Doctor out of this learned Bishop, is taken
from his answer to Bellarm^ne, which he lived to publish himself, and thus
begins it, Credunt nostri institutam a domino Eucharistiam in sui
commemorationem, etiam Sacrificii sui, vel (si ita loqui liceat) in Sacrificium
commemorativum. See the modesty of this deep Divine, making doubt whether he
might give it the name of Sacrificium commemorativum or no, which doubtless he
would never have done, had he thought it had been a Sacrifice properly so
called; Neither would he so often in that Page have taken up Vocem Sacrificii,
rather then Sacrificium, Nihil ea de Voce Rex: Sacrificii Vocem scit patribus
usurpatam: nec a Voce vel Sacrificii vel oblationis abborremus; placeret loca
videre quae citat nisi Vocem propter quam citat videret Lector nobis non
displicere. Surely so weary, and so wise a man would never have repeated Vocem
so often, had he believed the thing. To the words by the Doctor stood upon,
Tollite de missa transubstantiationem nec diu nobiscum lis erit de Sacrificio;
it may be replied in the Bishops own words immediately following, which may
well serve as a commentary upon these going before: Memoriam ibi fieri
Sacrificii damus non inviti, so as his meaning seems to be lis non erit de
Sacrificio, conditionally that by Sacrificium they understand memoriam
Sacrificii, as we do, neither in truth do I see how the crutch of
Tranfubstantiation being taken away, a Sacrifice properly so called, can well
stand upon its own feet.

From the Bishops answer to the Italian Cardinal, the Doctor leads us back
again to his answer to the French Cardinal, and there has found an Altar
suitable to his Sacrifice; If we agree about the matter of the Sacrifice, says
the Bishop, there will be no difference about the Altar,] but about the former,
sure I am, we agree not as yet, nor I doubt ever shall agree (they making that
the Subject which we make only the object of this Sacrifice) and consequently
the difference is like still to remain about the Altar. That the Lords Table
may fitly be called an Altar, the Bishop indeed affirms, but that it may
properly be so called, that he affirms not, nor as far as we may conjecture
by his words ever intended it: Fitly, I grant it may be so called, and yet
figuratively too. That Christ was fitly called a Lamb, we all willingly yield,
yet withal that he was not properly but figuratively so called, no man I
presume will deny. The Altar (says the Bishop in the same Chapter) in the Old
Testament, is by Malachy called Mensa domini; and of the Table in the New it is
said Habemus Altar, M
as then the Altar is by the Pr^phet improperly called a Table in the Old, so
likewise is the Lords Table, by the Apostle improperly called an Altar in the
New Testament. Neither indeed can the Bishop (as I conceive be otherwise
understood, the Sacrifice which he allows, consisting (by his own description
thereof, in the same place) in representation by the breaking of the Bread and
pouring forth of the Cup) which may objectively, that is improperly be called a
Sacrifice in relation to the all-sufficient Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cr^sse,
but subjectively, that is properly, it cannot be so called.

As Bishop Andrews wrote at King James his motion, against Car^inall Bellarmine
(says the Doctor) so Isaac Casaubon, writ King James his mind to Cardinal
Perron, and in expressing his mind affirms, E^ist. ad Card. Perron.
Veteres Ecclesiae patres etc. That the ancient Fathers did acknowledge one
only Sacrifice in the Christian Church, which did succeed in place of all
those Sacrifices in the law of Moses, that he conceived the said Sacrifice to
be nothing else, Nisi commemorationem ejus quod semel in cruce Christus Patri
suo obtulit; That oftentimes the Church of England has professed, she will not
strive about the Word, which she expressly uses in her public Liturgy.] Yea
but if Casaubon, or the King by Casaubons pen expressed himself, that he
conceived the Christian Sacrifice, now in use to be nothing else but the
commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice offered to his Father upon the Cross, surely
they could not withal conceive it to be a Sacrifice properly so called, and in
saying that the Church of England will not strive about the Word, what is it
but as if they had said, she will strive about the thing, as it is most aparent
that she does, as well in her doctrine as practice. Nay one thing more, That
learned Writer has, or rather that learned King, by the hand of that Writer,
which the Doctor has omitted, though he take the words both before and after,
perchance because they made little to his purpose. Quare beatus Chrysostomus,
quo frequentius nemo hujus Sacrificii meminit, in nonum caput epistolae ad
Hebraeos, postquam (...) nominasset, continuo subjungit, sive explicationis,
sive correctionis leco (...) which words, whether they be taken by way of
explication or corrections evidently show, that S. Chrysostom held not the
Eucharist to be a Sacrifice properly so called, and that herein both the King,
and Casaubon adhered to S. Chrysostom the best interpreter of Scripture among
the Greek Fathers.

The next testimony is taken from Archbishop Cranmer, Defense of his fisth Book
against Gardener.
who (says the Doctor) distinguishes most clearly, between the Sacrifice
propitiatory made by Christ himself only, and the Sacrifice commemorative, and
gratulatory, made by the Priest and people.] This I easily believe, though the
Book it self, I have not now by me, but that the Archbishop any where affirms
either the commemorative or the gratulatory Sacrifice to be properly so called,
that I very much doubt, and surely if it be made both by the Priest and people,
as the Doctor voucheth him, at leastwise for the latter there can be no
question of his opinion therein.

Let us go on then to my Lord of Duresme, Who (says the Doctor) does call the
Eucharist a representative and commemorative Sacrifice, in as plain Language,
^s the Doctor himself, although he does deny it to be a proper Sacrifice.] Deny
it? why he does not only deny it, but strongly proves it against Bellarmine
and other Romish Writers, in two entire Chapters taking up no less then seven
leaves in Folio, so strongly, as I verily believe, I shall never see a full,
and sufficient answer thereunto.

The last testimony produced by the Doctor, is from my Lord of Chichesters
appeal, whom the Doctor thus makes to speak unto his i^formers; Cap. 29.
I have so good opinion of your understanding, though weak, that you will
conceive the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, or the Communion Table (which you
please) to be a Sacrifice.] And the Doctor having a while infisted upon these
words, in answer to his adversary, goes on out of the Bishops Book. Walk you at
random, and at rovers in your bypaths if you please, I have used the name of
Altar for the Communion Table, according to the manner of antiquity, and am
like enough sometimes to use it still; nor will I abstain notwithstanding your
oggannition to follow the steps and practice of antiquity, in using the words
Sacrifice and Priesthood also. Finally (says the Doctor) he brings in Bishop
Morton, professing thus, That he believes no such Sacrifice of the Altar as
the Church of Rome does, and that he fancieth no such Altars as they employ,
though he professed a Sacrifice and an Altar.) Now for an swer to this
testimony, he that will be pleased but to peruse that chapter, will I presume,
desire no farther satisfaction, the Bishop having therein so clearly and fully
unfolded himself, as if the Doctor will stand to his judgment in the point, he
will undoubtedly be cast.

To the first allegation then, where the Doctor makes a stop, the Bishop thus
goes on. Not propitiatory, as they call it (I will use this word. call it, lest
you challenge me upon Popery for using propitiatory) for the living and the
dead, not an external, visible, true, and proper Sacrifice, but only
representative, commemorative, spiritual Sacrifice; where the Bishop as we see
in downright and direct terms denies the Euch^ist to be a Sacrifice properly
so called, and for this immediately he voucheth the testimony of Doctor
Rainolds, and Bishop Morton, Doctor Rainolds (says he) and Bishop Morton have
granted, that though we have no proper Altar, yet Altar and Sacrifice have a
mutual relation and dependence one upon another. And herein does the Bishop
profess himself fully to accord with them.

To the second allegation; The Bishop between the words vouched by the Doctor,
brings in these; Saint Paul calls the Pagan Altars (which were indeed and
truly Altars) Tables, and why may not we name the Lords Table an Altar?
whereby it appears, that he held the Lords Table an Altar in none other sense
than as the Pagan Altars were Tables, that is both improperly.

To the third allegation touching Bishop Morton, he thus brings him in not
far from the beginning of that chapter: But I rather choose (says he) to
speak in our Bishop Mortons words, apologizing for Protestants against Papists;
It may be I have taken license in use of terms, but no error in Doctrine can
you find, for to put off your imputation, from farther fastening, I believe no
such sacrifice of the Altar, as the Church of Rome does, I fancy no such Altars
as they employ, though I profess a Sacrifice and an Altar.] In the same
Reverend Bishops words, the Lords Table being called improperly an Altar, can
no more conclude a Sacrifice understood properly, than when as Saint Paul
calling Titus his son according to the faith, which is improperly, a man may
contend Saint Paul was his natural father, according to the flesh.] In which
words we have both the Bishops, and those excellently learned in terminis
terminantibus, directly opposite to the Doctors opinion, though by him
alleged in maintenance thereof.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing the Testimonies of other Reverend Prelates, and great Divines of
our Church, who have likewise opposed the proper Sacrifice maintained by the
Doctor.
With foreign Divines of the Reformed Churches I will not meddle, there
being not so much as one of them, I think, of what party soever, who in this
point sides with the Doctor, I will content my self with the suffrages of our
own Divines, for learning and dignity the most eminent in our Church, and
consequently the fittest interpreters of her meaning.

-- Doctor White Lord Bishop of Ely, in his reply to Fisher, page 465.
The New Testament acknowledges no proper sacrificing Priests but Christ Jesus
only, Heb. 7. 23. 27, 28. and cap. 10. 21. Neither is there any word or
sentence in our Saviors doctrine concerning any real Sacrifice, but only of
himself upon the Cross, neither was any Altar used and ordained by Christ and
his Apostles; And if in all real Sacrifices the matter of the Oblation must be
really destroyed and changed, and no physical destruction or change is made in
the Body of Christ, or in the elements of bread and wine by Transubstantiation,
then Romanists have devised a real Sacrifice in the new Testament, which has
no Divine Institution.

Doctor Davenant, Lord Bishop of Sarisbury, Professor of Divinity in the
University of Cambridge, in his determinations, qu. 13. Missa Pontificia non
est Sacrificium propitiatorium pro vivis and mortuis.
Pontificii in hoc suo missatico negotio tres gravissimes errores nobis
obtrudunt. Esse nimirum in missa reale, externum and proprie dictum
Sacrificium. Esse inihi Sacerdotem qui actionem Sacrificandi proprie dictam
exercet; Esse denique potestatem huic Sacerdoti pro voluntate and intention
sua applicandi tam vivis quam mortuis praedicti Sacrificii efficaciam salutarem.

Nos e contra asserimus, primo in missa nihil posse nominari proprie dicti
Sacrificii, quamvis quae adhiberi in eadem solent preces, eleemosynae,
gratiarum actiones, spiritualium Sacrificiorum nomen sortiantur; quamvis etiam
ipsa representatio fracti corporis Christi and fusi sanguinis figurate
Sacrificium a veteribus saepenumero vocetur.

Secundo Contendunt Pontificii Presbyteros suos esse secundarios

Sed nobis Jesus Christus est solus and aeternus, neque successorum, neque
vicariorum indigus novi Testamenti Sacerdos. Quaero enim cui bono alii
Sacerdotes substituerentur ipsi Christo, non ut Sacrificium ejus adumbrent,
tanquam futurum est enim olim Deo exhibitum, non hodie exhibendum, non ut
significent tanquam factum, nam repraesentare illud ut factum est Sacramentum
celebrare non Sacrificiu^ offerre. Non denique ut agant quod actum fuit ab ipso
Christo seipsum offerente, nam hoc and mutile esset si fieret, and plane
impossible est ut fiat. Hactenus igitur in missa Pontificia, neque Sacrificium
proprie dictum, neque Sacerdotem, neque actionem ipsam Sacrificandi, vel ipsi
missarum opifices ostendere potuerunt.

Doctor Hall Lord Bishop of Exeter in his Book, entitled No peace with Rome.
Sect. 9.
What opposition is there betwixt the order of Melchisedech and Aaron, betwixt
Christ and the Priests of the old Law, if this office do equally pass and
descend in a long pedigree of mortal successors? or why were the legal
Sacrifices of the Jewish Synagogue so often repeated, but because they were not
perfect? And how can or why should that which is most absolutely perfect, be
reiterated?

What can either be spoken or conceived more plainly then those words of God.
Once offered, One Sacrifice, One oblation, And yet these popish shavelings
(devout men) take upon them to Crucify and Sacrifice Christ again.

We will remember the holy Sacrifice of Christ (as Cassander well advises) and
celebrate it with a thankful heart, we will not repeat it; We will gladly
receive our Savior offered by himself to his father, and offered to us by his
father, we will not offer him to his father; which one point, whilst we stick
at (as we needs must) we are straight stricken with the thunderbolt of the
Anathema of Trent; Here can be therefore no possibility of peace.

Doctor Abbot late Lord Bishop of Sarisbury, and public Professor of Divinity,
in the University of Oxford in his Counterproof, against Doctor Bishops reproof
of the defense of the Reformed Catholic. Cap. 14. page 364.
It is truly said by Cyprian, that the Passion of Christ is the Sacrifice
which we offer, and because the Passion of Christ is not now really acted,
therefore the Sacrifice which we offer, is no true and real Sacrifice. Now
therefore the oblation of the Altar, of which S. Augustine speaks has no
reference to the Mass, which they hold to be a proper and real Sacrifice.

But now strange it should seem, Page 365.
that the Apostle in those words should be thought to have any intention of the
Sacrifice of the Mass, who in the Epistle to the Hebrews (if it were he)
whilst he destroys the Jewish Priesthood, for the advancing of the
Priesthood of Christ, argues impregnably to the disavowing of all real
Sacrifice thenceforth in the Church of Christ. Whilst he affirms but one
Priest in the New Testament, instead of many in the old, he absolutely takes
away all the rank and succession of popish Priests.

Doctor Bilson late Lord Bishop of Winchester in his Book of the true
difference between Christian subjection, and unchristian rebellion, the 4 Part.
P. 691.
If the death of Christ be the Sacrifice which the Church offreth, it is
evident that Christ is not only Sacrificed at this Table, but also crucified,
and crufied in the self same sort and sense that he is Sacrificed, but no man
is so mad to defend, that Christ is really put to death in these Mysteries,
Ergo neither is he really Sacrificed under the forms of Bread and Wine.

His reasons why we do not use the word S^crifice so often as the Fathers did,
Page 702.
There are reasons why we do not think our selves bound, to take up the
freq^ent use of their terms in that point, as we see you do, for first they be
such words as Christ and his Apostles did forbear, and therefore our faith may
stand without them. Next they be dark, and obscure speeches, wholly depending
on the nature and signification of Sacraments. Thirdly, we find by experience
before our eyes how their phrases have entangled your senses, whiles you
greedily pursued the words, and omitted the rules which should have mollified
and directed the letter: These causes make us the waryer, and the willinger to
keep us to the words of the holy Ghost, though the Fathers applications, if you
there withal take their expositions, do but in other terms teach that which we
receive and confess to be true.

Bishop Jewel the Jewel of Bishops, in defense of his 17. Article, which Book
is by public authority to be kept in every Church.
Even so S. Ambrose says Christ is offered here on earth, Page 424.
(not really and indeed, as Master Harding says) but in like sort and sense,
as S. John says, the Lamb was slain from the beginning of the world that is,
not substantially, or in real manner, but in signification in a Mystery, and
in a figure.

As Christ is neither daily borne of the Virgin Mary, Page 427.
nor daily crucified, nor daily slain, nor daily rises from the dead, nor
daily suffers, nor daily dies, but only in a certain manner of speech, not
verily and indeed, even so Christ is daily Sacrificed only in a certain manner
of speech, and in a Mystery, but really, verily, and indeed, he is not
Sacrificed.

Archiepiscopus Spalatensis, while he was ours, that is while he was himself,
de rep. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 6.
Nobis satis est apud Chrysostomum, Page 204.
Eucharistiam in se continere Sacrificium quoddam commemorativum, ac
consequenter in ea non fieri verum Sacrificium.

Confirmat haec omnia Bellarminus ex eo quod in Ecclesia Page 280.
antiquus sit usus and nomen altarium altar vero and Sacrificium sunt
correlativa.] Respondeo quale Sacrificium tale Altar, Sacrificium improprie,
Altar improprie.

Esse verum Sacrificium nunquam usque ad postrema cor rupta saecula invenio aut
dictum, Page 281.
aut cogitatum, aut traditum aut practicatum in Ecclesia.

Doctor Rainolds, professor of Divinity, extraordinary in the University of
Oxford, in his Conference with Heart. c. 8. divis. 4.
Since the Sacrifice offered in the Mass, is a true and proper Sacrifice (as
you define it) and that of the Fathers is not a true Sacrifice, but called so
improperly, it remains to be concluded that the Fathers, neither said Mass,
nor were Mass Priests.

Laurence Humphrey, Doctor of the Chair in Oxford in his answer to Campian de
conciliis, P. 424.
Quale est Sacrificium, talis est sacerdos, qualis sacerdos tale esse debet
Altaere, sive de Christo proprie loquamur, sive de nobis Christianis improprie.

De Sacrarum literarum sententia, Page 155.
Sacramentum proprie ab omnibus, metaphorice a nonnullis Patribus Sacrificium
nuncupatur.

Doctor Field Dean of Gloucester in his Appendix to his third Book of the
Church. Page 207.
Christ was Sacrificed on the Cross, when he was Crucified and cruelly put to
death of the Jews; but how he should now be really Sacrificed, Sacrificing
implying in it a destruction of the thing Sacrificed, it is very hard to
conceive.

Doctor Crakanthorp in his answer to Spalat^nsis. Cap. 74.
Sed nec omnino v^^um and proprie dictum Sacrificium in Missa ullum est.

Doctor Whitaker public professor of Divinity in Cambridge, in his answer to
Mr Rainolds, cap. 4. p. 76.
You cannot pull in sunder these two offices, but it you will needs be Priests,
and that properly according to the order of Melchisedech, then seeing that
order of Priesthood has a Kingdom inseperably annexed to it, it must
necessarily follow that you are also Kings, and that properly, which were a
very proper thing indeed, and greatly to be accounted of.

Doctor Fulke, in his answer to the Rhemists, on Heb. 7. verse 12.
Neither does any ancient Father speak of a Sacrifice in the form of bread and
wine, although many do call the Sacrament which is celebrated in bread and
wine, a Sacrifice unproperly, because it is a remembrance of the one only
Sacrifice of Christ's death, and because the spiritual Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving is offered therein, not by the Minister only, but by the whole
Church that is partaker thereof.

Again the same Author in Hebr. 13. verse. 10.
The Apostle means Christ to be this Altar, who is our Priest, Sacrifice, and
Altar, and not the Table whereon the Lords Supper is ministered, which is called
an Altar, but improperly, as the Sacrament is called a Sacrifice.

Doctor Willet, in his Synopsis, Controv. 13. Quaest. 2.
If there remain still in the Church a read, external Sacrifice, then there
must be also a real and external Priesthood, and so a multitude of
sacrificing Priests, but this i^ contrary to the Scripture, that makes this
difference between the Law and the Gospel, that then there were many Priests,
because they were not suffered to endure by reason of death, but now Christ
has an everlasting Priesthood, Heb. 7. 23, 24. 50. so that he is the only
Priest of the Gospel, ergo, there being no more sacrificing Priests, there is
no such Sacrifice, for it were a derogation to the everlasting Priesthood of
Christ, to ordain other Priests beside.

Master Perkins, in his Reformed Catholic. 11. point of the Sacrifice of the
Lords Supper.
Heb. 7. 24, 25. The holy Ghost makes a difference betwixt Christ the High
Priest of the new Testament, Reas. 4.
and all Leviticall Priests in this, That they were many, one succeeding
another, but he is the only one, having an eternal Priesthood, which cannot
pass from him to another. Now if this difference be good, then Christ alone in
his own very person, must be the Priest of the new Testament, and no other with
or under him, otherwise in the new Testament, there should be more Priests in
number than in the old.

Alexander Nowell, Dean of Paul's, in his Catechism, ordained for public use,
and so allowed in our Church.
M. An fuit instituta a Christo coena ut Deo Patri hostia pro peccatis
expiandis immolaretur?

A. Minime, nam Christus mortem in cruce occumbens unicum illud sempiternum
Sacrificium semel in perpetuum pro nostra salute obtulit, nobis vero unum hoc
tantum reliquum esse voluit, ut maximum utilitatis fructum, quem sempiternum
illud Sacrificium nobis praebet, grati ac memores percipiamus, quod quidem in
caenae dominica praecipue praestared bemus.

Thus have we seen that neither by the light of nature, nor by the definition
of a Sacrifice, nor by the Institution of our Savior, nor by the practice of
his Apostles, nor by the suffrage of the Primitive Fathers, nor by the
authority of our Church, nor by the testimony of the most eminent Writers
therein, it yet appears, either that our Ministers are properly called Priests,
or our Sacrament of the Eucharist properly a Sacrifice, or our Communion Table
properly an Altar, but rather the contrary that they are all improperly so
called. Which being so, whether the proper situation thereof should in
congruity be either Table-wise for the administering of a Sacrament, or
Altar-wise for the offering of a Sacrifice, I leave that to the prudent
Governors of our Church, and better judgments than mine own to consider and
determine of.

FINIS.

