IPP-ANTHPOPOS: OR, AN Ironicall Expostulation WITH DEATH and FATE, For the
Loss of The late Lord Mayor of LONDON; Who on Friday October 27. 1648. expired
together with his Office; and both He and his Bay-Horse di'd of the Sullens.

Whereunto is annexed an Epitaph both on Mayor and Horse.

Also a Dialogicall brief Discourse held October. 29 between Col. Rainsborough
and Charon, at their Meeting.

Composed by Philanar and Misostratus, two London-Apprentices once in-Counter'd
last year for their Loyalty.

Si Cato reddatur, Caesarianus erit. Martial. Printed, Anno exulantis
Monarchiae 8. Anno Domini 1648.

IPP-ANTHPOPOS: OR, An Ironicall Expostulation with Death and Fate, for the
loss of the late Lord Mayor of London.
FOrtune, thou art a Whore; and Death, thou art
('It Is to be feared) a Cavaleer in Heart:
You, that so formal stand with Scythe and Glass,
Think not in private with our Lord to pass,
Was there but one choice piece? one dainty bit,
And your lean ugly Jaws must fall on it?
Were there not Dray-men, Butchers, plump and fat,
But you must pick a Weasle out, a Rat?
Was it you took a liking to the Elfe,
For his Complexion, 'twas so like your self?
Or for your Ease, left a more weighty pack
Should in the transportation break your back?
Was it you found him grating of a scuil
Which you might call your own, you did him cull?
Or that his sovereign He was a Druggist in Bucklers Berry.
Drugs restored a Brother,
That through an Hurdle sucked (you will say) his Mother?
Was it you came before his Plots were ripe,
And he refused to ask you, smoke a Pipe?
If none of these, why then so hasty, Death?
What, not afford a Lord Mayor two days breath?
When the Potato-Pies, and Capons were
Bought, and in readiness to end the year?
If 'twas his lot to die, well; else 'twas base,
To cull a Magistrate for's Chain, or Mace.
This was plain Tyranny, we cannot blame
Him for an Independent, when you came.
Restore him to us; sure 'twas a mistake,
King Noll and's Kindred else will make you quake.
Was it for this he did so long oppose
Monarchy, and Princes, to be led by the Nose,
And shown in Pluto's Court, with O yes! here
Comes my Lord Mayre and's Horse; provide um cheer?
Was it for this he became Pimp, to the State,
And to admit their Army opened the Gate?
While in Triumphant manner they bestrid
London, like George on Horseback, as they rid?
Was it for preservation of the flock,
So many of the wicked he condemned to the Block?
And with his sword of Power cut in two
What neither Law nor Justice e're could do?
O Death! thou art ungrateful; he has sent
More to thee in one year then the Plague or Lent.
By Proclamations, by Collections too
Against the Common Enemy what e're would do.
I say again, restore, or we will appeal
And have you put down Traitor under seal.
Say Mr. Speaker, is it not Treason scanned,
For Death to arrest a Member under hand
And without the Houses leave? -- I know it is so,
You Will find it -- Caroli Vicesimo.
Is It not against an Order lately made,
All Members to be free, their debts unpaid?
Did they not pitch upon a day, to wit,
Doomsday in the Afternoon to think on it?
But all this will not do: he is gone to tell
Hampden and Brooks, and Pym the News in Hell.
How there is Peace (God bless us) coming on
(That Antichristian brat of Babylon)
When it is against his Conscience to submit
Or have a finger in restoring it.
Would not the world cry shame, Mr. Warner.
should he accord
Who in his Name has War, and's Arms the sword?
He Is gone to tell them of a certain thing
Coming to London, whom men call the King:
Whose Scepter will out-sway, and bring in thrall
Th'establish'd Government Anarchicall.
And with his Radiant luster quite dispell
What for these seven years has been hatched in Hell.
Yet let none say he is broke or run away,
But (as the wiser called) he did convey
Himself into a Church, in policy,
Where he was sure none would suspect him lie.
No clamorous Bell pronounce his fall, no Gun,
He was no Warriar, nor no Whittington.
(Only the joviall Butchers (in the Stocks)
Gave him a dismal peale with cleaver-knocks.)
Let him sans Common Prayer in silence pass,
Be buried with the burial of an Ass.
So farewell horse and man, dead and forgot,
Both infamous let both together rot.
Rejoice Apprentices, your day is come
No more to stand in fear of Martyrdom:
No more shall ye to Bridewell go, and pay
For your extravagance the last Lords day.
Now ye may circumambulate, and see
Morefields and Islington without a fee.
No more henceforth shall the Surry Cavaliers
Go home and shake their heads without their ears.
All troubled waters now shall to their springs
Return, and one reign, not five hundred Kings.
Yet all this while we err, and accuse Fate,
When he his own end did accelerate;
For having drunk a scruple overnight
Of jealousies and fears, he took his flight.
Thus Hanniball, and those heroic blades,
Minding an easy way to get to the Shades,
Made use of the Druggists Art, and to provide
Against future vengeance, drunk their dosse, and di'd.
An Epitaph on the Mayor, etc.
Under this Tombstone lies a thing,
Enemy both to Church and King.
No Protestant, and yet no Papist,
A Puritan, and yet an Atheist.
For Magistracy a grand stickler,
Yet a most zealous Conventickler:
One that for Christ would live and die,
(Yet kept no Christ-tide verily.)
One that the Prophets slew, and took
The Apostles badge from out the Book.
One that the Rubric took away,
And gave the Apprentices Tuesday.
One that did every thing amiss,
Then riddle me, riddle me, who was this?
An Epitaph on my Lord Mayors Horse.
HEre in this Oyle-Tub (Reader stand aloof)
Lies great Bucephalus, beware his hoof;
Who out of a good nature needs would die,
Merely to keep his Master company.
Bay was his name, some called him, Rosemary,
For his victorious feats, and Chivalry:
But if he had no name, the Bulks and Shambles
Would speak him famous for his Christmasse Gambolls:
When from an Amble to a Trot anon
Bravely he trod down Superstition.
For which rare service it is decreed he lie
Pickled and Powdered for Posterity.
And live by this Inscription (somewhat course)
Down went the Popish Rites, Grammercy Horse.
A Dialogicall brief Discourse between Rainsborough and Charon, at their
meeting, October. 29. 1648.
Charon. WElcome to the shades; hail Brother Rainsborough:
I am a Boat-man, so were you.
Most opportunely! See the triumphant Mayor;
(No less a man) is our first fare.
Had you not come, his Honor had (by Styx)
Fairl' in a Sculler gone to Old Nick's.

Rainsb. Now he may ride in Oars -- forbear; alas,
He that you speak of may not pass.
What will Judge Rhadamanth and Minos say,
If we the Arrrested by a Knight whose son was slain in the late bickering in
London.
arrested Corpse convey?
I that on Earth was above Law, yet know
How to conform my self below.

Charon. Hum! I have lost my Naula; let it go;
Now to your business Rainsborough.

Rainsb. Know then, that I from The English Coast am sent
By the States, to know your Government.
And e're the Vote pass, hence must have command,
That the new Anarchy may stand:
Speak Charon, speak; if Pluto think it good,
I have already sealed it with my blood.

Charon. Dull Man, or Ghost; or whatsoever thou art,
Thou think to alienate my heart:
Know not we have a Prince; and though the Devil,
One that abjures all you that Level?
You that incroach, my Office to enjoy;
Were you not once a Skippers Boy?
By all the infernal gods, lay by thy Spade,
Or be suspected guilty Hell t'invade.

Rainsb. No more; I yield: the Government stand,
I was but sent here underhand)
Yet if our Agents with you here might try,
They would put hard for Anarchy.

Charon. Anarchy? Hell and Furies! such a word
Once more, and thou go overboard.
Beelzebub, if he knew thee at this height,
Would have thee carbonado'd straight.
Leave us -- and yet I Will write thy Epitaph,
Merely to make the Devil laugh.
For, by the Rabbis leave, without control,
'Twas not a So Walker upon Tho. Rainsborough, he that from an Ironmonger
became a Newesmonger, and now makes Hebrew Pot-hooks and Andirons cum
privilegio.
Fire removed his pure Soul.

Epitaph.
WEitring in blood see here an Horse-leech sprawll,
Glutted and overcharged, yet loath to fall;
Bred up 'ith Ocean; lately crept to the shore,
(Though he had all, yet covetous of more)
Which when the wise Physician saw, his thirst
That 'twas unsatiable, let him burst:
So having empti'd and disgorg'd his Maw,
Hence through the Rubick sea he swam away.
Fear not Coichestrian Dames, left Lucas 'rise;
Vengeance is fully paid; Here Rainsb'rough lies.
FINIS.

