JAMAICA VIEWED: WITH All the Ports, Harbors, and their several Soundings,
Towns, and Settlements thereunto belonging TOGETHER, With the nature of it is
Climate, fruitfulness of the Soil, and it is suitableness to English
Complexions.

With several other collateral Observations and Reflections upon the ISLAND.

The second Edition.

By E. H.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1661.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please your Majesty,
ALl your Dominions, being the happy Subjects of your care, are therefore, the
proper objects of your view: If in the throng then, Jamaica here humbly
presents her self to your Royal presence, be pleased to Interpret this her
obsequiousness to be duty, not intrusion. For since your Majesty has already
graciously daign'd this Isle your Royal Patronage, vouchsafe, Great Sir, at
some vacant hour to grace It with your auspicious Aspect, in this Mirror,
with all humility presented by

Your Majesty's faithfully devoted Servant, Edm. Hickeringill.

TO THE READER.
THE Partial Censures and nicknames which prejudice and interest have
injuriously imposed upon the Island of Jamaica, (after it became the Refuge of
that English Colony that of late unhappily invaded Hispaniola) moved me, in the
negligence of better Pens, to Apologize for it, in this ensuing Description;
For indeed to describe Jamaica, is to praise it; nor can it look better then
with it is own face, exempt from the adulterate Fucus of artificial Piliary: And
believe me, Reader, 'twas no private nor politic design, (hereby to allure
and duccoy the unwary world) but mere zeal to truth, that engaged me by my
opportune continuance there, to do this right to that injured Island.

Quid them? Quid non them? renuis tu quod jubet alter. Hor.
To my honored Friend. Capt. Edm. Hickeringill; Upon his Reflections on
Iamaica: At his Return.
THis Welcome-home, how blunt so e're it be,
Thou vvilt accept, Dear Mun, coming from me:
And deign it to attend thy smoother Line,
Mine Is honored with an Handmaid's place to thine:
And though thou knovv'st, thou had my Heart before,
Methinks I love thee for this Book the more,
Which I would Preface with Applauses fit,
(Praising therein my Judgment, and thy wit)
But that thou do detest bespoken Bays.
Yet Truth compells me to prefix this Praise,
That as Thy pregnant Lines now life does give
Unto Jamaica; here long shall it live:
And this epitomized Vrn shall retain
The Indies Memory when they are dead again.
Observe. amicitiae ergo composuit G. E. Med. D.

map of Jamaica JAMAICA


JAMAICA VIEWED.
THat the Island of Iamaica was rather the Grave then Granary to the first
English Colony (seated there, after their inauspicious Enterprise, upon
Hispaniola) cannot modestly be denied;

Whether occasioned by the griping Monopoly of some hoarding Officers; or
through want of timely Recruits, always found necessary for such
Infant-settlements: or, through some fatal Conjunction of the superior
Luminaties, (that frown by course with a squint and malignant Aspects on one
Nation or other,) I will not now dispute.

But that such a Mortality should proceed, either from the Clime, being
situate in the Torrid Zone, (a Heresy unpardonable in the ancients;) or from
any accidental Malignitie in any of the Elements, peculiarly entailed upon it,
whereby it should be less habitable then any other most auspicious settlement
remains here to be controverted.

The Decision whereof can be no better evidenced, then by a faithful

Description, Of the nature of the Clime, and Soil.
1. FIrst therefore, it is Climate is placed betwixt the Tropicks, in 17 and 18.
degrees of Northern Latitude; and therefore twice every year subjected to the
Perpendicular Beams of the Sun, whence it borrowed the style of Torrid Zone; a
name which did so bugbear and affright the credulity of our Ancestors, that
they unjustly exiled and razed it out from the habitable part of the world,
(then monopoliz'd in the temperate Zones) till the more daring spirits of
Columbus, and others, convoyed us to an experimental confidence in the
contrary; the Chariby Islands, Barbados, St. Kits, Mevis, Antego, etc. having
proved as happy to the complexions and constitutions of English men; as
Virginia, New England; nay as Portugal, Spain, Italy, or any other confines
upon the Mediterranean Sea, all which notwithstanding, are situate in the
Temperate Zone; a term of Art that now Ironically scandalizes that vulgar
division of the World into Zones habitable, (the Temperate Zones;) and
inhabitable, the ( Frigid, and Torrid Zone.) For I must avouch that I have
found the Air as sulphurous and hot in England, in the months of June, July,
and August, especially whilst the Sun was near the Meridian, as in the hottest
seasons at Iamaica, whilst the Sun makes a double in Cancer) or in Guiana, in
the months of March, and September; whilst the Sun gallops over their Zenith
in the Aequinox.

And this will appear to be no such prodigious a Paradox, if we be undeceived
of that vulgar error, that the neighborhood of the Sun is the only cause of
extreme heat, and it is elongation the reason of extremity of cold: for if so,
our Summers would be equally hot one year, as another, and each day (after the
Sun's departure from the winter Solstice) hotter then another, 'till he had
posted over his halfdirect stages to face about in retrograde Cancer) both
which experience does disprove; for though his appropriation and elongation be
the same every year, yet our Summers and Winters are not equally hot and cold,
and therefore we must seek out for more intrinsecal and occult causes; which
now (are not the Asylum of ignorance) since we can certainly ascribe them to
the Sun's Conjunction (improperly termed an Aspect) and his Aspects with other
Planets, together with his configurations, with the Fixed stars: for the
weather is usually the hottest with us in England, after the Sun has taken his
leave of us from his nearest visit, and most fervent Complement, in the foot of
Gemini, with his old fashioned Congee in the Right knee and shoulder of Orion,
and Auriga: and our hottest seasons are the Dog days; yet does not the Sun
accompany the lesser heavenly Dog, till he come to his feminine nocturnal and
unfortunate Lodging, which is in the eighteenth Degree of Cancer; of which more
at large you may consult Astronomy; my business here being only to present you
with an Historical Truth.

And as the coldness of our Nightair in England tempers our hottest and most
canine seasons; so the fresh Breezes that rise always with the Sun, do fan
the sweltering and sultry Climes within the Tropicks: so that the days are
usually as cold as the nights, except toward the morning, and then a culinary
fire is had in request, though the Inhabitants are thought to be dandled in
Apollo's Lap, or (as the Poets feign) to have been scorched, when rash Phaeton
mistook his way, in his unskilled and unhappy Journey, -- magnae pereunt cum
moenibus urbes:
Cumque suis totas populis incendiae Gentes
In cinerem vertunt, sylvae cum montibus ardent,
Ardet Aethos --
Quodque suo Tagus omne vehit fluit igntbus aurum.
Ovid. Met. l. 2. This scorched soil Phaethon to Cinders burned,
When he his Father's Chariot overturned;
With hotter flames (if fame we credit may)
Then those he smutch't in Aethiopia.


But the Native Indians are sensible of no such extraordinary warmth; always
making a fire under their Hammocks, that the piercing air disturb not their
sleep.

And the English themselves that inhabit almost under the Line in Surinam,
contemn not their Coverlets in the night; though indeed very few of them rest
in beds, but Hammocks, which do somewhat the more expose the body to the
inquisition of the searching vapors.

Yet as the extremities of cold in these Regions betwixt the Tropicks are
indisputably more remiss then in England, and the rest of Europe; so the heat
qualified with the benefit of the Breezes, more justly styles them Temperate,
then those Climates that have already falsely, (though with vulgar consent)
usurped the Title.

And I must not credit my senses, if I should not affirm, that upon an
impartial compare, I never came in more temperate Climes then those of Iamaica,
Hispaniola, St. Kits, Barbados, etc. so slanderously calumniated; the heat in
the day time being always alloy'd with the Sea Breezes; and the nights,
naturally cool, are by an interchangeable and never-failing intercourse,
refreshed with Land Breezes; and therefore authentically renowned (by the Lord
Verulam, and others,) above Barbary, Spain, and Italy (though famed to be the
world's Garden) as being neither so intemperately hot nor cold.

Though the Lord Bacon's Arguments are only drawn from the Dictates of his
reason, neither backed nor reinforced with experience; now sufficiently
confirmed by every Mariner, to take off the greatest sit-fast of incredulity.
And this shall suffice for our information touching the Clime.

Secondly. The nature of the Soil.
2. THe fertility of the Soil of this Island may best be examined and appear by
it is Productions, Wild and purely natural; or, Improved and artificial.


First then. Of the purely natural, or wild Productions of this Island.
1. With which, the Soil is so pregnant and fertile, that Nature has stored it
in no niggardly nor novercal benevolence, with Oranges, Lymes, (or bastard
Lemmons,) Guavars, Pomegranates, a kind of Pepper, that tastes like Cloves, and
very Aromatic (known by the name of Iamaica-Pepper) with innumerable kinds of
several Fruits that have scarcely found a name in English with which the Woods
are so universally crowded, that they are likewise incomparably stockt with
abundance of Wild Hoggs, fat and large, that cannot but thrive well upon so
bountiful Commons, as falls from the trees in a very liberal contribution; yet
their Ordinary is not so free, but that it sometimes costs them their lives;
Their fat backs betraying their throats, to the no small advantage of the
Hunters, and the whole Island.

Nor are the Woods a more plentiful Nursery for the Hoggs then the Savana's are
for the Beeves and wild Cattle; in some of which one thousand would graze in a
drove, till the too greedy and repented eagerness of felling them by Gun shot,
frighted them to the shelter of the Woods and Mountains; from whence now they
dare scarcely peep, except secured with the covert of the night, (their now
usual feeding-time in the Savana's,) and now but in smaller numbers.

An inconvenience wisely prevented by the Spaniard (that lately inhabited, and
first stockt the Island) who always on horseback singled out the Beast he
intended to kill, (if so wild as not to come to his Pen, amongst his tamer
fellows) and with a sharp Iron in form of an half moon, fastened to a staff,
hough'd him on both his hin-leggs; afterward dispatching him at his leisure.

With which two singular advantages, for the raising and increase of stock,
(either of Swine in the Woods, or Beeves in the Savana's or Plains,) is happy
in Iamaica above any other Island or Settlement; (whether upon the Continent or
Islands of America) at this day peopled by any English Colony and Plantation;
and will soon flourish above any other, if it want no due encouragement for the
preservation and defense of the Planters.

Every ship that comes from the Wind ward Islands of Barbados, Mevis, St.
Christophers, etc. being crowded above convenience with all sorts of people.

For besides that the Soil yields not to any of the Chariby Islands in the
plentiful produce of Sugarcanes, Tobacco, Cotton, Maiz or Indian Corn,
Potatoes, Yawmes, and the like American Provisions: it has three, or four
singular and extraordinary Advantages to enrich the Planter.

First:
1. By the speedy raising a stock of Cattle, though from a very mean principle,
and beginnings: a notable Policy in the thriving Spaniard upon Hispaniola, and
especially, on Cuba, which is better peopled;) and it is this: Near some
convenient place, in the Wood, that is best stored with all sorts of
fruit-bearing Trees, as Orange Trees, a sort of Cabbage-trees, raged with
berries, etc. they build two or three little Houses, or more; by them called a
Crawle, and in these, they first enclose these tame Hogs, with which they begin
their stock, and there feed them; that after (being let out) they will come to
the haunt, at the sound of a Horn; But if they be out of hearing, (they many
times suspending all care of them for a week together) they go out with three
or four Dogs, that hunt them in; the whole Herd making homewards so soon as
ever the Dogs do Bay them; unto which discipline, if any of the Hogs be not
conformable, his refractoriness cost's him his life; his keeper (for example
sake) scarcely indemnifying him for the first fault.

Thus two or three Spanish slaves, (for a native Spaniard scorns the Employ)
will look to six or seven hundred Hogs, and provide them meat, not putting
their Masters to a penny charge.

Which course may as effectually be managed upon Iamaica, in any part of the
Island; unparalled by any other English settlement in the more VVindward
Islands.

For a stock of Sheep, Cows, Horses, Goats, and the like, there is excellent
Pasture in the Savana's; some of them, forty, some fifty miles in
circumference, wherein the grass springs fresh and green all the year long.

The Earth never recalling her lent sap (as she does mock the Europeans) by
giving and taking again, every Month being an April; The Trees and Plants
being never disrobed of their Phary-liveries, but wear their best clothes every
day; in which prodigality they are licensed and born out, by their indulgent
Parents, the Sun and the Earth; These Regions being their Darlings, and (to use
Sir Walter Rawleigh's style ( The Paradise of the world.

In so much as here is plenty of food to relieve the Planters Cattle throughout
the year, needing no winter- hoard; The providence of the Ant being useless
here.

2. Another singular benefit to the Planter, is the large numbers of wild
Horses, well shaped and very serviceable, being all bred of the Spanish
Gennets, one of these tamed and well managed may be bought for three pounds
sterling which would yield six thousand pounds of Sugar at the Barbados: of which
special advantage, in easing the charge of making Sugars, needs no dispute.

3. Thirdly, the said Savana's are common to every man that will make use of
them; For as they are good for little else: The woody ground producing the best
Provisions for a family, as Corn, Potatoes, Plantanes, Cassauder, Sugar Canes,
etc. so seating your self upon the skirt of a Savana, bordering upon a Wood,
you may with convenience enjoy the benefit of both.

Again, as you may stock these Plains without limit; so you may have fifty
Acres, per head, for your self and servants, freely assigned and made over to
you, in any place you best like to make your choice; so that the seat, you
pitch upon, be not first taken up by another; whereas in St. Kits, Barbados,
etc. you cannot turn a Horse out but he presently trespasseth upon his
Neighbor, if not upon your own Canes: the most barren Rocks (even in the
Scotland of Barbados) owning a Proprietor, and the whole Island pestered with
a super-numerary glut of Inhabitants; too small a Hive for such a swarm of
people.

Lastly, I shall conclude the transcendency of this Isle, by the abundant
plenty of choice Timber trees and Wood for the Dyer's use, as Fustick,
Brasiletta, Ebonies, and a kind of Logwood; (but not so effectual as that which
grows in the Bay of Campeachee) together with choice of medicinal Drugs, as
China Roots, Gum Guaic. Lignum vit-Trees, Cassia, etc. And thus much of the
wild and purely natural productions of this happy Soil.

Reddit ubi venerem tellus inarata quotannis:
The Virgin-earth's not barren here,
But will unoccupy'd, Fruit, bear.

2. General. Second, Of the improved Productions of the Isle.
IN the next place, the fruits of Iamaica that are produced by the improvement
of Art, will most methodically present themselves to be considered; wherein I
shall purposely omit to give the Reader any account of those usual Household
Provisions, of Cassawder, Corn, Potatoes, etc. nor of those Merchantable
Commodities of Cotton, Indico, Tobacco, Sugar, etc. common to it with the rest
of the English Plantations; But presuming the Reader's acquaintance with those
Fruits and Merchandise so vulgarly known; I shall only treat of those that are
more rare and not to be found in any other of the English Colonies in America.

1. The first that I shall mention is the Cacoa. Walks, which are not few in
this Island, some of them containing ten or twelve Acres of Ground, some more,
some less: The Trees are about the bigness of our largest Plum-trees in
England, orderly set, like our Orchards, at the distance of 6, or 7. foot from
each other; which Interstitiums are carefully weeded, and cleared from the
Grass, that the Cacoa Trees may without a Rival engross the Sap and substance
of the Soil, which is chosen the most fertile that can be got, and naturally
skreen'd and shaded from the piercing rays of the Sun; Nor indeed can any
ground be better employed; the Spaniard, (who best understands the value of
them) reckoning every one of his Cacoa trees to be worth him a piece of Eight
per an. after it begins to bear, which is usually about seven years after it is
first planting; in which time they are once or twice transplanted for the first
two years, and especially in their Infancy must be protected from the
scorching Sun by the favorable interposition of some shady Trees; and
therefore the Plantane-Walks are usually made choice of, for such Nurseries.

Of the Fruit or Nuts of these Trees is made the so famed Chocoletta, whose
virtues are hyperboliz'd upon every post in London: though we must confess it
of excellent nourishment.

The Spaniard victualling for a long and wilderness Journey, with no other
Refreshment, then Cakes made of the Kernels of those Cacoa Nuts; which he
dissolves in water for his meat and drink.

The Composition of these Cacoa Cakes or Chocoletta is now so vulgar, that I
will not disparage my Reader by doubting his acquaintance in so known a Recipe,
a very Crambe in other Authors.

Yet will it not be impertinent to render a most exact description of the Nuts,
then is hitherto extant, either in the English or Spanish writings, that have
as yet come to my hands. Herrera and Acosta report this fruit to be less then
an Almond; whereas Doctor Hernandez, or rather, Anthonius Recchius in Hist.
Plant. in Amer. excuss. Romae, 1651. describes it to be bigger then a
Musk-million. Hernandez was employed by the King of Spain, to give an account
of the Physical rarities and Plants of America, and to that purpose dispatched
thither by the said Catholic King, and is therefore more creditable and
authentic then Herrera or Acosta: though indeed he does somewhat hyperbolize
when he equals this Fruit with the largeness of a Musk-million; for the husk
or cod is no bigger then the largest Pears in England; growing immediately out
of the bole or body of the Tree, and stock of the branches, admitting not so
much as the intermedium or usherage of a twig, sprouting from the bottom to
the top, twice especially every year, viz. in the months of January and May,
the chief months for the Harvest of them.

The outward crust, or put aminous husk, being broken, appears full of little
kernels, or nuts, each of them inveloped in a slimy substance and film, of a
phlegmatic complexion, but of a most relishing taste: under which is another
shell, which when baked in the Sun, resembles the color and substance of a
Chestnut; but the kernel is of a Chesnut-hue both within and without, and of
this is made the Chocoletta Cakes; full of an oily substance, not unlike that
of the oil of Almonds per expressionem: and of this meanest Labourer in Iamaica
compounds his Morning draughts, wherein though he fares like a Gallant, yet his
following Music upon the Hoe-boy (wherein he practices to keep his hand in
use, and sometimes till his heart aches) does more melodiously affect his
masters ears then his own, and seems more harmoniously consonant to his
Canvas-Drawers, which are also the sometimes ornament of the Petticoat-Sex
(through the rigor of their Masters unmanumitted;) so that here likewise the
women, (though not with that complacency) sometimes wear the Breeches.

In the Bay of Honduras, the Coast of Carthagena, and also in most places of
Nova Hispaniola: two of these little Cacoa Nuts (or Kernels) pass current for
one farthing, with which (as good sterling) they truck in the Markets.

2. The Coco Nuts, which grow on a smooth and slender Tree, whose wast (in
circumference) equals that of a man's; but it is stature doubles his height.

Upon the top of whose Bulk, the Nuts in small clusters do germinate
immediately from the Tree, at the footing of the branches.

The Nuts (with the Husk on) is of a Pyramtdal form and may vte dimensions with
the greatest Logger-head.

The outward rind or husk is of a fibrous, spongy substance, about an inch
thick, warily guarding, with superfluous chariness, the enclosed shell, whose
Negro-skull is not easily broke.

In some Countries (as in Guinee) the Natives, card out this Rind into a kind
of course Tow, which serves them for Cordage, Cables, Okam, and Ropes to rigge
their Ships; whose Hulls and Masts (as is reported) are shaped out of the body
of the Tree; and victualled, only with the Nuts, in whose content, is barrell'd
up both Drink and Bread; a milky liquour running out, so soon as you give it
vent: for which purpose nature has trimmed it with three bung-holes at the top.

Thus one Tree sets up a Mariner, and an Orchard sets out a Fleet: and at the
return of the Voyage, the Seamen are contentedly paid off with this Fruit
alone; which serves for money, meat and drink.

And indeed the milky juice is a most ambrosian Dainty, very Diuretic, and
proper Pharmacy for Nephritick distempers.

Of the shells ( polished) are made very handsome Drinking-cups, in which
Office, they serve us for rarity here in Europe. But they make no such use of
the Rind at Iamaica; the inner Bark of a kind of Fig Tree furnishing them (by
the Negroes Art) with all sorts of Cordage, useful in a Plantation.

This tree parturiates every Month, and will have fifty or sixty Nuts at a
burden.

If you cut the Bark of the Tree or Fruit (whilst green) there issues forth a
Nectar, like that of the wounded Vine; or the English Birtch-tree perforated in
the spring, but of a far more aromatic taste.

I purposely omit to speak of other pleasant Fruits in the Country, that are
either common with other Islands, or not transported into Europe: because I
would not puzzle the Reader with hard names, nor Tantalize him with a Discourse
of Dainties, that he is never like to taste in Europe; and those that go
thither, need no Tutor.

But the Cacoa and Coco Nuts are Merchantable Commodities, enhanced for their
singular use and delight.

I shall conclude with one rarity more, of which in Iamaica is too great a
plenty; and that is the Alligator, or Indian Crocodile, an amphibious Creature,
that (like an Otter) haunts both the land and water.

I have seen many of them upon Hispaniola, but never any in the Chariby
Islands, nor in the Wind-ward Settlements upon the Main.

It would be too long to tell what large feats are storied of this Beast; as
that he will pull the Bulls into the water, (catching them like a keen Mastiffe
by the cheek) when they come to drink, etc.

This is true, that they have an incomparable strength in the water, in which
as their most friendly Element, they do usually encounter the prey, especially,
if the mastery, will require their utmost strength in the grapple.

But though he winnes the field in the water, (with a Bull) yet he must share
the Spoil on the shore; for he cannot (without the danger of drowning) swallow
his Booty, through an impediment in his throat. Some of them (I have seen) six
or seven yards long, but their usual stretch, may bate the half; And indeed,
though they are fierce and ravenous, yet at the approach of a man, whilst they
lie basking upon the Sands, they betake themselves, (though with no great
haste) into the water; yet is it not very safe sleeping near the shore where
they haunt, lest they take you napping. Yet can they not prejudice a child that
is but aware of them: For their motion is very slow; neither can they turn the
head, but the whole body must wheel for company.

Dat Deus immiti cornua curta -- There is as good Civet in the Cods of an old
rammish Alligator, as in the Ginney Civet Cats.

I shall not mention here the plenty of all sorts of Fish, and wild Fowl, as
Ginney Hens, Ducks, wild Pigeons, etc. because these Collections shall take
notice only of what is singular in this Island, without a Co partner, or any
Parallel in any other Settlements of our Country men.

But possibly amongst these Rarities some will expect I should (as the most
welcome News) discover some Mines of Silver or Gold; as the most undoubted
transcendency of a rich Land Scilicet uxorem cum dote, fidemque and amicos,
Et Genus and formam, regina pecunia donat.
Ac been nummatum decorat suadela, Venusque.
This Auri sacra fames of the Lyrick, is usually the Grand Inquest; and without
it other things seem to want their taste, or relish but unsavourly, especially
to such an Epicurean as that was that charmed his senses with this Lullabie;
Forbear your Stoic Rules, go read
To bedridden Age; for I Will not heed
Your peevish morals, till dull sense
Despairs to have concupiscence.
No, (whilst my spirits are young and good,
Revelling in my frolic blood)
Compared to me old Epicure,
Shall be a Puritan demure,
Each sense shall play the Parasite,
To humor my coy Appetite,
Till I (bidding all joys goodnight)
Prove the Nil ultra a of delight,
For virtues only that attend
A State not needy I commend;
For on your beggar-virtues I
Dote not (except integrity,)
Such as is Patience per force,
A virtue practiced by my Horse.
When him to the Manger I do tie
From meat, longed for with leering eye.
And let humility be gone,
When I have naught to be proud on.
Rather then such poor virtues have,
Some court rich vices, or a grave.
Such is some men's profane Boulimy and insatiable Poludipsie after Gold,
through the depravement of their canine and pical Appetites. -- nec
Terret ambustus Phacthon avaras spes.
Hor. Neither heat nor cold can baracade the entratls and womb of the earth
from the Caesarean Section, and debauched midwifery of the greedy Miners; which
(as it is thought) would not in Iamaica, prove labor in vain; for some
Melottoes and Negroes, (that were lately Slaves to the Spaniards in this Isle)
tell us, that their Masters did certainly know of two Silver Mines; yet are
they not hitherto found by the English; whose scrutiny therein is not very
prying and exact, the which, though astured, were no policy to divulge, till
their numbers be increased, and their foot hold secured; Arguments, that
persuaded the Spaniard to reclose and dam up a rich Silver Vein in a Mountain
near the Sea, a few Leagues to the Norward of Cape St. Nicholas, at the
west end of Hispantola: not daring to present such a temptation to the Princes
of Europe, till his Mines in Petozo, Peru, and new Spain be worn out; that his
spare hands then may not only extract, but secure the Oar; a prize, which if
now exposed to public notice) would create him many an unwelcome Rival, that
would not be to seek of pretenses enough, to further his suit: since our mother
Earth does indifferently prostrate her womb to the common embraces of any
Ravisher, that has Arms strong enough to secure him, in the Rape; the only
Patent that the Spaniard can show for his Indie-Mines.

Which himself very well knows, and is therefore very unwilling to dispute his
Title, but where he can empannell an Army, instead of a Jury to make good the
Claim; the which he can hardly levy upon Hispaniola; it being so thinly
peopled, that he can scarcely muster five hundred fighting men, (in the whole
Island) though he should put forth a general Press (enforced with the
strictest Commission of Array;) except only in the Town of St. Domingo; which is
distant above one hundred and fifty miles from the forementioned Mine; and are
not able with all their skill and strength to root out a few Buckaneers or
Hunting Frenchmen, that follow their Game, in despite of them, though they
cannot number three hundred at a general Rendezvouse: and those dispersed at
three hundred miles distance from one another, on the North and West sides of
the Island; of whom peradventure I may have hereafter more occasion to
discourse.

Therefore it is not much material, whether or no, Iamaica own any Silver
Mines, though it be more then probable that time will discover some: Quicquid
sub terra est, in apricum proferet aetas.

For if there were but strength of hands in Iamaica, they might procure money
with less labor then digging: except the Spaniard will quietly suffer them to
reap the Fruits of the Common Earth. For the propriety whereof he can show no
Bill of Sale but his Sword.

Thus much in General.

I shall now give you a more particular Description of this Isle, with it is
Harbors, Towns, Ports, Soundings, exactly represented in this Map, to your
view.
WHerein the chiese Harbor at Point Cagway merits Precedence, lying North-West
from the said Point in an Arm of the Sea, that shoots in three or four Leagues
within the Land.

Where 1000. tall ships may safely ride at one time, and all sufficiently
sheltered from winds and waves; and if they please, close aboard the shore, for
an English mile in length, incomparably convenient for careening ships of all
Burdens.

Upon this Point or sandy Bay is now built above five hundred houses, by the
English, chiefly for the accommodation of Seamen, especially the Privateers,
who are their best Customers; and sometimes, as now it is, the Residence of the
General, and some Merchants and Manufactures; whose shares to build upon is
measured out to them by the Foot, and that immediately forfeited, if not
forthwith improved by Buildings, which now almost cover the face of the Bay for
a mile in length; the breadth thereof being variable, sometimes borrowing of
the two Seas, in whose Arms it lies, and then repaying with unequal Interest;
so that about a mile from the Harbour's mouth, it is almost Bankerupt.

The Bank in that place not extending to above half a Cables length in breadth:
where, if cut through from Sea to Sea, (which very little labor would effect.)
This Isthmus would lose it is name in an Island; And the Conversion conduce much
to it is security.

For there is no landing upon the South Side of the Bay (which is washed and
Buts upon the main Seas) by reason of the fury of the waves (not pacified by
any Breakers,) even in the becalmest seasons.

And the entrance into the Harbor is commanded with a Fort, built by the
English: wherein there are at this day, some as good Canon planted, as the
Tower of London would afford, yet the Bay, (or said Town) consisting on nothing
but loose sand (in most places whereof you have water, in sinking but three or
four foot) admits no sufficient defense in Teneable Bulworks, without the
Tribute of foreign Materials; which are not far to seek.

The worst is, their water, which is infected (by the intrusion of the
Neighbour-seas) with a brackish taste; and therefore they make use of none but
what is fetched three or four leagues in Boats and Canoues.

Which incovenience dissuaded the Spaniards from gracing it with so much as one
house, seating themselves near a pleasant River, and by the side of a most
lovely Savana, in the famous Town of

WHich was as well built, and as large as any Town in England; but now have
lost much of it is pristine luster, since the Landlords became English; for it
did contain two thoufand Houses, and upwards, with sixteen Churches and
Chappells, when it was first seized upon by the Army conducted by Genesis
Venables; now there remains only the Skeletons of two Churches and an Abbey,
with about five or six hundred Houses; some of which are yet very pleasant and
habitable.

This Town was first founded by Columbus, to whose happy search, the
West Indies first discovered it self; (all former Commerce and Traffic thither
being till then adjourned beyond the Records of Time and Memory) bur now by him
revived to Correspondency. He was the first Father and Godfather to this Town,
giving it the name of St. Iago de la Vega; which it reciprocally retorted to
him in his, and his yet remaining Families Title of Honor) by the good
pleasure of the King of Castile, created Duke de la Vega; famous in Spain, even
to this day.

Here is plenty of Cassta Ligrea, and Oranges of excellent relish in abundance,
with some other choice Fruits, the Fruits of the Spanish Industry.

The mentioned Savana that faces this Town is now pretty well stockt with
Sheep, Goats, Cowes, and especially tame Horses. But it did contain many
thousands of each whilst the Spaniard owned it.

The backside of the Town is washed with a fair, but unavigable River which
buries it self in the Sea Passage-Fort.

About twenty or thirty years ago, this Town was won by a little Fleet of
English men, fitted out from the Chariby Islands, chiefly from Sr. Kits, under
the Command of Genesis Iackson, who landed about five hundred men at Passage-Fort,
and fought his way up to the Town, against two thousand Spaniards, who still
fled before him; but some what retarded his Carcer, by six or seven several
Breastworks, cast up athwart the Road, on purpose to Bulwark this Town, (the
Jewel of this Isle) from such Inroades and sudden surprizals: For the
prevention whereof they kept continual watch upon a great Hill that overlooks
the Sea, the Harbor, and the Town, from whence the Centinells, in the
twinkling of an eye by tokens agreed upon, signified the imminency of
approaching dangers; As at this time when Genesis Iackson made the Onset; the
strength of the Isle being drawn up on the shore, before he could land his men;
whom, though the Spaniards some what resisted, and at their several Brest-works
caused them to make an unwilling Halt; yet the fury of Iackson's men, greedy of
spoil, overcame all difficulties, neglecting dangers in comparison thereof:
Thus with the loss of forty men, forcing to the Town, plundered it, to their
no small enrichment. The booty likewise being advanced by a large Fine paid him
by the Spaniard, on condition the Town might be preserved from burning; which
was accordingly saved, and their retreat to the Fleet undisturbed.

But when the swelling Armado with Genesis Venables, attempted this Town, (after
their worse success against St. Domingo) they beat the bush so long, till the
Bird was flown. For the subtle Spaniard, belaying our men with parleys, and
fair words, in the interim dispatches away Bag and Baggage; sometimes sending
Beeves to stay the stomachs of the hungry Soldiery; and bearing Genesis Venables,
in hand with choice Viands; and Spanish Dainties presented to his Lady, who had
more mind to eat then fight.

Thus staving them off, till their Train and best Movables had got so much Law,
that afterward the swiftest pursuit could not give them a Turn, before they
had got Covert in their Fastness, the Woods.

And certainly, the treasure they carried with them could not but be very
considerable if we may guess at the worth of the Jewel by the splendour of the
Cabinet, that kept it: or estimate the largeness of the Bird by the Nest: the
Town being then even to magnificence, adorned with spacious Houses.

For the safeguard whereof the Spaniards never durst cope with our men in the
plain field; yet would sometimes gawl them, when befriended with the treachery,
that night and the Woods do afford; in which clandestine encounters, though at
first the Spanish success was too fortunate; yet dear bought experience did in
a little time train up our men in the same Mysteries: in which now they are
grown so perfect, that they never ceast beating both Spaniard and Negro at
their own Play, and with their own weapons, till they had cleared the Island of
them; In despair now of Recovery (being so often refrustrated in their
reattempts,) except by some invincible Armado, which yet will find work enough,
e're they make the Island too hot for the English, now naturalized to the
Country, and can never want shelter nor victuals whilst they have the Woods to
befriend; with which now they are so well acquainted, that the Molottoes and
Negroes, (which the Spaniards left behind them to keep possession of the
Island, therein reckoning without their Host, presuming them unconquerable, and
past finding out) are now so overmatch'd in their own Arts, that their Captain
and the major part of them have submitted; thereby lessening their master's
Title by eleven Points of the Law; and craving English protection; into which,
they are upon submission received, by the truly Honorable General Dawley, and
now authorized to prey upon, and hunt their fellows, that in scattered Parties
yet stand it out, having already sealed their Allegiance with the blood of
their old Associates, not without the dextrous contrivement of that Noble
General, whose happy policy in the wary preservation of this Forlorn in
Iamaica, has already without the suspicion of flattery, authorized the style.
To whom our Nation, in some measures stands indebted for the Reprizal of that
honor at Rio-Novo, which was so shamely lost under the debauched conduct of
Genesis Venables in Hispaniola: the Spaniards till then having so mean and
despicable thoughts of English courage, that upon the Onset at Rio-Novo they
upbraided our men with the opprobrious mention of Sancta Domingo, till the
repented assay of their valor, disciplined them into better manners.

For though the numbers of the Spanish Forces at Rio-Novo doubled the English
(being sent from Cuba to reinforce and resettle the Island) and those strongly
entrenched; yet such was the enraged earnestness of the Soldiery to redeem
their wounded Honors, that (regardlesse of all odds and disadvantages) they
stormed them in their trenches with a resolution as undaunted as the success
was prosperous. Hereby not only retriving the Pristine same of their
Contrymen; but also hitherto frustrating all hopes in the Spaniards of
further attempts to regain the Island.

Another Party of Spaniards reseating themselves at Point-Pedro, being attended
with a no less inauspicious fate.

And the truth is, the Island, though it were less fruitful, is worth the
fighting for, thou it should cost the Spaniard some of his best blood; for it
lies within his Bowels, and in the heart of his Trade.

For all the treasure that his Plate-Fleet brings home from Carthagina steer
directly for St. Domingo in Hispaniola, and from thence must pass by one of the
ends of this Island to recover the Havana, The common rendezvouse of this whole
Armado, before it returns home through the Gulf of Florida. Nor is there any
other way (whereby to miss the Island of Iamaica) because he cannot in any
reasonable time turn it up to the Windward of Hispaniola; the which though he
might with difficulty perform, yet he would thereby loose the security of his
united forces, which at the Havana (from all the Parts of the Bay of Mexico,
New-Spain, and the rich Merchandise that comes by Nombre de Dios, from the
South Seas,) accompany each other home from the said general Rendezvouse.

So that the Privateers from Iamaica are often fingering the Plate, and other
precious commodities, that was never consigned to them; by picking up their
single and straggling Vessels before they are ensur'd by their embodied Fleet.

In which respects (as in many others) Necessity has made a better choice of a
seat for the English Dominions, then their intended surprizal of Hispaniola,
though it had been achieved: And their winnings, (if the Game be followed)
will unexpectedly outvie the stakes.

And here I cannot but take notice of the many convenient Harbors, adjudg'd by
the most experienced Mariners to equal the best that they ever came to Anchor
in. For besides that already mentioned at Point Cagg way. There is another
(nothing inferior) below it to Lee-ward at about four or five Leagues
distance; and may as conveniently serve the Town of St. Iago, as that other at
Cagg-way; they being triangularly situated: It is usually known by the name of
Old Harbor, where four hundred tall ships may ride together without danger of
falling foul upon one another.

And about fourteen Leagues to Wind-ward, is another safe Port called by the
Spaniards Porto Morant, which yet retains the name. In the Confines whereof a
Regiment is seated; who with many other Planters, have now made themselves
considerable in the Produce of Sugar, Tobacco, Cotton, etc.

But it is besides my scope to mention every Harbor on this and the North side
of the Isle, lest this Volume extend beyond the compendious Dimensions of
Journal Notes; calculated only for those that are most remarkable, especially
since the fore-inserted Plat may satisfy a more critical enquiry; and be
sufficiently Authenrick to confute those traditional Heterodoxes, that some *
Amer. desc. p. ult. 1655.
men's rashness has published to the contrary upon bare report.

But I shall adjourn a more plenary discovery to these ensuing Animadversions.

REFLECTIONS Upon the present Affairs of JAMAICA; And the Expedition against
HISPANIOLA: Under the Conduct of GENERAL VENNABLES.
1. THat Bulky Armadoes are many times sunk with their own weight; which, if
parcell'd out into seasonable Recruits, had signified more by each Retail, then
the prodigal waste of such wholesale Adventures.

The Dimensions of this great Preparation vastly exceeding the difficulties
that could encounter them, from all the united Forces in Hispaniola: and fitted
out with strengths sufficient to make Prize of the whole Spanish Plate-Fleet,
rather then the sacking of a small Town, or an unpeopled Land, such as is St.
Domingo, and Hispantola; who at the first brunt left this town to the Ransack
of Genesis Iackson's men; though timely Alarmed by Iackson's Demurre, at the
Harbors mouth, for four days space; and then not able to land above five
hundred men.

A thousand English Soldiers being now an over-match to all the power, that
the Spaniards in Hispaniola, can bring into the field; unable at this day to
serrit out a new French Buckaneers, or Hunting Marownaes, formerly mentioned;
who live by killing the wild Beeves for their Hides; and might grow rich by the
Trade, did not their lavish Riotings in expense (at the neighbor- Tortudoes)
exceed the hardship of their Incomes. Their comfort is, they can never be broke
whilst they have a Dog and a Gun; both which, are more industriously tended
then themselves.

These Acteon-straglers (that seldom number above five or six in a company)
are often affronted with the Spanish Rounds (consisting of about one hundred
Firelocks) that once a year compass the Island, yet dare they never cope with
these resolute Champions, and wandering Knights; who, setting back to back,
would make sure to sell their lives at a double rate, and in that posture bid
defiance to the Enemy.

The Grave Seignior scorning to barter a drop of Poenish blood in exchange for
an Ocean of such Rascal- Gaul.

And I am very confident that the small Remnant left in Iamaica (knowing how to
victual their Camps with what the Woods afford) will be able to disaray the
Spaniards in Hispaniola or Cuba, (even to admiration,) and above what the most
favoring presage can expect or Autumn.

And certainly this Foot-hold (yet secured, maugre the Spanish craft and
power,) foiled twice by them in their reattempts does open so fair a passage
into the Indies; that if His sacred Majesty, our most excellent Prince do not
in mercy balk the Spaniard; a few years will immortalize Him one of the
greatest Emperors of the World: being happy, and not only in an invincible
Navy, but in the Dominion of Northern Kingdoms, that are therefore so
fruitful, that they store him with more men then Room: who are soonest likely
to leave justling when they are parted with more elbow-room: The very Division
of that united Abraham and Lot, who by too near correspondence fell together by
the ears. Thus too nigh neighborhood begets contentions, whilst distance and
absence usually enhanceth the affections of near friends.

Reflex. II.
2. THat sudden surprises from an Ambuscade, usually prevails more then open
force. The whole strength of Hispaniola, though embodied and in view, not being
able to strike that terror, and make such havoc of our amazed Soldiers, as
forty or fifty Negroes and Molettoes effected by an unlooked for onset.

Gaining more by this juggling delusion then their whole Army could by Play
above-board. The Spaniards (like Hannibal) obtaining conquest with their heads
rather then their hands. Nor are they so usually foiled, as when encountered
with their own weapons: a wary plodding Fabius signifying more then a hot Spur
Marcellus.

To which squint-eyed Mode in war Scanderbeg stands indebted for most of his
Victories against the Ottomanes; as also Joshua, though backed with a Divine
reserve, for the defeat of Aj.

Thus also do the Native Indians encounter their adverse Nations, rather
stealing upon them, then assailing them; especially, practiced by the
Meridional, and more oriental Americans; whose diminitive statures call for the
assistance of wily stratagems; neglected by the more Northerly and armstrong
Regions, whose Character, (according to mine own knowledge and experience)
especially of those Guiana and Char^by Indians, that cohabit with the English
in Surinam, I deem not much extravagant here to insert.

Under the Line that equal's night and day
Guiana stands, part of America:
On whose head Phoebus shoots his fiery steams,
Twice every year, with down right darted beams.
In his Twelve Houses, as he travels forth
Along the Zodiac, 'twixt the South and North.
Whose Native Indian has not, nor needs Art
To clothe himself, Nature supplies that Part.
They Are true Philosophers, not much they have,
Nor do they want much, nor much do they crave.
They care not for to morrow; no supply,
But just from hand to mouth, no Granary:
If they want Flesh, they take their bow in hand.
And then for Hare or Deer, hunt over the Land.
For all Game here most easily taken be,
Since they take Covert in some hollow tree.
Or some such crazie Refuge, whence they are
Dig'd forth at leisure for the Hunter's fare.
Or if the stomach do in Fish delight,
With wily feats he gluts his appetite.
His bread and drink both made of one root are,
Cassawder called, cooked by the Women's care;
Who show their best of duty to their Home,
When their Mates wearied with their Booties come.
For every man in's house is Lord and King,
Has power of Life and Death, and every thing:
His will's his law, from him there is no appeal,
No other Monarchy or Commonweal.
If Wives and children offenders are,
His will's the Judge; hand, Executioner:
To none but to their Chief, they Homage owe,
That Is the Eldest Son, when married, to him they bow,
His Father, Mother, Brethren, Nephews, all;
Must lower to him, and on the knee must fall:
Till his first Son be married, then he
(Deposed) must to his own Son bend the knee.
Thus do they live by families, thus then
They Are always governed by middleag'd men.
When any dies, into his Urne is hurled
All that he has; (to use; in the other world:)
His Axe, Bill, Knife, his Bow and Hammock too,
And this the best of service they can do
For their dead Friend. If he a Captain be,
Then if he have a Slave, he then must die;
And the same Roge burn both; thus is supplied
Each one in the other world, as before he died.
But usually their Slaves, when captive taken,
Are to the English sold; and some are slain,
And their Flesh forthwith Barbacu'd and eat
By them, their Wives and Children as choice meat.
Thence are they called Caribs, or Cannibals;
The very same that we Man-eaters call.
And yet herein lies not their chief content
To eat for food, but as a Sacrament;
To bind them and their Children to be fierce,
And into the entrails of their foes to pierce.
Though in the world no greater Cowards be,
Managing all their Fights with treachery,
Most of their feats by stealth and night are done,
If once it come to handy-gripes they run.
Thus much I Will say; I would not wish to have
A better friend, or foe, or better slave
Then is an Indian; where he once affects,
In love and service shall be no neglects.
Command him as your slave, his life, his All,
If he do once you but Bone-aree call;
And who would wish an easier foe then he,
That (like a Buck) at noise of Guns will fly,
But then your slave if that an Indian be,
No other Caterer you need but he.
He plenty shall provide for yours and you,
With his Dogs only, and his Bill and Bow
And thus much for their Men. Their Women are
Lovely, though brown; modest, hiding their Ware,
With several colored Beads together knit,
With Art methodical together set;
And this they use whilst they are young and fair,
But when they are old, their heedlesse, all is bare.
If of your Wine and Brandee, youl'e be free,
They Will not leave till they drunk as beggars be.
They call the Devil Yerkin, him alone
They worship, saying, God wills harm to none,
But is entirely good; and therefore they,
The mercy of their Yerkin only pray.
When they are sick, Yerkin does bear the blame,
Of him they beg deliverance from the same,
The Muses and their Flamens they cashiere,
Only Diana's Troops are 'stablish'd here,
Except some Priests, which they do call Peei,
With mumbling charms Yerkin to pacify.
(In sum to say) they are all simplicity,
Almost like Adam, in's innocence.
Whatever Nature or their Appetite
Does dictate, they do follow with delight;
Not once with conscience check embittered,
Being by the law of Nature only led.
Not coveting large Barns, with hoards to stuff,
When once their belly's full, they have enough;
For Avarice, here never makes them jarre,
Nor warrants, by religion's varnish, war.
His pride so natural, (if it be a vice,)
Yet costs him nothing, or but little Price;
It never makes him sell his land, nor shut
Shop-windows up, nor a spare Jewel put
To trouble, in a Pawn for Cloak or Gown.
His only pride's a Feather on his Crown:
The cast-clothes of some gaudy Bird fits him.
For which he needs not venture life nor limb,
Nor Hector it, nor list under Sir Hugh,
(When known by the old suit, to fish for new;)
Nor cringe to Velvet Titles, with a gape,
Like fawning Cur, or mopping Jackan-Ape:
Nor need to be light fingered in a crowd;
Nor light heel'd to procure a Scarf or Hood,
Nor with stretched Fancies beg a Ladies smile,
Which she (poor soul) scarce understands the while,
They make no mintage here of Brains, nor be
The sterling Pence coined with a Comoedie.
For pomp and fine clothes only are the cause
Of all our shirking Trades, and endless laws.
Since Nature never brought forth a Creature yet,
Unfurnished, with what Coverlets were fit.
The Back (if not misused) in coldest Land,
Craving no waste clothes, more then face or hands.
But this Diversion is somewhat out of our way to Iamaica.

Reflex. III.
3. THough in multitude of Councillors there is safety, yet multitude of
Commanders equally sharing in power, are usually attended with confusion. And
therefore though the wary Romans invested their Confuls with equal Authority,
(lest the unmated Interest of a single General should by happy Victories win
so much upon the affections of his concerned Followers, as to enfringe the
Liberties, with which they hugged themselves in their Aristocracy;) yet the
Consuls commanded by turns, by intermitting days; and very seldom in one and
the same Province;

Counter to the Instructions in this Expedition, which obliged the General to
act nothing without the joint consent of Gown-Commissioners, for that purpose
constituted. Which, though it pleads somewhat in Apology for General
Vennables, yet nevertheless it raseth out this Model from the more Genuine
Maxims of Policy; as invented only by the jealousies of Tyrants and Usurpers;
but found useless and prejudicial to more justly installed Princes; whose
undisputed Titles need not the broke-age of such shifting and by-way stratagems
to ensure their Negotiations.

Reflex. IV.
4. THat Soldiers wives are more properly seated in their husband's Kitchen,
then his Tent. General Vennable's Lady being not unjustly blamed, both for his
sluggish and listlesse Proceedings, as also, for his unlicens'd and immature
Return, furthered, if not procured by her too opportune Inculcations. A
Dalliance of so sad a consequence to the English Nation, that zeal to my native
Country whets my passions to so Satirical an edge, that I can scarce forbear,
here to lash out, against her whole Sex, did not the Virtues of some others
interceed. However I must have a touch at the Martyred State, that warrants
such unseasonable Companions for the Wars; wisely prevented by the Turks in
their Eunuch-Generals.

The best on it is I am not awed (thanks to my fates) with the dreadful
Catechism of a Curtain Lecture.

I cannot think on wretched Cleopatra,
But she does move my spleen, and Bilis atra:
Who caused silly Mark Anthony to smart;
Losing his head, when he gave her his heart.
He first embraced the Serpent in his arm,
But she, long after; both, with equal harm.
How call you those who fooled old Solomon;
And shameless put the Royal Breeches on?
What can secure us from the Petticoat?
When wit, nor Samson's strength can save the throat?
If Pins and Laces Emperors enthral,
Wonder not at a puny General.
But if you must wed; see some charm you get,
Enclose in the wedding-Ring an Amulet:
Nothing can be too safe; we thunder fear,
A toy to the Curtain-whisper in the car.
Thus Socrates cursed Zeno, (when in strife,
Vying for curses, wished, he had a Wife.
Thus the grave Judge in rigor did decree,
To him that had two Wives, He should have three.
(As the Monck shriv'd the Drunkard) for his pain,
Ordaining that he should be drunk again.)
If Expiations merit, none's more meet.
Then to do Penance in the Nuptial sheet:
For sure they need not Purgatory fear
Hereafter, that (poor souls) endure it here.
There Is no such joy in this betwin'd State then,
If any, the women get it, not the men.
Though I must say, those pretty sweetmeats please
Sometime; But to cloyed stomachs a Disease.
Such is the Nuptial Surfeit, a mere Glut,
Like loathed Baggage to the nauseous Gut.
Enough is better then a feast, each one,
After a fast does fall the keener on;
But to lie wallowing in Cates, though rare,
Fie on it, what is it but a hoggish fare?
If then at best no better Cheer you meet,
How does he fare that is lodged in the loathed Sheet?
If the most stately Prisons cannot please,
What shall we find in the Jakes and Little-ease?
Is there no Paradise in Cherry-cheek,
What a plague is that then, that is as green as Leek?
If that your pretty Maids be things, but filly,
(Compared by ancient Bards, to Rose and Lilly)
Then sure, that look must needs be out of date,
Bedaub'd (like ulcers) with Precipitate.
If Females, at the best, but pester men,
He Is Matched, that has a Leagure-Lady then.
But I Will forbid no Banes; nor rouse the Nest
Of little angry Wasps: I Am but in jest;
Though, whilst some read these lines, their Wives in view,
They Will whisper to themselves, and say, they are true.
For by your leave, with Venus though you're matched,
There is no doubt but you are Coneycatch't.
But such poor men, as this General Vennables, (that are thus o're-mated) works
my pity rather then scorn, moving my bowels more then my spleen; for though the
Kingdom was the loser, he is none of the gainers, and the thraldom of his
sheets out-vies the Halter; furnishing us with this conclusion, That he is unfit
to be Pater Patriae that is not Domt Dominus; nor to head an Army, that must
kneel at his own Fire side; nor to ride Admiral of a Fleet, that cannot carry
the Flag at home, but is forced to lowre his Top sail, to a Petty coat. In
defiance whereof, I have here, with their own worded weapon, taken up the
Gantlet, to my no little hazard of a scolding: though if they knew the respect
and honor I have for the worthy thy Ladies; (as those that knows me, know I am
no woman hater,) nor in this relation any thing of kin to the Noble Blake, the
nicest coins would easily vouchsafe me an Act of Grace. All my quarrel with
their Sex consisting only in the defense of those poor men that stand in need
of Abasuerus his Decree.

Reflex. V.
5. THat the most promising designs, though launched out and promoted with all
the appertinent utensills, that policy can contrive; are many times easily
defeated by uncalculated Accidents: sometimes a mistaken letter, in the sound
of a word, has rooted great Armadoes: and the whistling of the wind in the
Sicamour trees destroyed an Host. Thus Gideon founded the Midianites with the
sudden surprizal of Trumpets, Lamps, and broken Pitchers. Caes. Com. de bell.
Gallic.
The very looks of the Germans affrighted the Gauls; And the very flashes in
the besmeared faces of the Picts, did gawle the Saxons. Thus did the hellish
visage of the grim Negroes and Molettoes beyond all imagination at the first
assault nonplus our men at Hispaniola; which yet had not signified so much, if
it had not been seconded with the unhappy Conduct of Genesis Venables; whose crazy
management of affairs shared so sinister an influence to his better deserving
Followers.

The Indulgent Heavens till now, suspending the Award of any Damages to the
English Nation, in repair of the loss of that invincible Armado in Eighty
Eight.

Reflex. VI.
6. THat Necessity often trains up a Militia better then Plenty. For had not
the Belly been Magister artis, putting the Soldiers to their shifts, to silence
it is importunities, they had never proved so good Marks-men, nor had come so
familiarly acquainted with the Woods: whose skill therein has now stood them
in so good stead, for the stubbing up those Spanish Negroes, that till then lay
as thorns in their sides, that they could scarce stir abroad without being
pricked.

Thus the Alps proved less fatal to Hannibal's Army, then Capua; and hunger
and cold spurred and egged on the weather-beaten Goths and Vandalls to better
their Sun, till they did Lord it in France and Italy.

This only inconvenience attended the Soldiery of Iamaica, that finding their
legs, and able to stand by themselves without the assistance of a Providore,
they became more refractory, and headstrong, and of a less bounded
discipline: acknowledging but small Homage where they received so small Pay;
which did the rather subject them to mutiny, and easy to be wrought upon by
more working Pates.

Nor did this licentiousness long want the misimproved subtilty of a Gentleman,
one Lieut. Col. Raymond, a discontented Soldier, that wanted nothing but a
better Employ, to set out his vast Parts: and had he not encountered with a
General, that is cunning enough, and proved himself at all Machievilltan
assayes, his Match; he had certainly reduced the Forces in Iamaica, into a
self-destroying Flame; especially now their discontents had heated them to so (
tinder-like) a touchinesse, that they were ready to take fire on all occasions.
Nor were these Incendiaries to seek of all plausible Pretexts that witty
usurpation does use to color and gild blacker Designs. But what the aims of
Lieut. Col. Raymond were are not easily to be discovered; but it is more then
presumed, that his want of employment: (having never had any Charge in Iamaica)
though not incapable of the greatest, that this Isle could afford) made him
(unable to bear Neglects) thus over busy; and too too active in moulding poor
Lieut. Col. Tison to what shape he pleased; his Heart being better then his
Head, and his Armoury better blazoned with the Dove then the Serpent; and I am
very confident did not foresee the evil and danger that those lawless Bandyings
do incur, which Relation may admit the more credit in that I am altogether
unconcerned in either Party, and neither prejudiced nor biased with Partiality.

Nor were those fickle-headed Soldiers so soon invited to rise in Arms with
them, but they sooner deserted them: leaving them to the Mercy of their
Opponents Court-Mashalls, who presently doomed them, to be shot to death.
Lieut. Col. Tison died with some reluctance and regret; but Lieut. Col.
Raymond, like himself; with an undismayed Resolution answerable to his wonted
Magnanimity on whose Interment a busy Wit threw this Epitaph.

AT thy Nativity the Heaven's have worn
Such visage as when Cataline was born.
Your Significators sure must be the same,
And Aspects; since you differ but in name.
His vaster soul Rome 's walls could not confine,
Thine daign'd no Pere, scarce that of Cataline.
His style long-winded Tully 's did surpass,
And thine so ravishing, too persuasive was.
He knew no fear, scarce of his own deemed Gods,
Oh that in this, of thee he would had the odds!
His soul, engrossed the Monopoly of Arts,
And thy Orphaean skill could ravish Hearts.
His to w'ring Genius could not bend the knee,
And thine was fitter for a Throne then thee.
The King of Terrors could not him affright,
And thou did seem to court eternal might.
Not un bewailed was his Catastrophe,
And even thine enemies lamented thee.
He lives (though not entombed) by'is famous facts,
Thy Grave, scarce known; but, well enough thine Acts.
Reflex. VII.
7. THat though Infant-Settlements, like Infant-years, are usually most fatal;
yet their Blossoms once Set, are not so easily Blasted. Happily experimented
in Iamaica, whose Blooming hopes now thrive so well, and their Stocks so well
Rooted, that they are not easily Routed. The Major part of the Inhabitants
being old West-Indians, who now Naturalized to the Country, grow the better by
their Transplantation, and flourish in health equivalently comparable to that
of their Mother-Sotl. For which I need not beg credit, since there is no
Country Disease (as at Virginia and Surinam) endemically raging throughout the
Isle; nor any new and unheard of distempers that want a name.

So that a wise man needs no other Physic there but his Temperance, scarcely
craving Hospital assistance so much as we in England, nor have any more reason
to deify an Aesculapius.

And therefore we consult our fears, rather then the dangers, when the very
name of Travel into Foreign Parts, does so much affright us, especially into
so serene an Air as breathes in Iamaica, that owns nothing but it is distance
to dismay us from it is visit; The Indies being no such Bugbear as they are
(usually portrayed. In vindication therefore,

For Travel, take this APOLOGY.
PRithee, persuade me not, my Dear,
You do mistake my Fates, I fear.
My Glass will run no sooner out,
Though I do range the World about.
Could my stay here, bribe a delay,
From the pale Sisters, I would stay.
But it is too true (though it be a Fable)
The Sisters are Inexorable;
And are as nimble with their Knife
To those that lead a Homebred life.
Brave Rawleigh found (too soon) a Tomb!
Not in the Indies, but at home.
The Destinies did Drake forbear
In the Antipodes, not here;
And do, like Ladies coy, neglect
Those most, that Court them with respect.
But will Embraces beg and pray
Of those that are as niceas they.
Or, if the froward Stars dispense
With their Malignant influence,
Adjourning Plagues they use to bring,
In peccant Autumns, or the Spring:
Yet a Consumption, or the Gout,
In Chimney-corner finds us out:
Or, (what is worse) old driveling Age,
With all it is loathed Aequipage,
Arrests us, till we have unsaid
The Prayers which we for long life made;
Yet, they are forced soonest to recant,
That fruits of youthful Travel want:
For knowledge only does commend
Old Age; whilst listening Nephews'tend
With greedy ears to catch up all
Old stories, Grand-sires does let fall;
(Thus shortening long Winters Night)
This paliiates Age with some delight,
For when the cold Palsy does seize
On other members, Tongues at ease.
And is the old man's Commendamus,
Which without Travel is less famous.
Nay damned Exile in this was blessed,
Of Kings, it has made ours the best:
Thus Ioseph's Brethrens (meant) Abuse
Raised him, the Honor of his House.
Aeneas thus enhanc'd his fame,
From Trojan to the Roman Name.
Reflex. VIII.
8. THat an Army once cowed, especially in their first foreign attempt, seldom
bound their fear till it become altogether Panick: like that Punick amaze that
epidemically invaded Carthage, after the first defeat of Hannibal by the more
thriving Genius of Scipio Africanus.

This is certain, that after the first check given to our Forces by the Negroes
and Molettoes in Hispaniola; The very mention of their coming, (though bruted
but for experiment) caused some to hasten their march, beyond the pace of
gravity and valor.

Though after Trials approved them to be English men, rather then Normans,
daring, to Rally defeated Courage. The truth whereof many an Aethiope has now
unwillingly asserted by the lavish expense of his sooty blood. And here I
intended to publish some Essays touching the future Settlement of Iamaica,
which now are upon second thoughts condemned to privacy.

FINIS.

