THE ACTORS VINDICATION, CONTAINING, Three brief Treatises, viz.

I. Their Antiquity. II. Their ancient Dignity, III. The true Use of their
Quality.
Written by Thomas Heywood.

Et prodesse solent and delectare --

LONDON, Printed by G. E. for W. C.

To the most Knowing, the great Encourager of all Arts and LEARNING, The Right
Honorable HENRY Lord Marquess DORCHESTER, Earl of Kingston, Viscount
Newarke, Lord Pierrepont, and Manvers.
My Lord,
THe Author of this ensuing Poem, not long before his Death, discovering how
un. deservedly our Quality lay under the envious and ignorant, made our
Vindication his Subject, which he has ascerted with such Arguments of Reason
and Learning, that the judicious will no doubt rest satisfied of the lawfulness
and (indeed) necessity of it: the gentleman was a Fellow of Peter. house in
Cambridge; I should think it a high part of ingratitude to let so illaborate a
Piece lie buried with him. And therefore to pay the Duty he Owed your Honor,
to undeceive the World, and to revive his memory: I beseech your Lordship, give
me leave to pursue his Intention, by the humble Dedication of this his so
Genious a Work: And if to fix your Name to it be not a presumption beyond the
reach of Pardon, I shall not despair of your Mercy, since your Candor affords
it to the meanest, and to me by consequence, who am in heart,

My Lord, Your most Submissive, W. C.

To my good Friends and Fellows, the Actors of this City.
OVt of my busiest hours, I have spared my self so much time: as to touch some
particulars concerning us, to approve our Antiquity, ancient Dignity, and the
true use of our quality. That it has been ancient we have derived it from more
than two thousand years ago, successively to this Age. That it has been
esteemed by the best and greatest: To omit all the noble Patrons of the former
world, I need allege no more than that Royal and Princely service, in which
of late years we have lived. That the Use thereof is authentic, I have done
my endeavor to instance by History, and approve by Authority. To excuse my
ignorance in affecting no flourish of Eloquence, to set a gloss upon my
Treatise, I have nothing to say for my self but this: A good face needs no
painting, and a good cause no abetting. Some overcurious have too liberally
taxed us: and he (in my thoughts) is held worthy reproof, whose ignorance
cannot answer for it self: I hold it more honest for the guiltless to excuse,
than the envious to exclaim. And we may as freely (out of our plainness)
answer, as they (out of their perverseness object) instancing my self by famous
Scalliger, learned Doctor Gager, Doctor Gentiles, and others, whose opinions
and approved arguments on our part, I have in my brief discourse altogether
omitted; because I am loath to be taxed in borrowing from others: and besides,
their works being extant to the world, offer themselves freely to every man's
perusal. I am professed adversary to none, I rather covet reconcilement, than
opposition, nor proceeds this my labor from any envy in me, but rather to show
them wherein they err. So wishing you free leave, with judicial Audience,
honest Poets, and true gatherers; I commit you all to the fullness of your best
wishes.

Yours ever, T. H.

To the Judicial Reader.
I Have undertook a subject (courteous Reader) not of sufficient countenance to
bostler it self by his own strength; and therefore have charitably reached it
my hand to support it against any succeeding Adversary. I could willingly have
committed this work to some more able than my self: for the weaker the
Combatant, he needs the stronger Arms. But in extremities, I hold it better
to wear rusty Armor, than to go naked; yet if these weak habiliments of war,
can but buckler it from part of the rude buffets of our Adversaries, I shall
hold my pains sufficiently guerdoned. My Pen has seldom appeared in Print
till this occasion; I have ever been too jealous of mine own weakness, willingly
to thrust into the Press: nor had I at this time, but that a kind of
necessity enjoined my coming abroad to satisfy this present generation what
has been said in this business. I have neither showed my self
over-presumptuous, in skorning thy favor, nor too importunate a beggar, by too
servily entreating it. What thou art content to bestow upon my pains, I am
content to accept: if good thoughts, they are all I desire: if good words, they
are more than I deserve: if bad opinion, I am sorry, I have incurred it; if evil
language, I know not how I have merited it: if any thing, I am pleased, if
nothing, I am satisfied, contenting my self with this: I have done no more than
(had I been called to account) showed what I could say in the defense of my own
quality.

Thine T. Heywood.

Firma valent per se, nullumque Machaona quaerunt.
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...):
(...)
(...):
(...):
(...).
(...).
(...).

In laudem, nec Operis, nec Authoris.
FAllor? en haec solis non solum grata Theatris?
(Esse putes solis quanquam dictata Theatris)
Magna sed a sacro veniet tibi gratia Templo,
Parve Liber; proles haut infitianda Parenti.
Plurimus hunc nactus Librum de-plebe-Sacerdos
(Copia Verborum cui sit, non copia Rerum)
Materiae tantum petet hinc; quantum nec in uno
Promere Mense potest: nec in uno for sitan Anno.
Da qu^mvis Textum; bal^a de Nare locutus,
Protinus exclamat (Nefanda piacula!) in urbe
(Pro^ dolor!) Impietas nuda^a front vagatur!
Ecce librum Frat^es) Damnando Authore Poeta:
Pejo^^m^^^ Sol vidit, nec Vorstius Ipse
Haer si^r^h^ val^t componere: Quippe Theatri
Mentitas l^quitu^ laude^ o Tempora!) laudet
Idem si potis est, Monar^^um, Monac^^v^ Cucullum.
Sa^^^ q^is Laud^^ unqu^m Nome^-ve Theatri
Repp^rit in CANONE? ^^u^ ul^us Stolidissime, Dogma
Non CANONEM sapit hoc igitur, sed Apocr^phon. Inde
(Lymphatum at^onito pectus tundente Popello.
Et vacuum quassante eaput moestumque ^uen^^)
Sic multo raucum croci^ans sudore perorat;
Quod non dant Proceres dedit Histrio: nempe benignam
Materiam Declamandi, plebemque docendi.
Quis tamen hic Mystes tragico qui Fulmina ab ore
Torquet? Number doctus? Certe Nam Metra Catonis
Quattuor edidicit, totidem qu^que Commata Tulli.
Jejunamque cateche sin pistoribus aeque
Fartoribusqu^ Piis scripsit. Liber Vtilis his, Qui
Baptistam simulant vultu, Floralia vivunt:
Queisque Supercilio brevior coma. Sed venerandes
Graios. Hic Latiosque patres exosus ad unum est;
Et Canones damnans fit Ap^cryphus. Vritur intus.
Laudibus ACTORIS multum mordetur. Ab illo
Laud sua fraudatur enim Quis nescit? Iniquum'st
Praeter se Scripto laudetur Hypocrita proprie personarum histrinem d^notat.
Hypocrita quisquam.
Fallor? an haec solis non solum grata Theatris?
Anonymus, sive Pessimus omnium Poeta.

To them that are opposite to this Work.
CEase your detracting tongues, contest no more,
Leave off for shame to wound the Actors fame,
Seek rather their wronged credit to restore,
Your envy and detractions quite disclaim:
You that have termed their sports lascivious, vile,
Wishing good Princes would them all exile;
See here this question to the full disputed:
Heywood, has you, and all your proofs confuted.
Would see an Emperor and his Council grave,
A noble Soldier acted to the life,
A Roman Tyrant how he does behave
Himself, at home, abroad, in peace, in strife?
Would see what is love, what is hate, what is foul excess,
Or would a Traitor in his kind express:
Our S^agyrites can (by the Poets pen)
Appear to you to be the self same men.
What though a sort for spite, or want of wit,
Hate what the best allow, the most forbear,
What exercise can you desire more fit,
Than stately stratagems to see and hear.
What profit many may attain by plays,
To the most critic eye this book displaies.
Brave men, brave acts, being bravely acted too, Vide page 5.

Makes, as men see things done, desire to do.
And did it nothing but in pleasing sort,
Keep gallants from mispending of their time,
It might suffice: yet here is noble sport,
Acts well contrived, good Prose, and stately time.
To call to Church, Campanus bells did make,
Plays, dice, and drink invite men to forsake:
Their use being good then use the Actors well,
Since ours all other Nations far excel:
A. H.

To his beloved friend Master THOMAS HEYWOOD.
Suine superbiam quaefitam meritis.
I Cannot though you write in your own cause,
Say you deal partially; but must confess,
(What most men will) you merit due applause;
So worthily your work becomes the Press,
And well our actors, may approve your pains,
For you give them authority to play;
Even whilst the hottest plag^e of envy rai^ns,
Nor for this wa^^ant shall they dearly pay.
What a full state of Poets have you cited,
To judge your cause? and to our equal view
Fair Monumental Theaters recited:
Whose ruins had been ruined but for you.
Such men who can in tune, both rail and sing:
Shall viewing this either confess it is good,
Or let their ignorance condemn the spring,
Because it is merry and renews our blood.
Be therefore your own judgment your defense,
Which shall approve you better than my praise,
Whilst I in right of sacred Innocence,
Durst ore each gilded Tomb this known truth raise.
"Who dead would not be acted by their will,
"It seems such men have acted their lives ill.
By your friend, J. W.

To my very loving Friend and Fellow THOMAS HEYWOOD.
THou that do rail at me for seeing a play,
How would thou have me spend my idle hours?
Would have me in a Tavern drink all day?
Melt in the Suns heat? or walk out in showers?
Gape at the Lottery from morn till even,
To hear whose mottoes blanks have, and who prises?
To hazard all at dice (chance six or seven?)
To card? or bowled My humor this despises.
But thou will answer: None of these I need,
Yet my tired spirits must have recreation:
What shall I do that may retirement breed?
Or how refresh my self? and in what fashion?
To drabbe, to game, to drink, all these I hate:
Many enormous things depend on these,
My faculties truly to recreate
With modest mirth, and my self best to please.
Give me a Play; that no distaste can breed,
Prove thou a Spider, and from fl^we^s suck gall,
I Will like a Be, take honey from a weed:
For I was never Puritanicall.
I love no public soothers, private scorners,
That rail against letchery, yet love a harlot.
When I drink, it is in fight, and not in corners:
I am no open Saint, and secret Varlet.
Still when I come to Plays, I love to sit,
That all may see me, in a public place:
Even in the Stages front, and not to get
Into a nook, and hood-wink there my face.
"This is the difference, such would have men deem,
"Them what they are not: I am what I seem.
R. P.

To my good friend and fellow, THOMAS HEYWOOD.
LEt others task things honest: and to please
Some that pretend more strictness than the rest,
Exclaim on Plays: know, I am none of these
That in-ly love, what out-ly I detest.
Of all the modest pastimes I can find,
To content me, of Plays I make best use,
As most agreeing with a generous mind.
There see I virtues crown, and sins abuse.
Two hours well spent, and all their pastimes done,
What Is good I follow, and what is bad I shun.
C. B.

To my good friend and fello THOMAS HEYWOOD
HAve I not known a man that to be hired,
Would not for any treasure see a play,
Reele from a Tavern? Shall this be admired?
When as another but the other day,
That held to wear a surplesse most unmeet,
Yet after stood at Paul's Cross in a sheet.
R. P.

To my approved good friend Mr. THOMAS HEYWOOD.
OF thee, and thy Apology for plays
^f will not much speak in contempt or praise:
Yet in these following lines I Will show my mind,
O Plays, and such as have against Plays repined.
A Play's a brief Epitome of time,
Where man may see his virtue or his crime
Laid open, either to their vices shame,
Or to their virtues memorable fame.
A Play's a true transparent Crystal mirror,
To show good minds their mirth, the bad their terror:
Where stabbing, drabbing, dicing, drinking, swearing
Are all proclaimed unto the sight and hearing,
In ugly shapes of Heaven-abhorred sin,
Where men may see the mire they wallow in.
And well I know ^t makes the Devil rage,
To see his servants flouted on a stage.
A Who^e, a Thief, a Pander, or a Bawd,
A Broker, or a slave that lives by fraud:
An Usurer, whose soul is in his chest,
Until in hell it comes to restless rest.
A Fly-blown gull, that fain would be a Gallant,
A Raggamuffin that has spent his Tallent.
A sel-wise fool, that sees his wits out-stript,
Or any vice that feels it self but nipt,
Either in Tragedy or Comedy,
In Moral, Pastoral, or History:
But straight the poison of their envious tongues,
Breaks out in volleys of Calumnious wrongs.
And then a Tinker, or a Dray-man swears,
I would the house were fired about their ears.
Thus when a Play-nips Satan by the nose,
Straight all his vass^^l^ are the Actors foes.
But fear not man, let envy swell and burst,
Proceed, and bid the Devil do his worst.
For Plays are good or bad, as they are used,
And best inventions often are abused.
Yours ever J. T.

The Author to his Book.
THe World's a Theater, the earth a Stage,
Which God and Nature ^^th with Actors fill, So compared by the Fathers.

Kings have their entrance in due equipage,
And some their part play well and others ill.
The best no better are (^n this Theater,)
Where every humour's fitted in his kind,
This a true Subject acts, and that a Traitor,
The first applauded, and the last confined,
This plays an honest man, and that a knave
A gentle person this, and he a clown
One man is ragged, and another brave:
All men have parts, and each man acts his own.
She a chaste Lady acts all her life,
A wanton Curtezan another plays,
This, covets marriage love, that, nuptial strife,
Both in continual action spend their days.
Some Citizens, some Soldiers, born to adventure,
Shepherds and Seamen; then our play's begun,
When we are born and to the world first enter;
And all find Exits when their parts are done.
If then the world a Theater present,
As by the roundnesse it appears most fit,
Built with star-galleries of high ascent,
In which Jehove does as spectator sit,
And chief determiner to applaud the best,
And their endeavors crown with more than merit.
But by their evil actions doomes the rest,
To end disgraced whilst others praise inherit.
He that denies then theaters should be,
He may as well deny a world to me.
Thomas Heywood.

The Actors Vindication, and first touching their ANTIQUITY.
MOVED by the sundry exclamations of many seditious Sectists in this age, who,
in the fatness and rankness of a peacable Commonwealth, grow up like unsavory
tuffs of grass, which, though outwardly green and fresh to the eye, yet are they
both unpleasant and unprofitable, being too sower for food, and too rank for
fodder: These men like the ancient Germans, affecting no fashion but their own,
would draw other nations to be slovens like themselves, and undertaking to
purify and reform the sacred bodies of the Church and Commonweal (In the
true use of both which they are altogether Ignorant) would but like artlesse
Physicians, for experiment sake, rather minister pil^ to poison the whole body,
than cordials to preserve any or the least part. Amongst many other things
tolerated in this peaceable and flourishing State, it has pleased the high and
mighty Princes of this Land to limit the use of certain public Theaters, which
since many of these overcurious heads have lavishy and violently slandered, I
hold it not amiss to lay open some few Antiquities to approve the true use of
them, with arguments, not of the least moment, which according to the weakness of
my spirit and infancy of my judgment, I will (by Gods grace) commit to the eyes
of all favorable and judicial Readers, as well to satisfy the requests of
some of our well qualified favorers, as to stop the envious acclamations of
those who challenge to themselves a privilege Invective, and against all free
estates a railing liberty: Loath am I (I protest) being the youngest and
weakest of the Nest wherein I was hatched, to soar this pitch before others of
the same brood more fleg, and of better wing than my self: but though they whom
more especially this task concerns, both for their ability in writing and
sufficiency in judgment (as their works generally witness to the world:) are
content to over-slip so necessary a subject, and have left it as to me, the
most unworthy: I thought it better to stammer out my mind, that not to speak at
all; to scribble down a mark in the stead of writing a name, and to stumble on
the way, rather than to stand still and not to proceed on so necessary a
Journey. Nox erat, and somnus lassos submisit ocellos.

It was about that time of the night when darkness had already overspread the
world, and a hushed and general silence possessed the face of the earth, and men's
bodies tired with the business of the day, betaking themselves to their best
repose, their never-sleeping souls labored in uncouth dreams and visions,
when suddenly appeared to me the tragic Muse Melpomene.

-- animosa Tragedia.
-- and movit pictis immixa Cothurnis
Densum Cesarie, terque quater que Caput:
Her hair rudely disheveled, her chaplet withered, her visage with tears
stained, her brow furrowed, her eyes dejected, nay her whole complexion quite
faded and altered: and perusing her habit, I might behold the color of her
fresh robe all Crimson, breathed, and with the invenomed juice of some profane
spilt ink in every place stained: nay more, her busken of all the wonted Jewels
and ornaments utterly despoyled, about which in manner of a garter I might
behold these letters written in a plain and large Character.

Behold my Tragic Buskin rent and torn,
Which Kings and Emperors in their times have worn,
This I no sooner had perused, but suddenly I might perceive the enraged Muse,
cast up her scornful head: her eye-bals sparkle fire, and a sudden flash of
disdain, intermixed with rage, purple her cheek, When pacing with a majestic
gate and rowsing up her fresh spirits with a lively and quaint action, she
began in these or the like words.

Grande sonant tragici, tragicos decet Ira Cothurnos.
Am I Melpomene the buskend Muse,
That held in awe the tyrants of the world,
And played their lives in public Theaters,
Making them fear to sin, since fearless I
Prepare to write their lives in Crimson Ink,
And act their shames in eye of all the world?
Have not I whipped Vice with a scourge of steel,
Unmasked stern Murder; shamed lascivious Lust.
Plucked off the visar from grimme Treasons face,
And made the Sun point at their ugly sins?
Has not this powerful hand tamed fiery Rage,
Killed poisonous Envy with her own keen darts,
Choked up the Covetous mouth with moulten gold,
Burst the vast womb of eating Gluttony,
And drowned the Drunkards gall in juice of grapes?
I have showed pride his picture on a stage,
Laid open the ugly shapes his steel-glasse hide,
And made him pass thence meekly: In those days
When Emperors with their presence graced my Scenes,
And thought none worthy to present themselves
Save Emperors, to delight Ambassadors,
Then did this garland flourish, then my Robe
Was of the deepest Crimson, the best die:
Cura Ducum fuerant olim regumque poetae,
Praemiaque Antiqui magna tulere Chori
Who ledge then in the bosom of great Kings.
Save he that had a grave Cothurnate Muse.
A stately verse in an Iambick style
Became a Kesars mouth. Oh these were times
Fit for your Bards to vent your golden Rimes.
Then did I tread on Arras, Cloth of Tissue,
Hung round the forefront of my stage: the pillars
That did support the Roof of my large frame.
Double apparreld in pure Ophir gold:
Whilst the round Circle of my spacious orb^
Was thronged with Princes, Dukes and Senators.
Nunc Hederae sine Honor jacent.
But now is the Iron age, and black mouthed Curres,
Bark at the virtues of the former world.
Such with their breath have blasted my fresh roabe,
Plucked at my flowery Chaplet, towsd my tresses.
Nay some whom for their baseness hist and skorn'd
The Stage, as loathsome, has long-since spued out,
Have watched their time to cast envenomed Ink
To stain my garments with. Oh Seneca
Thou tragic Poet, had thou lived to see
This outrage done to sad Melpomene,
With such sharp lines thou would revenge my blot,
As Armed Ovid against Ibis wrote.
With that in rage she left the place, and I my dream, for at the instant I
awaked, when having perused this vision over and over again in my remembrance,
I suddenly bethought me, How many ancient Poets, Tragic and Comic, dying many
ages ago live still amongst us in their works, as amongst the Greeks,
Euripides: Menander, Sophocles, Eupolis, Eschilus, Aristophanes, Appollodorus,
Anaxandrides, Nichomachus, Alexis, Tereus and others, so among the Latins:
Attilius, Actius, Melithus, Plautus, Terence, and others whom for brevity sake
I omit.

Hos Ediscit and hos arcto stipata Theatro
Spectat Roma potens, habet hos, numeratque Poetas.
These potent Rome acquires and holds dear,
And in their round Theaters flocks to hear:
These or any of these had they lived in the afternoon of the world, as they
died even in the morning, I assure my self would have left more memorable
trophies of that learned Muse, whom in their golden numbers they so richly
adorned. And amongst our modern poets, who have bin industrious in many an
elaborate and ingenious poem, even they whose pens have had the greatest
traffic with the Stage, have been in the excuse of these Muses most forgetful.
But leaving these, lest I make too large a head to a small body, and so mishape
my subject, I will begin with the antiquity of Acting Comedies, Tragedies, and
Histories. And first in the golden world.

In the first of the Olimpiads, amongst many other active exercises in which
Hercules ever trimph'd as victor, there was in his nonage presented unto him by
his Tutor, in the fashion of a History, acted by the choice of the nobility of
Greece, the worthy and and memorable acts of his father Jupiter. Which being
personated with lively and well spirited action, wrought such impression in his
noble thoughts that in mere emulation of his fathers valor (not at the behest
of his Stepdame Juno) he performed his twelve labors: Him valiant Theseus
followed, and Achilles, Theseus. Which bred in them such haughty and
magnanimous attempts, that every succeeding age has recorded their worths,
unto fresh admiration. Aristotle that Prince of Philosophers, whose books carry
such credit, even in these our Universities, that to say Ipse dixit is a
sufficient Axioma, he having the tuition of young Alexander, caused the
destruction of Troy to be acted before his pupil, in which the valor of
Achilles was so naturally expressed, that it impressed the heart of Alexander,
insomuch that all his succeeding actions were merely shaped after that pattern,
and it may be imagined had Achilles never lived, Alexander had never conquered
the whole world. The like assertion may be made of that ever renowned Roman
Julius Caesar. Who after the like representation of Alexander in the Temple of
Hercules standing in Gades was never in any peace of thoughts, till by his
memorable exployts, he had purchased to himself the name of Alexander: as
Alexander till he thought himself of desert to be called Achilles: Achilles
Theseus, Theseus till he had sufficiently imitated the acts of Hercules, and
Hercules till he held himself worthy to be called the son of Jupiter. Why
should not the lives of these worthies, presented in these our days, effect
the like wonders in the Princes of our times, which can no way be so exquisitly
demonstrated, nor so lively pourtrayed as by action: Oratory is a kind of a
speaking picture, therefore may some say, is it not sufficient to discourse to
the ears of Princes the fame of these conquerors: Painting likewise is a dumb
oratory, therefore may we not as well by some curious Pigmalion, draw their
conquests to work the like love in Princes toward these Worthies by showing
them their pictures drawn to the life, as it wrought on the poor painter to be
inamored of his own shadow? I answer this,

Non magis expressi vultus per ahenia signa
Quam per vatis opus, mores animique virorum
Clarorum apparent. --
The visage is no better cut in brass,
Nor can the Carver so express the face
As does the Poets pen, whose arts surpass,
To give men's lives and virtues their due grace.
A Description is only a shadow received by the ear, but not perceived by the
eye, so lively pourtrature is merely a form seen by the eye but can neither
show action, passion, motion, or any other gesture, to move the spirits of the
beholder to admiration: but to see a soldier shaped like a soldier, walk,
speak, act like a soldier: to see a Hector all besmer'd in blood, trampling
upon the bulks of Kings. A Troilus returning from the field in the fight of his
father ^riam, as if man and horse even from the steeds rough fetlocks to the
plume in the champions helmet had been together plunged into a purple Ocean: To
see a Pompey ride in triumph, then a Caesar conquer that Pompey: laboring
Hanniball alive, hewing his passage through the Alps. To see as I have seen,
Hercules in his own shape hunting the Boar, knocking down the Bull, taming the
Heart, fighting with Hydra, murdering Gerion, slaughtering Diomed, wounding the
Stimphalides, killing the Centaurs, quashing the Lion, squeesing the Dragon,
dragging Cerberus in Chains, and lastly, on his high Pyramides writing Nil
ultra, Oh these were sights to make an Alexander.

To turn to our domestic histories, what English blood seeing the person of
any bold Englishman presented and does not hug his fame, and hunney at his
valor, persuing him in his enterprise with his best wishes, and as being wrapped
in contemplation, offers to him in his heart all prosperous performance, as if
the Personater were the man Personated, so bewitching a thing is lively and
well spirited action, that it has power to new mould the hearts of the
spectators and fashion them to the shape of any noble and notable attempt. What
coward to see his countryman valiant would not be ashamed of his own cowardice?
What English Prince should he behold the true pourtraiture of that amorous King
Edward the third, foraging France, taking so great a King captive in his own
country, quartering the English Lions with the French Flower-delyce, and would
not be suddenly Inflamed with so royal a spectacle, being made apt and fit for
the like achievement. So of Henry the fifth: but not to be tedious in any
thing. Ovid in one of his poems holds this opinion, that Romulus was the first
that brought plays into Italy, which he thus sets down

Primus sollicitos fecisti Romule Ludos.
Cum jurit viduos rapta Sabina viros
Tunc neque marmoreo pendebant vela Theatro, etc.
Which we English thus.
Thou noble Romulus first plays contrives,
To get thy widdowed soldiers Sabine wives.
In those days from the marble house did wave
No sail, no silken flag, or ensign brave.
Then was the Tragic stage not painted red,
Or any mixed stains on pillars spread,
Then did the Scene want art, the unready Stage
Was made of grass and earth in that rude age:
About the which were thick leaved branches placed,
Nor did the Audients hold themselves disgraced,
Of turf and heathy sods to make their seats,
Framed in degrees of earths and mossy peats.
Thus placed in order, every Roman pried
Into her face that sat next by his side;
And closing with her, severally began move,
The innocent Sabine women to their love:
And whilst the piper Thuscus rudely played,
And by thrice stamping with his foot had made
A sign unto the rest, there was a shout,
Whose shrill report pierced all the air about.
Now at a sign of rape given from the King,
Round through the house the lusty Romans fling,
Leaving no corner of the same unsought,
Till every one a frighted virgin caught.
Look as the trembling Dove the Eagle flies,
Or a young Lamb when he the Woolf espies;
So ran the poor girls, filling the air with skreeks,
Emptying of all the color their pale cheeks.
One fear possessed them all, but not one look,
This tears her hair, she has her wits forsook,
Some sadly sit, some at their mothers call,
Some chase, some fly, some stay, but frighted all.
Thus were the ravished Sabines blushing led
(Becoming shame) unto each Romans bed.
If any strived against it, straight her man
Would take her on his knee (whom fear made wan)
And say; Why weep'st thou sweet? what ailes my dear?
Dry up these drops, these clouds of sorrow clear,
I Will be to thee if thou thy grief wilt smother,
Such as thy Father was unto thy Mother.
Full well could Romulus his Soldiers please,
To give them such fair Mistresses as these.
If such rich wages thou will give to me,
Great Romulus, thy Soldier, I will be.
Romulus having erected the walls of Rome, and leading under him a warlike
Nation, being in continual war with the Sabines, after the choice selecting
of a place, fit for so famous a City, and not knowing how to people the same,
his train wholly consisting of Soldiers, who without the company of women
(they not having any in their Army) could not multiply; but so were likely that
their immortal fames should dye issuless with their mortal bodies Thus
therefore Romulus devised; After a p^rle and at^^nement made with the neighbor
Nations, he built a Theater, plain, according to the time; yet large, fi^ for
the entertainment of so great an Assembly, and these were they whose famous
issue peopled the City of Rome, which in after-ages grew to such height, that
not Troy founded by Dardanus, Carthage laid by Dido, Tyrus built by Agenor,
Memphis made by Ogdous, Thebes seated by Cadmus, nor Babylon reared by
Semiramis, were any way equal to this situation grounded by Romulus: To which
all the discovered Kingdoms of the earth after became tributaries. And in the
noontide of their glory, and height of all their honor, they edified
Theaters, and Amphi-theaters: For in their flourishing Commonweal, their
public Comedians and Tragedians most flourished, insomuch that the Tragic and
Comic Poets, were all generally admired of the people, and particularly every
man of his private Mecenas. Imperante Augusto, natus est Christus, Imperante
Tiberio crucifixus.


In the Reign of Augustus Christ was borne, and as well in his days as before
his birth, these solemnities were held in the greatest estimation. In Julius
Caesar's time, predeces^^ur to Augustus, the famous hony-tongu'd Orator Cicero
flourished; who, amongst many other his eloquent Orations, writ certain yet
extant, for the Comedian Roscius (pro Roscio Comoedo) of whom we shall speak
more large hereafter. These continued in their honor till the reign of
Tiberius Caesar, and under Tiberius Christ was crucified. To this end do I use
this assertion, because in the full and perfect time our Savior sojourned on
the earth, even in those happy and peaceful days the spacious Theaters were
in the greatest opinion amongst the Romans; yet, neither Christ himself, nor
any of his sanctified Apostles, in any of their Sermons, Acts, or Documents, so
much as named them, or upon any abusive occasion, touched them. Therefore hence
(me thinks) a very probable and important argument may be grounded, that since
they, in their divine wisdoms, knew all the sins abounding in the world
before that time, tax and reproved all the abuses reigning in that time, and
foresaw all the actions and inconveniences (to the Church prejudicial) in the
time to come; Since they (I say) in all their holy doctrines, books, and
principles of divinity, were content to pass them over, as things tolerated,
and indifferent, why should any nice and over scrupulous head^, since they
cannot ground their curiousness either upon the old or new Testament, take
upon them to correct, control, and carpe at that, against which they cannot
find any text in the sacred Scriptures?

In the time of Nero Caesar, the Apostle Paul was persecuted and suffered, Nero
was then Emperor, Paul writ his Epistle to the Romans, and at the same time
did the Theaters most flourish amongst the Romans; yet where can we quote any
place in his Epistles, which so bids the Church of God, then resident in Rome,
to absent them selves from any such assemblies.

To speak my opinion with all indifferency, God has not enjoined us to wear
all our apparel solely to defend the cold. Some garments we wear for warmth,
others for ornament, So did the children of Israel hang earrings in their
ears, nor was it by the law forbidden them. That purity is not looked for at
our hands, being moral and humane, that is required of the Angels, being
celestial and divine. God made us of earth, men; knows our natures,
dispositions and imperfections, and therefore has limited us a time to
rejoice, as he has enjoined us a time to mourn for our transgressions; and I
hold them more scrupulous than well advised, that go about to take from us the
use of all moderate recreations. Why has God ordained for man, variety of
meats, dainties and delicates, if not to taste thereon? why does the world
yield choice of honest pastimes, if not decently to use them? Was not the Hare
made to be hunted; the Stagg to be chased; and so of all other beasts of game
in their several kinds; since God has provided us of these pastimes, why may
we not use them to his glory? Now if you ask me why were not the Theaters as
gorgeously built in all other Cities of Italy as Rome? And why are not
Play Houses maintained as well in other Cities of England, as London? my answer
is: It is not meet every mean Esquire should carry the part belonging to one of
the Nobility, or for a Noble man to usurp the estate of a Prince: Rome was a
Metropolis, a place whither all the nations known under the Sun, resorted, so
is London, and being to receive all Estates, all Princes, all Nations,
therefore to afford them all choice of pastimes, sports, and recreations: yet
were their Theaters in all the greatest Cities of the world, as we will more
largely particularize hereafter.

I never yet could read any History of any Commonweal which did not thrive and
prosper whilst these public solemnities were held in adoration. Oh but (say
some) Marcus Aurelius banished all such trivial exercises beyond the confines
of Italy. Indeed this Emperor was a Philosopher of the sect of Diogenes, a
Cinick, and whether the hand of Diogenes would become a scepter, or a root
better, I leave to your judgments. This Aurelius was a great and sharp
reprover, who because the Matrons and Ladies of Rome, in scorn of his person
made a Play of him; in his time interdicted the use of their Theaters. So,
because his wife Faustine played false with him, he generally exclaimed against
all women: Because himself could not touch an Instrument, he banished all the
Musicians in Rome, and being a mere coward, put all the Gladiators and
sword-players into exile. And lest his own suspected life should be again acted
by the Comedians, as it before had been by the noble Matrons, he professed
himself adversary to all of that quality so severe a reformation of the weal
publik he used, restraining the Citizens of their free liberties, which till
his days was not seen in Rome; but what profited this the weal public? do but
peruse the ancient Roman Chronicles, and you shall undoubtedly find, that from
the time of this precise Emperor, that stately City, whose lof^y buildings
crowned seven high hills at once, and overpeer'd them all, streightway began to
hang the head, by degrees the foreign Kingdoms revolted, and the homage done
them by strange Nations, was in a little space quite abrogated: For they
governed all the world, some under Consuls, some under Pro-consuls, Presidents,
and Praetors, they divided their Dominions and Countries into Principalities,
some into Provinces, some into Toparchies, some into Tetrarchies, some into
Tribes, others into Ethnarchies: But now their homage ceast, Marcus Aurelius
ended their mirth, which presaged that shortly after should begin their sorrow,
he banished their liberty, and immediately followed their bondage. For Rome,
which till then kept all the Nations of the world in subjective awe, was in a
little space awed even by the basest Nations of the world. To leave Italy, and
look back into Greece, the Sages and Princes of Grecia, who for the refinedness
of their language were in such reputation through the world that all other
tongues were esteemed barbarous; These that were the first understanders,
trained up their youthful Nobility to be Actors, debarring the base Mechanics
so worthy employment: for none but the young Heroes were admitted that
practice, so to embolden them in the delivery of any foreign Embassy. These
wise men of Greece! (so called by the Oracle) could by their industry, find
out no nearer or director course to plant humanity and manners in the hearts of
the multitude, than to instruct them by moraliz'd mystries what vices to avoid,
what virtues to embrace; what enormities to abandon, what ordinances to
observe: whose lives (being for some special endowments in former time
honored) they should admire and follow: whose vicious actions (personated in
some licentious liver) they should despise and shun, which born out as well by
the wisdom of the Poet, as supported by the worth of the actors, wrought such
impressio^ in the hearts of the plebe, that in short space they excelled in
civility and government, insomuch that from them all the neighbor Nations drew
their patterns of Humanity, as well in the establishing of their laws, as the
reformation of their manners. These Magi and Gimnosophistae, that lived (as I
may say) in the childhood and insancy of the world, before it knew how to speak
perfectly though even in those days, that Action was the nearest way to plant
understanding in the hearts of the ignorant. Yea (but say some) you ought not
to confound the habits of either sex as to let your boys wear the attires of
virgins, etc. To which I answer. The Scriptures are not always to be expounded
merely, according to the letter: (for in such estate stands our main
Sacramental Controversy) but they ought exactly to be conferred with the
purpose they handle. To do as the Sodomites did, use preposterous in lusts in
preposterous habits, is in that text flatly and severely forbidden: nor can I
imagine any man, that has in him any taste or relish of Christianity to be
guilty of so abhorred a sin. Besides, it is not probable that Plays were
meant in that text, because we read not of any Plays known in that time that
Deutronomie was writ among the Children of Israel, nor do I hold it lawful to
beguile the eyes of the world in confounding the shapes of either sex, as to
keep any youth in the habit of a virgin, or any virgin in the shape of a lad,
to shroud them from the eyes of their fathers, tutors, or protectors, or to any
other sinister intent whatsoever. But to see our youths attired in the habbit
of women, who knows not what their intents be? who cannot distinguish them by
their names, assuredly knowing, they are but to represent such a Lady at such a
time appointed?

Do not the Universities, the fountains and well springs of all good Arts,
Learning and Documents, admit the like in their Colleges? and they (I assure
my self) are not ignorant of their true use. In the time of my residence in
Cambridge, I have seen Tragedies, Comedies, Histories, Pastorals and Shows,
publicly acted, in which Graduates of good place and reputation, have been
specially parted, this is held necessary for the emboldening of their junior
scholars, to arm them with audacity, against they come to be employed in any
public exercise, as in the reading of the Dialectick, Rhetoric, Ethicke,
Mathematicke, the Physic, or Metaphysick Lectures: It teaches audacity to the
bashful Grammarian, being newly admitted into the private College, and after
matriculated and entered as a member of the University, and makes him a bold
Sophister to argue pro and contra, to compose his Sillogismes, Cathegorick, or
Hipothetick (simple or compound) to reason and frame a sufficient argument to
prove his questions or to defend any axioma, to distinguish of any Dilemma, and
be able to moderate in any Argumentation whatsoever.

To come to Rhetoric, it not only emboldens a scholar to speak, but
instructs him to speak well, and with judgment, to observe his comma's, colons,
and full points, his parentheses, his breathing spaces, and distinctions, to
keep a decorum in his countenance, neither to frown when he should smile, nor
to make unseemly and disguised faces in the delivery of his words, not to stair
with his eyes, draw awry his mouth, confound his voice in the hollow of his
throat, or tear his words hastily betwixt his teeth, neither to buffet his desk
like a madman, nor stand in his place like a liveless Image, demurely
plodding, and without any smooth and formal motion. It instructs him to fit his
phrases to his action, and his action to his phrase, and his pronunciation to
them both.

Tully in his book ad Caium Herennium, requires five things in an Orator,
Invention, Disposition, Elocution, Memory, and Pronuntiation, yet all are
imperfect without the sixth, which is Action: For be his invention never so
fluent and exquisite, his disposition and order never so composed and formal,
his eloquence and elaborate phrases never so material and pithy, his memory
never so firm and retentive, his pronunciation never so musical and plausive,
yet without a comely and e'egant gesture, a grat^o^s and a bewitching kind of
action, a natural and a familiar motion of the head, the hand, the body, and a
moderate and fit countenance suitable to all the rest, I hold all the rest as
nothing. A delivery and sweet action is the gloss and beauty of any discourse,
tha^ belongs to a Scholar. And this is the action behoveful in any that
profess this quality, not to use any impudent or forced motion in any part of
the body, no rough, or other violent gesture, nor on the contrary to stand like
a stiff starcht man, but to qualify every thing according to the nature of the
person personated: For in overacting tricks, and toyling too much in the antic
habit of humors, men of the ripest desert, greatest opinions, and best
reputations, may break into the most violent absurdities. I take not upon me to
teach, but to advise: For it becomes my Juniority rather to be pupild my self,
than to instruct others.

To proceed, and to lo^k into those men that profess themselves adversaries to
this quality, they are none of the gravest, and most ancient Doctors of the
Academy, but only a sort of find-faults, such as interest their prodigal
tongues in all men's affairs without respect. The^e I have heard as liberally in
their superficial censures, tax the exercises performed in their Colleges, as
these acted on our public Stages, not looking into the true and direct use of
either, but ambitiously preferring their own presumptuous humors, before the
profound and authen^ical judgments of all the learned Doctors of the
University. Thus you see, that touching the antiquity of Actors and Acting,
they have not been new, lately begot by any upstart invention, but I have
derived them from the first Olimpiads, and I shall continue the use of them
even till this present age. And so much touching their antiquity.

Pars superest coepti: pars est exhausta laboris.
The end of the first Book.
OF THE ACTORS, and their ancient DIGNITY.
THE SECOND BOOK.
JVLIVS CAESAR, the famous Conqueror, discoursing with Marcus Cicero, the
famous Orator, amongst many other matters debated, It pleased the Emperor to
ask his opinion of the Histrions, the players of Rome, pretending some cavil
against them, as men whose employment in the Commonweal was unnecessary: to
whom Cicero answered thus: Content thee Caesar, there be many heads busied and
bewitched with these pastimes now in Rome, which otherwise would be inquisitive
after thee and thy greatness: Which answer, how sufficiently the Emperor
approved may be conjectured by the many gifts bestowed, and privileges and
Charters after granted to men of that quality. Such was likewise the opinion of
a great statesman of this land, about the time that certain books were called
in question. Doubtless there be many men of that temper, who were they not
carried away, and weaned from their own corrupt and bad disposition, and by
accidental I means removed and altered from their dangerous and sullen
intendments, would be found apt and prone to many notorious and traiterous
practices. Kings and Monarchs are by God placed and inthroned supra nos above
us, and we are to regard them as the Sun from whom we receive the light to live
under, whose beauty and brightness we may only admire, not meddle with: Ne
ludamus cum Diis, they that shout at the stars over their heads, their arrows
fall directly down and wound themselves, But this allusion may be better
referred to the use of action promised in our third Treatise, than to their
dignity which next and immediately (by Gods grace) our purpose is to handle.

The word Tragedy, is derived from the Greek word (...), Caper a goat, because
a goat being a beast most injurious to the vines, was sacrificed to Bacchus:
Hereupon Diodorus writes, that Tragedies had their first names from the
oblations due to Bacchus; or else of (...), a kind of painting, which the
Tragedians of the o^^ time used to stain their faces with. By the censure of
Horace, Thespis was the first Tragic writer.

Ignotum Tragicae genus invenisse Cam^nae
Dicitur,, and plaustris vexisse poema^a Thespis. Horace Art Poetica,

The unknown Tragic Muse Thespis first sought,
And her high Poems in her Chariot brought.
This Thespis was an Athenian Poet, born in Thespina, a free town in Eoetia by
Helicon, of him the nine Muses were called Thespiades. But by the censure of
Quintilian, Aeschiles before him, but afte^ them Sophocles and Euripides
clothed Polid. Virgil.
their Tragedies in better ornament. Livius And^onious was the first that writ
any Roman Tragedy in which kind of poesy Accius, Pacuvius, Seueca, and
Ovidius excelled.

Sceptra tamen sumpsi curaque Tragedia nostra Ovid Amorum ^b. 2. 18.

Crevit, at huic operi quamlibet aptus eram.
The sceptred Tragedy then proved our wit,
And to that work we found us apt and fit.
Again in his fifth book de tristibus; Eleg 8.
Carmen quod vestro saltari nostra Theatro
Versibus and plaudi scribis ^amice meis.
Dear friend thou writ'st our Muse i^'mongst you song,
And in your Theaters with plaudits rung.
Likewise in his Epistle to Augustus, writ from the Pontick Island, whither he
was banished.

Et dedimus tragicis scriptum regale Cothurnis,
Quaeque gravis debet verba Cothurnus habet.
With royal style speaks our Cothurnate Muse,
A buskined phrase in buskined plays we use.
The word Comedy is derived from the Greek word (...), a street, and (...)
Cantus a song, a street-song, as signifying there was ever mirth in those
streets where Comedies most flourisht.

Haec paces habuere bonae ventique secundi.

In this kind Aristophanes, Eupolis, Cratinus were famous, after them Menander
and Philemon: succeeding them Cicilius, Nevius Plautus and Terentius.

Musaque Turani tragicis innixa Cothurnis,
Et tua cum socco, Musa, Melisse levis.
Turanus tragic buskin graced the Play,
Melissa'es Comic shoe made lighter way.
The ancient Histriographers write, that among the Alex. Metapol.
Greeks there were diverse places of exercise, appointed for Poets, some at the
grave of Theseus, others at Helicon, where they in Comedies and Tragedies
contented for several prices, where Sophocles was adjudged, victor over
Aeschilus. There were others in the City of Elis, where Menander was foiled by
Philemen. In the same kind Hesiod is said to have triumphed over Homer. So
Corinna for her excellencies in these inventions, (called Musca lirica
(excelled Pindarus the Theban Poet, for which she was five times crowned with
garlands.

The first public Theater was by Dionysius built in Athens, it was fashioned
in the manner of a semi-cir^le, or Theaters.
half moon, whose galleries and degrees were reared from the ground, their
stairs high, in the midst of which did arise the stage, besides such a
convenient distance from the earth, that the audience assemble might easily
behold the whole project without impediment. From this the Romans had their
first paterns, which at the first not being roof't, but lying open to all
weathers, Quintus Catulus was the first that caused the outside to be covered
with linen cloth, and the inside to be hung round with Curtens of silk. But
when Marcus Scaurus was Aedilis, he repaired it, and supported it round with
pillars of Marble.

Caius Curio, at the solemn obsequies of his father, erected a famous Theater
of Timber, in so strange a form, that on two several stages, two sundry
plays might be acted at once, and yet the one be no hinderance or impedement
to the other; and when he so pleased the whole frame was artificially composed
to meet in the midst which made an Amphitheater.

Pompey the great, after his victories against Mithridates, King of Pontus, saw
in the City Mitelene, a Theater of another form, and after his triumphs and
return to Rome, he raised one after the same pattern of freestone, of that
vastness and receipt, that within his spaciousness it was able at once to
receive fourscore thousand people, every one to fit, see and hear.

In emulation of this sumptuous and gorgeous building, Julius Caesar, successor
to Pompeis greatness exceeded him in his famous Architecture, he raised an
Amphitheater, Campo Martio, in the field of Mars, which as far excelled
Pompeies, as Pompeyes did exceed Caius Curioes, Curioes, that of Marcus
Scaurus, Scaurus that of Quintus Catulus, or Catulus that which was first made
in Athens by Dionysius: for the Basses, Columns, Pillars, and Piramides were
all of hewed Marble, the coverings of the stage, which we call the heavens
(where upon any occasion their Gods descended) were Geometrically supported by
a Giant-like Atlas, whom the Poets for his Astrology, feign to bear heaven on
his shoulders, in which an artificial Sunn and Moon of extraordinary aspect
and brightness had their diurnall, and nocturnall, motions; so had the stars
their true and coelestiael course; so had the spheres, which in their
continual motion made a most sweet and ravishing harmony. Here were the
Elements and planets in their degrees, the sky of the Moon, the sky of Mercury,
Venus, Sol, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn; the stars, both fixed and wandering: and
above all these, the first mover, or primum mobile, there were the 12 signs;
the lines Equinoctial and Zodiacal, the Meridian circle, or Zenith, the Orizon
circle, or Emisphere, the Zones torrid and frozen, the poles artick and
antartick, with all other tropicks, orbs, lines, circles, the Solstitium and
all other motions of the stars, signs, and planets (...) brief, in that little
compass were comprehended the perfect model of the firmament, the whole frame
of the heavens, with all grounds of Astronomicall conjecture From the roof grew
a lover or turret, of an exceeding altitude, from which an ensign of silk waved
continually, Pendebant vela Theatro. But left I wast too much of that
compendiousness, I have promised in my discourse, in idle descriptions, I leave
you to judge the proportion of the body by the making of this one limb, every
pillar, seat, foot-post, stair, galery, and whatsoever else belongs to the
furnishing of such a place, being in cost, substance, form, and artificial
workmanship, most suitable. The floor, stage, roof, outside, and inside, as
costly as the Pantheon or Capitols. In the principal galleries were special
remote, selected and chosen seats for the Emperor, patres conscripti,
Dictators Consuls, Preto^s, Tribunes Triumviri, Decemvi^i, Ediles, Curules, and
other Noble Officers among the Senators: all other rooms were free for the
plebe, or multitude. To this purpose I introduce these famous Edifices; as
wondering at their cost and state, thus intimating that if the quality of
Acting, were (as some propose) altogether unworthy, why for the special
practice, and memorable employment of the same, were founded so many rare and
admirable monuments: and by, whom were they erected? but by the greatest
Princes of their times, and the most famous and worthiest of them all, builded
by him that was the greatest Prince of the world, Julius Caesar, at what time
in his hand he gripped the universal Empire of the earth. So of Augustus Caesar.

Inspice ludorum sumptus, Auguste, tuorum]
Empta tibi magno --
Behold Augustus the great pomp and state
Of these thy Plays paid dear for, at high rate.
Haec tu spectasti spectandaque saepe dedisti.
And could any ^^feriour quality be more worthily esteemed or noblier graced,
than to have Princes of such magnificence and state to bestow on them places of
such port and countenance, had they been never well regarded they had been
never so sufficiently provided for, nor would such worthy Princes have strived
who should (by their greatest expense and provision) have done them the amplest
dignity, had they not with incredible favor regarded the quality. I will not
traverse this too far, least I incurr some suspicion of self-love, I rather
leave it to the favorable consideration of the wise though to be perverseness
of the ignorant who ha^^ they any taste either of Poefie, Philosophy, or
Historical Antiquity, would rather stand mated at their own impudent
ignorance, than against such noble, and notable examples stand in public
defiance.

I read of a Theater built in the midst of the River Tyber standing on pillars
and arches, the foundation wrought under water like London Bridge, the Nobles
and Ladies in their Barges and Gondelayes, landed at the very stairs of the
galleries. After these they composed others, but differing in form from the
Theater, or Amphi-theater, and every such was called Circus, the frame
Glob-like, and merely round.

Circus in haenc exit clamataque palma Theatris.
And the year from the first building of Rome, five hundred threescore and
seven, what time Spurius Posthumus Albinus, and Quintus Martius Philippus, were
Consuls, Nero made one, and the noble Flaminius another, but the greatest was
founded by Tarquinius Priscus, and was called Circus maximus: In this the
Gladiators practiced, the wideness and spaciousness was such, that in it they
fought at Barriers, and many times ran at tilt. Dion records eighteen Elephants
slain at once in one Theater. More particularly to survey the rarer Monuments
of Rome, near to the Pantheon (the Temple of the Roman gods) at the descent
from the hill Capitolinus, lies the great Forum, by which is situate the great
Amphi-theater of Titus f^^st erected by Vespatian, but after (almost ruined by
fire) by the Roman Titus rarely reedified. It is called Coll^s^us, also a
Cavea, which signifies a scaffold, al^o Arena, a place of combat, by Silvianus
and Prudentius, which name Tertullian, Pliny, Ovid, Firmicus Ammianus, (...) 29.
and Apuleius likewise give it. It had the title of Circus, Caula and Stadium,
by Suetonius, Capitolinus and Arcadius. Cassianus affirms these Theaters
consecrated to Diana Taurica; Tertullian, to Mars and Diana; Martial, to
Jupiter Latiaris, and to Stigian Pluto, whose opinion Minutius and Prudentius
approve. The first structures were by the Tribune Curio, which Dio, lib. 37.
affirms. Vitruvius, lib. 5. says, Pliny. lib. 36.
Multa Theatra Romae structa quotannis. Of Julius Caesar's Amphi-theater, Campo
Martio, Dio Cassius records, which Dio Cassus lib. 43.
Augustus after patronized, as Victor remembers of them, whose change Statilius
Taurus assisted, of whom Dio speaks thus, (...), etc. anno urbis, DCCXXV.
Dio. lib 51. Suetonius c. 21
Pub. Victor for gets not Circus Flaminii, and Suetonius remembers one builded
by Caligula at Septa, whose building Claudius at first interdicted. Nero
erected a magnificent Tacitus lib. 13 Anna^ium.
Theater in the field of Mars, Suetonius lib. Ner. 12.

Publius Victor, speaks further of a Castrense Theatrum, a Theater belonging to
the Camp in the Country of the Aesquiles, built by Tiberius Caesar, and of
Pompey's Theater Pliny Pliny, lib. 36. cap. 15.
witnesses. The great Theater of Statilius being in greatest use, was burnt in
the time of Nero, which Xiphilinus thus speaks of, (...). This was built in the
midst of the old City, and after the combustion repaired by Vespatian,
Consulatu suo 8 whose coin of one side, bears the express figure of his
Theater, yet was it only begun by him, but perfected by his son Titus.
Eutropius and Cassiodorus, attribute this place soly to Titus, but Aurelius
Victor gives him only the honor of the perfecting a place so exquisitely
begun: This after was repaired by Marcus Anthonius Pius, by whose cost says
Capitolinus, ^^e Temple of Hadrianus was repaired, and the great Theater
reedified, which H^liogabalus by the testimony of Lampr^dius, patronized, and
after the Senate of Rome, took to their protection, under the Gordians.

Touching Theaters without Rome, Lypsius records, Theatra circa Romani,
extructa passim, even in Jerusalem, Herodes magnificus and illustris Rex non
uno loco Ju^^ae Amphitheatra aedificavit, extruxit in ipsa urbe sacra, (...)
(as Josephus says) (...). Herod a magnificent and illustrious King, not in one
place of Juda, erected Amphitheaters, but even in the holy City he built one of
greatest receipt. Also in Greece, Asia, Afric Spain, France: nor is there any
Province in which their ancient structures do not yet remain, or their
perishing ruins are not still remembered. In Italy, ad Lyrim campaniae Fluvium
juxta Minturnas, remains part of an ample Amphi-theater.

At Puteolis a City not far from the Seaside in Campania, eight miles from
Napl^s, one.

At Capua, a magnificent one of solid Marble.

At Alba in Italy, one.

At Oericulum in Vmbria, one.

At Verona, one most beautiful.

At Florence, one whose compass yet remains:

At Athens in Greece, one of Marble.

At Pola in Istria, by the Hadriatick Sea, one described by Sebastian Serlius.

At Hyspalis in Spain, one built without the walls of the City.

In Turamace a^ Vesuna one of squared stone, the length 30 perches, or poles,
the breadth 20.

At Arelate one.

At Burdegall one.

At Nemaus one, remembered by Eusebius. in Ecclesiastica Historia.

At Lygeris one.

Another among the Helvetians.

The Veronense Theatrum Marmoreum, erected before the time of Augustus, as
Torel^us Serrayna in his description of Verona records: but Cirnicus
Anconitanu^ reports it built in the n^ne and thirteth year of Octavia^ Carolus
Sigonius referres it to the reign of Maximinian, who says, Maximinian built
theaters in Mediolanum Aquilea, and Brixium. Sicon. lib Hist. O^cident.
The like Cornelius Tacitus 2. Hist. remembers in Placentia, but the
description of the Verona Theater Levinus Kersmakerus sets down. This the great
King Francis an. 1538. gave to certain Actions, who thirty days space together
represented in the same the Acts of the Apostles, nor was it lawful by the
Edict of the King for any man to remove any stone within thirty poles of his
situation, lest they should endanger the foundation of the Theater.

The like have been in Venice, Millan, Padua. In Paris their are diverse now in
use by the French Kings Comedians, as the Bu^gonian, and others. Others in
Massilia, in Trevers, in Magontia, in Agripina, and infinite Cities of Greece,
Thebes, Carthage, Delphos, Creet, Paphos Epyrus, also in the City Tydena, so at
Civil ^n Spain, and at Madrill, with others.

At the entertainment of the Cardinal Alphonsus, and the infant of Spain, into
the Low Countries, they were presented Archduke Alphonsus.
at Antwerp, with sundry pageants and plays: the King of Denmark, father to
him that now reigns, entertained into his service, a company of English
Comedians, commended unto him by the honorable the Earl of Leitester: the
Duke of Brounswick, and the Lands grave of Hessen retain in their Courts
certain of ours, of the same quality. But among the Romans they were in highest
reputation: for in comparison of their plays, they never regarded any of their
solemnities, there ludi funebres, there Floralia, Cerealia, Fugalia,
Bacchinalia, or Lupercalia.

And amongst us, one of our best English Chroniclers records, S^ow.
that when Edward the fourth would show himself in public state to the view of
the people, he repaired to his palace at St. John's, where he accustomed to see
the City Actors. And since then, that house by the Princes free gift; has
belonged to the office of the Revels, where our Court plays have been in late
days yearly rehearsed, perfected, and corrected before they come to the
public view of the Prince and the Nobility* Ovid speaking of the Tragic Muse,
thus writes,

Venit and ingenti violenta tragedia passu,
Front comae torva palla jacebat humi
Laeva manus sceptrum late regale tenebat,
Lydius apta pedum vincta cothurnus habet.
Then came the Tragic Muse with a proud pace,
Measuring her slow strides with majestic grace.
Her long train sweeps the earth, and she does stand,
With buskined leg, rough brow, and sceptred hand.
Well knew the Poet what estimation she was in with Augustus, when he describes
her holding in her left hand a scepter. Now to recite some famous Actors that
lived in the preceding ages: the first Comedia^s were Cincius and Faliscus,
Cincius: Faliscus. Minutius: Prothonius. L. Attili^s. Latinus. Prenestinus:
Lucius. Ambivius Turpio.
the first Tragedians were Minutius, and Prothonius Elius Donatus in his
preface to Terence his Andrea says, that in that Comedy Lucius Attilius,
Latinus Prenestinus, and Lucius Ambivius Turpio were Actors: this Comedy was
dedicated to Cibil, and such were called ludi Megalenses, acted in the year
that M. Fuluius was Edilis, and Quintus Minutius Valerius and M. Glabrio were
Curules, which were Cou^sellers and chief officers in Rome, so called, because
they customably sat in Chairs of Ivory. The songs that were sung in this Comedy
were set by Flaccus, the son of Clodius. Terence his Eunuchus Flaccus.
or second Comedy was acted in the year L. Posthumus, and L. Cornelius were
Ediles. Curules Marcus Valerius, Protinus.
and Caius Fannius Consuls. The year from the building L. Servius.
of Rome 291. in his Adelphi, one Protinus acted, and was highly applauded; in
his Heeyra, Julius Servius. Cicero commends one Rupilius a rare Tragedian: I
read of another Offic. 1.
called Arossus, another called Theocrines, who purchased Rupilius: Arossus:
Theocrines.
him a great applause in the plays called Terentini. There were other plays
in Rome, called Actia and Pythia, made in the honor of Apollo, for killing the
Dragon Python. In those one Aesopus bare the praise, a man generally esteemed,
A Esopus.
who left behind him much substance, which Clodius his son after possessed.

Quae gravis Aesopus, quae doctus Roscius egit.
Labericus was an excellent Poet, and a rare Actor, who Labericus.
writ a book of the gesture and action to be used by the Tragedians and
Comedians, in performance of every part in his native humor. Plautus himself
was so inamoured of the Actors in his days, that he published many excellent
and exquisite Comedies, yet extant. Aristotle commends Theoderetes.
one Theoderetes to be the best Tragedian in his time. This in the presence of
Alexander personated Achilles, which so delighted the Emperor, that he
bestowed on him a pension of quinque mill Drachmae, five thousand Drachmaes,
and every thousand Drachmaes are twenty nine pounds three shillings four pence
sterling.

Roscius, whom the eloquent Orator, and excellent Statesman of Rome Marcus
Cicero, for his elegant pronuntiation and formal gesture called his jewel, had
from the common Treasury of the Roman Exchequer, a daily pension allowed him of
so many Sestertii as in our coin amount to 161. and a mark, or there abouts,
which yearly did arise to any noble man's revenues. So great was the fame of
this Roscius, and so good his estimation, that learned Cato made a question
whither Cicero could write better than Roscius could speak and act, or Roscius
speak and act better than Cicero write. Many times when they had any important
orations to be with an audible and loud voice delivered to the people, they
employed the tongue and memory of this excellent Actor, to whom for his worth,
the Senate granted such large exhibition.

-- quae pervincere voces,
Evaluere sonum referunt quem nostra Theatra,
Gorganum mugire putes nemus aut mare Thuscum,
Tanto cum streptu ludi spectantur and arts.
What voice can be compared with the sound,
Our Theaters from their deep concaves send,
For their reverberate murmures seems to drowned
The Gorgon wood when the proud winds contend.
Or when rough storms the Thuscan billows raise,
With such loud joy, they ring our Arts and Plays.
To omit all the Doctors Za^yes, Pantaloones, Harlakeens, in which the French,
but especially the Italians, have been excellent, and according to the occasion
offered to do some right to our English Actors, as Knell, Bentley, Mills,
Wil^^n, Cross, Lanam, and others: th^se, since I never saw them, as being
before my time, I cannot (as an eyewitne^s of their desert) give them that
applause, which no doubt, they worthily merit, yet by the report of many
judicial auditors, their performance of many parts have been so absolute, that
it were a kind of sin to drown their worths in Lethe, and not commit their
(almost forgotten) names to eternity. Here I must needs remember Tarlton, in
his time gracious with the Queen, his Sovereign, and in the peoples general
applause, whom succeeded William Kemp, as well in the favor o^ her Majesty, as
in the opinion and good thoughts of the general audience. Gabriel, Singer,
Pope, Phillips, Sly, all the right I can do them, is but this, that though they
be dead, their deserts yet live in the remembrance of many. Among so many dead
let me no^ forget the most worthy famous Mr. Edward Allen, who in his life time
erected a College at Dulledge for poor people, and for education of youth:
When this College was finished, this famous man was so equally mingled with
humility and charity, that he became his own Pensioner; humbly submitting
himself to that proportion of diet and clothes, which he had bestowed on
others; and afterward were interred in the same College. To omit these, as
also such as for diverse imperfections, may be thought insufficient for the
quality. Actors should be men picked out personable, according to the parts
they present, they should be rather scholars, that though they cannot speak
well, know how to speak, or else to have that volubility that they can speak
well, though they understand not what, and so both imperfections may by
instructions be helped and amended: But where a good tongue and a good conceit
both fail, there can never be good Actor. I also could wish that such as are
condemned for their licentiousness, might by a general consent be quite
excluded our society: For as we are men that stand in the broad eye of the
world, so should our manners, gestures and behaviors savor of such government
and modesty, to deserve the good thoughts and reports of all men, and to abide
the sharpest censures even of those that are the greatest opposites to the
quality. Many amongst us, I know to be of substance, of government, of sober
l^ves, and temperate carriages, housekeepers, and contributary to all duties
enjoined them, equally with them that are ranked with the most boun^i^ull; and
if amongst so many of sort, there be any few degenerate from the rest in that
good demeanor, which is both requisite and expected at their hands, let me
inticate you not to censure hardly of all for the misdeeds of some, but rather
to excuse us, as Ovid does the generality of women.

Parcite p^ucarum diffundere crimen in omnes,
Spect^tur meritis quaeque puel^a ^uis.
For some offenders (that perhaps are few)
Spare in your thoughts to censure all the crew,
Since every breast contains a sundry spirit,
Let every one be censured as they merit.
Others there are of whom should you ask my opinion, I must refer you to this,
Consule Theatrum. Here I might take fit opportunity to reckon up all our
English writers, and compare them with the Greek, French, Italian, and Latin
Poets, not only in their Pastoral, Historical, Elegiacal, and Heroical Poems,
but in their Tragical and Comical subjects, but it was my chance to happen on
the like, learnedly done by an approved good scholar, in a book called Wits
Commonwealth, to which treatise I wholly refer you, returning to our present
subject. Julius Caesar himself for his pleasure became an Actor, being in shape
state, voice, judgment and all other occurrents, exterior and interior
excellent. Among many other parts acted by him in person, it is recorded of
him, that with general applause in his own Theater he played Hercules Fureni,
and amongst many other arguments of his compleatness, excellence, and
extraordinary care in his action, it is thus reported of him: being in the depth
of a passion, one of his servants as his part then fell out, presenting Lychas,
who before had from Deianeira brought him the poisoned shirt, dipped in the blood
of the Centaure Nessus: he in the midst of his torture and fury, finding this
Lychas hid in a remote corner (appointed him to creep of purpose) although he
was, as our Tragedians use, but seemingly to kill him by some false imagined
wound, yet was Caesar so extremely carried away with the violence of his
practiced fury, and by the perfect shape of the madness of Hercules, to which
he had fashioned al his active spirits, that he slew him dead at his foot, and
after swong him terque quaterque (as the Poet says) about his head. It was the
manner of the Emperors in those days, in their public Tragedies to choose
out the fittest among such, as for capital offenses were condemned to die, and
employ them in such parts as were to be killed in the Tragedy, who of themselves
would make suit rather so to die with resolution, and by the hands of such
princely Actors, than otherwise to suffer a shameful and most detestable end.
And these were Tragedies naturally performed. And such Caius Caligula, Claudius
Nero, Vitellius, Domitianus, Comodus, and other Emperors of Rome, upon their
festivals and holy days of greatest consecration, used to act. Therefore M.
Kid in the Spanish Tragedy, upon occasion presenting it self, thus writes.

Why Nero thought it no disparagment,
And Kings and Emperors have taken delight,
To make experience, of their wits in plays.
These exercises, as traditions, have bin since (though in better manner)
continued through all ages, amongst all the noblest Nations of the earth. But I
have promised to be altogether compendious, presuming that whatsoever is
discourst, may for the practice of plays, their Antiquity, and Dignity be
altogether sufficient. I omit the Shows and ceremonies even in these times
generally used amongst the Catholics, in which by the Churchmen, and most
religious, diverse pageants, as of the Nativitie, Passion, and Ascension, with
other Historical places of the Bible, are at diverse times and seasons of the
year usually celebrated; sed baec praeter me. In the year of the world 4207 of
Christ 246. Origin writ certain godly Epistles to Philip, then Emperor, of
Rome, who was the first Christian Emperor, and in his life I read, that in the
fourth year of his reign, which was the 1000. year after the building of Rome,
he solemnized that year, as a Jubilee with sumptuous pageants and plays. Homer,
the most excellent of all Poets, composed his Illiads in the shape of a
Tragedy, his Odisseas like a Comedy. Virgil in the first of his Aeneiads in his
description of Didoes Carthage.

-- hic alta Theatris
Fundamenta locant alij, immanesque Columnas
Rupibus excidunt, cenis decora alta futuris.
Which proves, that in those days immediately after the name of Troy, when
Carthage had her first foundation, they built Theaters with stately columns of
stone, as in his des^^i^tion may appear. I have sufficiently di^c^urst of the
first Theaters, and in whose times they were erected, even till the reign of
Julius Caesar, the first Emperor, and how they continued in their glory from
him till the reign of Marcus Aurelius the 23. Emperor, and from him even to
the^e times. Now to prove they were in as high estimation at Lacedemon, and
Athens to the most famous Cities of Greece. Cicero in his book Cato major, s^u
de senectute. Cum Athenis ludis quid^m grandis n^tu in Theatrum venisset, etc.
An ancient Citizen coming into one of the Anthe^ian Theaters to see the
pastimes there solemnized (which shows that the most ancient and grave
frequented them) by reason of the throng, no man gave him place or reverence:
but the same Citizen being employed in an Embassy to Lacedemon, and coming like
a private man into the Theater, the general multitude aro^e at once, and with
great ceremonious reverence gave his age place. This Cieero alleges to prove
the reverence due to age, and this I may fitly introduce to the approbation of
my present subject. Moreover, this great Statesman of Rome, at whose exile
twenty thousand of the chiefest Roman Citizens wore mourning apparel,
oftentimes commends Plautus, calling him Plautus noster, and Atticorum an^iq^^
Comedi^, wh^^^ he proceed^ further to extol Aes^pus, for personating Ajax, and
the famous Actor Rupilius, in Epigonus, Medaea, Menalip, Clytemnestra and
Antiopa, proceeding in the same place with this worthy and grave sentence Ergo
Histrio hoc videbit in scena, quod non videbit sapien^ in vita* shall a
Tragedian see that in his Scene which a wise man cannot see in the course of
his life? So in another of his works, amongst many ^nstructions to his son
Marcus, he a^plau^s Turpio Ambinius for his action, Statius Nevius and Plautus
for their writing. Ovid in Augustum.

Luminibusque tuis totus quibus utitur orbis,
Scenic a vidisti lusus adulteria.
Those eyes with which you all the world survay,
See in your Theaters our Actors play.
Augustus Caesar, because he would have some memory of his love to those places
of pastime, reared in Rome two stately Obelisci, or Pyramides, one in Julius
Caesar's Temple in the field of Mars, another in the great Theater, called
Circus maximus, built by Flaminius: these were in height an hundred cubits
apiece, in breadth four cubits, they were first raised by King Pheron in the
Temple of the Sun, and after removed to Rome by Augustus; the occasion of their
first composure was this: Pheron for some great crime, committed by him in his
youth against the god^, was by them stroke blind, and so continued the space of
ten years: But after by a revelation in the City Bucis, it was told, that if he
washed his eyes in the water of a woman that was chaste, and never adulteratly
touched with any save her husband, he should again recover his sight* The King
first tried his wife, then many other of the most grave and best reputed
matrons, but continued still in despair, till at length he met with one veruous
Lady, by whose chastity his sight was restored; whom (having first commanded
his Queen and the rest to be consumed by fire) he after married. Pheron in
memory of this, builded his two Pyramides, after removed to Rome by AUGUSTUS.

Sanctaque majestas and erat venerabile nomen Vatibus --
The end of the second Book.
OF THE ACTORS, and the true use of their QUALITY.
THE THIRD BOOK.
TRagedies and Comedies, says Dona^us, had their beginning a rebus divinis,
from divine sacrifices, they differ thus: In Comedies, turbulenta prima,
tranquilla ultima, In Tragedies tranquilla prima, turbulenta vltima, Comedies
begin in trouble, and end in peace; Tragedies begin in calmes, and end in
tempest. Of Comedies there be three kinds, moving Comedies, called Motoriae,
standing Comedies, called Statariae, or mixed betwixt both, called Mistae: they
are distributed into four parts, the Prologue, that is, the pr^f^ce, the
Protacis, that is, the proposition, which includes the first Act, and presents
the Actors; the Epitasis, which is the business and body of the Comedy; the
last the Catastrophe, and conclusion: the definition of the Comedy, according
to the Latins: a discourse consisting of diverse institutions, comprehending
civil and domestic things, in which is taught what in our lives and manners
is to be followed, what to be avoided, the Greeks define it thus: (...). Cicero
says, a Comedy is the imitation of life, the glass of custom and the Image of
truth; in Athens they had their first Original. The ancient Comedians used to
attire their actors thus: the old men in white, as the most ancient of all; the
young men in party colored garments, ^o note their piversity of thoughts,
their slaves and servants in thin and bare vesture, either to note their
poverty, or that they might run the more lighter about their affairs: their
Parrasities wore robes that were turned in, and intrigately wrapped about them,
the fortunate in white, the dscontented in decayed vesture, or garments, grown
out of fashion; the rich in purple, the poor in crimson, soldiers wore purple
jackets, handmaids the habits of strange virgins, bawds, pide coats, and
Curtezans, garments of the color of mud to denote covetousness: the stages
were hung with rich Arras, which was first brought from King Attalus into Rome:
his state-hangings were so costly that from him all Tapestries, and rich Arras
were called Attalia. This being a thing ancient as I have proved it, next of
d^gn^ty, as many arguments have confirmed it, and of late years, by the best,
without exception, favorably tolerated, why should I yield my censure, grounded
on such firm and established sufficiency, to any Tower, founded on sand, any
castle built in the air, or any trivial upstart, and mere imaginary opinion.

Oderunt Hilarem tristes tristemque jo^ost.

I hope there is no man of so unsensible a spirit, that can inveigh against the
true and direct use of this quality: Oh but say they, the Romans in their time,
and some in these days have abused it, and therefore we volly out our
exclamations against the use. Oh shallow! Because such a man had his house
burnt, we shall quite condemn the use of fire, because one man quaft poison, we
must forbear to drink, because some have been shipwrak't, no man shall
hereafter traffic by sea. Then I may as well argue thus: he cut his finger,
therefore I must wear no knife, yond man fell from his horse, therefore must I
travel a foot, that man surfeited, therefore dare not I eat. What can appear
more absurd than such gross and senseless ascertion? I could turn this
unpointed weapon against his breast that aims it at mine, and reason thus:
Roscius had a large Pension allowed him by the Senate of Rome, why should not
an Actor of the like desert, have the like allowance now? or thie, the most
famous City and Nation in the world held plays in great admiration^ Ergo, but
it is a rule in Logic, ex particularibu^ nihil fit. These are not the Bases we
must build upon, nor the colums that must support our architecture.

Et latro, and cautus, praecingitur ense viator,
Ille sed insidias, hic sibi portat opem.
Both thieves and true-men, weapons wear alike.
The One to defend, the other comes to strike.
Let us use fire to warm us, not to scorch us, to make ready our necessaries,
not to burn our houses: Let us drink to quench our thirst, not to surfeit; and
eat to satisfy nature, not to gormondize.

-- Comedia recta si mente legatur,
Constabit nulii posse nocere --
Plays are in use as they are understood,
Spectators eyes may make them bad or good.
Shall we condemn a generality for any one particular misconstruction? give me
then leave to argue thus: Amongst Kings have there not been some tyrants? yet
the office of a King is the image of the Majesty of God. Amongst true subjects
have there not crept in some false traitorrs? even among the twelve there was
one Judas, but shall we for his fault censure worse of the eleven? God forbid:
Art thou Prince or Peasant? Art thou of the Nobility or Commonalty? Art thou
Merchant or Soldier? Of the City or Country? Art thou Preacher or Auditor? Art
thou Tutor or Pupil? There have been of thy function bad and good, profane
and holy. I induce these instances to confirm this common argument, that the
use of any general thing is not for any one particular abuse to be condemned:
For if that assertion stood firm, we should run into many notable
inconveniences.

Qui locus est templis angustior hanc quoque vitet,
In culpam si qua est ingeniosa suam,
To prooceed to the manner: First, playing is an ornament to the City, which
strangers of all Nations, repairing hither, report of their Countries,
beholding them here with some admiration: for what variety of entertainment can
there be in any City of Christendom more than in London? But some will say,
this dish might be very well spared out of the banquet: to him I answer,
Diogenes, that used to feed on roots, cannot relish a March-pane. Secondly, our
English tongue, which has been the most harsh, uneven, and broken language of
the world, part Dutch, part Irish, Saxon, Scotch Welsh, and indeed a
gallimaffry of many, but perfect in none, is now by this secondary means of
playing, continually refined, every writer striving in himself to add a new
flourish unto it; so that in process, from the most rude and unpolisht tongue,
it is grown to a most perfect and composed language, and many excellent works,
and elaborate Poems writ in the same, that many Nations grow inamoured of our
tongue, before despised, Neither Saphick, louick, Iambick, Phaleutick, Adonick,
^lic^^i^k, Hex^mi^er, Tetramit^er, Pentamiter, Asclepediack, Choriambick, nor
any other measured verse used amongst the Greeks, Latins, Italians, French,
Dutch, or Spanish writers, but may be expressed in English, be it in blanck verse
or meeter, in Distichon, or Hexastichon, or in what form or feet, or what
number you can desire. Thus you see to what excellency our refined English is
brought, that in these days we are ashamed of that Euphony and eloquence which
within these 60. years, the best tongues in the land were proud to pronounce.
Thirdly, plays have made the ignorant more apprehensive, taught the unlearned
knowledge of many famous histories, instructed such as cannot read in the
dicsovery of all our English Chronicles, and what man have you now of that weak
capacity, that cannot discourse of any notable thing recorded even from William
the Conqueror, nay from the landing of Bruit, until this day, being possessed
of their true use, For or because Plays are writ with this aim, and carried
with this method, to teach the Subjects obedience to their King, to show the
people the untimely ends of such as have moved tumults, commotions, and
insurrections, to present them with the flourishing estate of such as live in
obedience, exhorting them to allegiance, dehorting them from all traiterous and
fellonious stratagems.

Omne genus scripti gravitate Tragedia vincit. Use of Tragedies.


If we present a Tragedy, we include the fatal and abortive ends of such as
commit notorious murders, which is aggravated and acted with all the Art that
may be, to terrify men from the like abhorred practices. If we present a
foreign History, the subject is so intended, that in the Use of Historical
plays.
lives of Romans, Grecians, or others, either the virtues of our Countrymen
are extolled, or their vi^es reproved; as thus, by the example of Caesar to
stir Soldiers to valor and magnanimity: by the fall of Pompey, that no man
trust in his own strength: we present Alexander, killing his friend in his
rage, to reprove rashness: Myda^, choked with his gold, to tax covetousness:
Nero, against ^y^anny: Sardanapalus, against luxury: Nynus, against ambition;
with infinite others, by sundry instances, either animating men to noble
attempts, or attaching the consciences of the spectators, finding themselves
touched in presenting the vices of others. If a moral, it is to persuade men to
humanity and a good life, to instruct them in civility and good manners,
showing them the fruits of honesty, and the end of villainy. Use of Morals.


Versibus exponi Tragicis res Comica non vult.
Again, Horace, Art Poetica.
Et nostri proavi Plautinos and numeros and
Laudavere sales --
If a Comedy, it is pleasantly contrived with merry accidents Use of Comedies.
and intermixed with apt and witty jests, to present before the Prince at
certain times of solemnity, or else merrily fitted to the Stage. And what is
then the subject of this harmless mirth? either in the shape of a Clown, to
show others their slovenly and unhansom behavior, that they may reform that
simplicity in themselves, which others make their sport, lest they happen to
become the like subject of general scorn to an auditory; else it entreats of
love, deriding foolish inamorates, who spend their ages, their spirits, nay,
themselves, in the servile and rediculous employments of their Mistresses: and
these are mingled with sportful accidents, to recreate such as of themselves
are wholly devoted to Melancholy, which corrupts the blood: or to refresh such
wearied spirits as are tired with labor, or study, to moderate the cares and
heaviness of the mind, that they may return to their trades and faculties with
more zeal and earnestness, after some small soft and pleasant retirement.
Sometimes they discourse of Pantaloons, Usurers that have unthrifty sons, which
both the fathers and sons may behold to their instructions: sometimes of
Curtesans, to divulge their subtelties and snares; in which young men may be
entangled, showing them the means to avoid them. If we present a Pastoral, we
show Use of Pastorals.
the harmless love of Shepherds diversely moralized, distinguishing between the
craft of the City, and the innocence of the sheep-coat. Briefly, there is
neither Tragedy, History, Comedy, Moral, or Pastoral, from which an infinite
use cannot be gathered. I speak not in the defense of any lascivious shows,
scurrelous jeasts, or scandalous invectives: If there be any such, I banish
them quite from my patronage; yet Horace, Sermon 1. Satyr 4. thus writes;

Eupolis atque Cratinus Aristephanesque Poetae,
Atque alii quorum Comaedia prisca virorum est:
Si quis erat dignus describi quod malus, aut fur,
Quod Maechus foret aut sicarius, aut alioqui,
Famosus, multa cum liberate notabunt.
Eupolis, Cratinus, Aristaphanes, and other Comic Poets in the time of Horace,
with large scope, and unbridled liberty boldly and plainly scourged all such
abuses as in their ages were generally practiced, to the staining and
blemishing of a fair and beautiful Commonweal. Likewise, a learned Gentleman in
his Apology for Poetry speaks thus: Tragedies well handled be a most worthy
kind of Poesy. Comedies make men see and shame at their faults, and proceeding
further amongst other University-playes, he remembers the Tragedy of Richard
the third, acted in St. John's in Cambridge, so essentially, that had the
tyrant Phaleris beheld his bloody proceedings, it had mollified his heart, and
made him relent at fight of his inhumane massacres. Further, he commends of
Comedies, the Cambridge Ped^n^ius, and the Oxford Bellum Grammaticale; and
le^ving them passes on to our public Plays, speaking liberally in their
praise, and what commendable use may be gathered of them. If you peruse
Margarita Poetica, you may see what excellent uses and sentences he has
gathered ou^ of Terence his Andrea, Eunuchus, and the rest. Likewise out of
Plautus his Amphitrio, Asinaria, and moreover, Ex Comediis ^hilodoxis, Caroli
Acretini: De fal^a Hipocrita, and tristi Mercurii, Ronsii versellensis: Ex
Comedia Philanira Vg^lini parmensis, all reverend scholars, and Comic Poets,
read else the four Tragedies, Philunica, Petrus, Aman, Katherina, Claudii
Roileti Beluensis: But I should tire my self to reckon the names of all French,
Roman, German, Spanish, Italian and English Poets, being in number infinite,
and their labors extant to approve their worthiness.

Is thy mind Noble? and would thou be further stird up to magnanimity?
Behold, upon the Stage thou may see Hercules, Achilles, Alexander, Caesar,
Alcibiades, Lysander, Sertorius, Hannibal, Antigonus, Phillip of Macedon,
Mithridates of Pontus, Pir^hus of Epire, Agesilaus, among the Lacedaemonians,
Epaminondas; among the Thebans, Scevola alone entering the armed tents of
Porsenna: Horatius Chocles alone withstanding the whole army of the Hetrurians:
Leonides of Sparta choosing a Lion to lead a band of Deer, rather than one Deer
to conduct an army of Lions, with infinite, others in their own persons,
qualities and shapes, animating thee with courage, deterring thee from
cowardice. Have thou of thy Country well deserved? and art thou of thy labor
evil requited? to associate thee thou may see the valiant Roman Marcellus,
pursue Hannibal at Nola; conquering Syracusa, vanquishing the Gauls, all Padua,
and presently, for his reward, banished his Country into Greece. There thou
may see Scipio Affricanus, now triumphing for the conquest of all Africa,
and immediately exll'd the confines of Romania. Art thou inclined to lust?
behold the falls of the Tarquins, in the rape of Lucrece: the guerdon of luxury
in the death of Sardanapalus: Appius destroyed in the ravishing of Virginia,
and the destruction of Troy in the lust of Helena. Art thou proud? our Scene
presents thee with the fall of Phaeton, Narcissus pining in the love of his
shadow, ambitious Hamon now calling himself a God, and by and by thrust
headlong among the Devils. We present men with the ugliness of their vices, to
make them the more to abhor them, as the Persians use, who above all sins,
loathing drunkenness, accustomed in their solemn feasts, to make their
servants and captives extremely overcome with wine, and then call their
children to view their nasty and loathsome behavior, making them hate that sin
in themselves, which showed so gross and abominable in others. The like use may
be gathered of the Drunkards so naturally imitated in our Plays, to the
applause of the Actor, content of the Auditory, and reproving of the Vice. Art
thou covetous? go no further than Plautus his Comedy called Euclio.

Dum fallax servus, durus pater, improba lena
Vixerit, and meretrix blanda, Menandros erit.
While there is false servant, or obdurate sire,
Sly baud, smooth whore, Menandros we will admire.
To end, in a word. Art thou addicted to prodigality? envy? cruelty? perjury?
flattery? or rage? our Scenes afford thee store of men to shape your lives by,
who be frugall, loving, gentle, trusty, without soothing, and in all things
temperate. Would thou be honorable, just, friendly, moderate, devout,
merciful, and loving concord? thou may see many of their fates and ruins,
who have been dishonorable, unjust, falls, gluttenous, sacrilegious,
bloudy-minded, and brochers of dissension. Women likewise that are chaste, are
by us extolled, and encouraged in their virtues, being instanced by Diana,
Belpheby, Matilda, Lucrece, and the Countess of Salisbury. The unchaste are by
us showed their errors, in the persons of Phrinc, Lais, Thais, Flora: and
amongst us Rosamond and Mistress Shore. What can sooner print modesty in the
souls of the wanton, than by discovering unto them the monstrousnes of their
sin? It follows that we prove these exercises to have been the discoverers of
many notorious murders, long concealed from the eyes of the world. To omit all
far-fetcht instances, we will prove it by a domestic and home born truth,
which within these few years happened. At Lin in Norfolk, A strange accident
happenning at a play.
the then Earl of Sussex Players acting the old History of Friar Francis, and
presenting a woman, who insatiately doting on a young gentleman, had (the more
securely to enjoy his affection) mischievously and secretly murdered her
husband, whose ghost haunted her, and at diverse times in her most solitary and
private contemplations, in most horrid and fearful shapes appeared and stood
before her. As this was acted, a towns-woman (till then of good estimation and
report) finding her conscience (at this presentment) extremely troubled,
suddenly skreeked and cried out, Oh my husband, my husband! I see the ghost of
my husband fiercely theatning and me^racing me. At which shril and unexpected
outcry, the people about her, moved to a strange amazement, inquired the reason
of her clamor, when presently unurged, she told them, that seven years ago,
she, to be possessed of such a Gentleman (meaning him) had poisoned her husband,
whose fearful image persona^ed it self in the shape of that ghost: whereupon
the murdress was apprehended, before the Justices further examined, and by her
voluntary confession after condemned: That this is true, as well by the report
of the Actors as the records of the Town, there are many ey-witnesses of this
accident of late years living, who did confirm it.

As strange an accident happened to a company of the same quality 60. years
ago, or thereabout, who playing A strange accident happenning at a play.
late in the night at a place called Peri^ in Cornwall, certain Spainards were
landed the same night unsuspected and undiscovered, with intent to take in the
Town, spoil and burn it, when suddenly, even upon their entrance, the players
(ignorant as the towns men of any such attempt) presenting a battle on the
stage with their drum and trumpets, struck up a loud alarm: which the enemy
hearing, and fearing they were discovered, amazedly retired, made some few idle
shot in a bravado, and so in a hurly-burly fled disorderly to their boats. At
the report of this tumult, the towns men were immediately armed, and pursued
them to the sea, praising God for their happy deliverance from so great a
danger, who by his providence made these strangers the instrument and secondary
means of their escape from such imminent mischief, and the tyranny of so
remorselesse an enemy.

Another of the like wonder happened at Amsterdam in Holland, a Company of our
English Comedians (well A strange accicident happenning at a play.
known) traveling those Countries, as they were before the Burgers and other
the chief inhabitants, acting the last part of the 4 sons of Amon, toward the
last act of the history, where penitent Renaldo, like a common labourer, lived
in disguise, vowing as his last penance, to labor and carry burdens to the
structure of a goodly Church there to be erected: whose diligence the laborers
envying, since by reason of his stature and strength, he did usually perfect
more work in a day, than a dozen of the best, (he working for his conscience,
they for their lucres.) Whereupon by reason his industry had so much disparaged
their living, conspired among themselves to kill him, waiting some opportunity
to find him asleep, which they might easily do, since the sorest labors are
the soundest sleepers, and industry is the best preparative to rest. Having
spied their opportunity, they drove a nail into his temples, of which wound
immediately he died. As the Actors handled this, the audience might on a sudden
understand an outcry, and loud shreek in a remote galery, and pressing about
the place, they might perceive a woman of great gravity, strangely amazed, who
with a distracted and troubled brain ost sighed out these words: Oh my husband,
my husband! The play, without further interruption, proceeded; the woman was to
her own house conducted, without any apparent suspicion, every one conjecturing
as their fancies led them. In this ago ^y she some of these few days
languished, and on a time, as certain of her well disposed neighbors came to
comfort her, one amongst the rest being Churchwarden, to him the S^xt^n posts,
to tell him of a strange thing happening him in the ripping up of a grave: see
here (quoth he) what I have found, and shows them a fare skull, with a great
nail pierced quite through the braine-pan, but we cannot conjecture to whom it
should belong, nor how long ^t has lain in the earth, the grave being
confused, and the flesh consumed. At the report of this accident, the woman,
out of the trouble of her afflicted conscience, discovered a former murder,
For 12. years ago, by driving that nail into that skull, being the head of her
husband, she has trecherously slain him. This being public y confessed, she was
arraigned condemned, adjudged, and burned. But I draw my subject to greater
length than I purposed: these therefore out of other infinities, I have
collected both for their familiarness and latenesse of memory.

Thus our antiquity we have brought from the Grecians in the time of Hercules*
from the Macedonians in the age of Alexander: from the Romans, long before
Julius Caesar, and since him, through the reigns of 23. Emperors succeeding,
even to Marcus Aurelius: after him, they wore supported by the Mantuans,
Venetians, Valencians, Neopolitans, the Florentines, and others: since, by the
German Princes, the Palsgrave the Landsgrave, the Dukes of Saxony, of
Brownswick, etc. The Cardinal of Bruxels, has at this time in pay a company of
our English Comedians. The Cardinal Alsensus.
French King allows certain companies in Paris, Orleans; besides other Cities:
so does the King of Spain; in Civil, Madrill, and other Provinces. But in no
Country they are of that eminency that ours are: so our most royal and ever
renowned Sovereigns licenced, us in London, so did his predecessor, the ^^rice
virtuous Virgin Queen Elizabeth, and before her, her sistes Queen Mary, Edward
the sixth, and their Father, Hen^^ the eighth: And before these, in the tenth
yea^ of the reign of Edward the fourth, Anno 1490 John S^ow an ancient grave
Chronicles, ^e^ords (amongst other (...) to the like effect) that a Play was
acted at a place called Skinners-well, fastly Clerken-well, which continued
eight days, and was of matter from Adam and Eve (the first creation of the
world) the spectators were no worse than the Royal^y of England. And among
other commendable exercises in this place, the Company of the Skinners of
London held certain yearly solemn Plays In place whereof, now in these latter
days, the w^astling, and such other pastimes have been kept, and is still held
about Bartholomew-tide. Also in the year 1390. the 14. year of the reign of
Richard the second, the 18 of July, were the like Enterludes recorded of at the
same place, which continued 3 days together, the King, and Queen, and Nobility
being there present. Moreover, of late years in diverse places of England, here
were Towns that held the privilege of their Fairs, and other Charters, by
yearly Stage Plays; as at Manningtree in Suffolk, Kendall in the North, and
others. To let these pass, as things familiarly known to all men. Now to speak
of some abuse lately crept into the quality, as an inveighing against the
State, the Court, the Law, the City and their governments, with the
particularizing of private men's humors, Noblemen and others. I know it
distastes many; neither do I any way approve it, nor dare I by any means excuse
it. The liberty which some arrogate to themselves, committing their bitterness
and liberal invectives against all estates, to the mouths of Children,
supposing their juniority to be a privilege for any railing, be it never so
violent: I could advise all such, to curb and limit this presumed liberty
within the bands of discretion and government. But wise and judicial Censurers,
before whom such complaints shall at any time hereafter come, will not (I hope)
impute these abuses to any transgression in us, who have ever been careful and
provident to shun the like. I surcease to prosecute this any further, lest my
good meaning be (by some) misconstrued: and fearing likewise, left with
tediousness, I tire the patience of the favorable Reader, here (though
abruptly) I conclude my third and last Treatise.

Stultitiam patiuntur opes, mihi parvula res est.
FINIS.

