Queen Esthers Resolves: OR A Princely Pattern of Heaven-born RESOLVTION, For
all the Lovers of God and their Country: OPENED IN A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE
Honorable House of Commons, at the Monthly Fast, MAY 27. 1646.

By RICHARD HEYRICKE, Warden of Christ's College in Manchester in Lancashire,
and one of the Assembly of DIVINES.

EXODUS 32.32. Yet now if thou will forgive their sin, and if not, blot me, I
pray thee, out of thy Book which thou have written.

ROMANS 9.3. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
Brethren, my kinsmen in the flesh.

JER. 3.9. They are not Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for LVKE FAVVNE, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the sign of the Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

Die Mercurii, 27 Maii 1646.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Colonel Moore do from
this House, give Thanks to Mr Heyricke for the great pains he took in the
Sermon he Preached this Day, at the entreaty of this House at St Margarets
Westminster, it being the day of public Humiliation; And to desire him to
Print his Sermon: And it is Ordered that none shall presume to Print his Sermon
without leave under his hand writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do appoint LUKE FAVVNE to Print this Sermon.

Richard Heyricke.

A Sermon Preached at a late Solemn Fast, before the Honorable House of
COMMONS. May 27. 1646.
ESTHER 4.16. -- and if I perish I perish.


REsolution is the life of Action, a thing well resolved is more then half
done, Vita sine proposito languida. Of all the Resolutions that I have read of,
I find none parallel with, nor comparable to this of Queen Esther. And this
will appear if you will consider the Resolution it self, the acting or
executing of this Resolution, the success and issue; The Resolution had the
royal stamp of Virtue and Glory; the Execution, of Wisdom and Courage; the
Success, of Wonder and Honor: The Resolution did breath an Heroic Virtue,
the Execution a Religious Fortitude, the Success Honor and Glory.

1.The Resolution is commended from the beauty, the Majesty, of her that
resolved, a Woman, a Queen.

2. From the preparation she makes unto it, wherein we have.

1.Her discreet deliberation with her self. 2.Her wise Consultation with
others. 3.From the difficulties and dangers she was to encounter withal. 1.She
must go uncal'd to the King, there she exposed her self to the penalty, to the
danger of the Law. 2.She was to affront and confound the Minion of the Court,
the Favorite of the King, she was to hazard the frowns the thunder of the
Kings Creature. 3.She must attempt to reverse a Law of the Medes and Persians,
which were not to be changed, to be canceled.

In the first there was evident danger, in the second eminent difficulty, in
the third apparent impossibility; but not the one, nor the other, nor the
third; not the danger, not the difficulty, not the Impossibility, could weaken
or shake her Resolution.

4. This Resolution receives commendation from the Motives that invites her,
from the Object, the end that encourages and strengthens her to it.

1.The preservation of her Country people, unjustly and wickedly doomed to ruin
and destruction. 2. The continuation of her Jewish Religion, attempted to be
corrupted, extirpated. 3. The Vindication of the glory of her God, which would
be ecclipsed, blasphemed.
The Execution of this Resolution is commended: First, from the means by which
she accomplisheth it, they are all fair, direct, and Lawful.

2ly, From the circumstances which accompany it, they are Religious, Honest,
and Seasonable; the means proclaims her Piety to God, the circumstances her
policy to man.

The Success and issue answerable to both these; she is crowned with glory,
her enterprise with honor, God graciously heard her prayer, the King smilingly
received her Person, Mordecai her Uncle advanced, Haman the common Enemy
hanged, the Jews her people rescued, the confederate combined conspirators
executed, her Religion established, Gods glory mightily exalted. This is the
resolution of this Resolution, of which briefly by way of Explication, then of
Observation, and Confirmation, and in the close by Application.

Ester, a Woman, a Queen. Admirabilior in foemina quam in viro virtus. We use
to admire, says Quintilian, the same virtue more in women then in men, whence
his sentence is, If we desire to beget in any the love and emulation of
courage, the instance of Horatius and Torquatus would not prove of so great
efficacy, as of that woman who with her own hand slew Pyrrhus: In persuading
you to true Christian resolution, the instance of Cato, the example of Joab,
cannot be so powerful as this of Queen Esther. It was a blindness to be
pitied in Seneca, that he could not see a fairer Object for God, than Cato
standing bolt upright in the midst of public ruin; were it lawful to speak
in his swelling language, Ecce spectaculum, behold a spectacle truly worthy of
God, not an Heathenish man desperately struggling with a private misfortune, but
a virtuous woman more then manfully wrestling with public danger and
destruction; Behold strength in weakness, virtue in infirmity, Resolution in
inconstancy; strength, virtue, resolution in a woman, Graetior est virtus
veniens e corpore pulchro.

Esther been yet amongst the Virgins of the common rank, within the walls of her
obscure family, a Captive, a Stranger, she had then lost much of the glory of
this Sacred Resolution; when Poverty and Obscurity exposes it self to a
doubtful danger for a public safety, few observe them; many stars may be
Ecclipsed and few take notice of it; miscarriage it self to a desperate
condition is the cure of its misery, what is it for hunger-starved Lepers to
adventure on the Enemy? If they kill us we shall but dye, this is not
resolution, but necessity; But for one without the verge of danger, to interest
and hazard her self in another rescue, is a Character of true fortitude, for
one preferred to the height of Majesty, encompassed within the walls of strength
and safety, incircled with Guards and Pensioners, for a Queen to expose her
self in a voluntary compassion to the danger of a fall of death, this blazons
an Heroic spirit and proclaims a Royal goodness, this commands amazement and
admiration; the sun Eclipsed, all eyes are fixed upon it.

Esther wisely considers the nature of the business, not only in the
superficial and outward appearance, but she penetrates into the inside, she
weighes and considers the accidents and consequences, she balanceth the beauty,
the excellency, the glory of the enterprise, together with the trouble,
difficulty, and danger. True Resolution is not an inconsiderate and rash
temerity, not a senseless and brutish stupidity; this virtue cannot be without
knowledge and apprehension; she seriously and soberly pondreth and weighs all
things, she ballanceth and poyzeth together the eminency, the worthiness of
her undertaking, with her strength and ability; the weakness of her Sex, nor
the Majesty of her Person does not more commend her Resolution, then her
wisdom in deliberating, her judgment and discretion in consulting about it,
another circumstance that commends the Resolution.

In difficult and dangerous affairs, in business of great consequence and
importance, the wisest, they of most understanding, are to use advice and
council of others; two are better then one, Pro. 24.6.
In the multitude of Counselors there is safety: Non unius men's tantae molis
est capax; Esther consults with her Uncle, a wise, religious and faithful
friend, a grave and advised Councellor, she commends it to the whole City of
Shusan, they approve it, they bless it, she does not precipitately nor rashly,
being wedded to her own judgment, conceive, resolve, and execute: but she
debates the matter, she canvaseth it pro and con, she puts it to the Vote; thus
being prepared and fortified, she will not be deterred; it is not a Lion in the
way, nor a Legion of Devils, though she fore-sees she must encounter with both,
yet she is armed, she knows the worst, she can but perish, and that standing in
competition with her peoples safety she regards it not, Go I will unto the King
which is not according to the Law.

The Court of Kings ought to be as the Court of Heaven, equally near and
distant to every one; it argues more Tyranny than Majesty to have set and
standing Guards to keep out Petitioners. Turks, and Persians, that make it
their glory to fear all, may keep such Guards and Enact such Laws, because they
are afraid of all; But Christian Princes who are to rule by Law and not by
will, they are to have their Courts open to all, the poorest subject may have
liberty to prefer his Petition, a privilege that Esther though a Queen could
not have, but if she would go uncal'd to the King, she must run the hazard of
the Law, for it was not according to the Law.

How far such Laws do bind I cannot determine; He is no transgressor, says
the Civil Law, that crosses not the mind of the Lawgiver, though he break
the Letter of the Law; and a reasonable cause, as the Casuists and the
Schoolmen agree, ever excuses the breaking of a humane Law; I heard it very
lately from the Authority of the Honorable House of Commons, what Laws,
Ordinances, or Orders soever, that are against the Law of God, are by the Laws
of this Land nulled; The observation of Laws is very commendable; but when
exigences are so violent, when confusion has turned all upside down, when the
State is disturbed, when wicked men are combined, when all Order is perverted,
then men are to look to the main chance, then to solicit the principal
business, and so much the more zealously, as Esther did, by how much there is
less possibility of compassing it the ordinary way. When necessity is so
urgent that it makes the observing of the Laws impossible; Nature, Reason,
Laws, Religion, all instruct us to betake our selves to that which is most
necessary; Prerogative, Privilege, Liberty, all must be laid aside: It was a
reproach unto Cato, he would rather suffer the Commonwealth to run into all
extremity, when he might have succored it, would he have a little transgres'd
the Laws: and contrary wise Epaminondas is commended, that in case of necessity
he continued his charge beyond his time, though the Law upon pain of life did
prohibit it. The Parliament shall ever be famous, they have not only followed
presidents but made them: Men may swerve from a second particular and
municipall Obligation, denying obedience to the Laws and Customs of the
Country, when they are against the first and more ancient, against Universal
Nature and Reason: the Queen did not contemn the Law, but necessity made her
pass it over; this way it might please God to bring forth a glorious
deliverance, and to make her a blessed Agent in her peoples rescue; if she
should miscarry, she might loose some of her hopes, none of her virtues; the
Laws deter her not, nor the greatness of her adversary; Go she will though
Haman advances against her.

Satan when he cannot master the truth by meaner Agents, he interesseth great
ones; Haman his name discovers his humor, he was a troubler, and at this time
a troubler of Israel, by birth an Agagite, of that Nation which God cursed, and
with whom the Jews were to have perpetual Hostility; this was one reason why
Mordecai refused to bow, he would not stoop to so accursed an Enemy of God and
his people; Haman was incorporated a Persian, whose Princes exacted more then
Civil observance; this was a second reason. He was advanced the second in the
Kingdom, where he plots and contrives by a desperate and bloody Stratagem, the
utter ruin and destruction of the Jewish people: Kings are but men, their
favorites often the worst of men, they lie open to the envy of the people,
which like the Sunbeams, beats always most scorchingly upon rising grounds.
What that Prerogative is I know not, that Kings cannot offend; Kings sin, and
Kingdoms are ruined: Esther bows low to the King, but stands upright against
Haman; she encounters his person, and is resolved either to stand by his fall,
or to fall if he stands; this difficulty though a great one, yet not the only
one, the last is worst, there is a seeming impossibility, she must reverse the
Law, the last discouragement.

Non conveniat (says Caesar) vel ullum verbum; disconsonant it is that one
word should pass vainly out of a Princes mouth. But when laws are enacted,
decreed and established, when signed and sealed with the Kings seal, and that
according to the Laws of the Medes and Persians which alter not, what hope to
reverse or change it? set aside Principles, Grounds, Articles of Religion,
unquestionable truths and undeniable Aphorisms, the Moral and Eternal Law of
God; Men are not to make, nor may any entertain the Laws with an Oath never to
change them; none may vow a perpetual marriage to their own Mandates, there
may be a cause for a Bill of divorce, room for retractations. What made these
Persian Laws unalterable, but the Laws themselves? that power that makes, may
change. This Esther knew, this might be, though there was little hope this
should be, but she will venture it, it was for her people, her Religion, her
God, which are the Motives that moved her, the last consideration that commends
the Resolution.

Esther been of the ordinary temper, as jolly and proud of her Majesty and
beauty as her predecessor Vasthi, how easy had it been for her to have
over-looked the calamity of her people? she that before neglected her Husband
her Sovereign, how would she have here under-valued her servants, her subjects?
her wise Ladies would have persuaded her; yea, she would have said her self it
had been an unnecessary anxiety, to have interrupted her mirth with the thought
of their misery; a business beneath the State of a Queen to undertake the
rescue of a few despised Countrymen, especially with the hazard of the
forfeiture of her honor, the high displeasure of the King, the danger of the
Law, the hazard of her life, the small hope of success. This certainly would
have been her voice, if they perish they perish; but Religious Esther she more
esteems of her peoples safety then her own, her life is bound up in theirs,
if they perish she could not live, she would have been more miserable had she
survived their Misery; who could desire to live when the Country is dead? all
owe more to their Country then to themselves; this Esther knew which thus
strengthened her resolution, together with the preservation of her Religion, a
second consideration.

2. Religion is the very Nerves and sinews of the Commonwealth, the very heart
and prime fountain of life and livelihood, the Crown, the glory of a Nation,
the beauty, the strength, the perfection, the Spirit, the soul of a Kingdom;
In Religion is Embarked the public safety; when that is aimed at, the danger
is dreadful, the loss beyond recovery; Eli's heart trembled whilst the Arc
was in the field, in doubtful disputation; but when he heard the Arc was
taken, he fell from his seat, whose heart was sooner broken then his neck; yet
with that he dyed; Happy death that made him not outlive the loss of the
Arc! none but Atheists that know no life but the present, but they make
Religion the first thing. The Heathen is recorded to all ages, for the laying
aside his Father, Wife, and Children, and taking the care of his Country gods;
few make Religion their business, especially they that sit at the top of the
wheel, clothed in soft raiment, dandled on the knee and lul'd in the bosom of
sovereignty; there are that will sell Paradise for Paris, and will lance no
farther forth, then they may return safe again; but Esther is of a more divine
temper, she stands up for the defense of her Religion; In her Religion, she saw
the glory of God had founded it, and it could not be ruined without a manifest
hurt to the glory of that God which was dearer to her then her own life: the
third and last encouragement.

Chrysostom professed he loved nor honored Rome so much for her Antiquity,
her multitude of inhabitants, her sumptuous fair buildings, the great
privileges and immunities of the Citizens, the beauty and glory of the City,
as for that the Lord of Glory was held forth there in the preaching of Peter
and Paul: Heaven it self is not so glorious, as a poor Country Village, where
the King of glory is preached: Queen Esther rather then the glory of God should
be obscured by a black cloud of his servants blood, rather then the miscarriage
and downfall of Religion should open the mouth of blasphemy to spit reproach in
the face of Gods people, she will stake her own soul, lay her life at pawn to
redeem the glory of God from such an injury, Finis dat amabilitatem, the end
beautifies the enterprise; if any end can add glory to any, surely this does
multiply on the head of Ester, she is resolved, actum est, it is done already
in her unbended resolution, she clothes her self with Virtue, and puts on
courage with her Jewels; Thus accompanied with Divine beauty, and heavenly
Valor, she sets forward to her already bleeding Nation; her Weapons are faith
and prayer, her Armor courage and resolution, her Attendants beauty and
virtue, her word Si pereo pereo, nor can danger, difficulty, or impossibility,
Haman, Death, nor Devil turn her back again, Go I will.

Thus you have heard with what cautions, with what courage and wisdom Queen
Esther, and by her Example, every good Christian ought to enter into a
Resolution; here was an absolute integrity of all concurrencies, which made
this resolution good, acceptable to God, comfortable to her self, profitable to
her people; The person that made it fitly qualified, the end moving
sufficiently warrantable, the circumstances honest and seasonable, the means
direct and lawful: Here was no defect, iniquity and exorbitancy of any
particular, but a general combination of all requisites: The Resolution was
necessary and religious, which will the better appear, if we compare what Queen
Esther did in Persia, with what the Scriptures testify the Saints and servants
of God have done at other times, and ought to do at all times, which is my
second thing, the Doctrine and the confirmation of it.

Doct.
In the Cause of God, Religion, and our Countries, we are not to pass for
perishing. Gracious and Religious spirits, neither are nor ought to be
out-dared in the cause of God, Religion, and their Countries safety, by the
fear and danger of perishing.

They that are on Gods side as Moses proclaimed in the gate, Exodus 32.26.
they are to know neither father nor mother, but every one to stay his brother,
companion and neighbor; Luke 14.26.
Christ teaches us to hate father and mother and wife and children and
Brethren and Sisters; yea, and our own lives also, when they stand in
competition with God; Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 16.22. 1 Cor. 16.22.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha; he
speaks not of the Jews and Heathens, but of Christians; the Apostle blesses
those and prays for them that love Jesus Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24.
Ephesians, 6.24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity; as the blessing is so is the curse, Anathema Maranatha to them that
love not the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity: None can love Jesus Christ in
sincerity, that love their lives before and above Christ. Saint Jerome
protested he would trample upon Father and Mother, if they hindered his way to
Christ; Cursed be he, said that noble Marquess, that counts the whole world to
one hours enjoyment of Jesus Christ. Saint Paul could not by the prayers and
tears of his friends be kept back from going to Jerusalem (though the Spirit
witnessed, Bonds and afflictions did attend him there) why do ye break my
heart? Acts 21.13.
for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the
Name of the Lord Jesus; All their tears and entreaties could no more prevail
with him, then Dido's did with Aeneas, when Jupiter commanded his departure;
Romans 9.3.
For my brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh, I could wish that my self
were accursed from Christ: Moses full of zeal and compassion, when wrath was
going forth against Israel, when the destroying Angel was waving his sword over
them, his sword furbished and garnished to make a sore slaughter, He bows his
knee to the father of Jesus Christ, he cries out; Exodus 32.31, 32.
O this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold; yet
now if thou will forgive their sin: and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of
thy Book, which thou have written. He speaks after the manner of men, in whom
compassion and passion stops passage to further speech; an abrupt kind of
speaking, an imperfect sentence, wherein much more is employed then was
expressed: Luther would to Worms, though there were as many devils as tiles;
and Antonius Marinarius said, standing up in the Council of Trent, Though
heaven fall and the whole world run headlong, yet I will look up to the
goodness of God, and though an Angel from heaven should persuade me the
contrary, yet I would say Anathema to him. A French Cavalier protested for the
recovery of Callis he would be content to lie two years in hell. A reverend
Bishop lying at the point of death, spoke zealously and soberly Me moriente let
me dye so the Church may flourish. Sejan with the hazard of his own life did
bear off the burden that would have crushed Tiberius to death, and our
Santleger received the Arrow into his own breast, that would have pierced the
King to the heart. Those Worthies did worthily, that presented the first
Petition at York; and this Parliament shall live for ever, for the first
Remonstrance and Protestation. This is a duty that we all owe to God, to our
Religion and Country, which all that are eminently godly, truly religious and
zealous Patriots, have ever preferred before their particular estates, honors,
and Lives. I shall but commend one Precept to you, with an example to
illustrate and back it, you have them both in one verse of the same chapter, 1 John 3.16.
1 John 3. v. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he has laid down
his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren, the
example is the highest that can be given, and the Precept in every word
emphaticall; we ought in point of duty, it is not arbitrary nor voluntary, a
necessity lies upon us, and woe unto us if we lay not down our lives for the
brethren, to lay down freely and of our own accord, not by constraint and of
necessity, but of choice and desire; Our lives the highest thing in our power,
higher then our honors, our estates, our liberties, our privileges, our
present comforts, for the brethren, the Saints, the servants of God.

The Reasons that strengthen this Doctrine are mighty convincing, and strong to
invite if not to enforce the obedience to it.

This we ought to do in point of Equity, Honor, Reason 1
and Policy.

1. In point of equity, what can we stake in Gods cause and our Countries, that
we have not received from God and for Gods purposes? The Lord has made all
things for himself, the Lord found nothing made to his hand; what is there in
heaven and earth, that can stand out against God and say, I made my self; it
was a blaspheming sin, no sin of ignorance, which King Pharaoh, belched forth,
Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the
Lord, Exodus 5.2.
neither will I let Israel go: The great Turk blasphemed God in heaven, when
he cried out; O God have thou not enough to do with thine own business in
heaven, but thou interesteth and interposeth thy self with mine on earth; it
was sordid and base flattery, Jupiter in coelis, God rules in heaven, Caesar
on earth; the Tyrant set his mouth against heaven when he said, Is not this
great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Dan. 4.30.
And as God made all himself, so he made all for himself; when he made them, he
made no overture of his interest and propriety: All that man has, and all that
man is, is from God, and therefore all that he has and all that he is, must be
for God, Of him and to him, there is S. Paul's Alpha and Omega; when God endowed
man with the greatest trust, power, and prerogative; when he made him his
Viceroy, his Vicegerent, his Lieutenant General, when he gave the foul of the
Air, the beast of the field, the fish in the sea, the trees in the Garden to
his command, yet then the Lord laid this restraint, but of the tree in the
midst of the Garden thou shall not eat; That tree could then baffle Adam, when
all the creatures besides would bow unto him, and give homage and obedience,
then that would stand upright and say, Adam touch me not, pass by, lay no hand
on me, lest thou dyest; what can we lay out for God, which we have not received
from God, and for Gods purposes? if we lay out much of our silver and gold for
God, God therefore has given us much because we should use much; Of thine own
says David we have given unto thee, 1 Chro. 29 14.
when the Kings and Princes offered liberally toward the building of the
Temple; If we have large parts, hearts and heads enlarged as the sand on the
sea shore, so that we had as many choice notions as sands on the sea shore, God
intended to make large use of them; Wisdom and Understanding calls God
Father, life it self was bestowed on man by God, that it might be bestowed on
God by man; The Lord Jesus Christ himself received a body, not that he needed a
body, but that with that body he might serve the great design of Gods
Predestination, Heb. 10.5.
and so he understood and acknowledged it, A body have thou prepared for me, I
come to do thy will O God. The whole Church resolves according to this, Cant.
2.16.
My beloved is mine and I am his, He is mine in all he has, he is mine in all
he did, in all he suffered; he for my sake encountered with the malice of men,
with the rage of devils, with the wrath of God, and therefore good reason I
should be His, His in all I have, His in all I am, His in all I can do and
suffer: O says Spira, Were it with me as in times post, I would scorn the
threats of the most cruel Tyrant with invincible Resolution, and glory in the
outward profession of Christ, till I were choked in the flame and my body
consumed to Ashes: Certainly they are to be begged as fools, and to be esteemed
as mad, that rise against the Parliament that has stood for them; we have
received all from God, Judge ye, owe we not all to God? is not this equal?

They that honor me, them will I honor, God honors them that are of public
Spirits, 1 Samuel 2.30.
that will lay out themselves and what they have for God; the greatest title of
honor among the Romans, was to be entitled patres patriae, they had divine
honors and were enrol'd among the Gods; the name of Quintus Curtius, of
Attilius Regulus, of Papilius Decius the father and son, others are famous and
renouned to this day; Constantine had the name great, and Theodosius had the
name good, not from the greatness of their Empire, but from the goodness of
their Religion. You have studied to set marks of honor upon them that have
jeoparded their lives in the high places of the Earth. King Darius upon a time
opening a great Pomegranate, and being asked of what he would wish to have as
many as there were grains in that Pomegranate, he answered presently, So many
Zopirusses; Zopirus was a Valiant and Noble Commander, who seeing the King his
Master could hardly surprise Babylon, where the traiterous Assyrians were
entrenched, put in execution this wonderful and strange Stratagem, he caused
his servants to rent his whole body all over with scourging, to slit his nose,
to cut his lips and ears, then flying covertly to Babylon he made the
Assyrians believe Darius had used him so, because he had spoken in their
behalf, councelling him to break up his siege and to remove his Army from
assaulting them; they believing the story, seeing his Massacred and dis-figured
body, they gave him the first command, by which means he delivered them and the
City into Darius power. When the Lord Jesus heard of the faith of the
Centurion, the Text says, He wondered, it is read, he honored it; this raises
a man above himself, and shows that he has more then man, somewhat of God in
him; as there cannot be a greater reproach, ignominy and obloquy upon the name
of any, then of them that have betrayed their Country, their names shall rot
for ever, and their memorials shall perish, it is their curse, and let their
heirs inherit it. The Jews to this day when they read this History of Esther,
as often as mention is made of Haman, they stamp with their feet, frown, knock
with their hands, shout and make an hydeous noise: the name of the gunpowder
Traitors is abhord, and is in execration to this day, and after ages will
abominate their baseness and villainies, that have lifted up their hand against
the Parliament; but the Esthers, the Mordicai's, the Religious Patriots, that
have acted in the sphere, the brave soldiers whose lives were not dear unto
them, the faithful Ministers, the Horsemen, the Chariots of Israel, they shall
be had in everlasting remembrance, their names shall be perpetuated to all
generations, and their memory shall live for ever; Jael shall be blessed above
women, and David for killing Goliath shall marry the Kings daughter, and his
house shall be free in Israel; Mat. 26.13.
He is worthy, He loved our Nation and has built us a Synagogue. Where ever
(says Christ) this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, there shall
also this, that this woman has done, for a memorial of her. Pilate is
gibbited up in the Creed for condemning Christ, whilst Christ for dying for his
people, Is exalted above all principalities and powers.

Luke 17.33. Mat. 10.1. Mal. 1.10.
Luke 17.33. He that loses his life shall preserve it; No man can give a cup
of cold water, but shall have his reward: Who says God has shut my door for
naught? God is not nor cannot be a barren wilderness. He that has pity on
the poor, Prove. 19.17.
lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given will he pay him again:
read what Mordecai told Esther when her fear at first prevailed with her, chap.
4. v. 13, 14. Esth. 4.13.14.
Think not with thy self that thou shall escape in the Kings house more then
all the Jews; for if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall
there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place, but
thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed; and who knows whether thou be
come to the Kingdom for such a time as this. A gracious spirit cannot enjoy it
self, while the public is in danger; that History is worthy your observing
though Apocryphal: A spark is safer in the fire then separate alone; 2 Esdr.
9. 40. to c. 16 27.
how easy may it be quenched? joined to the rest it preserves it self, and may
burn them that seek to extinguish it: a drop taken from the rest instantly
dryes away, in the sea it lives whiles the sea lives: one soldier from the
Army in continual danger, in the Army safe: certainly that policy is folly,
that council foolishness, that leaves men to themselves to divide from the
whole. He that bottles all the Tears, that numbreth all the hayres, that
pondreth all the steps, that keeps all the Bones, so that not a tear shall be
lost, not a hair fall, not a foot dash against a stone, not a bone break: if
God takes care of the tears, the hairs, the outgoings, the bones of his
people, how much more for their Liberty, for their livelihood, for their blood,
for their lives, for their bodies, for their souls? peruse the sacred book of
God, search all the Annals, the Histories, the Records of the Bible, and find
me one, one example, one man, one woman, that ever were of public spirits,
that did but lay to heart the miseries of the Country, that did but weep and
mourn for the Abominations and Desolations, and see if God did not ever
preserve them, if he was not a Sanctuary, a City of Refuge, a hiding place, a
Royal Pavilion to them; I could give twenty instances, how God has preserved
them, Enoch, Noah, Lot, Jeremy, Barach, Ebedmelech. God gives in express
charge, Ezekiel. 9.4. Ezec. 9.4.
Go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a
mark upon the foreheads of them that sigh and that cry for all the Abominations
that be done in the midst thereof: Certainly they that will not perish for
their Country, shall perish without it or with it; whereas they that care nor
to perish, so that their Country perish not, they may be saviors to themselves
and to the Country; neither they nor the Country shall perish, witness the
success and issue of this Resolution of Esthers perishing: and thus much for
the Observation and Confirmation; I come in the third and last place to the Use
and Application.

Use 1.
Learn, God sometimes brings his people into a perishing condition, he leaves
them hopeless and helpless, as Orphans and Widows; the Jews they were at
this time in a low and sad condition, the Decree was gone forth, the day was
assigned, the Executioners ready; the Israel of God they have been as a valley
of dead and dry bones, Ezec. 37.
without skin, without flesh, without life; the Church of God as Isaac, bound
hand and foot, the knife at the throat, the fire burning; as Jonah in the belly
of the Whale, in hell, as Christ in the Grave. How desperate was the condition
of the Jewish Estate, in the Reign of King Ahaz, they were so low, that they
knew not by what possibly they could rise again, Isa. 7.11, 12.
God said to him, Ask a sign of the Lord thy God, ask it either in the depth
or in the height above; But Ahaz said I will not ask; and why would not he? He
thought nothing in heaven, nor in earth could do him good. Israel was in Egypt
as a burning Lamp in a smoking furnace, as Abraham in a deep sleep, full of
horror and of great darkness; in Babylon as a Lion dead, in Rome as men killed,
whose bodies lie unburied; the Church sometimes passes through the waters,
through the Rivers, through the fire, through the flame. Christ the head of the
Church (therefore much more the Church) was as a Plant or Root, in a dry
ground, without form, Isai. 53.
without comeliness, without beauty; despised, rejected of men, a man of
sorrows, one acquainted with griefs. Yea the Heroes, the worthies, they of the
first Three, they are sometimes necessitated to pass through the Pikes, to
break through an Host, an Army, to gain a little water. You your selves the
Worthies of the Kingdom, have you not several times received the sentence of
death within your selves? have you not been at your stands, at your loss, God
will raise up Mountains of opposition that you may be nothing in your selves,
that you may be all in him.

Haman the common enemy that plotted and contrived the utter ruin of the people
of God, was himself hanged upon the same gallows that he prepared for Mordecai.
-- nec lex est justior -- Nor did Haman dye alone, as the head of the Malignant
partee, but Hamans ten sons drank of the same cup; yea, they that would have
acted in so hellish a design, the Jews put to the sword 76000 men; it is worthy
of your observation, the Jews that stood up for their Liberties, for their
Religion, yet the Text twice expressly Records, That they laid not their hands
on the Prey. Esth. 9. c. 10. v. 16.
See what the Gibeonites asked of David, 2 Samuel 21.3, 4, 5, 6. What shall I do
for you, and wherewith shall I make the Atonement, 2 Samuel 21.3, 4, 5, 6.
that ye may bless the inheritance of the Lord? And the Gibeonites said unto
him, We will have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house, neither for us
shall thou kill any man in Israel. And he said, What ye shall say that will I
do for you: And they answered the King, The man that consumed us, and that
devised against us, that we should be destroyed for remaining in any of the
coasts of Israel, Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us* and we will
hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, whom the Lord did choose: And the
King said, I will give them. I do not deny but the Law of God, does it self
allow composition for men's lives, Exodus 21.30.
men may in some cases redeem their lives with their Estates. Ismael did not
slay them that said, They had treasure in the field: But if there be any whom
God has marked out for destruction, Jer. 41.8.
they that give their lives to them, their lives may go for their lives, Cursed
be he that does the work of the Lord negligently. All are not involved in the
same guilt, that are in the same Action; 200 joined themselves to Absolon in
his treasonable practice, yet they went in the simplicity of their hearts: Yet
there are a partee that are leaders to the blind, that Justice may not shut her
eye against them; in Babylon there are some that have not the mark of the Beast
upon them, they are to be invited, to be called out, to be received in* but
they that have the name, the number, the mark of the beast, they must dye
without mercy, and like milstones be thrown into the midst of the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone: the commands of God are not only peremptory,
Revel. 18.6.
Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and double unto her double according
to her works; in the cup that she has filled fill to her double: but a
blessedness is promised to them that execute this command: Psa. 137.8.9.
O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be that
rewards thee as thou have served us, Happy shall he be that takes and
dasheth thy little ones against the stones: peruse that of the Lamentations and
you shall see who they are that are to be destroyed, and how to be destroyed;
Lam. 3.64.65, 66.
Render unto them a recompense O Lord according unto the work of their hands,
give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them, persecute and destroy them in
anger, from under the Heavens of the Lord: [Give them sorrow of heart] there is
their character, there is their mark by which they are set out for
destruction, there is that black bean, that fatal robe which designs them for
death; the margent of your Bible reads it, give them obstinacy of heart; an
hard heart is a great evil; but an heart hardened, an obstinate heart,
obstinacy of heart, such a heart that will not, that cannot be softened: one
reads it give them a veil upon their heart, they upon whose heart there is a
vail, Isa. 26.11.
that when Gods hand is lifted up they will not see: give them a shield upon
their heart, a shield not to defend them from the fiery darts of Satan, but as
the Interlineary gloss reads it, ne penetrentur jaculo praedicationis. The sin
against the holy Ghost is unpardonable, and could we distinctly know that sin,
men should not pardon it more then God; blasphemy was to be punished by death,
this sin the highest blasphemy; I believe there are many at this day that are
guilty of this sin; to sin against mighty convincement (so Christ argues
against the Pharisees) is to sin this sin; they that fight against God as the
Jews did that opposed Stephen, who were not able to resist the spirit by which
he spoke, yet they were cut to their heart, they gnashed on him with their
teeth, they stopped their ears, they stoned him to death; if some are not
guilty of this sin against the holy Ghost, yet there are many that are guilty
of that sin which is unto death, of that sin which leads unto death, which
shall never return again, that have stood out against the Word of God, the
Providence of God, the mercies of God, that have grieved the Holy Spirit,
resisted the Holy Ghost, quenched the Spirit and done despite unto the Spirit
of grace: Christ would not spare the figtree above three years; they that stand
out this year, after the master of the Vineyard has been at so great cost, and
has taken so great pains, after he has done so great things, that heaven and
earth are astonished, I fear not to say, they have sinned this sin which is to
death, which God will not, which men should not pardon: but if your charity be
yet above my faith, That you believe there are that have not sinned, neither the
one nor the other, yet your sense cries loud unto you, they have shed innocent
blood, precious blood, the blood of the sons of God, which God will not, nor
you may not pardon; they have not only filled Jerusalem, shed the blood of many
of your Citizens, but they have filled England, Scotland, Ireland, with blood;
Recompense them according to their work, they whose sword has made many
childlesse, let your sword make their mothers childlesse, Recompense them
according to their work, yea, give them double not only according to the work
of their hands, but according to the mischief of their heart, which far
exceeds the work of their hands, yea it is double unto it; and therefore God
which sees their bloody minds, bids his people recompense them according to
what they have done, double unto them according to what they would have done:
It was a bloody speech of one, once your prisoner, now Governor of a strong
hold, that yet stands out against you: If the King commanded him, he would not
care but glory in it, to burn all the Cities of the Kingdom, to lay the Land
as Sodom and Gomorrah, to sow this Garden of Eden with salt. O let not these
sons of Zerviah that have shed the blood of war in peace, and have put the
blood of war upon their girdle, and in their shoes that were on their feet,
let not their hoary head go down to the grave in peace, they have been the
troublers of Israel; God and you trouble them; enter into your chamber and shut
the doors upon you, and then revolve again and again all the sad stories of
these men's cruelty, sum up whatever loss or damage the three Kingdoms have
suffered by them; yea, exact not the principal but the utmost farthing of Use
and Interest: Our Savior Christ tells the Pharisees, That they have filled the
measure of their sins, Mat. 23.35.
and that they had brought upon them all the righteous blood shed upon the
earth, from the blood of Righteous Abell, unto the blood of Zacharias, son of
Barachias, whom they slew between the Temple and the Altar: these men are
guilty of all the blood that has been shed in this Kingdom, in the cause of
Liberty, of Privilege, of Religion; God will lay all the blood to their
charge, he will not loose one drop of the blood of his Saints. Abels blood yet
cries for vengeance: God when he comes to make Inquisition for blood, he will
account for every drop of blood; he that pardons all other sins, will not
pardon innocent blood. Tears shall not wipe away the guilt of blood,
Reformation cannot hinder when God inquires for blood; God may defer his
Visitation, yet come he will, and he will enquire whether there be any of the
house of Babylon alive, to make restitution for blood. The same Spirit that
actuated Cain to kill his brother Abell, actuated the Pharisees to kill the
servants the sons of God: the same have actuated these men to kill the Saints.
The devil was a Murderer from the beginning; the whole world lies in the
wicked one, they all walk by the same bloody principles, they have the same
enraged spirit, with the same hellish rage which reaches up to heaven, by
which they have shed any of the blood of the Saints, they would have shed all;
if all the blood that were shed from Abell to this time, did run in the veins
of any one child of God, they would open that vein, and let out that blood, and
spill it as water upon the ground: Caligula's bloody wish is in all their
hearts, O that all the Saints and servants of God had but one head, that with
one blow I might strike it off.

Neither let your eyes spare, though there are great ones that are guilty;
Queen Vasthi too curiously wedded to the observation of the Persian Law which
inhibits women to be seen of strangers, and too much doting upon her own beauty
and Majesty, refuses to come, though the King sends a first and second time,
and therefore she shall never come more, Esth. 1.16 17, 18.
the King and his Council Decree it, and give a Moral Reason for it;
greatness and wickedness may not twin together, Princes have not any license
to offend, Queens themselves have not an Obstante for sin: It Is the misery of
greatness, the offense is as great as the offender, the sin as sovereign as
the Person; great Persons do not so much commit sin as teach it; their
disobedience is ever Masculine, and it begets followers of it, as of their
Persons; they are of a diffusive and spreading nature. The highest Court may
reach the highest Persons; Causes and not Persons are to be heard in Your
Parliament: Ezra 7.26.
I Will conclude this with that of Ezra chap. 7. ver. 26. Whosoever will not do
the Law of thy God, nor the law of the King, let judgment be executed speedily
upon him, whether it be unto death or to banishment, or to confiscation of
goods or to Imprisonment.

Perish, that have adventured the perishing, that you and the Kingdom might
not perish; Esther found favor in the eyes of the king and the king gave her
Hamans house: It was the Piety of David that he inquired Whether there was any
of the house of Saul, 2 Samuel 9.3
that he might show the kindness of God unto him: and it was a commendable
custom in the Courts of Persia, to have the good Acts of the Subjects
Chronicled; Esth. 6.1.3.
Mordecai was found in the History, and the King highly advanced him for it.
Would you be pleased to peruse your own Records, you may find some places,
that now like Mordecai lies sad and desolate in the gate, that did you
admirable service, whereof you did rejoice and glory: pardon my zeal if I name
the Town and Parish of Manchester unto you, a Town famous for Religion ever
since the Reformation; believe it, it has been a Goshen, a place of light,
when most places of the Land have been places of darkness, it has been an
hiding place, a place of refuge and sanctuary against the Tyranny of Prelacy,
the storms and tempest of persecution; They were with the first that jeoparded
themselves in the high places of the Earth, that ventured the perishing in the
cause of God and the Kingdom; They offered themselves willingly amongst the
people, and they laid out themselves in what they had for the public service;
yea, I know there were that like the Widow threw in all their treasure into
the public Treasury; God did great things by them and for them; I fear not to
say they preserved the North; Manchester was the public Magazine, the
Sanctuary to poor Exiles, the Prison to proud Enemies, the Bulwark to the
County; but now she sits like a Widow desolate, the hand of God has lately
gone out against them, the only Town untouched by the Enemy, and the only
town in all the County stroke of God: The Priests the Ministers of the Lord,
that did bear the Ark of God upon their shoulders, there were sixteen of them
in that Parish, and now I know but one, one alone as Eliah left to do the
service of the Lord, and he is upon tiptoe, ready to take his flight, scarce
having bread (through the wickedness of the times the great revenues of the
Church being unjustly withheld from him) to put into his childrens mouth: the
Walls of the Garrison they moulder away, and what the Enemy could never do, time
has made wide breaches in their Works, and there is not at this time that I
know of, five soldiers to keep the Garrison; these things in a Petition, they
have lately laid at your feet: Give me leave in theirs and others behalf to
say, Let not so great labor of Love be forgotten, Let the blessing of them
that are ready to perish be upon you, Comfort them, yea comfort them according
to the time wherein they have been afflicted; yea, give them double for what
they have done.

There are many Uses that I could make of this Doctrine, but time and strength
would both fail me. I will conclude all with a short meditation; peruse 1 Kings
22.19, 20. 1 King. 22 19, 20.
And he said hear thou therefore the Word of the Lord, I saw the Lord sitting
upon his Throne, and all the Host of heaven standing by him, on his right hand
and on his left: And the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up
and fall at Ramoth Gilead? and one said on this manner and another said on
that. Be pleased to conceive a Parliament at this time conveen'd in Heaven, and
God on his Throne asking this Question, Shall I destroy England? And so some
Answers after this manner and some after that.

England must be destroyed, Elijah a bold and daring man, he makes intercession
to God against Israel, Lord they have killed thy Prophets, and dug down
thine Altars, thou have consumed with the Spirit of thy mouth, and have
consumed with the brightness of thy coming, the great Antichrist, the Grand
Imposter, the man of sin, the son of Perdition, the wicked one; and behold
there are many Antichrists, many wicked ones that are risen up in the room of
him, there are little Foxes that spoil the Vines, those Vines that have tender
Grapes, and they are not taken away.

England must be destroyed, there is a great cry of injustice, of oppression,
of wrong, of injury, blood touches blood, Courts of Justice, Committees, are
Courts of Robbery and spoil; the poor sheep flies to the bush for shelter and
loses his fleece: Papists, Malignants compound, and they oppress their poor
Tenants, that have engaged themselves in the public for the Lord against their
lords.

England must be destroyed, wrath is begun amongst them, they begin to imbrue
their hands in each others blood, and because others cannot murder them, they
will kill one another: Lord what fears, what suspicions, what jealousies, what
sad divisions amongst thine own people! they that Affliction made friends,
prosperity makes enemies; they whom one heaven will contain, one Church cannot.

England must be destroyed, they have broke the Covenant, they have falsified
the Oath of God; Oaths and Covenants are like Sampsons coards, every one makes
use of them to their own Interests. To these agreed many more, there was a
great cry heard in the house, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground:
God looked from his throne and wondered there was not one found, not one to
stand in the Gap, to make an Atonement, to speak in the behalf of England.

England, England for whom thou have done so great things, amongst whom thou
have magnified thy Name, have done Wonders, What Nation is there so great, who
has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord their God is, in all things they have
called upon him for? and what Nation is there so great, that have Statutes and
judgments so righteous? Ask now of the days that are past which were before
thee, since the day that God created man upon Earth, Deu. 4.32, 33, 34.
and ask from the one side of heaven unto the other, whether there has been
any such thing, as this great thing is, or has been heard like it? Did ever
people hear the Voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou
have heard and live? or has God assayed to go and take him a Nation from the
midst of another Nation, by temptation, by signs, and by wonders, and by War,
and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out Arm, and by great terrors,
according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?
God never did more by Josuah, by Macchabeus, by Alexander, by the King of
Sweden, then by the Parliaments Army this year; will thou destroy what thine
hand has done? what will the Atheists, the Papists, the Malignants say, Surely
God was not able to save them? save them for thy great Names sake.

England must not be destroyed, Lord will thou destroy a righteous Nation, if
there be fifty, forty, thirty, twenty, ten, righteous there? shall not the
Judge of all the Earth do that that is right? there are seven thousand at least
that have not bowed their knees to Baal, there are sixty thousand and more, yea
then sixty hundred thousand, that cannot discern betwixt the right hand and the
left; thou never did destroy a praying, a reforming people, will thou now do
what was never in thy thoughts before?

England must not be destroyed, there is a Parliament in the midst of them,
Physicians of great value, God has been amongst them and in the midst of them,
and they are still acting for God and the Kingdoms safety, did ever Parliament
perish before?

England, England must not be destroyed, they cannot dye alone, the three
Kingdoms must dye with them, yea the Protestant Churches throughout the world;
have thou not said, That hell gates shall not prevail against thy people?

To these many more joined in heart and Vote; there was a considerable partee
of both sides, nor could it be determined whether had more voices, they that
spoke for the destruction, or they that spoke for the salvation of England: and
having said they were silent; And behold as we read in the Revelation there was
in heaven great silence for half an hour, both sides waiting for Gods
determination; at last God in his glorious Majesty, raised himself from his
Throne, and effectually cried out, How shall I give thee up England, how shall
I give thee up? and so without Conclusion and final determination, dissolved
the Session, to the admiration and astonishment of both parties.

Beloved, the truth is we are yet in an uncertain and doubtful condition, none
knows what the sentence shall be at last, what God will do with us; God has
already done as much above our hopes as our deserts, God has lengthned out our
tranquillity, he has given us a breathing time, great Salvation he has
wrought for us, he has given us. Liberty and opportunity to work our salvation
with fear and trembling; believe it the Lord waits for something from us; O ye
that are the Lords remembrancers, ye Senators, ye Ministers, ye people, speak
often in his ears, give the Lord no rest, ye Israel of God, ye mighty Princes
of the Lord, ye men and women of Prayer, O all ye that are before the Lord this
day, this Fasting day, open your mouths wide unto the Lord, ask great things
of God, ye Noah's, ye Daniels, ye Jobs, ye Moses, ye Aarons, ye Jeremiahs, ye
Ba^u^hs, plead Englands cause with God, and let not God go till he has left
the blessing behind him; O pray, pray, pray with strong cries and groans, pray
away what ever it is, whether person or things, that keeps God from us; Esther,
Mordecai, they of Shusan, they prayed Haman and all the Conspirators dead
together; Haman and his wise Counselors, they for twelve Months together used
Divination and Enchantment: Esther in three days praying, overthrew what they
were contriving twelve Months; nothing can stand against Prayer, Prayer is
omnipotent, it is a Commander of the Heavens, a Controuler of the Elements, it
commands God himself; one prayerfull Christian may do more then ten thousand
beside; let not then God go, lay hands upon him, pray the sentence on your
side. You that are the Parliament of England, act strongly for God, act like
your selves according to the trust reposed in you. Did Publius Scipio a private
man kill Tyberius Gracohus that did but lightly weaken the Commonwealth? and
shall we that are Consuls, says the Consul of Rome, let Cataline alone to work
a common-destruction? let not Malignants rest quiet amongst you, there can be
no safety to our Country, to our Religion whiles such misereants lurk in our
dwelling; little know we what Gunpowder Plots are now in hatching, and how
near they are to the Birth, whilst the Pope remains at Rome and the Devil in
Hell, and their Agents in England, the sons of darkness will be still working
in the vault of Darkness; to ruin the children of light; show not the least
countenance to the detestable Neutrality that is practiced by many: God writes
in his books, write you in yours, all Neuters Enemies, all that are not for you
against you. The Hedgehog the Hierogliphick of the Newter, has two holes the
one toward the South, the other toward the North; when the South wind blows,
she stops that hole that is toward the North; when the North wind blows, she
stops that toward the South; such urchins are all Temporizers that halt
betwixt two opinions: And as for Apostates that are falls to their Covenant and
to your State, let not your eye pity them, let not your hand spare them,
execute justice to the enemies of the Commonwealth, show mercy with favor to
your friends. You my Beloved in the Ministry, be zealous for God; if God bids
us prophecy, nullus consultandi locus, no choice is then best; that Roman
Magnanimity must then take place necesse ut eas non ut vivas. Silvanus and
Timotheus peremptorily told the Emperor, Power thou have O Emperor to punish
us, but never to drive us from the Tenets of our forefathers: Eusebius refused
to deliver Constantius the Emperor the Decree made by the Council against the
Arians, though he threatened to cut off his hand, yet he refused it: Theodosius
reports that the King of Scythia slew Anacharsis the Philosopher for worshipping
the mother of the gods, after the Athenian manner; and the Evangelist records,
that twice our Savior purged the Temple, he that was the mirror of Patience
see how he loses the Reins in an holy Indignation in Sacrilegious abuses, in
Religious quarrels: The Multitude of the Offenders, the might and malice of the
Observers, the danger of the Action, nor the peril of the consequence stays
his hands, but he scourges out the buyers and sellers out of the Temple: Truly
Phineas Zeal, Iehu's March, Iosiahs Resolution, Luthers Heroical Spirit are
necessary for these times: It is all one to deny the faith and not to maintain
it; silence strengthens Error, and they that through fear or negligence hold
their peace like sleepy watchmen they betray the City when a truth in Religion
is questioned, when error is preferred; he that to his power does not resist,
de suo damnabitur silentio shall be condemned for his silence. Courage, the
Lord is with you: And ye people of the land come forth and help the Lord
against the mighty. Judge. 5.23
Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the
Lord against the mighty. These are not the words of an angry passionate
Prophet, but of the Angel of the Lord, not rashly thundered out from the
Pulpit, but zealously from Heaven, not with meekness and calmnesse of Spirit,
but in bitterness and fervency of Spirit; Here is not a single Curse, but a
double, a multiplied Curse, not against the professed open Enemies, but against
the lukewarm, the feigned friends, not against the Cities of the Cananites, but
against Meroz a City now in the Confines of Israel: All Israel was against
Achan, and all Israel must be for the public safety. If any man draw back,
Gods Soul shall have no pleasure in that man; they are no Israelites indeed
that will sit still on this side Jordan, whilst their brethren are in the
field. Be all active in your way: for encouragement I will only say this, you
shall see your desire of your Enemy, your soul shall be filled with the
goodness of the Lord; for the first see Isaiah 60.14. The sons of them that
afflicted thee shall come bending Unto thee, Isa. 60.14.
and all they that despised thee shall bow down themselves at the soales of thy
feet, and they shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy One
of Israel: God will make the sons of Princes bow down unto you, the greatest
that have afflicted you and despised you, shall lie at your feet. For the
second, see the success of this Resolution, Esther 9.29, 30, 31, 32. Your
Fasts shall be turned into Feasts, your days of mourning into days of
rejoicing, your good ones shall be made great, the Esthers, the Mordicais shall
be advanced; the Hamans the common Enemies shall be destroyed; Religion shall
be established, the Peace and safety of the Country shall be secured, Gods
glory shall be exalted, and you your selves highly Honored; God shall have the
glory, you the happiness, posterity the blessedness of this desired Work.

FINIS.

