THE LIBERTY OF THE Subject: AGAINST THE PRETENDED POWER OF IMPOSITIONS.

Maintained by an Argument in Parliament Ano. 7o. JACOB 1 Regis.

By WILLIAM HAKEVVIL of Lincolns Inn Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by R. H. An. Dom. 1641.

To the Reader.
BEing very sensible of a great Injury lately done me, by the extreme false
printing of a small Treatise of my Composing, stolen out without my consent, and
hearing accidentally that some part of this also had passed the Press, I
thought good for the preventing of the like wrong to stay the forwardness of
the printer until I had reviewed and corrected it by mine own Notes. For my
part, I should have been contented altogether to have restrained it, if I
might, But now seeing it must abroad, I shall not be ashamed to let it bear
my name, and own the errors of it my self (those of the Press excepted)
though heretofore it had gained so much reputation by some, as it was
attributed to a worthier Author. Some there are yet surviving that heard this
Argument about thirty years since in the Commons-House of Parliament, but it
has now extended it self beyond the probable proportion of a Speech or
Argument, by the insertion of many Records and Acts of Parliament more at
large, which at the delivery of it, were but merely quoted.

The Endeavor of it is to prove that the just Prerogative of our Kings never
warranted them to raise moneys at their pleasure, by laying a charge on
Merchandise to be Exported or Imported, without assent of Parliament. But, on
the contrary, the settled Laws of the Land, the Presidents of former Ages, the
Acts of our most necessitous and powerful Princes, and indeed every thing
requisite to make the Truth apparent, do as it were unanimously consent to
discharge us of this unjust and heavy Burden.

And you shall see herein how the policy of active Princes has by many ways
attempted to undermine those Fortifications which the wisdom of our Ancestors
has raised to maintain themselves from this kind of Assault. You shall see
with how great difficulty their prevailing was withstood: And (which is the
glory of Truth) you shall find those designs which were laid to overthrow our
Right, mainly to make for the evidence and confirmation of it. For, whatever
unjust Impositions were either exacted by a pretended lawfullnesse, or set up
by a commanding power, were by complaint in Parliaments presently following
taken down, and remain on Record as (witnesses against themselves) unlawful,
and against our Liberty.

These Reasons and Arguments of mine (how mean soever) those times wherein I
urged them, accepted favorably; and since, in their private passage in
manuscripts, were entertained in many judicious hands, which made me somewhat
enlarge the conceit that before I had of them; And now seeing necessity
enforces me to make them more public, I must adventure them to the censure
of these nice times. Beneficial (happily) they may be to some, prejudicial I
hope to none: In which confidence (having the leave of Authority) they have
likewise my leave to go abroad.

Vale. W. H.

The Contents.
1 THat there was ever some Custom due to the King by the Common Law. folio 6.
2 That it was a sum certain by the Common Law. folio 10. 3 That all the
Revenues which the Common Law gives to the King (out of the interest of the
Subject) are certain, or reduceable to a certainty by some legal course, and
none left to the Kings pleasure. folio 11. 4 The reasons why the Law requires
such certainty in those Revenues which the King has out of the interest of the
Subject. folio 12. 5 Examples of Revenues given by the Common Law to the King,
out of the interest of the Subject, and that they are all certain. folio 13. 6
Answer to an Objection, that the King may lay Impositions upon extraordinary
occasions. folio 21. 7 Arguments drawn from the actions of our Kings, that
they had no power to impose. folio 25. 8 Arguments drawn from the forbearance
of our Kings to lay Impositions, notwithstanding their urgent occasions. folio
34. 9 The difference between the Presidents urged, of Impositions laid by the
ancient Kings, and those which are now laid. folio 29. 10 A particular answer
to the Imposition of 3d in the pound, laid upon Merchant-strangers by Charta
Mercatoria, 31, Ed. 1. folio 42, 43. 11 The urgent occasions which Ed 2. had to
lay Impositions, and yet how he forbore. folio 48. 12 The several policies
used by Ed 3. for the introducing of the power of Imposing: 1. Impositions
taken by color of a voluntary Grant from Merchants, folio 49. 2 By way of
dispensation wiih penal Laws, folio 59. 3 By way of Ordinance in Parliament,
folio 61. 4 By color of a Loan by Merchants, folio 64. 5 By Grants of
Merchants for Liberties granted to them, folio 65. 6 By express and direct
commandment, folio 66. with several answers to all these several ways. 13
In what Statutes Impositions are mentioned after Edw. 3. time, until Qu.
Mary's; and upon what occasions, and how to be interpreted. folio 73. 14 The
signification of the words Imposition, Toll, Maletolt, Custuma and Consuetudo
magna and parva. folio 73, 103. 15 No Imposition laid from Edw. 3. time till
Qu. Mary's. folio 78. 16 What urgent occasions all the Kings from Edw. 3. till
Qu. Mary's time, had to lay Impositions, and yet did it not. Rich. 2. f. 79.
Hen. 4. f. 82. Hen. 5. f. 84. Hen 6. f. 85. Edw. 4. f. 85. Hen. 7. f. 86. Hen
8. f. 89. Edw. 6 f 92. with a Corolary of all those times and occasions. folio
92. 17 The Impositions laid by Q. Mary, and how answered. folio 93. 18
Admitting the Kings had power by the Common Law to lay Impositions, yet how
they are barred by Statutes. folio 98. 19 Magna Charta, cap. 30. urged against
Impositions, and the objection made against it, answered. 1 Objection, That it
extends only to Merchant-strangers, f. 100. 2 That it was made only against
Taxes within the Land, f. 101. 3 That by the exception in the end of the
Statute, the Kings Prerogative is salved. folio 111. 20 The Statute de Tallagio
non concedendo urged, with the answers to the objections made thereunto, folio
113. The exposition of the words Tallage, Aid, Subsidy. folio 112, 114. 21
The Statute of 25 Ed. 1. cap. 7. urged against Impositions, and cleared from
Objections: 1 That it is against the excess of Imposititions, and not against
the Right, f. 115, 116. 2 That it is only aagainst Impositions on Woolls.
folio 118. 22 The Statute of 14 Ed. 3. cap. 21. urged against Impositions, and
cleared from Objections: 1 That it extends only to Impositions within the
Land, and not upon merchandises, with an exposition of the word Charge. folio
118, 121. 23 Answers to the Reasons urged in maintenance of Impositions: 1 That
because it cannot appear that the ancient Customs were set by Parliament,
therefore they were imposed by the King. folio 125. The Antiquity of
Parliaments. folio 128. 24 Answer to the the second Reason urged for
Impositions, That the King may totally restrain importation and exportation,
and therefore may restrain sub modo by laying Impositions. folio 124, 125,
etc. 25 Answer to the third Reason, That the Ports are the Kings, and that he
may open and shut them on what conditions he pleases. folio 136. 26 Answer to
the fourth Reason, That the King is bound to protect Merchants, and safeguard
the Seas, and that therefore he may lay moderate Impositions, for raising of
many to defray his charges. folio 138. 27 Answer to the fifth objection, That
all foreign Princes have power to impose; and if our King should not have the
like, it might be very inconvenient to this State. ibid. 28 A summary
Conclusion of the whole Argument. folio 141.
Mr. SPEAKER:
THe Question now in debate amongst us, is, Whether his Mtie. may, by his
Prerogative Royal (without assent of Parliament) at his own will and pleasure,
lay a new Charge or Imposition upon Merchandises, to be brought into, or out of
this Kingdom of England; and enforce Merchants to pay the same.

I Must confess, that when this Point was first stirred among us, and that
we, not contented to seek redress for the excess of the present
Impositions, resolved to proceed farther, by calling his Majesty's right of
Imposing into question, I was very sorry: for I saw we were then in a fair way
to have obtained a very great abatement of the Impositions that now are; and
besides, we had his Majesty's promise never to lay any more but in Parliament
time, by the advice and free consent of his Subjects, repayring hither from all
parts of the Realm; This hope of a present ease, and gracious promise for the
time to come, gave me (I confess) a full satisfaction; especially, seeing I
was confidently persuaded that his Majesty's right to impose was very clear
and not to be disputed, and that therefore by drawing into question the right,
we might give his Majesty just occasion to withdraw from us his gracious
purpose of the present abatement, as also his promise for the time to come: For
Sir, when the Case of Bates (who as you know was called into question for
refusing to pay the Imposition laid upon Currants) was argued in the Exchequer,
in which Case his Majesty's right to Impose, was solemnly disputed (and there
resolved for his Majesty) I was then present at all the Arguments both at the
Bar and at the Bench; And I do confess that by the weighty and unanswerable
reasons (as I then conceived them) of those grave and reverend Judges, Fl^ming
Chapter Bar. Clarke. Savil.
sitting in their seat of Justice, I was much persuaded; but by those many
records vouched by them, I was altogether overcome, and as it were vanquished
to yield to them; for Sir, Ratio suadet, Anthoritas vincit: But though I were
then, and when the Question was first moved in this house, very confident, yet
as you shall perceive anon, I was not very constant in that opinion; for being
(amongst others) employed by this house to make search in the Exchequer for
Records, which (by the practice of former ages) might guide our judgments in
this weighty point, and having diligently collected the Arguments made in the
Exchequer, and not only so, but compared my own collections with Reports
thereof made by diverse other of my friends, and finding that some of the
Records urged in those Arguments were untruly vouched (and many misaplyed) I
then began to stagger in my opinion, and presently fell to examine the weight
of the Reasons which had been alleged, which in my poor censure, I found not
of strength sufficient (without the full concurrence of clear Presidents of
former times) to maintain the Judgment given, or my Opinion grounded
thereupon: And therefore (Sir) In love to the truth I did forsake my former
opinion as erroneous, and do now embrace the contrary, that is, That his
Majesty has no right to impose, and so am now become a convert. Those Reasons
that moved me thus to change, and the weakness which I discovered in the
Reasons alleged against the opinion which I now hold; I will, with your
patience, open unto you, and will therein follow the commandment of Christ to
Peter. Being converted, seek to convert my brethren,

As touching the Judgment in the Exchequer standing yet in force, so often
cast as a block in our way, though I much reverence the persons of those yet
living, and the memory of those that are with God, who gave the Judgment: Yet
seeing (as I hope I shall be able evidently to prove) the same to be against
the great Charter of our Liberties, I can esteem no otherwise of it then the
Statute of 25. Ed. 1. cap. 10. pronounces of all such Judgments, that is;
that it is void and to be held for naught. Thus much I thought good to say by
way of Preamble or Introduction to the matter: now (by your favors) I will
enter into the debate of the Question; in handling of which I will purposely
avoid the repetition of any thing that has been spoken by any man that has
argued before, as knowing in what presence I speak. That I may the better
convey my self through my Argument, and be the better conceived of you that
are to hear me, I will divide that which I have to say into certain parts,
which I will prosecute in order.

First, I hold it necessary to consider whether Custom were due to the king by
the Common Law.

Secondly, admitting it to be due by the Common Law, whether it were a sum
certain, not to be increased at the kings pleasure, or otherwise.

Thirdly, supposing that by the Common Law the king might, by way of
imposition, have increased his Custom at his own will, by his absolute power,
without assent in Parliament, whether or no he be not bound to the contrary
by Acts of Parliament; In the handling of which part, I will consider the
strength of every Act of Parliament hitherto vouched to this purpose,
answering, as I go, such objections as have been made against those Statutes
by such as have maintained that the king is not bound by them. I will also add
a Statute or two as yet not remembered by any. Lastly, I will discover unto you
the weakness of such Reasons as have been made in maintenance of the Kings
right to Impose; in the prosecuting of which parts I will (as occasion is
offered) give some answer to that which has been last spoken; as knowing it
to be expected at my hands. By Sir Robert Hitcham.


First then to consider Whether there were by the Common Law any duty belonging
to the King upon Merchandise to be carried into or out of the kingdom, known by
the name of Custom. Though the mainteinance of Custom to be due by the
Common Law be a point of such consequence to them that maintained the Kings
right to Impose, as without the upholding of which their opinion (as I
conceive) is not so much as colourably to be maintained, and that to maintein
the same it be not at all necessary to induce my conclusion; and although to
admit it, it may seem perhaps no good policy of Argument, but rather a great
disadvantage to me to admit that, without which the contrary part cannot uphold
their opinion, and which being admitted cannot make any thing for me; yet
because we are here not as Arguers at the Bar, but as Judges in a high-Court,
and that all our ends tend to the discovery of the truth: I will therefore not
only admit it, but will maintein it as well as I can.

That Custom is due by the Common Law I collect, That there was ever some
Custom due by the Common Law.
first by the name thereof, for though at this day it be (and so has been
for more then 350 years as I shall have occasion more fully anon to open unto
you) called in our law-Latin Custuma, yet in ancient time it had no other name
here amongst us (for I mean not to wander into forreign-learning) then
Consuetudo, as may appear by the Statute of Magna Charta cap. 30. Per rectas
and antiquas Consuetudines (for I shall anon directly prove unto you that
Consuetudo in that place is not to be understood, a usage, as has been said;
but in that sense which I, take it.) This name Consuetudo in the same sense is
also found in many ancient Records brought into this house upon the late
search; That this name then Consuetudo, which implies an approved continuance
without a known beginning should by the Common Law be given to this Revenue
more then to any other Revenue belonging to the King; nay, that this term
which is the common and general name to all common and approved usages, of
what nature or kind soever should be applied to this duty rather then to any
other amongst all the ancient usages and Customs which the Common Law
imbraceth, cannot but denote the great antiquity thereof, and more then so, the
allowance and approbation thereof by the Common Law; for doubtless, if, beside
the antiquity of this duty, the Common Law had not also allowed the
reasonableness of it, and in a manner the necessity of it, it would never have
denoted it unto us by this name of excellency above all other Customs which
require reasonablenes as well as antiquity: Therefore doubtless this duty, thus
favored, is a Child of the Common Law; nay farther, it is of the very essence
of a Custom to have his only beginning by alowance of the Common Law; for that
which begins by private contract of party, or by Act of Parliament, and
depends not wholly upon the alowance of the Common Law (by one of which three
ways, all things considerable in Law, have their commencements) cannot be
called or be a Custom, in Name or Deed; moreover considering that this
Custom is not limited to any one place within the Realm, we shall so little
need to be curious in affirming it to be due by the Common Law, as we may
boldly pronounce it to be part of the Common Law it self. Thus you see that
the very name Consuetudo proves Custom to be a duty by Common Law: To this
may be added that Magna Charta cap. 30. which (Statute was made little more
then 150 years after the Conquest) terms this not only Consuetudo (which as
I have said, implies Antiquity beyond all remembrance of a beginning) but
Antiqua Consuetudo; not only Custom, but old and ancient Custom. And in
comparison to this old Custom due at Common Law, the Custom upon Staple
Commodities, given or increased by act of Parliament, 3 E. 1. not printed, was
called Nova Consuetudo: Before the making of which Statute of 3 E. 1. you may
further see, that Custom was due: For an. 52. H. 3. in the Statute of the
Exchequer, printed, you may read, that the Collectors of the Custom of Wools
were to yield their account twice every year into the Exchequer. But that
which most of all moves me to believe that this duty was and is due by the
Common Law, is this; That in all Cases where the Common Law puts the King to
sustain Charge for the protection of the Subject, it always yields him out
of the thing protected some gain toward the maintenance of the Charge: As for
the protection of Wards, Lunatiques, and Idiots, the profits of their Lands;
For the maintenance of the Courts of Justice, it gives him Fines for purchase
of Original writs, and Fines pro licentia Concordandi, which in supposition of
Law are no other than Fines paid for not proceeding according to the surety by
pledges, put in upon purchase of the Original; and for troubling without cause
the Kings Justices, who are maintained in their places at the Kings charge:
There are many the like profits of Court given by the Common Law to the King
for the maintenance of his charge in the administering of Justice.

This observation, which might be further proved by diverse other instances in
things of other nature, makes me to think, that because the Common Law
expects that the King should protect Merchants in their Trades, by
maintaining, repairing, and fortifying the Havens at home; by clearing the Sea
of Pirates and Enemies in their passage; and by maintaining Ambassadors abroad
to treat with foreign Princes upon all such occasions: That it also gives
him out of Merchandises exported and imported, some profit for the sustentation
of this public charge; otherwise were the Law very unreasonable and unjust.
So as to prove that by the Common Law Custom is due to the King, I shall need
to say no more; especially considering it has not only been yielded to, but
proved by those which maintain a contrary Conclusion. I will therefore proceed
to my second Consideration: Whether that profit upon Merchandises, which the
Common Law for these respects gave unto the King, were a duty certain, not to
be increased or inhaunced at the Kings will and pleasure, without a common
assent in Parliament? Or otherwise, Whether the Common Law has left an
absolute power in the King, to demand in this case more or less at his own
pleasure, and to compel his Subjects to pay it? The resolving of which
question will as I conceive, make an end of this controversy between us; for
what are these Impositions which we complain of, other than the enhauncing of
the Custom by the Kings absolute pleasure?

That this duty given by the Common Law (as I have proved) unto the King, That
Custom due by Common Law, was a Sum certain.
was and is a duty certain, not to be enhaunced by the King at his own
pleasure, without assent Parliament, I hope I shall be able clearly to prove
unto you: In mainteinance of which, I will use some Arguments of direct proof,
and others of great presumption and probability. And first, I lay this as a
ground which will not be denied me by any man; That the Common Law of England
(as also all other wise Laws in the World) delight in certainty, and abandon
incertainty, as the mother of all debate and confusion, than which nothing is
more odious in Law: And therefore the rule is, Quod certum est retinendum est,
quod incertum est dimittendum; nay further, quod incertum est nihil est: This
is the censure of Law upon all the acts of men which fall under the judgment of
the Law. If then the Law so judge of the acts of men, holding them for naught
and void that are incertaine; how much more then does the Law require
certainty in her own Acts, which are to bind all men: And if in any of the
acts of Law certainty be to be specially expected, most of all is it requisite
that bounds of limitation and certainty be set between the King and his poor
Subject, between the mighty and the weak, between the Lion and the Lamb. And if
in any Case between the King and his Subject more than other, this certainty be
required, most of all it is requisite in Cases where the Common Law gives the
King a perpetual profit or revenue to be raised out of the interest and
property of his poor Subjects estate, either in lands or goods. If in all other
things the Law (as I have said, and wherein I suppose you have yielded to me)
do require certainty and limitation, and only in this case where it is most
requisite, it has omitted and neglected it, we must conclude the Law to be
most unreasonable, improvident, and contrary to it self; which to say, were to
conclude it to be no Law. Out of these grounds I may then in my opinion safely
and with some confidence deduce and maintain this position; That all the
Revenue; which the Common Law gives to the King out of the interest of the
Subject are certain, or reduceable to a certainty by a legal course: and none
left to the Kings pleasure.
That the Common Law of England gives to the King, as to the head of the
Commonwealth, no perpetual revenue or matter of profit out of the interest or
property of the Subject, but it either limiteth a certainty therein at the
first, or otherwise has so provided, that if it be uncertain in it self, it
is reduceable to a certainty only by a legal course, that is to say, either by
Parliament, by Judges, or Jury; and not by the Kings own absolute will and
pleasure. Though this Position be grounded upon those sure foundations out of
which I have (as you perceive) drawn it, and needs no farther proof: yet
because you shall see how plentiful the truth is in reasons to maintain it
self, I will further open unto you the particular reasons of this position,
which are these:

First, the Law requires certainty in matter of profit, The Reasons why the
Law requires such certainty in those Revenues.
between the King and the poor Subject, because to make any man Judge in his
own case, especially the mighty over the weak, and that in a point of profit
to him that judges, were to leave a way open to oppression and bondage.

Secondly, because by reducing it to a certainty, the King may know what
certainty to expect; that so he may order his charge accordingly.

Thirdly, that the Subject may know likewise what he is to pay, that so he may
know certainly what shall remain to him as his own.

Finally, that the King may not depend upon the good will of his Subject for
his revenue, seeing the Law expects he should bear the charge, but may know
in certainty what to claim as due to him, and may accordingly compel the
Subject to pay it; and that the Subject may not be under the Kings absolute
power to pay what the King pleases, which may perhaps extend to the whole
value of the Merchandise.

You see in general, how the Law by requiring certainty in matter of profit
between the King and the Subject, preventeth many mischeifes which would fall
out if the Law were otherwise; and therefore without more saying, I might here
conclude, that Custom being due by the Common Law, was and is a sum certain,
not to be increased at the Kings pleasure by way of Imposition: but because
there are many other revenues due to the King by the Common Law, as well as
Custom; if they all, or as many as we can call to mind, shall fall out to be
(as I have said) sums certain and not subject to be increased at the kings
will, this will be a forcible Argument, that custom is likewise certain and
not to be inhannced at the kings pleasure; for, this Argument drawn a simili
is of great force, and the most usual of any other in debate of things
doubtful in Law. Quae Legibus decisa non sunt Index ex his quae decisa sunt
statuet, and de similibus ad similia procedat. May it please you to consider in
this respect other revenues which the Common Law of this Land gives the King;
Examples of Revenues given by the Co^mon-Law to the King, out of the interest
of the Subject; that they are certain.
and according to the rule, to decide that which is in question by the same
rule and measure by which other things of the same nature have been decided and
ordered. The Common Law gives the King a Fine for the purchase of an original
writ; Is it certain? it is, and ever has been; if the debt or damages
demanded amount to above forty pounds, the Fine is, and ever has been six
shil. eight pence, and no more: if to a hundred pounds, then ten shillings, and
no more: May the King increase this Fine at his pleasure? there is no man that
will say he may. There is a Fine due by the Common Law, pro Licentia
concordandi; is it not certainly known, and so has always been, to be the
tenth part of the Land comprised in the writ of Covenant? And is not also the
Post-Fine thereupon due certainly known to be once and a half as much more as
the Fine pro licentia concordandi, or Pre-Fine? As for example, when the
Pre-fine is ten shillings, the Post-fine to be fifteen shillings: and can the
King demand any more of the Subject? So likewise, when in a writ of Right, the
Demandant alleging the seisin of his Ancestor, will not be compelled to prove
the seisin alleged, is he not to tender to the King a sum certain of a
demy-mark, to have this benefit? was it ever more or less? or can it now be
more if the King would? these, amongst many others, are duties belonging to the
King by the Common Law from the Subject, for the maintaina^ce of his Charge in
the administration of Justice, which the Civilians call Vectigal Judiciarium.
There are also in diverse other Cases duties certain, belonging to the King by
the Common Law: As for example; the relief for an Earldom is certainly
known to be a hundred pounds; for a Barony a hundred marks; for a Knights fee
a hundred shillings: all which in the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. are called
old and ancicient duties: this is Vectigal Patrimoniale; of which sort I could
produce many others, all which have like certainty. Nay, there is one duty well
known to us all, which the Common Law gives to the King; and is in his nature
a Custom (our very case) in which the King is bound to a certainty which he
cannot exceed; and that is Prisage, a duty given by the Common Law to the King,
upon every shiploading of Wine brought into the kingdom by English Merchants;
and is one Tun of Wine before the Mast, and another behind. I am unwilling to
trouble you with any more particulars of this kind: but let any man show me
one particular to the contrary, and I will then yield, that my position being
false in one, may be in more: But till my position has been in this point
infringed, this general concordance of the Law in all these particulars, is
argument enough for me, without having aleadged other reasons, to conclude,
that Custom being as all these are, a revenue due to the King by the
Common Law, arising out of the Property and interest of the Subject, is (as all
these are) limited and bounded by the Common Law to a certainty, which the King
has not power to increase: Vbi eadem Ratio, eadem Lex. It may perhaps be here
objected, that the Aid paid to the King upon the Knighting of his eldest Son,
or marriage of his eldest Daughter, was by the Common Law uncertain; and that
the King did take more or less at his pleasure, until he was bound to the
contrary by Statute. To this I make diverse answers: Though it were indeed a
sum uncertain, yet the Common Law did in some sort give it a limitation; for
it is by a special name called Reasonable Aid: So as if the sum demanded do
exceed Reason, it became from a Reasonable Aid an unjust exaction. Besides,
this revenue was a thing happening very rarely, and therefore the certainty
thereof not so much regarded by the Law: and yet it is to be observed how the
frame of this Commonwealth could not long endure incertainty even in this
casual Revenue; but it was reduced to a certainty of twenty shillings upon a
Knights fee, and 20s. upon every twenty pounds Soccageland, by the Stat. of
West. 1. cap. 35.3. Ed. 1. If in this casual Revenue they were so careful to
be at a certainty, to avoid unreasonable exactions (as the words of the Statute
are) how much more careful would they have been, for the same cause to have
reduced the great and annual Revenue of the Custom to a certainty, if they
had not thought it to have been certain by the Common Law, or limited by
Statute Law before that time made? But (Sir) that which I rely upon for answer
to this objection, is this: Reasonable Aid was and is by the Common Law due as
well to mean Lords as to the King: But mean Lords were not limited to a
certainty, otherwise than in general, that it must be reasonable, as I have
said; therefore to limit the King any further, was no reason: And this answer
may be given for all uncertain Revenues belonging to the King, the like of
which mean Lords have of their Tenants; for the incertainty of which there may
also be given especial reason, because these duties first began by special
contract and agreement between the Lord and the Tenant, and not directly by
operation of the Common Law, and so were certain and uncertain as they did at
first agree: and therefore you may be pleased to remember, how in laying my
positio^ I was wary to say, That such revenues as are due to the King as to the
head of the Common wealth (by which I purposely excluded such revenues as are
common to him with other mean Lords) are always certain. I am now according
to promise, and in maintenance of a second part of my position, to show you,
That where the Common Law gives the King a Revenue not certain at the first,
that is always reduceable to a certainty by a legal course, as by act of
Parliament, Judges, or Jury, and not at the Kings pleasure. Every man that by
his tenure is bound to serve the King in his wars, and fails, is to pay
according to the quantity of his Tenure, a fine by the name of Escuage; this
cannot be assessed but in Parliament: Upon forfeitures for treason, or
otherwise, to the King; though it be a kind of a certainty that the Law
gives, in giving him all the estate of the party convict, both in goods and
Lands, or in goods only, as the case is; yet for reducing it to a more
express certainty, the Law requires that it be found by Office. Wayfe, Stray,
Wreck, Treasure-Trove, and such like, are no less certain; for the King has
the things themselves in kind. Fines for misdemeanors are always assessed by
the Judges, Amercements in all cases are to be afferred by the Country, and not
to be assessed by the King, though the form of the Judgment be, Et sit in
misecordia Domini Regis, in the Kings mercy pro contemptu predict. Nay, though
for punishment of an offense it be by Statute Law enacted, that an offender
shall make Fine and Ransom at the Kings pleasure, the Law even in this case
(which is as strong a case as may be) will not leave the assessing of the Fine
to the Kings pleasure, to be by him rated privately in his Chamber; but it must
be solemnly and legally done in an open Court of Justice by the Judges, who in
all other cases are to judge between the King and his people, where the
interest or property of the Subject, or any charge or burden upon them does
come in question, as may be proved by the book of 2 R. 3. fo. 11. Insomuch
that I am of opinion, that if a Statute were made, that the King might raise
the Customs at his pleasure, yet might it not be done as now it is, by the
Kings absolute power, but by some other legal course, of which the Common Law
does take notice; as in the case of the Fine and Ransom: much less then will
the Common Law permit, that it should depend upon the Kings absolute pleasure,
there being no such Statute in the case.

You have heard out of what grounds I first deduced this my position, That the
Law requires certainty in matter of profit between the King and his people.
You have heard likewise the particular reasons of that position: you have also
heard what proof I have made by particular cases of like nature to this in
question; and how I have applied them to the point: And so leaving the
Judgment of the whole to your wisdoms, who can best discern whether the
Argument be of weight, I proceed to my second Reason, which is drawn from the
policy and frame of this Commonwealth, and the providence of the Common Law:
The which, as it requires at the Subjects hands loyalty and obedience to their
Sovereign; so does it likewise require at the hands of the Sovereign,
protection and defense of the Subject against all wrongs and injuries
whatsoever offered either by one Subject to another, or by the Common Enemy to
them all, or any of them.

This Protection, the Law considers, cannot be without a great charge to the
King; And because, as Christ says, No man goes to war upon his own charge;
the Common Law therefore has not only given the King great Prerogatives and
favors touching his own patrimony, more (I believe) than any other Prince in
the world has; but also has, for the sustentation of his great and necessary
expenses in the protection of his Subjects, given him out of the interest and
property of the Subject an ample, and very honorable revenue in very many
particular cases, some of which I will call to your remembrance.

He receives out of the Subjects purse for wardships and the dependances
thereupon, as we have of late accounted, about forty five thousand pounds by
the year. This is a Revenue which no other King of the world has: And as it
appears by the Statute of 14. E. 3. c. 1. It ought to be employed in
maintenance of the wars; and so doubtless was the first institution of the
Common Law: For the Lord has the profit of the Wards lands to no other end,
than to maintain a man in the war during the infancy of him who otherwise
should serve in person.

He has likewise all forfeitures upon Treason and Outlawry, and upon penal
Laws, Fines and Amerciaments, Profits of Courts, Treasure-Trove, Prisage,
Butlerage, Wreck, and so many more, as the very enumeration of the particulars
would take up long time. To what other end has the Common Law thus provided
for the maintenance of the Kings charge, by all these ways and means of
raising profit out of the Interest and property of the Subjects estate in lands
and goods, but only to this end, That after these duties paid, the poor
Subject might hold and enjoy the rest of his estate to his own use, free and
clear from all other burdens whatsoever? To what end has the Law given a part
to the King, and left the rest to the Subject, if that which is left be also at
the Kings will, to make his profit thereof as he pleases? To give a small
portion to him that may at his pleasure take more, or all, is a vain and an
idle act; which shall never be imputed to a wise Law. But it may be objected
that as the revenues are ordinary, Answer to an objection, that the King may
lay Impositions in times of extraordinary occasions.
so are they by the Law provided only for the susteyning of the kings ordinary
charge; and that if the Law have not taken further consideration and limmitted
some certain course, how upon sudden and extraordinary occasions the kings
charge may be sustained, that there is yet no reason showed to the contrary,
why the king may not upon such occasion take some extraordinary course for the
raising of money, as by the laying of Impositions upon Merchandises, or by a
tax within the Realm, rather then the Common wealth for want thereof, should
perish or be endangered. Sir Robert Hitcham.
And hereupon by the knight that last spoke, it was held that upon occasion of
a sudden and unexpected war, the King may not only lay impositions, but levy a
tax within the Realm, without assent of Parliament, which position in my
opinion is very dangerous; for to admit this were by consequence to bring us
into bondage. You say that upon occasion of sudden war the king may levy a
Tax; who shall be Judge between the king and his people of the occasion? can it
be tried by any Legal course in our Law? it cannot: if then, the king himself
must be the sole Judge in this case, will it not follow that the king may levy
a tax at his own pleasure, seeing his pleasure cannot be bounded by Law? You
see into what a mischief the admittance of one error has drawn you. But for
a full answer to the objection, I say, that the providence of the Common Law is
such, and so excellent, as that for the defraying of the kings charge upon any
occasions of a sudden war, it has, over and above all the ordinary Revenues
which it gives the king (which in the time of war cannot indeed but fall
short) made an excellent provision; for (Sir) The war must needs be either
offensive or defensive: Offensive, must either be upon some Nation beyond the
Seas, or against the Scots, or Welsh, or other borderers within the Island: If
it be an offensive war upon some Nation beyond the Seas, it cannot be a
sudden Accident, for it is the kings own act; and he may, and it is fitting he
should take deliberation; and if it be a just and necessary war, he may
crave, and easily obtain assistance of his Subjects, by grant of Aid in
Parliament: If an offensive war upon some of his neighbors within the
Continent of this Island, as the Scots, or the Welsh, which also cannot be
sudden or unexpected to the king, being his own act; you know how politikely
the kings of this Realm have provided, by reserving Tenures, by which many of
their Subjects are bound to serve them in those wars in person, at their own
charge: Only a Defensive war, by invasion of foreign enemies, may be sudden:
in which case the Law has not left the king to war upon his own expense, or
to rely upon his ordinary Revenue, but has notably provided, That every
Subject within the Land, high and low, whether he hold of the king or not, in
case of foreign Invasion may be compelled at his own charge to serve the king
in person, as it appears by the opinion of Justice Thirming, in 7 H. 4. The
reason of which, in my opinion, was to no other end, than that the king might
have no pretense whatsoever for the raising of money upon his Subjects at his
own pleasure, without their common assent in Parliament. I do then conclude
this Argument, that seeing the Common Law for maintenance of the Kings ordinary
charge, has given him such an ample Revenue out of the interest and property
of the Subject, and provided also for sudden occasions; that in so doing it
has secluded and secured the rest of the Subjects estate from the Kings power
and pleasure; and consequently, that the King has not power upon any occasion
at his pleasure to charge the estate of his Subjects by Impositions, Tallages,
or Taxes (for I hold them all in one degree) or any other burden whatsoever,
without the Subjects free and voluntary assent, and that in Parliament: If it
were otherwise, you see how it were to the utter dissolution and destruction of
that politic frame and constitution of this Commonwealth, which I have opened
unto you; and of that excellent wise providence of the Common Law, for the
preserving of property, and the avoydance of oppression. These two Arguments
used by me, that of Certainty, and this of the provision made by the
Common Law, are in my poor opinion, Arguments of direct proof, that the King
cannot Impose. I will now, according to my division, urge an Argument or two of
Inference and presumption; the rather, because Arguments of this nature have
been much enforced by those who have maintained the contrary opinion, Sir
Francis Bacon.
(especially by Mr. Solicitor:) I call them Arguments of inference, and yet in
my opinion, those which I shall urge are also of good proof; such as they are,
you shall judge of them. They are drawn either from the actions or
forbearances of the Kings of this Realm, or, from the actions and forbearances
of the people.

First, in the actions and forbearances of the Kings, Arguments drawn from the
actions of the Kings, that they have no power to Impose.
I observe, that all the Kings of this Realm since Hen. 3. have sought and
obtained an increase of Custom, more or less, by the name of Subsidy, of the
gift of their Subjects in Parliament: Nay, some of them, and those not the
weakest in Spirit, or power, but the most courageous and potent in that whole
rank, even that mighty and victorious Prince, King Ed. 3. being to undertake a
just and honorable war, than which there could not happen a better or juster
occasion to have made use of his Prerogative of Imposing, did nevertheless at
that time stoop so low in this point, that he did in full assembly of the
three States, pray his Subjects to grant him a Relief in this kind for the
maintenance of his war, and that to endure but for a short time; and further,
was well content to suffer his prayer in that behalf to be entered of Record to
the memory of all posterity: And the succeeding Kings have also suffered the
same to be printed, as may appear by the printed Statutes at large, An. 14.
Ed. 3. cap. 21. Is it likely, that if any or all these Kings had thought they
had had in them any lawful power by just Prerogative to have laid Impositions
at their pleasure, that they would not rather have made use of that, than have
taken this course by act of Parliament, so full of delay, so prejudicial to
their Right, so subject to the pleasure of their people, who never undergo
Burdens but with murmuring and much unwillingnes: Can there be any thing more
hateful to the high Spirit of a King, than to subject himself to the pleasure
of his people, especially for matter of Relief, and that by way of Prayer,
having lawful power in his hands to relieve himself without being beholding
to them?

If perhaps the Kings themselves were ignorant of this great Prerogative, which
cannot be imagined; had they not always about them wise Counselors to assist
them, and such as for the procuring of favor to themselves would not have
failed to have put them in mind of it? Nay, if they had known any such lawful
Prerogative, had they not been bound in conscience so to have done? What an
oversight was it of King Ed. 3. and all his Counsel, so much to prejudice his
right in so beneficial a Prerogative; as to suffer him upon Record, and that
in Parliament, to pray for that which he might have taken out of his absolute
power? Can there almost be a more direct disclaiming in the Right, (to compare
great things with less) if the Lord by matter of Record claim any thing of
his villain, it is a disclaimer of the villenage.

The Kings of England have other noble and high Prerogatives; I will only name
two of them, The making of war and peace, and the raising and abasing of
Coin at their pleasure: Did they ever crave the assent of their Subjects in
Parliament to make a war? Their advice indeed they have sometimes sought, and
their aid for treasure to maintain it. The Prerogative of raising and abasing
the value of money has been oftentimes put in practice by them, and sometimes
strayned to such a height, that the King might well suppose the Subjects could
not but be much discontent therewith: And yet never any King of this Realm did
it by assent of Parliament, which perhaps some one mild King among so many
would have done, and it may be, would also have prayed his Subjects to yield
thereto, only to avoid the grudging of the people, if the seeking of assent in
Parliament had not been thought to have been prejudicial to the absolute power
of their Successors: and yet, as for some of these Kings, it may be supposed,
they made little conscience to prejudice a Successor in one point, that made no
scruple totally to depose a Predecessor from his Throne, and all his
Regalities, and to usurp it to themselves.

And so I proceed to my next Argument of Inference drawn from the actions of
our Kings. Some of the Kings of England, as namely; Ed. 2. Edward the 2.
in the year of his Reign, and Ed. 3. in the 1. and 24. year of his Reign,
as may appear by the Records here amongst us, were contented to accept an
increase of their Custom by way of Loan from the Merchants, and solemnly
bind themselves to repay it again. Would any wise man in the world, that
thought he had but a color of Right, so much prejudice his himself, as to
borrow that which he might take without leave, and bind himself to repay it.
If a poor man perhaps through fear might be enforced so far to yield to a
mighty adversary, yet that a powerful man should stoop so low to one much
weaker than he; nay, that a King, in a point of such consequence, should so
far descend from his Greatness, as to borrow of his poor Subject that which
without being beholding to him he might obtein as his Right; and bind himself
to repay it again: I say, it cannot with any reason be imagined; but withal
it must be concluded, that a king that shall so do, does not think that he
has so much as color of Right to impose.

I will not much press or enforce the actions of Ed. 2. who (I confess) was
but a weak Prince; Edward the 3.
But as for his Son and successor, Ed. 3. there was not (as I have said) a
stouter, a wiser, a more noble and courageous Prince than he, and none more
careful to preserve the Rights of his Prerogative, as may evidently appear by
all his answers in Parliament, on any complaint of the Subject. Besides, never
had king of this Realm more occasion than he to strain this Prerogative of
imposing to the utmost: For besides his excessive expense in the wars of
France and Scotland, he had also a continual charge of many expensive
children, his wife Queen Philip had also for her maintenance a large allowance
out of his Revenue; but the dowry of Queen Isabell his mother (who lived till
about the 27. year of his Reign) was so great, as it is reported by some
writers, that little more than the third part of the certain Revenue of the
kingdom was left to him: In so much, as through these occasions of
extraordinary expense, and the diminution of his Revenue, he was driven to such
necessity, as his Queen in the ^ year of his Reign, was enforced to pawn her
Crown and Jewels to procure money for him, as may appear by the Record of
that year in the Office of the Clerk of the Pels. Nay, the king himself in
these extremities, was oftentimes driven to lay his Jewels to pawn for money:
And in An. 17. did also pledge his Crown for 4000. pound, to certain Merchants
of Florence, as by the Records of that year, in the Office of the Lord
Treasurers Remembrancer in the Exchequer, is manifest. By this you may see,
that this powerful king wanted not urgent and just occasion (if any occasion
may be just) to have put in practice his absolute power of Imposing; and yet,
as you see, it appears of Record, that in the midst of his great wants he
took an increase of Custom by way of Loan, and bound himself to repay it.

It may be here objected, that he did lay Impositions.

What Impositions they were, and how to be compared with the Impositions now in
question, I purpose to tell you, when I come to ans^r objections, which I have
referred to the end of my speech: In the mean time I will go on with my
course, and urge one Argument more, drawn from the actions of our kings,
touching the increase of Custom.

A man would think, that the taking of the increase of Custom by all the
kings, both one and other, with the assent of their Subjects in Parliament, and
sometimes by way of Prayer and Entreaty, for a short time; nay, the taking of
it by way of Loan, and binding themselves to repay it; and that to have been
done by the most powerful kings, in their greatest necessities, were Argument
enough that they did not believe they might justly claim it as their right by
their absolute power.

And yet is not this all: For, some of them, by name, Ed. 1. Edward the 1.
did not only take it by assent in Parliament, or by way of Loan, but (as one
that buys for his money in the Market) did give for it a real and valuable
consideration, and that to Merchant-strangers, of whom there was more color to
demand it as a duty, than of his natural Subjects. In proof of which I
produce Charta Mercatoria, made Anno 31. Ed. 1. whereby it is recited, that in
lieu of certain liberties and immunities granted by the king to the
Merchant-strangers, as also for the release of Prisage, they granted to the
king an increase of Custom. What were all the special liberties that were
granted them, I know not, nor whether they continue; but sure I am, that by
virtue of that Grant they are at this day free of Prisage, paying only 2s.
upon a Tun of Wine, by the name of Butlerage, which they granted by the same
Charter: whereas Englishmen pay Prisage in specie, viz. One Tun before the
Mast, and one Tun behind.

And it is very worthy the observation, how the same King, E. 1. in the same
year of his reign did command his Customers throughout England, That whereas
certain English Merchants were, as he was informed, of their own accords
willing to pay him the like increase of Custom which the Merchant strangers
had granted unto him, so as they might enjoy the like liberties and benefits;
that nevertheless they should not compel such English Merchants, against
their wills, to pay it: the words are worth the hearing: Cum quidam Mercatores
de regno and potestate nostri, ut ipsi dictis libertat. (having before recited
Charta Mercatoria) uti and gandere, and de prisis nastris quieti esse possint;
praestationes and Custumas hujusmodi, de bonis and mercandizis suis nobis dare
and solvere velint; ut accepimus, assignavimus vos ad praestationes and
Custumas praedictas, de his qui praestationes and Custumasillas gratanter and
absque cohercione solvere volnerint, colligendum, and ad opus nostrum
recipiendum; ita tamen quod aliquem Mercatorem de dicto Regno nostro ad
hujusmodi praestationes and Custumas nobis invite solvendum nullatenus
distringatis. What stronger inference can there almost possibly be against the
Kings absolute power of Imposing, than this: that he was contented, and so
specified to all his Officers of the Ports, That if the Merchants did of their
own accords pay more than their ancient Customs, they should have
consideration for it; But if they themselves were not willing to pay more, then
they should not be compelled thereunto.

One other observation I draw from the actions of the kings touching the
increase of their custom, which is this, that those kings which did lay
Impositions (which as I will show you by and by, was very rarely) though it
were never but in time of great necessity, and but to endure for a short time;
yet they always did it, not with the advice alone of the Merchants, as at this
day, but the Merchants did always solemnly grant an increase of Custom; and
the kings were always wary, for the better justification of their actions to
the people, in their Commissions for collecting of Custom, to recite not only
the great necessity which moved them to take an increase of Custom, but also
the grant of the Merchants, as may appear by the Records, of which we have the
copies amongst us; I dare confidently say, there is not above one or two at the
most that are otherwise, if the Impositions be of that nature which these are
of which we complain; And yet these Impositions also, by the grant of
Merchants, though raised upon never so great a necessity of State, and to
endure but for a short time, were always complained of by the Commons, when
they met in Parliament, as may appear amongst other Records, by the Parliament
Roll of 27. Ed. 3. No. 27. where in a Petition of the Commons, exhibited to the
King in Parliament, are these words, Les Commons monstrent coment que les
Merchants dyent grant per eux sans assent de Parliament, un subsidy de XLs. de
sacc. de Layn, outre le droiturel male tout de demi mark. Et prion que soit
amend a rest Parliament. Car est encounter reason, que le Comialtie de lour
biens soient per Merchants charges; Which I English thus, The Commons show how
the Merchants have granted by themselves, wihout assent of Parliament, ^
Subsidy of 40s. upon a sack of Wool, over and above the rightful custom of
half a Mark, and pray that it may be redressed at this Parliament; for it is
against reason that the Comminalty should be charged in their goods by
Merchants: with this agrees the printed Statute of 36. Ed. 3. cap. 11. in the
Statutes at large, where you shall find an express Provision against the
raising of Impositions upon Woolls, by grant of Merchants, In which Petition I
do observe, that the Parliament in those days did distinguish, even as we now
do, between Impositions laid by act of Parliament, and Impositions laid only
by the grant of Merchants, acknowledging that Impositions laid by Parliament,
are only lawful, and condemning all other as unlawful, for otherwise why
should they term the demy-Marke, which was laid by Act of Parliament. 3. Ed.
1. (Droiturel maletout) a lawful Imposition: but with relation to the
unlawfulness of these Impositions granted by Merchants, which they then did
complain of; Besides, I observe that they say, That it is against reason, that
Merchants should by their grant, without assent in Parliament, charge the whole
Commonaltie, by which it plainly appears, that they complained not so much of
the excess or greatness of the Impositions, as of the unlawful manner of the
raising of it by grant of merchants, without assent in Parliament.

Hitherto I have, according to my division, drawn Arguments from that which
our Kings have done, and put in practice for the increase of their Custom.

I will now make some observations of their forbearance, Arguments drawn from
the forbearance of our Kings, to lay Impositions not withstanding their great
occasions.
to put this pretended power in practice, considering the several occasions of
the times, which I will prosecute in order.

First therefore in general, I observe, that from the Conquest, until the
Reign of Queen Mary, being no less then 480. years space, (whatsoever the
occasions were) whatsoever the disposition of the Kings were, yet in the
practice of this pretended Prerogative of Imposing the Kings have been so
sparing, as notwithstanding, this curious search, that has been made (wherein
I suppose nothing that might make for the clearing of the Question, has
escaped us) it cannot be found or proved by matter of Record, that six
Impositions (such as we now complain of) were laid by all those Kings (who
were in number 22. And those six (if they were so many) though they were
unlawful, yet were they in some sort to be born withal. First, by reason they
were very moderate; Secondly, that they were laid in the times of great and
apparent necessity, and that they were to endure but for a year or two; For
none of them, except only that upon Wine, laid 16. E. 1. lasted longer. They
were (I say) notwithstanding their unlawfulness) yet in these other respects,
so far to be borne withal, as if the impositions which are now laid, had
been so qualified, we should I suppose, never have complained of them; and yet
not one of these few impositions laid in former times, but was complained of,
and upon complaint taken away, as may appear by the Records here amongst us:
How much more reason is there then, that we should expect the like Justice now?
considering that not one Merchandise alone, as then, but very near all the
sorts and several kinds of Merchandises that are, are charged; that not a
moderate and easy charge is laid upon them, but such, as though we should
confess his Majesty's absolut power, to lay what he list, yet we had just
cause to complain of the excessivenesse of the Burden: For first, the rates of
Merchandises, for the Subsidies of Poundage and Tonnage, are extremely raised
(a thing also though lawful, yet has been rarely put in practice) then comes
the Impost upon the back of that, and is as much as the Subsidy it self is;
in some few Merchandises, it is true, the Impost is perhaps less then the
Subsidy, but it is as true, that in diverse others, the Impost is far more.
Besides, these Impositions were not laid in the time of war, but even then
when we were at peace with all the world, except perhaps there were some sparks
of Rebellion in Ireland, then not fully quenched. Lastly these Impositions are
not (as those in former time were) limited to endure for a year or two, but
are to come to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors for ever, as may appear
by his Majesty's Letters Patents in print, prefixed before the new book of
Rates. So as if those few Impositions laid in former times, had been lawful,
yet can they not by any means be a warrant or president for our present
Impositions, differing so far from them in all these points of consequence. But
if even those few, so quallified as they were, were complained of and taken
away, what shall we then say of ours, so far exceeding them in all the
degrees of Irregularitie; Besides, if so few Presidents, as five or six in so
many years space, and those in times of so great necessity, without any
express Judgment in Law; or good authority in approbation of them, but
accompanied with as many complaints against them, be argument enough to prove
the lawfulness of the act, I dare undertake, that as well taxes within the
land, as Impositions upon Merchandises may be proved to be lawful: But to
allege the acts of kings, in raising a profit to themselves upon their
Subjects, to prove thereby their right, is of all other arguments that are, the
weakest, and so I leave it, and call to mind, that when I told you, it could
not be proved by the Records amongst us, that from the Conquest to Queen Mary's
time, there had been any more then six Impositions laid; I did in that number,
limit my self to such Impositions as those are which we now complain of, for I
must confess, that in that space, many more Impositions were laid, but they
were of a far differing nature from ours, differing I say, not only in those
circumstances, by which I did even now compare the Impositions of these times
to those five or six of former ages, but in very essence and property,
insomuch as they may not properly be called Impositions, and yet the frequent
practice of them has been objected and relied upon, as so many Presidents, to
prove the lawfulness of the Impositions now complained of: It behooves me
therefore, that in maintenance of my assertion, that so few Impositions have
been laid, as I have affirmed, that I open unto you the difference between the
one and the other, which being done, your selves will easily judge that the
greater part make nothing toward the defense of these present Impositions; For
these Impositions which now are in question, are no other then an increase of
Custom, at the Kings pleasure, and commanded by him to be taken, the passage
being free and open to all men. Those other which make such a great show in
number, and are produced as so many Presidents in maintenance of these, are no
other then so many Dispensations or Licenses for money, to pass with
Merchandises prohibited by Act of Parliament to be exported, as will evidently
appear by comparing the times, and examining the Statutes. I will therefore in
this place, as shortly as I can, run over those Presidents that have been, or
may be alleged by the contrary part, out of those Records which are here
amongst us, and leave it to your judgment, whether I maintain my assertion,
or be not rather better then my word for the number.

The first Imposition by them alleged, Urged by Flem. Clark. Doderig.
is that of 16. Ed. 1. which as it appears by the Record, was 4. shillings upon
a Tun of Wine. This indeed, for ought I know to the contrary, was a mere
Imposition, such as are now in question; and yet if I did deny it, and say that
it was laid by assent of Parliament, I know not how the contrary could be
proved, for though indeed the words of the Record are ( Cum Rex precipisset, ut
de singulis doliis vini caperentur 4. solidi) it follows not that it was laid
therefore only by the kings commandment, for we see that even some Acts of
Parliament, in those ancient times, though they were made by the full assent
of all the three Estates, yet they have these words in their preambles, (Rex
precepit: Rex vult.) But as for Recitalls of Acts of Parliament by the King, in
his Commissions, and otherwise, it was in those times usual to say, (Cum nuper
ordinaverimus) and therefore notwithstanding the Recital be (Cum nuper Rex
precipisset) it is no clear proof, that therefore it was done only by the
Kings Commandment. Nevertheless I will, I say, admit this to be a mere
Imposition, and to be one of the number, and indeed, as this is the first they
produce, so is it their best, only this (amongst all the rest) is not limited
to endure for a time certain: but give me leave (I beseech you) to open unto
you, with what circumstances this Imposition was accompanied, and what followed
of it, and then I will leave you to judge (who best are able) how far the
present Impositions may be justified by this; The first circumstance to be
observed in this Imposition, is that it was laid immediately after the war
against Wales was ended, and at the time, when for the selling of the Estate of
Gascoigne, the king himself was in person enforced to undertake a voyage
thither, as may appear by our Histories of those times, which also may be
collected by the very words of the record which are these, Cum Rex ante ultimum
Recessum suum ab Anglia precepisset, etc. That as these times were troublesome,
they were also very chargeable to the king, and did put him to try all means
for the levying of money, I shall not need to urge it, it cannot be otherwise.

One other circumstance is this, that this imposition laid in this time of
great necessity was not, as now, upon all Merchandises, nor so much as in
general upon one kind of Merchandise, coming from all the parts of the
world, but only upon such wines as were brought hither from two Towns in
Gascoigne, Bergerac. and St. Emilians, 16. E. 1.22. E. 1. in Scacario.
as may appear by the Records, and it is probable that these Towns were then in
revolt, and that the sooner to reduce them to obedience, the King laid this
burden upon their commodities, thereby to hinder the vent of them.

Another circumstance is this, that though that this Imposition were indeed
laid without limitation of any time, as touching the continuance thereof, yet
within six years following, viz. 5. December. a. 22. upon complaint of the
Merchants the king released two shillings of the four shillings, as may appear
by the Records of 22 E. 1. with which the Merchants not holding themselves
contented, the very same year within eight or nine months following, viz. 23.
Juliian. 22. the whole Imposition was released, as may appear by a recital in
the account of one William Randall receiver of the Impost money entered, an. 26
E. 1. And within three years after the release, viz, an. 25. there followed an
act of Parliament against all Impositions in general, as when I come to show
you what Statutes there are, in the point, I shall I hope clearly prove unto
you; In the mean time I will proceed to examine the rest.

The next president urged is an imposition of 40. shillings upon a sack of
wool laid by E. 1. an. 21. For the proof of which, a record of the Exchequer
of that year has been vouched. I must confess I have not seen that Record,
but by another Record of the same Court, an. 26. E. 1. it is evident that the
said Imposition was not raised by the kings absolute power, but by grant, and
that also the same was in the time of war, and to endure but two or three
year, if the war should so long continue, as will best appear by the words
of the Record. Cum custuma 40s nobis in Subsidium guaerrae nostrae contra Regem
Franciae de quolibet sacco lanae exeunte regnum nostrum percipiendum per
biennium vel triennium si tantu^ durasset guerra illa nuper concess. fuit, etc.

By this you perceive, by what means, upon what occasion, and with what
limittation this imposition was laid: if you will further know, what followed
of it, May it please you to read the Printed Statute of an. 21. E. 1. c. 7.
where it is said that the more part of the Commonalty found themselves sore
agreeved therewithal; And by the same Statute, not only that imposition of 40.
shillings upon a sack of wool, which was the occasion of the great grief and
complaint was taken away; but upon occasion thereof, there was at the same time
provision also made, against all other impositions whatsoever, as I say, I hope
I shall anon clearly prove unto you, Insomuch as this imposition of 40.
shillings upon a sack of wool, ought to be so far from being urged as a
president for the present imposition and consequently of the grievance of the
Common wealth which follows thereupon, as that rather on the contrary part it
may be thought to be the happiest accident in the consequence thereof, that
ever befell the Common wealth in this kind. For it was the occasion of the
making of the first law that ever was made against impositions, and other
charges and burdens of that nature to be imposed by the kings absolute power
without assent of Parliament.

And so I leave their second President, Vouched by Fleming, Clark, Dodderidge,
Bacon, Attorney Hobart.
and come to the third, which in time was 31. of the same King E. 1. It is no
other then that increase of Custom, which by the Merchant strangers was
granted to king Ed. 1. by that Charter now familiarly known unto us by the name
of Charta Mercatoria, which by all that have maintained his Majesty's right to
impose, has been stood upon and urged, as an imposition by the kings absolute
power; but more especially has Master Solicitor been strongly enforced with
all the advantage possible for the mainteinance of his opinion. Nevertheless I
doubt not but I shall give it a very full answer, such as yet this objection
has not received, though diverse that have spoken before, and some this day,
have undertaken to clear it; wherein I will arrogate nothing to my self, but
leave it wholly to your censure. It has been said by Master Solicitor, that
though this increase of Custom may seem to some, to proceed from the grant of
Merchants, yet that this grant of theirs was to no other purpose, nor had other
effect, then only thereby to declare their assent; For that, that those which
did grant were no Corporation or body in the estimation of Law, and so could
not bind any but themselves alone, and not such as should succeed them. And
that it was only the authority of the kings pleasure to accept and take this
increase of Custom that gave it life at the first and strength to continue as
an Imposition till this very day. For even at this day says he, the 3. pence
upon the pound granted by the said Charter, is paid by the Merchants strangers,
and they likewise enjoy some privileges granted by the said Charter. And it
was further by him observed; that notwithstanding all the Statutes that have
been urged against impositions, yet this imposition has continually stood and
has never been denied to be paid by any man; And that therefore it is likely
that no man till now ever conceived that these Statutes were made against
impositions upon Merchandises, but were rather to be understood to extend only
to impositions within the Realm.

To this objection, 27. E. 3. No. 27 13 E. 3. c. 26.
I make this Answer, that it is indeed true, that the grant of Merchants in
this case, cannot bind the whole Common wealth; as I have heretofore proved by
the Petition exhibited in Parliament by the Commons 27 Ed. 3. No. 27. and by a
Statute of 36 E. 3. c. 26. And therefore I cannot but confess that this
increase of custom may very truly be called an imposition, For that indeed it
did at first take strength, only by the kings pleasure to accept it (as has
been said) and not by the grant of the Merchants, admitting it therefore to be
a mere imposition; Let us consider with what extraordinary circumstances it is
accompanied.

First (as you may perceive by the Record it self, and as it has partly been
said already, the King took it not without yielding recompense for it; For the
Merchants strangers, by submitting themselves unto this charge, obtained diverse
liberties and immunities from the King, by the same Charter, amongst which
freedom from Prisage is one which at this day they enjoy, In which respect
this imposition is in some sort tolerable, though not at all Lawful.

Another considerable circumstance, and difference from our present Impositions
is this, that it was a composition made by the King with Merchant strangers,
which though it be by strictness of our common law, not of force to bind in
perpetuity; yet how far by the Civil Law this does bind strangers, which
are governed by these laws, is not so easily decided, and this may be a good
color to uphold it.

These special reasons, though they may well serve the turn, to make an
evident difference betwixt this, and our present impositions, and so
consequently to avoid the conclusion, drawn from the President, and may also
seem colorable, and particular reasons to uphold the Imposition it self; yet
is not this that which I mean to rely upon for Answer; For even this
Imposition, in recompense of which the King parted with so large privileges
and benefits, and which because it concerned only merchant strangers, did
neither in the burden thereof, nor in the president, so directly touch the
English, yet in the detestation, as it seems of all impositions of what nature
or kiude soever, and upon what pretext or color soever they were grounded, I
say, even this imposition also was complained of in Parliament within few
years following; and upon complaint, taken away, as may appear by the close
Roll of 3. Ed. 2. Membrana 23. Where you shall find enrolled a Supersede as,
commanding that the new Custom, granted by the Merchant strangers (reciting
the particulars, as they are contained in Charta Mercatoria) shall cease at the
Kings pleasure, and this is there said to be yielded to at the request of the
Commons which cannot be but in Parliament; but because the renewing of it again
rested at the Kings pleasure, therefore within two years after, by a public
Ordinance made by the principal Prelates, Earls and Barons, and other great
men of the Kingdom, authorized by the Kings Commission, dated the 16. of May,
the same third year of his reign, the Charter it self was declared to be
utterly void, For that it was hurtful to the Commonwealth, against Magna
Charta, and made without assent in Parliament; and not only that Charter, but
all other new Customs or Impositions whatsoever, imposed since the Coronation
of Ed. 1. till that time were also taken away, saving only the old custom
upon Wool, Wooll-felts, and Leather, And further it was ordained, That if any
man should presume to take any more then the ancient custom rightfully due,
and should be thereof convict, he should answer to the party greeved his
Costs and Damages, be imprisoned according to the quantity of his offense,
and be further punished, as an offender against Magna Charta, according to the
discretion of the Justices. To. ordinationum 5. Ed. 2. in the Tower.

Though the force and authority of this Ordinance, may perhaps be doubted and
blemished because it was made by the Barons, at the time when they had the
better hand of the King, as has been in part objected, yet you see that they
deliver not their censures, without alleging also their reasons; 37. E. 3.20.
and this their Ordinance is no more in effect, then that which was thought fit
by all the Commons in the Parliament of 5. Ed. 2. before mentioned.

But it has been yet further said, that notwithstanding this Ordinance, the
imposition does nevertheless continue in force, and is at this day paid by the
Merchant strangers, and that therefore in likely hood, the ordinance prevailed
not against it. It Is true that at this day the Merchant stranger does pay three
pence more in the pound for Subsidy of poundage, then the English does, and
that by virtue of Charta Mercatoria: But let me tell you that Charta Mercatoria
in it self, had not strength and virtue sufficient to subsist for so long a
time: It was as I have said suspended by the king himself, an. 3. condemned by
the ordinance of 5 E. 2 and had at this day been of no more force, then it was
all the time of Ed. 2. after 3o. that is, of none at all; had it not been
confirmed by act of Parliament an. 36. Ed. 3. cap. This was only that which
protected Charta Mercatoria against all those Statutes made against
impositions, and that has kept it in life till this day; And this indeed (I
mean an act of Parliament) is the only means that our Law acknowledges, for
the laying or establishing of impositions, and without which they cannot long
last.

You have now heard opened three of those six presidents, which are most relied
upon for mantenance of these present impositions which are all that have been
urged, or can be found to have been practiced from the Conquest till the reign
of Ed. 3. during which time there are as you see, as many public acts in
opposition of them, which are of so much the more force in that they are the
Legal regular Acts of great Counsels, whereas on the contrary part, those
three impositions were the acts of powerful Kings wills, in the times of
extreme necessity, As for Ed. 2. Edw. 2.
his successor, there has not been one Imposition alleged to have been laid
by him of one kind or other. Nay all the records touching this business found
in his time being only four make directly against them.

The first is anno 3. which was (as you have heard) a release at the Kings
will, upon complaint of the Commons, of the Impositions raised by Charta
Mercatoria.

The second was the Ordinance made an. 5. declaring Charta Mercatoria, and all
other impositions to be void, and inflicting punishment upon such as should
demand any.

The third was, an. 11. which is a Supersede as to discharge certain
commodities from yielding an increase of Custom granted by Merchants, by way
of loan, which in great probability the King would never have released, but
upon complaint; the rather I think so, because as the Record recites, it was
granted in a time of great necessity.

The fourth is, anno 12. and is much of the same nature, the recital of which
contains some very observable things, which I will open unto you: It shows
first in very effectual words the greatness of the Kings wants, and the
causes thereof, the words are, Cum pro expeditione guerrae nostrae Scotiae, and
aliis arduis necessitatibus nobis multipliciter incumbentibus, pro quarum
exoneratione quasi infinitam pecuniam profundere oportebit, pecunia plurimum
indigeamus in presenti; ac insuper, pro eo quod exitus Regni and terrae nostrae
simul cum pecunia nobis in subventionem praemissorum tam pro Clerum quam pro
Comunitatem Regni nostri concessa ad sumptus predictos cum festinationem qua
expediret faciend. non sufficient: Here was cause, (if any cause may possibly
be just) for the King presently to put in practice his Prerogative of
Impositions, his expense by reason of a necessary War in Scotland was so
great, as the whole Revenue of the kingdom, together with an aid which had
been lately granted him, could not with that expedition that was requisite
supply his present want, does he for all this make use of his Prerogative of
imposing? or does he hastily for want of advised proceedings, take some other
course prejudicial to his right? No, the record further says, that he
enquired by all ways and means how he might most commodiously and fitly levy
money for these occasions. After which advised deliberation, the course at last
resolved upon, was not by absolute power to lay Impositions, which of all other
courses (if it had been lawful, had been the most speedy and beneficial) but
a course more justifiable; which was, that Merchants should be called together,
and that they should be entreated to lend the King upon every sack of wool 10.
shillings and upon every last of Lether 5. shillings, above the ancient
custom, and that for their security of true repayment, without fiction or
delay, which are the words of the Record, (whereby it seems that only a
pretense of a Loan and repayment had been before that time used to color
Impositions, commandment should be given to the Customers to certify into the
Exchequer, the names of every particular Merchant, that should so lend unto the
King, that they might accordingly receive full satisfaction. And it is worth the
observing, that this Loan was for no longer time, Then from April, till
October following; thus much is warranted by the Record: So as you see that in
all this time of this King, Ed. 2. Impositions were not only altogether forborne
even in the times of his greatest necessity, but they were also condemned as
unjust and utterly unlawful.

We come now to the reign of King Ed. 3. Ed. 3.
in whose time there was no practice or means, that by the policy of man could
be thought on to bring the people under this yoke of Impositions, without
assent of Parliament, but it was by him attempted: Insomuch, as I have in my
observation out of the Records collected no less then five or six several
ways all of them very colorable, which in his time were put in practice for
the raising of impositions, and yet none of them but was resisted by Parliament
and condemned.

That which was most usual with him was that Merchants should grant to pay him
so much upon every Commodity exported or imported by way of increase of
Custom; Impositions by way of Grant of Merchants.
this seems not unreasonable, for that every man might grant of his own what he
listed, and this also to make it more colorable was never attempted, but in
the time of war: And yet as it has been pastly said already, this was
always held unlawful, as may appear by the Record of 17 E. 3. 17 E. 3. No.
27. To. Parl.
where the Commons in Parliament say that it is a great mischief, and against
reason, that they should be enforced to pay the deerer for Commodities, by
reason of a charge upon Merchandises, by the grant of Merchants, anno 25. Edw.
3. 25 E. 3. No. 22. To. Parl.
the which is a charge to the people, though none to the Merchant; the Commons
reciting, that whereas Merchants have granted a new increase of Custom to the
King, pray that Commissions to collect such new increase of Custom, by
singular grant of Merchants be not awarded, anno 36 Ed. 3. cap. 11. (Amongst
the printed Statutes) Grants of Subsidies upon Woolls by Merchants without
assent of Parliament are declared to be void, which act was made upon a
Petition of the Commons in anno 36 Ed. 3. desiring a Law to be made to the same
effect. If impositions raised by the Grant of Merchants, 36 E. 3. No 26. To.
Parl.
(which I suppose to have been by some public and solemn instrument, under
the hands and seals of the principal Merchants of all the great Towns of
England, being called together for that purpose; were not of force in this
behalf) much less, was their bare assent without any such solemnity, which
also was a course in practice in the days of Ed. 3. And was also used in the
laying of these present impositions, which we now complain of.

Another means of raising impositions used by Ed. 3. was by way of
dispensation for money with some Statute in force, Impositions by way of
Dispensation with a penal Law.
which restrained the passage of Merchants; most of his impositions of one
kind or other, laid after 11. were of this nature, for anno 11. cap. 1.
amongst the printed Statutes, you shall find it enacted, that no man upon
pain of Death, loss of Lands, and Goods should export Wools: Stat 11. Ed. 3.
cap. 1.
imediately after the making of this Statute Impositions, by way of
Dispensations for money, came to be so frequent and burdensome that the very
year following the King being in person to undertake a War in Scotland, and
for the raising of treasure having laid heavy impositions in this kind, which
he perceived to be very burdensome to the people; he wrote to the Archbishop
of Canterbury (his Letter is extant upon Record) to this effect; that whereas
the people were much burdened with diverse charges, tallages, 12 E. 3. No. 22.
To. Aleman.
and impositions (which he could not mention but with much grief) but being
enforced by inevitable necessity could not as yet ease the people of them, he
required the Archbishop to exhort the people patiently and humbly to bear the
burden for a while, and to excuse him toward the people, hoping he should ere
long recompense his said people, and give them comfort in due time. His
necessities were nevertheless so great, and this means of raising money was so
colorable (seeing no man was compelled to pay that did not himself desire to
be dispensed with, for the breach of a penal Law, by which his life, goods and
lands were forfeited) as he spared not to lay on load in this kind; Insomuch
as you shall find that in An. 13. he took for dispensations to pass only to
Antwerp of Englishmen 40. 13 Ed. 3. Orig. de Scac. To. 3. and 12.
shillings upon a sack of Wool, 40. shilllings upon 300. Wooll-fells, and 4.
pound upon a Last of Leather; Of strangers 3. pound upon a Sack of Wool, 3.
pound upon 300. Wooll-fells, and 6. pound for a Last of Leather, whereas the
ancient and due custom was no more then 6. shillings upon a sack of Wool, the
like upon 300. Wooll-fells, and 13. shillings 4. pence upon a Last of Leather;
13 Ed. 3. no. 5. To. Parliam.
Immediately hereupon, even this very year, was this complained of in
Parliament, and a Petition exibited by the Lords and Commons, that it might be
enacted, that this Maletolt or Imposition, because it was taken without assent
of Parliament, might be taken away, and that a Law might be made, that no such
charge might be laid, but by assent of Parliament: And they further prayed,
that they might have a Charter under the great Seal, confirmed and enrolled in
Parliament, to the same effect, which was performed the next Parliament, as may
appear by the Statutes printed, where, An. 14. Ed. 3. cap. 21. 14. Ed 3. cap.
21.
you shall see an act of Parliament to this effect, and that a most effectual
one. And immediately after, follows the Charter to the same effect, of both
which I shall have more occasion to speak hereafter; But such were the Kings
wants, that even in the mean time, between the petition, and the making of the
act, he could not forbear to raise money by this means, For in An. 14, the
Eleventh day of March, 14. Ed. 3. To. 3. orig. de Scac.
in the end of which month the next Parliament began (as may appear by the
Preamble to the Statutes of that Parliament) he took by way of dispensation,
40. shillings upon a sack of Wool, when it should be safely landed at
Bruxells, and 40. shillings at the port within England, which was indeed an
intolerable charge: but the better to color it, the King in his Commissions
for collection thereof, pretended that the Merchants had been humble suitors to
him, that the passage for Woolls might be open till Whitsontide following, and
that to obtain the same, they had of their free wills offered to give him the
said sums, as may appear by the recital, in the beginning of the said
Record.

In further prevention of this mischief, Stat. 27. E. 3. cap. 2.
in an Act of Parliament printed, made An. 27. Ed. 3. cap. 2. there was a
special provision made against all Licenses to Transport: Nevertheless as it
may be collected by a Record of the same year, the King raised 40. Orig. de
Scac. 27. E. 3. To. 7.
shillings upon a sack of Wool, 40. shillings upon 300. Wooll-fells, and 4.
Pound upon a Last of Leather, by the same means (I mean by way of
dispensation.) For though indeed it be recited to be granted by Merchants, yet
was it no otherwise granted by them, then for Licenses to transport, For at
that time the Staple of Wool was in England, as may appear by the printed
Statute of 27. Ed. 3. cap. 1. and 2. 27 Ed 3. cap. 1. and. 2.


And here I think it fit to make this observation in general, that whereas in
some other of the Records of Ed. 3. there is mention made of Impositions upon
Woolls, granted by Merchants, because the passage of Woolls was in those days
so often restrained by Statute, as may appear by very many printed Statutes of
that time, it is very likely that these grants of Merchants, were also for
dispensations to transport, Yet you shall find an act of Parlia. for free
passage. An. 15. Ed. 3.
as appears that this of 27. was, and it may well be, that some of the
Statutes, being but temporary, were not committed to the Press; This kind of
Imposition, by way of dispensation, I find not to have been at all practiced
from 27. till 39. where without any coloring of the matter, with pretense of
the grant or gift of Merchants, or any recital of suite made by Merchants, to
have the passage open, as usually in former times, 39. Ed. 3. To. 2. Orig.
Scacario.
but plainly and aptly the King recites, That whereas English Merchants were by
Act of Parliament restrained to transport Woolls, Nevertheless, upon advice
with his Counsel, he thought fit to give leave that such as would, might
transport Wolls, paying 46. shillings 8. pence upon a sack, which the King
commands to be levied. This Imposition lasted a very little while, For the
next Parliament following, the Subjects granted to the King a Subsidy, upon
Woolls, Wooll-fells, and Leather, to endure for a very short time; and yet, as
it appears by the words of the Record, the King does thank his people for it,
with all his heart: at which time, for the maintenance of his wars in
Scotland, he obtains the continuance thereof for two years, at the end of
which two years, 43. Ed. 3.9 and 10 To. Parl.
he further obtains, in Parliament, a continuance of the same from Michaelmas
following, for three years, for the supply of treasure for the war. Two
years following, viz. in An. 45. Number. 42. Rl. o. Parliam.
the Commons doubting, as it seems, that the King had secretly concluded to
increase (by way of Imposition) this Subsidy, which was yielded to in
Parliament, and granted for three years, made a conditional petition, that if
any Imposition be laid upon Woolls, Wooll-fells, or Leather, more then the
Subsidy granted in Parliament, that it may be taken away: the King answers,
That if any be laid since the Statute, it shall be taken away; and then follows
the printed Statute, An. 45. Ed. 3. cap. 4. That no Impositions be laid upon
Woolls, wooll-fells, or Leather; which is the first place where I find
Impositions named in our printed Books; I find them first named upon my Latin
Record, 12. Ed. 3. in the Kings Letter to the Archbishop: and first upon any
Record in French, not printed, An. 21. Ed. 3. Number. 16. To. Parliament.

But to proceed: about a year following this Parliament of 45. (near which
time, the Subsidy granted, An. 43. 46. Ed. 3. Nu. 10. To. Parl.
for three years, was expired) there was another Subsidy of Forty three
shillings four pence upon a sack of wool, as much upon Twelve score
Wooll-fells, and Five pounds upon a Last of Leather, above the ancient
customs, granted in Parliament, for the maintenance of the war in Guyen, to
endure for two years; For which, the King likewise gave thanks.

The next year following, the Subsidy granted the last Parliament, 46. Ed. 3.
Nu. 12 To. Parl.
was continued from Michaelmas, for a year, without any condition, and for the
next year, upon condition (amongst other things) That no Imposition be laid
during the two years, 48. E. 3. To. 2. Orig. de Scac.
and that the money levied, be employed upon the wars. In the next year
following, the King took, as by the grant of Merchants, upon a sack of Wool,
of Denizens Fifty shillings, and of strangers four Marks; upon 240.
Wooll-fells, of Denizens Fifty shillings, and of Strangers Four Marks, and
upon every Last of Leather, of Denizens Five pounds, and of Strangers Eight
Marks; Though this Record pretends nothing but the grant of Merchants, yet it
is upon the matter no other then a dispensation for so much money, For at this
time, the passage was not open, other then to Callice, where the staple then
was, as may appear by the two Records of 38. Ed. 3. To. Parl. and 50. Ed. 3.
Number. 24. And yet you may see how hateful, even these Impositions, by way of
Dispensation (which are far more tolerable then our present Impositions)
were in those days: For within two years following, one Richard Lions, 5^ 1^ ^
Farmer of the Customs (amongst other things laid to his charge) was accused
in Parliament for setting or procuring to be set, new impositions (not showing
of what nature) without assent of Parliament, and was adjudged to forfeit his
Goods and Lands; 50 E. 3. N. To. Parl.
but more particularly the Lord Latymer, Lord Chamberlain of England, was
expressly accused, that he combined with Richard Lions and others, who for their
own profit, had procured and Counseled the King to grant many Licenses for the
transporting of great quantities of Wool beyond the Seas, other then to the
Staple at Callice, against diverse Ordinances and Commandments to the contrary,
and had put upon Wools and Wool-fells new impositions; Here you see that the
device of Dispensations for money, had the name of an Imposition in those
days, though indeed it be not in its nature a mere imposition, or at least
not such a one as those are which we complain of: But such as it was, you see
how from time to time it has been condemned, and how it is reckoned up
amongst the most heinous faults of those two great offenders, who though
perhaps they were condemned also for other offenses, yet the laying of these to
their charge, did show the great hate generally conceived against impositions
of this kind; I might here further add in proof of the invalidity of these
Dispensations, that certain Merchants having obtained some of these, and having
also the advantage of the Kings Proclamation to dispense with the Statute,
which restrained their passage, yet they never thought themselves secure from
ths punishment of the Statute, till they were provided for by Act of
Parliament, as may appear by a Statute printed, anno 35 Ed. 3. cap. 21. To
allege therefore any of this kind, thereby to prove the lawfulnes of ours
cannot but argue a weak cause.

For first (as I have said) there is far more reason and color for these,
then for ours; for in this case no man was compelled to pay, that did it not to
avoid a greater mischeife, for by paying the Imposition, he was free from a
grieveous punishment for breach of a penal Law, which restrained his passage;
whereas in our case a charge is laid upon him for exercising his lawful Trade,
where no Statute Law, or Common Law is to the contrary, but rather both the one
and the other make for him.

But it may be here objected, that the King may Lawfully restrain, the breach
of which restraint, is a contempt and against Law, and that to impose does
imply a restraint upon a penalty. Suppose it were so, yet if in case where the
restraint is not only by the King, but the whole Estate assembled in
Parliament, for some urgent cause it be unlawful to give License for money (as
you perceive it is) how much more is it so, where the restraint is for no other
purpose then to raise an imposition as in our case; but of this more largely
hereafter.

Another devise of raising impositions without assent of the Commons in
Parliament, Impositions raised by way of Ordinance in Parliament
practiced by Ed. 3. was by way of Ordinance, which indeed is in the next
degree of strength unto a Statute. For it is a Constitution made by the king
himself, and all the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, not at the Counsel Table,
or in the Kings Chamber; but sitting solemnly in Parliament, and has also the
like solemnity of inrolement that a Statute has, only it is enrolled in a
Roll by it self, which has the name of the Roll of the Ordinances; But the
only essential difference between this and an Act of Parliament, is, that this
has not the assent of the Commons.

Some Ordinances have had that estimation amongst us, that they have at this
day; the force of Statutes as the Ordinance of Merton, made 20 Hen. 3. (which
though it were no other then an Ordinance made by the King, the Prelates,
Earls, and Barons, without assent of the Commons, yet has it by continuance of
time gotten not only the strength, but the name also of a Statute. There be
some others of this by nature, and we find it usual, that the names of
Statutes and Ordinances, have been Indifferently and confusedly used, to
express the one or the other. So as there was not any other more probable
devise or invention to have brought the people under the yoke of Imposition,
without their own assent, then was this, by the way of Ordinance; Nay to add
yet a further strength to this high authority of an Ordinance in Parliament,
the assent also of Merchants was usually joined therewithal, to make it have
the cleerer passage with the Subject; and further it was never, but in the time
of war.

The first imposition of this kind by way of Ordinance, 7 Ed. 3. R 9. Orig. de
Scac.
which I find amongst the Records was 7 E. 3. amongst the Originals of the
Exchequer, where it is said by way of recital, that the King considering how
Merchants (which make great gain by trading) ought as well as others to assist
him with treasure for his War, especially considering how at their entreaty
he had placed the staple in England: Therefore at his Parliament held at York,
by the Prelates, Earls and Barons, it was ordained that the Merchants should
yield unto the King a Subsidy upon Merchandises: This Subsidy or rather
Imposition, thus solemnly ordained, and in the times of so great necessity, was
no sooner established then revoked, as may appear by the words imediately
following in the same Record, whereupon the Merchants of their own accords
yielded, and freely gave ten shillings upon a sack of Wool, as much upon three
hundred Woolfels, and twenty shillings upon last of Lether, for a short time by
way of Dispensation or License toward the maintenance of the War.

The like is found, anno 20. E. 3. 20. Ed. 3. Nu. 18. To Parl.
where the Commons complaining of an imposition of this kind, laid by the
Prelates, Earls, and Barons in Parliament, and by the agreement also of
Merchants; It was not denied unto them, but that their suit was just; only it
was answered them, that as yet it was not convenient to take it away; For that
the King had taken up great sums of money of diverse Merchants, for his
present necessity, to be repayed out of the said Subsidy, and therefore it
could not be as yet discharged without great damage to the King and the
Merchants. But the most material Record against Impositions by way of
Ordinance, is the year following, where the King in excuse of impositions
complained of, answers that they were laid in times of great necessity, and
by the assent of the Prelates, Earls and Barons, and other great men, and some
of the Commons then present, nevertheless his pleasure is, that such
impositions not duly laid, be not drawn into consequence, but taken away 21 E.
3. No. 17.

There are some others of this kind, but never any that did abide the trial,
though they have always been accompanied with all such circumstances, as were
most likely to give them passage without controllment, as to be laid in the
time of war, to be limited to a short time, with consent of Merchants. If the
authority of an Ordinance in Parliament, joined with the assent of Merchants,
were in those days not of force sufficient to uphold Impositions, much less
will an Order of the King and his Counsel out of Parliament, uphold them at
this day, especially after so many years discontinuance.

Another invention to raise impositions, Impositions raised by way of Loan by
Merchants.
practiced by Ed. 3. and in former times, was by way of a pretended or feined
Loan from the Merchants, of so much above the old custom upon Merchandise
exported or imported, which Loan was never repaid to the Merchant. That this
was an old practice, may be collected by the president, 12. of Ed. 2. already
cited, where the King promises, that without fiction, or delay, he would repay
them their money, implying thereby, that sometimes fiction had been used, and
doubtless that loan which was 11. Ed. 2. the very year before, was such a
fained Loan as I speak of, for otherwise (without question) the King would
not have released part of it, as may appear by that Record that he did; For if
the money be, bona fide, borrowed, and truly intended to be repaid, then
doubtless the course is lawful; if otherwise, I hold this kind also as
unlawful as any of the rest.

Edward the Third did once or twice borrow in this kind, as may appear by
Records already cited to another purpose, with which I will not again trouble
you.

There was yet another Device for raising of Impositions (begun indeed by Ed.
1.) and condemned in the time of Ed. 2. Impositions raised by grant of
Merchants, for Liberties granted to them.
but revived, and much practiced by Ed. 3. which was also by way of grant of
Merchants, and yet not altogether the same that I first observed to have been
so much practiced by Ed. 3. but is much more colorable and tolerable. For
whereas that was a grant, or rather a mere gift, without any thing granted
back again in lieu thereof; this I now speak of, is a solemn grant indeed,
made by Merchants, of an increase of custom, for liberties and freedoms, and
other valuable privileges, and exemptions, granted unto them by the King: that
former was, date nihil expectantes; this is, date and dabitur vobis, and indeed
the recompense that the Merchants had by this Charter granted unto them, made
their grant to the King less subject to control, then otherwise without such
recompense it would have been; I mean the grant of Merchant strangers, so often
remembered amongst us, by the name of Charta Mercatoria, which though it were
damned all the time of Ed. 2. from the third year of his reign, yet was it
revived by E. 3. ( Even that very year, when he likewise deposed the King his
father, and usurped to himself his Crown.)For it appears by the Records, that
he commanded the same to be levied the very first year of his Reign. 1. Ed.
3. To. Fin.
What has been said against this kind of Imposition, I shall not need here
again to repeat, only let me call to your remembrance, how this Charter, as
needing a better prop then his own strength, and Validity in Law, was in the
same Kings Reign confirmed by Parliament, and only by that strength
continues in force at this day.

You have heard five or six several politic Inventions and Devises for the
easy drawing on, and sweetning of this yoke of Impositions, all practiced by
this prudent and potent King, Ed. 3. whose times were indeed so troublesome, and
his charge every way so excessive, as it is no marvel, that he left not any
way unattempted, to raise money, without the assent of the Commons, whom he
always found unwillingly and hardly drawn to matters of charge.

One other way of Impositions he used, Impositions laid by express and direct
Commandment.
not colored or masked under any such pretense, or politic Invention, as you
have heard, but plain and direct, only his own express commandment to his
Officers, to collect of every Merchant so much for such a commodity, exported
or imported, and to answer it into his Exchequer, without any recital in his
Commissions, of Grant, Assent, Gift, Loan of Merchants, Dispensation, or
Ordinance in Parliament, or any other such colorable pretext whatsoever.

These indeed, and only these are mere Impositions, and may be aptly compared
with these of our times; Of this kind, amongst all the Records of Edward the
Thirds time, I find only two, which I will truly open unto you; The first is
in the Twenty one of his Reign, where it appears that Lionell afterward Duke
of Clarence, named upon the Record, 21. Ed. 3 no 11 To. Parliam.
Lionell of Antwerp, because I suppose, he was there borne, the Kings second
son being then Guardian of England, whilst the King his father was at the
siege of Callice, at a counsel by him held the same year, which I take to be
no other then the Privy Counsel, assessed without assent of Parliament, upon
every sack of Wool Two Shillings, upon every Tun of Wine Two Shillings, upon
every Pound of Aver de poys of Merchandises imported, Poundage imposed.
Six pence. This Imposition was, I must confess (for ought I know to the
contrary) such as our present Impositions are, I mean, in that it was imposed
only, and simply by the Kings absolute power, and may in that respect be the
Fourth (of that number of Six) which I told you were all that could be found
in any degree like to ours, ever to have been practiced in this Commonwealth,
from the Conquest, till Queen Mary's time. But though in the authority of
imposing, it be like, yet in circumstances very material, you shall find an
apparent difference between them.

First, this Imposition is very moderate in the sum, as you may perceive, for
it was but Two Shillings upon a sack, whereas in 13. Ed. 3. forty Shillings
upon a sack of wool was usual, and sometimes fifty shillings.

Secondly, it was to continue no longer then till Michaelmas following.

Thirdly, it was laid in the time of a most chargeable war, and ordained to
be employed for the maintenance of Ships of war at Sea, for the safeguard of
Merchants in their passage, of which it is apparent, there was at this instant
very great necessity; for it was (as I have said) imposed then, when King Ed.
3. lay at the siege of Callice.

Besides, such as it was, and so qualified as you perceive, it was
nevertheless complained of in Parliament, by a Petition from the Commons, as
may appear be the Records of the same Parliament of 21. Ed. 3. To which
Petition or complaint, this answer was given, That all the said Impositions
were already taken away, save only the Two Shillings upon a sack of Wool,
which should last no longer then Easter, and seeing the same was ordained for
the safeguard of merchants, in which there had been greater sums of money
expended by the King, then could be collected between that and Michaelmas,
therefore to continue the same till Easter, he hoped it would not seem
over-burdensome or grieveous unto them. In the Parliament following, viz. anno
22. the Commons pray that writs may be directed to the Customers to forbear
at Easter next to take the two shillings upon a sack, 22 E. 3. N 16. To. Par.
according as it was granted at the last Parliament, and that it be not any
longer continued by the procurement of any Merchant. The King answers, Let it
cease at Easter, as it was agreed the last Parliament.

Here you see it was absolutely taken away, and therefore though it had wanted
these qualifications and circumstances which I have observed it had, yet it
being a thing so publicly condemned, it ought to be of little force with you
to justify these present Impositions. But that which I observe out of this
last Record, makes me rather to incline that this Imposition was only by way
of dispensation, then that it was an absolute Imposition, such as Ours are. For
to what end (I pray you) should the Commons pray that it might not be any
longer continued by the procurement of any Merchant, except it were likely that
Merchants for their benefit should pray the longer continuance thereof; and
what benefit can any imposition whatsoever be to a Merchant except it be by
way of Dispensation to give him leave to trade where before such dispensation
given, he stood altogether restrained. If then it be an Imposition by way of
dispensation with a penal Statute of restraint, then is it no president for
our present impositions. But whether or no it be a Dispensation or absolute
Imposition I leave it to your judgments; you have heard my observation.

And so I come to the next president in the times of Ed. 3. produced for
maintenance of our Impositions, 24 E. 3. N. 12. Orig. de Scac.
which was in the 24 year of his Reign, the Record of which and that which
followed thereupon, I will without any inforcement at all, open unto you, and
so leave it to your censures. The King reciting, that whereas the Spanyard and
French had joined in league to make War against him, and that for the
withstanding of his said adversaries, as also for the safeguard of Merchants
against Pirates, he had ordained that certain ships should be set forth; and
that for maintenance of the said Ships, there should be paid by Merchants two
shillings for every sack of Wool, two shillings for three hundred Woolfels,
four shillings for a last of Lether, a Scute of Gold, or four shil. Poundage
imposed.
for a tun of Wine, and six pence of the pound upon all other Merchandises
for one year following. He commands his Customers to levy the same
accordingly.

The very next year and Parliament following, 25 Ed 3. No. 12 Rot Par.
the Commons exhibit a Petition in Parliament against Impositions and other
like charges, without assent of Parliament: To which answer is given that, it
is not the Kings intion they should be charged.

I have now gone through all the material Records here amongst us, of the
times of Ed. 3. in which, though his reign were very long, and by reason of his
Wars, and other excessive charge, more occasion was given him to try the
strength of this point of the Prerogative, then ever any King before or since;
though oftentimes, and by many politic inventions (as you have heard) he
attempted to establish this Prerogative, of laying impositions without assent
in Parliament; yet can there not be produced in all his time, any more then two
Presidents of Impositions like to these of ours; (that is) imposed by the Kings
absolute authority: and yet these two were also, as you perceive, qualified
with such circumstances, as if ours were such, we should have held them
tolerable though perhaps not lawful, yet they, such as they were, escaped not
without being complained of, and condemned also in Parliament, as you have
heard.

It may perhaps be that some one or two of these Impositions which were by
assent or grant of Merchants, in this time of Ed. 3. were in times when the
passage was open, and not restrained by act of Parliament, and so to be
compared to our impositions: but whosoever shall by looking over the Statutes
and Records with never so much heed consider the times of opening and shutting
of the Sea by Statutes, shall find it so intricate, as he shall be very
hardly able directly to say, that at the time when any of these impositions
were granted, the passage was open.

If in my observation I had found any such, I should have admitted it for an
absolute imposition, as I have done Charta Mercatoria, which was by grant of
Merchants; For certainly (as I have yielded) the grant of Merchants is in this
case of no other effect, then the declaration only of their assent; and the
Imposition rests merely upon the kings authority: But I find none such, if
any such could be produced, you have heard how they have been from time to
time controlled in Parliament.

And so I pass from E. 3. to the times follow. From the end of the Reign of E.
3. till the reign of Queen Mary, who was the eleventh Prince of this Realm,
after Ed. 3. (as Ed. 3. was the eleventh after the Conquest) being the space of
170. years or thereabouts. It has been confessed by all those that have argued
in maintenance of his Majesty's Right to Impose, that there has not been found
one Record that proves any one imposition to have been laid; there are indeed
in our printed books some three or four Statutes during that time, in which
mention is made of Impositions, but they are (as I shall prove) Impositions of
another nature then those are which we complain of; and so make nothing at all
to the proof of his Majesty's Right: or if they were such as ours are, yet are
they no where found mentioned but with disgrace, and to the end to be taken
away, which may be the reason, that notwithstanding the great use that might
have been made of three or four Presidents of Impositions in these times, for
the patching up of a continuance of the practice, which otherwise by this long
discontinuance receives a great blemish: those which argued for impositions did
not take hold of these, but chose rather to confess that no Impositions at all
were laid during all this time, and labored to seek out the reasons of the
discontinuance.

I will briefly show you what Statutes they are, during that time which,
mention impositions, the first is, 11 R. 2. cap. 9. 11 R. 2. cap. 9. Statutes
in which there is mention made of Impositions after the end of Edw. the thirds
reign until Queen Mary's Ed. 3.
No Imposition nor charge shall be put upon Wools, Lether, or Woolfels, other
than the Custom and Subsidy granted to the King this present Parliament, and
if any be, the same shall be repealed and annulled, as it was another time
ordained by Statute, saving always to the King his ancient right. If by this
saving the pretended right of imposing should be excepted (as was said in the
Exchequer) the saving should then be contrary to the body of the Act, and
therefore it must needs have some other interpretation, that it may stand with
the rest of the Act, and not condemn the Law makers of so much want of
discretion: therefore doubtless this (saving) is no other then an exception of
the ancient Right, full Customs, due upon those staple Commodities. And for my
part I am of opinion that the Statute was made, not so much to take away any
Imposition laid by this King R. 2. as out of a provident and prudent care in
the Law makers, proceeding from the fresh memory of the practice of Ed. 3. in
this kind; For all those that were of this Parliament, did live and were at
man's age in Ed. 3. time, and could not but well remember the grievousnes of his
Impositions: Besides, I observe that they desire, that no Imposition be laid by
way of addition to the Subsidy, upon Wools and Lether then granted: It was
never heard till of late, that an Imposition upon any Merchandise, was charged
at the same time with a Subsidy, and therefore without question, this was no
other then an abundant provision by them wherein they were no more careful
then any wise man would be in the like case; when they had of their own free
wills given the King a liberal gift, they were careful not to be further
charged by him.

The next Statute in these times, where Impositions are found mentioned is, 23
H. 6. cap. 18. 23 H. 6. cap. 18.
By which it appears that English Merchants being restrained from repayring to
G^scoigne and Guien, to buy the Wines of that Country, they were nevertheless
suffered to repair thither paying certain new Impositions, which were
demanded of them. Upon complaint hereof, it was enacted that all English
Merchants might freely pass into those parts, and buy Wines there at their
pleasure without any new Imposition or charge to be put upon them; For that
such Impositions were to the damage of Merchants, and to the hinderance of all
the Kings people: if any were demanded by the King Officers, the officers so
demanding them should forfeit twenty pound, besides treble damages to the party
grieved.

That these Impositions were by way of dispensation with a Statute, which
restrained the repair of English Merchants into those parts, and not by the
kings absolute power, thereupon to ground an Imposition, is evident by the
Statutes in Print. For from 27 Ed. 3. 27. E. 3. c. 6. 38. Ed. 3. c. 10 and 38
Ed. 3. cap. 42 E. 3. cap. 8. 43 E. 3. c. 12.
till this 23 H. 6. there are five, or six Statutes in Print to this purpose
some more strict then other, which continued in force till 23 H. 6. The reason
of the restraint by Ed. 3. I suppose to have been because Gascoigne and Guien
were then in his possession, and he was desirous his Subjects, the Merchants of
those Countries should have the sole profit of their own Commodities; and that
they only should import them into England, and not the Merchants of England:
whatsoever the cause of the restrain was, it is very clear the restraint was
by Statute, and that this Imposition raised by way of Dispensation was
condemned, which nevertheless (suppose it had not been controled) yet as I
have said oftentimes, it is in nature so far differing from ours, as the
practice thereof will not so much as help to salve this long discontinuance.

The next mention of Impositions is found, 1 R. 3. cap. 12. 1 R. 3. cap. 12.
The words are, the Subjects and Cominalty of this Realm shall not from
henceforth be charged by any such charge or Imposition called a Benevolence,
nor by such like charge; you perceive by the words of the Statute, what
Impositions are intended within that Statute.

The next mention of Impositions in these times, I find to be, 7 H. 7. 7 H. 7.
cap. 7.
where a charge of eightteen shillings, laid upon a But of Malmesie by
Parliament is called an Imposition.

Another mention of Impositions, I find to be 12 H. 7. cap. 6. 12 H: 7. cap. 6.
In the preamble of the Statute; the words are, That every person ought to use
himself to his most advantage without exaction, Fine, Imposition or
contribution to be had, or taken of him, to, or by any English person, or
persons.

Though some that have argued before me against Impositions have urged this
Statute, as making against our present Impositions, yet for my part, I am not
of that opinion, but upon perusing the Statute, do rather think, that it
extends only to impositions laid by the Merchants of London, upon the
Merchants of other Cities and Towns not incorporate into their Companies, as
will evidently appear by the Statute: so as notwithstanding this Statute, that
which I have averred, and has been yielded to by the Kings Counsel, that no
Imposition was laid from Ed. 3. to Queen Mary's reign, is not yet impeached.

There is yet one other Statute of later time, in which mention is made of
Impositions, and that is, 14. H. 8. 14. H. 8. cap. 4.
cap. 4. The words are, Every Subject borne in England, and sworn to be
Subjects of other Princes, as long as they shall so abide Subjects to the other
Princes, shall pay such Customs, Subsidies, Tolls, and other Impositions, within
this realm, as Strangers do. I hold that this word Impositions, in this place
is used as a general to all the particulars before mentioned, and no
otherwise, and is no more in effect then charges, a thing usual in Statutes of
this nature, to add general words for the more security, which I collect by
the word (other) going next before it, For to what end should it be said, no
(other) Impositions, if those particulars first named, were not contained
within that general word of Impositions. This word (other) is a Relative, and
must needs be answered with words going before, when there are no other words
following.

Besides, it is common in the Statutes and Records of Ed. 3. No Imposition upon
woolls shall be laid, but in Parliament, By which it appears, that a charge
laid by Parliament, may be called an Imposition, which is very evident by a
Statute made not above 28. years before this, I mean the Statute of 7. H. 7.
cap. 7. 7 H 7. 7.
which I spoke of even now, where a charge of Eighteen Shillings upon a Butt of
Malmsey, laid by that Act of Parliament, is called an Imposition; And as I have
showed you, the word Imposition has been applied to all these several
Inventions, used by Ed. 3. The signification of the words Maltolt, and
Imposition, or Impost.
for the charging of Merchandises, Nay, the word Maltolt, which is Englished by
Rastall, an evil Toll (as indeed it signifies) and in that respect, is of a
far harder sense then the word Imposition) is used indifferently for a charge
set by Parliament, or a charge set by the Kings absolute power upon
Merchandises.

Impositio derived from the verb imponere, is no other then the Act of laying
on, or imposing, and therefore in my opinion, Impositions are more properly by
the Merchants called Imposts which signifies the things Imposed. But I shall
not need any further to enforce this, considering it has so liberally been
confessed by the Kings Counsel, No Imposition laid from Ed. the Thirds time,
till Q. Mary's.
that there is no Record or Statute from Ed. 3. till Queen Mary's reign, that
gives any assurance that impositions, or so much as any one Imposition was
laid, during all that space of above 170. years, only it behooves me for further
opening the truth, to testify, that being one of those that were by you
employed to make search in the ancient custom Books of those times, remaining
in the Exchequer, together with some of the best experienced Merchants of this
house, some of which had sat at the receipt of Custom, we had many meetings,
and spent many whole days in turning over the old Custom books, and as
carefully as we could, did survey some books of every age and time; But after
all our search ended, could not find any one Imposition from the time of Ed.
3. till Queen Mary's reign, to have been received by any Customer or
Collector. And if you please to give me leave to remember to you the passages
of those times, you cannot but marvel, that none of all those Princes should
so much as attempt to try the strength of this so beneficial a Prerogative,
so much practiced by Ed. 3. and when you have heard their occasions, and
compared their other actions, What great occasions all the Kings from Ed. 3.
till Q. Ma. had to lay Impositions, and yet did it not.
with their forbearance in this kind, you will, I think, conclude, and say in
your hearts, that surely none of all those Kings had so much as any
imagination, that any such Prerogative belonged unto them, as to raise money at
their pleasure, by laying a charge upon merchandises, to be exported or
imported without assent in Parliament.

Richard the Second, being the Grandchild and next Successor of Ed. 3. Rich.
2.
(in whose times impositions of all sorts did so much rage) had little less
occasion then his Predecessor had: For first, he had little treasure left him,
and he was no sooner in his Throne, but news was brought that the French had
invaded the Realm, they had burned Rye and Hastings in Sussex, they had taken,
and possessed the I Will of Wight, they had besieged Winchelsey: From the Northern
parts, That the Scots had burned Roxborough, and were ready to overrunne all
the North parts of England. Being thus beset with war on all sides, does his
Counsel (which in all likelihood, had most of them been of Counsel to his
Grandfather) advise him to raise money by impositions, as his Grandfather had
done (for this course of raising money by way of Impositions, was yet fresh in
all their memories?) they do not, but he takes the ordinary course, by calling
a Parliament, which for mainteinance of his charge in the war, the second year
of his reign, grants him a Fifteenth; he calls another Parliam. and has
another Fifteenth granted, the Fourth year of his reign, the wars
increasing, his necessities were such, and so conceived by the Parliament, as
they granted him a most unusual Tax throughout the whole Kingdom, upon every
Ecclesiastical person, one and other, Six shillings Eight pence, upon every
other man or woman within the Realm, Four pence, which when it came to be
levied, caused (though causelessly, because it was legally granted) that
notorious Rebellion of which Wat Tyler was the Captain. This Tax as it was
levied not without that great Rebellion, so questionless was it unwillingly
yielded to in Parliament; and yet because there was no other course thought
lawful for the raising of treasure upon the Subjects goods, then by their own
assent in Parliament, only that course was thought fit to be practiced, which
was such as ought to be obeyed.

From the 5. to the 18. year of his Reign, he obtained every other year one
aid or other in Parliament; sometimes a tax, sometimes a Fifteenth, sometimes
a Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage: In the eighteenth year, he was enforced to
go in person into Ireland, to settle the state of that Country then in
Rebelion: all these troubles he had from abroad besides those famous
Rebellions here at home, which afterward cast him out of his Seat; yet did he
never for all this attempt to lay impositions, though he wanted not about him,
to put him in mind of his absolute power: For Edward Strafford, Bishop of
Exeter, Lord Chancellor of England, in a Sermon made to the Parliament held,
anno 21. as our Chronicles report, did publicly maintaint that the King was
not bound by any Law; but was of himself absolute and above Law, and that to
control any of his actions was an offense worthy of Death, at which Parliament
all that were present came armed for fear of the King; and the Parliament House
it self was beset with 4000. Archers by his appointment. I will speak no more
of him then this; though he were a King of a weak spirit, yet did he not spare
to practice upon his people the most grievous things that were; Insomuch that
he so far discontented them that they deposed him by common consent in
Parliament, the only desperate example of that kind, that our Histories do
afford, or I hope ever shall.

His successor Henry the fourth, Hen. 4.
in respect he held the Crown by so weak a title, had cause to give the people
all the content he could possible, and yet he was so oppressed with wars on
all sides, from France and Scotland, but especially by continual and dangerous
invasions made by the Welsh, as without the aid of his people for the supply
of his treasure; it had not been possible for him to have held his Crown on his
head, and therefore he pressed his people so far, that in a Parliament held
the fifth year of his reign, they yielded to him so great and so unaccustomed
a tax, as that the grantors thereof, as our Chroniclers say, took special
order that no memory thereof should remain of record only to avoid the
president; and yet the very next year following, his wants were again grown
so great as his Subjects being assembled in Parliament to give him further
aid, did resolve that there was no other way to supply his want, then to take
from the Clergy their temporal Lands and goods, and to give them all to the
King, which being withstood by the Clergy, a resumption of all the gifts of
Ed. 3. and Ric. 2. was propounded: at last (after they had sat a whole year)
they gave him two Fifteenths; at this time, most of his Counsel, and the great
Officers of the Kingdom were Spiritual men; had they not now, (if ever) a
just occasion given them to have put the King in mind of his Prerogative of
laying impositions, not only to the intent to have diverted him from the
harkning to that desperate motion that had been made against them to all their
utter undoings, but were they not also bound in duty and conscience, in this
time of so great necessity (seeing the Parliament knew not otherwise how to
supply the Kings wants) to have advised him to have made use of his lawful
right of imposing, by which means, he might, without troubling the Parliament,
quickly have raised great sums of money: certainly it was not because they
were ignorant of any such practice in former times, For none of them that were
then of the Counsel to Henry the Fourth, but they lived in Ed. 3. time, and
most of them doubtless, were in Ed. 3. time men of age and discretion; But in
all likelihood as they knew that Edward the Third did lay impositions, so
likewise they knew that impositions had been from time to time, in those days
condemned as unlawful, and were become hateful to the people, and only for
that reason, they did forbear to advise the King to take that course, though
the necessity were never so great.

Another Prerogative, as much concerning the interest of the Subject, as this
of Impositions, namely the abasing of Coin, this King made no scruple at all
to put in practice, because he held it to be lawful.

His Son, and next Successor, Hen. 5. who by his many victories over the
French, Hen. 5.
and his noble disposition and behavior toward his people, was so far
beloved of them, as never was King of this Realm more, though the Kingdom
were now, by one degree of descent, more firmly settled upon him then it was on
his Father (who usurped it) though also his expense of treasure, by reason of
that great war in France, were as much, as any king's of England ever were,
though he had troubles also from his Neighbors the Scots, and within his own
Realm, by Rebellions: and lastly, though he spared not for supply of
treasure, to suppress above a 100. Priories of Aliens; yet neither out of the
strength of his love with the people, nor in his extreme necessity, by reason
of these honorable wars in France, for the maintenance of which, the people
would willingly have undergone any burden which he would have laid upon them,
especially after the victory at Agencourt, did he ever so much as attempt the
laying of Impositions.

His Successor Hen. 6. Hen. 6.
(though indeed of a meek spirit) yet he was so followed with troubles within
the Realm, and from abroad, that he was enforced to crave such an
extraordinary aid of his Subjects in Parliament, as the levieing thereof was
the cause of that famous Rebellion of Jack Cade in his time. Besides, in the 18
year of his Reign, for the ease of his charge and supply of his wants, all
Grants by him made of any Lands, Rents, Annuities, or Fees whatsoever, since
the first day of his Reign, were resumed: and this is never yielded to, but in
cases of extreme necessity. As for Impositions, notwithstanding his great
wants, he thought not of them.

Edw. 4. Edw. 4.
that succeeded him, was no less free from troubles; for he was (as you know)
driven to forsake his Kingdom, and to live for a while like a banished man
with the Duke of Burgundy; He was also enforced in the 5 year of his Reign to
make a Resumption; and the same year to abase his Coin: And Comines observes
of him, that he obtained a Subsidy of his Subjects in Parliament, upon
condition that he should himself in person undertake the war in France; and,
that only to get the Subsidy, he passed the Seas into France, but presently
returned without doing any thing. What should such shifts as these have needed,
if he might (without being beholding to his Subjects) lawfully, and without
control have raised Treasure by laying of Impositions? It is well worth the
remembering, that which the same Comines (speaking in commendation of the frame
of this Commonwealth) says; That this State is happy, in that the people
cannot be compelled by the King to sustein any public charge, except it be by
their own consent in Parliament.

I proceed from Ed. 4. to Hen. 7. Hen. 7.
(omitting Ed. 5. and Ric. 3. because of the shortness of their Reigns.) Hen.
7. H. 7. had a Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage granted to him for his life, as
may appear by the Parl. Roll 1 H. 7. which appears no where in our printed
books.
had indeed a more peaceable time than any of his Predecessors; and yet he was
not altogether free from troubles both within the Realm, and from abroad: But
his natural inclination was rather to embrace Peace; he was so provident and
politic in the gathering and storing up of Treasure, as never any Prince of
this Realm was therein to be compared to him: He did himself take the
accounts of his Revenues, (which I have seen under his own hand:) He had for
his Assistants about him, Empson and Dudley, men learned in the Laws, and by
all probability, very canning in all the profitable points of the Prerogative;
men that that intended or studied little else than the advancing of their
Masters profit; men even till this day infamous for their wicked counsel, in
persuading that good King to lay such heavy Exactions and Burdens upon his
people, as he did: If these men who in all likelihood should have best known
the Kings right (especially in so high a point of profit) had but had the least
notice of so profitable a Prerogative as this, would they not have been at
strife which of them should first have put the king in mind thereof? Or if
they had held it questionable, would they not have put it to some trial?
Certainly there can be no cause imagined that should make them thus to
forbear, but either they were utterly ignorant of any such Prerogative, or,
that knowing such a thing to be claimed by some of the ancient kings
(especially by Ed. 3.) they knew likewise that it was in the same times
continually complained of in Parliament, and always condemned; and that there
were acts of Parliament directly against it, and this is more probably to be
conceived of them being men of such searching spirits, and so well studied in
point of Prerogative, then that they were ignorant of the practice of Ed. 3.
considering also that they were nerer to those times by 120 years then we are.

But that which most of all moves me herein is that there was in H. 7. time
such an occasion offered of making use of this Prerogative, as there could not
possibly happen any other that might better have justified the laying of
Impositions; which was this: The Venetians, to the intent to drive our
Merchants from fetching sweet wines at Candy, that they might the better employ
their own ships and Merchants, did impose upon every But of Malmesey brought
thence by English Merchants four Duccats, by which means the English wholly
lost that Trade, and the Venetians made the whole profit thereof: This
mischief was no other way better to be remedied, than by imposing the like, or
a greater charge upon Merchants of Candy bringing Malmsey into England; that so
they of Candy not being able to afford them better cheap than the English, the
English might still fetch them from Candy as they had wont to do. I say, there
could not possibly be a more justifiable occasion of laying Impositions, than
this was: And did this king (so careful in other things of preserving his
Prerogative, and most of all in matters that concerned his profit) take hold of
this occasion to lay an Imposition by his absolute power? Nay rather, though he
saw it convenient, and in a manner necessary, yet he conceived it to be
unlawful so to do; and therefore did it not by his absolute power, but by
assent of Parliament, as may appear by the Statute of 7 Hen. 7. cap. 7.
printed; where, in the preamble of the Act, you shall see the occasion of the
making of the Act to be as I have opened it unto you: and you may perceive by
the body of the Act, that for the counterpoysing of the imposition of four
Duccats laid by the Venetians upon our Merchants, there was imposed 18s. for a
But of Malmesey, upon their Merchants bringing it hither, to last as long as
the imposition of four Duccats (which, as appears by the Act, came but to
18s.of our money) should endure. It is not probable that this king, considering
his other actions, would have suffered this to have been done by Parliament, if
he had thought he might have lawfully done it by his absolute power? And
therefore it cannot almost be gaine-said, that in these times this pretended
Prerogative of laying Impositions without assent of Parliament was held to be
against Law.

Hen. 8. his son and successor, Hen. 8.
was so far from the disposition of his father, in this point of thrift and
providence, Hen. 8. had a Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage granted to him for
his life, the first year of his Reign, as appears by the Parl. Roll.
as there was not in the whole rank of our kings any one like to him, for
excessive prodigality; the great riches stored up by his father, with so much
care, and left unto him, he so suddenly consumed in Triumphs, Maskes,
Mummeries, Banquets, pompous and braving Wars, as was that of Turwin and
Turney, and in the satsfying of his lust, as he was out of very necessity
enforced to crave most unreasonable aids of his Subjects in Parliament, such as
never before had been granted, which through very dread and fear were yielded
to him; yet not so satisfied, that no means for the raising of money might be
neglected or unattempted, in the 15 year of his Reign, by the council of
that proud Prelate Cardinal Woolsey, he spared not to send out Commissions
into every shire throughout the whole Realm, with privy instructions to the
Commissioners, how they should with most advantage behave themselves, in
persuading the people to contribute to the king the sixth part of their whole
estates, to be paid presently, either in money or plate, whereupon followed
extreme cursing, weeping and exclamation against the king and his council, and
the people were in point to rebel had not the king stayed the proceedings of
the commissioners by his Letters. Finding that this way would not serve his
turn, he demanded a benevolence, which not answering his expectation, he did
the same year raise unto himself a great deal of treasure by abasing his
gold.

Such things as these Princes never put in practice but when all other means
fail them, and yet he went many degrees beyond this: For, in the 27. year of
his reign he suppressed above 370 Religious houses, the yearly value of whose
revenues I have read to be no less than 32000l. per annum in those days: and
that of their goods (sold at very low prises) he made above 100000l. in present
money. About 4. years after he dissolved all the Monasteries, Abbeies,
Priories, Nunneries, and all other Religious houses of what kind soever
throughout England. By which means, and by the sale of their goods he gathered
such a mass of Treasure, as it might have been imagined that never any king of
this Realm should have needed to have sought relief at his Subjects hands:
Yet he himself, no longer than within 3. years after following, craved and
obtained (as may appear by the Statutes of that time) an excessive great Aid
by Parliament, and yet the year following he did also abase his coin, more
then half in half, such an abasement as never before or since was heard of,
and could not but be very grievous to the people; but because perhaps they
held it lawful so to do, they made no pubilque complaint thereof; and it is
worth the observing, That though this Prerogative of abasing Coin be a thing
which trencheth as deeply into the private interest of the Subject as the
laying of Impositions; for, by this means a man, that this day is worth in
revenues a hundred pounds per an. he shall to morrow, if the king be so
pleased, be worth but fifty or forty, or less, in real value; and though also
the practice of this Prerogative has not been forborne by any of the kings of
this Realm, and that some of them have used it very immoderately, yet cannot
there be found any one public complaint, that ever I have met withal, upon
Record against it, as from time to time there have been many against
Impositions, which argues that the Subject did make a difference between these
two Prerogatives; this, of laying Impositions; and that, of abasing coin;
thinking the one lawful and the other not. But to conclude my observations
upon the actions of Hen. 8. The next year after this unconscionable abasement
of his money, he craved a benevolence. The year following he took the
profits of all the Chantries, Colleges and free Chapels, etc. during his
life, which ended the next year: Can any man imagine that during this kings
Reign it was held lawful (or any such thing so much as dreamed of) to raise
treasure by laying Impositions; I will enforce it no farther, but leave it to
the judgment of any reasonable man that shall consider these things which I
have remembered, whether or no it be likely.

Out of the time of his Son and Successor Ed. 6. Edw. 6.
I can observe little, because of the shortness of his Reign; but methinkes,
if his Governors had imagined that any such Prerogative had been due unto him,
they should not in honor have forborne the practice thereof for the supplying of
the Kings great necessities, and in stead thereof have craved of the Subjects
that unacustomed and unreasonable Subsidy, granted an. 2. of a certain sum of
money upon every sheep and every Cloth within the Realm, for 3. years; which
afterward for the unreasonablenes thereof was released.

I have now gone through in such sort as you have heard, A Corolary or
connection of all the times before mentioned.
the times of all the Kings from Ed. 3. till Q. Mary's Reign: during which
time what can there be more imagined, that might possibly have happened to have
awakened Impositions, if they had not been more than asleep? Neither the
necessity of just and honorable war, nor the subtleties and curiosity of
Peace, nor the prodigality of some of these Kings for the better satisfying of
their pleasures, nor the covetousness of others, nor the softness of some of
their dispositions, nor the nonage of others apt to be abused by evil
Counselors, nor the dreadful and fearful awe in which some of them held
their Subjects, nor the assurance of the peoples extraordinary affection, which
might have emboldened some others; nor the evil conscience of Usurpers, nor
any other motive whatsoever which happened during this long time, could revive
them; until Q. Mary did at last raise them out of the grave, after they had
been so many years dead and rotten.

The first Imposition that she laid, Qu. Mary.
was that upon Cloth, continued till this day, which grew upon a special
reason, as may appear by the printed book of the rates of her Customs and
Subsidies; in the end whereof you shall find a declaration expressing the
loss sustained by reason of the difference between the Customs and Subsidies
of Wool and cloth, by which it appears that a sack of Wool yielded in custom
six shillings eight pence, and in Subsidy thirty three shillings four pence;
that the custom upon a short cloth was fourteene-pence, and that a sack of Wool
did commonly make four short clothes, the custom of which was four shillings
eight pence; so that the custom of Wool made into cloth, was less then the
Custom and Subsidy of so much Wool not clothed; In every sack in short
clothes thirty five shillings foure-pence: which difference was reduced to an
equality by rating upon every short cloth ten shillings: After this declaration
made of the difference and of the rate which reduced both to an equality,
follow these words; Which difference considered, and the great loss sustained
by Us in the same, by reason that clothing is much increased, It is thought
convenient by Us, with the advice of our Council, toward the relief of the
loss, for to assesse upon the Clothes carried out, by way of Merchandise, some
larger rate then heretofore has been used, and though it were reason to
appoint such a rate as might recompense the full of the loss sustained, yet
upon diverse considerations, at this time, Us and Our Council moving, We are
pleased only to assesse upon every short-cloath, by the name of custom, six
shillings eight pence, etc.

I thought good to open this at large unto you that you might see upon what
special reason of equity this Imposition was grounded, and how it differs
from ours: And it is worthy the observing, how the Queen commands this
increase of Custom to be yielded unto her, not as an Imposition, or by the
name of Impost, but by the name of Custom, because it comes in lieu of the
ancient Custom upon Wool, which is the reason that at this day it is demanded
and paid by that name; whereas no other new raised duty has that privilege;
but they are either called Subsidy of Tonnage or Poundage, if they be raised
by act of Parliament; or Impost, if by the Kings absolute power.

The name of Custom was anciently given to none but to Wools, Wool-fells, and
Leather; and upon this occasion, to Cloth also.

This Imposition, though grounded upon such equity as you have heard, yet in
Dyer, 1 Eliz. fo. 165. a. and b. it was, as appears by my L. Dyer, complained
of by the Merchants of London, with great exclamation (which are his words) and
suit to the Queen to be unburdoned of it, because it was not granted in
Parliament, but assessed by Queen Mary of her absolute power: whereupon there
were diverse assemblies and conferences of the Justices and others, Plowdens
argument against it, in M. Tates hand.
but their resolution is no where to be found, at least by Us; It is very
probable that if they had given judgment for the Queen, it would not have
been kept close, but howsoever the profit was too great to be taken from the
Crown and therefore it continues till this day.

Howsoever the reason in equity in the laying this Imposition upon Cloth may
seem to be sound unto some men, and so to allow of this Imposition as
differing from ours, yet for my part, I hold it not so, when I consider what
course was taken by Ed. 3. upon the same occasion, an. 11. E. 3. c. 1. and 2.
It was enacted, that no wool should be carried out of England, but by the Kings
license; and that no man should wear Cloth, other than such as should be made
in England: this Law took such effect, as within ten years the greatest part
of the Wool in England was made into Cloth; and it became to be transported in
such abundance, by reason that there was no Custom at all due upon Cloth, and
the Custom and Subsidy upon Wools was very high, that in the 21 year, the
King finding his Custom of Wools so much decreased, does seek to remedy it,
not by imposing a new charge upon Cloth by his absolute power, as Qu. Mary did,
but did it by assent of his Subjects in full Parliament, as I collect partly by
my L. Dyer in the place last mentioned, but more fully by a recital in a
Record amongst us, of 24. E 3. to. 13. orig de Scaccar. to this effect: That
whereas the Customs and Subsidies due and granted upon Wools are much
decreased, because a great part of the Wool of England is made into Cloth, for
which no Custom is due; and whereas in consideration thereof, at our Council
held the 21 year of our Reign, by the common assent of the Prelates, Earls
and Barons, and others, it was ordained and accorded, that 14d. by Denizens,
and 20d. by Strangers should be paid for every cloth of Assise, etc. made of
English wool, and transported; upon pain of forfeiture of the Clothes: And so
follows an authority given to collect the same.

The next Imposition laid by Q. Mary, was forty shillings upon a Tun of French
wines, imposed in the 5 year of her Reign: at which time there was first a
Proclamation made, that no wines at all should be brought from France, being
then in enmity with England, upon pain of forfeiture of the Wines; (which, by
the way, is a strange clause in a proclamation.) Immediately after this
restraint there was an order made by the Qu. and her privy Counsel, that such
as would might bring in French wines, notwithstanding the Proclamation, paying
forty shillings upon every Tun by the name of Impost, as does appear by Record
in the Rolls of Easter Term, 1 Eliz. in the office of the K. Remembrancer of
the Exchequer, in the case of one Germane Ciol, German Ciols case.
against whom an Information was exhibited for not paying the said Imposition:
Whereunto, taking it by way of Traverse, that there is any Law of the Land by
which he may be charged with Impost, he pleads a license made unto him, an. 1.
and 2. Ph. and Mar. to import a certain number of Tons of Wine within a
certain time, any restraint then made, or afterward to be made to the
contrary, notwithstanding; Provided always, that the Custom, Subsidy, and
other duties due and accustomed to be paid to the King and Queen, were duly
satisfied; He shows, that for all Wines brought in by him during the life of
Queen Mary, he paid the Subsidy of Tonnage, viz. three shillings for every
Tun, which was all that was due and accustomed to be paid: Upon this plea a
demurrer was joined, and judgment given thereupon against the Queen; This
Judgment has been enforced in the maintenance of Impositions: Whether or no
it make not rather against them, I leave to your censures.

Near about the same time there were Impositions laid also by Queen Mary upon
all French commodities whatsoever to be imported, as may appear by the
Port-bookes of those times in the Exchequer; which Impositions were received to
the use of Queen Eliz. in the beginning of the 1 year of her Reign, but ere
the year ended they were all taken away, as may appear by the same
Port-bookes; which in my opinion is a great argument that they were not then
held lawful: For, Princes do not so easily give over their hold in matters of
profit, if they be any way able to maintain it. What has hitherto upheld the
Imposition upon Wines, I know not, except it be the great profit that comes by
it to the Crown, and because there was never any late Judgment given directly
against Impositions.

You have hitherto heard what reason and direct proof I have used, Admitting
the king had power by the co^mon-Lawe to lay Impositions, yet he is barred by
Statutes.
to maintain, that by the Common Law the King cannot at his will increase his
Custom by way of Imposition: You have, secondly, heard what the practice of
former ages has been in this kind, till this day; from which I have also
drawn reasons of Inference, that prove the Common Law so to be. But now,
admitting that by the Common Law it had been clear and without question, that
the King might at his will have laid Impositions and that also the same could
have been clearly proved by the practice of the ancient Kings, yet I affirm,
that so stands the Law of England at this day (by reason of Statutes directly
in the point) as the Kings power, if ever he had any to impose, is not only
limited, but utterly taken away, as I hope I shall be able evidently to prove,
notwithstanding any objection that has been made against the interpretation of
the Statutes to this sense.

The first Statute is in Magna Charta, cap. 30. Magna Charta cap. 30. Enforced,
and the objections made against it, answered.
The words are; All Merchants, if they were not openly prohibited before, shall
have their safe and sure conducts, to enter and depart, to go and tarry in
the Realm as well by Land as by water, to buy and sell without any evil
tolls, by the old and rightful Customs (except in the time of War.) And if
they be of the Land making war against us, and be found in our Realm at the
beginning of the war, they shall be attached without harm of body, or goods,
until it be known to us, or our Justices, how our Merchants be entreated
there in the Land making war against us, etc.

The Statute of which this is a branch, is the most ancient Statute Law we
have, won and sealed with the blood of our Ancestors; so revere^ced in former
times, that it has been by Parliament provided, that Transcripts thereof
should be sent to all the Cathedral Churches of England, there to remain;
that it should be twice every year publicly read before the people; that
likewise twice every year there should be excommunication solemnly denounced
to the breakers thereof; that all Statutes and all Judgments given against it
shall be held as void; that it should be received and allowed as the Common Law,
by all such as have the administration of Justice; 25 E. 1 cap. 1.2.3.4.
and it has been no less than 29 times solemnly confirmed in Parliament: I
will therefore with so much the more care endeavor to free this Law from all
the objections that have been made against it.

The first objection does tend to the diminishing of the extent of this
Statute, The first objection, that it extends only to Merchant-strangers,
answered.
as touching the persons whom it may concern; for it has been collected out
of the latter words of the Statute, that it should extend only to
Merchants-Aliens, and not to Denizens.

First, it is improbable that the makers of the Law should be more careful to
provide for the indemnity of Merchant-strangers than of English; except
perhaps they might imagine that English Merchants were already sufficiently
provided for by the Common Law: If that were their reason (as there could be no
other that I can imagine) it does as much maintain my opinion, as if they had
been contained within the Statute.

Again, the words are general: All Merchants; and, Qui omnes dixerit, nullos
excipit.

Besides, the Statute is a beneficial Law; in which case particular and
special words do always admit a general extent: And therefore, to restrain
general words, as the Objectors would, is against all reason, and rule of Law.
As for the latter words, it is true, they do indeed extend only to
Merchant-strangers; but the sense of the first sentence is perfect without
this: and as long as no absurdity nor contradiction does follow by interpreting
the first words to extend to all Merchants in general, and the latter only to
Merchant-strangers, the most ample and beneficial construction is ever the
best, as in all other Statutes of this nature.

But this objection is, in my opinion, clearly removed by 2. Statutes made by
Ed. 3. in declaration of this very clause: The first is, 2 Ed. 3. c. 8. the
words are, All merchants, Strangers and Privies may go and come with their
merchandises into England, after the tenure of the Great Charter. I take it,
that Privies in this place, being the very word that is found in the Original,
which is in French, ought to be understood Denizens; for, otherwise I suppose
it would have been joined to the word [Strangers] by a conjunction disjunctive,
which is usual where the words are of one sense; and not by a copulative, as
here it is. Besides, I take the word [Privy] to be derived from the Latin,
Privatus, which signifies a particular property; as res privata, a man's own
private estate: so, mercatores privati, our own Merchants. That
Merchant-strangers should be first named, is common in Statutes and Records.

The next Statute explaining this of magna Charta, is, 14 Ed. 3. c. 2. The
words are, Whereas it is contained in the Great Charter, that all Merchants
shall have safe conduct, etc. We grant that all Merchants, Denizens and
Forreins, may freely pass, etc. which I take to be no other than a mere
declaration of Magna Charta.

The second Objection made against this branch of Magna Charta, The second
Objection. That Magna Charta cap 30. was made only against Taxes within the
Land, answered.
is, That the meaning thereof was to secure the Merchants, not from a new
increase of Custom to be imposed by the King, to be paid at their entrance or
going out of the Ports, such as our Impositions are; but from certain petty
exactions, as Tolls and such like, which were then usually demanded of them
within the Land, by the Towns through which they were to pass and where they
sold their Merchandise; for the farther remedy of which there were afterward
diverse Statutes made which do evidently manifest that such was the mischief,
and they do the rather make this collection because of the words, buy and sell
without evil tolts; For, say they, Impositions are not paid upon the buying
and selling of Merchandise, but when they are to ship or unship: they take hold
of the word Toll, which properly is an exaction for passage within the land, or
for sale in markets or faires. These objections, notwithstanding I hold it
somewhat clear that the meaning of this Statute was principally to secure
Merchants touching Impositions. My first argument is drawn ab Authoritate, from
the authority of the wisest and most sage men in greatest places and offices
within this kingdom, in the times wherein they lived, and who also could so
much the better judge of the true meaneng of this Statute in that they lived so
near the time of the making thereof, even in the beginning of the reign of
the next King (save one) to him that made this Statute: I mean those who made
the Ordinance in 5. Ed. 2. heretofore diverse times mentioned by me, who in
alleging their reason against Charta Mercatoria, do amongst other things say
that the same was made against Magna Charta; What was the cause of the grief
conceived against Charta Mercatoria, other then the Impositions by color
thereof, laid upon foreign commodities; It appears by the Ordinance, that was
the only cause: if then Charta Mercatoria were by them adjudged to be against
Magna Charta, only because by color thereof, new Impositions were raised,
without assent of Parliament, it is evident, that they interpreted the Statute
of Magna Charta to be made against impositions; if they had thought it to have
extended only to petty tolls and exactions within the land, as is objected,
then could it not have extended to Charta Mercatoria. As for the words Buy and
Sell, without any manner of evil Toll; I deny not but the words may perhaps
have that sense, which has been collected out of them, viz. that in buying and
selling, they should be free also from unjust exactions within the land. But I
say further, that these words, without any manner of Evil Toll, by the old and
rightful Customs, do extend not only to the next precedent words (Buy and
sell) but also to the former words, Enter and return, and more principally to
them then to any other; For to have provided that they should be free from
those petty exactions of tolls in Markets, and for passing through Cities and
Towns, and to leave them subject to Impositions, to be laid on at the Kings
pleasure, had been but a slender security. This exposition of mine is
confirmed by a Record here amongst us, of 16. Hen. 3. no longer then seven
years after the making of this Statute. By which it appears, that the King
commanded his Officers, at the Ports, to signify to all Merchants, that they
might with safety enter into his kingdom, paying the rightful and ancient
customs, Nec timeant sibi de Maletoltis quas faciet Rex.

As touching the word Toll, Derivation of the word Toll.
which they say is to be understood of Toles for passages, and for buying and
selling in Faires and Markets, it behooves me to say something of the derivation
thereof, the rather because it is very often used in our ancient Statutes and
Records in the same sense, as it is in this place; and by the derivation
thereof the natural and true meaning of the word shall be best understood; I
hold it therefore to be derived from the Latin word Teolonium, which signifies
custom, by cutting off the latter part of the word, and retaining only the
first part Teol, by contraction Toll, of which manner of derivation, there are
infinite examples in our language, the Latin Teolonium (as says Calvin in his
Lexicon Juris Civilis) is derived from the Greek Telos, which signifies as well
Custom as it does Finis: Hence it is that the Customers are called in Latin
Telonarii.

Thus you see that the genuine, and primative signification of our word Toll,
is no other then Custom upon Merchandises: from the word Toll are come those
two barbarours Latin words found in our Statutes, and Records, Toltum, which
is the word used in the Record of 16 H. 6. but even now vouched by me; and
Tolnetum, the Original word in the Statute now in question, which I must
confess is also in our Law Latin used by us for Toll in the Market, and Toll
for passage, as may appear by the Register, and the Book of enetries. But in
this place, Malum tolnetum properly signifies not a Toll in the common sense,
but an unlawful charge laid by the King upon Merchandises, as an increase of
Custom, according to the Primitive signification, which is evidently proved in
that it is here opposed to old and rightful Customs; sine omnibus malis
Tolnetis per certas and antiquas consuetudines; wherefore it ought so to have
been translated, for so it signifies, without Impositions, by the old and
rightful Custom: This exposition and translation is further warranted by the
use of the word Maletolt, so often found in our ancient Statutes and Records,
which without scruple is derived from the Latin, Malum Tolnetum, the very word
of our Statute; I find it diversely written, Maletout, Maletolt, Maletot, and
sometimes Maletent, but I never find it any where used in any other sense then
for an Imposition by way of increase of Custom upon Merchandises: Sometimes
indeed but that very rarely, It is taken in the best sense for lawful and
rightful Custom, as the word Imposition sometimes is, but then commonly it is
accompanied with another word to free it from the worst sense, as Droiturel
Maletout, etc. That malis Tolnetis is in this place ought to be translated
Impositions, may be farther proved by that which I find in a writer of the
french History, one Jean Serres, who says, That in the time of Philip le Beau
king of France, which was about the time of Ed. 3. king of England, there were
rebellions in France because of Impositions laid by the K. which in those days,
they did, says he, call Maletouts, the very word then anciently used in Engl.
for Impositions, as may plentifully appear by the Statutes and Records of H.
3. Ed. 1. Ed. 2. and Ed. 3. The word Imposition.
for the word Imposition was not used in any French Record, Statute or other,
for ought I have seen, till Ed. 3. I find it once used in Latin, 12. Ed. 3.
in the Letter which King Edward the Third writ to the Archbishop, to excuse him
to the people, for laying Impositions, and as all that Letter throughout, is of
an eloquent style, so as it seems he was careful to avoid also that
barbarous word, Malum tolnetum, though common and familiar, and in stead
thereof, to use the pure Latin word Impositio. Sylvius writing upon Tullies
Oration for Marcus Fonteius, where these words are used by Tully, Imposuit
vectigal, (says) Ita usitatum vulgo est ut vectigalia nova appellent
Impositiones. The word Vectigal, in this place, though in a general sense it
may be applied to any revenew whatsoever, yet with the Civil Lawyers, it is by
way of Excellence, commonly used for Custom, as may appear by Calvin in his
Lexicon, Vectigal quod Fisco vel Reipubl. portorii nomine pendintur, id est,
pro mercibus quae invehuntur vel evehuntur, Sometimes they use to join with it
for a more clear distinction, the word Portorium, as a man would say, the
revenue of the Ports, agreeable with which, upon some Records of Henry the
Thirds time, I have found it to be called, Exitus Portuum. By this it is
evident, that Impositio in pure Latin, and Imposition in English, is the same
with Maletolt in French, and Malum tolnetum in our Law Latin; and they do all
signify a new increase of Custom, and not any thing else; Wherefore I
conclude, that these words, sine malis Tolnetis, in our present Statute, are
naturally and properly to be expounded, and understood of Impositions, and so
ought to have been translated, and not as they are; and although the word
Imposition it self, as also the word Maletout, and Malum tolnetum may be (as I
have confessed) taken as well for a new increase of Custom, by a lawful means
(viz.) by assent in Parliament: as for an increase of Custom by the Kings
absolute power, which is unlawful, yet by the words that immediately follow, it
is evident that this Statute does only intend unlawful impositions, that is,
impositions laid by the Kings absolute power, without assent in Parliament,
otherwise would they not have been opposed to due and rightful customs, as by
the words of the Statute they are.

But because there has been some exception also taken to the exposition of the
word Custom in that sense in which I take it (that is) for custom upon
Merchandise, for that the word in the Original is Consuetudo, The word Custom,
Custuma, and Consuetudo expounded.
which signifies an usage, and not Custuma, which is the Latin word we now use
for Custom upon Merchandise; it behooves me therefore to say something touching
these words, Consetudo, and Custuma, for the clearing of this scruple. This
word Consuetudo in his first and proper signification, does, I confess,
signify an usage, or practice of a thing time out of mind, but it is evident
by the Records in the time of H. 3. and Ed. 1. this word in a more special
manner, was applied to all, or most of the duties belonging to the Crown, by
reason of Trade, As Consuetudo aquae Thamesis, Consuetudo piscis venientis ad
vicum Pontis London, Consuetudo quae vocatur Scavagium, Consuetudo quae vocatur
Gauge, But yet more specially it was applied to that duty, which we following
the same rule, because of the greatness of the Revenue, do likewise per
Excellentiam, call Custom; This may appear by the Pipe Roll of 52. Hen. 3.
this title Consuetudo Mercandizorum, and by diverse other Records of Hen. 3.
times, the Rolls and Records of the beginning of Ed. 1, do likewise prove the
same very evidently, Insomuch, that not only that which in this kind belongs
to the King by the Common Law, and by ancient prescription, was called
Consuetudo; but in later time, if any increase were of that duty, though it
came not by prescription, but by grant in Parliament, or otherwise, yet it
still retained the name Consuetudo, which by continuance of time, came to be
the proper name to that kind of duty howsoever it began; And therefore in 3.
Ed. 1. you shall find that after the old custom of Woolls was increased to a
demy-Marke by Act of Parliament, yet the word consuetudo was nevertheless
still retained, but with an addition, For it was then called nova consuetudo.
Nay, though the increase were by the Kings absolute authority, and upon the
matter, a mere Imposition, Yet the King in his Commission did always call it
consuetudo, as in 16. Ed. 1. the Imposition of Four Shillings upon a Tun of
Wine, is in the Kings Commission to collect it, called consuetudo.
Nevertheless, I assure my self, the people called it by some worse name, as
Maletolt or the like.

The several applications of this word Consuetudo to all duties whatsoever
belonging to the Crown by reason of Trade, is the reason as I conceive that
the word is used in the plural number in the Statute of Magna Charta, per
antiquas and certas consuetudines, that so they might be secure against all
unjust exactions upon Merchandises whatsoever; but as I have said, the
principal scope was to provide against Impositions, and by reason also that
the word Consuetudo was taken as well for Impositions as for rightful
Customs, therefore to make all sure, they insert the words antiquas and
rectas. This word Consuetudo in this sense continued till about the twentieth
year of Ed. 1. after which time I cannot call to mind that I have seen it
upon any Record: In stead and place thereof came in the word Custuma, which I
find first in Charta Mercatoria an. 31. Ed. 1. where the increase of Custom by
the grant of Merchant-strangers is called parva custuma, and that which before
was called nova Consuetudo does now begin to lose that name, and to be called
magna Custuma, which terms of magna Custuma, intending thereby that increase
made by Parliament, anno 3. Ed. 1. upon the three staple commodities, Wools,
Wooll-fells, and Lether: And parva Custuma, intending thereby the increase
granted by the Merchants-strangers, an. 31 Ed. 1. Custums.
are the terms used at this day by the Customers, and by which they
distinguish their entries. This word Custuma I find to have been also
promiscuously used by E. 1. E. 2. and E. 3. in their Commissions, and applied
as well to increase of Custom by way of Imposition, or by acts of Parliament
of those times, as to ancient custom upon the Staple commodities; but
regularly none ought to be called Custuma but that which is due upon the Staple
commodities, and so is it used at this day, except only cloth; for, if it be
laid by act of Parliament, it is called a Subsidy; if without assent of
Parliament Impost. You see in what sense the words malum Tolnetum, and the word
Consuetudo have been used in former times, and are thereby able to judge how
they ought to be understood in this present Statute which, as I have said,
ought to have the most benign interpretation that the words may bear.

But it has been likewise objected that in this Statute there is a special
clause of exception which leaves the king at his liberty to lay what
impositions he pleases, The third objection against Magna Charta, cap. 30.
that by the Exception the Kings prerogative to lay Impositions is salved,
answered.
this Statute notwithstanding, and that is the words in the beginning of the
Statute. All Merchants (if they were not openly prohibited before) shall have
their passage, etc. which implies, say they, that if they be prohibited (which
rests wholly in the kings power) then they are not to have benefit of this
Stat. touching the freedom from impositions; and they say farther, that the
very laying of impositions does imply a restraint sub modo. Though I purpose to
speak more fully in answer of this objection when I come to show you the
weakness of the reasons alleged for Impositions, yet I cannot forbear in
this place to speak a word or two in answer thereof, having the Statute now
before us: Except they be prohibited they shall have free passage (says the
Statute) without paying Evill-toll; This does imply, say they, that if they be
prohibited they may be compelled to pay Impositions; but that cannot be
necessarily concluded; it implies indeed somewhat strongly, that they may be
prohibited. The Statute of 1 R. 2. cap. 12. inhibiteth the warden of the Fleet
to deliver any prisoner out of execution, unless it be by writ or other
commandment of the king. It may be as strongly implied out of this Statute that
the king may, by his commandment without writ, 4 and 5 P. and M. fo. 162. b.
Dyer.
deliver a prisoner out of execution; but the contrary has always been held.
The same objection is made, and the same answer may be given to another
exception in the latter end of this branch, Except in the time of war.

I come to the second Statute against Impositions, The second Statute against
Impositions, the Statute De Tallagio non co^cedendo, expounded and cleared.
which is the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo, touching the time of the
making of which there is great variety of opinion; for it is not, for ought I
could ever learn, found any where upon Record; Justice Rastall accounts it to
have been made 51 of H. 3. and with him agrees an old manuscript which I have
seen: It may well be, for in one of the Statutes you shall find a pardon to
Humfrey Earl of Boham Earl of Hertford and Essex, Constable of England, and
to Roger Bygott Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk marshall of England, who both
lived in that time. Tho. of Walsingham in his history of England, says it was
made in the 25 year of Ed. 1. he recites the Statute de verbo in verbum as
it is in our printed books, otherwise I should have thought he had meant
another Statute against Impositions made indeed 25 Ed. 1 and found upon the
Records of that year, in our printed Statutes at large, it is placed last of
all the Statutes of E. 1. Though there be some disagreement about the time of
the making of this Statute, yet they all agree the occasion to be the laying of
a great imposition upon Wool, the words of Tho. Walsingham, Auxit Rex tributum
Lanae ad 40s. cum prius ultra dimidiam mercam non daretur tota autem comunitas
sentit se gravatam de vectigali Lana enim Angliae fere extendit ad medietatem
valoris terrae and vectigal ad quintam partem terrae. The Custom of Wools as
you perceive was in those days esteemed to be the fifth part of the value of
the whole land; it follows, in him, that upon complaint the Subject at last
obtained the Statute I now speak of, the words of which are, No Tallage or
Aid shall be raised or set by Us or our Heirs in Our Realm, without the
assent and good will of Archbishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and
other Freemen of the Land, after these general words, by way of provision
against all manner of burdens whatsoever to be laid in time to come, without
assent of Parliament, follows in the next branch, save one especial
provision for the taking away of the imposition then in demand upon Wools,
which latter clause, as it does clearly show the cause of their present grief
to be the same which our Chronicles say it was, so does it likewise make it
evident what it was which they sought to be secured of for the times to come;
neither are the words themselves so obscure, by reason of the generalty of
them, but that they also without knowing the occasion of the making of the law
do directly point at Impositions; for, though indeed the word Tallage be (as
I conceive) to be understood only of charges within the Land, Tallage.
yet the word Aid extends to all charges of what nature soever; Aids.
nay, that even Impositions themselves have been called Aids or Subsidies
(which is all one) is evident by almost all the Records of the Exchequor here
amongst us, especially by those of Ed. 3. time; in which, wheresoever you find
any mention made by the King, in his Commissions, of an imposition raised by
him, he ever calls it Subsidium or Auxilium; Subsidies.
So likewise in the printed Statute of 36 Ed. 3. cap. 11. you shall find that
the Imposition by grant of Merchants there mentioned is called a Subsidy or
Aid: This exposition of the word Aid, concurring with the occasion of the
making of the Statute, does in my opinion strongly enforce this Statute against
Impositions; and it is to be observed that in this Stat. there is no saving or
exception of the kings ancient Right, which (as our Chronicles say) was a point
principally insisted upon at the making of this Law, earnestly pressed by the
Subject to be without that clause, and for a long while stood upon by the
king, but at last yielded unto in such sort as you have heard.

The next Statute against Impositions is 25 Ed. 1. cap. 7. The third Statute
against Impositions, 25 Ed. 1. cap. 7. cleared from objections.
the words are, Forasmuch as the more part of the Cominalty has found
themselves sore agrieved with the Male-tolt of Wools, viz. a toll of 40s for
every sack of Wool, and have made petition to be released of the same, We at
their requests have clearly released it, and have granted for Us and our
Heirs, that We shall take no such, things without their common assent and
good will, saving to Us and our Heirs the custom of Wools, Skins and Leather
granted before by the Cominalty aforesaid. I might, in enforcing this Statute,
rely upon a rule of Law for the exposition of Statutes of this nature, Omnis
Impositio est odiosa, ideo stricta contra Impositiones, and large ad favorem
gravatorum interpretanda est lex contra Impositiones data, but there shall not
need any such favorable construction; for the words are in themselves very
clear. The Law consists of three parts; the first is the kings grant of a
petition made by the Commons, for the releasing of an Imposition of 40s upon a
sack of Wool, then in demand; when the present grief was ended, the next care
was to prevent the like mischief in all times to come; It therefore folowes,
And We have granted for Us and Our Heirs that We shall take no such thing
without their common assent, which is the second part of the law; The saving in
the end is the third part.

Against this general provision, two objections have been made. The first
objection, that this Statute is only against the excess of the Impositions
then laid, and not against the right of Imposing, answered.
First, that the words No such things are to be understood only of the
burthensomnesse and excess of Impositions, and not otherwise. No such things
(that is, say they) No such grievous Impositions as this present Imposition is.
It had been a poor security for times to come, to have left it to
interpretation, whether or no, Impositions which might happen to be laid in
after ages be as grievous as the Imposition complained of in this time? by
comparing one with the other; it is so uncertain a computation, as no man (when
he thinks thoroughly of it) can imagine that men, worthy to sit at the making
of Laws, should suffer such a thing to pass them. Who can certainly say
whether our Impositions be more or less grievous then the rate of 40s upon a
sack of Wool: Beside, how easily had this Law been to have been deluded by
abating only 12d, or but 1d in the next Imposition; for, if it be but a penny
less, it is No such Imposition, for the burden; Therefore it must needs be
expounded of the quality and very nature of the thing complained of, 26 Ed. 1.
Interbrevia ret^rn. de Term. Mich. in Scac. in offic. Rem. Thesaurar. ibidem.
and not of the quantity. No such thing (that is) No such thing as this is
(that is to say) an Imposition: But that which will clear this objection is a
Proclamation made the very next year after the making of this Act, in which the
king reciting this Act, in stead of these words, We will take No such thing,
uses these words Nullam aliam Custumam sine communi consensu Capiemus, not
only No such, but no other: By which you may see that the words were then
interpreted in that sense in which I do now interpret them.

But admitting, say they, The second objection, that is only against
Impositions upon Wool, answered.
that it be so to be expounded that the king will lay No other Imposition
without assent in Parliament, that is to be uuderstood, say they, No other
Imposition upon, Wools, and not otherwise; which is their second objection. It
were a very strict construction for a Statute of so beneficial an intent as
this is so to restrain it; if there were no other words in the Statute that
did enlarge the exposition, But by the words following it is most evident that
the scope of this Law is more liberal then so, and that the kings intent was
for ever to secure his Subjects against all charges of this nature, I mean
Impositions, not upon Wools only but upon any other Merchandise whatsoever,
which I collect from laying all the parts of the Law together.

The Petition for present ease is to be released only of the Maletolt of four
shillings upon a sack of Wool, which is yielded to: The security for the time
to come, is, We will take no such thing: The saving which follows that, is,
Saving the Custom of Woolls, Woolfells, and Leather. I observe, the saving
extends not to woolls alone, as the Petition does, but also to Woollfells and
Leather, by express name; by which it is evident, that the security for the
time to come is of a larger extent than to stretch only to Woolls, as has
been objected: For else, to what end should Wooll-fells and Leather be excepted
in the saving, if they had not been contained in the general words, no such
thing. An exception cannot be but of a thing contained in former words: If
therefore the grant would have extended to Wooll-fells, if they had not been
specially excepted; then do I conclude by the same reason, that it does extend
to all other Merchandises not excepted; for the words are general. And so I
leave this Law cleared of all objections, and very full against Impositions.

The next Statute made against them, is, 14 Ed. 3. The fourth Statute urged
against Impositions, 14 E 3. cap. 11. cleared from objections.
cap. 21. By the first part of which Law you may perceive, that whereas the
Commons had prayed the King not to take of Woolls, Wooll-fells, Leather, Tyn,
or Lead any more than the ancient Custom, the King prayed them to grant him
forty shillings upon a sack of Wool for a year and a half, which they
granted: whereupon the King, by way of Retribution, and in answer of their
Petition, as touching the Wool causes it to be enacted for their Security in
time to come, That neither he nor his heirs would demand, assesse, nor take
more custom of a sack of Wool than six shillings eight pence: And so
likewise upon Woolls and Leather, no more than the ancient custom, without
assent of Parliament. All this while there is no answer given touching the Tyn
and Lead mentioned in the Petition; upon which, as it appears, the King had
also laid Impositions: But there do follow certain general words by which,
not only Tyn and Lead, but all other Commodities whatsoever are freed from
Impositions: The words are, The King promised in the presence of his Earls,
Barons, and others of his Parliament, no more to charge, set, or assesse upon
the Custom, but in manner aforesaid. Except these words do extend to Lead and
Tyn, to free them from Impositions for times to come, as well as woolls,
wooll-fells, and Leather are freed by the former special words, their Petition
touching Tyn and Lead is no way answered: And if they do extend to Tyn and
Lead, by reason of the generalty of the words, they do by the same reason
extend to all commodities: For what more liberal words can there be than
these; That the King will not charge, set, or assesse upon the custom: these
words, the custom, being words indefinite, are (you know) equivalent to an
Universal, according to the rule, Indefinitum aequipollet universali: And
although the King do but promise, yet I doubt not but in this case his promise
is a Law: And it is worth the observing, that the Lords do in very
extraordinary and unusual manner solemnly undertake, as much as in them lies,
that they shall procure the King to hold the same, and that they shall in no
wise assent to the contrary, if it be not by the assent of the Prelates,
Earls, Barons and Commons, and that in full Parliament; and for the greater
surety, and to give cause to eschew all counsel to the contrary of this
Ordinance, the Prelates have promised to give sentence upon them that counsel
against the same in any point; which are the very words of the Statute in print.

The Statute of 14 Ed. 3. cap. 21. was yielded unto by the King, 13. Ed. 4. no.
5. To. Par.
upon a Petition exhibited the Parliament before, both by the Lords and the
Commons, praying that a Law might be made against Impositions, as may appear
by the Records of the 13 year of Ed. 3. at which time they likewise prayed,
that the King would be pleased to grant them a Charter to the same effect, to
be enrolled in Parliament: The Statute you have heard; the Charter follows in
our printed books immediately after the Statute, where the King (in the
preamble thereof) reciting the great gift that he had given him at the same
Parliament, that is to say, the 9th Fleece, 9th Sheep, and 9th Lamb throughout
the Kingdom, which indeed, was a very extraordinary great gift; and therefore
his grant, in regard thereof, is to be intended so much more beneficially) does
in lieu thereof, for him and his heirs, grant to his Subjects in these words;
From henceforth they shall not be charged, nor grieved, to make any aid, or to
sustain charge, if it be not by the Common assent of the Prelates, Earls,
Barons and other great men, and the Commons of our said realm of England, and
that in Parliament. It has been objected, that these words, Aid and Charge,
are to be understood of Charges within the Land, such as are Taxes and
Tallages, An Objection that the stat. of 14 Ed. 3. An. 21 extends only to
Impositions within the land and not to Imposition upon Merchandises, is
answered.
and not of Impositions upon Merchandises; And this is the only Objection made,
or indeed can be made against this Statute; For the clearing of which, I can
say no more then already I have proved by matter of Record for the opening of
the sense of this Statute, viz. That this Charter, and the last Statute were
made upon a Petition exhibited in Parliament, for a law and Charter to be made
against Impositions upon Merchandises. And therefore that conjecture of theirs,
that it should extend only to Taxes, and not to Impositions, cannot but fall to
the ground, especially since there is not in the Petition, any mention at all
of Taxes or Tallages, or of any other charge or aid but impositions only,
then which there cannot almost be a cleerer proof, then that this Law being
made upon this Petition, is to be expounded against Impositions; which, if this
Petition had not been extant, would with no less cleernesse have been proved
by considering the mischief at the time of the making of this law, which was
not Tallage or Taxes, but those heavy Impositions of Four pound, and five
pound upon a sack of Wool, by way of dispensation with the Statute of 11. E.
3. cap. 1. of which I have formerly made mention. So as this Statute, being
made in the first intention against dispensations for money, with a penal law,
though the occasion were particular, yet (the words being general) I hold that
with reason it may be extended against all dispensations, with penal laws for
money: in particular, I hold, that the raising of money by dispensations, with
the Statutes against Alehouses, is (if not by the Common Law) yet by the force
of this law, unlawful, For certainly, quod prohibitum est una viae, non debet
alia permitti.

As for the words Aid and Charge, I have already proved that it was a term by
which Impositions were commonly called in those times; That they were also
called charges is evident by very many Records of those times, The word Charge.
where complaint is made against them, as 21. Ed. 3. Numb. 11. Les commons
prion qe la charge de 2^. sur sack de lane soit Ouste, 21. Ed. 3. Number. 16. The
Commons pray that no charge be set upon them without assent of Parliament. The
kings answer is, if any Imposition be levied unduely it shall be taken away;
of this kind there are very many Presidents, so as if the precedent Petition
had not assured us of the scope of this Law as it does, the very words
themselves, rightly understood, would have made it clear.

In the same Charter there is another clause as beneficial as this, to this
effect, All Merchants Denizens and Forreins (except those which be of our
enmity) may without let safely come into the Relm of England with their goods
and Merchandises, and safely tarry, and safely return, paying the customs,
subsidies and other profits reasonably thereof due. The objection to this
clause is very obvious, for what (say they) can these words, Other profits
reasonably due signify other than Impositions; for, by the words going before,
Custom and Subsidies are expressly named, and there is (say they) no other
third profit upon Merchandise but Impositions, and indeed this Statute they
themselves have vouched in maintenance of Impositions. To this objection it
might serve for a full answer, that there are other duties then Customs and
Subsidies due upon the landing of wares; for example Wharfage, Cranage, Scavage
and such like, the which with more probability I may conjecture to be intended
by these words, Other duties, then they can conjecture it to be meant of
Impositions, Sed in planis non opus est conjecturis. The best expositors of
this Act are those that lived in the same times, and they do clearly expound
this clause to be made against Impositions, as may appear by the Record of 21
E. 3. No. 29. for you shall there find a Petition exhibited in Parliament by
the Commons to be relieved touching an Imposition upon Wools, alleging for a
reason of their Petition, that every man ought freely to pass paying the
ancient custom as it was ordained by the kings Charter. This Petition against
Impositions was exhibited by the whole Parliament, within six years after the
making of the Charter, as may appear by comparing the times, and if they had
not then thought that Impositions had been meant to have been provided against
by this Charter, they would not certainly have made such a special reference
thereunto. In discovering the weakness of the reasons alleged in maintenance
of Impositions, Answers to the Reasons urged in maintenance of Impositions
I shall not greatly need to say any thing more then has been said, because
the state of the question has been already so thoroughly opened unto you, that
whatsoever can with any color of reason be said for Impositions, may receive
an answer out of that which has been spoken against them: Nevertheless, I
will in a few words recall to your memories their reasons, and in as few apply
the answers to them, with some additions of mine own, that by laying both
together in your view at one time, the weakness of the one, and strength of
the other may the better appear unto you.

It has been said that the old Custom of a Demi-marke upon a sack of Wool
must have his beginning either by the kings absolute power, The first argument,
That because it cannot appear that the ancient Customs were set by Parliament,
therefore they were imposed by the King, answered
or by a legal assent of the people, which can be no where but in Parliament,
and cannot but appear of Record; but because no such assent can be shown,
therefore they conclude that it began by the kings absolute power, and infer
that the same power remains still. The substance of this argument is found in
my Lord Dyer in the place cyted by me; It was much enforced in the Exchequer:
but as touching the particular of the old Custom of a Demi-marke upon a sack,
and the other old custom upon Fels and Leather, it is now no longer urged
because it appears expressly by diverse Records of 3 E. 1. in the Tower, That it
was granted per les grandes et al prier des Commons et de les Merchants de tout
Englaterre, and by a Record of 25. E. 1. cap. 7. Stat. printed, per
Communitatem Regni nostri Angliae, To. Pat. 3. E. 3. M. 1. Stat. 25. E. 1. c.
7. To. fin. intus 3 E. 1. M. 24.
which concurres also with the Statute of 25 E. 1. cap. 7. in print. Saving to
Us and our Heirs the Customs of wools, skins and leather granted heretofore
by the Comminalty aforesaid. The Pattent roll of 3 E. 1. which has these words
cum Prelati Magnates ac tota Comunitas Mercatorum Regni nostri nuper nobis
concesserunt quandam novam consuetudinem, 3. E. 1. M. 1. To. Par.
viz. de quolibet sacco Lanae 6s 8d, etc. being something thing obscure are by
the concurrence of all those other Records so clearly expounded, as there
cannot be, neither now is there, any question made but that the Custom of a
Demy-marke, and the other old Customs, which by my Lord Dyer, and by all those
who argued for, or against Impositions in the Exchequer, was held to be due by
the Common-Lawe, was by grant in Parliament; nevertheless the strength of the
argument they still retain, though the Demy-mark and those old Customs upon
the staple commodities were by Act of Parliament, yet (say they) before that
increase by Parliament the king had Custom, and no doubt a some certain,
otherwise could not this increase be called nova consuetudo; besides (say they)
the Custom reduced to a certainty by 3 E. 1. is only upon three commodities,
wool, skins, and leather: there are many other commodities which did likewise
pay Custom; How began that Custom (say they) if not by the kings absolute
power? and when was that power taken away? I answer, admit it were by the
kings absolute power, yet that the king has clearly discharged himself of
that power by Act of Parliament, I hope I have clearly proved: But this
question, How began the first Customs? is best answered by another question,
How began the Fine for purchase of Original Writs? the Fine pro licentia
concordandi? the certainty of prisage? nay, who reduced it first to certainty
that the trial of issues should be by twelve Jurors, no more nor no less?
that the full age of a man should be accounted twenty one years? of a woman
fourteen, twelve years her age of consent, and nine years capable to be
endowed? a year and a day given to sue an appeal, the like limitation of a
year and day in very many other Cases? In effect, who reduced all the known
grounds of the Common law to that certainty that now they are? Because we
cannot tell how or when they began, shall we therefore conclude that they began
by the kings absolute power, and infer, that by the same reason, they may be
changed at his pleasure? If the king may increase his Fines upon the purchase
of Original writts (which by the same reason he may do, that he may do his
Custom, nay, he has more color for this then for that, because there is no
Statute against this) he might easily raise that revenue to the value of his
Customs: But no man can, nor will I hope offer to maintain it to be lawful.
You see the weakness and the dangerous consequence of this argument, by
comparing it to other cases of like nature. To say the truth, all these things
began no man can say certainly when or how, but by a tacit consent of king and
people, and the long approbation of time beyond the memory of any man, and yet
no man can directly affirm but that most of them might begin by Act of
Parliament, though now there be no Records extant of such ancient Parliaments.
The first Parliament was not kept 9 H. 3 though it be the first in our books.
If we will give credit to other Records, and to our best Chroniclers, The
antiquity of Parliaments
we shall hear and read of diverse Parliaments in the Reign of King John, and
of his Predecessor Rich. 1. and in the Reign of H. 2. of two famous
Parliaments, one at Claringdon in Wiltshire, the other at Gedington in
North-Hamptonshire: And although our Chronicles say, that the first Parliament
kept in this Realm was held 19 Aprilis, 16 H. 1. yet I am of opinion, that
William the Conqueror held Parliaments; for what can be else understood by
these words, Per commune consilium totius Regni nostri stabilitum fuit, which I
find in Mr. Lamberts collection of the ancient Laws of England, in the
beginning of the Laws of W. the Conqueror: Many of the Statutes of E. 1. have
no other words: Nay, long before him, in the year of our Lord 712. in the time
of Inas King of the West Saxons, I assure my self there were Parliaments held,
and that of the three Estates, as at this day; as may appear by these words in
the beginning of the Laws of King Inas, in Mr. Lambert: Suasu and Instituto
Episcoporum nostrorum omnium, Senatorum nostrorum, and natu majorum populi
nostri in frequentia magna: And more plainly in the conclusion of some other of
his Laws; Hoc factum fuit per commune consilium and assensum Procerum,
Comitum, and omnium Sapientium, Seniorum, and Populorum totius Regni, and per
praeceptum Regis Inae, which are the same in Latin which ours is in English,
By the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons. Why might
not the Custom upon Woolls be first granted at one of these Parliaments, as
well as to have it first begun by the Kings absolute power? There is no more
probability of the one than the other: because most of the ancient Records were
burnt in H. 2. time, when the Exchequer was burnt, shall we conclude therefore
that there were never any such? You see the weakness of this Argument in all the
points thereof. I leave it, and pass to another.

The King may (say they) restrain the passage of Merchants at his pleasure, The
second Argument, that the King may totally restrain the importing and exporting
of merchandises, therefore he may do it sub modo by laying of an Imposition,
answered.
which they prove by diverse Records; 2 E. 1. m. 18. To. Par. 2 E 1. m. 17. To.
fin. 31 E. 1. n. 44. To. Pat. 17 H. 6. To. Clo. in dorso: Upon which they
infer, that if he may restrain a Merchant that he shall not pass at all, he
may much more so restrain him that he shall not pass except he pay a certain
sum of money: For this (say they) is less than totally to restrain him; And
(Cui licet quod majus, licet etiam quod minus.) Of this Argument my L. Dyer
gave light in his case of Impositions, 1 Eliz. and this has been diversely
enforced by all that have argued for Impositions. In answer of which I will
consider how far the king may restrain the passage of Merchants; and then
will examine the consequence of the Argument.

For my part, I think the king cannot restrain the passage of Merchants, but
for some special cause; wherein to define certainly and resolutely, to say for
what causes he may, and for what not, I will not undertake: Only let me inform
you, that there is not one of these presidents vouched by them to prove the
kings power to restrain, but they are upon special reasons; as by reason of
Enmity with such a Nation from whence they are restrained, or because such a
Commodity may not be spared within the kingdom: Besides, they are not
restraints from all places, and of all manner of Merchandises, but from certain
places only, and for certain sorts of Merchandises: And for my part I think
that restraints in all these cases, and of like nature, are by the Common Law
left to the kings absolute power; For if it were otherwise, it should be in the
power of a Merchant, for a little private lucre, to enrich the kings Enemies,
or to furnish them with munition to be employed against the State, or utterly
to ruin the Commonwealth, by carrying out a Commodity which may not be
spared, or by bringing in of some that may be hurtful. Nay (which is more)
such may be the occasion, that the king may, I doubt not, stop the passages of
all Merchants from all places for a short time, as upon the death of the late
Queen it was put in practice, to prevent Intelligence: there may likewise be
such necessary use of their ships, as the want of them, upon some sudden
attempts, may be a cause of the overthrow of the whole State. In such cases as
these, if the Common law did not give the King leave to restrain their passage
by his absolute power, it were very improvident in the highest points, which
cannot be imagined of so wise a law; And yet the Kings of this Realm have
always been sparing in the practice of their absolute power in this point, For
there are little less then 30. Acts of Parliament, touching the opening and
shutting up of the passage of Merchants, most of which, as I conceive, were
made rather for the increase of punishment, then for want of power in the King,
For the breach of a restraint by absolute commandment, is punishable, as all
other contempts, only by Fine and Imprisonment, and not by forfeiture of the
Merchandises, as in the president of the Wines, An. 5. of Queen Mary, vouched
by me, and is in some of those old presidents. If it be otherwise, I must
confess I know not the reason of the difference of this from other contempts.
You see that I have yielded to their proposition, That the King may by his
absolute power restrain the passage of Merchants, and have therein granted,
more then their presidents prove; But is the consequence good, that because the
King may restrain, therefore he may impose upon such as pass? First I deny
that in our case there is any restraint at all, as there was in the case of the
French Wines, by Queen Mary, by her Proclamation going before the imposition.
For proof of which, I refer you to the Kings Letters Patents prefixed before
the last Book of Rates, by which instrument, the impositions now complained of,
were altogether raised, you shall find it no other then a Declaration of the
Kings pleasure so to have it, and a course prescribed for levying of it; But
admitting that the very laying of an imposition, did implie a restraint, yet I
deny the consequence, Because the King may restrain totally, that therefore
he may restrain for a time, or from certain places, or certain commodities,
or certain Merchants. This indeed is a good Argument, a majori ad minus. But
because he may restrain totally, therefore that he may give passage for money,
is no good consequence; For in our case, there is no restraint at all, but it
is rather a passage for money. If there be just occasion of a restraint, the
law gives the King power to restrain; but when Merchants may without hurt of
the State, have passage, as in our case, to enforce them to pay for that
passage, is in my opinion, as unlawful as to enforce any man whatsoever, to
pay for doing that which he may lawfully do; Merchants have (as I may so say)
as good inheritance in their trade, as any man in his lands, and when it may
stand with the good of the state, that they may pass, they ought to pass as
freely without charge imposed on them, as any man ought to hold his
inheritance, or any Artificer, or other Tradesman ought to exercise their
lawful trades, and means of living, free from burdens to be laid on by the
Kings absolute power; if all others should be free, and only Merchants, (who
adventure their persons and estates in so many dangers, to bring us from far
places, such things, as without which we cannot subsist, and to return us
profit for our superfluities) should be subject to involuntarie burdens, their
estate were of all other men's most unhappy and slavish, which of all other
trades, is indeed the noblest, and most worthy to be cherished.

And here by the way I note, that in all other Nations of the world, where the
Merchant is subject to impositions at the Kings pleasure, the Landlord, the
Farmer, the Artificer, the very Plowman, and all others are in like sort
subject to Taxes and burdens, when the King pleases, The Merchant is not the
man alone that is subject to Taxes, and all other men free: if in the frame of
our Common wealth, it were thought fit to free all other Trades and Professions
from taxes, much more ought it to be thought reasonable, that our Merchants
should be free, and by all means possible, encouraged in their Trade: For our
case is not, as it is with other nations of the Continent; we are Islanders,
and divided by the Sea, from all the world, and in that respect, have such use
of Merchants, as we cannot live without them; if therefore any should be free
amongst us, it should be the Merchant, and not the quite contrary, only the
Merchant charged, and all others free: Plato in his 8. book de Rep. is of
opinion, that the Merchant for his encouragement to trade, should be free from
all Custom whatsoever, we seek only to be free of involuntary impositions. But
to return to the Argument of restraint, from whence I am a little digressed; if
it be a good Argument, that because the King may restrain in Toto, he may
restrain in Tanto; It will not be denied unto me (for it follows necessarily)
that in cases where he cannot restrain in Toto, he cannot restrain in Tanto:
But there is no man that will say that he may restrain the entrance and
passage of all Merchants, to and from all the parts of the world whatsoever,
without any limitation of time, but the restraint to endure for ever, and for
all kinds of Merchandises whatsoever, of most necessary and common use, to be
brought into, or carried out of the Realm; There is no man I suppose will say,
That the Law has given the King power to make so unreasonable a restraint as
this; for it were to give him a power to destroy merchandise, and consequently,
to ruin the Common wealth, Beside, it were against the law of nations, and of
reason it self; It cannot be imagined, that any wise law in the world should
allow it. But if our Impositions (as it is said) do implie a Restraint, and
that a restraint be always the forerunner of all Impositions, Then such an
unreasonable restraint, as I have spoken of, must needs be presupposed to have
been the ground or forerunner of our present imposition, For in our
impositions, are not all the merchandises of necessary and common use charged?
Are not all the Merchants Denizens and Strangers, importing from any part, or
exporting to any part of the world, subject to the charge? is there any
limitation of time, but to endure for ever? if I say such a restraint had been
unlawful, which I suppose no man will deny, then whatsoever implies such a
Restraint (which our impositions do) is likewise unlawful; But the ill
consequence of this their argument drawn from the Kings power of restraint,
will best appear by comparing it to other cases.

I little doubt but the King upon some occasion, may lawfully restrain the
passage of all men through the gates of London; as for the purpose, when the
City shall be besieged, or in the time of an extreme plague; Nay is it not by
authority derived only from him, that the gates are shut every night? Does it
follow therefore, that because he may do it upon some extraordinary occasion,
or at some time that he may shut up the passage for ever? or that presupposing
such a restraint by his absolute power, he may lay an imposition upon every
burden of any thing brought in, or carried out, as the Duke of Florence, and
many other States in Italy and Germany do, or upon every man by the Poll, that
shall pass through the gates?

You see the weakness and danger of the consequence of this Argument, and how
it tends to justify Impositions within the land. And so I leave it, and
proceed to the next.

The Ports and Haven Towns of England, are (say they) the Kings, The third
Argument, that the Ports are the Kings, and that he may open them, and shut
them upon what conditions he pleases, answered.
and in regard thereof, he may open and shut them upon what conditions he
pleases; I answer,

I. That the Position, that all the Ports are the Kings, is not generally true;
For Subjects may also be owners of Ports, as may appear by the Patent Roll of
3. E. 1. M. 1. Parl. where you shall find, that King Ed. 1. granted to the
Lords of Port Towns, the forfeitures granted to him by Parliament, for not
duly paying the new Custom of the demy-Marke within every several Port, of
theirs, where the Merchandises should happen to be imported or exported. But
admitting the truth of the position, yet is the consequence as weak and
dangerous, as of any of the rest of their arguments; For are not all the gates
of Cities and Towns, and all the Streets and Highwayes in England the Kings,
and as much subject to be open or shut at his pleasure, as the Ports are? Nay,
whenever we speak of the Highway in any law business, we call it via Regia,
the Kings Highway, and the King in his Commissions, speaking of London, or any
other City, calls it Civitas nostra, London, or Civitas nostra Exon; Does it
follow therefore, that the King may lay Impositions upon every man, or upon all
Commodities that shall pass through any of these places? Nay the gates of the
Kings own house (for the purpose, his Palace of Westminster) are his in a
far nearer degree then any of these, may he therefore by his Proclamation
impose upon every man that shall pass in or out at Westminster Hall door a
sum of money? Doubtless he may not; because the King is a person public,
and his Subjects ought to have access to him, as to the fountain of Justice,
and to the Courts of Justice, sitting by his authority; I make little doubt,
but his Majesty may upon just occasion, cause any of these passages to be
shut, as he may also the passage at the Havens; But when the Passage may
without danger to the State, be open, and that the Subjects may pass, his
Majesty may not then exact money for their passage; For the law has given the
King power over these things, for the good of the Commonwealth, and not
thereby to charge and burden the Subject; If the King may not exact money for
passage in and out of his Court gates, because of the publikenesse of his
Person; Nor for passage through the gates of Cities, much less may he for
passage out at the Ports, which are the great gates of the Kingdom, and which
the subject ought as freely to enjoy, as the air or the water.

Another of their arguments is this, The fourth argument that the King is bound
at his own charge, to protect Merchants, and therefore it is necessary it
should be in his power to lay moderate Impositions upon Merchandises for
raising of money to defray his charge; Answered.
The king is bound to protect Merchants from spoil by the enemy, he ought to
fortify the Havens, that their ships may there abide in safety; he ought, if
occasion be, to send Ambassadors to foreign Princes, to negotiate for them, and
many the like charges is the King by the Law to undergo for the protection of
his Merchants. It is reason therefore that his expense be defraied out of the
profit made by Merchants, and consequently, that he may impose upon Merchandise
a moderate charge, thereby to repay himself.

The consequence of this Argument is thus far true, The law expects that the
King should protect Merchants, therefore it allows him out of Merchandise a
revenue for the maintenance of his charge, which is the old Custom due (as at
first I said) by the Common law, But it is no good consequence, The Fifth
Argument that all foreign Princes have power to impose, and if our King had
not the like, it might be very inconvenient to this State. Answered.
that therefore he may take what he list, no more then he may at his pleasure
increase that old revenue, which the law gives him for protecting of Subjects
in their suits, or for protecting Wards, etc.

Another Argument of theirs is this, All other Princes of the world may impose
upon merchandise at their pleasure, and so may make our Merchandises less
vendible with them, by laying an Imposition upon them, to be paid by us, when
they are brought into their Territories, whereby their own Commodities of the
same nature, may be sold more to the gain of their Merchants, and our Merchant
impoverished, or driven from his Trade; They may also lay Impositions upon our
Merchants, fetching Commodities from thence, and leave their own Merchants
free from any Imposition in the same case, by which their merchants shall reap
all the profit by that commodity, in affording it better cheap to us here,
then we can fetch it, and consequently our merchants shall be undone, Many the
like cases have been put to prove, That if the King of England may not impose,
as other Princes may, they shall be able at their pleasure to destroy our
trading; This I conceive was the same as now it is, during all that time from
Ed. 3. till Queen Mary, and doubtless it could not but sometimes (during that
long space) so fall out, that foreign Princes did put their power in practice
to our prejudice, and yet we hear not of any Imposition laid by any of our
Kings, by their absolute power, which may give any man assurance, that they
took some other course to meet with the inconvenience, and in deed, the means
are diverse, which these our Kings used to prevent it.

First they were careful in all their Leagues and Treaties with foreign
Princes, specially to provide for it, as may appear by the Records of the
ancient Leagues: Neither is there any League of late time, that has not had an
Article for provision in this point; which Leagues for the most part, are upon
oath on both parts. And yet for further security, our Kings have always had
Ambassadors resident in the Courts of such foreign Princes, to put them in
mind of their Leagues, if upon any occasion our Merchants have in that case
happened to be never so little wronged by them, and if upon complaint of the
Ambassador, our merchants have not found redress, our Kings have held the
League as broken, and denounced War, or seized all the goods of the same
Princes Subjects within England; and I dare say there have been more wars
undertaken by our Princes, against foreign nations, only for this cause, then
for any one other cause whatsoever.

Besides, our Kings have in this case sometimes made use of that their
Prerogative of restraint, either by prohibiting our Merchants from carrying our
Commodities into those parts, where they are charged with Impositions, that so
by the want of our Commodities, foreign Princes might be enforced to abate
their Impositions laid upon them, or by restraining the Merchants of foreign
Princes to import or export commodities from hence; By which means foreign
Princes have been compelled to deal favorably with our Merchants for the good
of their own Subjects; All these are lawful and ordinary means to prevent or
redress the inconvenience which may grow by the Impositions of other Princes:
If all these ordinary means should happen to fail, which can hardly so fall
out, and that the laying of Impositions be indeed the only means that is left
to redress the inconvenience, why should not that be done by Act of Parliament
as well in these times, as it was in 7. H. 7. cap. 7. to take down the
Imposition of Four Ducates upon a But of Malmsey, imposed by the Venetians,
And as it was done by Queen Eliz. the 19. year of her Reign, to prevent the
laying of Impositions by foreign Princes upon Salt-fish, as may appear by the
printed Statutes of 19. Eliz. cap. 10. But as I have said, the providence of
the Prince, and ordinary power of restraint may very well meet with the
inconvenience.

These are the chief reasons made in maintenance of impositions, the weakness
of them, and their dangerous consequence, you cannot but perceive; For by the
same reasons, Taxes within the Land, may be as well proved to be lawful. On
the contrary part, you have heard the reasons against impositions fortified by
many Records and Statutes in the point; So as I conclude, that Impositions,
neither in the time of war, or other the greatest necessity or occasion that
may be (much less in the time of peace) neither upon foreign, nor inland
Commodities of whatsoever nature, be they never so superfluous or unnecessary,
neither upon Merchants, Strangers nor Denizens, may be laid by the Kings
absolute power, without assent of Parliament, be it for never so short a time,
much less to endure for ever, as ours. Though this be now my opinion, yet am
not I so obstinate therein, but if yet I hear better reason, I will once
again change my mind; in the mean while, you see I had reason to alter my
first: opinion, as being grounded upon very weak Reasons, as now they appear
unto me. And so I suppose they do also unto you.

FINIS.
7o. Julii 1641.
AT a Committee of the Honorable House of Commons, for Examination of books,
and of the Licensing, and Suppressing of them, etc.

It is Ordered, That this Argument upon Impositions, be forthwith published in
print.

EDWARD DERING.


