CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
HIS SACRED MAJESTY CHARLES the II.
His Royal TITLE Anagramatiz'd.
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, King; Defender of the truly, anciently Catholic and Apostolic Faith,
and in all Causes, and over all persons, as well Ec'lesiastical as temporal,
within these His Majesty's Realms and Dominions, by and under God, Supreme
Governor.

The ANAGRAM.
ACcept the valiant and loyal Georg Monck, Captain General of the Armi's, and
the chief Restorer of our Du's, Laws, Religion and Liberti's, his Princes
friend at need.

And recc'n Thomas Allen that is a loyal Subject, Lord Mayer of London City,
and a like blessed means for us; sing prais and thanks as ever du' to the Wise
God.

In Honor of the Lord General Monck, and Thomas Allen Lord Major of London, for
their great Valor, Loyalty, and Prudence.
EPINICIA.
THus mounts the Rising Sun that guilds the day,
The Morning Star his Harbinger, appears,
Dispelling Mists, chasing all Fogs away,
Chearing men's hearts, dispelling nightly fears:
The lesser Stars all vanish out of sight,
That made such twin^kling in the dark of Night.
What Histories relate, if that be true,
Saint George for England, as men used to sing,
Was but a Type; that George one Dragon slew,
This killed a HYDRA, and brings in the KING,
Raises the Church and State that quite were sunck,
Then say, God save the King, and God bless Monck.
Heralds at Arms are posed in Heraldry,
Searching for Titles best become him might,
George Duke of Sommerset, Earl of Dundee,
Marquess of Dublin, and Sir George his Knight:
All these and more they needs must yield they find,
Short of his worth, and of his Princes mind.
So Walworth that one Rebel killed, was not
More honored than Lord Allen has his Seat,
Whose Loyalty shall never be forgot,
And Prudence when the Danger was so great;
For he by wisely managing his Place,
Preserves the Cities Charter, Sword, and Mace.
When that so many Traitors here did swarm
Within this Land, that put most men in doubt,
Such Vipers which no Art of man could charm,
Lord Monck and Allen nobly cast them out.
Let them recorded be to endless Date,
Preservers of our King, the Church and State.
Let them be like Parheliums to the Sun,
When other stars will be combust too nigh,
These by reflection, as they have begun,
Shall shine like Suns with beams of Majesty:
Let both live Nestors years, and when they dye,
In Heaven live with God eternally.
The King and Peoples Favorites, that is strange!
And seems for to import the Golden Age,
For hardly have we heard of such a Change,
That any man could both at once engage;
For whom the King delights in, commonly
The People hate, and know no reason why.
But these are Stars of the first Magnitude,
And under these are comprehended all
The smaller lights; which here I must include,
That being fixed, did not like Comets fall;
Since we have had so many Blazing stars.
Cause of our Woe, and our late bloody Wars.
These are two Worthies which this Land upheld,
To be compared with any went before:
Two Presidents that are unparalleled,
No Subjects e're deserved Honor more.
All Glory, Honor, Praise, and Thanks we can,
We give to God, and Jesus Christ God-Man.
Jo: Rowland, M. A. C C C Oxon.
God save King Charles the Second, and God bless the Parliament, the Lord
General Monck, and Alderman Allen Lord Mayor of London, and all their Cordial
Adherents.
London, Printed by T. J. 1660.


