HIS MAJESTY'S Going from the Isle of WIGHT AND The Answer of the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common council, to the Lord Fairfax his Letter to the City of
LONDON.

ALSO, A Letter from the Lord General Fairfax, concerning the Citizens of
London that have guarded the Parliament, and the Headquarters now at St.
James, the Mewes, and other places about the City.

WITH The Armies Appeal from the Parliament to the Kingdom, and a Letter from
the Parliament to the Lord General. A full Relation touching Col. Hamond, and
other passages in the Isle of WIGHT.

THe Original Papers were read, and this is published for general
satisfaction to the Kingdom.

London, Printed for Richard Robinson, 1648.

A LETTER From the Isle of WIGHT Concerning the ARMY.
Monday Nov. 27. comes a letter to the Parliament from Col. Hamond (Governor
of the Isle of Wight) and in it another enclosed from the Lord Genesis commanding
him to come to the head quarters; as also an intimation that some Orders were
given to Col. Ewers, to be Goxernour of Carisbrook castle, and for securing the
person of the King. After the Parl. had debated this business, they voted that
Col. Hamond should still continue Governor of the Isle of Wight; and ordered
that a letter from the House should be sent to the Lo: General to acquaint him
with these Votes, and to desire him to countermand his Letter, for calling Col.
Hamond to attend at the Headquarters, in regard they thought him fit to
continue his command in the Isle of Wight.

Col. Hamond conceives himself to ow^ immediate obedience to the Lo: Genesis
orders, for that the Parliament had made him commander in chief of all the
forces, etc. and his power was derived by Commission by his Excellency, and
thereupon leaves the command of that Island to Col. Ewers, and the rather for
that Col. Hamond was informed that Col. Ewers had power in case of refusal to
force the command of that Island, which might upon the offer of the least
resistance occasion a very great trouble and disturbance in the Kingdom, but
whether Col. Ewers, or Major Rolfe has the present ^ustody of the person of
the King, was not yet known.

The Commissioners are coming away and it is said that on Monday last which
was the last day of the Treaty, his Majesty was at liberty, and the
Commissioners solemnly kissed his Majesty's hand, and took their leaves.

The 28 of November went from London to the headquarters at Winsor, diverse of
the City agents and propound that the General engagement of the people might
be hastened in saying the remonstrance lately presented to the house give not
sufficient satisfaction desiring no time might be lost in the going on in that
great work, which was taken into consideration by the Genesis Council.

Major Cromwell which brought Col. Hamonds letter before spoken of, and was
employed to carry unto him the Votes of the House for Col. Hamond to continue
his command in the Isle of Wight, returned by Windsor thinking that the said
Col. might be come thither by that time, and having not the Lord Genera^ pass
he was one night detained at Windso, and this day taking his journey toward
the Isle of Wight, he met about Faraham Col. Hamond, coming toward the
Headquarters and with him Col. Ewers, and diverse other Officers then Major
Cromwell delivered the letters and votes of both Houser of Parliament for Col.
Hamonds stay in the Isle of Wight, to which he said he would give obedience and
hastened to return back again to his former charge but some of those with him.

The 30. of Nov. the General Council of the Army passed a Declaration,
showing that they had made their applications to the present House of Commons
for avoiding of dangers, and settling the kingdom in peace and righteousness,
with equal constitutions of Parl. to be ratified by an Agreement and
Subscription of the people; but they find their Remonstrance wholly rejected,
and the consideration put off till there should be no place at all left for
it: yet do they not presume that the things propounded by them, must be
considered, save for the Reason, Justice, and public concernment thereof.

And seeing the prevailing part of the House wilfully shut their eyes, and stop
their ears against any thing of Light or Reason, they find no place left for
any charitable hopes concerning their error in such evil ways. Nevertheless,
the Army assume not a standing power acknowledging that lies most properly in
those whom the people does choose, and trust to judge for them.

But considering that such power where it is, is committed but in trust, and
that neither this, nor any other people, did ever give up their natural
capacities of common Sense or Reason, as to the ends and Inndamentals of that
trust, and that as to the breach of such trust, there is no higher formal power
of man in being to appeal unto for judgment, so as we cannot but exercise that
common Judgment which in our natural capacity is left to us. And though in
smaller failers of such trust, which might be born without hazard of
destruction to that Interest and those people, for which especially the trust
is, or where the Trustees were of an indifferent equal constitution, in
reference to the whole, or where we had an orderly and open way left for a just
succession of another formal and proper Judicature to be apealed unto in due
time; we should not oppose or hold forth our private judgments to the least
disturbance of that orderly and peaceable course of judgment so established; yet
we are so fully convinced of the destructivenesse of those evils we have
declared against, as that we dare with confidence apeale to the common
judgments of indifferent and uncorrupted men.

The Army do therefore desire and propound. 1 That the Majory of the Parliament
would be sensible of the evil and destructivenesse of their late way, and
apply themselves to the speedy executing of Justice, with the righting and
easing of the distressed people. 2 That so many of them as are touched with a
sense of these things, would by protestation acquit themselves of breach of
trust and withdraw from that persist in the guilt thereof.


A Letter sent from the Lord Genesis Fairfax, to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City of London.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
BEing upon an immediate advance with the Army toward London, we thought good
hereby to give you notice thereof. For the ground and necessity loading us
^^^reunto we refer you to our late Remonstrance, and to our later Declaration
concerning the same. We have only this there to add, That as we are for from
the least thought of plunder or other wrong to your City, or any the places
adjoining which we hope your former experience of us will give you cause enough
to credit us) so for the better prevention of any disorder in the Soldiery, or
of any abuse or inconvenience to the Inhabitants in the quartering of the
soldiery at private houses, we earnestly desire. That you would take a present
course for the supply of Money to pay these forces, while we shall be
necessitated to stay there; upon which we assure you, we shall so dispose of
them into great and void houses about the City as much as may be possible, as
that few or none of the Inhabitants shall be troubled with quartering of any
soldiers at all: And for the p^rpose, we defire that 40000. li. may be
forthwith provided upon these curity of your arrears, to be ready to be paid
out to the Forces to morrow night if possible: And we shall be ready to receive
from you any intimations for the further prevention of hurt or inconveniences
to the City in this business, I remain

Your most assured friend and servant, T. FAIRFAX.
Windsor ^0. Nov. 1648.

The Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council sat all night in debate of the
B. Genesis letter to the City, and came to this result, viz. That the money should
be paid forthwith, and a Committee was chosen to carry a letter to the L. Genesis
to this essect.

May it please your Excellency,
THe Lord Mairr, Aldermen, and Common council of the City of London, have
debated in Common council your Lordships letter of the 30. Nov. last, and have
agreed that the 40000. li. required for the Army (to whom is at least 80000.
li. due from the City) shall be paid this present Saturday, or the greatest
part thereof, desiring that no violence or injury be done to the City.

Signed MICHEL.


The last night came a Letter from his Excellency for discharging the horse of
the Mewes which formerly guarded the house, his excellency lets them know that
he intends to make that his head quarters for his horse ad those that address
themselves to the Army shall be accepted, etc.

It is reported with much confidence the King is this day to be removed from
the Isle of Wight to Harst caSle, whereof col. Ewers is Governor, the
headquarters of the Army were this day at Hammer-smith and at night are
expected at St. Jameses, and many of the Horse are already come to the Mewes.

FINIS:

