EIGHTEEN Choice and useful SERMONS, BY Benjamin Hinton, B. D. Late MINISTER
of HENDON. And sometime fellow of TRINITY COLLEGE IN CAMBRIDGE.
Contra rationem nemo sobrius senserit.

Contra Scripturam nemo Christianus senserit.

Contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserit.

Imprimatur, EDM: CALAMY. 1650.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. For Humphery Moseley, at the Princes Arms in S.
Paul's Churchyard, and for R. Wodenothe, at the Star under S. Peter's Church
in Cornehill, 1649.

To the Right Worshipful Master FRANCIS PHILIPS Auditor of LONDON, Grace and
Peace.
YOur love and kindness, whereof I have had so long experience, imboldens me
to present these few Sermons unto you, not as presuming of the worth of them,
but as desiring to testify my thankfulness, having so just occasion. I am old
and gray headed, wanting not much of seventy years, yet not so old in years, as
I am in infirmities; and in my age it pleased God to visit me (through a fall
whiel^ I took) with an incurable lamenesse, and (through sickness which I had)
with great weakness, both in my memory and voice, whereby I have been much
disabled to preach. I was therefore the more willing with my pen to supply the
defect of my tongue, as Zachary wrote, when he could not speak, and made his
pen to make known what his tongue could not. Luke 1.63.
And though many have done the like before me with far greater ability, yet
remembering that God at the making of the Tabernacle, accepted as well the
offerings of the poorer sort, who brought thither but Goats-haire, and
Rams-skinnes, as of those who were rich, and offered blew silk, and purple, and
scarlet; I have offered these few mites into the treasury of the Church out of
my want and penury, when others offer talents out of their store and plenty.
And I doubt not of your favorable acceptance hereof, as coming from him, who
will no longer desire your favor, then he desires to remain

Your truly loving in the Lord BEN. HINTON.


Courteous Reader,
IT was the earnest desire of the Author my Reverend Father, that these
Sermons might pass the Press in his life, for the furtherance of others
passage to life eternal: but being himself taken away by death before his
purpose was effected, I thought it my duty not to let his works die with him
but to impart to others what GOD had imparted to him. I desire that as they
teach the word of Truth, so they may be the word of life; And although in these
days Sermons are neglected by the most, contemned by the worst, and too little
esteemed even by the best; yet I doubt not, but these will meet with some, who
will receive the Message for the Masters sake. And as formerly, the feet of
those, who brought glad tidings of the Gospel of peace, were counted
beautiful, so will the Gospel it self I hope, though plainly preached, not be
trod under feet, but be acceptable, and helpful to augment their peace, who
indeed seek peace, which shall be the prayers of him to the God of peace, who
is your Christian Friend,

WILLIAM HINTON*

The several SERMONS.
I. Abraham's offering his Son Isaac. GENESIS 22.2 Take now thy Son, thine only
Son, Isaac whom thou love, and get thee into the Land of Moriah; and offer
him there for a burnt-offring, upon one of the Mountains which I will tell thee
of. II. The good ground or hearer of the word. MATTHEW. 13.23. But he that
received seed into the good ground, is he that hears the word, and
understands it, which also bears fruit, and brings forth some an hundred
fold, some sixty, some thirty. III. Zacheus converted. LUKE 19.8. Behold Lord,
the half of my goods I give to the poor, etc. IV. Gaining the world and losing
the soul. MATTHEW. 16.26. For what is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? V. Man like the grass and flowers of the field.
PSALM. 103 15. As for man, his days are as grass, as a flower of the field, so
he flourishes. VI. The Devil a coward if he be resisted. JAMES 4.7. Resist the
Devil and he will flee from you. VII. Gods best beloved most afflicted. HEBR.
12.6. For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth. VIII. No peace to the wicked.
ESAIAS. 57.21. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. IX. God the Author
and protector of the Scripture. 2 PETER 1.21. For the Prophecy came not in old
time by the will of Man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. X. Christ's miraculous Cures. MATH. 11.5. The blind receive their
sight, and the lame walk, the Leapers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the
dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached to them. XI. The
Churches love to Christ. CANTIC. 3.1. By night on my bed I sought him whom my
soul loves. XII. Both Poverty and Riches occasions of evil. PROVERBS 30.8.
Give me neither Poverty nor Riches. XIII. Gods pardoning great sinners, a great
comfort to others. PSALM. 32.6. For this shall every one that is godly, pray
unto thee in a time when thou may be found. XIIII. Steven Stoned. ACTS
7.59.60. And they stoned Steven, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. And he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay
not this sin to their Charge. XV. Lawful and unlawful swearing. JEREM. 4.2.
Thou shall swear, the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and
i^^^ghteousnesse. XVI. Jonas sent to Nineveh. JONAH 3.1. etc. And the word of
the Lord came unto Jonah the second time, saying, arise, go to Nineveh that
great City and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee. So Jonah arose,
and went to Nineveh. XVII. Hiding of sin no small sin. PROVERBS 38.13. He
that covers his sins shall not prosper, but who so confesses and forsakes
them shall have mercy. XVIII. Christ's coming to judgment, both certain and
uncertain. 1 THESE. 5.2. For you your selves know perfectly, that the day of the
Lord so comes, as a Thief in the night.
THE FIRST SERMON.
GENESIS 22.2. Take now thine only Son Jsaac whom thou love, and get thee
into the Land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt-offring, upon one of
the Mountains which I will tell thee of.


Paradisus Genesis in quo pullulant Patriarcharum virtutes Ambr. Epist. 41.
THis book of Moses, is resembled by St. Ambrose not unfitly unto Paradise.
Genesis (says he) is a Paradise, wherein spring forth the virtues of the
Patriarchs; For as in Paradise there were variety of trees, which brought forth
variety of excelent fruits, both pleasant to behold and good to eat: Genesis 2.9.
So in this Paradise, this book of Genesis are many worthy plants, Gods
Children and Servants, whose fruits of Faith, of Love and obedience, are both
delightful for us to read, and profitable to imitate. Now of all these plants,
the chief are the Patriarchs, of all the Patriarchs the most fruitful is
Abraham, and of all the fruits which he ever brought forth, we have here the
worthiest without all comparison, his wonderful Faith and Obedience to God, in
offering his Son; For this Chapter contains that admirable History of
Abraham's offering his Son Jsaac unto God; wherein three things are especially
set down.

First, The cause which moved Abraham to offer his Son; namely, the
commandment of God in this second verse.

Secondly, Abraham's obedience to Gods commandment, to the 11. verse.

And thirdly, Gods approbation and acceptance of Abraham's obedience, in the 12,
and 13. verses.

For the first, which is, the cause that moved Abraham to offer his Son,
namely the Commandment of God, it was the most grievous Commandment that ever
was given; and it was given, as appears in the ^ver. for the trial of Abraham.
A strange trial of so holy a man, Lippoman in Cate. in Genesis
which as Zeno the Bishop of Ver^na said, Ant e^^m sacrilegum faceret si
contemneret Deum, a^t crudelem si occideret filium; would make him either
guilty of sacrilege if he contemned God, or of great cruelty if he killed his
Son. So that Abraham is here brought into wonderful straits; for if he do
not that which God Commands him, God will condemn him of great impiety; and yet
if he do it, 5. Difficulties in this Commandment.
all the world will condemn him of extreme cruelty. Now the difficulty and
grievousnesse of this Commandment appears especially in these five things,
which are all comprised and couched together in this second verse.

First, In regard of the sacrifice it self which is to be offered, and that is
Isaac, not Abraham's Servant, but his Son: not one out of many, but his only
Son: not one that he cares not for, but his beloved Son. Take now thine
only Son, Jsaac whom thou love.

Secondly, I regard of the party that must offer this sacrifice, and that is
Abraham, Abraham a Father must sacrifice his Son, he must do it himself and
no other for him; Take now thine only Son and (do thou) effer him.

Thirdly, In regard of the manner how he must sacrifice his Son, He must offer
him to God (in holocaustums) for a burnt-offring. So that first he must kill
him, then hew him in pieces, and when that is done, he must lay him upon the
fire and he must burn him to ashes; for all this is required in a
burnt-offring.

Fourthly, In regard of the place where he must sacrifice his Son, and that is
set down two ways, 1. More generally, in the Land of Moriath, a place (as
appears in the fourth verse) that was distant from him three days journey, that
all the while he is traveling thither with his Son, his affection might have
time to work within him, 2. More specially, upon one of the Mountains (says
God) that I will tell thee of. Though it be a most unnatural and monstrous act
which he is to persome, yet he may not do it in secret; but he must do it upon
a Mountain where he may the les^e conceal it.


And fifthly, In regard of the time when he must sacrifice his Son, he must not
stand to deliberate it; but he must go presently about it, Take now thine only
Son. Nay, now when he is old and his wife past bearing; and therefore
hopeless of having any other children; now he must take this his only Son:
he must post into the land of Moriah, and there upon one of the Mountains, he
himself must offer him, and that for a burnt-offring.

Isaac; the Son and only Son of Abraham.

God, as appears in the former chapters, had many ways made trial of Abraham's
obedience. Get thee, says God unto Abraham in the 12. chapter, 1. verse, Get
thee out of thy Country and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers House unto
the land that I will show thee. This was a hard Commandment. Abraham was then
almost fourscore years old, and he must begin to travel and which might grieve
him the more, he must travel into a far Country; but he knows not whither;
Genesis 12.5.
yet Abraham did it, and so he came into the land of Canaan, as God had
appointed him. But it may be when he came thither, this was a place to seat
himself in, and better it may be then in his own Country. He was no sooner come
thither, Genesis 12.10.
but he was welcomed into the Land with an extreme famine, insomuch that he
was fain to shift for himself, and to fly into Egypt and his wife with him; yet
Abraham was contented, and never murmured against God. But it may be when he
came thither his entertainment was better. He was no sooner come thither, Genesis
12.15.
but Sarah his wife was taken from him, and for no other cause; but because she
was so beautiful to look upon. Still Abraham persisted without any murmuring.
But it may be that God had extraordinarily blessed him in all other matters. It
is true indeed, that God had greatly blessed him; but yet so, as that, that which
of all wordly things he chiefly desired, he still wanted, Genesis 15.2.
the comfort of having a Son to succeed him. And therefore in the 15. chap.
1. verse, when God had promised Abraham to be his exceeding reward, Abraham
takes the opportunity, and presently puts up a Petition to God, Lord, says he,
What will thou give me seeing I go childlesse, and the Steward of my house is
this Eliezer of Damascus; Behold, thou have given no seed unto me, and
therefore my servant must be my heir. This was that which so troubled Abraham:
God had given him great wealth and riches, but what should he do with them, he
himself was old and might well suppose, that he could not long enjoy them, he
was in a Country where he had no Kindred, and he must leave them to a stranger
that must succeed him. Genesis 16.15.
God promised him issue; and first he gave him Jshmael by Hagar the bondwoman:
but this was not he that should be his Heir, but another which Sarah his wife
should bear him. To be short, Sarah conceived and brought forth Isaac; Genesis
17.19. Isaac.
God himself had given him his name before he was borne, a name which signified
joy and laughter; because Isaac should be a comfort and joy to his Father. And
now old Abraham's soul is revived; when he sees his Son Isaac, presently he
thinks he has lived long enough now he has a Son to succeed him; but
presently again he checks his thoughts, and wishes to live longer, that he may
the longer enjoy him. But Abraham's joy may not long continue, God has another
cross for him in store, and that is this; Abraham must take Jshmael his first
begotten, and cast him out of doors with his mother Hagar. But this, howsoever
it was a grief to Abraham; yet it inflamed his affection the more toward
Isaac. For, as when Eliah was taken away, his spirit was doubled upon Elisha: 2
Kings 2.9, 10.
so Jshmael being gone, now Isaac is his Fathers only darling; and now Abraham's
affection is doubled upon him. But when God sees this his deep-setled love, he
strikes him as it were with a thunder bolt from Heaven, and commands him to
kill this his only Son. A Commandment more cruel then the Laws of Draco
which were written in blood; wherein every word stabs Abraham to the heart.
Take says he, thy Son, thine only Son even Isaac thine only beloved Son. Was
it not enough, O Lord, says Origin, that thou do command him to kill his
Son; but thou must add for this further vexation, his only Son, or was
not this enough, but thou must put him in mind how dearly he loves him, and was
not this yet enough, but the more to kindle and inflame ^is affection, thou
must likewise name him? The parting with a Son will move a Father very much,
His Son.
so great is a Fathers affection unto his Son: when Jacob heard that his
Son Joseph was dead, he mourned and Iamented, Genesis 37.34.35.
he put on Sackcloth and would not be comforted; yet Jacob (ye know) had many
more Sons. In Rama says the Prophet, there was a voice heard, weeping,
mourning, and great lamentation; Jerem. 31.15.
Rachell weeping for her Children, and would not be comforted, because they
were not. Yet Rachell was young and might have more Children, 2 Samuel 18.33.
when David heard that his Son Absolon was slain, he wept and lamented very
bitterly for him; nay, he wished that himself had died in his room. O Absolon
Absolon, my Son my Son, I would to God says he, that I had died for thee
my Son Absolon. Yet Absolon was a graceless and rebellious Son, one that
rose up in Arms against his own Father, and sought to deprive him both of life
and Kingdom; and yet because he was his Son, David could not but love him, so
great is a Fathers affection unto his Son, which no man indeed can
sufficiently conceive, but he that is a Father, and has a Son.

We read in the Ecclesiastical Histories, Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 24.
That a certain Merchant in Theodosious time, hearing that two of his Sons
were taken prisoners, at the day appointed that they should be executed, he
came in all haste to Thessalonica where his Sons were, and hearing the matter
why his Sons were to suffer, he first offered a great sum of money for his
Sons Ransom, and when that would not be taken, he offered his own life, and
made suit that he himself might die in their room. They who had the charge of
the Prisoners committed unto them, made him this answer, that his death could
not possibly excuse them both, because a set number were appointed to suffer;
but offered withal, that if he would die for any one of them, his death should
be taken. The Father presently accepted their offer, and mourning and lamenting
over both his Sons, he would willingly have died for either of them, but he
knew not whether: so great was this Fathers affection unto his Sons, that
though it were equally divided between them both, yet he was willing to have
saved either of their lives, even with the loss of his own. His only Son.
But now if a Father have but one Son, then all his care, all his love, all
his affection is wholly set upon him, and then it is the greatest grief in the
world to lose him. And therefore the Prophet Jeremy in the sixth of his
Prophecy speaking of the great mourning which the Jews should make, when
their most cruel enemies the Chaldeans, and Assyrians should come to destroy
them, Jerem. 6.26.
he knew not how to express the greatness of their sorrow, but by the sorrow of
a Father, who having but one Son is to part with him: make, says he,
lamentation and bitter mourning, as for thine only Son, showing thereby, that
there is no sorrow like the sorrow of a Father, who having but one Son, is to
be deprived of him. And therefore our Savior John 3. to set forth Gods
infinite love toward us; John 3.16.
he says, That God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. If
a Father have many Sons, Pluta^ch. de multitud. Amicorum.
his affection is divided among them all, and therefore the less toward any
one; like a River, which being cut into many Channels, his current ye know must
needs be the weaker. If a Father have many Sons, the loss of one cannot be so
grievous unto him, because he finds comfort in those which are left him; but
having but one, if he loose him (especially when he is old as Abraham was) this
must needs be an extraordiraly grief unto him. And yet Abraham's case is far
more grievous. His beloved Son.
Many a Father, though he have but one Son, yet his grief is the less, when he
is taken away; because while he lived he was a grief unto him. But Abraham must
loose not his Son only, and his only Son, but Isaac his only joy and
comfort, Isaac his only beloved Son. And indeed there was never any Father,
that had the like cause to love his Son. Parents do commonly love their
Children, either because they are their own flesh and blood, or because they
continue their name after them; for so long as their Children and Posterity
continue, they seem in a manner to live in them. But besides these Abraham had
many other causes, and far more forcible to love his Son. Abraham as we heard
before (out of the 15 of Gen.) even longed as it were to have a Son; after
that God had promised him a Son, many a year past before he had him. In the
mean time, God to make him as it were amends for his long expectation, had
given him many comfortable promises concerning this Son; as that his seed
should be called in Isaac, Genesis 17.19.
that he would multiply his seed like the stars of Heaven; that he would
establish his Covenant with Isaac for an everlasting Covenant, and with his
seed after him. And has not Abraham then an extraordinary cause to love his
Son? But besides this, Abraham was fully a hundred years old before he had
him, Sarah had been barren for a long time, and if she had not been so, yet by
reason of her age she was past bearing; so that God had wrought a double
miracle, in giving him a Son; all which did more inflame his affection
toward him; and yet now all upon the sudden, as if God had repented him of
his former kindness, he commands him to sacrifice this his only Son; what
now might Abraham think with himself? he might now suppose that God had but
deluded him in all his promises, and that God had given him many fair words
concerning his Son; Job. 10.1.2.
but all to no purpose. And surely had it not bin Abraham, he would have
offered like Job, in the bitterness of his soul, to have pleaded with God; he
would have stood up in the behalf of his Son, and replied again: And is this
that Isaac that should be my comfort? is this he whom thou have so often
promised, and whom I have so long expected, as a pledge of thy love and favor
toward me? and must I now kill him? Quid meus hic Isaac in te committere, etc.
Alas, what has Isaac committed against thee? how has he offended thee? who
will ever believe that thou would have spared Sodom, had there been ten that
were good in it, if thou now take delight in the blood of the innocent? do
thou thus reward thy Children and Servants? and is this the fruit of their love
and obedience? O let it not be known in Gath nor published in Ascalon, lest the
uncircumcised Philistines insult over thy people, and say among themselves; such
honor may have all his Saints. But Abraham never opened his mouth for his
Son, but grace having got the upper hand of nature, and faith of affection,
he was glad when God had given him a Son; but more glad that he had a Son
to give unto God: for so says Chrysostom, Latus erat Abraham cum silium
acciperet, laetior cum sibi imolandum dominus postularet: Abraham rejoiced when
he received his Son, but he rejoiced more, when God commanded him to offer
him unto him.

The Doctrine that may be gathered from hence is this: That God makes trial of
our love and obedience, in those things which of all other are dearest unto us.
For so we see he deals here with Abraham, when he sees how dearly he loves his
Son; for the better trial of his love and obedience, he commands him to
offer him for a burnt-offring.

Thus dealt our Savior with the Ruler in the Gospel; Luke 18.22.
for knowing that he was rich, and withal, that his heart was set upon his
treasure, he willed him to sell all that ever he had, and to give it to the
poor, and so tried him in that which was dearest unto him.

He, Math. 10.37.
says our Savior, that loves Father, Mother, Son or Daughter more then me,
he is not worthy of me. It is no ordinary love which God requires of us, but
such a love as is able to subdue all natural affection: So that if our
Children were dearer unto us then our own souls; yet the love of God is to be
preferred before them.

And this was prefigured by those milch kine (1 Samuel 6.) which being to carry
the Ark of the Lord, it is said, that their Calves were taken from them, and
yet they went on, and only sometimes did low after their Calves, but never
turned back to look after them. To note unto us, that Religion must always
oversway affection, and though we do naturally love our Children, yet if they
be any hinderance unto us in Gods service, we are not to regard them. It is the
commendation of Levi ( Deuteronomy. 33.) that he said to his Father and Mother, he had
not seen them, and that he knew not his Brethren nor his own Children. For when
the Levites were commanded ( Exodus 32.) to consecrate their hands unto the
Lord, every man upon his own Son and his own Daughter; they were so zealous
in Gods Cause, that they fought against nature, and had no more compassion on
their Parents or Children, then if they had been mere changers whom they had
never seen. Hieron. lib. 2. Epist. Select.
It is an excellent saying of St. Jerome, Licet pervulus ex collo pendeat nepos,
etc. Though thy little Nephew should hang about thy neck, though thy Mother
should entreat thee by those her own duggs that gave thee suck, though thy
Father should lie upon the Threshold, and cling about thy feet as thou art
going out, to stay thee from spending thy life in Gods service, per calcatum
perge patrem, etc. Tread thy Father under thy feet, and trample upon him;
Solum in hac re crudelem esse pietatis est genus, Only in this case it is a
kind of piety to use cruelty. This, howsoever it may seem a very harsh
Doctrine unto flesh and blood, yet if our hearts were once thoroughly inflamed
with the love of God; if we were wholly devoted unto Gods service, and if we
did even hunger and thirst after righteousness, then whatsoever it were that
God required at our hands, we would be ready with Abraham to perform obedience.
Mat. 4.21.22.
And as the Disciples when our Savior called them, they left both their goods
and their Parents to follow him: So whatsoever it were that God required of us,
though it were to the loss of all that ever we have. yet we would be willing
to resign it when God commands us.

And thus much concerning the first difficulty in this Commandment, in regard
of the sacrifice which is to be offered, Abraham's only beloved son Isaac, I
come now to the second.

Abraham; Abraham a Father must sacrifice his Son, he must do it himself and no
other for him, Take thine only beloved Son Isaac, and (do thou) offer him.

If a Father having but one only Son, should but hear that he were causeless
to be put to death, this (ye know) would be a great grief unto him; but if he
were commanded to be present himself, and to be an eyewitness and spectator
of his death: this must needs be a further vexation. O, but being come
thither, if he himself were enforced to be his Sons executioner, and with his
own hands to kill his Son; this were a torment beyond all comparison. But
this is Abraham's case here, If God had commanded him, to deliver his Son to
some of his Servants, and that they should kill him; yet Abraham might have
conceived some comfort, for it may be his Servants would have had compassion on
him (as it has often been seen) or if they had not, but had put him to death;
yet Abraham should not have been a spectator thereof, but that Abraham may be
sure of the death of his Son; God will have him not only an eyewitness
thereof, but to be the actor himself; he will have him with his own hands to
kill him. Valor. Max. lib. 5. tit. 7.
When Caesar commanded Cesetus a Roman, to subscribe but his hand to the
bannishment of his Son, he made him this answer. Celerius tu mihi Caesar, omnes
meos liberos eripies, quam ex his ego unum mea nota pellam. Thou shall sooner,
says he, berave me of all my Children, then I will ever set my hand to bnnish
any one of them. What would he have answered, if he had been commanded with his
own hands to have killed him? for so must Abraham.

It is noted by Suetonius, that among other arguments of Caligula his great
cruelty, Sueton. Calig. 27 Sect.
this was one, That Parents were often compelled by him, to be present
themselves at the execution of their children: And when a father would have
excused his absence from his sons execution, in regard of his sickness: we
read there, that Caligula sent him his horse-litter to bring him thither: but
we never read among all his cruelties, that he forced any father to be his sons
executioner. There have been some, says Philo, who for the safety and good of
their Country, Philo lib. de Abra.
have suffered their children to be sacrificed to their gods, but they in the
mean time, have either stayed at home, and would not be present when their
children were sacrificed, or if they were present, they have turned away their
eyes, and covered their faces, as unable to behold so sad a spectacle. Thus
when Iphigenia was to be sacrificed to Diana, Agamemnon standing aloof off,
when he saw his daughter to be brought to the Altar, he could no longer endure
it, but as Euripides writes, Euripid. in Iphig.
he turned away his head, he drowned his eyes in tears, he covered his face,
and all that he might not see his daughter sacrificed. How then would he have
endured, if he himself should have done it? for so must Abraham, if God had
put it to Abraham's choice whether he would have offered himself, or his son,
no doubt he would have thought, that God had dealt very graciously with him,
and that God had set Isaac but at too low a rate, seeing he might purchase his
life with the loss of his own: for Abraham was old, and therefore would
willingly have yielded his life unto God, which he must of necessity have
yielded unto nature not long after. But God will not be content with Abraham's
death, but with the death of his son, for he knew it would be worse then death
unto Abraham, to live without Isaac, but a thousand times more grievous when he
himself should kill him. For what might Abraham think with himself? Cain was
the first parricide that ever was, and Abraham must be the second. When Cain
had murdered his brother Abel, he thought he had committed such an abominable
act, that every one that saw him, would be ready to kill him, whosoever finds
me, says Cain will slay me. And Abraham might well imagine, that this would
make him odious among his neighbors, and that every one would count him as an
enemy to nature, and as one that were not worthy to live among them. If but any
bruit beast says Plutarch, do kill their young, we stand amazed at it, we
count it prodigious, and that is portends some strange event, we offer
sacrifice to appease the Gods, that they may defend us from it. For we know,
says he, that nature has taught them to love their young, and not to destroy
them. And would not every man then exclaim against Abraham? Is not this that
Hebrew that murdered his son? is not this he, who as short a time as he has so
journed in our Land, has made the whole Country to ring of his cruelty? are
these his good works? Lord, how precise he seemed amongst us? how ready to
reprove us of impiety and profaneness? and shall we harbor among us such a
monster in nature, as seems to make a scruple of the least sins, and makes no
conscience of murder? Thus every one would be ready to cry out against
Abraham, and yet such was his obedience, that he had rather become odious
amongst his neighbors, and show himself cruel in killing his son, then
irreligious in disobeying God. Scelus enim est (says Saint Augustine) filium
occidere, sed Deum scelestius non audire, It is a sin for a father to kill his
son, but a greater sin, if he kill not his son when God commands him.

That God makes trial of our obedience, according to the measure of his gifts
and graces which he has bestowed upon us. For so we see, he deals here with
Abraham, A light temptation had not been fit for so great a Patriarch, and
therefore as God had extraordinarily enricht him with the graces of his Spirit,
so he makes an extraordinary trial of his faith and obedience. For God deals
with us, as a Schoolmaster is wont to deal with his scholars, who examines
not every one alike, but according as they proceed and profit in learning, so
he still puts them to further exercises. If God should lay any grievous trial
upon those that are weak, and not strengthened in faith, it were enough to
discourage them: if light and easy upon those that were strong, it were not
enough to make manifest their virtues which lie hidden in them. And therefore
he proportions his trials of our faith, to that measure of grace which he has
vouchsafed us. When then we see, what God here requires of Abraham, we may
admire Gods goodness and mercy toward us, who spares our infirmity; and makes
not the like trial of our obedience: For if God should lay the least of those
trials upon us, which he laid upon Abraham, how unable were we to undergo the
same? And this we may see, if we examine our selves as touching our obedience
in smaller matters. If God do but visit us with any tedious and long
sickness, or if he lay upon us any cross or affliction by taking our goods,
or our children from us, presently we fall into great impatience, and we think
that God deals very hardly with us. How then would we bear it, if he should
make the like trial of us, which he makes here of Abraham, and if he should
command us for the proof of our obedience, to kill our children with our own
hands, and to offer them unto him? yet Abraham went willingly about the same.

If the loss of our goods will so overcome our patience, as many times it does,
what then would we say, if God should lay upon us that which he laid upon Job,
when he took both his goods and his children from him, and when of all that
ever he had he left him nothing; yet Job blessed God when he had taken away all.
The Lord (says he) has given, Job 1.21.
and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. In a word, if a
little pain in the time of our sickness will so bereave us of patience, what
then would we do, if God should lay upon us, that which he has laid upon
thousands of our betters, I mean those Martyrs in the time of persecution,
whereof some have had their flesh torn by piece-meale from their bodies with
hot pincers, some have had their bodies cut asunder with sawes, and others have
endured whatsoever the wit of man, or the malice of Satan could invent against
them, and yet they have triumphed in the midst of their torments. So that this
may teach us to extol and magnify Gods goodness toward us, who lays not
so much upon us as he laid upon them, but proportions his trials to our
infirmity and weakness.

And thus much likewise for the second difficulty in this Commandment, in
regard of the party that must offer this sacrifice, Abraham Isaac, a father his
son.

(in holocanstum) for a burnt-offring.

The manner how they were to offer their burnt-offrings in the old Law, is
prescribed by God unto Moses, in the first of Leviticus, where we find that
the burnt-offring that was to be offered, was to be killed, to be cut in pieces
or quartered, and every part to be laid upon the fire till it were wholly
consumed. Whether Abraham when he had killed his son, was likewise to quarter
him, and to hew him in pieces, I will not determine? but yet it is probable.
For howsoever the manner of offering these offerings was specified long after
this Commandment was given, yet Abel and others had offered burnt offerings
long before, which no doubt they had done as God himself had taught them. But
this is certain, that when Abraham had killed his son with his own hands, he
was likewise to lay him upon the fire, till he were wholly consumed, and burnt
to ashes; for so much the word holocaustum signifies. And therefore Musculus
says upon this place, (Non simpliciter immolare filium jubetur Abraham, sed
offerre in holocaustum, hoc est, etc. Abraham is not commanded simply to
sacrifice his son, but to offer him for a burnt-offring, that is, says
Musculus, after that he has imbrued his sword in his sons blood, with his own
hands to lay his body in the fire, and when one side is burnt to turn the
other, and so to let it burn till it be consumed to ashes, which is all one, as
if his body were to be consumed to nothing. So that this is more horrible then
all the rest. For how is it possible for a father to endure, when he has
bathed his sword in his sons blood, to take him up in his arms, and to lay him
upon the Altar, to see his bowels fry and crackle in the fire, and to turn him
upside down, till every part be consumed and burnt to nothing? What death can
be imagined so horrible as this? If God had commanded Abraham, either to have
strangled or smoothered his son, yet his body (ye know) would have remained
whole, and he might have entombed him: if God had commanded him to cast him
down headlong from the top of the mountain, so that every member had been
dashed asunder, yet some part of his body would have been remaining. Nay if God
had commanded him to take his son, and cast him to the wild beasts, that they
might devour him, yet at leastwise, ye know, his bones would have been left,
and so Abraham might have had some relic of his son, but this is such a death
as does utterly consume every part of the body, and brings all to nothing. But
besides this, Abraham knew very well, that God could not away with humane
sacrifices, and therefore that Abel, Noah and the rest, had never offered the
like in any of their offerings. It is true indeed, that many years after, the
Children of Israel had learned of the Gentiles (as we see Psalm. 106) to
sacrifice their sons and their daughters to devils, Psalm. 106.37.
but therefore says David, The wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, so
that he abhorred even his own inheritance. Psalm. 106.40.
Nay this is so monstrous and abominable an act, that many of the heathen did
utterly condemn it. We read of the Carthagincans, that they were wont to
sacrifice their children to Saturn, Plutarch. in Reg. Apophth.
as thinking that this would be acceptable to their God, because they had heard
the fable, that Saturn was wont to devour his children. But therefore when
Gelo the King of Sicilia had subdued Carthage, he forbad this custom, as
thinking it monstrous, that the gods should be worshipped with such cruel
sacrifices. And therefore when Agesilaus, Plutarch. in vita Agesilai.
as Plutarch records, was admonished in a dream to sacrifice his daughter to
Diana, as Agamemnon had done, he made this answer, that he would not imitate
Agamemnons folly, but he would offer such a sacrifice as was fit for a
goddess. How then could Abraham think that God would be pleased with such a
sacrifice, and that he who is the father of mercies, and would not so much as
the death of a sinner, should delight in cruelty, and in the slaughter of
innocents? so that when God commands Abraham to sacrifice his son, here is a
further temptation then all the former, which seems not so much to impugn his
affection, as to confound his faith, in that God here seems contrary unto
himself.

And indeed beloved, the conflict which Abraham sustained in his affection, was
nothing to that which his faith sustained. For how should he believe the
promises of God concerning his son, being now commanded by God to kill him.

God had promised Abraham as we heard before, that him seed should be called in
Isaac, that he would multiply his seed, like the stars of Heaven, Genesis 26.4.
and that he would establish his Covenant with Isaac for an everlasting
Covenant, and with his feed after him. Abraham believed according to Gods
promise, that the Savior of the World should spring from his Son, and that
so all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed in him; and yet now he
commands him to sacrifice his Son, and so to burn as it were the bond of his
own salvation. For if Isaac must die, how can Abraham look for the Messiah from
him? and if no Messiah, what remains but Gods wrath and vengeance to be powered
upon all men? so that this Commandment seems quite to overthrow Gods former
promise; and yet such was Abraham's faith and obedience, that he both performed
that which God had commanded, and withal believed that which God had promised.
For howsoever it might seem as impossible to flesh and blood, that seed should
be raised from Isaac being dead, as that a Tree should budde forth, when the
root is withered, yet he knew there was nothing impossible with God; and
therefore though Isaac were wholly consumed and burnt to nothing, yet that God
was able even out of his ashes to raise up seed unto him.

Abraham here, to offer his Son in holocaustum for a burnt-Offring, so that
no part of his body may be kept, but that it must wholly be consumed and burnt
to nothing. The Doctrine that might be gathered from hence is this, That as God
makes trial of our Obedience, in that which of all other is dearest unto us so
he requires that we keep nothing thereof unto our selves; but that we dedicate
it wholly to Gods service. But I will pass this over, and come to the fourth
difficulty.

in the land of Moriah upon one of the mountains which God would show him.

Morti destinatum cito occidere misericordia genus est: It is a kind of
mercy, if a man be condemned to die, to dispatch him quickly: and the reason
is, because the punishment is much augmented through the expectation of it, the
expectation of any evil, being as ill or worse then the evil it self. But God
here, the more as it may seem to torment Abraham, Commands him not only to
Sacrifice his Son, but injoynes him a long and tedious journey before he must
do it. God might have appointed him. First, to go with his Son into the Land of
Moriah, and being come thither, then he might have told him the cause of his
coming. But first he commands him to sacrifice his Son, and then sends him to
the place where he must perform the same: and what is the Reason but only
this, as Origin says, ut dum ambulat, dum iter agit, per totam viam
cogitationibus discerpatur, that all the while he is traveling with his Son,
he might ruminate upon that which he went about, and be confounded in a manner
with the remembrance of it.

Now concerning this place where Abraham was appointed to sacrifice his Son,
some of the Jews report, that Cain and Abel had offered their offerings upon
the same Mountain. St. Jerome writes, that he had heard it for certain of some
ancient Jews, that Isaac was offered in the very same place, where afterward
our Savior Christ was crucified. St. Augustine adds that he had heard it
reported, that Christ was crucified in the very same place where Adam had been
buried, and therefore that it was called Calvaria locus, the place of a dead
man's skull, quia caput humani generis ibi dicitur esse sepultum, because the
head of mankind lies there buried The Saracens (who will needs borrow their
name from Sarah, though they came of Hagar) to make it more profitable that
they sprang from Isaac, they feign that the land of Moriah is a part of their
Country, and therefore when any stranger comes to their City of Mecha to see
Mahomets Sepulcher, hard by the City, they do show him the Mountain, where on
Abraham as they say, did sacrifice his Son. But the truth is, that the Land
of Moriah where Isaac was to be offered, was the same which was afterward
called Jerusalem, as we may plainly gather out of the second of the Chronicles,
2 Chronicles. 3.
the third Chapter; for there it is said in the first verse, that Solomon built
the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem in Mount Moriah: So that the place where
Isaac was to be offered, was either the same, or very near to the place, where
our Savior was afterward to be crucified. And indeed it was not unfit, that
Isaac should be offered where our Savior was to suffer, because Isaac was a
type and figure of our Savior. So says St. Augustine, Abraham, quando filium
suum obtulit, typum habuit Dei Patris, Isaac typum gessit Domini Salvatoris.
Abraham when he offered his Son represented God the Father, Isaac when he was
offered represented our Savior the Son of God. For many things which wore
shadowed forth in Isaac, were afterward verefied in our Savior Christ. As the
promises of God unto Abraham concerning his Son, were often renewed, and his
birth foretold; so were the promises and the birth of the Messiah. As Isaacs
was named before he was borne, so was also Christ. As Isaacs Birth was strange
and miraculous, in regard that he was borne of Sarah, that was barren; so was
also Christ's being borne of a virgin. As Isaac was Abraham's only Son, whom he
so dearly loved; so Christ was the only begotten Son of God, in whom alone he
was well pleased. As Isaac was causeless to be put to death, so was Christ being
innocent. As Isaac bore the wood wherewith he was to be sacrificed, so Christ
bore the Tree whereon he was to be crucified. In a word, as Isaac, by yielding
himself to be offered, did testify his obedience unto his Fathe, and his Father
his wonderful love unto God: so Christ, by submitting himself to the death,
declared his wonderful obedience unto, God, and God his unspeakable love
toward us.

And indeed beloved, this is the most excellent use that can possibly be made
of this whole History; when we hear how Abraham did offer his Son, we stand
amazed at it, we wonder how it was possible for a Father to do it: And may we
not much more admire the infinite love of God unto us, in giving his only
begotten Son to be crucified for us. When we hear how Isaac yielded himself to
be bound and offered, we cannot but wonder at his strange obedience: and may we
not much more wonder at the infinite obedience of our blessed Savior, who
being equal with God, yet humbled himself and became obedient, ^ven to the
death of the Cross? Abraham when he offered his Son unto God, he did but
restore unto God that which God had given him, and he might well the rather be
moved thereunto; because God had been always so gracious to him; But when God
gave his Son to be offered for us, we were so far from having deserved any
thing at his hands, that we were his open and professed enemies. Isaac when he
yielded himself to be offered, yet he yielded himself into his Fathers hands,
who was to present him for a sweet savor unto the Lord; and so to put him to a
kind of death, which of all other might seen the most glorious: But Christ
when he yielded himself to be offered, he yielded himself into the hands of his
persecutors, who he knew would not only put him to the most ignominious death;
but for his further vexation, even deride him in his torments: When Abraham was
to sacrifice his only Son, God was so moved with compassion and pity, that
instead of his Son he provided a Ram; Indeed it was fitter that a Ram
should dye, if the death of a Ram might ransom a Son: But when Christ was
to be offered the case was altered; the Ram was spared, and the Son was
sacrificed; Nay, the Son was therefore sacrificed, that the Ram might be
spared.

Read over all the Histories of Heathen Authors, examine their writings,
search out all their antiquities, and see if there were ever the like example
of love: For a man to die for his friend it is no small matter, and but few
have done it; but if one should offer to dye for a stranger we would wonder at
it; O but for a man to dye for his enemy, nay, the Son of God to come down
from Heaven, even from his Fathers bosom, to dye a most accursed death for his
enemy; this is that love of God which passes all understanding, and can never
be sufficiently expressed either by men or Angels.

And yet, that we may in some measure conceive a little better of this infinite
Love of God; suppose with thy self, that thou being a poor and a silly
creature, should live under the Dominion of some mighty Emperor, who had
made this Law; That whosoever should be found guilty of high Treason, should be
put to the most exquisite torments that could be imagined, and that thou
afterward (having received many favors from him) should give ear
notwithstanding to some of his Nobility, and willingly join with them in
Treason against him: And being both convicted of the same, he should execute
the utmost of his fury upon his Nobility; but cast with himself how he might
save thee. And finding no other means for thy deliverance, he should give his
only beloved son, the sole Heir of his Kingdom, to suffer the must shameful
and accursed death of all other for thy ransom; who willingly taking the same
upon him, should never speak so much as one word in the behalf of his Nobility,
but only plead and sue for thee, that thou by his death might not only be
forgiven; but likewise might be made Heir of his Fathers Kingdom. What now
would thou think of his love unto thee? How would thou wonder at it? How
would thy soul be ravished when thou thoughtest upon it? Beloved, such and far
greater is the love of God unto thee, if thou can apply it. The Angels, that
were far more glorious creatures, made to attend upon God and to be in his
presence, yet God spared not them, when they had but once, and that only in
thought rebelled against him; but as for thee, though thou had often rebelled
against him; yet God has given his only begotten Son, to dye in thy room,
that thou might inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. And this was that real
sacrifice which was here prefigured by Abraham's off^ing his only Son.

And therefore, when Abraham was come to the place appointed, and had already
stretched forth his hand to have sacrificed his son, God presently forbad him;
because only the death of our blessed Savior and not Isaacs death was a price
sufficient for our redemption. But ^et we are to remember, that Abraham knew
not but that his Son should die; and therefore (no doubt) all the while that
he was traveling to the Mountain, he was distracted between faith and
affection. between his love unto God and his love to his Son; the one still
pulling him backward, and telling him what an unnatural act he went about: the
other putting him forward; because it was God that had commanded him to do it.

Abraham to go and sacrifice his Son in the land of Moriah; which was as I
told you, distant from him three days journey. We may learn from hence, That
while we are to perform any service to God, no journey ought to seem tedious
unto us; For he that commands Abraham to go so far to sacrifice his Son, he
requires of us that we refuse no labor, while we are about to perform that
which God commands us. But I will likewise pass this over, and proceed to the
last difficulty.

The last difficulty in this commandment, is in regard of the time when he
must sacrifice his Son, Take now thine only Son, namely, now when he was old
and his wife past Bearing; and therefore hopeless of having any other
children, now he must sacrifice his only Son.

We read in Herodotus, Herod, Thalia.
that when Intaphernes, one of the privy Council of King Darius, had offended
the King, the King commanded that both he and his whole family should be put to
death; but being moved with the complaints of his wife he both spared her, and
withal gave her the choice, which of them all she would choose to deliver. She
having a while deliberated upon it, resolved in the end to make choice for her
brother; and the King demanding why she sued not rather for her husband or
children, she made this answer; that though her husband or children should dye,
yet she being young might marry again, and so might have more; but if her
brother were put to death now that her parents were dead, she was sure she
should never have any other brother. If God had given Abraham a child, while
himself and Sarah, his wife had been young and had then commanded him to have
put him to death; yet his loss had been the less, in that he might have hoped
to have had more children; but they both being old when he was to sacrifice
Isaac, they could not hope for any other after him.

Fathers says Philo, when they come to be old, of all their children they make
most of their youngest; Philo lib. de Abraham.
and he gives this reason; because being old they expect no more, now nature
being spent and decayed in them. But Abraham, as I told you before, Joseph.
lib. 1. Antigen.
was a hundred year old, and Sarah was ninety before Isaac was borne, Isaac
was now (as JOSEPHUS writes) five and twenty year old, when he was to be
offered; and therefore they, being struck so far in years might well imagine,
that as Isaac was their first: so he was like to be their last that they should
have between them; So that Abraham's grief must needs be the greater in regard
of the time, when he was commanded to sacrifice his Son.

But to come more directly to the time, it is said in the former verse, that
after these things God did prove Abraham, and said unto him, Take now thine
only Son, namely, after that God (as we see in the former chapter) had had
notable experience of Abraham's obedience, by calling out Jshmael his first
begotten; now he lays a new task upon him, and far more grievous then the
former was; Now says he, Take thine only Son, as though he should have said,
I have made heretofore some trial of thine obedience in smaller matters. I
commanded thee to leave thy native Country and thou have left it; I bad thee to
cast Jshmael out of doors with his mother, and thou have done it, deest adbuc
vnum, yet there is one thing wanting, now that thou have done all this, now
thou must sacrifice thine only Son. We see then, how many trials God lays
upon Abraham, and how many difficulties are couched together in this one
trial, to be deprived of his only Son whom he so dearly loved, himself to
become his Sons executioner. to put him to so violent and horrible a death, to
undertake so long a journey to perform the same; and then to do it when himself
w^^ so old, and his wife past bearing. The least of these trials was very hard
to be overcome; yet Abraham like a Giant that rejoices to run his course, rose
up early in the morning and went about it: and having a full resolution to
sacrifice his Son, as God commanded, he concealed his purpose from his wife,
and his Servants, lest they should have hindered him from the execution of it.

That God the better to sound the hearts of his Servants, makes often trial of
their obedience; and after that one trial is past and over, he lays another
upon them for their further exercise. If any man says our Savior, will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross every day and follow me.
Luke 9.23.
Where we see two things, 1. The generality of these crosses and trials which
are laid upon us, in that every Christian must be content to bear them; If any
man Will come after me let him take up his Cross. 2. The multitude of these
trials, Let him take up his Cross every day and follow me; Every day, to show
that the trials which the faithful undergo, are many in number, and that they
come (as it were) thick and threefold one after another. Job had no sooner
heard that the Sabeans had taken away his Oxen as they were ploughing, and his
Asses as they were feeding in their places but presently there comes another
and brings him worse tidings, that the fire fell from Heaven and consumed his
Servants; and presently after, he hears worse news then the former, that
while his children were together at a banquet, the house fell upon them all so
that not one of them escaped. And this is the condition of Gods servants, many
are the trials which they are to endure and the end of one trial is many
times but the beginning of another; For we serve not God with this condition,
that after he has laid one trial upon us, and we have borne the same, we
should crave as it were a pasport, and seek to be discharged from any-further
service; but whatsoever it is that God requires at our hands, and how often
soever; yet we must be ready with Abraham to perform obedience.

The comfort is this, that though the trials which God lays upon us be never
so many; yet God will enable us to bear the same. 1 Cor. 10.
For God is faithful, says the Apostle, and will not suffer us to be tempted
above our power; but will give an issue with the temptation that we may be able
to bear it: and when we have borne it, he has promised to reward us, and that
infinitely for it. Blessed is the man says Saint James, James 1.12.
that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of
Life, which the Lord has promised to them that Love him.

FINIS.
The Second SERMON.
MAT. 13.23. But he that received Seed into good ground, is he that hears the
Word and understands it: which also hears fruit; and brings forth some an
hundred some sixty some thirty.


THese words are the conclusion of an excellent Parable, Coherence.
which our Savior did first propound to the People, and afterward expound
unto his Disciples. Wherein the word of God is resembled to seed, The Preacher
of the Word to the Sower of Seed, and the Hearer of the Word, to the ground
whereon the Seed is sowed. The ground proportionable to the diversity of
Hearers, is distinguished by our Savior into four several kinds; whereof
three are unprofitable, and one only fruitful, To note unto us that we need
be very careful, how we hear the Word; considering that the greatest part of
Hearers do but hear in vain as three parts of the ground were fruitless and
barren, where the seed was sown, and only one part was fruitful and good,
and this is that ground which is here described: wherein we may observe these
two things.

First, The means of a good ground, And Secondly, the signs of a good ground.

The means of a good ground are two. First, the receiving of Seed, or the
hearing of the Word. And Secondly, the receiving in of the Seed, or the
understanding of the Word: But he that received Seed into good ground, is he
that hears the Word and understands it. The signs of a good ground are
likewise two.

First, The bearing and bringing forth fruit, which also bears fruit and brings
forth.

Secondly, The quantity of fruit which it brings forth, Some an hundred, some
sixty, some thirty.

And these are the several parts of these words, whereof God willing, I will
speak in order, And first, of the first means of a good ground, the receiving
of seed, or the hearing of the Word.

The Word of God is resembled to diverse things in diverse respects. Psalm. 19.10.
Sometime to the most refined gold, and that for the perfection and purity of
it, Hebr. 4.12.
sometime to a sharp two-edged Sword, and that for the power and efficacy of
it: sometime to a treasure hid in the field, Mat. 13.44.
and that for the value and excellency of it: and sometime to bread, to rain,
to seed, and that for the use and necessity of it. For seed is no more
necessary to make the earth fructify and give her increase, then the seed of
Gods Word to make us fruitful in all good Works, Ye know, if the Earth do not
give her increase, there follows a Famine; if seed be wanting, and the Earth
not sown, it cannot give her increase: And thus where the seed of Gods Word is
wanting, there follows a dearth of all spiritual graces.

And therefore as we read Genesis 47. of a dearth or famine for want of seed: Genesis
47.19. Amos. 8.11. Mat. 4.4.
so likewise we read Amos 8. of a dearth or famine for want of the Word; for
man cannot live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. God is able indeed to make us fruitful, without the preaching of
the word, as he made the Earth fruitful at the first Creation, Genesis 2.5.
without the sowing of seed: he is able to save us when his word is wanting by
some other means, as he preserved the Israelites with Manna from Heaven, when
they had not the ordinary means of tillage; but the ordinary means to make
the Earth fruitful, is the sowing of Seed, and the ordinary means to make us
fruitful, is the preaching of the Word. And therefore in those places where
the People are not taught, or the word is neglected, we may see them abound in
superstition and ignorance, and all the unfruitful works of darkness, even as
Solomon passing by the field of the sluggard, he saw it all over grown with
thorns and nettles; Prove. 24.30.31
whereas on the contrary, where the seed of Gods word has been sown and
received, John 4.35. Phil. 1.11.
we may see the Regions even white unto Harvest, and filled as the Apostle
speaks with the fruits of righteousness.

Therefore David describing the godly man. First brings him in meditating upon
the Law of God, Psalm. 1.
and then bringing forth fruit in due season: as our Savior here describing
the good ground, first makes mention of the receiving of seed, and then of the
bearing and bringing forth fruit. So that the first means of a good ground, is
the receiving of seed or the hearing of the word.

And from hence we may gather many profitable instructions, partly concerning
the Preachers of the Word, the Sowers of this Seed; and partly concerning the
Hearers of the Word, the ground that receives it.

God is resembled to Seed, that therefore he omit no fit opportunity of
preaching the Word.

The Sower ye know when Seed-time comes, he lays all other business
whatsoever aside, and betakes himself wholly to the sowing of his ground, as
knowing that there is a time to sow, and a time to reap. First to sow and
then to reap, and never any reaping unless there have been sowing. And thus we
must omit no fit opportunity of preaching, nay we must be instant in season and
out of season, expecting no Harvest where the seed of Gods Word has not first
been sown. The less pains the Husbandman takes with his ground, and the
thinner he sowes it, the thinner the Corn must needs come up, and he cannot
but expect the less fruit of it. And thus the less pains we take with our
auditors, the less we instruct them, we cannot but expect the less fruit of
them. And therefore in the morning (says the Preacher) sow thy Seed, Eccles.
iii. 6.
and in the evening withhold not thy hand.

Secondly, Seeing the word is resembled to Seed, that therefore we sow nothing
but the Seed of Gods word. The Sower ye know before he sowes his Seed, he
will first sift and vvinnovv it, he will cleanse it at home before he come
into the field, and he will take away the chafe and the refuse from it. And
thus before we come into the Pulpit, we must examine the Doctrine that we
are to deliver, we must weigh and premeditate what we are to speak, that
nothing pass from us but the pure Word of God.

In the 23. of Jeremy, the 28. verse, The Prophet (says God) that has my
Word, let him speak my Word faithfully, what is the Chafe to the Wheat says
the Lord?

Lastly, Seeing the Word is resembled to Seed, it shows to what end we are to
preach the Word: namely, for the benefit of those that hear it. The Sour ye
know, when he sowes his Seed, he propounds no other end to himself but this,
that he may make the Earth fructify and give her increase: and thus the end of
our preaching must be the good of our Auditors, not to show learning, wit or
eloquence, or to purchase credit and reputation to our selves, but to make them
fruitful in good works. Therefore the Sower to make his ground the more
fruitful, he first considers the nature of his ground, and sowes it with that
Seed which is fittest for it, every soil being not fit for every seed; but one
for Barley, another for Wheat: and thus, that our preaching may be the more
profitable; we must apply our selves to the quality of our hearers, and
consider what Doctrine is fittest for them: We speak wisdom, says the Apostle,
among them that are perfect; but to you, says he, that are Babes in Christ,
(...) Cor. 2.6.
I gave milk to drink and not meat, for you were not able to bear it. And thus
much in a Word for the Sower of this Seed.

Secondly, for the ground that receives this seed, the hearer of the Word:
Seeing the hearing of the Word is the receiving of seed, therefore we are first
to be fitted and prepared before we hear the Word. The ground ye know before it
be sown, it must be first plowed and broken up; otherwise it is not fit to
receive the seed. And thus before we hear the Word, we must break up (as the
Prophet speaks) the follow ground of our hearts, Jer. 4.3.
otherwise we are not fit to hear the Word. And indeed the reason, why the seed
of Gods Word is less fruitful, in some then it is in others, is because they
are not fitted and prepared alike to hear the word. The seed which fell before
by the highway side, and the seed which fell upon the stony ground, as
likewise the seed which fell among thorns, the seed was all alike, and
altogether as good, as the seed which fell here into good ground, and the sower
was the same that sowed the seed: yet in the one it became fruitful, and in
none of the other: and what is the reason? no difference in the sower, no
difference in the seed, but only in the ground, the ground being not fitted and
disposed alike to receive the seed. And thus where the seed of Gods Word is
sown, though the Preacher and Doctrine be both the same, yet it is fruitful in
one, and not in another, and not by any defect in the Word, or him that
delivers it, but by default of the hearer, as being not fitly disposed and
prepared to hear the Word. Therefore when the people were to hear the Law, God
commanded Moses Exodus 19. to sanctify the people three days before, Exodus
19.10.11.
that they might be the better prepared to hear it. If we have but a field or
piece of ground of our own to be sown with seed, we will first trim and
dress it, we will pick out the stones, and root up the weeds, before we sow
any seed in it. So careful we are that our seed be not lost, how careful
(beloved) then ought we to be that Gods Seed be not lost? and therefore not to
harden our hearts if we will hear his voice; but to come with prepared and
sanctified affections, Psalm. 95.7.8.
that we may be the more fit to receive his Word.

Secondly, Seeing the hearing of the word is the receiving of seed, therefore
we are to be diligent in hearing the word. Seed, though it be necessary to make
the earth fructify, yet it has not this virtue, unless it be sown, and the
earth receive it; while it lies in our barns, or is laid up in our Garners, it
yields no increase, and has not any power to make the earth fruitful. And
thus it is likewise with the Seed of Gods word, though it be the means to make
us fruitful in the works of righteousness, yet it has not this virtue, before
it be heard and received of us, while it lies in our houses, or is locked up in
our Libraries, it has no such effect, but by hearing thereof it becomes
fruitful in us. For the word must first take root in the heart before it can
ftuctifie, it cannot come into the heart but by the ear, the ear being as it
were the door where the word must enter. Therefore when Moses Deuteronomy. 5. was to
repeat the Law unto the people, to show them how they were to receive the Law,
he begins the same with Hear O Israel. And therefore when Solomon will teach us
wisdom and understanding, Deuteronomy. 5.1.
he first knocks as it were at the door where wisdom must enter, Prove. 1.^8.
and cries Hearken my Son. The Kings daughter, Psalm. ^45.10.13.
the Spouse of Christ, before she become all glorious within, must first
hearken and consider and incline her ear. And the sheep of Christ's fold, John
10.4.
must first hear his voice before they can follow him. If either with the Adder
we stop our ears, and refuse to hear the voice of the charmer, Psalm. 58.4.5.
or fall asleep with Eutichus, Acts 20.9.
when we are come into the Church, or be busied with Martha about other
matters, Luke. 10.4.
no marvel though the word be not fruitful in us. For as the ground cannot
fructify without the receiving of seed, no more can we without the hearing of
the word.

Lastly, Seeing the hearing of the word is the receiving of seed, it shows us
from whence the hearing of the word becomes fruitful in us, not from any
virtue that we have in our selves, but from Gods blessing; as the ground which
is sown cannot bring forth fruit, but by the influence and virtue which it
receives from heaven. The ground, ye know, when it has been sown with seed,
must have the rain from heaven to moisten it, it must have the heat of the Sun
to cherish it, otherwise it becomes fruitless, and yields no increase. And
thus unless God give a blessing to his word, unless he mollify our hearts,
and illuminate our minds, the word which we have heard cannot fructify in us.
For Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but it is God that must give the
increase. And therefore as the ground when it has been sown with seed, if it
be but a while without the rain, it will thirst after it, it will open as it
were the mouth, and gape toward heaven, with a longing desire to be refresht
with it: and when the blade comes forth, it will seem even to droop, and to
hang down the head, till the Sun do strengthen it. So must we be affected when
we have heard the word, we must long for a blessing from heaven upon it; we
must pray unto God for the assistance of his Spirit, and we must thirst after
grace, even as the heart does bray after the rivers of water, Psalm. 42.1
and as the dry land does thirst after rain in the drought of Summer. And thus
much for the first means of a good ground, the receiving of seed, or the
hearing of the word.

The second means of a good ground, is the receiving in of the seed, or the
understanding of the word.

The ground though seed be sown upon it, yet if the seed stay there, and go no
further, and if the ground recieve not the seed into it, it must needs be
fruitless. And thus though we hear the word of God, yet unless it do pierce
further then the outward ear, unless what we hear with our ears, we
understand with our hearts, the seed of Gods Word cannot fructify in us. And
therefore Saint James by an other like metaphor wills us to receive ((...)) the
engrafted Word; to note unto us, James 1.21.
the Word must likewise be engrafted in the heart like a sience in a stock,
before it can bear and bring forth fruit. The seed which fell before upon the
stony ground, soon withered away, and became fruitless, and our Savior gives
this as the reason of it, because it had no root. For though we hear the word
never so often, yet till the understanding be informed, and the heart affected,
our superficial hearing will profit us nothing. Therefore when Saint Paul did
preach at Philippi, and converted Lydia, it is said there, that God opened her
heart, so that she attended unto that which he spoke. Acts 16.14.
And when our Savior instructed his Disciples out of the Law and the prophets,
it is said there, that he opened their understanding that they might understand
the Scriptures. Luke 24^45.
The Scripture is as it were a letter, sent down from heaven, wherein God has
revealed his will unto man, the hearing and reading whereof are singular means
to instruct us in righteousness, but neither of them sufficient, unless we
understand what we hear and read. Therefore our Savior requires understanding
to be joined with hearing, Mark 7.14.
Hear (says. he) and understand. Acts 8.30.
And therefore Philip requires understanding to be joined with reading, Legere
and non intelligere negligire est, imo neo legere est.
Understand thou (says he) what thou read? as if reading were to no
purpose without understanding. For the end why we must hear and read the word,
is that we may bring forth the fruit thereof, by endeavoring to conform our
lives unto it, which we can never do unless we understand it, no more then the
ground which is sown can bring forth fruit unless it receive the seed into
it. And therefore our Savior makes the second means of a good ground the
understanding of the word.

Rome, in holding it unlawful to have the Scriptures translated into the
vulgar tongue, and will not suffer the people to read the Scriptures, whereby
they might be brought to the understanding of them. But if the Scriptures be
the covenant which God has made with his people, then must they not know what
is contained in the Covenant? If the Scriptures be writ (even as Saint Paul
tells us) for our learning, Romans 15.4.
then must we not know and understand what is written? And if the Scriptures be
written as Saint John tells us, John 20.31.
that we might believe, and by believing have life everlasting, then that we
may know what we are to believe, must we not necessarily know what is written?
To what end were the Apostles so miraculously furnished with the gift of
tongues, John 5.39.
but that all might come to the knowledge of the truth revealed in the word,
while every one heard it in his own language? To what end are all commanded to
search the Scriptures, if they may not be translated into the vulgar tongue,
that the people may read and understand them? Acts 17.11.
we see, the Bereans are commended in the Acts for examining the Doctrine of
Saint Paul by the Scriptures: we see when our Savior did preach to the people,
he both preached and read the Text in a known language: Luke 4.
and we see that the Jews were commanded by God to write his Laws upon the
gates of their houses, Dent. 6.7.
to teach them their children, and to talk thereof in their ordinary
conference, and therefore if they were to be so skillful in the Scripture, then
much more should we be now in the light of the Gospel, of whom God requires a
greater measure of knowledge.

Minister ought to preach as plainly as he can, and to do his best endeavor to
speak so perspicuously, that the simplest in his auditorie may understand him.
God promises this as a blessing to his Church. Jer. 3.15. that he will give
them pastors according to his own heart, which shall feed them with knowledge
and understanding: and therefore they are to speak to the capacity of their
auditorie, that they may the more readily conceive their Doctrine: Ministers in
the Scripture are called Interpreters. Now it is the part of an Interpreter,
Job. 33.23.
to open and explain the sense and meaning, to speak to the understanding of
those that hear him, that he may be understood whom he does interpret.

And thus the Minister that is Gods interpreter, is to reveal and explain his
Will, to make known with St Paul the Mystery of the Gospel, and with John the
Baptist, Ephesians. 6.19. Luke 1.77 Mat. 5.14.
to give knowledge of Salvation unto his People. Ministers are called The Light
of the World; now it is the property of light wheresoever it comes to expel
darkness, and to make things apparent and manifest to the light. And thus the
Minister that is the light of the People, is to remove ignorance out of the
minds of his Auditors, and so to explain Gods Word unto them, that they may be
filled (as the Apostle speaks) with the knowledge of his will, Ephesians. 1.19.
inall wisdom and spiritual understanding.

Scripture, you shall have them as speechless as the guest in the Gospel, Mat.
22.^ 1 Cor. 14.20. 1 Pet. 3.15.
you shall find them to be Children in understanding, and not able to give a
reason of the hope that is in them. And what is the reason? because they take
no delight in the Word, they regard not to have any knowledge in it. But were
they as careful for the good of their souls, as for their worldly affairs,
they would be more skillful in the Word of God, and not perish as they do for
want of knowledge. I have longed says David for thy Salvation O Lord, Psalm.
109.174.
and thy Law is my delight. He that does long to be saved like David, he will
use the means to attain unto it, he will take delight in the word of God, he
will meditate in it, and rather then he will want it, with the Merchant in the
Gospel, he will sell all that he has for the purchase of it. Mat. 13.46.
For this is that one thing that is necessary, as Christ told Martha; and
therefore it is compared to those things which are the most necessary of all
other. Luke 10.42.
Thus it is sometime compared unto food: what can there be named so necessary as
food, and what so intolerable as the want of it? for a man will suffer any thing
rather then famine. Ye know, when there was a famine among the Egyptans, how
they parted with all that they had for food. First with their money, then with
their (attell; in the end they sold their Lands and their bodies for bread, Yet
food is no more necessary for the preservation of the Body, then the word of
God for the preservation of the soul: for as the body cannot live without the
natural food, no more can the soul without the spiritual food, which is the
word of God; and therefore we ought to hunger and thirst after it, and to
desire it as earnestly, as one that is hungry desires food. ^ Pet. 2.2.
As newborn Babes, says the Apostle, desire the sincere milk of the Word,
that ye may grow thereby. Young Children of all other are the most impatient of
hunger, they must presently have the dugge, or they will cry for it, they
cannot abide to be long without it, but ever and anon they must be fed again.
And thus says the Apostle, should we be desirous of the milk of the Word, like
newborn Babes, we should long after it, and not endure to be long without it.
And therefore such are in a miserable case, who by rejecting this spiritual
food, do starve and famish their own souls. Physicians say, that when a man's
appetite refuses meat, and cannot away with it, it is a sign of death, and a
manifest token that he cannot live long. Psalm. 107.18.
And therefore the Prophet David says to this purpose. Their soul abhors
all manner of meat, and they draw near unto the Gates of death.

And surely when a man is once come to this pass, that he will not suffer
wholesome Doctrine, but that the word of God which is the food of the soul,
begins to be irksome and unsavory unto him; then questionless his soul is in
a desperate case, it is even pining away as it were in a Consumption.

Sometime again the word is called the Sword of the spirit. Ephesians. 6.17.
Now what is more necessary for a Soldier in the field, then the use of a
Sword? Our life is a Warfare upon the Earth, as Job says, and we are all
Soldiers, having given up our names at the time of our Baptism to Christ
Jesus our Captain, to fight the Lords Battles: the enemy with whom we are to
encounter, is the Prince of darkness with all his forces, and Gods word is the
weapon which we are to use against them. How then shall our hands be able to
war, and our fingers to fight, if we have no knowledge in the word of God,
and have no skill how to handle the sword of the spirit? And thus to omit many
other particulars, the word as ye see here is resembled to seed; what is so
necessary to make the Earth fructify as the receiving of seed? The best soil
that is, though it be never so fertile in its own nature, yet if it receive not
the seed into it, it must needs be unfruitful. And thus the best man that is,
though he be never so furnished with all natural parts; yet till the seed of
Gods word have been sown in his heart, he can never be fruitful in the works
of righteousness. And therefore if we be Gods Husbandry, as St. Paul calls us.
1 Cor. 5.9. Colos. 3.16.
Let us receive this seed into the furrows of our hearts, and suffer Gods word
to dwell plenteously in us.

And thus much for the means of a good ground, the receiving of seed or the
hearing of the word, and the receiving in of the seed or the understanding of
the Word.

Signs of a good ground.
I come now to the signs of a good ground, and first that it bea^es and brings
forth fruit.

As the means whereof we have already heard, will teach us how we may become
this good ground, if as yet we be not; so the signs will teach us whether we
be this good ground or no. For like as the ground when it has been sown with
seed, it will show it self by the fruit thereof, whether it be a fertile or a
barren soil; so when a man has been taught and instructed in the word, he
will show by the fruits which he brings forth, whether he be a profitable or a
fruitless hearer.

The ground therefore when it has been sown, it first cease to bring forth
thorns and briars, and is not so plentiful in thistles and weeds as it was
before. And thus when a man has been instructed in the word, if he be a
profitable hearer thereof, the word will have this operation in him, that first
he will relinquish his former vices, and will not be so ready to commit any
evil as he was before. Psalm. 119. ii.
I have hid, says David, thy word in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee. So that this is one fruit and effect of the word, that it will make a man
leave and forsake sin.

If heretofore thou have been given to swearing, yet when this seed of the word
has been sown in thy heart, Jer. 23.10. Exodus 20.7.
That because of Oaths the Land shall mourn, and that God will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain, this will cause thee to make a
Conscience of Oaths, and will root out this weed of unnecessary swearing.

If heretofore thou have slandered and defamed thy Neighbor, and wronged him
in his good name and reputation; yet when this seed of the word has been sown
in thy heart, That a false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks
lies shall not escape: Prove. 19.5.
this will root out this weed of slander and detraction.

In a word, what sin soever thou have committed heretofore, yet when the seed
of Gods word has been sown in thy heart, it will root it out, and cause thee
to leave it.

Secondly, The ground when it has been sown with seed, it not only leaves
bringing forth evil fruit, but likewise it brings forth good fruit; it not
only cease from bringing forth weeds, but it brings forth, Corn for the
use of man.

And thus he that is a profitable hearer of the word, he will not only
mortify the deeds of the flesh, but he will likewise bring forth the fruits
of the spirit, he will not only leave evil, but he will do good. Titus 2. ii.
The grace of God, says the Apostle, which brings salvation, has appeared
unto all men, teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts (there is the
former fruit of the word, the leaving of evil) and to live soberly, righteously
and godly in this present world (there is the other, the doing of good.) Gods
word herein being like a sweet perfume, which not only takes away the evil
sent, but leaves a sweet sent in the room of it.

If heretofore thou have had an overweening conceit of thy self, and have been
possessed with pride and arrogancy, yet when the seed of Gods word has taken
root in thy heart, it will not only dispossess and root out pride, but in the
room thereof it will place humility: So that thou will be little in thine own
eyes, and think thy self with St. Paul the least of all others. If heretofore
thou have lived in hatred and enmity, yet when the seed of Gods word has taken
root in thy heart, it will not only remove and root out hatred, but in the
room thereof it will place charity: So that thou will bless them that curse
thee, thou will do good to those that hate thee, and thou will pray with St.
Steven for them that persecute thee. Acts 7.60.
And thus in a word, wheresoever this seed has taken root, it will not only
weed out the former vices, but it will place in their room the contrary virtues.

Thirdly. The ground when it has been sown with seed, as it leaves bringing
forth evil fruit, and brings forth that which is good, so it deferrs not the
bringing forth fruit, but brings forth the same at the expected time. And thus
he that is a profitable hearer of the word, as he will abstain from that which
is evil, and do that which is good: So he will not defer the doing thereof, but
in a seasonable time he will bring forth the fruits which are required of him.
When occasion is offered him of doing any good, whether such as concerns him
after a more general manner, as he is a Christian, or more particularly in
regard of his calling, he will take the opportunity, and bring forth his fruit
in a seasonable time. If God have increased thy wealth and substance, and given
thee sufficient, not only for thy self, but for the relief of others; when
thou see the hungry that would be glad of the Crumbs that fall from thy Table,
when thou see the naked and the stranger that want Clothing and Harbor, or
any that are in any want and necessity, then thou have opportunity to do good,
and if thon be this good ground which is here mentioned, then thou will bring
forth the fruits of mercy.

If God have given thee the tongue of the learned, and enabled thee to exhort
with wholesome Doctrine, and to convince the gainsayers of it, when thou see
thy Brother ready to fall into error, and to make shipwreck of faith and a
good Conscience, then thou have opportunity to do good, and if thou be this
ground which is here mentioned, then thou will bring forth the fruits of
knowledge. If God have advanced thee to the place of Authority, and committed
into thy hand the sword of justice, when thou see the poor to be deprived of
hi^ right, and the innocent oppressed; when thou see iniquity to abound in the
Land, and robbery and violence in all quarters, then thou have opportunity to
do good, and if thou be this good ground which is here mentioned, then thou will bring forth the fruits of justice.

The ground indeed when it has been sown, yet before it do bear and bring
forth fruit, it shall have many impediments to hinder the grows and increase
thereof; it must undergo many storms and tempests, many frosts in winter,
much scorching in Summer; but yet if it be a good and a fertile soil, it will
overcome them all, and bring forth fruit at the time expected.

And thus when the seed of Gods word has taken root in thy heart; yet before
thou can bring forth the fruit thereof: thou shall meet indeed with many lets
and hindrances, partly from thine own unruly affections, and partly from
others; but yet if thou be this good ground which is here mentioned, thou will
overcome them all, and with the Tree that is described in the first Psalm,
Thou will bring forth fruit in due season.

To draw then to a conclusion of this first sign, if fruitfulness be a sign
of a good ground, then that we may not deceive our selves, Jam. 1.22.2 Cor. 6.1.
let us not only be hearers of the word, but doers of it; let us not receive
the grace of God in vain, but when the seed of Gods word has been sown in our
hearts. Let us be careful to practice the same, and to bring forth the fruits
thereof in our lives. We would count him ye know a very bad Husband, who when
his ground has been sown with seed, should turn in his swine to root it up,
or when it is come forth and begins to ripen, should let in his Beasts to
spoil and devour it; what then beloved may we think of our selves, if when we
have been partakers of the word of God, we give way to our affections, and
suffer the delights of the world, or the lusts of the flesh, to hinder this
seed from fructifying in us.

And thus much for the first sign of a good ground, that it brings forth
fruit. I come now unto the second, the quantity of fruit which it brings forth,
some an hundred, some sixty, some thirty.

The ground if it be good, 2. Siga^.
it is not only fruit full when it has bin sown, but it yields as ye see, a
very great increase, every s^ed at the least bearing thirty for one.

And thus he that is a profitable hearer of the word, he is not only fruitful
in the works of righteousness, but he brings forth the same in great abundance.
I, says our Savior Christ, am the vine, and ye are the branches, he that
abides in me and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. John 15.5.
So that it is not enough to be fruitful, unless we be fruitful in some good
measure. And now that we know what are the signs of a good ground, it
remains, that we try and examine our selves, whether we be this good ground or
no. You will say, I have gotten this good, by hearing the word, that now when I
hear it, I hear it willingly, I take delight in hearing it, is not this a
good sign? surely this is but a good beginning; for thou may hear the word,
and that with delight, and yet be but an hypocrite; for so did Herod, he heard
John the Baptist, and he heard him gladly, and yet all the world knows what
Herod was. Mark 6.
You will say again, but I am gone further then so, for I do not only hear the
word, and that with delight; but I have left many sins since I have heard the
word; and is not this a good sign? surely this likewise is but a good
beginning; for first, it is not enough to leave many sins, unless thou
endeavor to leave all: otherwise, God that for one sin of pride cast the
Angels out of Heaven, for one disobedience thrust Adam out of Paradise, and for
one only lie, showed his judgment on Ananias, will likewise reject thee for
any one sin, if thou take delight to continue in the same Secondly, as it is
not enough to leave many sins, unless thou endeavor to leave all. So this is
not sufficient, unless as thou leave evil, so thou do good. For as that is not
to be counted a good ground, which only leaves bringing forth evil fruit,
except it likewise bring forth good fruit: So God will not repute him for a
good man, who only leaves evil, but does no good.

The fruitless Fig Tree was cursed by our Savior not because it bore evil
fruit, but because it forbore to bring forth good fruit.

The unprofitable Servant is condemned in the Gospel, not because he did evil
with his Talent; for he only hid it; but because he did not do good therewith,
he did not employ it. In a word, to those whom our Savior places at his left
hand at the day of judgment, he gives not this Reason; for when I was hungry,
ye took away my meat, when I was a stranger, ye took away my lodging. But
says he, when I was hungry, ye did not give me to eat; and when I was a
stranger, ye did not provide me Harbor. So that it is not enough for thee to
leave evil, except thou likewise do good. You will say again, but I am gone
further then the leaving of evil since I have heard the word; for I have done
good. Come therefore unto the second sign of a good ground and see whether
thou have brought forth fruit, according to that measure which is here
mentioned. Is thy knowledge answerable to that which has been taught thee?
have thou brought forth the fruits of Faith and obedience, according to that
measure of seed which thou have received, and proportionable to the pains
which have been taken with thee? You will say, this is a hard saying; for who
is able to do the same? Know therefore for thy comfort, that if thou bring but
forth fruit in some good measure, and if thou do but thy best endeavor to be
more and more fruitful, God will accept of thy good endeavor: and though thou
be not so fruitful as some others are, yet this may be thy comfort, that God
does as well accept him for fruitful that brings forth thirty, as he does him
that brings forth an hundred. And like as the Husbandman when he reapes his
Corn, he will not refuse and pass by those ears, which are not so full as
the rest are, but will carry them all into the barn together: So God will not
reject our imperfect obedience, but when he shall gather his Saints together,
he will bring us all to those heavenly mansions, whither Christ is gone before
to provide them for us.

FINIS.
The Third SERMON.
LUKE 19.8. Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, etc.


IT was the prophecy of Isaiah, That the eyes of the blind should be opened at
the coming of the Messiah; Isa. 35.5.
which words of the Prophet are to be understood, both of those that were
corporally and spiritually blind; Namely, that they who were outwardly blind,
should be restored to their sense of seeing; and that they who were inwardly or
spiritually blind, should be lightened in their mind and understanding. And this
prophecy of Isaiah was here fulfilled by our Savior, by two notable miracles
which he wrought immediately one after the other; the one in the end of the
former Chapter, where he miraculously cured a blind-man: the other in the
beginning of this Chapter, where he wrought a more miraculous cure, in the
sudden conversion of a sinful Publican; thereby to teach us, that he indeed
is that skillfull Physician, that cures both our corporal and spiritual
diseases. He whom he cured before was a poor beggar, he whom he converted here
was a rich Publican, thereby to teach us, that of what condition soever they be
that do come unto him; whether they be rich or poor, he will not reject them.

Now concerning this miracle that is wrought here by our Savior; it is the
more accurately set down by this Evangelast; because it is not mentioned by any
other. And therefore for our better understanding thereof, 1. He sets down the
place where this miracle was wrought. 2. The party upon whom it was wrought.
3. The manner how it was wrought. And lastly, The fruits and effects of it.


The place where this miracle was wrought, was, as we see in the first verse,
the City of Jericho; a City which was destroyed by Joshua, Josh. 6.21. and
afterward re-edified by Hiel, 1 Kings 16. When Joshua came to Jericho, he came
with an Army, he wasted the City and destroyed the Inhabitants which were
grievous sinners; but when Christ came to Jericho, though no doubt, there were
as grievous sinners in the City as there were before; yet he came not as Joshua
did, to destroy them, but he came in mercy to convert and save them.

The party upon whom this miracle was wrought, is set down by the Evangelist in
the second verse, when we find him described diverse ways.

1. By his name, he was called Zacheus. 2. By his place or office, he was the
chief receiver of the Tribute or the chief among the Publicans. 3. By his
Estate and condition, that he was a rich man.
The manner how his conversion was wrought, is set down by the Evangelist in
the 4 verses following. Where first we see that Zacheus had a desire to see
Christ, in the third verse.

Secondly, he uses the means to see him, in the fourth ver. For when he
perceived that he could not see Christ, by reason of the preasse of the people
that flocked about him, Zacheus ran before them, and climed up into a tree
where Christ should pass by, that so he might see him.

Thirdly, Christ's calling of him in the 5. verse; For Christ understanding what
an earnest desire Zacheus had to him, he calls him down, and offers himself not
only to be seen, but to be entertained by him. Zacheus, (says he) Come down,
for to day I must abide at thy house.

Lastly. His joyful receiving and entertaining of Christ, in the sixth verse;
for Christ had no sooner called him down; but he came down hastily, says the
Evangelist, and received him joyfully.

The fruits and effects of his miraculous conversion, are set down here in this
eighth verse: and they are two, his mercy in giving, and his justice in making
restitution; his mercy in giving, in the words of my Text, Behold Lord, the
half of my goods I give to the poor. His justice in making restitution, in the
next words following, And if I have taken (says he) from any man by false
accusation, I restore him fourfold. In the former we may observe these four
things.

First, The giver, or who it is that gives this gift, Zacheus, a rich Publican,
I give.

Secondly, The gift it self, or what he gives, I give (says he) the half of
my goods: he gives of his own, and not of other men's goods, and he gives
bountifully of his own: for though he be rich, yet he gives the half of his
goods.

Thirdly, The persons to whom he gives them, I give (says he) the half of my
goods to the poor, not to his kindred or friends that love him, nor to the rich
that are able to requite him, but he gives his goods to the poor that want them.

And fourthly, The time when he gives them to the poor: he gives them presently
without any delay, he gives them not upon his deathbed, or when he lies a
dying, but he gives them now in the time of his health, while ^^^ight have
still enjoyed them, Behold Lord (says he) the (...) of my Goods I give to the
poor. And these are the several parts of these words, whereof, God willing, I
will speak in order, and first of the giver, I give.

Who he was that gave this gift, we see, as I said, The Giver.
in the second verse. Where first the Evangelist sets down his name, because he
is to speak of his conversion, and because it makes for his commendation which
he is to speak of him. For it is the wisdom of the Evangelist, when he
mentions any matter that tends to their disgrace of whom it is spoken, Parcere
personis dicere de vitiis, to speak of their vices, but to conceal their names.
Thus speaking of the pride of the Pharisees, Luke 18.9. yet their names are
concealed that they might not be disgraced. He spoke (says the Evangelist)
this parable against certain that trusted in themselves, and despised others;
He spoke (says he) against certain, but he does not name them. Thus speaking
of the rich glutton, Luke 16.19. that was tormented in head for being
unmerciful, he spares his name because he would not defame him. There was
(says he) a certain rich man: but who he was, he does not name, but presently
after speaking of the beggar, that was carried by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom, because this made for his commendation he sets down his name; And there
was (says he) a certain beggar named Lazarus. And thus the Evangelist speaks
of Mary Magdalene, Luke 7.37. A certain woman, says he, in the City which was
a sinner. Because he touches the looseness of her life, and calls her a
sinner, therefore he purposely conceales her name, as unwilling to defame her,
by making her known; but presently after in the next Chapter, speaking of her
following of Christ, and ministering unto him, because this made for her
commendation, he sets down her name, and calls her Mary Magdalene. Which may
teach us this lesson, That we must neither maliciously make a man's name known,
when we mention any matter that may disgrace him, nor yet enviously suppress
and conceal a man's name in a matter that tends to his just commendation. As
because it was commendable which Zacheus here did, the Evangelist names him.
And as he describes him by his name, so by his place or office, that he was the
chief re^^^r of the tribute, or the chief amongst the Publicans. Now they
among the Romans were called Publicans, whose office it was, to collect the
tribute of the people, for the Roman Emperors. And when the Jews became
tributary to the Romans, many bought this office, and paying yearly unto
Caesar a certain sum of money for the tribute which they gathered among the
Jews: whatsoever they collected was for themselves, and therefore they exacted
more then was due unto them, and so became infamous among the people for their
intolerable extortion. And therefore when the Publicans, Luke 3. came among
the rest to be baptized of John, and demanded of him what they should do, he
made them this answer, Luke 3.13.
Require (says he) no more then that which is appointed you: as thinking that
this was the best counsel which he could give them, to leave their unjust and
unlawful exactions, because this was the vice which was most ordinary among
them: in regard whereof, the Publicans were always had among the Jews in the
greatest disgrace of all others. And therefore the Pharisees Mat. 9. accused
our Savior unto his Disciples for eating with Publicans, Mat. 9.11.
Why eats (say they) your Master with Publicans and sinners? as thinking the
Publicans to be so vile persons, that it was a disgrace for any honest man to
be in company with them. And our Savior himself Mat. 18. speaking of such a
man as having trespassed against his brother and done him wrong, and yet will
not be won by fair means or foul, neither by private or public admonition,
Let such a man (says he) be unto thee as a Publican or Heathen. Mat. 18.17.
Noting thereby, that such a man is incorrigible, and his case desperate, and
therefore that there is no more hope to be conceived of him, then there is of a
Publican. And Matthew. 21. reproving the chief Priests and the Elders for their
great unbelief and disobedience, he tells them, That even the Publicans and the
harlots should go before them into the Kingdom of God: Mat. 21.31.
showing them thereby, that there was small hope for them to be admitted into
Heaven, when the most notorious sinners, even Publicans and harlots should take
place before them. Thus the name of a Publican, is a name of disgrace, for they
seldom (ye see) appear in the Book of God, but they come shackled together
with desperate persons, sometime with sinners, sometime with harlots, and sometime
again with heathen or infidels. But Zacheus here was not only a Publican but
the chief among them, so that if the Publicans were such notorious sinners,
then what was he that was the chief of the Publicans? And therefore the people
had so bad an opinion of him, that though they saw how earnestly he desired to
see Christ, for which they might have thought the better of him, yet they
murmured when our Savior went into his house, because he would lodge with so
sinful a man. And yet Zacheus though he be the chief of the Publicans, and a
man reputed to be so wicked, yet it is he that is here converted by Christ, and
brings forth such fruit of his conversion.

And from hence we may learn two special Lessons.

First, To admire Gods infinite power, who is able to make us new creatures,
though we be never so wicked, and to restore us again to his own Image. It is
said of Apelles an excellent painter, that having made an exquisite picture it
was afterward by chance so strangely defaced, that no man was able to repair
the same but only Apelles himself that made it: And thus man having lost the
Image of God wherein God created him, God only is able to renew the same, and
by casting us again as it were, into a new mould, to make us the Sons of the
living God. If a man should make any curious work, though the matter whereof he
made it were either gold or silver, yet we would like his workmanship, and
commend him for it: but if he should take the dross thereof, and to show his
cunning should make as exquisite a piece of work as the former, then we would
have him in admiration: But God, even of the scum, as it were, of the people,
even of those that of all other are the vilest of sinners, he makes singular
instruments of his own glory, and inables them to bring forth excellent fruits
by converting them to grace, as he did here Zacheus, which may teach us to
admire his infinite power.

Secondly, Seeing Zacheus is here converted, it may teach us neither to judge
rashly of others, nor to despair of our selves, though we have been never so
heinous sinners, For who can despair of Gods mercy which extends it self even
to those that are Publicans? The whole Scripture is written for our
instruction, and there is not so much as one example in the whole Book of God,
but a man may make excellent use of it, if he will apply it unto himself. For
to what end are there set down in the Scripture, so many examples of Gods
wonderful mercies to grievous sinners, but that we might learn not to despair
of mercy, by applying these examples unto our selves. When we read of Zacheus
here, that though he were a Publican and a grievous sinner, yet as soon as he
had a desire to see Christ and sought for grace, Christ called him unto him,
and offered him grace; are we not to make this use hereof, that how lewdly
soever we have lived herecofore, yet if we have a desire to entertain Christ in
our hearts, he will offer himself unto us as he did to Zacheus? When we read
of the Publican in the former Chapter, who being truly humbled with the sight
of his sins, went into the Temple, and prayed unto God, O God be merciful to
me a sinner, and that he went away justified, are we not to make this use
thereof, that if we will humble our selves, and acknowledge our sin, God will
likewise forgive us as he forgave that Publican? In a word when we read of
the young unthrift in the Gospel, who though he had left his Father and his
Country, though he had spent his patrimony, and that very lewdly, yet after
that he repented and returned to his Father, his Father went out to meet him,
and when he saw him, he was so joyful for his Sons return, that he never
expostulated why he had left him, he never demanded how he had spent his
portion, but forgetting all his former lewd behavior, he entertained him as
gladly as if he had never offended him; are we not to make this use thereof,
that though we have run riot with the Prodigal and lived never so levvdly, yet
if we repent and return unto God, he will receive us into favor as he did
this Prodigal? For these things are written for our instruction, that we might
apply the same to our selves, and find comfort in them. It was a custom
among some of the Heathen, that when any man was cured of any dangerous
disease, he went into the Temple of Aesculapius, and there he registered his
name and disease, and the means whereby he was restored to his health, and the
reason of this custom among them was this, that if any man fell afterward
into the like disease, he might there find the means which he was to use for
his recovery. And thus have Gods Secretaries the penmen of the Scriptures set
down in the Book of God many several examples of such as have been heinous and
notorious sinners, to the intent, that we observing both how they fell, and
were afterward restored, finding mercy through their unfeigned repentance,
might learn by their examples not to despair of mercy.

And therefore to conclude the first point, when soever thou art ready to
despair of Gods mercy through the heinousness of thy sins, set this example
before thine eyes, and remember that this Publican though he were a grievous
sinner, yet as soon as ever he sought for grace, he found grace, and was
enabled to perform the works of grace. And thus much for the person that gave
this gift, Zacheus a Publican.

The second thing which we are to consider, is the gift it self, or what he
gives, I give says he, the half of my goods. He gives of his own and not of
other men's goods, and he gives bountifully of his own; for though he be rich,
yet he gives the half of his goods.

Some are forward enough in giving, but they give that which they have no right
to give, they give not of their own. Thus when the Devil tempted our Savior,
Mat. 4. he promised to give him all the Kingdoms of the Earth: All these says
he, Mat. 4.5.
will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me: here is a large gift;
but the Earth is the Lords, says the Prophet David, and all that is therein,
and therefore the Devil had no right to give it, because it was not his own.
Some give that which they have unlawfully gotten.

Thus when Ahab 1 Kings 2^. grew malcontent, and would eat no meat, because
he could not get Naboth to part with his Vineyard: Jezabell promised him that
she would give it him, Be of good cheer, says Jezabel unto Ahab, I will give
thee the Vineyard of Naboth the Jesrcelite, 1 Kings 21.7.
and then she caused Naboth to be stoned to death, and gave Ahab the Vineyard
which she had unlawfully gotten. Some give of their own, and that which they
have given lawfully, but yet they give sparingly, as if they were unwilling to
give.

Thus when the Jews did sell their possession, and brought the money unto the
Apostles to be distributed among those that needed, Acts 4.35. Ananias and
Saphira likewise sold their possessions, as the rest did; but yet they gave
more sparingly then any of the rest; for they kept back a part of the price to
themselves. But we cannot properly be said to give, unless we give of our own;
we cannot give of our own, unless we give that which we have lawfully gotten;
and though we give of our own, and that which we have gotten lawfully; yet it
is not acceptable in the sight of God, unless we give liberally For howsoever
it be a more blessed thing to give then to take, as our Savior said; yet to
give that which is none of our own; as the Devil did, is but a mere delusion:
to take from one to give to another, as Jezabell did, is no better then
extortion; and to give sparingly of our own, as Ananias did, argues rather
covetousness and misery in retaining, then liberality in giving. But Zacheus
as ye see here, gives of his own; I give, says he, my Goods, he gives of his
own which he has lawfully gotten; for look what he had unlawfully gotten from
others, he restores to the owners in the next words, and that with advantage,
and he gives liberally of that which he has gotten lawfully; for though he be
rich, yet he gives the half of his Goods.

How hard a thing it is for a rich man to part with his Goods, we see by an
example in the former Chapter, where there comes a rich man unto our Savior,
in the 18. verse, having as it seems a full resolution to do any thing
whatsoever, for the obtaining of Heaven. Good Master, says he, what ought I to
do, that I may inherit eternal life? as if he had said, Good Master, if there
be any thing that I ought to do, do but teach me what it is, and I will do it:
Oh I will do it whatsoever it is. But when Christ wills him to sell all that he
had, and to give it to the poor, and he should have Treasure in Heaven, he went
away heavy and discontented, as thinking he should have made but a hard
bargain; and therefore rather then he would part with his goods, he would part
with Christ and the Kingdom of Heaven. So that here is a great difference
between him and Zacheus. He, though he was spoken to by our Savior to give his
goods to the poor, and that with promise of reward in the Kingdom of Heaven;
yet he would not do it: Zacheus here stays not till he be spoken unto, but
gives them a way voluntarily, and of his own accord: the one showing what rich
men are by nature, the other what they are by grace.

Euripides, when he brings in any women in his Tragedies, he makes them always
bad. Sophocles in his Tragedies, makes them always good, whereof when
Sophocles was asked the reason, he made this answer: Euripedes, says he,
represents women as they be, I represent them as they ought to be.

And thus the Evangelist in these two Chapters, represents before our eyes as
it were in two several Pictures, two different examples of rich men, showing
us by the one what rich men are by nature, covetous and miserable, and by the
other what they ought to be, and what they are by grace, franck and bountiful.
If riches increase, says the Prophet David, Psalm. 62.1^.
set not your hearts upon them; but this is hard counsel for a natural man,
in whom covetousness and riches, are for the most part inseparable companions,
covetousness being a means to increase a man's riches, and riches his
covetousness.

There is a Riddle in a Athenaeus of two sisters, Athen. Dei^nos. lib. 10.
which mutually and by course brought forth one another; which though it be
there spoken of the day and the night, which bring forth one another by course;
yet it may as truly be said of riches and covetousness. For first, covetousnes
is in labor, and brings forth riches; then riches wax great and bring forth
covetousness.

Hence it is, that the more a man has, the more he desires; and though he have
never so much, yet he is not satisfied; but as the Israelites when they had
store of Manna, yet they murmured as much as when they had none: So though a
covetous man have riches in abundance; yet he is no better contented then when
he was without them.

And therefore it is, that covetous men are said to be miserable, miserable
both in regard of that which they have not, and that which they have, that
which they have not makes them discontend because they are without it, and as
for that which they have, they are no better for it; for though they have
whatsoever they want, yet they want indeed whatsoever they have, because they
cannot find in their hearts to use it. And such for the most part are rich men;
so that this makes much for the commendation of Zacheus, that though he be
rich, yet he is not covetous; but as God has given him goods, so he imploies
them to good uses, and as God has given him bountifully, so he gives
bountifully to others. I give says he, the half of my goods.

First then, in that he calls them his goods, it confutes the Anabaptists, who
hold that all things ought to be common, and that no man has a right and
propriety in any thing; but if this were true, how could Zacheus here give of
his own? And the Scripture does every where confute their opinion. We are
forbidden by Gods Law to steal, but what needed a Commandment to inhibit
stealing if all things were common? for if nothing were more proper to one then
another, then no man could properly be said to steal, Deuteronomy. 27.17.
They are accursed by God that remove the ancient bounds and marks; but if all
things were common, to what end should there be bounds in men's Lands and
possessions? The wise man says, withdraw thy foot from thy Neighbors House,
Prove. 15.17.
least he be weary of thee and hate thee: but how should any man have a house
of his own, which might more properly be called his house, if all things were
common? The Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6. Charge them which are rich in this World
that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, and willing to
communicate; but how should one man be richer then another? or why should we be
commanded to give to the poor, if no man had more right then another in any
thing? We see that the Scripture allows of Contracts and bargains in buying
and selling, as Abraham bought a field to bury his dead, Genesis 23. And Lydia is
recorded to have been a seller of purple, Acts 16. But how should it be lawful
either to buy or to sell, if all things were common and nothing proper to any
man? And we see that Zacheus here gives of his goods, by all which it is plain,
that it must needs be an idle conceit of the Anabaptists, in holding that no
man has a propriety in any thing.

Secondly, from the example of Zacheus, in that he gives away part of his
goods, we may learn this lesson; that when God does increase our wealth and
riches, we are not to keep them private to our selves, but to make others
partakers of them: like a conduit, which being fed from a Fountain with water,
retains not the water within it felf, but as freely bestows it on those that
want it. Let every one, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4. As he has received a
gift, so let him minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the
manifold graces of God. So that we are but as Stewards to lay out Gods
blessings, and to dispose them among others. For as God has given light to the
Sun, not only that it should be lightsome in it self, but that it should give
light unto other Creatures: and as God causes the rain to fall from Heaven,
and to make the earth fruitful, not that it should retain the fruit within it
self; but that it should bring forth herbs for the use of man: So when God
powers down his blessings upon us, it is for the good and benefit of others. We
see in the body, when the stomach receives any meat or nourishment, it imparts
the same to the rest of the Members, and so must we, because we are
Fellow Members of the same body.

God gives several gifts to several Members. as to the eye to see, to the
ear to hear, to the hand to work, to the feet to walk, and to the tongue to
speak; yet they have not these gifts to themselves only, but the tongue
speaks, the ear hears, the handworks, and the rest do employ their several
faculties for the good and benefit of the whole body. So it must be with us,
for those gifts which God bestows upon us, we must not keep them private to
our own use, but make others also partakers of them, as well as our selves. And
so does Zacheus, who imparts the goods which God has given him to the benefit
of others. But let us see now to whom he imparts them, I give, says he, the
half of my goods to the poor: not to his kindred or friends that love him, nor
to the rich that are able to requite him, but he gives his goods to the poor
that want them. Plutarch. in Cato. Majore.
Cato dividing the prey among his Soldiers which he had got in the Wars, he
gave (says Plutarch) unto all alike, as thinking it better that many should
return from the Wars with silver, then some few with gold, and that all
should have something, rather then some few should have all, and all the rest
nothing. But God deals otherwise in the distribution of his gifts, though he
gives something to every man, yet he gives not alike unto all men, but to some
he gives more, and to some less, thereby to exercise them in several virtues;
that the poor might be moved to pray unto God for the supply of their wants;
the rich to thankfulness to God for his blessings; and that the poor might
labor and take pains for their livings; and that the rich might help to
relieve them of their superfluity and abundance. And therefore Zacheus, knowing
that God has given him riches, not so much for himself as the good of others,
he imparts them here to the poor that want them. Our giving of Alms is
compared by St. Paul, (2 Cor. 9.6.) To the sowing of seed. Now ye know when the
Husbandman sowes his seed, he sows it on the ground which lies bare and
naked, and not not on the ground which has already Fruit upon it: and thus
when we give, we must not give unto them that have enough of their own, but to
those that have nothing. Luke 3.11.
He (says John the Baptist) that has two coats, let him part with the one of
them, to him that has none. The Widow was counseled by the Prophet Eliseus 2
King. 4. To pour her oil into empty vessels, 2 King. 4.3.
not into vessels that Were full, and Would run over, but into empty vessels
that would hold the more. And our Savior wills us Luke 14. When we make a
feast, not to invite the rich thereunto, Luke 14.12.13.
but those that are poor. It is said of the Eagle, that when she seeks her
prey, she is commonly attended by the lesser fowls, upon whom when she has
filled and satisfied her self, she bestows the remainders. And thus the poor
are commonly waiting at rich men's doors, that when the rich are satisfied, the
poor might be fed with their leavings. It is worth the observing how the rich
man, Luke 16. is left by the Evangelist without all excuse, and has nothing
left to allege for himself, why he was so hard-hearted to poor Lazarus. If he
say, that he was not of ability to relieve the poor, and that he had but
sufficient for himself and his family, the Evangelist answers, That he was a
rich man, that he was clothed in purple and fine linen, and that he fared
sumptuously every day. If he reply, that though he were wealthy, yet there were
so many of the poor, that it was not for him to relieve them all, the
Evangelist answers, that there was but one. If he reply again, that though
there was but one, yet he was such a one as needed not to have begged, but
was able enough to have labored for his living, the Evangelist answers, That
he could not labor, for he was full of sores.

If he reply again, that though he were full of sores, yet he was not in any
great want and necessity, the Evangelist answers that he was so hungry, that he
would have been glad of the very crumbs which fell from his Table. In a word, if
he reply again, that though he was hungry, yet he would not stay till he might
be served, and that he might have been served if he would have stayed; the
Evangelist answers, that he stayed long enough, for he lay at his Gates. And as
he is left without all excuse, so are all they, that turn away their ears from
the cries of the poor. For first, lest any man should imagine, That giving to
the poor is no matter of necessity, but left to every man's own discretion, God
has given strick charge and command for the performance of this duty. Deuteronomy
15.11. Because there shall ever be some poor in the Land, therefore I command
thee, saying, thou shall open thy hand unto thy brother, to the poor and needy
in the Land: Charge them (says Saint Paul. 1 Timothy 6.18.
that are rich in this world that they do good, and be rich in good works, and
that they be ready to distribute and willing to communicate. Least any man
should think again, that this is a duty which is imposed only upon those that
are of ability, and that it concerns not those that have but sufficient to
maintain themselves, Ephesians. 4.28
the same Apostle tells us, That though we have not of our own to give, yet we
must labor and work with our hands, that we may have to give unto him that
needs. Least any man should think again, that so he himself may come into want
by giving to others, God has given us his promise, that while we supply the
wants of others, he will give us this blessing, Prove. 28.27.
that we shall not want our selves. He that gives unto the poor, he shall not
want, he shall be like unto a garden that is watered, Esaias 58.11.
or like unto a spring of waters, whose waters fail not. Thus the widow of
Sareptha (1 King. 17.) while she imparted her meal and her orle to the
Prophet, God gave such a blessing to that little which she had, that whatsoever
she spent. yet it decreased not: and thus while we supply the wants of others,
we shall have this blessing, that we shall not want our selves. Prove. 19.17.
He that gives unto the poor, he lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will
recompense him that which he has given. Is not the poor then worthy that we
should give him alms? yet God is worthy that requires it at our hands. Has
not the poor deserved that we should give him any thing? yet God has deserved
whatsoever we can give him. Is not the poor of ability to pay us again? yet God
is able, and he has promised to pay us for him. O says Saint Basil upon the
14th. Psalm. Would thou not have the Lord of heaven and earth be indebted
unto thee? If any wealthy man (says he) in the City should promise to pay thee
for an other, thou would take his word, and art thou afraid to take Gods
word, when he has bound himself by promise to pay thee for the poor? Indeed
Evaegrius the Philosopher as we read of him, being exhorted by Synesius the
Bishop of Alexandria, to give some part of his goods to the poor, and that God
would repay him an hundreed sold for it, he could hardly be brought to believe
this doctrine; and therefore before he would give any thing to the poor, he
took a Bond of the Bishop, for Gods payment of it. But is not God to be
credited without a pawn? and shall we doubt of Gods payment for that which we
lend him? Deus in paupere absconditur, says Chrysostom, panper quidem porrigit
manum, sed Deus Juscipit donum. God lies hidden in the poor man. It is the
poor man indeed, that stretches sorth his hand to take thy alms; but it is
God that takes them. And therefore we may well be assured, that what we give to
the poor, God will' pay it us again.

One writes of St. Thomas the Apostle, that he being commended to Gnodophrus
the King of India, Romans 15.20. Gal. 2.18.
for a skillful builder (as the Apostles are compared in the Scripture to
builders) he was appointed by the King, to build him a sumptuous and stately
palace. St. Thomas having received a great sum of money of the King for the
same purpose, distributed the money among the poor. The King being therefore
incensed against him, caused him presently to be apprehended, and clapped, him in
prison. It happened in the mean time, that the Kings brother fell sick and
died; and afterward being carried forth to be buried, he revived upon the
sudden and was brought back again. And coming to the King, he told him what
he had seen and heard in Heaven; that he had seen a very goodly Palace which
was newly erected, and that he had heard it was built by St. Thomas for the
King of India, but that the King had made himself unworthy of it, whereupon St.
Thomas was set at liberty; and the King by hearing the Apostles doctrine, was
soon after converted to Christianity.

The History it self may well be but a siction; but this is most certain, that
whatsoever we give to the poor upon earth, is rewarded in Heaven. Come ye
blessed of my Father, (will Christ say at the day of Judgment, Math. 25^)
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you; For when I Was hungry ye gave me to
eat, when I was thirsty ye gave me to drink, etc? And when the godly (who are
unwilling to justify themselves) shall say unto him. Lord when saw we thee
hungry and gave thee meat? When saw we thee a stranger and provided thee
harbor, etc. Verily will Christ say, in as much as ye have done it to one of
the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it to me. Thus he counts, that
what we give to the poor we give it to him, and he will reward us as if he
himself had received it.

But it may be demanded, what kind of poor are to be relieved? For answer
whereof, we must distinguish of such as are poor. For some become poor and fall
into want through their own fault, and that especially two ways.

First, by unthriftiness, as by gaming, drinking, keeping ill Company, and
unnecessary mispending that portion of goods which God has given them. These,
howsoever the World accounts them good-fellowes; yet God reputes them no better
then the thieves, and no doubt without their repentance and amendment, they
will be arraigned and condemned for thieves, at the day of judgment. For these
by their unthriftiness do waste their Estate, mispend their time, loose their
good name, impoverish themselves, and undo their Children: and so by this
means, do themselves more harm, then any these could do, that should meet
them in the high way, and take their purse away from them.

These, because they fall into want through their own fault, are the less to
be pitied. And as these become poor through their own unthriftiness; so others
by idleness and want of laboring in their particular Callings. For want is
always attending upon idleness; and where idleness goes before, want follows
after. And therefore Solemon speaks of an idle man in this manner. Prove.
24.30.31.
I passed, says he, by the field of the slothful man, and lo it was all over
grown with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone
wall thereof was broken down: and then he shows what his end was, that
poverty came upon him like an armed man. For he that will be idle must needs
be poor. And this is the cause, that there are such swarms of beggars in every
place, who being well able to labor for their livings, choose rather to live
upon other mers labors, and had rather live by begging then take any pains to
get their living. These are wicked Generation, having this curse of God upon
them to be vagabonds upon the earth, and to wander up and down from place to
place, because they will not yield to the Ordinance of God: In the sweat of thy
brows thou shall eat thy bread. The faithless Steward, Genesis 3.19. Luke 16.3
Luke 16. though he could not dig, yet he was ashmed to beg; but these are
more faithless in their Callings, who are not ashamed to beg, when they are
able to dig or to take any other pains to get their livings. Such the
Apostle will not have to be relieved, He that will not labor let him not eat,
2 These. 3.10.
says the Apostle. For by giving unto these, we both maintain them in their
idleness, and we disable our selves from giving to those, that are not able to
labor for their livings. And as these become poor through their own fault: So
some become poor and fall into want through the hand of God; As such as loose
their goods by fire, by thieves, or any other means which they could not
avoid: or such as fall into decay through any infirmity; as by lameness,
blindness, sickness or age, and so are not able to labor for their livings: or
such as have a great charge of Children, so that howsoever they be able to
labor, yet their la our will not maintain both themselves and them. These and
the like are the poor whom the Scripture will have us to relieve, and to such
no doubt Zacheus here gave. And thus much likewise for the persons to whom he
gave his goods.

The last point to be considered, is the time when he gave them his goods I
give, says he, he gives them presently without any delay, he gives them not
upon his Deathbed, or when he lies a dying; but he gives them now in the time
of his health, while he might have still enjoyed them.

As there are many that defer their repentance to the end of their life, so
there are many that defer their liberality and almes-deedes to the poor, till
the day of their death. But as the ones over-late repentance is seldom
acceptable, because they do but then leave their sins, when they can sin no
more: so the others late giving to the poor, is seldom available, because they
do but then give away their goods, when they can keep them no longer. And
therefore it is the just judgment of God upon many, who having attained great
wealth and riches, and doing no good therewith in their lives, are so overtaken
by death upon the sudden, that they have no time to dispose of their goods at
their ends, which may teach us to do it in our lifetime our selves, and not to
leave it to be done by others after us. All Gods Commandments are given ye
know in the second person to every one, that every one might take them as
spoken to himself, and so might perform them in his own person: We read of
Trajan the Emperor, that upon a time as he was going to war, a poor Widow
met him, and taking hold of his horse, desired him before he went to do her
justice. The Emperor willed her to rest content for a time, and he would not
fail to do her justice when he returned home. Oh says the Widow, but how if
it happen that you never return? why then says the Emperor I will leave it to
my Successor, and he shall do thee justice in my room: your Successor (says
she) and why not you your self? you are bound to do good in your own person,
and what is that to you if another discharge that which is your duty? number te
liberabit aliena justitia? will another man's justice excuse you? The Emperor
was so moved with this speech of hers, that before he went any further, he in
his own person did her justice. And so may we say unto those, who put off those
duties, which themselves ought to do, to be done by others; what is that to you
if another discharge that which is your duty? or if you leave it to your Heir
to relieve the poor? you are bound to relieve them as well as he; and if he
should leave it to his Heir as you have done, what shall become of the poor in
the mean time? Zacheus did not thus, but making his hands his executors, and
his eyes his overseers; he gave his goods to the poor himself, and did not
leave it to be done by others. And therefore if Zacheus, as soon as he was
converted, was so fruitful in good works, it may be a shame for us, if we that
have professed Christianity so long, do come behind him in the works of mercy.

FINIS.
The Fourth SERMON.
MATH. 16.26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own Soul?


HEre is mention in my text of gaining and losing, and a comparison between
them: gaining the World, the whole world, a great gain; losing the Soul, a
man's own soul, a far greater loss: For our Savior, comparing them both
together shows that howsoever the gain be great, yet the loss is greater;
and that he that should purchase the whole World with the loss of his own
soul, he should not gain so much on the one side, as he should lose on the
other; For what (says he) is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole World
and lose his own soul?

First therefore, I will show you what this gain is. Secondly, what this loss
is. And then having compared them both together, I will come to some Use to be
made of it.

First then for the gain, The very name of gain, like a sweet perfume, is
pleasing to every man. Lucri bonus est odor ex^re qualibet, and though many are
much affected with pleasure and delight; yet the h^ost are most affected with
gain and profit. What makes the Husbandman, to toil all his lifetime but
hope of gain? What makes the Merchant to venture his life and his whole
Estate, but hope of gain^? This is that which the most so affect, that they can
never find any arietie in it; but the more they have the more they desire, and
the greater the gain the more it affects them. But here you see is the gaining
of the whole World, a whole world of gain; that if a man will part with his
soul for any thing, he can hardly part with it upon a better bargain.

If it were but for the gaining of one Kingdom in the world, what would a man
hazard and venture for it? Judges 9.5.
Rather then Abimilech will not reign over Israel, he will put seventy of his
Brethren to death together. Rather then Herod will stand in fear of losing his
Kingdom, Mat. 2.16. Macrob. Satur. lib. 2. cap. 4.2. Sam. 15.10.
thousands of innocents shall lose their lives, though his own son be one of
them. Rather then Absalon will not reign, he will rise up in Arms against his
own Father, and seek to deprive him of life and Kingdom. And rather then Nero
shall not reign, his own Mother will be content to be murdered by him; Oc^idat
modo imperet, Let him kill me, says his Mother, so he may get the Empire.

A Kingdom can hardly be valued at too high a rate. For if we consider the
state of a King, there is scarce any thing that may seem to make a man happy,
that can be wanting unto him. His word, for the most part, is a sufficient
warrant for the effecting of his pleasure, and his entreaty a most forcible
kind of command for the obtaining of his desire: so that if he would have any
thing, he may have what he likes, and no man deny him; if he would do any
thing, he may do what he please, and no man oppose him.

If therefore a King be so mighty, how mighty should the Monarch of the World
be? If he has such command that has but a Kingdom, What command should he
have, that should have the whole World under his Dominion?

If King Assnerus his Dominions were so large, that he reigned over an hundred
and seven Provinces; Hester 1.1.
if his magnificence and bounty were such, that he made a feast royal for all
his Princes and Servants, which continued for an hundred and fourscore days:
If King Salomons yearly revenues were so great, that he had six hundred
threescore and six talents of Gold, Ester 1.4. 1 Kings 10.14.
and Silver as plentiful as stones in the street: If King Xerxes his power was
so unresistable, that Rivers and Mountains could not stand before him, 2 Chro.
1.15.
but he was able to turn and overturne them at his pleasure; then what might
not he do that were Monarch of the World, and had all Kingdoms and Nations to
do him service?

A King, howsoever his power be great, yet he has his equals in other
Countries; and though his command reach very far, yet it reaches no farther
then his own Dominions: But he that were Monarch of the whole World; command
where he would and he should be obeyed; for all the Princes of the earth should
be his Subjects.

A King, though he may have whatsoever his Kingdom affords; yet every Kingdom
affords not every thing, and those things do commonly most affect us, which
other Countries do yield and are not to-be had in our own: But he that were
Monarch of the whole World, whatsoever any Kingdom in the World could afford,
he should be sure to have it, and happy were he that should first present it.

A King, though he may greatly advance his favorites; yet he has but one
Kingdom for himself and them, and if with Herod he should promise unto one the
half of his Kingdom, Mark 6.23.
and after promise as much to another, were he taken at his word he might leave
himself nothing: But he that were Monarch of the whole World, he should have
several Kingdoms for his several favorites'; and yet leave himself more when
he had enriched them all, then ever Alexander had after all his conquests.

It is said of Cyrus, that to persuade the Lacedaemonians to follow him in the
wars, he made them this promise; They, says Cyrus, Plutarch. in Reg.
Apophtheg.
that will be my followers, if they be Footmen I will give them Horses, if they
be Horse men, I will give them Chariots; if they have houses and tennements of
their own, I will give them Villages; and if they have Villages, I will make
them Lords of Towns and Cities. This was a great advancement of his followers:
But he that were Monarch of the whole World, where King Cyrus left there might
he begin, They who were his favorites and Lords of Towns, he might make them
Princes, and give them Kingdoms; if they were Kings he might make them
Emperors; and if this were not enough he might double their Dominions. For a
Kingdom in comparison of the whole World, is no more then a town in comparison
of a Kingdom; then what would not a man do for so great a gain?

And therefore the Devil, when he tempted our Savior in the fourth of
Matthew, knowing that there is not any more forcible argument, to persuade a
man to any thing then the gaining of the World, like a cunning Orator, he
reserved this temptation for the last of all, and when he had showed him all
the Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them, and had given him his promise,
Mat. 4.9.
That he would give him all if he would fall down and worship him, and saw that
all this would not prevail with him, it was high time for him to be gone, he
thought it to no purpose to tempt him any longer, and so presently left him.
For he that will not stoop to so fair a lure, he that will not be moved with
so great a gain, he will be moved with nothing.

But now howsoever this gain be great, yet withal it has diverse
inconveniences, which do lessen and diminish the value of it, And therefore as
he that would purchase a house, he will not only know what commodities it has,
but he will likewise be informed of the inconveniences of it. So having heard
of the profits and pleasures and preferments of the world, we are further to
enquire of the discommodities of it. And they especially are these three.

Fulgos. lib. 7. cap: 2
And therefore Saladine a great and victorious Prince in his days, he gave
command when he lay upon his deathbed, that at his Funeral his winding sheet
should be carried on a spear before him with this proclamation, That of all the
victories which Saladine had gotten, this windingsheet was even all that he
carried him. For when a man dies he must leave all; and though he have never so
much, yet he may die before the day ends. So that this is one great
inconvenience of the world, that whatsoever the world can afford us, yet it is
but momentary and of short continuance.

Plutarch in vita Pyrrhi.
Plutarch writes of Pyrrhus the King of Epyrus, that when he prepared to make
war upon the Romans, Cyneas asked him this question, what he meant to do if
he overcame them? The King made answer, that then he would leavy a greater
Army, and subdue Sicily. He asked him again, what he would do if that he
vanquished them? the King answered, that then he would go into Africa, and bring
all Africa under his dominion. But (says Cyneas) if you subdue all Africa,
what then will you do? why then, says the King, we will live merrily together,
and spend the rest of our days in delight and pleasure. Alas (says Cyneas) if
that be all, what need all this labor? you have a Kingdom already, and you may
live as contentedly with that which you have, as if you had more. Cui quod
satis est non sufficit, nihil sufficit. He that is not content with that which
is sufficient, will never be content though he have more then sufficient. So
that this is another inconvenience of the world, that the pleasures, profits
and preferments thereof, can never afford any true contentment.

Ye cannot (says he) serve both God and Mammon. We read of Thomas Aquinas the
School-man, that when he came upon a time to Pope Innocentius the third of that
name, the Pope had then great store of silver and gold lying before him; you
see, says the Pope to Thomas Aquinas, I cannot say, as sometime my
Predecessor Saint Peter said, Argentum and aurum non habeo, Acts 3.6.
Silver and gold have I none. True holy Father, answered Aquinas, but therefore
you cannot add as he did, Surge and ambula, Arise and walk: To note unto him,
that the more he was careful for the goods of the world, the less able he was
to perforn such good works, as the Apostles did. For the love of the world, and
the love of God, as I said before, cannot stand together. We see then, what it
is to gain the world, and withal, the discommodities and inconveniences of it.

Now again, though it be great, yet it may too dearly be bought, as when Gehazi
gained two talents of silver, but a leprosy withal. 2 King. 5.
If a man should angle with a golden hook, all the fish which he took would not
make him amends for the loss of it: and it is not wisdom to venture any thing
where a man may lose more then he can gain by the bargain. For gain is not so
welcome and acceptable to any man, as loss is grievous, especially where the
gain will not countervail the loss. But here indeed is a very great gain, the
gaining of the world, but withal a loss that is far greater, the loss of all
losses, the loss of the soul. Let us see therefore now what this loss is.

The soul, as the more excellent part of man, is put here by a figure for the
whole man, the soul for both body and soul together. And therefore that which
is here called by Saint Matthew, the losing of the soul, is called by Saint
Luke in his 9th. Chapter, the losing of a man's self, Luke 9.25.
What (says he) is a man advantaged, if he gain the Whole world, and lose
himself? So that the losing of the soul, is the losing of a man's self both
body and soul. The greatness of which loss will the better appear, if we
take a view of a double misery which the soul which is lost is to undergo: the
one in regard of the felicity it loses, the joys of heaven, the other in
regard of the torments if susters, the pains of hell; both implied in those
words of our Savior, Depart from me ye c^rsed into everlasting sire.

For the first, The soul which is lost, is for ever banished from the sight of
God, and therefore being banished from his sight and presence, is withal
excluded from all joy and happiness. For the sight of God, as the Scripture
tells us, is that which hereafter shall make us blessed. Mat. 5.8.
Blessed, says our Savior, Mat. 5. are the pure in heart, and he gives this
reason, for they shall see God. So that the sight of God shall make us blessed.
When Saint Peter saw our Savior transfigured on the Mount with Moses and
Elias, he was so affected with the sight, that he cried out to our Savior,
Master, it is good for us to be here, if thou will (says he) let us make three
tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. If he were so
affected with the glorious presence of Moses and Elias, how shall they be
affected, that shall for ever enjoy the glorious company of all the Patriarchs.
Prophets and Apostles, of all the blessed Saints and Angels, nay of God
himself, where they shall see him even as he is, and face to face, as the
Apostle speaks. Psalm. 16.11.
In thy presence (says David) is fullness of joys, such fullness of joys,
that if all the hearts in the world were one, yet it could not contain them,
they cannot possibly enter into man, but he that is to be made partaker
thereof, must enter into them, Enter (says our Savior) into thy Masters joy;
Mat. 25.23. Chrysest. de Repar 1 laps.
such fullness of joy, that as Chrysostom says, If a man were to endure all
the miseries of this life, and to suffer the torments of hell for a time, yet
he might well be content to endure them all for the joys of Heaven. St.
Augustine says more, That if a man were to enjoy all the pleasures of this
life, August. lib. de morib.
and that for innumerable years together; yet he might well be content to
contemn them all for the joys of Heaven, though he were to enjoy them but for
one day and no longer. For one day in thy Courts, says the Prophet David,
Psalm. 84.10.
is better then a thousand: If one day there, be better then a thousand here,
how happy are they that shall enjoy this happiness, even for ever and ever: For
there God will (as it were) share himself and all that he has among his
Saints, there he will make them all Kings and Princes, and will give them,
says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 5.4.
a Crown of glory which shall never decay. There the Lord of Hosts, says Esaias,
will make them a Feast, Esaias. 25.6.
Convivium pinguium et vini defoecati, a feast of fat things and the purest
wines: there they shall be filled, says David, with the fatness of thy House,
and thou shall give them to drink out of the Rivers of thy pleasures. Thus God,
to set as it were our teeth an edge with the joys of heaven, has given us in
his word a taste thereof beforehand, but with this reservation, that the eye
has not seen, the care has not heard, 1 Cor. 2.9.
neither has it entered into the heart of man, what God has prepared for them
that love him.

Therefore David cries out with admiration, Psalm. 31.19.
o quam magna est bonitas, etc. O how great is thy goodness which thou have
laid up for them that fear thee! how great, says he, is thy goodness! he knew
it was great, but how great he knew not. And therefore St. Paul, calls it the
glory that shall be revealed: it shall be revealed, Romans 8.18.
but as yet it is not. For we shall not know it, until we enjoy it, and when we
enjoy it, we shall find it far greater then ever we expected. That as the Queen
of Sheba, when she had seen the wisdom and glory of Solomon, she confessed that
she believed not the report thereof until she had seen it; and when she had
seen it, 1 Kings 10.7.
that she found that the half had not been reported. So then we shall say, many
excellent things have been spoken of thee, thou City of God, which at first
when we heard, the report was so great that we could hardly believe it; but now
we see that we heard not then of the half of thy glory, and though the
happiness which we expected was very great, yet we find it far greater then
ever we expected. Now the more unspeakable this happiness is, and the greater
these joys, the more miserable is the soul that may not enjoy them, and the
more intolerably is the loss of the soul that is banished from them. When
Absolon was banished from the Kings Court, and might not be admitted into the
presence of David, it was such a vexation and torment unto him, that he wished
rather to die if he had deserved it, then to live as he did for a time in
banishment. 2 Samuel 14.32.
Then how wretched and miserable is their condition, that shall for ever be
banished from the presence of God and the joys of Heaven? And yet this is not
all, for though the loss of their joys were misery enough, though there were
no more, yet that which remains is far more intolerable. For they shall not
only lose all these joys; but withal, they shall suffer extreme torments.
The torments they shall suffer is Hellfire, the manner, in every part and
Member, and the time or continuance even for ever and ever. The fire which we
have ye know, is so terrible, that a man would not for any thing hold his arm
therein, but for the space of an hour. If therefore the fire which we have
here be so terrible, which God has ordained for man's use and comfort; how
terrible is that fire, which God has only prepared for a torment. Here
whatsoever a man suffers, yet he is not tormented in every Member, but some
suffer in one part, and some in another; but there every part shall be
tormented and all together. Here whatsoever a man suffers, yet it continues not
long, and the pain, the more violent it is, the less it continues, but there
though the pains be never so intolerable, yet they must suffer them for ever.
If it were but for so many thousands of years, as there were several hours
from the Creation of the world to the day of judgment, yet they might comfort
themselves in this, that there would come a time when their torments should
cease; but what comfort can they have, when they consider with themselves, that
when they have continued never so long therein, yet still they are as far
from the end thereof, as they were at the beginning.

But here by the way, two questions may be propounded.

First. How it is possible, that the bodies of the wicked should continue for
ever in Hellfire, and not be consumed?

And Secondly, how it can stand with the justice of God, to punish the
temporal sins of men with eternal punishment?

For the first we see, that the fire which we have, will consume and burn to
nothing in a very short time, even those things which are more durable then our
bodies are: and therefore how should the bodies of the wicked lie burning for
ever in Hellfire, and not be consumed. But if we consider Gods infinite power,
we need not to make any doubt hereof, because he that has said it, is able to
perform it. For God that was able to bring this to pass for the Children of
Israel, that their Clothes waxt not old, Deuteronomy. 20.5.
nor their shoes wore out, while they lived in the desert forty years together.
God that was able to preserve the three Children in the fiery Furnace, Dan.
3.27.
so that the fire had no power to hurt their bodies: and God that was able to
preserve the Bush in the third of Exodus, that though the fire did burn it, yet
it did not consume it: he is able like wise to bring this to pass; that the
bodies of the wicked, though they lie burning for ever in Hellfire, yet they
shall never be consumed.

But the second question is somewhat more difficult, how it can stand with the
justice of God, to punish the temporal sins of men with eternal punishment?
For the punishment must not exceed the fault, it being against the rule of
justice, to inflict any punishment that is greater then the offense.

And therefore we see, Revel. 18. Revel. 18.7.
That God did proportion the punishment of Babylon to the measure of her sin,
how much she has exalted her self and lived deliciously, give her, says God,
so much torment and sorrow. But the pleasure of sin, Heb. 11.25.
as the Apostle tells us Hebrews 11. is but for a season; and therefore seeing
the sins of the wicked are but temporal, how can it stand with the justice
of God, that their punishment is eternal?

First, Therefore we are to know, that sin, though it be committed, and past
in a moment, yet as it is a trespass against God that is infinite, so it
deserves an infinite punishment. Tanto majus est peccatum, quanto major in quem
peccatur. Every sin is by so much the greater, and so deserves the greater
punishment, as the person is the greater against whom it is committed.

If a man should dishonor and revile his Father, he deserves ye know, a far
greater punishment, then he that should dishonor and revile his Neighbor. If
a man should strike a public Magistrate, he deserves a greater punishment to
be inflicted upon him, then he should, if he struck but a private person; but
every sin is committed against God, and therefore deserves eternal
punishment.

Secondly, Though the wicked do but sin for a time, yet they have a
perpetual desire to sin, and should they live never so long in this World,
they would continue in sin, For like as Gamesters, that delight in nothing so
much as in gaming, they will usually play as long as they can see, and still
have a desire to play longer, but that the night comes upon them and compells
them to give over: So it is with sinners, they take their pleasure and delight
in their sins, through the whole course of their life, and so would
continually go on in their sins, but that they are prevented and cut often by
death. Voluissent (says Gregory) sine fine vivere, ut sine fine possent in
iniquitatibus permanere. they would have lived in this World for ever, that
they might have continued in their sins for ever; and therefore as they would
have continually sinned, so they justly deserve to be eternally punished. And
thus we have heard What it is to lose the soul, and the misery which the soul
which is lost is to undergo, both in regard of the felicity it shall lose, and
the torments it shall suffer.

What comparison is there then, between the gaining of the World, and the
losing of the soul? the gaining of the World with some temporal pleasures,
and the losing of the soul with eternal happiness? the gaining of the World,
whereby we are freed from some worldly miseries, and the losing of the soul,
whereby we are subject to everlasting torments? the gaining of the World,
whereby for a time we may advance our friends, and the losing of the soul,
whereby for ever we undo our selves? All other losses whether of body or goods
a man may well bear, but the loss of the soul, of all other losses is the
most intolerable: whatsoever a man loses besides his soul, yet he loses that
which was given him but for a time, and which at one time or other he must have
forgone; but losing his soul, he loses that which he might have kept for
ever. Whatsoever a man loses besides his soul, yet he may recover it again If
he lose his Children as Job did, Job 1.19.
yet he may have more: if he lose his friends as David did, yet he may find
better: Dan. 4.31.
if he lose his Kingdom as Nebuchadnezer did, yet he may recover it again or
get another; but losing his soul, he loses that which he can never recover.
Whatsoever a man loses besides his soul, yet he has something left him. If
he lose his goods, yet he may have a good name; if he lose his good name, yet
he may have his liberty; if he lose his liberty, yet his life may be left him;
and if he lose his life, yet his soul is remaining; but losing his soul, he
has no more to lose, but loses all at once; his life, liberty, goods,
good-name, even all that he has, and his soul besides.

Xxres having escaped a dangerous tempest, Sabellic. lib. 2.
but yet with the loss of diverse of his Nobles, to reward the Governor of the
ship for it, he set upon his head a Crown of gold; but withal, Ennead. 3.
because he had not saved his Nobility, likewise he caused him to be beheaded.
So he gave him that which he could take away from him but he took away that
which he could not give him; making him to lose not only his reward, but his
life to boot. Now who would have a Crown upon the like condition? If the
Devil should offer as he did to our Savior, the whole World unto any man, and
should say unto him, All this will I give thee if thou will die presently:
there is no man in the World would accept of his offer, for he should be so
far from gaining by the bargain, that he should lose all he had, and his life
together. If this therefore be so hard an exchange, then what is theirs, who
for the gaining of the World do part with their souls? Job. 2.4.
The Father of lies said true in this, skin for skin, and all that a man has
he will give for his life; but yet life and all he may well give for his soul,
for he may lose his life and not lose his soul; but losing his soul he loses
life and all. Jonah. 1.5.
We see that Seamen will cast away their goods into the Sea to save their
lives, as the Mariners did, in the first of Jonas. We see in the Gospel, that
the woman that was diseased with an issue of blood, she valued her bodily
health at so high a rate, that she spent all her substance upon the Physicians
to be cured of her disease. And we see in the old Law, that every part and
Member of our bodies, was valued by God at so high a rate, Exodus 21.24.
that he that should put out another man's eye, or but strike out his tooth, he
was to be punished with the loss of his own, and might not be excused with any
other satisfaction: if a man had taken away another man's goods, yet he was
bound with his goods to make him amends; but in this case his goods would not
serve the turn, but an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, and no other
satisfaction. If therefore our bodies be so dear and precious, that every part
and Member thereof, is more to be valued then our Worldly goods, then what
gain is sufficient to make any recompense for the loss of our souls?

We have heard then briefly, both what it is to gain the Would, and to lose the
soul; and that the gain of the one cannot countervaile the loss of the other.



If a man have a Jewel of any great value, which he is to carry through any
dangerous place, he will look carefully to it, and he will take no delight to
converse with those by whose means he may lose it.

Now our souls as we have heard, are of an invaluable price; the riches,
pleasures, and preferments of the World, are as so many snares to entrap our
souls. So says the Apostle. They that will be rich, 1 Timothy 6.9.
fall into diverse temptations and snares: and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction. And therefore if we regard
the safety of our souls, we must beware that we be not ensnared with the love
of these.

FINIS.
The Fifth SERMON.
PSALM. 103.15. As for man his days are as grass, as the flower of the field,
so he flourishes.


Painters, that when they would draw the Picture of Death, they make a sceleton
or bate Carcass of a man with a Sith in his hands, as if he were mowing or
cutting down grass: to signify thereby the frailty of our nature, that we are
but as grass, which is soon cut down, and soon withers. A similitude which is
usual and ordinary in the Scripture, wherein we are more often resembled to
grass, and to the flower of the field, then to any thing else. The Prophet
Esaias was willed to cry, All flesh is grass, and all the goodlines thereof as
the flower of the field, Esaias. 40.6.
the grass withers, and the flower fades. St. Peter has the same similitude
almost word for word. All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the
flower of grass, the grass withers, 1 Pet. 1.24.
and the flower therethereof falls away.

So Job says of man, that he comes forth as a flower, Job 1^.2.
and is cut down. St. James says of him, that he shall pass away as the
flower, James 1.10.
of the grass.

And not to allege any more places, David says here, that man's days are as
grass, and as the flower of the field, so he flowrishes. Which similitude, the
Scripture the more often uses, as being taken from those things which are
daily in our way and continually before us, that whereas we are so prone to
forget our mortality, the very grass and flowers of the field might be our
remembrancers; that if we stir but out of doors, and see how soon they
come up and how soon they are gone; they might put us in mind of our own
condition.

In handling of which similitude, I will first show you briefly, how man is
very fitly resembled to the grass, and to the flowers of the field, and then
come to some Uses that may be made of it.

Man therefore is fitly resembled to these in three respects. In respect of
their like beginning, in respect of their like progress and continuance, and
in respect of their like ending.

Let the earth bring forth fruit, Genesis 1.11.
and the herb yielding seed; and so thorough that powerful word of God, the
earth still brings them forth. Though there be great difference between
flowers, that some are more beautiful then others are, and make a fairer show,
some have a more fragrant sent then others, and some more variety of
delightful colors, yet they are all alike in this, that the earth is the
place from whence they sprang and had their beginning. And in this regard man
is resembled very fitly to grass and to the flowers of the field. For he had
likewise his beginning from the earth, as the matter whereof he was first made.
Genesis 2.7. Genesis 18.27. Job 4.19. 2 Cor. 4.7.


The Lord God, says Moses, formed man of the dust of the ground. Therefore
Abraham acknowledged, that he was but dust and ashes. Job says, that we dwell
in houses of clay, and that our foundation is in the dust: and St. Paul calls
our bodies earthen vessels. And this is the condition not of some, but of every
one of us. Though some do greatly differ from others, and make a fairer show
then others do, either in regard of their birth and parentage, or for their
place and office, or for their wealth and riches, their beauty, wisdom wit or
eloquence; yet they are all alike in this, that they had their original from
the earth and were made thereof. And so for their beginning all men are but as
grass, and the flowers of the field which spring from the earth.

when they first spring up; and when they are come to their full growth and
strength, that they have taken deeper root and have a stronger stalk; yet still
they are so weak, that the least blast of wind will shake them up and down, and
any little force will put them up, and cause them to wither before their time:
or if they continue their full time; yet their time is very short, they
flourish but a while, and presently wither. In the morning says David, Psa.
90.6.
(speaking of the grass in the 90. Psalm) it is green and growth up; but in
the evening it is cut down, dried up and withered, And in this respect, man is
likewise very fitly resembled to the grass and flowers of the field. He is
weak and tender while he is growing up, and when he is come to his full growth
and strength; yet he is not so strong, but the least fit of an Ague you know
will shake him, and any little sickness will soon pull him down, and bring him
to his end before his time.

And though he escape all sickness and diseases, and all other casualties; yet
his time is but short, age will come upon him before it be long and bring him
to his end. And so in regard of his progress and continuance, he is well
likened to the grass and flowers of the field.

Agamemnon cannot be known from Thersites; the rich glutton in the Gospel,
cannot be known from Lazarus; but all are so like that we can see no
difference. Respice sepulchra, says St. Augustine, et discern si potes Jrum a
Rege, fortem a debili, pulorum a deformi, Look into men's Sepulchers, and
distinguish if thou can between the King and the beggar; the strong and the
weak; the fair and the deformed.

Therefore we read of Diogenes the Philosopher, that when Alexander the Great
as he was passing by, saw him looking very wisly into Tombs and Sepulchers, and
demanded of him what he was looking for, Diogenes answered, That he was looking
for the bones of King Philip, Alexanders Father, who had been the terror of
all Greece, and that he could not distinguish them from other men's bones, nor
find any difference: To note unto Alexander, that even he, notwithstanding all
his pomp and bravery, after all his conquests, must in the end be laid in the
dust, and then there would be no difference between him and others. We see then
briefly, how man is like the grass and the flowers of the field; and wherein
this resemblance between them consists, That they are like for their beginning,
like for their continuance, and like for their end. But that which the Prophet
David here specially intends, is the second of these, that they are like for
their short continuance. For he says, That the days of man are as grass, not
reckoning our lifetime by years, or by months, but only by days, to signify
how soon our life passes, even as the grass, and the flower, which does not
continue from one year to another, but as it comes up soon, so it soon withers
And he says, That man slourisheth as the flower of the field. Sient slos agri,
non horti, As the flower of the field, not as the flower of the garden: for
garden-flowers ye know are more carefully looked to, the Gardener keeps them
standing as long as he can, because they make a fair show, and are a grace to
the gardens; but for field-flowers, they are subject, ye know, to many more
dangers, they lie open to passengers that pull them up, and to the beasts, that
either crop them, or tread them under foot, and if they escape all dangers, yet
the time they flourish is very short; they come up later then the grass, and
yet stand no longer, for when the grass is cut down, they are cut down
together.

Here then in that we are resembled to grass, and the flowers of the field, we
may observe from hence two things, The certainty of our death, and the
shortness of our life.

First, The certainty of our death, That we shall as certainly die, as we are
sure that the grass and flowers of the field shall fade and wither. Death
indeed is uncertain in some respects, as in respect of the time, in respect of
the place, and in respect of the m^^^ner thereof; because we do not know,
either when or where or how we shall die. Death is uncertain in regard of the
time, for we do not know when death will arrest us, whether by day or by night,
whether in the morning, at noon, or in the evering, whether at the cock-crowing
or in the dawning. For when we lie down, we do not know whether we shall rise
again, and when we are risen, we do not know whether we shall lie down again.
Death is uncertain in regard of the place, because we do not know where death
will arrest us, whether when we are in company, or when we are alone, whether
in the Field, or in the Town, whether abroad, or at home; for when we go forth
we do not know whether we shall return again, and when we are returned, we do
not know whether we shall go forth again. And death is uncertain in regard of
the manner, because we do not know how death will arrest us, whether we shall
die a natural or a violent death, whether a painful or an easy death,
whether a lingering or a sudden death. In these respects death is uncertain, yet
nothing again more certain then death. For though we know not as I said, either
where, or when, or how we shall die, yet we know for certain, that either here
or elsewhere, either sooner or later, either by one means or other, we are
sure to die. Therefore David propounds this question, What man is he that lives
and shall not see death? Psalm. 89.48.
because death is common to all men, and no man by his greatness, strength, or
wisdom, or any other means can avoid the same. And this the Heathen knew very
well, and therefore though they worshipped the Sun, the Moon, and all the Host
of heaven, though they offered sacrifice to stocks, to stones, to men, to
devils, and to all manner of creatures, whom they worshipped as Gods; yet among
all their sacrifices, there was never any that offeted sacrifice to death, as
knowing that death will never be appeased, and therefore that their sacrifices
should have been to no purpose, Contra omnia aliquid inveniri potest, contra
mortem nihil. One remedy or other may be found against every thing, but no
remedy can possibly be found against death, Galen, Hipocrates, and other
skillful Physicians have found out many remedies against the most diseases, and
have prescribed many rules how to preserve our health, and to keep us from
sickness, but how to preserve and keep us from death, there was never any that
could invent any remedy. And though Paracelsus had such considence in his
knowledge, that he professed himself able, to keep a man by physic in so
perfect a temperature, that he should never die of any disease whatfoever, yet
he could not prescribe any physic against death. For though we diet our
bodies, and use all preservatives to keep us from sioknesse, and though we live
all our life time without any disease, yet either casnality or age will bring
us to our graves. Therefore the grave is called by Job, Job 30.23.
the house appointed for all the living, I know (says Job) that thou Will
bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all the living: it is
appointed, and therefore cannot be avoided, it is appointed for all the living,
and therefore none are exempted, but all that live upon the face of the earth
are subject unto it. In several Kingdoms there are several Laws, whereunto
they are not bound in other Kingdoms. Now in the whole world there are three
Kingdoms, where the Laws concerning death are diverse. In heaven they have a
Law, that they shall live for ever, and never die. Mat. 19.17.
Therefore heaven is called by the name of life, If (says our Savior) thou will enter into life, (that is into heaven) keep the Commandments. And heaven
is called Psalm. 25. the land of the living, I should (says David) have utterly
fainted, but that I believe verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the land
of the living: that is, in heaven, for there they live eternally, and never
die. In hell there is a quite contrary law, that they die eternally. Therefore
it is said of the wicked, Psalm. 49. They lie in hell like sheep, and death
gnawes upon them, because there they suffer the second death, which is
everlasting. And here upon earth, there is a third law between them both, Heb.
9.27.
That every one living shall once suffer death. Therefore says the Apostle,
Heb. 9. It is appointed unto all men that they shall once dye: not live here
for ever, as they do in heaven, nor die for ever as they do in hell, but once
they must die: and this is a law which all that live on the face of the earth
are subject unto. God has given great privileges to many of his servants, and
has miraculously preserved them from many dangers; Exed. 34.28. 1 King. 19.8.
Dan. 3.25. Mat. 14.29. Josh. 10.12.13.
some he has preserved without any nourishment for many weeks together, as
Moses and Elius; some he has preserved in the midst of fire, as the three
children in the furnace: some he has enabled to walk upon the waters, as Peter
did; some he has enabled to stay the course of the Sun, as Joshuah did: but to
stay and hinder the course of death, and to free men from the same, this is a
privilege which God never gave to any of his servants. Therefore even they
that lived before the deluge, though some of them lived seven hundred years,
some eight hundred, some nine hundred years, and upwards, yet they died in the
end: nature delaying more and more in them, till it were quite spent, as a
candle being lighted, wastes by little and little, till it quite goes out.

Seeing then it is certain that we shall die, this may therefore teach us to
fit and prepare our selves against the coming of death, by frequent meditation
and remembrance thereof. The oftener a man bethinks him of death, the better he
will be prepared for it: as a man that foresees and expects a storm, he will
provide himself the better against it come. And herein the Heathen themselves
may be patterns unto us, who though they knew not God, nor the punishment of
sin in the world to come, yet knowing they should die, they used many strange
and memorable devises, to put them in mind of their mortality. Ortelius writes
of a Country in the World, where the people do use the bones of dead men in
stead of their coin; which being continually before their eyes, they cannot but
continually remember their ends. Plutarch writes of Ptolomie the King of Egypt,
That always when he made any sumptuous feast, among the rest of his dishes,
the skull and bones of a dead man were brought in a platter, and set before
him, and one was appointed to say thus unto him, Plutarch in Conviv. Sept.
Sapientum.
Behold, O King, and consider with thy self this president of death, that he
whose skull and bones thou now see, was once like thy self, and the time
will come when thou shall be like unto him, and thy skull and bones shall be
brought hereafter to the Kings table, as now his are to thint. Isodore writes.
That it was a custom in Constantinople, that always at the time of the
Emperors Coronation, among other Solemnities this was one, A free, Mason
presented the Emperor with diverse sorts of marble, and asked him of which of
them he should make his Tomb, that so he might remember, even then when he was
in the height of his glory, that he was but mortal. Dion writes of Severus a
Roman Emperor, That while he lived he caused his Hearse to be made, and was
often wont to go in into it, adding these words, Thou O Hearse, as small as thou
art, must contain him, whom now the whole world is searce able to contain. If
these who were Heathen were so mindful of their ends, what should we that are
Christians? We know that God has made the end of our life, the manner of our
death, and the place thereof to be unknown and uncertain, that we might always
have it in expectation. So says Saint Augustine, Latet ultimus dies ut
observentur omnes dies. Augustine Hom. 13.
The last day of our lives is hidden from us, that that day might be expected
all the days of our lives. And indeed the reason why we are not prepared for
the coming of death, is because we seldom or never think of dying; for who of
us almost have any thought thereof, till either sickness, or age, the two
Sergeants of death do come to arrest us? or if at any other time we bethink us
thereof, it is only then when we hear the Bell to ring out for any, or when we
see some of our neighbors to lie upon their deathbed, and past recovery. Then
it may be we think of our ends, and that it is high time for us to prepare our
selves for death, that we may be in a readiness against God shall call us. But
these meditations are but for a fit, and they presently vanish. I have seen
sometimes, when a Fowler coming to a Tree where there were store of birds, and
has killed any one of them, all the rest have immediately flown away, but
presently after, forgetting the danger wherein they were before, they have all
of them returned to the same Tree. And do not we resemble these silly birds?
when death comes to our houses, and takes away any one of us, we are all
amazed, and we presently think, that the next course may be ours, and therefore
that it behooves us to reform our lives: but presently after, when the
remembrance of death is out of our minds, we return again to our former
courses. But he that will be provided against the coming of death, must always
have death in his remembrance. Tota vita sapientis debet esse meditatio mortis,
The whole life (says Gregory) of a wise man, ought to be a meditation of
death. That as the birth of sin was the death of man, so the meditation of
death may be the death of sin.

And as David here by comparing us to grass, and the flowers of the field,
implies thereby the certainty of our death, that we shall as certainly die, as
we are sure that these shall fade and wither. So he implies hereby the
shortness of our life, that we shall not live long, but shall die soon, as the
grass and flowers do fade and decay in a short time. Theodorus Gaza tells us of
a father that had twelve sons, and each of those brethren had thirty children,
yet every one of them expired soon. The father expired within the compass of a
year, never a one of his sons but expired in a month, and never a one of their
children but expired in a day.

Though this be spoken of the Year, which has twelve months, and every month
thirty days, yet their expiring so soon may well put us in mind of ours,
seeing the shortness of our life is such, that we are not sure we shall live a
year, no not a month; nay, though we be now well for ought we know, yet for
ought we know we may be dead before to morrow.

How many have we known, that have been well and lively in one hour, and yet
dead the next? how many are there in this Land, that were alive this morning
and dead before noon? Nay, how many are there in the World that are now alive,
and since thou have read these words (are now alive) are now dead? who no doubt
made reckoning, as many now do, that they should have lived a long time.

But the Scripture teaches us to make another account, by joining together, as
many times it does, the day of our birth, and the day of our death, Eccles. 3.2.
without making any mention of the time of our life, as if our lifetime were so
short, that it were not worth the naming. So Solomon, Eccles. 7. Eccles. 7.1.
Job 14.2.
The day of death is better then the day of man's birth. So Job. Man that is
borne of a Woman is of few days, and full of trouble, he comes up like a
flower and is cut down. Upon which words, Bernard says thus, In ipso statim
introitu, de exitu quoque admonemur. In the very beginning and entrance into
life, we are put in mind of the end of our life: as if there were no distance
between them both.

And hence it is, that we are often in the Scripture compared to those things,
which are of the shortest abode and continuance. So our bodies are compared to
vessels of earth; we have, 2 Cor. 4.7.
says the Apostle, this treasure in earthen Vessels. He compares them not to
Vessels of brass, or Iron, which will last long, but to earthen Vessels
which are soon broken.

In the Potters shop there are Vessels ye know, of diverse sorts, some less
some greater, some made for one use and some for another, but all so brittle,
that a little force will break any of them to pieces.

And such is the frailty of our mortal bodies, some are stronger and more
durable then other, but yet none so strong, but that a little sickness will
soon pull him down, and bring him to nothing. Nay, earthen Vessels, howsoever
they be brittle, yet if we let them alone, if we set them up safe, and keep
them from falling, they will continue the same for a longtime; but such is our
frailty, that we never continue in one stay, but though we look never so
carefully to our selves, though we avoid all occasions of coming into danger;
yet before it be long, even age will consume us.

So we are compared by St. James to a vapor, that appears for a while, and
presently vanishes; so by Job to a Weavers shuttle, that makes no stay in the
Web, but passes in a trice from one side to the other. So to a Garment that
is soon worn out, to a tale that is, soon told, to a span which is soon
measured, and here to the grass and flowers of the field which are soon
withered.

The field we see has variety of flowers, but none of them all do continue
long but come up and are cut down, and others grow up in their room. So it is
likewise with the owners of those fields, they are soon gone, and others
succeed them. There is not any field, that has had such variety of flowers in
it, as owners of it the same field which thou hold, has been held by
thousands before thee, who held it for a while one after another, and lest it
to thee, as thou must leave it to others after thee: and thou do not know,
whether thy self or the flowers which spring up in thy field shall be gone
soonest; for thy days are but as grass, and as the flowers of the field, so
thou flourishest.

If you ask why God has made our life so short, the answer is, that it is his
goodness and mercy toward us, to shorten our days. For though Theophrastus
the Philosopher complained at the time of his death, that nature had given to
Hearts and Ravens a long time of life, but a short time to man, who could better
have employed the benefit of time; yet indeed it is his mercy toward us that
we live not so long, because he saw that a short life would be better for us in
diverse respects.

Genesis 47.9.
Few and evil, says Jacob, have the days of the years of my life been. If
the days of our life be evil, it is well they be few; for for if they were
more, they would be more evil. Man (says Job) that is borne of a Woman, Job
14.1.
is of few days, and full of trouble. So full of trouble, that one of the
wisest among the Heathen could say, Nemo vitam acciperet si dare turscientibus.
Seneca.
If life were not given us before we had knowledge of it, there is no man but
would refuse it. Herod. Tap.
Therefore the Tracians as Herodotus writes, were wont according to the Custom
of their Country, to mourn and lament when their Children were borne,
reckoning up the calamities which they were to undergo, through the whole
course of their lives, but when they died, they followed them to their graves,
with mirth and rejoicing, because they were freed from a World of miseries. Our
bodies are subject to labor and weariness, to sickness and pain, and a
thousand Diseases: our souls, besides the grief and sorrow which they are
subject unto, they are continually assaulted with strong temptations, and
always in danger of many powerful enemies, for we wrestle not, says St.
Paul, Ephesians. 6.12.
against flesh and blood, but against Principalities and powers, and the Prince
of darkness; from all which we are not freed till this life be ended, and
therefore God in mercy has shortened our life, that we might the sooner be
freed from the miseries thereof, and that in the mean time we might have this
comfort, that though our life be miserable, yet withal it is short.

Absolon lived in exile, and was kept for a time from the sight of his Father,
it grieved him so much, that he wished rather to die if he had deserved it, 2 Samuel 13.32
then to be kept any longer from his Fathers presence. God knows how his
Children, while they live here in this World, the place of their banishment, do
long to be with him; saying with David, Psalm. 42.2. Phil. 1.23.
when shall I come to appear before the presence of God? and desiring with
Paul, to be dissolved and to be with Christ: and therefore God in mercy has
shortened our days, that we may the sooner come into his heavenly Kingdom and
enjoy his presence.



To draw then to a conclusion of all, we have briefly heard, why we are here
resembled to the grass and flowers of the field; and from thence, both of the
certainty of our death, and the shortness of our life, and the reasons why God
has made our life so short, all which may serve to teach us two lessons.

1. Alexander, that to show his affection to a certain Philosopher, he willed
him to ask what he would of him, and he would give it him. The Philosopher
desired him to give him the fee-simple of his life, that he might be free from
death. O says Alexander, if I could do this, I would do it for my self, why
then it seems (says the Philosopher) that you are mortal. True, says
Alexander. Indeed says the Philosopher, that you are mortal, I do not doubt,
yet I greatly doubt whether you think that you are mortal, and shall ever die,
because you live so, as if you thought you were immortal, and should never
die. The like may be said to many of us; for though we cannot deny, but must
needs acknowledge that we shall surely die, yet man, live so, they seek so
greedily after worldly goods, they so pamper their bodies, and are so sumptuons
in their buildings, as if they were immortal, and should never die. The
Patriarcks though they lived so many years, yet they lived in Tents and in poor
Cabins; but we that live not the half of their days, do build our houses so
fair and so durable, as if we meant here to set up our rest, and that we
should never depart from hence, which argues that though we know we shall die,
Theatr. Histor. ex Guide.
yet we think we shall live a long time, whereas we should daily look to die.
Like Messodanus a holy old man, who being invited by his friend to dinner for
the morrow after. Why, says he, do you invite me to morrow to dinner? I have
not looked to live till to morrow this many a year. For we no sooner begin to
live, but we begin to die, and look how many days of our life are past, so
much of our life is already cut off, and the less is remaining; as the more of
an Houre-glasse is already run out, the less it has to run.

And secondly, seeing we shall so soon die, it may therefore teach us so to
live, as that death when it comes, may be welcome, and not fearful unto us,
and that is, by preparing our selves against the coming of death, by a godly
life. For this is the comfort which a man can find when he lies on his
Deathbed, that he shall enter into a better life when this life is ended, and
this comfort he cannot have at his death, unless he have lived a godly life:
Death to the wicked may well be fearful, because as it is in it own nature, it
is the wages of sin, and imposed as a curse and punishment upon man for his
transgression; but by virtue of Christ's death to the godly it is otherwise,
ceasing to be a curse unto them, nay, of a curse it is made a blessing, even a
passage out of a miserable life into the Kingdom of Heaven. It was Sampsons
Riddle, Judge. 14.14.
out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness. Which was
meant of the honey which was found in the Lion which Sampson had slain; for so
the Philistines ye know, expounded it, what is sweeter (say they) then honey, and
what is stronger then a Lion? and it may not unfitly be applied to death; for
what is stronger then death that subdues the strongest? yet after that Christ
had vanquished death, as he did for the godly, out of the strong came sweetness;
for what can be more svveet or pleasant unto us, then the passage out of a
miserable life into eternal happiness? And such is death to the godly: and
therefore if we would find this comfort at the time of our death, we must
prepare our selves against the coming thereof by a godly Life.

FINIS.
The Sixth SERMON
JAMES. 4.7. Resist the Devil and he will fly from you.


IN the beginning of this verse we are exhorted to submit our selves unto God,
and the reason thereof is given by the Apostle in the words immediately going
before, because God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Now
because we cannot submit our selves unto God, unless we be careful to resist
the Devil, who labors by all means to withdraw us from godliness: therefore
the Apostle adds in these words which I have read unto you. Resist the Devil
and he will fly from you.

to resist the Devil; and a motive or reason, because he will fly from us if
we resist him. For as God is overcome by our yielding unto him, and therefore
we must submit our selves unto God: so on the contrary we must resist the
Devil, because he is overcome, and will fly away from us if we resist him. In
the exhortation we may observe two things.

First, the person whom we must resist.

Secondly, The manner how we must resist him.

And first for the person, it is the Devil, whose name which is here given
him does signify an accuser. And indeed his name is not given him for naught,
but as Abigail said of Nabal, Nabal is his name and folly is with him, so it
may truly be said of the devil, 1 Samuel 25.
Accuser is his name, and accusation is with him: for his chief delight has
been in slandering and accusing even from the beginning. Sometime accusing God
unto man, as he accused God of envy to our first Parents in Paradise, to
alienate man's affection from God: and sometime again, to alienate Gods affection
from man: he accuses on the other side man unto God, as he accused Job. And
therefore he is called in the 12th. Chapter of the Revelation,: The accuser of
our brethren, which accused them before God day and night. Now as a man that is
to encounter with an Enemy, it is necessary that he know what his Enemy is,
what weapons he will use, and what strength, and courage, and cunning he has,
that knowing them beforehand, he may provide himself the better to make
resistance. So it is necessary for us to know what our Adversary is whom we are
to resist, and therefore the Scripture does set him out in his lively colors,
and instructs us beforehand how subtle, how malicious, and how powerful he
is.

And first for his subtilty, he is called a Serpent, which ye know, is more
subtle then any beast of the field: and this is the first name which the
Scripture gives him. For he does not always roar like a Lion, but for the most
part he lies in wait like a Serpent, prevailing far more by his craft and
policy, then by his strength and power. Therefore it is that he will not appear
in his own likeness, but like as the wife of Jeroboam, 1 King. 14. disgnised
her self when she came to the Prophet, that she might deceive him. So the
devil, though he be the Prince of darkness, yet he transforms himself into
an Angel of light that he may beguile us. For if he should show himself as he
is, and in his own nature, then as one says, Semel videris semper oder^s. If
we saw him but once, we would hate him for ever. And therefore like Proteus he
transforms himself, sometimes into one shape, and sometimes into another, as he
did into a Serpent, when he deceived Eve, who little suspected that it was the
devil. Now besides his transforming and disguising himself, he has mill
nocendi arts, a thousand ways to deceive and beguile us. When he comes to
tempt us to any sin, he will show us the bait, but not the hook, the pleasure
of sin, but not the danger of it. Ye know when he tempted our Savior Christ,
he showed him all the Kingdoms of the world, Mat. 4.
and the glory of them, but for the sorrow and misery, the vanity and vexation
which were in the world, those he would not show him. And so does the devil
deal with us when he comes to tempt us. He shows us the profit, the pleasure
and delight, which we shall reap by sin, but for the sorrow and misery, the
punishment and shame which shall attend upon sin, he hides and conceals them,
yet that he may the better prevail against us, he watches the time when we
are at the weakest, and then takes the opportunity to set upon us. When David
fled from his Son Absolon, it was the counsel of Achitophel, to pursue him in
the night time while he was weary with traveling; 2 Samuel 17.
and it was the policy of the Philistines, ( Judges 16) to set upon Sampson,
while he was at the weakest, and least able to resist them. And thus deals our
spiritual enemy with us, he watches the time when we are at the weakest, and
then takes the opportunity, when he thinks us least able to resist his
temptations, When the Husbandman had sowed good seed in his ground, Mat. 13.
the enemy watched the time when men were asleep, and then he sowed tares among
the wheat. And therefore when Peter was fallen asleep, Mark 14. Watch and pray
(says our Savior) least ye fall into temptation; intimating thereby, That
then the devil is most ready to tempt us, when he finds us least fit to
resist his temptations. Thus when he tempted our first Parents in Paradise,
that he might the better prevail against them, he set upon Eve the weaker
vessel, and withal took the advantage of her husbands absence, as thinking
she might the sooner be overcome now she was alone. Thus that he might the
better prevail against Peter, he watched the time when Christ was taken, as
thinking that then (if ever) he might be drawn to deny his Master, when he
could not acknowledge him but with great danger. And thus that he might the
better prevail against our Savior, he watched the time when he was hungry
with fasting, as thinking it most likely, that if ever he could bring him to
doubt of Gods favor, now was the time when he had fasted so long, and God had
provided no sustenance for him. And therefore he then laid his snares for
Christ, when he saw be was hungry, and had no sustenance, as the Fowler lays
his limed ears of corn in a hard frost, when he sees that the birds are ready
to famish. And thus he continually sets upon us when we are at the weakest, and
least able, as he thinks, to make resistance. And as he watches the time when
we are at the weakest, so he tempts us in those things wherein we are the
weakest, by examining every man's disposition and humor, and in^ising him
especially to those sins; whereunto by nature he is most prone and inclinable.
For like as a man that goes a fishing, he will have several kinds of baits
for several kinds of fish, because every fish will not bite at every bait,
but some are taken sooner with one kind of bait, and some with another: so the
devil has several baits for several persons, and before he tempts any man,
he will conceive with what bait he will soonest be taken. If he perceive that
Christ is hungry with fasting, he will present him with stones to be made
bread, if he perceive that Ahab is covetous, and that he has a desire to
enlarge his possessions, he will present him with Naboths vineyard.

That like as Salust writes of Catilin a Traitor in Rome, that to draw others
into the same conspiracy with him, he used this policy, to fit every man
according to his disposition, giving horses to those that delighted in riding,
Hounds to such as took pleasure in hunting, and to every man those things
which best liked him: So does the Devil, he observes to what sin a man is
most inclining, and fits his temptations as they are most agreeable to every
man's humor.

And as his subtilty appears, both in watching the time when we are at the
weakest, and observing what temptation is fittest for us: so likewise in this,
that he begins at first with smaller sins, and draws us on by degrees to
evil, making the less sins like smaller wedges, to make way for greater.
For he knows that a man will sooner yield at the first to a little sin, that
sin will grow in the heart as the child grows in the womb: and that if he
can bring us to give entertainment but to an angry thought (though we count
this but a small matter) yet it will grow from the heart to the tongue, and
from the tongue to the hand, so that many like Cain begin with anger and end
with murder. For he knows that little sins, if we yield unto them, will grow
to be great ones and will procure our ruin.

The Swallow in the Fable, when she saw the Husbandman begin to sow Hemp Seed
in his field, she counseled the Birds to peck it up: because otherwise if it
were let alone it would prove dangerous for them. The Birds could not see how
so small a seed should do them any harm; but afterward when it was grown
ripe and was cut down, the Husbandman made snares and nets of the Hemp
whereby the Birds were taken. Those little sins which we think so small
that they can do us no harm; yet the Devil will use them as snares to entrap
us, and to work our destruction. And therefore he will begin with small
sins, and dravv us on by degrees from the less to the greater, as he drew on
Peter from lying to perjury; and David from adultery to commit murder. And yet
that he may the more easily deceive us, what sin soever he tempts us unto, he
will commonly set such a Gloss upon it, that it shall seem to be either no
sin at all, or a very small matter till we have committed it. Nay, that which
is strange, many times when he tempts a man to never so heinous a sin; yet he
will make him believe that it is a good work, and that he shall deserve
commendation, and reward for the doing of it: as when he tempted Paul to
persecute the Church, he made him believe that he did God good service: and
when he perswads the Jesuits to the murdering of Princes, he make them believe
that it is a meritorious work, and puts them in hope of being rewarded by God,
as the Amalekite was in hope of being rewarded by David, 2 Samuel 1.14, 15, 16.
for bringing him word that he had killed King Saul, and instead of a reward he
was executed for it.

And as his subtlety appears in tempting us to evil under the color of good:
so likewise in tempting us to do that which is good but to an evil end. As
when he tempts us with the Pharisees to give alms in public, and openly in
the sight and view of the world, that we may be seen of men and commended for
it. The giving of Alms is a good deed, and to give them in public is likewise
lawful, that others may be moved to do the like by our example. But the Devil
knows that though it be a good deed, yet if a man do it openly for vain glory,
the good deed becomes evil in the doer of it: and therefore he will tempt a
man to do that which is good, where he sees it will be a sin in him that
does it. And indeed, his craft and subtlety is such, and he has so many vvays
to deceive and beguile us, that we have great cause to sear all our works
lest we be taken with his hook at unawars. He will do the best he can, to turn
those good gifts which God gives unto men, to be occasions of sin.

Thus many times where God gives Knowledge and Learning, the Divill allures
men thereby to pride; where God gives beauty, the Devil allures men thereby
to wantonness; where God gives strength the Devil abuses it to do wrong
and violence; and where God gives wit, the Devil turns it to gibing and
scoffing at others; Yet still when he tempts a man to sin, he will extenuate
the same make it seem less, and to make him to yield the more easily unto it,
he will persuade him that God is infinitely merciful, and that he daily
pardons many sins of many that are far greater. When he has brought a man to
yield to his temptation, then he labors to make him continue in his sin, by
putting him in hope that he has a long time to live, and that he may repent
him when he comes to be old, and all in good time. And when he has now brought
him to this, that he sees him continue secure in his sins, then he will go a
degree further, he will labor to hinder him from hearing the word, from
praying unto God, and from all other means that might bring him to repentance:
as the enemy when he has besieged a City, he will stop all the passages, and
will hinder any from coming to the City for their aid and assistance. And
these are indeed his most usual vviles whereby he deceives us.

And as he is subtle, so he is very malicious. He would deal with us (if God
would suffer him) as he dealt with Job: he would take away from us all that
ever we have, and would leave us nothing, unless it were that which might do
us harm; as when God gave him leave to afflict Job, he took away his goods,
his Servants and his Children, but left him his wife to be a cross unto him.
Therefore it is that he is called our adversary: your adversary, says the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 5. Like a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may
devour. For such is his malice, that he is never at rest, but goes compassing
the earth from one end to the other, Job 1.7.
seeking the destruction of the whole race of Adam, both in body and soul.

Now if ye ask the reason, why the Devil is so maliciously set against man:
the reason is plain, because that man is the Image of God. The Devil bears
infinite hatred to God for casting him out of Heaven, and because he cannot do
God any harm; yet he seeks maliciously to deface his Image, and to be
revenged upon man: not unlike the Panther, whose hatred toward man is so
implacable, as St. Basil says, that if he see but a man's Picture, he will set
furiously upon it, and tear it in pieces.

Lastly, As his subtilty and malice are great, so likewise is his power.
Therefore Christ calls him the Prince of this World, to show that his power is
very great. And therefore St. Paul when he tells us, that we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against Principalities and Powers: he counsels us
twice in the same Chapter, to take and put on the whole Armor of God, that so
we might be able to resist his temptations. We see then what this enemy is whom
we are exhorted to resist, one that is both subtle, and powerful, and
malicious. Though he were never so malicious against us, yet if he were not
powerful withal, like a cursed Cow, as the Proverb is, that has short horns,
for want of power to effect his malice, we might fear him the less. Or though
he were both malicious and powerful, yet if he were not subtle and crafty
vvithall, the danger were the less, because there were some hope that we
might overreach him by some means or other; but being both subtle, malicious
and powerful, it behooves us to be more careful to make resistance. And so from
the person whom we must resist. I come to the manner how we must resist him.

The word which is here translated to resist, does signify to confront, and to
stand against as it were face to face, to note unto us, that we are not to
yield and to turn our backs, 1 Samuel 17.48.49.
but to stand manfully against him when he does assault us. That as David when
he was to fight with Goliath, he went against him and struck him in the
forehead: So we whensoever we are assaulted by the Devil, are to stand
against him face to face, and not to turn our backs like the Children of
Ephraim in the day of battle. Psalm. 78.9.
Therefore we are still commanded in the Scripture, to fight, to wrestle, to
quit our selves like men, to withstand and to resist, but never to fly and to
turn our backs. Ephesians. 6.
And therefore St. Paul where he particularly sets down the whole Armor of a
Christian; which we are to use against our spiritual enemy, yet he mentions
not any part for the back: there is an Helmet for the head, a Courselet for the
breast, a Sword for the hand, Sandals for the feet, and a Shield to guard all
the foreparts; but for the back and the hinder parts there is no Armor at all;
to note unto us that we are manfully to stand against him, and not to turn our
backs when he does assault us.

Now further, for the manner how we are to resist him, we must deal with this
Enemy as men do in War when a City is besiedged.

First, They shut up the Gates and make all fast, to keep the Enemy from making
entrance. And thus must we do, we must shut up as it were the Gates of our
senses, we must turn away our eyes from beholding vanity, we must stop our
ears from hearing vanity, and we must strengthen every part and look that all
be fast, otherwise if he find any part to be weaker then other, he will break
in upon us.

We read Judges 18. that the Tribe of Dan. having no Inheritance nor possession
of their own among the Children of Israel, they went up and down like spies to
survey the Country, and finding the City Laish to be vveakly guarded, the
Inhabitants thereof being careless and secure, and otherwise busied, they made
toward it, they besieged it, and having conquered all the Inhabitants thereof,
they took possession of it.

And thus the Devil having lost the right of his own Inheritance, and having
no possession of his own among the Children of God, he vvanders up and down
like a spy, and finding the soul of man to be meanly fortified, the
Inhabitants thereof, the wit, memory, will, understanding being unprovided,
he sets upon it, and finding little or no resistance, he easily takes it, and
therefore it behooves us to keep vvatch continually, and to look carefully to
our selves, that we give him no entrance.

Secondly, We must not only be careful to keep him out when he does besiege
us; but vvithall we must be careful, and do our best endeavor to raise his
siedge, we must do the best we can to beat him from the assault, and to put
him to flight. And this is done by the word of God, which is called by the
Apostle, the Svvord of the Spirit. Ephesians. 6.17.
Therefore when our Savior was tempted by the Devil, Matthew. 4. the only
Weapon whereby he repelled him was the Scripture, to teach us that howsoever
he does assault us, we must betake our selves to the Word of God to resist his
temptations. If he tempt us to covetousness and the love of the World, we may
say it is written, Mat. 16.26.
what shall it profit a man to gain the whole World, and to lose his own soul?
If he tempt us to pride and vain glory, we must say it is written, God resists
the proud and gives grace to the humble. If he tempt us to malice, we must say
it is written, He that hates his Brother is a murderer. James 4.6. 1 John 3.15.
If he tempt us to uncleanness, we must say it is written, Marriage is
honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled; but Whoremasters and
Adulterers God will judge. In a word, Heb. 13.4.
what sin soever he tempts us unto, we may find in the Scripture wherewithal
we are to withstand his Assaults. For the Scripture is like the Tower of David,
Cantic. 4.4. that was built for an Armory, a Thousand Bucklers (says Solomon)
do hang thereon, and all the shields of mighty men; and from thence we may
fetch what Weapons soever we are to use against our spiritual enemies, and
without which we can never repel their temptations.

And therefore this shows their extreme folly, that regard not to have any
knowledge in the Scriptures; For how shall their hands be able to war and
their fingers to fight that are not acquainted with the word of God, and know
not how to handle the sword of the Spirit? Such must needs be in a fearful
case, because they do voluntarily disarme themselves, and cast away their
Weapons, and so betray their souls into the hands of the Devil, while they
have not where withal to resist his temptations.

If a man had an enemy that had vowed his death, how careful would he be to
provide himself Weapons, and to get some cunning how to use the same, for the
safeguard and preservation of his natural life. How careful then should every
one be for his souls safety, to put on the whole armor of God, and to learn
to use aright this sword of the Spirit; that when Satan his mortal enemy
assaults him, he may be the better provided to withstand him.

It is said of Hanniball a Carthaginean Captain, that as long as Scipio his
enemy was in the field and ready continually to bid him battle, he was always
afraid lest he he should be suddenly surprised; and therefore never slept but
with his armor on, and with a guard of Soldiers to keep watch about him. And
we read of Saul, 1 Samuel 26. That while he slept in the field, he had his spear
in a readiness stuck up at his Boulster: And so should we, while we are in this
World, which is as it were the field of temptation, wherein we are so often
assaulted by Satan; we should always have the Word of God in a readiness, that
whenever he assailes us, we may be able to vvithstand him. But how far
are the most (especially they that are in their youthful days) from doing
thus? Tell them of resisting the Devils temptations, forsaking their pleasures
and betaking themselves unto Gods service, they will be ready to say. Why art
thou come to torment us before the time. Alios mores he atas postulat. Our
youth requires other kind of manners, and it is needless for us to do thus
till we be grown in years. For young men do commonly make account that they
shall live long, that God will allow them more liberty while they are young,
and will not require so much of them as of old men. But they should rather
consider that which experience may teach them, that they who are young are as
well subject to death as they who are ancient, like glass which is as,
brittle when it is newly made as when it is old, and so though they be young
yet they may die soon; and therefore need always to be in a readiness against
God shall call them. They should consider that which reason may teach them,
that the longer it is before they seek God, the longer it will be before they
can find him; as the further a man strayes out of his way, the longer it will
be before he can find the same. And they should consider that which the
Scripture teaches them, that young men as well as old shall be called to an
account at the day of Judgment of all they have done. And they should remember
the precept which the Apostle gives here, not in the future but in the present
time, Resist the Devil, not resist him hereafter. If God as they imagine,
regard not what they do in their youthful days, what needed David to pray,
Psa. 25.7. Eccles. 12.1. Leuit. 5.7. Mar. 10.14.
Remember not the sins of my youth; or Solomon to say, Remember thy Creator
in the days of thy youth. Why did God in the old Law, command that young
Pigeons should be offered unto him? Or Christ in the Gospel forbid that young
children should be kept from him? but to show that our youth is to be
consecrated to God, and to be seasoned with Religion. If they think it too soon
to forsake their sins, and to begin to serve God in their younger years: God
will think it too late when they come to be old, to entertain them to be his
Servants; and as they have spent the greatest part of their time in the Devils
service; so God will leave them to him whose work they have done, to pay them
their wages. We our selves will be loath to take such a servant as is lame or
old, and so unfit or unable to do us service, especially if he be one who while
he was young and strong refused to serve us: And do we think that God when we
have refused to serve him in our younger years will be content to receive us,
when we are old and impotent to be his servants? When we have served his enemy
with the best of our days will God be content to have the leavings? Sardus de
morib. Genesis lib. 3,
For if we serve him thus, what do we else, then as some of the Heathen were
wont to do, whose custom it was that when they had eaten the meat themselves,
they did sacrifice the bones unto their Gods. Deuteronomy. 25.
We are forbiden by God to have diverse measures a greater and a less, because
they that do thus are an abomination to the Lord. If God count it abominable
for a man to have diverse measures, a greater for himself and a less for his
neighbor or a greater for his friend and a less for a stranger; How
abominable then must it needs be to God, when we have diverse measures for God
and his enemies, serving sin and Satan, with the best and greatest part of
our lives, and alotting the least and the worst part unto Gods service. And
therefore it behooves us ever while we are young, to resist and withstand the
Devils temptations, to renounce our pleasures and to betake our selves unto
Gods service. And thus much concerning the former part of these words, Resist
the Devil. I come now to the reason, which I will dispatch briefly. Resist the
Devil and he will see from you.

The Devil though he be fierce when he gives the first assault, yet where he
finds resistance he will break up the siege and fly like a coward. Ye know when
he tempted our Savior Christ in the fourth chapter of St. Matthew, though he
gave the first blow, yet he took the last; and though he gave the onset and
set first upon him, yet he was the first that sounded the retreat, and was
glad to leave him.

But it may be demanded, Whether the Devil will flee if he be resisted? Will
he flee into Hell and be seen no more? No, that he will not; but if he flee
from tho godly, he will be sure to take his pleasure of the wicked, and he will
make them pay for it; If he cannot prevail against our Savior, he will enter
into Judas; if he cannot have his will of men, yet rather then fail he will
enter into the Swine: Math. 8.32.
as a Hawk when she cannot speed of her prey, she will sease upon carrion; But
though the Devil flee when we resist him, yet we must not be secure; for
though he can not speed at the first assault, yet he will come again: as when
he took the foil in tempting our Savior, he departed from him as St. Luke
says, Luke 4.13. Luke 20.40.
but for a season. He is not like the Sadduces, Luke 20. who were so confounded
with our Saviors answers, that they never durst ask him any more questions;
but being overcome yet he will come again: like Pharaoh, who though he were
feign to let the Israelites go, yet they were no sooner gone but he presently
pursued them; or like the Philistines ( Judges 16.) who though they had often
set upon Sampson and could not prevail, yet they would not give him over but
still assaulted him. For though the Devil do take the foil, yet he will not
quite give over; but when he sees that he cannot prevail one way, he will try
if he can prevail another. We see when God had given him leave to afflict Job.
to try whether he could draw him to impatientie, and the Devil had taken away
all his goods, killed his servants, and destroyed his children, and could not
in all this prevail against him; yet he would not leave him thus, but got
leave of God to assault him afresh, and to afflict his whole body with sores
and ulcers; for he knows that our weakness and infirmity is such, that though he
cannot prevail one way; yet another he may prevail against us. If he cannot
prevail against David to lay hands on Saul the Lords anointed, yet he will
try if he can tempt him to murder Vriah; If he cannot draw the Pharisee to
extortion, adultery and the like Vices, he will go another way to work, and try
if he can make him proud of his virtues.

And so though he be vanquished in one temptation, yet he will tempt us again;
and therefore we are not to be secure, but after that one temptation is past,
we must expect and prepare our selves for another; yet this is our comfort,
that though the Devil assault us never so often, yet God that here exhorts us
to resist the Devil, will likewise help us to overcome him. Qui hortatur ut
pugnes adjuvabit ut vincas, He says St. Augustine that exhorts thee to fight,
will likewise help thee to get the victory. If thou be ready to sink like
Peter, Mat. 14.31.
he will put forth his hand to keep thee from sinking: nay, if thou fall like
Peter, yet he will not suffer thee to be quite overcome; Luke 22.61.
but he will look back upon thee with the eye of mercy, and will raise thee
again; For as the Devil encounters thee with new assaults: so God will supply
thee with fresh forces, and his grace (if thou be but careful to resist the
Devil) shall be sufficient for thee against all his Temptations.

FINIS.
The Seventh SERMON.
HEBR. 12.6. For whom the Lord loves be chasteneth.


THe Apostle, having exhorted us before unto patience, and not to faint when
we are afflicted, here he gives us a reason, which is as it were a cordial
to keep us from fainting; For it is God that sends afflictions, The Lord
chastens. They be his beloved that are afflicted; He chastens whom he loves,
and he he does not torment and torture them like a tyrant; but he does only
chasten them, even as a Father does chasten and correct his children; For whom
the Lord loves (says the Apostle) he chastens: so that the parts to be
considered in these words are three.

First, Division.
The Agent or party afflicting, from whom these chastisements or afflictions
are sent, and that is God, The Lord chastens,

Secondly, The Patient or party afflicted upon whom these chastisements or
afflictions do light; namely the beloved of God, He chastens whom he loves.

And thirdly, The quality of the action, in the word chastens, which implies,
that they are not severe punishments; but fatherly chastisements.

And first for the Agent, or party afflicting, in that it is God that chastens.

The Doctrine to be gathered from hence is this, Dect.
That God is the Author of afflictions, All afflictions, all crosses and
tribulations whatsoever they be, from the least to the greatest, come not by
accident, chance or fortune, but by Gods providence. As we may see by these two
things.

Amos 3.6.
3d. of Amos, Shall there evil in a City (says the Prophet) and the Lord has
not done it? Where by evil, is meant, not the evil of sin, but the evil of
punishment: for there is a twofold evil, Malum culpae, the evil of sin,
whereof God is no way the Author ( For thou art a God, says the Prophet
David, Psalm. 5.4.
that have no pleasure in wickedness.) And there is Malum paenae, the evil of
punishment, as affliction and chastisement, and God is always the Author
thereof. And of this kind of evil the Prophet says, That there shall be no such
evil, no not in a whole City, but the Lord has done it, that is the Lord has
decreed it to be done: for ye see the Prophet speaks of a future evil, Shall
there be evil? and yet he says, that the Lord has done it, because in his
decreed it. So we see that whatsoever Herod and Pilat together with the people,
Acts 4.28.
did or conspired against our Savior; yet God had decreed whatsoever they did,
and they could not do any thing, but what God before in his eternal counsel
had determined to be done.

Secondly, Because. God has not only decreed all afflictions than can possibly
befall us, but be does likewise order and dispose the same, and brings them to
p^sse in the self-same manner that he has decreed them. For though God
sometimes do use the Ministry of Angels to afflict us, as he used the Ministry
of an Angel in the afflict on of David, and his people, by plague and
pestilence: and though sometimes he use the Ministry of the Devil to afflict
us, as he used the Ministry of the Devil in the affliction of Job: and though
he use sometime the ministry of men to afflict us, as he used the Ministry of
Joseph's brethren in the affliction of Joseph, 1 King. 24. Job. 1.12. Genesis
37.28. Numb. 21.6.
when he was sold to the Isra^lites; and though he use sometimes the Ministry of
unreasonable and encelede creatures to afflict us, as the fiery serpents to
^^lict the Israelites, the heat of the Sun to afflict Jonas, Jonas 4.4.
and a wind and a tempest to afflict the Discip^es, yet God himself is always
the principal Agent, Mat. 8.24.
and they but the instruments; God disposes of the quantity and measure of our
afflictions, and whomsoever he uses as instruments to afflict us, yet he
restrains their power, and sets them their bounds which they cannot pass. So
we see when the devil afflicted Job, God suffered him to take away all his
goods, to kill his children and servants, and to afflict his whole body with
sores and ulcers, but he must stay there, God has given him a charge
concerning his life, and he can go no further. Job 2.6.
God disposes of our afflictions for their time and continuance, and sets down
their limits when they shall end and cease. So we see in the affliction of
the Israelites, that God determined the time that they should be afflicted, and
the very same night that the years were expired, they were led out of Egypt,
Exodus 12.41.
and their afflictions ceased. God disposes of our afflictions in regard of
the end for which they were sent, by making them serve for his own glory, and
for our good. So we see in the affliction of Joseph, God disposed of his
affliction for the benefit of his brethren. And therefore Joseph says unto his
brethren, Be not you sad, Genesis 45.5.
nor grieved with your selves for that you sold me hither, for the Lord (says
he) has sent me hither for your preservation. Though you (says he) imagined
evil against me, Genesis 50.20.
yet God disposed it unto good. Seeing then, That God does not only decree all
afflictions, but likewise does execute and effect the same, both by disposing
of the manner of them, by limiting their time, and turning them to the end
which he has appointed, it is manifest hereby that God is the Author of all
afflictions, and that they come not by accident, chance or fortune, but by Gods
providence.



First, Seeing God is the Author of all afflictions, it may teach us this,
That whenever we are in any distress, we are to pass by all second causes,
and look specially upon God, as the principal Agent in all our afflictions.
Many take notice of the means or instrument whereby they are afflicted, but
look not up unto him that sent is: as the dog flies upon the stone that is
thrown at him, but minds not him that threw it, but in every affliction we
look up to God as the principal Agent. Thus when Shimei reviled David. 2 Samuel
16. telling him openly before all the people, that he was a murderer and a
wicked man, and that he was an usurper of Saul's Kingdom, and David's Servants
would have stain Shemei for railing on him, David would not suffer them to do
him any harm, and he gives this reason, Suffer him (says he) to curse me for
the Lord has bidden him: and so he looks not upon Shimei, 2 Samuel 16. 11.
but he has an eye unto God as the Author of this affliction. Thus when the
Devil had got a license from God to afflict Job, and the Sabeans on the one
side took away his oxen as they were plowing, and his asses as they were
feeding in their places, and the Calde ans on the other side took away his
Camels, and put his servants to the edge of the sword, Job though he understood
by his servants that it was done by them, yet he passes them by as being but
the instruments, and ascribes it to God as the principal Agent. The Lord
(says he) has given, Job 1.21.
and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. And thus when Joseph
was afflicted by his brethren, and sold into Egypt, though he knew that this
was done by them, and that of an evil intent and mere malice toward him, yet
he looks not upon them, but he looks upon God as the Author of his affliction.
Genesis 45.7.8. Genesis 50.20.
The Lord (says he) has sent me hither for your preservation, and the Lord
has disposed it unto good. So that whenever we are any way afflicted, we are
to pass by all second causes, as being but the means and instruments which God
uses to afflict us, but we are especially to have an eye unto God, as to the
principal Agent, and to remember that it is God that chastens us.

whenever we are afflicted, we are to humble our selves under the hand of
God, and to bear with patience whatsoever it shall please God to lay upon us.
For seeing God is the Author of our afflictions, who as Saint Paul says, 1
Cor. 10. is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above our power,
but will give an issue with the temptation, that we may be able to bear it: and
seeing that if we endure chastening, as the Apostle here tells us in the next
verse, God offers himself unto us as unto Sons, Heb. 12.7.
he offers himself as a father unto us, therefore we are patiently to under go
all afflictions that he shall lay upon us. Diogenes the Philosopher being
visited with sickness, and being impatient by reason of his pain, his friend
to comfort him, willed him to be of good cheer, and to bear it with patience,
because God was the Author of his sickness. Oh, says the Philosopher, but
this is that which grieves me the more, this is that which makes me the more
impatient, seeing that my sickness is sent of God. But it is not so with the
children of God, they are always the more patient when they are afflicted, and
do bear the same without murmuring and repining, because God is the Author of
their afflication. So when old Eli 1 Samuel 3. understood by Samuel, what God had
threatened, even to root out his house for ever, he submitted himself unto Gods
will, It is (faith he) the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18. Psalm. 39.9.
let him do what seems him good. The like did David, Psalm. 39. when the hand
of the Lord was so heavy upon him, that it even consumed him, yet he bare it
patiently, I became (faith he) dumb, and opened not my mouth, for it was thy
doing. When Jobs wife would have had him to blaspheme, and to curse God in the
extremity of his pain, Job 2.10.
Thou speak says Job, like a foolish woman, shall we receive good at the
hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? as thinking it unreasonable, that
we should be content to receive the one, and not the other. If our earthly
parents do chasten and correct us, we will endure it with patience, and should
we not endure the chastisement and correction of our heavenly Father? We have
had (says the Apostle, here in the 9th. verse) the fathers of our bodies which
have corrected us, and we have given them reverence, and should we not (faith
he) much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits? We will suffer the
Physician in the time of our sickness (because he has seen our water, or felt
our pulse) to let us blood, we will suffer him to prescribe us a less diet,
and to take away from us the use of some meats, wherein in our health we were
much delighted, and we will patiently endure the want thereof, and not murmr
against him. And should we not yield as much unto God, as we do to the
Physician? yet if God take away from us any of those things wherein we were
wont to take comfort and delight; if he afflict us with the loss of our goods,
with the loss of our health, or with the loss of our friends, we presently
fall into great impatiencie, as if so be God dealt too hardly with us: But does
not God know what is best for us? if he afflict thee with the loss of thy
goods, he foresaw (it may be) they would have done thee harm, and that thou
would have set thy heart upon them. Nisi perdidisses tu illa te forte
perdidissent, faith Seneca. If God had not withdrawn thy riches from thee, it
may be, thy riches would have withdrawn thee from God. If God take away thy
health, and afflict thee with sickness, it may be, it is to cure thee of a more
dangerous disease, as foreseeing that otherwise if thou had had thy health,
thou would have taken a greater surfeit of the pleasures of this life. If God
do afflict thee with any kind of disgrace, by suffering thee to be wronged in
thy good name and credit, it may be he does it to teach thee humility, as
foreseeing that otherwise thou would have waxed proud, and vainglorious.
For vic^sin the mind, says Plato, are as diseases in the body, and
chastilements as medicines, and surely God is the Physician that knows best how
to apply them. And therefore whenever we are any way afflicted, we are to
possess our souls with patience, because it is God that chastens. Lastly,
Seeing it is God that chastens, this may therefore teach us in all our
afflictions to seek unto God for help and deliverance, that he that wounded us
may cure and recover us, and the same hand that cast us down may raise us up
again. I (says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.) kill and make alive. I wound and I heal.
Therefore he wills us to call upon him in the time of trouble, and he will
deliver us. Deuteronomy. 32.32.
For howsoever by our sins we provoke him to afflict us, yet if we call upon
him for mercy and grace, he has an ear to hear us, an eye to behold us, a
heart to pity us, and an hand to help us. And thus much concerning the first
point, the Age^t or party afflicting, That it is God that chastens.

I come now to the second, namely, The Patient, or party afflicted, the beloved
of God, he chastens whom he loves.

who are of the household of faith, which is his Church. These he loves with an
everlasting love, he has given his only Son for their redemption, and has
adopted them in Christ Jesus to be his children: And yet howsoever he loves
them so dearly, yet many times he does afflict and chasten them; for so we see
here, whom he loves, he chastens. The Doctrine that we may gather from hence is
this, That they who are in the love and favor of God, are nevertheless
afflicted. In the 11th. of Saint John, Behold Lord, John 11.3.
he whom thou love is sick. Christ loved Lazarus, and yet did not free and
exempt him from sickness. Dan. 9.23.
Daniel was greatly beloved of God as the Angel Gabriel told him, yet Daniel
was cast into the Lions den. The Virgin Mary was freely beloved of God, as the
same Gabriel told her, Luke 1. yet a sword was to pierce through her heart,
Luke 1.28. Luke 2.35. 1 Samuel 13.14. Job 1.1.
as old Simeon prophesied. David was a man according to Gods own heart, yet
David was often and many ways afflicted. Job was a just and an upright man,
yet Job was extraordinarily afflicted. Saint Paul was a chosen vessel of God,
yet after he was converted, his whole life was nothing but a continued
affliction. In a word, Acts 9.15.
all the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, and all the beloved children of
God, even from the beginning of the world to this present time have suffered
affliction. Therefore Christ says Revel. 3. As many as I love, Revel. 3.19.
I rebuke and chasten. Read over the Scriptures, and ye see examples hereof
almost in every leaf. Genesis 39.20.
In one place ye shall see Joseph cast into the dungeon, Dan. 3.20.
in another the three children into a fiery furnace; 1 King. 22.27.
here ye shall see Michea fed with the bread of affliction, there David washing
his couch with tears; in one place ye shall see Steven stoned to death, Psalm.
6.6.
in another ye shall find John the Baptist beheaded. Acts 7.59.
To be short, as it was said of Rome heretofore, Mark. 6.27.
that a man could not step into any part thereof, but he should tread upon a
Martyr, so a man can hardly read any part of the Scripture, but he shall light
upon the affliction of the children of God either one or other: affliction
being common to every one of them, and more common then any thing. The flood
that overspred the whole face of the earth in the days of Noah, was common and
general, yet eight persons, ye know, were freed, from the flood, Genesis 6.18.
and preserved in the Ark Death is more common and general then the flood, Genesis
5.24.
seizing upon the whole offspring of Adam, and yet two persons Enoch and Elias
have been freed from death, a King 2.,11
and were taken up into heaven while they were living upon the earth. Sin is
more common and general then death, and yet one person, even Christ, and he
alone was free from sin, but affliction is more general then any of them all,
which has lighted upon all men without any exception, for even Christ himself
though he were free from sin, Esaias. 53.3.
yet he was vir dolorum, as the Prophet Esaias calls him, a man of sorrows, as
being subject through the whole course of his life to much sorrow and
affliction. For this is the condition of all Gods children, that first they
must wear a crown of thorns, before they receive a crown of glory; first they
must suffer with Christ in this life, before they reign with him in the life to
come. Therefore Christ wills us, if we will be his disciples, to take up his
cross every day, Acts 14.
and follow him. And the Apostle tells us That through many afflictions we must
enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

Goddeth visit his own children with the rod of affliction, then much less
shall the wicked escape Gods judgments; if God chasten the godly whom he
loves, and is loved of them, much less will he spare his enemies, and those
that hate him. Prove. 11.31.
Therefore Solomon, Proverbs 1^. Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in
the earth, much more the wicked and the sinner.

And therefore Peter, 1 Epist. 4. Chapter. If judgment, says he, 1 Peter
4.17.18.
first begin at us, what shall the end of them be that obey not the Gospel? and
if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? For if God chasten the one, much less out of doubt will he spare the
other. You will say, but it is ordinarily seen in the World, that the wicked
are not subject to the like afflictions that the godly are. Their houses, as
Job in his 21. Chapt. Job 21.9.
says of the wicked, are peaceable without fear, and the rod of God is not
upon them: and as the Prophet David says of the ungodly, they prosper in all
their ways, and flourish like a green bay tree. It is true indeed, and cannot
be denied, that the godly many times do suffer in this World more crosses and
afflictions then the wicked; but therefore we must remember that the punishment
of the wicked is kept and reserved till the World to come. Lazarus was far
more afflicted in this life, that lay full of sores at the rich man's gates, and
would have been glad of a morsel of bread; then the rich man was, that fared
so sumptuously and lived in pleasure: but therefore what says Abraham to the
rich man, Son, says he, Luke 15.25.
remember that then in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus
evil, but now is he comforted and thou art tormented. Whenever therefore we
see the godly to live in affliction and misery, and the wicked in prosperity
and hearts-ease, yet it need not trouble us, because there will come a time
when the wicked shall be punished and the godly comforted, When the godly shall
have all their tears wiped from their eyes, Revel. 7.17.
and the wicked shall suffer Gods wrath and vengeance; for if God afflict and
chasten such as he loves, much less shall the wicked escape Gods judgments.

Secondly, Seeing God does chasten those whom he loves, 2. Use.
this may therefore teach us to beware of censuring hardly of them, that are in
any distress or affliction, as if this were an argument that they are out of
Gods favor, and that God has forsaken them. We are prone to judge, amiss of
those that are in distress. If Job, be afflicted, Job 4.7.8. Acts 28.4.
his friends will think that he is an Hypocrite. If the Barbarians see a Viper
hang on Paul's hand, they will suspect him therefore to have been a murderer:
and if the Disciples see the man that was born blind, John 9.2.
they will judge that either he or his Parents had sinned, as if they must
needs be wicked persons that are afflicted.

The Samaritans as Josephus writes of them, when they saw that matters went
prosperously with the Jews, they were wont to say then that they were come of
Abraham; but when the Jews were under the Cross and suffered affliction, they
would then derive their Pedigree from Babel and other Nations, and would not
acknowledge them for Abraham's Children, as if only the wicked and not the godly
were subject to affliction. But we see here that God chastens whom he loves,
and therefore that we are not to judge hardly of such as we see afflicted.

And thus much likewise for the second point, the Patient or party that is
chastned by God, namely Gods beloved, He chastens whom he loves.

I now proceed to the third and last, the quality of the action in this word
chastneth, which implies (as I said) that God does not torment and torture us
like a tyranne, but he does only chasten us, as a Father does chasten and
correct his Children: these chastisements do not proceed from God as an angry
judge, for our plague and punishment, but as from a merciful and loving Father,
for our correction and amendment; for herein he offers himself unto us as unto
Sons, as the Apostle says. So that these chastisements to the godly are
signs of their adoption, and pledges of Gods love and favor toward them,
which that we may understand the better, I purpose to show you two things.

First, what these chastisements are, or how God does chasten us.

And secondly, To what end they are, or why he does chasten us.

Concerning the first, these chastisements of God are sometimes called in the
Scripture the judgments of God: So they are called by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.
The time, says he, is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God. 1
Pet. 4.17.
That is to say, the judgment of chastisement, for the judgments of God are
of two sorts, judicia castigationis, and judicia vindicte and condemnationis,
the judgments of chastisement or correction, and the judgments of revenge and
condemnation.

And this distinction is taken out of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. When we, says he, 1
Cor. 11.32.
are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with
the World. So that there is a judgment of chastisement which lights upon the
godly, and a judgment of condemnation which lights upon the wicked. And these
judgments are sometimes public and general, and sometimes private and
particular. Public and general, as when a whole Land or Country is afflicted;
as either by War, by Plague and Pestilence, by Death and Famine, and any other
common and general affliction.

Thus we see, 1 Chronicles. 21. That when David had sinned against God, by causing
his people to be numbered, God to chasten and correct him for it, offers him his
choice of three public afflictions, either a general dearth and famine all
over his Land, 1 Chronicles. 21.12.
for the space of three years, or the Enemies to come and invade his Land, and
prevail against him for the space of three months, or a Plague and Pestilence
among his people for three days.

David being in this extremity, did choose rather to fall into the hands of God
then into the hands of men, because there is mercy with the Lord in his
chastisements, and so there died of the Pestilence threescore and ten thousand
in three days. This was a general or public affliction.

Sometime again they are private or particular, as when any particular house or
family, or any private man is chastned and afflicted, and that either outwardly
or inwardly: outwardly as by the loss of goods, by the loss of health, by the
loss of friends, by the loss of liberty, and the like. And thus Gods Children
are often afflicted. Some are afflicted with want and po^erty, as L^zarus was,
Luke 16.21.
some with the loss of their health, as the Pal^i^-m^^ was, Mat. 9. 1 Samuel
2.23. Genesis 39.20. Job 16.2. Psalm. 59.1.
some are crossed in their Children, as Eli was; some are wronged in their good
name and credit, as Susanna was; some restrained of their liberty, as Ios^ph
was; some wronged by their friends, as Job was; and some persecuted by their
enemies, as David was. These are outward chastisements.

Sometimes again, God does inwardly chasten us, as when either he leaves us for
a time to our selves, so that we fall into some actual sins, and are
afterward grieved that we have offended God.

Thus Peter was afflicted when he had denied our Savior, and wept so bitterly
for his denial. Or when God withdrawes from us the feeling of his love and the
comfort of his spirit: Mat. 26.75.
So that we doubt for a time that God has forsaken us, because we can find no
inward comfort. And thus David was afflicted when he complained so grievously,
Psalm. 77. Psalm. 77.7.
Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will he show no more favor? has
he forgotten to be gracious, and will he shut up his kindness in displeasure?
These are inward chastisements.

Now God in all his chastisements deals otherwise with the godly then he
deals with the wicked. The one he chastens in love and mercy, the other he
punishes in his wrath and fury: the one he sustaines by his gracious
assistance, and inables them to bear what he lays upon them: the other he
gives over to endless despair; to the one he brings a pruning knife to lop and
purge them; to the other the Axe of desolation to cut them down and destroy
them. And thus we see what these chastisements are.

Secondly, We are to consider to what end they are, or why he does chasten us.
The end why God does chasten his Children. is partly for his own glory, and
partly for their good. For his own glory two ways especially.

First, To show how greatly he is displeased and offended with sin, insomuch
that he does not spare it in his own Children. For this is most certain, that
if man had never committed sin, he should never have been subject unto any
affliction; but as soon as Adam had sinned against God, then God by afflicting
him, made manifest how he is displeased and offended by sin, because, says
God unto Adam, Genesis 3.17.
Genesis 3. Thou have eaten of the Tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou
should not eat, Cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of
it all the days of thy life, etc. For as there is nothing in the World but
only sin that dishonours God, so there is nothing but sin that is
displeasing and offensive unto him. And this is so offensive, that at first
when it began to spring up in Heaven among the Angels, God presently pulled up
this weed by the root, and cast the Angels out of Heaven: afterward when it
began to take root in Paradise, among our first Parents, God weeded it from
thence, and thrust them out of Paradise: afterward again when it began to
increase, and to spread it self all over the earth God to cleanse the earth
from this pollution did send the deluge, and drowned all the world except eight
persons; and still to show how it does displease him, even those whom he loves,
he chastens for sin, and does not spare it in his own Children.

A second Reason, why God does afflict us for his own glory, is to make
manifest his power in our weakness, that when we are sufficiently humbled by
affliction, and past all recovery of our selves, he might show his power in our
deliverance, and provoke us to thankfulness when he has delivered us.

Thus he suffered Daniel to be cast among the Lions, the three Children to be
thrown into a fiery furnace; and the Israelites to be so hotly pursued by
Pharoh; that they were feign to fly through the read Sea with Moses, that when
they were delivered, they might ascribe the glory thereof unto God, and say
with the Prophet David, This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our
eyes: And these are the reasons which concern Gods glory.

Secondly, God does chasten and correct us for our good. Si bonus est qui
patitur, in bonum desinit quodcunque patitur. If he be good that suffers, it is
for his good whatsoever he suffers. For howsoever afflictions seem evil to us,
yet God like a skillful Physician that will make good use of poison, turns
them to the good and benefit of his Children, and that diverse ways.

First, To withdraw us from the love of the World, and to draw us nearer to
God; for when we are visited with any affliction, we are more ready to seek
unto God for help, as the sick man repaires unto the Physician. While we live
in health, and prosperity; we are more prone to forget God, as having less
feeling of the want of his help, and we commonly take such a liking of this
World, that we are loath to leave it; but when we are afflicted, then we seek
unto God for help and comfort, which because we cannot find in the World, we
grow weary of it.

Plutarch reports of a Soldier of Antigonus, that having a Disease which was
irksome unto him, it made him weary of his life; insomuch, that he would
adventure upon any danger, and there was no so desperate a piece of service,
but he would always be the foremost in it. The General much affecting him for
his great valor, was at great expenses to have him cured of his Disease; but
when he had got him cured, looking that he should be as valorous and resolute
as he was before, he found him far otherwise, and unwilling to put himself into
any danger; whereof when the General asked him the reason, he gave him this
answer, That when his Body was diseased, he was weary of it; but seeing that
now it was whole and sound, he was loath to loose it. As it was with this
Soldier, so God sees it to be with many of us; when we are in adversity, we
grow weary of this life, and can say with Jonah, Jonah. 4.8.
It is better for me to die then to live: but when we are in prosperity, the
case is altered; we take such a liking of this present World, that we are loath
to leave it; but can say with Peter, Master it is good for us to be here; and
are of the same mind as the Cardinal was, who prosest he would not leave his
part in Paris, for his part in Paradise. And therefore as a Nurse, when she
would weane the Child from sucking the dugge, will anoint her teates with some
bitter thing; to the end, that the Child may begin to mislike them: So God to
withdraw us from the pleasures of this World, sends us afflictions to reclaim
us from our pleasures, and to make the same more unsavory unto us. For as the
Children of Israel would never have thought of leaving Egypt, and coming into
Canaan, if they had not been afflicted in the Land of Egypt: So many will never
renounce the pleasures of this life, until they be distasted thereof by
affliction. And therefore God chastens and afflicts his Children, because
affliction is a means to weane them from the World, and to draw them unto him.

Tentatio quasi interrogatio.
A second Reason why God does afflict them, is to make manifest those gifts and
graces which lie hidden in them. For as showers in the spring time, cause the
budds to appear which before were not seen; so afflictions make manifest many
virtues in Gods Children which before lay hidden. If Abraham had not been
commanded to have sacrificed his Son, he had not had that occasion to have
testified his obedience: and if Job had not been so grievously afflicted as he
was, he had not had occasion to have declared his patience. Many virtues lie
hidden in the Children of God, while they are in prosperity; but when adversity
comes, then they break forth like stars in the night, and do show themselves.
I might allege other Reasons why God does chasten us, as to make us
conformable to Christ our head, to show us how weak we are of our selves,
without Gods assistance, to stir us up to prayer, to teach us humility, and to
exercise our patience; all which may hearten us in the time of affliction,
because it is for our good that God thus afflicts us. We are much dejected when
we are afflicted, we count our afflictions to be long and grievous for the
time; but the Apostle teaches us to make another account. where he calls our
afflictions both short and light, our light affliction, 2 Cor. 4.17.
says he, which is but for a moment. Some indeed are afflicted longer then
other, yet their afflictions are but short that continue longest. Acts 9.33.
Mat. 9.20.
We read of one Acts 9. that was sick of the Palsy, and kept his Bed 8.
years. St. Matthew tells us, of a Woman that was diseased with an issue of
blood for 12. years. St. Luke tells us of a Woman that had a spirit of
infirmity, Luke 13.11.
and was bowed together, and could in nowise lift up her self for 18. years.
St. John tells us of a Man that had been diseased 38. years. The time no doubt
seemed long unto these, John 5.5.
yet indeed our whole lifetime is but short, but a span long as David says,
and therefore our sufferings cannot be long, which are all comprised in so
short a time. For afflictions are as it were Gods speedy Messengers, which he
sends to do his Message or arrand unto us. Sometimes to tell us that we forget
God, and therefore need be put in mind of him by being afflicted. Sometime to
tell us that we are too proud, and therefore need affliction to be humbled by
it: Sometimes to tell us that we are too much afflicted with the love of the
World, and therefore need affliction to be weaned from it. Of these and the
like arrands they are sent unto us, and when they have done them, they are
presently gone like the Angels which were sent overnight to Lot, and when they
had done their arrands, went away the next morning. But though we suffered
afflictions for a long time, yet we might well count our sufferings short, in
regard of that endless and infinite happiness which follows our sufferings. If
our future happiness were of no longer continuance then the afflictions we
suffered; yet this might comfort us, that our sufferings come first, and our
happiness after, and that our happiness is to come when our sufferings are
over: which may afford us more comfort in our greatest sufferings, then the
wicked can find in their greatest pleasures. The wicked have their pleasures
first, they first enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, wherein they can
take the loss delight; when they consider that after their pleasures are past,
their sufferings are to come, which will eat up the pleasures which they have
formerly taken, as the seven years of famine which followed in Egypt, did eat
up and consume the seven years plenty which went before them. Genesis 41.30.
The godly on the contrary have their sufferings first, and their happiness
after, which being not short as their sufferings are, but endless and
eternal, if our hearts were affected with an unfeigned love and desire of it,
we could not but think all our sufferings short, though it were for a long time
that we were to suffer, as the seven years service which Jacob served for
Rachell, Genesis 29.20.
seemed short unto him, because he loved her.

FINIS.
The Eighth SERMON.
ISAIAH. 57.21. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God.


WE have here in these words, a Proclamation as it were of open War, against
all such as are impenitent sinners, wherein two things are to be considered,
The thing that is proclaimed, and the Person that proclaims it. The thing that
is proclaimed, There is no peace to the wicked, The Person that Proclaims it,
is the Prophet Esaias, as Gods Herald, and therefore proclaims it not in his
own, but the Lords name, not as from himself but from the mouth of the Lord,
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God.

And first, Genesis 16.12.
concerning the thing proclaimed, as it was said of Ishmael, that his hand
should be against every man, and every man's hand against him; so here it is
said that there is no peace to the wicked, as if they were enemies unto all,
and all unto them, and so had peace with none. They are enemies to God, enemies
to men, enemies to themselves, and therefore can have no peace at all, either
inward or outward, either at home or abroad, either with themselves or with
others.

The Reason is, because indeed there can be no peace, where there is no
righteousness. Therefore the Prophet, Esaias 32. makes peace to be a fruit and
effect of righteousness. The work, says he, of righteousness shall be peace.
And therefore the Prophet David, Esaias 32.17.
Psalm. 85. joins them both together, Righteousness, says he, Psalm. 85.10.
and peace have kissed each other; where righteousness and peace as St. Austin
says, are propounded by the Prophet as two loving Friends, who so agree
together, as that he who opposes himself against the one, must needs oppose
himself against the other, and so can never enjoy peace, who regards not
righteousness. But as Jehu said to Jehuram, 2 Kings 9. when he asked Jehu, 2
Kings 9.22
Is it peace? what peace, says Jehu, so long as the whoredoms of thy Mother
Iesabell, and her witch-crafts are so many? so while the wicked do multiply
their sins, what peace can they have? what peace either with God, who hates
all those that work wickedness; or what peace with the Creatures, who are
always ready to revenge Gods quarrel against his adversaries; or what peace
with men, whether they be the godly or the wicked like themselves, while they
hate the godly, and the godly them, as being Gods enemies; and the wicked again
hate them, as knowing them to be such, as only like them while they serve
their turns, and will be as ready to do them wrong, if it be for their
advantage: And what peace again can they have with themselves, while they have
one within them that bears witness against them, even their own Conscience?

First, They can have no peace with God, no more then a Subject can have peace
with his Prince against whom he rebels. For the wicked are Rebels against God,
Esaias. 1.30.
their disobedience in the Scripture is called Rebellion, to show that while
they disobey Gods Laws, he accounts them no better then Rebels and Traitors,
as if they were at defiance with him, and up in Arms against him. As indeed
they are, because they both serve his Enemy the Devil, and make no account of
disobeying God, so they may satisfy their own will and pleasure. For look what
sins they delight in, they wholly devote themselves thereunto, giving them
the chief place in their affection, and setting them up in Gods room. So the
Epicure makes his belly his God, the ambitious man makes honor his God, the
voluptuous liver makes pleasure his God, and the covetous miser makes money his
God, because they perform that service unto them which they owe unto God; they
love their pleasures, preferments and profits, more then they love God, they
obey them more then they obey God, they fear more to lose them then to lose the
savor of God; and they put more trust and confidence in them then they put in
God. Therefore as they regard not God, so he regards not them, but when they
seem to offer him their service, he rejects the same. So that even their very
prayers which they keep for their last refuge, and whereby they think to curry
favor with God in their distress and affliction; are abominable unto him.

For so we see Proverbs 28. Prove. 38.9.
He that turns away his care from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abomination. Which is to be understood not only of such as refuse to hear it,
but likewise of such as refuse to obey it, that though they tread in his
courts, and come to Church, though they hear his word, and offer him their
prayers yet because they are such as hate to be reformed, and will not leave
their sins, God abhors all their service, and will rather plague them for
praying unto him, then accept their prayers. For so long as they refuse to obey
his laws, he holds them for rebels, and professes himself an enemy to them as
they are unto him. So that the wicked can have no peace with God, because they
are his enemies, and he theirs, only the godly have this peace, as being
assured by faith that they are reconciled unto God in Christ Jesus, as the
Apostle says, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith we have peace with God
through. Christ our Lord. They therefore that would be at peace with God, they
must have faith, for like as our faith is, so is our peace, a true says, a
true peace, an hypocritical faith, an hypocritical peace, a temporary faith,
a temporary peace: and look where there is a weak or no faith, there is
likewise a weak or no peace. And so the wicked having no faith, to believe that
God is reconciled unto them, they cannot have any peace with God, but still
look upon him as upon an angry Judge, and expect nothing from him but wrath and
vengeance for their sin and wickedness.

Secondly, As the wicked have no peace with God, so likewise they have no peace
with the creatures, which are at enmity with them that are Gods enemies.
Therefore we see how all the creatures from the greatest to the least, have
opposed themselves against the wicked, and have armed themselves against those
that have disobeyed God. Therefore God is called the Lord of Hosts, as having
all creatures as soldiers under him, and ready, as it were, in battail-aray,
to fight against them, that do not serve him. If God be offended with the old
World for their sins, he need not march against them in his own person, but the
Windows of heaven, the Springs of the earth, will conspire together, to send
forth their water to overwhelm them. For all the creatures both in heaven and
earth do take Gods part to execute vengeance upon his adversaries. The Angels
destroyed the Army of blasphemous Zenacherib, slew the firstborn of Egypt, and
smote Herod. 2. King. 19.25.
The fire from Heaven consumed the Sodomites, the two hundred and fifty that
offeredincense, and Ahaziahs two Captains with their fifties. Acts 12.23. Genesis
19. 24. Number. 16.35.2 King. 1.10.11. Judges 5.20. Josh. 10.11. Exodus 14.28. Number.
16.32. Number. 21.6.2 King. 2.24.1 King. 13.24.2 King. 9.35. Acts 12.23.
The Stars in their courses fought against Sicera, hailstones from heaven
destroyed the Amorites, the Waters covered Pharaoh With his whole Army, the
earth opened and swallowed Corah and his accomplices. Fievy Serpents stung the
Israelites that murmured. Bears slew the children that derided the Prophet; a
Lion the Prophet that disobeyed the Lord; the dogs did eat Jezabell, and the
worms Herod. Humane Authors are full of the like examples, how the creatures
have been enemies unto the wicked. It is very memorable which they report of
Ibicus the Poet, That being robbed by some ruffians, and haled through a field,
and murdered by them, he seeing none by, while they were thus haling him, but a
company of Cranes flying over the field, he cried to the Cranes, you Cranes
shall bear witness what they do unto me. The murderers were not known for a
long time, but at last there being a great Solemnity kept in the same field,
whereat two of the murderers of Ibicus were present, suddenly a great noise of
Cranes was heard over the field, Hark, says one of the murderers to his
fellow, these are the witnesses which Ibicus said should disclose his death;
which one over-hearing, and knowing that Ibicus had been murdered, began to
suspect them, and telling the Magistrate what he had heard, they were sent for
and examined, and confessed the fact, and were condemned, and executed. It were
endless to instance in all the particulars, how the creatures have set
themselves against the wicked to revenge the Lords quarrels, and to bring them
to confusion that have refused to serve him. So we read of Ha to Bonosus the
Archbishop of Mentz, who was a great enemy to the poor, and was wont to call
them mise and vermin, that when any poor came to him for relief in a dear
year, he appointed them to go into a barn, pretending that he would send them
relief thither, but when they were there, he shut up the doors, and set the
barn on fire, and so burnt them all to death together: but afterward by the
just judgment of God he was haunted and assaulted, and pursued by mise, which
could not by any means be kept from him, but swam after him through the River
Rhene, and there devoured him. So we read of Hadrian, that proud insolent Pope,
who made the Emperor stoop, and hold his stirrup, how he was afterward
stifled, and choked by a gnat: God showing by these and the like examples,
that he has all creatures at his beck and command to do him service and that
he can pull down the pride of the greatest even by the basest creatures. The
creatures were made for the service of man, as man was made for the service of
God, God giving man sovereignty over the creatures, and restoring to himself
the Sovereignty over man; but because that man rebelled against God, the
creatures began to rebel against man, God making the creatures to become our
enemies that were our servants, because we that were made to be his servants,
were become his enemies. Therefore though the creatures be at enmity with the
wicked, yet they are at peace with the godly, Psalm. 34.7. Genesis 19.15. Acts
12.11. Acts 27.23, 24. Johsh 10.13. 1 King. 17.6. Exodus 14.22. Dan. 3.17. Dan.
6.22. Acts 28.5.
even from the highest to the lowest. The Angels do pitch their tents about
them to preserve them from danger, freeing Lot out of Sodom, and Peter out of
prison, and comforting Paul in his dangerous voyage. The Sun and the Moon will
stay their course till Joshuah be fully avenged of his enemies; the ravens will
minister food to Elias; the waters will give way to the children of Israel when
they are pursued by the Egyptians; the fire will not burn the three children
that are cast into the furnace; the Lions will not do any hurt to Daniel, nor
the viper to Paul. For the creatures are in league and at peace with them that
are at peace with God, they do service to them that are Gods servants, which
because the wicked are not, they therefore can neither have peace with God, nor
yet with the creatures.

Thirdly, the wicked have no peace with men. Therefore it is said here in the
former verse, The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose
waters do cast up mire and dirt. For the wicked are turbulent of their own
nature, but if they be stirred or moved never so little, they begin like the
sea when it is moved with winds to swell and foam, and disgorge their malice
against them that offend them. Therefore it is said of the wicked, Romans 3.
Destruction and misery are in their ways, To. 3.16.17
and the way of peace they have not known: not known the way of peace, either
actively or passively, either to make peace among those that are at variance,
or to embrace and entertain peace when it is offered them by others. Gal. 5.22.
Gal. 5.20.
And therefore the Apostle Gal. 5. names love and peace, and long-suffering,
among the fruits of the spirit, and hatred variance and emulation among the
Works of the flesh: to show that as the godly, who are renewed by the spirit,
live in unity and peace: so the wicked on the contrary are prone by nature to
dissension and variance. They are easily drawn upon any light occasion to fall
out with their neighbors, and not easily pacified, but hard to be reconciled
where they have taken offense. Nay, they are so far from either making or
taking peace, that they delight to sow discord and dissension among others,
like the Scribes and the Pharisees, who to make variance between Christ and his
Disciples, sometimes accused the disciples to Christ, Mark 7.5. Mark. 2.6.
why eat thy disciples with unwashen hands? sometimes Christ to his disciples,
why eats your Master with Publicans ana sinners? and all to breed dissension
and variance between them. But the godly on the contrary, who are called by our
Savior, The Sons of peace, they are peacemakers, Luke 10.16.
laboring to unite and reconcile those whom they see at variance. So we read
of Monistia, Saint Austins Mother, that when she heard there was variance
between any of her neighbors, she would first go to one of them, and relate
unto her some good of the other, and having brought her to acknowledge it to be
true, and won her to a better liking of her; then she would go to the other,
and tell her that she had heard, there was some discontent between her and such
a neighbor, but hoped it was not true, because she had lately been in her
company, and heard her speak very well of her, and so by relating some good
between them, she would breed a better liking of one to the other. Thus the
godly seek to reconcile those whom they see at odds. Nay, if there happens any
breach between themselves, and others, they will seek to be reconciled, though
it be to their own disadvantage. So did Abraham, Genesis 13.8.9.
Genesis 13. who when there fell a strife between his servants and Lots, he came
unto Lot, Let (says he) there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and me,
neither between my heard-men and thine, for we are brethren: Is not the whole
land before thee? if thou will take the left hand, I will go to the right, or
if thou will go to the right hand, I will take the left. Where you see how
desirous he was of peace. Though Abraham were a better man then Lot, yet he
stood not upon that, he stayed not till Lot would come unto him, but he went
unto Lot, and was the first that sought reconcilement: and rather then he would
not have reconcilement between them, he offers him his choice of the whole
land, and so was content to purchase peace, though it were to his own loss and
hinderance. For the godly who are the children of God, do imitate God, Heb.
13.6.
who is called in the Scripture the God of peace, and therefore they are
peacemakers, both seeking to unite and reconcile others that are at
dissension, and desiring if it were possible, and as much as lies in them, to
have peace with all men: whereas for the wicked, because they do not delight in
peace, it is far from them: and have not either any peace with God, nor peace
with the creatures, nor peace with men.

Lastly, As they have no peace abroad so none at home, as they have no peace
with others, so none with themselves. They carry within them a guilty
conscience which does accuse and condemn them, and will not suffer them to be
at peace. Their conscience indeed does not always trouble them, but then when
it does not, their case is more desperate. For like as it is in the sickness
of the body, when the pulse does not beat, the body is in a more dangerous
estate; so it is likewise in the sickness of the soul: When the conscience
does not beat and check them for sin, their case is more dangerous, because it
is a sign, that their conscience is seared (as Saint Paul speaks) with a
hot-iron; 1 Timothy 4.2.
and that their custom of sinning does take away from them the sense of sin,
and makes them past feeling. But when sickness or any other cross or
affliction is laid upon them, whereby the conscience is wakened again, then it
begins to torment them afresh and will so terrify and affright them with the
sight of their sins, that they shall find no rest. Though the wicked had all
the wealth in the world, and wanted nothing that their hearts could desire for
their outward estate, yet as long as their sins are a wound to their souls, and
a torment to their conscience, they can never have any peace in themselves. For
this peace is only wrought by faith in Christ, whereby a man believes that
Christ has made a full satisfaction to God for all his sins, and therefore
that they shall not be laid to his charge, which faith, because the wicked have
not, nor ever can have, while they continue in their sins, they cannot have
this peace, and wanting this peace, they want the greatest blessing that is.
For he that has this peace, though he have nothing besides, yet he wants not
any thing, and he that wants this peace, though he have every thing else, yet
indeed he has nothing. This peace is a continual feast to the godly, it makes
them to fare (as it is said of the rich man in the Gospel) every day
deliciously. And this peace is the fruit of our peace with God, which Christ
the Prince of peace, bath purchased for us, and bequeathed unto us and
therefore calls it his peace, John 15. Peace leave I with you, John 14.^.
my Peace give I unto you, not as the World gives, give I unto you. For all the
principalities and powers in the World, are not able to give us one jot of this
Peace. The peace which the World gives, is false and uncertain and does oftten
deceive us; but this is a true and certain peace which never fails us; the
peace which the world gives is only outward, and only affords us external
content, but this peace extends to the quieting of the conscience the peace
which the world gives is only transitory as the world is, but this is as
permanent as the giver of it; for this is one of the chief of his gifts whose
gifts you know are without repentance; And therefore he gives it only to the
godly and not to the wicked.

We have heard then, the thing that is proclaimed, that the wicked can have no
peace, no peace with God, no peace with the creatures, no peace with men, no
peace with themselves, their want of the first, their want of peace with God
being the cause that they want the rest and have no peace with others.

That there can be no security to those who continue in their sins. For how
can they have any security, who are not at peace with God, but have him for
their enemy. God is never enemy to any but only for sin, sin is that which
incenses his wrath and provokes him to punish them; Esaias 63.
therefore says the Prophet Esaias 63. They rebelled and vexed his holy spirit,
therefore he was turned to be their enemy and fought against them. And the
Apostle to the same purpose, Romans 1. The wrath of God says he, is revealed
from Heaven, against all unrighteousnes and ungodliness of men. Romans 1 13.
When therefore we see Gods wrath break forth against any place, as ye know he
has many ways revealed of late against this Land, by that heavy visitation of
Plague and Pestilence, whereby he swept away so many thousands, by hot
burning-Feaver and other grievous diseases in the most places, by
unseasonablenesse of weather and immoderate showers, by suffering the enemy to
give us the foil, and to have the better of us, and many other ways; we may
well be assured that our sins have provoked him, and if we repent not, these
are but the forerunners of greater judgments. God is not easily provoked to
anger, but many times bears a long time with sinners, that by his forbearing
them he might draw them to repentance; but if they go on, he will more and more
manifest his wrath against them; which as their sins increase grows further
and further, like fire which first takes hold of one house and then goes to
another. He powers not out his whole Vial of his wrath at once but by degrees,
the former judgments making way for the latter; the less for the greater;
first making some smart that others may amend; which if they do not, his wrath
will break forth upon them altogether. So we see he dealt with Pharaoh, God
brought sundry plagues upon him and his people; yet the latter were more
fearful and grievous then the former, and when none of those judgments which
he had powered upon them would make them take warning, in the end he drowned
them all in the Red Sea together. So when our Savior Math. 24 had forthtold
many judgments that should come upon Jerusalem, for their contempt of the
Gospel, and for their refusing and rejecting of grace when it was offered unto
them, he adds this, That the end is not yet, and that all these are but the
beginnings of sorrows: as they found afterward by woeful experience; For in
the end, when he had many ways plagued them before, and they were never the
better, he powered out his wrath in full measure upon them, and brought utter
desolation upon them all. They might have understood by the former punishments
(which were the beginning of their sorrows) that there were greater coming
except they prevented them; as when a man sees the smoke breaking out of the
house, he may know there is sire, which will break forth into a flame if it be
not looked to in time: And so may we, we may understand by Gods former
judgments, that there are greater hanging over our heads, except we prevent
them by unfeigned repentance. Let every one therefore in the fear of God, turn
unto him by true humiliation; assuring our selves, that as long as we continue
impenitent in our sins, we make God our enemy, and so can have no peace.

And thus much for the thing that is here proclaimed, That there is no peace to
the wicked. I come now briefly to the person that proclaims it, the Prophet
from the mouth of the Lord, Three is no peace to the Wicked says my God.



And from hence we may observe, That it is God that speaks by the mouth of his
Messengers, and that the Message which they deliver, is not theirs that bring
it; but Gods that sent it. Which serves for the instruction both of Gods
Ministers, and of those that hear them. That Ministers are to deliver nothing
but the Word of God, that they may be able to say as the Prophet here says,
says my God, And as St Paul says, That which I delivered unto you, I received
from the Lord. Non valet haec ego dic^, haec tu dicis, sed haes dicit dominus.
It is not sufficient says St: Augustine to say, I say thus, or thus thou
say, unless we can say, the Lord says thus; That while we deliver no more
then that which is agreeable to the Scripture, we may be sure we deliver Gods
Message, and that we speak that which God puts into our mouths.

Secondly, This serves to instruct the hearers, that they must make account
that they hear the Lord while they hear his Messengers. Therefore it is that
the faithful say Esaias 2. Come let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, the
house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, as making account
that they were taught by God, while they were taught by his Ministers. He says
our Savior, Luke 10.16. 1 These. 2.13.
Luke 10. that hears you hears me. And therefore St. Paul commends the
Thessalonians 1 These. 2. that when he preached among them, they heard what he
delivered, not as the word of man but as the Word of God. Ye know when a Crier
does make Proclamation in the Princes name, the Proclamation is to be heard,
not as his that utters it, but as his that sent it. Now Ministers are as it
were Christ's Heralds, to proclaim and make known his will unto us; which while
they Proclaim, we must make account that we hear him while we hear them. And
therefore as this serves to show their folly who make the less account of
hearing the Word, because they are but men like themselves that deliver it: so
it likewise serves to reprove those who are offended with Ministers when they
reprove their sins. For what reason has any man to be offended with the
Messenger for the Message lie brings, seeing he speaks not in his own name but
in his that sent him. and it is not his, but his Lords Message.

FINIS.
The Ninth SERMON
2 PETER 1.21. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.


THe scope of the Apostle in these words is this, to show us the infallible
truth of the Scriptures. And this he shows by the Author thereof two ways.
First Negatively, that the Scriptures are not of man's invention For the
prophecy (says he) came not in old time by the will of man. Secondly
Affirmatively, that the Holy Ghost was the Author of them; But holy men of God
(says he) spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

But some man may say, Indeed the Apostle says thus, but how does he prove it?
He says, as St. Paul does, that the Scriptures are inspired of God; 2 Timothy
3.16.
but how does he prove it? When Aristotle that great profound Philosopher, saw
the books of Moses. and read what he wrote about the Creation of the world, he
misliked his Books, because he proved not that which he wrote. Hic omnia dicit,
nihil probat, This man says he, says every thing, but he proyes nothing: But
we are to remember, that though we may doubt of that which men say, because all
men are liars as the Scripture says, and so need proofs to consume their
sayings; yet the Scripture being the Word of God, is of it self sufficient to
credit and need not any proof for the confirmation of it.

The Jews have a saying, that the Law does not need any fortification, in
regard that God was the Author of it: and so God being the Author of the
whole Scripture, it needs no fortification or proof to strengthen it; but
whatsoever we find written therein, we need make no question of the truth
thereof, but are bound to believe it.

True may some say, if we were assured that the Scriptures are the Word of God,
and that God and not man was the Author of them, then we need make no question
of the truth of those things which we find therein; But how shall we know them
to be Gods word, and that no other was the Author of them? Which because it is
the sum of that which the Apostle delivers in these words, I purpose briefly
to handle this question, How a man may know and be fully assured, that the
Scriptures must needs be the word of God?

Concerning which question, there is a great controversy between us and the
Church of Rome. They say, that the only Testimony of the Church, is sufficient
to persuade us that the Scripture is the Word of God; and that if it were not
for the Testimony of the Church, we could not give any credit to it. We say,
that the Scripture is known to be Gods Word, by the inward Testimony of Gods
Spirit; and that without this Testimony to persuade us hereunto, the testimony
of the Church and of all other whatsoever, is insufficient.

Titubabit sides nostra, si Scripturae vacillet autoritas. August. de Doct.
Christ. lib. 1. cap. 37.
Our faith will stagger, says St. Augustine, if the authority of the Scripture
stand not firm. But how can the authority of the Scripture stand firm, if it
be built only upon so weak a foundation as the testimony of man; For the
Church is subject to error, both in doctrine and manners; and therefore this
testimony may deceive us: But we require an infallible proof for the certainty
of the Scriptures. They say that the Testimony of the Church is infallible, and
when we will have them to prove it, they prove it thus, because it is the pillar
and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.
as the Scripture tells us. Thus if a man doubt of the authority of the
Scripture, to prove it they send him to the testimony of the Church; and while
he doubts of the truth of the testimony of the Church, to prove it, they send
him back again to the Scripture. But if the Church be sufficient to persuade a
man that the Scriptures are the word of God, how comes it to pass that Turks
and Insidels, who have often heard this testimony of the Church, are not yet
persuaded of the truth of the Scriptures.

How many thousands of Jews are now living in Italy, and many of them in
Rome, who deny the Gospel, and are not yet persuaded that Christ is come? If
the only Testimony of the Church be sufficient, why make they not proof
thereof upon them, that the World may see the virtue and efficacy of it: But we
know experience tells them daily to their faces, that they cannot do it; and if
you ask them the reason, they can give none but this, because of the blindness
and unbelief of the Jews: why therefore say we, that that which is able to
assure a man, that the Scripture is Gods word, must be able to illuminate his
understanding, and to give him faith that he may believe it, but this is only
the work of Gods spirit. There is nothing more ordinary among the Prophets;
then when they delivered Gods word to the People, to tell the People that it
was Gods word which they delivered. Hear the word of the Lord, says Esaias
(1.10.) The word of the Lord came unto me, says Jeremie (1.4.) and thus every
one of the Prophets from the first to the last, do testify that they delivered
the word of God. Esaias 53.1.
But who has believed our report, says Esaias, so that where there was one that
believed it, there were many that did not: and therefore if neither the word
it self, nor the testimony of the Prophets concerning the word, could persuade
them that it was the word of God, much less is the testimony of the Church
sufficient, when St. Paul preached at Phylippi, Acts 16. there were many that
heard him; but it is said there of Liddia, only that God opened her heart, so
that she attended unto that which he spoke: Acts 16.14.
now if she could not so much as attend unto those things which St. Paul
delivered, unless that God had first opened her heart; much less could she
have believed, that that which he spoke was the word of God, but by the inward
operation of Gods spirit:

The Word is sometimes called a light, because it is lightsome in it self as
the Sun, but as the Sun though it be never so lightsome, yet it cannot be
discerned by those that are blind: So the Word, though in it self it be never
so glorious, yet it is not apparent to us till our hearts be opened. The Word
is sometime compared to seed, because it is fruitful like the seed that is
sown; but as the seed which is sown cannot bring forth increase, but by the
influence and virtue which it receives from Heaven; no more is the word
fruitful and effectual in us, till God by his spirit give a blessing unto it.
The word is not unlike the poole in Jerusalem, whereof there is mention John 5.
The poole though it cured all outward Diseases, yet it had not this virtue, but
then only when the Angel did stir the waters: the word though it be the means
to cure our inward infirmities, yet it cannot do it but only by the motion of
Gods spirit.

Now the first Disease which is to be cured is out spiritual blindnss, whereby
we are ignorant of Gods will, his will is sufficiently revealed in his word
but we cannot discern it to be his word till God by his spirit do inlighten
our understanding. And therefore St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. we have received
the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.13.
that we might know the things that are given us of God: and presently after in
the same Chapter, but the natural man, says he, perceives not the things of
the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them
because they are spiritually discerned.

Now least we should imagine, that because we are assured of the truth of Gods
word, only by the testimony of Gods spirit, that therefore till his spirit do
work faith in our hearts, the testimony of the Church, and the hearing of the
word is but va^n and needless: we are to understand, that Gods spirit does
ordinarily beget faith in the godly by these outward means.

For first, the Testimony of the Church concerning the word, invites us to
come with the rest to hear it, and while we are diligent and attentive in
hearing it, Gods spirit does ordinarily beget faith in our hearts, whereby we
believe it; and when faith has once taken root in our hearts, then we are so
fully resolved of the truth of the Scriptures, that all those arguments whereof
before we made but light account, are now like infallible demonstrations unto
us. For then we see plainly how necessary it was, that God should reveal his
will unto us; and that if he have not revealed it in the Scripture, he has
revealed it no where. But that it is his will which he has revealed in his
word, these Reasons will confirm us.

First, In that the majesty of Gods spirit does appear in every part of the
Scripture, wherein there is nothing that savours of humane wisdom; but every
thing therein is heavenly and divine, for if we consider the matter thereof, it
far exceeds all humane invention. For who could tell us of the Creation of the
world, and the fall of Angels? of the corruption of the whole nature of man,
through the transgression and disobedience of our first Parents? of the
redemption of the world by the coming of the Messiah? of the rewards of the
faithful in the life to come, and the punishment of sinners? These things and
many other which the Scripture reveals, do so far go beyond the capacity of
man, that had not God revealed them in his word, they could never have been
known.

Secondly, If we consider who penned the Scripture, we shall find them for the
most part to be simple men, and therefore of themselves not capable of those
heavenly mysteries which they have revealed in their vvritings. Hos. 11.1.
Zach. 11.12.13. Psalm. 22.16.18.
They were not learned, and yet they foresaw things to come, as if they were
present, and foretold many things which many hundred years after did come to
pass. They were not eloquent, and yet more powerful in moving the affections,
then Tullie, Demosthenes, and all the Rhetoricians in the world besides. They
lived not together, but in diverse ages and several places, and yet they agree
so perfectly without the least contradiction, as if they had had but one mind
among them. In a word, Deuteronomy. 32.51. Jonah 1.3.6: Jonah 4.9.
they were not as other men given over to sin, but lived more uprightly then
the most in their times, and yet they have registered their own sins and
infirmities, to remain as it were upon the file unto all Posterities, which had
they been led by humane wisdom, they would never have done. All which shows,
that howsoever the Scriptures were written here by men, yet they were indicted
by God in Heaven.

Thirdly, If we consider the perfection of the Law which is called the
Decalogue, we shall see that none but God could be the Author of it. For there
is not any good either outward or inward, which we are bound to perform to God
or man, but it is there commanded, nor any evil from which we are to abstain,
but it is there prohibited: all which to be comprised in so few words, far
exceeds the invention of men or Angels. Men's Laws howsoever they fill many
large Volums, yet they are still imperfect, and daily want something to be
added unto them, which when they were made was not thought upon: Sometimes
again they must have something detracted, that being thought convenient for the
time when the Law was made, which afterward is found to be inconvenient, in
regard that men's conditions do so often change. So that as it is in the fable,
when the Moon upon a time begged a new Coat of her mother: her Mother replied,
that it was impossible to make her a Coat which would be fit for her, by reason
that her shape did so often alter, as being now in the full, now in the wane,
one while in one form, and strait in another: So it is impossible for men or
Angels to make Laws, which without adding or detracting should serve for all
persons and all ages, because their manners and conditions do so often change.
But this Law which we find recorded in the Scripture, is so absolute and
perfect, that it serves for all persons, in all places and all ages, and yet
needs nothing to be added or detracted. All other Laws extend no further then
to men's sayings or doings, their words and their actions, and take hold of them
only if they be not answerable to the Law, but for the thoughts of men's hearts
they do not inflict any penalty upon them, but do leave them free. The
Civilians say, Cogitationis paenam in foro nostro nemo luat, let no man be
punished in our Court for a thought. But this Law does search into the secrets
of the heart, not only restraining our actual sins, but our sinful thoughts,
even our very first motions and inclinations to sin, though we do not yield our
consent thereunto, to put the same in execution. Romans 7.7.
St. Paul says Romans 7. that he had not known concupiscence to be a sin, if
the Law had not said, Thou shall not covet. For like as the Sunshine does make
us to see the least atoms or moaths, which if it were not for the bright light
of the Sun, we could not discern: So this bright light of the Law discovers
the least and most secret sins, which without this Law we could not have known.
All other Laws because they cannot judge of the heart, do require no more then
outward obedience, and judge well of him that lives according to the Law for
his outward Carriage. But this Law which as the Apostle says, Heb. 4. is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents, Heb. 4.1^.
requires both outward and inward obedience, and judges not him to be a good
man, who frames himself outwardly to the observing of the Law, but not
inwardly. For as a man is not to be counted well and in good health, though his
hands and feet, and all the rest of his outward parts be sound and perfect, if
his lungs or any other of his inward parts be unsound and diseased. So this Law
does not count him to be a good man, though his outward actions seem never so
good, if his inward parts, his thoughts and affections be ill and disordered.
In a word, all other Laws propound no other but temporal rewards to those
that observe them, and temporal punishments to such as trangress them: but the
rewards and punishments which this Law propounds, are both corporal and
spiritual, temporal and eternal, both in this World, and the World to come.
By all which it is plain, that this Law which we find recorded in the
Scripture, is in many respects more absolute and perfect, then all the flowers
which men have invented, and therefore that God and no other could be the
Author of it.

Fourthly, If we consider what effects the Scriptures work in the hearers and
readers of them, it will confirm our faith in this point, that they must needs
have God for their Author, and not man.

The Doctrine which is contained in the Scripture, is quite opposite and
contrary to flesh and blood, and crosses our nature. We naturally desire to
live in peace and prosperity, we affect honor and advancement, ease, riches,
pleasures, liberty and the like; which if the Scripture had promised, it would
in all likelihood have been a motive to make men the more to affect and embrace
it. But we see the Scripture promises the quite contrary to these, crosses and
troubles, persecution and hatred for the Gospels sake, and yet the sound
thereof is gone through the World, and thousands do daily more and more affect
it. When Cyrus would persuade the Lacedaemonians to follow him in the Wars, he
made them this promise, whosoever, says Cyrus, will be my followers, if they
be footmen I will give them Horses; if they be Horsemen I will give them
Chariots; if they have Houses and Tenements of their own, I will give them
Villages; and if they have Villages, I will make them Lords of Towns and
Cities; and for gold and silver, I will heap it unto them by weight and by
measure.

Thus Cyrus allured them by his fair promises, as the likeliest means to
win their affections. Luke 9.23.
But what says Christ in the Gospel to his followers? If, says he, ye will
be my Disciples, ye must daily take up my Cross upon you; you must leave your
Parents, Wives, Children and Friends, and all you have to follow me, you must
be reviled and persecuted, Mat. 10.22.
and hated of all men for my names sake.

Now this ye know, should rather hinder men when they read the Scriptures from
embracing the Gospel, and becoming Christians: yet so effectual are the
Scriptures, through the operation of the spirit in those that read or hear
them, that nothing can hinder them from embracing the same, which is an evident
proof that no other but God could be the Author thereof.

Lastly, if we consider the long continuance, and antiquity of the Scripture,
how God in all ages has miraculously preserved it, notwithstanding the malice
of Satan, and all those Tyrants, and Persecuters, who have opposed themselves
against it, we may plainly see that it is the word of God. When the Jews would
have hindered the Preaching of the Apostles Acts 5. Acts 5.38.39.
it was Gamaliels Counsel to let them alone, and he gave this reason, for
says he, if it be of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God ye cannot
destroy it. All false Religions which have had their beginning and original
from man, have continued for a time and have afterward vanished: but the true
Religion which the Scripture contains, has continued without change in all
ages, nay the more it has been opposed the more it has flourish't, God having
ordained that the Persecution of those that profess the Gosple which in all
likelihood would have been a means to have rooted it out, should make men the
more to affect and embrace it. Histories are full of examples to this purpose,
I will only name one, and that out of Sozomen, when Christianity began to
increase in Persia, the King being an enemy to the true Religion, sought by
all means to root it out of his Kingdom. And first he imposed so grievous
taxes upon the Christians, that many thereby were brought into Poverty. And
seeing that the number still increased more, and that they would not leave their
Religion for the loss of their goods, he threatened them in the end with the
loss of their lives. Some few revolted for fear of Torment, but the number of
professers did daily increase, though they daily were Martyred. Amongst the
rest, Simeon the Archbishop of Seleucia was apprehended, and because he
persisted in the profession of the Gospel the King sent him to Prison. And as
he was going, Vstazares one of the Kings chief Officers about his house (who
had been a Christian but for fear of torment had renounced his Religion) met
the Bishop in the way and offered to salute him, but the Bishop turned away
from him as from an Apostata, and would not vouchsafe to look at him;

Oh woe is me: says Vstazares, what favor can I look for at Gods hands, whom I
have denied, when in regard of my apostasy, my familiar friend will not
vouchsafe me a word? And thus mourning and lamenting he ran to the King, and
openly professed himself a Christian, and added further, that he would never
recant the second time whatsoever became of him. The King commanded that he
should be beheaded at such a time, and when the time came, Vstazares sent this
message to the King, to desire him that for all the faithful service which he
had ever done him, he would grant him this favor, that while he was led to the
place where he should be beheaded, a Herald or Crier might go before him, and
make proclamation, that Vstazares was to suffer, not for any treason or evil
that he had committed, but only because that he was a Christian. The King
granted his suit, as thinking that this would be a means to terrify others,
when they should hear that the King would not spare, no not those who were his
chief Officers, if they professed themselves Christians. This in all likelihood
should have been a means to make others revolt, but this made them to be far
more courageous and resolute. Some embracing the block where they were to be
beheaded, as if their beheading had been their coronation: others running with
such alacrity to the stake where they were to be burnt, as if the very flames
which they were to enter into, had been the Gates of Heaven: The persecution of
the faithful in all ages, being the whetstone of faith, as Saint Jerome calls
it, which makes the godly that are persecuted the more willing to suffer, and
the persecutours when they see they cannot prevail, the more willing to give
over. In so much that Dioclesian a grievous persecutour, when he had used all
the means that ever he could for the utter abolishing of the Christian
profession, when he had sent out his Edicts for the burning of the Scriptures,
for the torturing of Christians, and putting down their Churches, and saw in
the end that he could prevail nothing, for very spite and anger he gave over
his Kingdom. I might further show you this, by the miserable ends of all those,
who have professed themselves enemies unto the professors of that Doctrine
which the Scriptures teach. Pharaoh the first persecutour of the Church that
ever was, was overwhelmed in the red sea with all his host. Dathan and Abiram,
the first Scismaticks that ever were, were swallowed up of the earth, with all
their Consederats: and such have been the ends of such as have succeeded them.

To pass over the examples which the Scriptures allege, Pilat.
Pilat who had unjustly condemned (...) Savior, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 7.
fell afterward into such misery that he slew (...), and so of an unjust Judge
became a just Executioner. Nero.
Nero after that he had made havoc of the Church of Christ, he fell in the end
into such extremity, that he would have accounted it for a favor of any man
that would have slain him, Ergone (says he) nee amicum habeo, nee inimicum? as
complaining that he could find neither friend nor foe, that would vouch safe to
kill him, in the end he grew desperate, and stabbed himself. Maximinus.
Maximinus as great a persecutour as ever Nero was, was struck by God with a
strong disease, an invisible fire, as Eusebius writes, inwardly eating and
consuming his flesh, and leaving him nothing in a short time but skin and
bones, his eyes burnt out of his head through the extremity of his torments,
and he cried out before he died, that now Gods vengeance was lighted (...) him
for his former persecutions. Valerian.
Valerian the Emperor another persecutour, was first taken captive, and led in
triumph in his Emperors robes, and afterward by the command of Sapores the
King of Persia, he was flead alive, and so was tortured himself as he had
tortured the Christians. Julian Apostata.
Julian the Apostata in his wars against the Persians was wounded on the
sudden, he knew not how nor by whom, Theoderet thinks he might be smote by an
Angel, Callistus that was present, says he was struck by the Devil,
whosoever he was he was sent by Christ, by Julians own confession, for casting
up some of his blood toward heaven, he cried out against Christ, Vieisti
Galilee, Thou have got the victory thou Galilean: and thus he died raving. Nay,
when he was dead, the earth opened (says Nazianzen) and swallowed it down, as
not vouchsafing to bear so accursed a burden.

It were endless to instance in all those particulars, whom God for their
persecuting his truth in the Scriptures, has made fearful examples unto all
others. The same may likewise be said of Heretics, who seeking by their false
and impious doctrins to corrupt the truth, have miserably perished in all ages.
Simon Magus.
Simon Magus the father of all Heresies, as Eusebius calls him, having gotten
great credit by his sorcery and Magic, persuaded the people that he was God,
but through Peter's prayers as he was flying in the air, his godhead failed
him, and he was fetched down headlong. Olympius who blasphemously denied the
Trinity, Olympius.
while he asked contemptuously, how three could be one, and one three? was
smote with three fiery darts from Heaven, the points of these three joining all
in one. Arrius. Valent. Manes. Montanus. Nestorius. Lucian.
Arrius, while he was doing that which nature requires, his bowels gusht out,
and he miserably perished. Valens the Arrian was burnt by the Goths, Manes, was
flead alive by the Persians: Montanus became his own hangman like Judas,
Nestorius had his tongue eat a sunder with worms. Lucian was worried and torn
in pieces with Dogs. In a word, God has always been so zealous in the
defense of his truth, that they who have opposed it, have not escaped
unpunished; but howsoever, he has let them go on for a time, yet in the end he
has paid them home, bringing vengeance and destruction like a whirlewind upon
them; which evidently shows, that God is both the Author and Protector of the
Scriptures.

Are the Scriptures then the word of God, 1. Use.
this therefore first serves te condemn the Papists, who vilify the Scriptures
and magnify traditions, giving more then they should do unto traditions, and
less^ (...) Scriptures, by making traditions to be more then they are, and
(...) Scriptures less. Which put me in mind of a certain Epitaph, which one
made of Erasmus, and when he had made it, he showed it to his friend, and
willed him to read it.

The Epitaph was this.

Hic jacet Erasmus, qui quondam bonus erat mus,
Rodere qui solitus, roditur a vermibus.
Out upon it, says his friend, why what have you done? be in bonus is short,
and you have made it long: true, says the maker, but therefore I hope ver in
vermibus is long, and I have made it short, and so have made amends for the
former fault. And so do the Papists, they give more then they should do unto
traditions, but therefore less to the Scriptures, seeking to cover one fault
with another, and so double their fault, and make it the greater.

Secondly, 2. Use.
This serves to condemn those, who believe not the Scripture to be Gods word,
as they show they do not, who are not careful to conform their lives unto it.
For do they who securely go on in their sins, believe what God threatens in his
word against sinners? Does the profane swearer, who can hardly speak a word
but an Oath must follow it, believe this for certain, that God as he threatens,
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain? Exodus 20.7.
Does the common Drunkard believe this, 1 Cor. 6.10.
that no such shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? Does the Adulterer
believe this, that Whoremasters and Adulterers God will judge? Heb. 13.4.
Does he that withholds the Laborers hire believe this, James 5.4.
that the hire of the Laborers does cry in the ears of the Lord of Hosts?
Does he, that deferrs and puts of his repentance, and yet presumes upon Gods
mercy, believe that to be true, that they who despise the riches of Gods
bounty, and abuse his patience, Romans 3.5.
treasure up wrath to themselves against the day of Wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God? In a word, does any wicked liver believe this
to be true, Romans 2.9. 2 These. 1.8.
that tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul that does evil? and
that the Lord in flaming fire shall render vengeance to those that obey not the
Gospel? For if they believed these things, it would strike such a terror into
their souls, that they would not suffer their eyes to sleep, nor the temples
of their heads to take any rest, till they had unfainedly humbled themselves
for their sins past, and had testified to the World, by the reformation of
their lives, that they are assured that God is the Author of the Scriptures.

And lastly, Seeing God is the Author of the Scriptures, it may therefore
teach us, both to hear and read them with all reverence, 3. Use.
to renounce all Doctrines which agree not with the Doctrine which the
Scripture contains, and if occasion requires, to stand in defense of the truth
of those things that we find written therein, even to (...) loss of our lives,
as many Thousar ^^oly Martyrs have done ^^re us.

FINIS.
The Tenth SERMON.
MAT. 11.5. The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the Leapers are
cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up and the poor have the
Gospel preached unto them.


THese words are an answer which was sent by Christ unto John the Baptist. For
John the Baptist, as we see before, had sent two of his Disciples with this
question to ou^ Savior, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for
another? Christ to prove himself to be the Messiah, refers them to the works
which were done by him, Go, says he, and show John what ye hear and see, The
blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the Leapers are cleansed, etc.
Which words will not well admit any division; but for order sake we may observe
two things in them, the persons and the cure which was wrought upon them. The
persons ye see are of diverse sorts; some blind, some lame, some Lepers, some
deaf, some dead, and some poor, and every one of them had their several cure.
The blind received their sight, the lame walked, the Leapers were cleansed, the
deaf heard, the dead were raised up, and the poor had the Gospel preached unto
them. But it may be demanded, how Christ did show by these works which he did,
that he was the Messiah; when we read that the like works have been done by
others. Acts 9.17.
Did not Ananias Acts 9. restore Paul to his sight, when he was struck blind?
Did not Peter and John, Acts 3. restore the cripple, Acts. 3.6.7.
that had been lame from his mothers womb? 1 King. 17.23.
Did not Elias and Elizeus raise some that were dead: and have not the like
miracles been wrought by others? But the answer is, That between the works
which, 2 King. 4.36.
were done by them, and which were done by Christ, there is a great difference.
For first, the miracles which they wrought, were not wrought by their own
power, but by the power of God, God using them as his instruments to work those
miracles. Therefore says Saint Austine, Sancti non propria virtute miracula
fecerunt, sed deo in illis operante. Those holy men did not work miracles by
their own power and virtue, but by the power of God that wrought so them.
Therefore we see, that they always wrought them in his name, and prayed unto
him that he would enable them. Acts. 9.17.
The Lord has sent me (says Ananias to Paul) that thou might receive thy
sight. Acts 3.6.
In the Name of Jesus of Nazareth (says Peter to the Creeple) arise, and walk.
O Lord my God, 1 King. 17.23.
I pray thee (says Eliah when he raised the Widows son) let this child's soul
come unto him again. And so Elizeus prayed, when he restored to life the
Shunamites Son. 2 King. 4.36.
All showing thereby that they did not these miracles by their own power, but
as God enabled them. But Christ did all by his Word and Command, as by his own
power. This was that which the Centurion acknowledged, Speak (says he) but the
word, and my servant shall be healed; Mat. 8.8.
and he proves it in the words following by an excellent reason, For I am a man
(says he) under authority, and have soldiers under me, and I say to this man,
go, and he goes, and to another, come, and he comes, and to my servant, do
this, and he does it. As if he had said, If I can do this by my authority,
then what can thou do? I am a man, and thou art God, I am under the authority
of another, but thou art Lord over all; I have soldiers and servants at my
command, to do as I will them; Sickness is thy soldier, and health is thy
servant, and thou may command them; Say but thou to the palsy, go, and it
will be gone; say thou to health, come, and it will come: and what thou willest
them to do, they will do the same. Therefore in the Gospel, we see how he
commanded when he wrought any miracle. So when he raised the young man to life,
Luke 7.14. Young man (says he) I say unto thee, Mat. 8.3.
arise. So when the Leper said to Christ, Mat. 8. Lord, if thou will, thou
can make me clean. He presently answered, I will, be thou clean. Luke 18.42.
So to the blind man, Luke 18. Receive thy sight. And thus he wrought miracles
by his Word and Command which others did not.

Secondly, Though others have wrought some miracles, yet Christ has wrought
more then they all together. Some have cured the lame, but have not restored
the blind; some have healed the sick, but have not raised the dead; some have
done one cure, but not another, but Christ did all: Healing as we see Mat. 4.
all manner of diseases among the people, Mat. 4.23.
and doing those works, John 15.24.
as himself testifies, John 15. which were never done by any other: as we shall
see in handling the several cures which he wrought here. Where first, it said,
That the blind receive their sight.

We read in the Scripture of a twofold blindness, the one outward, the other
inward; the one corporal, the other spiritual; the one of the body, the other
of the soul. Christ cured many that were outwardly blind, whereof some were
such as had lost their sight, and could have seen before, and some that were
born blind, and could never see at all, as the blind man that we read of John
9. the like cure whereof was never done by any but by Christ, John 9.32.
since the World began. The blindness of the body is very grievous. For that
which the Sun is to the world, the eye is to the body, which being void of
sight, remains in a perpetual night of darkness. A man would count it a very
grievous punishment to be kept in darkness, but for a twelve-moneth together,
where he might see no light. How grievous then must it needs be to them, who
for want of their sight do abide in darkness, and see no light for their whole
life time? Truly says Solomon, Eccles. 11.7. the light is sweet, and a
pleasant thing it is, for the eyes to behold the Sun. Therefore we read of some
Countries which are near to the Pole, where the night continues diverse months
together, and the Sun does not show himself all the while, that the
Inhabitants at the end of so long a night, at such a time as the Sun is wont to
appear, and bring the day among them, they get up to the top of their highest
mountains, as striving to have the first view of the Sun, which as soon as they
see, they cry out for joy, Behold the Sun, the Sun appears, and they put on
their best apparel, and feast one another, So welcome is the light of the Sun
among them, when they have wanted it long. For darkness, ye know, is most
uncomfortable: therefore though God sent darkness as a plague among the
Egyptians, Exodus 10.22.23.
yet his people had light in all their dwellings. And therefore as hell is
shadowed forth in the Scripture by the name of darkness, to express the
uncomfortablenesse and horror of it, Mat. 22.13. Colos. 1.12.
so heaven is illustrated by the name of light, to express the great comfort
we shall find in it; yet they which are in darkness, and have not the light
of the Sun among them, may have fire and candle, and other helps, to give them
light, and to take away darkness; but they who are blind, are always in the
dark, and have no help against it. So uncomfortable a thing it is to a man to
want his sight. In which regard, whereas it is said of Abraham, Genesis 25.8. That
he gave up the Ghost, and died a good old age, and old man and full of years,
and was gathered unto his people: It is only said of Isaac, Genesis 35.29. That
Isaac gave up the Ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people, being old,
and full of days. It is not said of him, as it is said of Abraham, That he
died in a good old age: but this clause is omitted in the death of Isaac, as
Divines observe; and they give this reason, Because Isaac's old age, by reason
of his blindness, could not be so good and comfortable unto him. For they want
many comforts which others have, who do want their sight. Therefore when our
Savior asked the blind man, Luke 18: Luke 18.41.
What he would have him to do for him, he presently answered, Lord, that I may
receive my sight? as being more desirous to have his sight then any thing
besides.

It is a grievous thing for a man to want his smelling or tasting, or any of
his senses, or his hands or feet, or any of his limbs, but far more grievous to
want his eyes, because the eye is the guide of the whole body, and directs
every part and member of it, without which the tongue knows not before whom it
speaks, the hand knows not what it is it takes, the foot knows not whither it
goes; but the tongue will err, the hand will mistake, and the foot will
stumble, where there is not an eye to vvatch over all, and to preserve them
from danger. Therefore God has placed the eyes in the head, where they may
look to the whole body, because every part has use of the sight to guide and
direct it. When therefore we read, That Christ cured the blind, and gave them
their sight, we may well imagine, that it was a vvonderfull benefit that he
did for them. And therefore it ^^^fused dravv us to bethink our selves, what a
blessing it is that God has given us our sight, whereby we take comfort in
the sight of the creatures, in the sight of our parents, and children, and
friends, and whereby we are freed from so many dangers. Yet this is a
blessing which fevv do ever think of, but find the benefit and comfort of it,
Carendo magis, quam fruendo, rather when we want then when we have it. If
we vvanted our sight, what a benefit should we lose, what a loss should
we have, and what would we not give that we might recover it? And
therefore when we hear how Christ cured the blind, or when we see any that
want their sight, it should put us in mind what a blessing it is that we can
see, and therefore should be thankful to God for it: yet though it be grievous
to want the sight, and a great blessing to have the same: yet it is far more
grievous when the mind is darkened, and wants the eyes of knowledge and
understanding. For that which the eye is to the body, the same is the
understanding unto the soul; and what blindness is to the one, the same is
ignorance to the other. And therefore when Christ did cure them outwardly, so
we may well think, that he cured them inwardly, as he took away their
blindness, and gave them their seeing, so he took away their ignorance, and
enlightened them with knowledge and understanding. And this was a greater
cure then the other. Men commonly think that a man that is blind, is far more
miserable then he that is ignorant; and that he, on the contrary, is in better
condition that has a sound and comely body, then he whose mind is adorned and
beautified with grace and virtue.

But as the soul is more excellent then the body, so knowledge and
understanding is more excellent then the sight, because the sight does only
give light to the body, understanding to the soul. They who want the eyes of
their body, yet they know they want them, and therefore will carefully seek for
help if they may be cured: and if they cannot be cured, yet they have this
help, that they may have one to lead and guide them. But they who want the eyes
of their mind, do not know their blindness, and therefore do not seek to have
any help, but think themselves well though they live in ignorance; whereby the
Devil leads them blindfold to hell before they be aware. 2 King. 6.18.19.
As the Army of the Syrians, being struck with blindness, were led into
Samaria amongst the midst of their enemies, and ^^ew not where they were, till
they were come thither, we may see then by that which I have spoken, that it is
a grievous thing to want the outward sight, but far more grievous when the mind
is darkened. And therefore as the blind here came unto Christ to be cured of
their blindness, so we must likewise come unto him, to remove our spiritual
blindness from us: because he is that dayspring from on high, as Zachary
said, that came to visit us, to give light unto them that sit in darkness, and
in the shadow of death, Luke 1.78.
and to guide our feet in the way of peace.

And thus much concerning the first cure which is here mentioned, that the
blind received their sight. And so I come to the next, that the lame walked.

As it is a great blessing to have the use of our eyes, and to be able to see,
so it is a great blessing to have the use of our feet, and to be able to go.
For God in framing the body of man, has so disposed of every part and Member
of it, that we cannot spare any one of them all, because all are necessary,
every part being both serviceable one to another, and serving for the good of
the whole body. If any part of the body do want any thing, all the rest will
afford it the best help they can, the tongue will ask what will do it good,
the ear will listen where it may be had, the eye will look after it, the foot
will go for it, and the hand will bring it: and if any part be wanting, every
part is the worse for the want of it. The eye says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 12.21.
cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee, nor the head to the feet, I
have no need of you. For as the eye does serve to see for the body, so does the
hand to work for it, and as the head is made to rule and govern the body, so
the feet to uphold it, every part having his several use and office, and no
part being needless.

Therefore Livie reports, that when there was dissension between the Senators
and the Commonalty of Rome, and the Commonalty refused to yield them aid, and
the whole body of the Commonwealth was much troubled about it, Menenius
Agrippa that was an excellent Orator being sent to make reconciliation between
them, did tell them this fable; That upon a time there fell out some variance
between the belly and the rest of the Members. The Members objected against the
belly, that they were set a work to provide for it, and the belly in the mean
while remained idle and consumed all. And therefore they all conspired
together, that they would not provide any longer for it, as they had done
before. The foot refused to go any more for it, the hand refused to reach any
meat to the mouth, the mouth denied to take it, the teeth to chew it; but what
became of this? The belly being almost starved with hunger, the whole body was
the worse, the eyes waxt dim, and the ears dull, the hands grew weak, and the
feet feeble, and all the Members began to faint and languish: and therefore in
the end when they saw the danger, they were glad to be reconciled, having
learned by experience, that there is not any part of the body needless, but
where any one Member performs not the Office which belongs unto it, the whole
body has a want and is the worse for it. Though the tongue can speak, yet if
the ear cannot hear, though the mouth can eat, yet if the hand cannot work;
though the eye can see, yet if the foot cannot go, it is a great defect to the
whole body. Therefore as our Savior restored the blind, and made them to see,
which before they could not: So he cured the lame, and enabled them to walk,
who before were not able to go or stand. Now some ye know fall lame by
mischance, as Mephibosheth did, by falling when he was young out of his Nurses
Arms. 2 Samuel 4.4.
Some are borne lame from their Mothers womb, as the Creple that we read of in
the 3. of the Acts. How these became lame which were here cured by Christ, it
is not set down, Acts 3.2.
but to be freed from their lameness howsoever it came, was a wonderful
blessing. For that which the foundation is to the building, the same are the
feet unto the body, as being made by God to bear and support it. Therefore God
has placed them under all the rest, to uphold all, because the body is no more
able to stand without them, then a building to stand without a foundation.
Neither serve the feet only to uphold the body, but likewise to carry it from
place to place, wheresoever we have occasion to go, without which we cannot
stir from one place to another without pain or trouble. So grievous a thing it
is to be lame, and so great a benefit to have the use of our feet, which as it
may put us in mind of this duty, to be thankful unto God for giving us the
perfect use of our lims, which we might have wanted as well as others. So it
may likewise teach us to use them well; to use our Members, Romans 6.19.
as the Apostle speaks, as Servants unto righteousness. We find in the Gospel,
that many were every where brought unto Christ that were lame and impotent, and
we cannot go any where but we see the like, all which are as it were so many
Preachers unto us, to admonish us what God has done for us, in giving us our
lims, and therefore that we ought to use them well, to his glory, our good, and
the benefit of others, Job. 29.15.
by being an ^ye to the blind, and a foot to the lame, as Job was, that though
we cannot heal them as Christ did, yet that we do help them the best we can,
by having compassion on their infirmities, and helping them with relief that
stand in need thereof, and cannot help themselves.

And thus much briefly for the lame that were cured. The next cure which is
here mentioned is that the Lepers were cleansed.

The Leprosy was a grievous and foul Disease, and the condition of a Leper,
was of all other that were diseased, the most wretched and miserable.

For first, Levit. 13.46
as we see the Leper by Gods appointment was to live alone, and to be separated
from the fellowship of Gods People, as unworthy to come into a clean Company.
In which respect, the four Lepers, that are mentioned when Samaria was
besieged, 2 Kings 7.3. Numb. 12.14
dwelt out of the City, Myriam though she was the Sister of Moses and Aaron,
was removed out of the Camp, and Azariah though he were the King of Juda, yet
being smote by God with a Leprosy, 2 King, 15.5
he lived a part in a several house. So uncomfottable it was to have this
Disease, because they were excluded (as they are now that have the Plague) from
all Company, which made many no doubt to pine away with grief and sorrow, as
being forlorn, and left utterly dest tute of all help and comfort in their
greatest extremity.

Secondly, The Leper did wear four marks to be known by, his garments torn,
his head bare, his mouth covered, Levit. 13.45.
and he was to cry unclean, unclean, that others might know that he had the
Leprosy, and might shun and avoid him. For the Leprosy was a Disease among
the Jews that was strangely infectious, which infected not only the persons
themselves, but their Garments and Houses, and that in such a manner, that as
we see in the 14. of Leviticus, the infection might be seen and discerned upon
them, it would fret into their Garments, and eat into the very mortar and
stones of their walls; and though the walls were plastered all over again,
yet it would break through them, that they were feign sometimes to pull down
their houses. Insomuch, that some think (and it is very probable) that the
Jews in a proper and peculiar manner, were troubled with this Disease, which
is unknown in these days, as ye know there are many Diseases now, which have
not been known in former ages.

Now though the Leprosy was a grievous Disease, yet there is a Disease, the
Leprosy of sin, that is far more grievous. The outward Leprosy infects but
the body, but this spiritual Leprosy infects the soul; so that no Leper is so
unclean in the sight of man, as the sinner is loathsome in the sight of God. If
we know of a man that has an infectious Disease, we will be very wary how we
come in his Company, for fear he infect us: But for those whose Company is far
more dangerous, who by drunkenness and the like communicating sins, do infect
men's souls, many are so far from shunning their Company, that they take
pleasure therein, as if they took delight to be infected by them. We have not
any of those kind of Lepers which the Jews had, but of these kind of Lepers,
that by drunkenness do daily infect others, I would we had not too many in
every place. Those Lepers were separated from the Congregation, and were not
suffered to come among them; but these Lepers that are drunk from morning to
night, almost every day in the week, and so continue infecting others all the
year long, are not ashamed to show their faces amongst us, but come openly to
Church into the Congregation. Those Lepers were constrained to live a part by
themselves, but these have liberty to frequent Tavernes and Alehouses, where
for the most part they are the welcomest guests. Those Lepers had their
Clothes rent in sign of their sorrow, and did acknowledge themselves unclean;
but these are so far from acknowledging their fault, that they take a pride in
their sin, and glory in their shame, boasting that they are able to make others
drunk, as if it were a Credit and commendation unto them. Those Lepers would
gladly have been rid of their Disease, and therefore came unto Christ to be
cleansed, and he did cleanse them. But what hope can these have to be cleansed
by Christ, who delight in their Leprosy and are unwilling to leave it? Christ
indeed is that skillful Physician, that cures both our corporal and spiritual
Diseases, but it is only of such as are laden and weary of the burden of
their sins, and desire nothing more then to be rid of them. And therefore if
they would be cured of their spiritual Leprosy, they must be weary of it, and
have an earnest desire, and do their best endeavor to be freed from it, and
then coming to Christ, as these Lepers did, they shall be cleansed.

The next cure which is here mentioned, is that the deaf heard. We read in the
Scripture of two sorts of deafness, the one corporal, the other spiritual.
The corporal deafness when the ear cannot hear is a great defect, and in
some respect, it is better for a man to want his sight then to want his
hearing; because by hearing we attain more knowledge then we do by seeing. For
hearing is the sense of knowledge and discipline: in which regard, Solomon when
he begins to teach us Wisdom, Proverbs 1.8. first knocks at the door where
Wisdom must enter and cries, hearken my Son. For Wisdom and Knowledge is got
chiefly by hearing, and, as some have thought, is rather lessened and impared
then increased by seeing. Therefore we read of some of the Philosophers, who
purposely put out their own eyes, that they might the better attain unto
knowledge, wherein they thought that their sight would hinder them, and
distract their minds with variety of objects. And we read of many blind men
that never saw at all, but were born blind; and yet have been famous for their
wisdom and knowledge. But we never heard of any man that was deaf from his
birth and could never hear, that ever attained to knowledge and understanding
in any measure. For how should they have understanding in any thing, to know
what they should do or leave undone, which they were never taught? and how
should they be taught who could never hear, and so are incapable of learning
any thing? Therefore though God have struck some blind; and some dumb; yet he
struck them not deaf but spared their hearing. Though he struck Zachary dumb
Luke 1. for his unbelief, Luke 1.20. Acts 9.9.
and Paul blind Acts 9. for persecuting the Church; yet he left them their
hearing, because if he had struck them deaf withal, they could not have known
his will. Blessed is he that reads, Revel. 1.3.
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy. Some cannot read, as they which
are blind, and they which were never taught; yet they are not excluded from
this blessing, because they may hear it read: but they who are deaf can neither
read it themselves, nor hear it read by others. Yet I speak not this as if they
who are born deaf, are therefore absolutely excluded from this blessedness,
but that they are excluded from the means of it. Yet God can save them without
the means; and we may well think that God who is so gracious, will not exact
the employment of a talent, where he has not given it.

I might further show you many great inconveniences which come by deafness,
whereby we might see, what a benefit it was which Christ did for them, in
taking their deafness away from them; and what a blessing we have of God, in
that he has given us the sense of hearing. But though this outward deafness
of the ear, be a grievous defect, yet there is a deafness, the deafness of
the heart, (whereby obstinate sinners will not suffer that which they hear with
their ears to enter into their hearts) which is far more grievous. Such are
they, who are compared by the Prophet David to the deaf adder, that will not
hearken to the voice of the charmer; Psalm. 58.4, 5. Pro. 1.20.
but though wisdom cry aloud in the streets, yet they will not hear her. Such a
one was Pharaoh, who though Moses and Aaron cried daily unto him, Dimitte
populum, Let my people go, and though God thundered from Heaven with his
judgments upon him, yet he would not hear them. And so though a man, as God
willed the Prophet, Esaias 58.1.
life up his voice like a Trumpet, and cry never so loud, against
covetousness, oppression, drunkenness and the like; yet many stop their
ears, and will not suffer what they hear to sink into their hearts. This is a
wilful and obstinate deafness. And this deafness, until our hearts be
opened as Lydia's was, is by nature in every one of us. And therefore as the
deaf here came unto Christ: so every one of us must come unto him to be cured
of this deafness.

The next cure which is here mentioned, is Christ's raising of the dead.

His raising of the dead was a more miraculous cure then any of the former. The
blind and the deaf whom Christ restored, did only want their sight and their
hearing, and had the rest of their senses, the lame whom he cured did only
want the use of their feet and had the rest of their limbs; the Lepers whom he
cleansed did only want their health, and had the use of their limbs and
senses; but they which were dead had none of them all, but were deprived of
them altogether: and so his raising of such as were dead was a greater work
then any of the former. Therefore whenever he raised the dead, the people did
greatly admire, and honor him when he cured two blind men, Mat. 9.31.
Math. 9, They spread ^abroad his fame throughout all the land. When he raised
to life the Widows son in Naim, Luke 7.16.
Luke 7. All that were present praised God and said, A great Prophet is risen
up amongst us, and God hat^ visited his people. And when he raised Lazarus
from the dead, John 11. it is said there, that many of the Jews that saw what
Jesus did, John 11.^5.
believed in him. While a man is alive, though he be never so much diseased or
so dangerously sick; yet we send for Physicians, and use other means, because
there is some hope that he may recover; but when he is once dead, there is no
more hope, and therefore we trouble our selves no further: so when the Rulers
daughter was sick, he came unto Christ and besought him for her, My little
daughter says he, lies at the point of death; but I pray thee come and lay
thy hands on her and she shall live. Mark. 5.23. Mark. 5.35.
But his daughter dying before Christ came to her, some brought the Ruler word,
Thy daughter is dead, why troublest thou the Master any further? as thinking it
in vain when his daughter was dead to seek for help; because the Physician is
not sought to for the dead, but for the living. But Christ that was as well
able to revive the dead, as to heal the sick, raised diverse in the Gospel
from death to life, whereof some are not named, but only mentioned ingenerall;
as here it is said, that the dead were raised up, without specifying in
particular who they were: some are mentioned in particular, as the Rulers
daughter whom he restored to life, when she was newly dead, Mark 5. Mark 5.42.
Luke 7.15. Joh. 11.17.
The Widows Son that was carried forth to be buried, Luke 7. and Lazarus that
had been four days dead, and was laid in his grave, John 11. If Christ then
were able to raise the dead, while he lived here in the form of a servant, we
may well he assured, that being in glory at the right hand of his Father, he is
both able to raise our souls from the death of sin to the life of grace; and
to raise our bodies, when they lie dead in their graves, to the life of glory.

Indeed the raising of the body being dead, see us a thing incredible unto
flesh and blood. And therefore when St. Paul Acts 17. did preach to the
Athenians about the resurrection, they were so far from believing that the dead
should rise, that they counted him a babbler and laughed him to scorn. But as
Christ here raised some from death to life: so at the ^^st day he will raise
all; Act. 7.60.
the one being as easy to him as the other. Therefore our bodies when they
die, are said in the Scripture to ^all a sleep, because Christ can as easily
raise our bodies being dead as one man can wake another when he is fallen a
sleep. If many be fallen asleep in a Chamber together; yet one voice you know,
is able to waken them all: and so the voice of Christ at the last day, shall
raise all that are dead in the whole world together. The hou^e shall come says
our Savior John 5. John 5.28.
in the which, all that are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son
of Man, and they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurection of
life, and they that have done evil unto the refurrection of condemnation. 1
Cor. 15.42.
And therefore the burial of our bodies is fitly resembled by St. Paul 1 Cor.
15. to the sowing of seed, because, as the seed being sown in the ground, does
afterward revive and spring up again: so our bodies after they are dead and
buried, shall be revived and quickened. Qui tibi grana seminum mortua et
putrefacta vivificat, August. de ver. Apost. Sermo. 34.
per quae in hoe saecul^ vivas, multo magis te ipsum resuscitabit ut in
aeternum vivas. He, says St. Augustine, that quickens for thee the grains of
Corn, when they are dead and rotten, whereby thou may live upon the earth
for a time. much more will he raise thy self hereafter, that thou may live
for ever in Heaven. For he has not only redeemed our souls but likewise our
bodies; and therefore will not suffer them to perish in their graves, but will
quicken them again, that both our bodies and souls may live with him. And thus
much concerning his raising the dead.

The last thing which is here mentioned, is that the poor had the Gospel
preached unto them.

It is the saying of the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the poor, he
has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
Captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound. Which words
Christ expounding Luke 4. when he preached in Nazareth, he applies them to
himself, This day says he, Luke 4.21.
is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears; to show that he was anointed of
God to preach the Gospel unto the poor. Now by the poor to whom he preached the
Gospel, they are understood, who are said by our Savior Math. 5.3. to be poor
in spirit. For there are two sorts of poverty, the one outward, when a man
has not means to maintain himself but wants outward necessaries; the other
inward when a man is destitute of spiritual graces. And thus every one of us
all are poor, but some do not see their poverty and want, as the La^diceans,
Revel. 3.17. that thought themselves rich, and increased with goods, when they
were poor and naked. Some see their poverty, and find in themselves a want of
grace, and therefore do hunger and thirst after it; and these are the poor to
whom Christ is said here to have preached the Gospel. Therefore in the place
which I named before, the Prophet shows to what poor the Gospel should be
preached, by naming presently the broken hearted, And Esaias 66.2. The Lord
promises, to have respect unto him, that is poor and of a contrite Spirit;
the latter of these explaining the former, that they are the poor whom God
respects, who are humbled with the sight of their spiritual wants, and bewail
nothing more then their want of grace. Such were they to whom Christ here
preached, as knowing that the Gospel which is the glad tidings of salvation,
would be most welcome unto them, because it offers grace unto those who finding
in themselves a want of grace, do unfeinedly and earnestly desire the same.

Here then we see who they be that are fit to hear the Gospel, and that do find
comfort in hearing of it; namely, such as do see their spiritual poverty, and
feel in their hearts a want of grace; and therefore renouncing their own
righteousness, do fly unto Christ to find^rest to their souls. Mat. 11.28.
Therefore Christ in the Gospel invites only such to come unto him as find
themselves weary and heavy laden, and rejected the Pharisees that trusted in
themselves, Mat. 9.12. Mat. 18.11. Mat. 9.13.
because the whole have no need of the Physician. For he came into the World to
save that which was lost, and he came not (as he says) to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance.

To draw then briefly to a conclusion of all, if we would reap comfort by the
preaching of the Gospel, we must labor to see our spiritual poverty, to find
in our selves our want of knowledge, our want of faith, our want of grace,
and then the good tidings of the Gospel will be as vvelcome to us, as cold
waters to a traveller that is weary, Prove. 25.25.
and as the bringing of good news from a far Country.

FINIS.
The Eleventh SERMON.
CANTICLES 3.1. By night on my Bed I sought him whom my soul loves.


THey are the words of the Church, expressing her longing desire after Christ.
Division.
And in the words we may observe these three things; the Act, the Object, and
the Circumstances; the Act, sought, the Object, Christ, I sought him whom my
soul loves; and the Circumstances are two, the circumstance of time, and the
circumstance of place; the time when she sought him, I sought him by night, and
the place where she sought him, I sought him on my Bed, By night on my Bed I
sought him whom my soul loves. And these are the parts, I will begin with the
circumstances, because they are set down first in the words. And first for the
time when she sought Christ, it was by night. Now night is taken two ways in
the Scripture. Sometime literally, sometime metaphorically: literally for the
time which is opposite to the day; when the Sun has passed over our Horizon
and leaves us darkness, through the interposition of the Earth between the Sun
and us. So the night is taken literally, when the Apostle says, These. 5.7.
They that are drunk are drunk in the night. Implying thereby that then
drunkards were ashamed to be drunk in the day, (which now a days they are
not) but were drunk in the night that they might the better conceal it.
Sometime night is taken metaphorically, as when the Apostle says, Romans 13. The
night is far spent, Romans 13.12.
the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let
us put on the armor of light.

But in my Text, as I take it, the night is not taken metaphorically, because
it is added, by night on my bed, which being joined together, do show that they
are both to be taken literally.

First, then here observe the Churches sincerity, By prayer she sought Christ,
not openly in the day to be seen of men, as the Pharisees were wont to pray in
the streets, but secretly in the night, Mat. 6.5.
when there were none to see or hear what she did. Ille colit vere, qui sine
test colit, He worships Christ truly, who worships him when there is no
witness of it. Many will do that openly where they may be seen and commended,
which they will not do secretly where they are not seen to do it: like the Monk
that would fast whole days together, whilst he was in the Monastery, where
men saw and commended him for fasting so long, but when he was in the Desert he
could not fast, because there were none to see him. This was hypocrisy, but
where there is sincerity, a man will rather do good in secret, that he may not
be known to do it. So our Savior Mat. 6. teaches us to fast, When thou
fast^st, Mat. 6.17.
anoint thy head, and wash thy face, that thou seem not unto men to fast. So he
teaches us there to give alms, Mat. 6.3.
When thou do thine alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand
do^th. So he teaches us there to pray, Mat. 6.6.
When thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and shut thy door. All to be done
in secret, that we may not be seen to do it, as the Church here sought Christ
by night.

Secondly here observe the Churches Wisdom, She sought Christ by prayer, and
made choice of the night as the fittest time to pray in. When we pray in the
night, our ears and our eyes are not carried away with variety of objects,
which many times so hinder us when we pray in the day that we cannot mind our
prayers. And therefore it is, that commonly when we pray in the Church, we set
our hands or our hats before our eyes, making the day as it were night, that
our eyes being not troubled with outvvard objects, our hearts may the better
mind our prayers.

Lastly, Here observe the Churches importunity: For that which is here
translated by night, is by nights in the original, implying that she sought
him night by night, and would not give over, but continued importunate like the
woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.
til she had obtained her desire: Christ likes an importunate suitor that will
take no demall, a wearilesse seeker that seeks while he finds, and till he
find what he seeks, will never give over. Such a suitor, such a seeker was the
Church here, she sought him night by night, and though as it is said in the
next words, she found him not, yet she still persevered, and never lin seeking
until she had found him.

And as she sought him by night, so on her bed. As the night is the time, so
the bed is the place to rest in, but when others were asleep, and taking their
rest, the Church was awake, and her thoughts and desires wholly set upon Christ.
So that as Origin says of Mary Magdalene, when she came to Christ's Sepulcher,
and found him not there, Maria ibi non erat ubi non erat, quia tota ibi non
erat ubi Magister erat, Mary was not there where she was, but was wholly there
where her Master was, So the Church was not there where she sought Christ, but
was wholly there where Christ was whom she sought. So wholly with him in desire
and affection, that she could find no rest, no not in the place of rest, but in
thinking of him. As the Church here sought Christ, so must we that are
Christians, we must seek him by prayer night by night in our beds, not
suffering our eyes any night to sleep, nor the temples of our heads to take any
rest, without seeking of him. For if David would not suffer his eyes to sleep,
till he had found out a place for the House of the Lord, then much less should
we, till we have found the Lord of the House, even him whom here the Church
sought night by night on her bed. And thus much briefly for the two
circumstances, the time and place, when and where she sought Christ.

I proceed to the Act in the word Sought, By night on my bed I sought him. Now
Seeking implies these three things.

First, A want of that which is sought. For a man will not carefully seek that
which he does not want, but that which he wants he will seek with the more
diligence: as a man that is hungry will seek food because he wants it, but if
he were not hungry, and vvanted not food, he would not seek it. So that seeking
implies a want or need of that which is sought.

Secondly, Seeking implies a desire of finding that which we seek. For though
a man do want a thing, yet if he have not vvithall a desire to find it, he
will not seek it: as a man that is in prison, though he want his liberty, yet
he will not seek it, unless he have likewise a desire to have it: So that
seeking implies not only a want of that which is sought, but a desire to find
it.

Lastly, Seeking implies a hope and possibility of finding that which we seek.
For though a man do want a thing, and though he be never so desirous to have
it, yet if there be no hope of finding the same, he will not seek it; as a man
that is sick, though he want his health, and be desirous to have it, yet if
there be no possibility and hope of his recovery, he will give over seeking it.
And in all these respects we are to seek Christ as the Church here does. For
there is nothing that we want so much as Christ, nothing to be desired in
comparison of Christ, and nothing so easily found as Christ, which are so many
motives to make us the more willing to seek Christ.

First, There is nothing that we want so much as Christ. We are all by nature
the Children of wrath, enemies to God, and bondslaves to Satan, and through
the disobedience of our first Parents, Damnati prius quam nati, says St.
Augustine, guilty of eternal condemnation before we were borne. From this
miserable condition we could not free our selves, neither could we be freed by
any other but Christ, whom God has made, 1 Cor. 1.30.
as the Apostle says, to be wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption unto us: all which we must needs want, if we have not him from whom
we must have them: and so there is nothing that we want so much as Christ. Many
indeed do not find in themselves any want of Christ, because all their
lifetime they have lived without Christ in their natural estate, and never
have known any better condition. For it fares with such, as it fares with them
that are borne blind, who because they never had the benefit of sight, cannot
so well conceive what it is to want it. And so these having never found any
comfort in Christ, do not know what it is to want him: but if it please God to
open their eyes, that they may find in themselves a want of grace, and see the
misery they are in for want of the same, they will see they want nothing so
much as Christ.

Secondly, That there is nothing to be desired in comparison of Christ, we may
see by this, because whatsoever we can desire without Christ, can never
satisfy us and give us content. For till we be assured, that Christ has took
upon him the discharge of our debts, and has reconciled us to God: our sins
must needs be such a wound to our souls, and a terror to our Conscience,
that nothing can give us any true contentment. The riches, pleasures, and
preferments of this World, may give a man some little content for a time, but
ever and anon they are ready to fail him, and when affliction, sickness or
death comes, they do all forsake him. Only the comfort which he has in
Christ, both in sickness and health, both in life and death, will never leave
him, and so nothing is to be desired in comparison of Christ. Nay, whatsoever
we can desire for our good, we may have it in him; for God has made him to be
all in all unto us, that in him we might have every thing. If we be terrified
with the sight of our sins, Mat. 1.21. Luke 1.71.
he is that Savior that came into the World to save sinners. If we desire
light and fear darkness; he is that dayspring from on high that came to visit
us. If we be hungry and desire food, John 6.35. John 4.14.
he is the bread of life that came down from Heaven. If we be thirsty and
desire to drink, he is the Fountain of living water, whereof he that drinks
shall never thirst again. If we desire to go to Heaven, he is the way. If we
desire to be freed from error, John 14.6.
he is the truth. If we desire to be freed from death, he is the life: In a
word, whatsoever we can desire for our good, we may have it in him who has
every thing: Habet omnia qui habet habentem omnia, He that has him who has
all things, has all things with him; and so nothing is to be desired in
comparison of Christ.

Lastly, As we want nothing so much as Christ, and as nothing is to be desired
in comparison of Christ, so nothing is so easily found as Christ. For he
invites all to come unto him, he never rejected any that came, but was always
found of all those that sought him. We see that at his Birth, he called both
Jews and Gentiles to come unto him, the wisemen that were Gentiles, and the
Shepherds that were Jews, to show that he is not ((...)) a respector of
persons. We see that in his life, he called both young and old to come unto
him; some that were but infants, and some of all other ages, to show that he is
not ((...)) a respector of times. And we see that after his Resurrection from
death, he commanded his Disciples to preach the Gospel all over the World in
all Countries, to show that he is not ((...)) a respector of places, but
accepts of all and rejects none; whosoever they be that come, whenever they
come, and from whencesoever they come unto him. And though our coming unto him
be for our good, for otherwise we cannot but everlastingly perish, yet he uses
many motives to persuade us to come. Mat. 22.23.
To make us the more willing to come unto him, he invites us in the Gospel by
the parable of the King, that made a great feast for the Marriage of his Son,
and sent forth his Servants to call them that were bidden.

To show how willing he is to receive us if we come, he propounds the parable
of the prodigal Son, Luke 15.20.
who but coming to his Father, his Father made more haste and ran forth to
meet him, fell on his neck and kissed him, and received him as joyfully, as if
he had never offended him. To show us the danger of deferring our coming, and
putting it off as many do, the whole time of their life, he propounds the
parable of the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.11.12.
who were excluded out of Heaven, because they were not ready at the time to
meet the Bridegroom. Yet to hearten us any time while we live to come, he
propounds the parable of those that were called into the Vineyard, and shows
that he who came at the eleaventh hour, did not lose his reward, but received
his hire. Mat. 20.9.


Nay, though we be strayed away from him, and do not seek him, he shows by the
Parable of the lost sheep that he will seek us; Luke 15.4.
and never linne seeking until he have found us: All plainly showing, how
ready he is to be found of us, who so graciously invites us to come unto him;
so joyfully receives us when we come, and so carefully seeks us when we are
strai'd away from him.

To wind up then that which has been delivered in this point. If seeking
implies a want of that which is sought, a desire to have it, and a hope and
possibility of finding that which we seek: and if there be nothing that we want
so much as Christ, nothing to be desired in comparison of Christ, and nothing
so easily found as Christ, it must needs follow from hence, that we must above
all things seek Christ as the Church here does. But how far are the most from
thus seeking Christ? some seek the favor of great persons, some preferment and
promotion; some seek their pleasures, some wealth and riches, but Christ has
few seekers, and many are hindered from seeking Christ by their seeking of
these. You know how they who were bidden in the Gospel to that great feast,
pretended excuses why they could not come: Luke 14 18.19.20.
one desiring to be excused because he had bought a piece of ground, and so
could not come, because he must go to see it; another because he had bought
five yoke of Oxen, and must go to prove them: another, because he had married a
wife, and therefore could not come. All these things were such as might
lawfully be done, but not sufficient to excuse them for not coming to Christ,
whom as we want, so we must seek above all things. And this we cannot do till
we can truly say, as the Church here does, I sought him whom my soul loves.

Wherein she expresses her unfeigned love and affection to Christ, which
kindled her desire the more to seek him. Anima est ubi amat non ubi animat, the
soul is where it loves, not where it lives. And therefore the Church thus
loving Christ could not choose but seek him, as counting it her happiness to
enjoy his presence, and to live with him.

The Courch ye know is Christ's spouse, and there is nothing so tedious to
lovers, and which they can less endure then one another absence. Hence was
that vehement longing of the Church for Christ's first coming, Esaias 64.1. Vtinam
dirumperes Caelos, O that thou would rent the Heavens and come down! as
wishing rather that the Heavens should be rent asunder, Esaias 64.1.
then that he should stay there, and she stay here and be absent from him. And
hence it was that when Christ was to leave the World and told his Disciples
beforehand of it, their hearts were troubled, and though he told them, that he
went to prepare a place for them, that he went to his Father, that he would
send them another Comforter that should abide with them for ever; John 16.6.
yet still their hearts were filled with sorrow, because he would leave them,
as being more willing to bear any loss then to endure his absence; and being
no more able to be without him if he should leave them a while, then for Ivey
to be without a tree or a wall, whereunto if it cleave not it will fade and
wither: so grievous it was to them that loved Christ, not to enjoy his presence.

Now as it was with the Disciples and here with the Church: so it is with all
those that do truly love Christ, they desire his presence and bewail his
absence, more then any thing besides. Every one of us as we bear the name of
Christians, so we will profess our love unto Christ, and be ready to say that
we love him unfeignedly; but if we examine our selves for the trial of our
love and affection to him, we shall many of us find, that though we have Jacobs
voice yet we have Esau^ hands, and do show by our works that we do not love
him. Mat. 10.27.
Christ requires that we love him above all, and says, that he that loves
Father, mother, Son or Daughter more then him, is not worthy of him; yet how
many things are there that we love more then Christ? If we have a friend whom
we truly love' because we love him we will be loath to do anything that shall
offend him; nay, we will take his part when he is spoken against, and will
be offended with them that do speak against him: But when we hear Christ
dishonored, and his name blasphemed by all manner of swearing, we can often
hold our peace, without being offended and reproving those that do thus
dishonor him, and do we not then love our friends more then we love Christ?

If we have a friend whom we truly love, because we love him, we will
take his Counsel and follovv his advice, before any others that Counsel us
otherwise; yet when Christ stands on the one side, and covetousness on the
other, and gives us contrary Counsel: when Christ on the one side wills us
to give to the poor, to feed the hungry and to cloth the naked; and
covertousnesse on the other side wills us to part with nothing, but to get
what we can, we follow rather what covetousness then what Christ Counsels
us, and do we not then love our riches more then we love Christ? Christ on the
one side wills us to follow him and we do it not, our pleasures on the other
side to follow them and we do it, and do we not then love our pleasures more
then we love Christ?

When David considered the wonderful love of God unto man, he knew not what to
think of it; but he cried out in admiration, Lord what is man that thou art so
mindful of him, Psalm. 144.3.
or the Son of man that thou so regardest him! But when we consider the
wonderful want of our love unto him, we may cry out rather, O man, what is the
Lord that thou art so unmindfull of him, or the Son of God that thou so
little regardest him!

He loved us so dearly that he thought not his life too dear for us, but
suffered a most shameful and accursed death, to free us from the curse which
was due unto us: yet we for requital of this his love (though love be requited
with nothing but love: as fire is kindled with nothing but fire) do so little
regard him, that we prefer our friends, our pleasures, our wealth and riches,
and for the most part whatsoever we love, before him.

How far are such from being able to say truly as the Church here does, I
sought him whom my soul loves. Her love unto Christ was not verbal and
outward, from the rine of the lips, but real and inward from the root of the
heart, from her soul and spirit, her soul loved him, she loved him, as the
Church, Esaias 26. desired and sought him, with my soul have I desired thee in
the night; Esaias 26.9.
yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. She loved him, as the
blessed virgin magnified him. My soul does magnify the Lord, Luke 1.46.47.
and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. She loved him, as the Prophet
David praised him. Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise
his holy name. Psalm. 103.1.
Outward love from the lips may be false and counterfe^, but inward love from
the soul is always unfeigned. And such a love it is which Christ does require
and no other, that we love him with the heart, and with the soul, with all the
heart, and with all the soul: So precious does he account our love, that he
will not have so much as the least grain of it lost, but will have it all. He
has millions of Angels that are inflamed with his love, who love him far
better then we do or can, and our love unto Christ is no benefit to him, he
reapes no prophet nor advantage by it, only because he loves us, he desires
again to be beloved of us, and that unfainedly from our very souls. He will
not have the soul and love divided, he likes not that soul that is without
love, nor that love which comes not from the soul. If love come unto him and
not from the soul, before he admit it he will first ask whence it came, as
Micha asked the Levite before he received him. And if the soul come unto him
without love, he will forbid it to come, as Joseph forbad his Brethren, Judges
17.9.
Genesis 43. to come unto him without their Brother Benjamin.

And therefore if we will come unto Christ, Genesis 43.3.
we must come with love, with love from our souls, as the Church here does, I
sought him whom my soul loves.

To draw then to a conclusion, that we may be the more careful to seek Christ;
let us meditate on those things which may kindle and inflame our love toward
him, by considering how he desires our love and deserves the same.

If a man have showed us any extraordinary kindness, and has deserved our
love, we could not but condemn our selves of unthankfulness if we did not love
him: Nay, though he have not deserved our love by any kindness he has showed
us, yet if we do but hear that he is desirous of our love, because this is an
argument that he loves us, we will love him again. But Christ does both desire
our love and deserve the same. He desires our love, not for his own but for our
good, that he might have occasion to requite our love. And therefore he uses
most forcible Reasons to procure our love: Sometimes entreating us, and making
it his earnest suit that we would love him. 2 Cor. 5.20.
We says the Apostle, are Ambassadors for Christ, as God beseeching you by us,
we pray you in Christ's stead (but for what?) to be reconciled unto God. Here is
the strongest suit that ever was made: God and man were fallen out, man is the
party that has offended, and God is the party that sues to be reconciled; man
that should entreat God that he would forgive him, is entreated by God that he
would be content to be forgiven. Thus he sues for our love that should sue for
his. Nay, he uses not only entreaty to procure our love, but likewise the
promise of infinite rewards. The eye, says the Apostle, has not seen, the ear
has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, what God has
prepared (but for whom?) for them that love him. Was it ever heard of since the
World began, that any man ever came to a poor beggar, and offering him meat that
was ready to starve and to perish for hunger, should entreat him to eat it, and
not only so, but wit^al, should promise to reward him for it? But God, though
it be for our good that we love him, for otherwise we cannot but everlastingly
perish; yet he entreats us that we would love him, and not only so, but
promises withal, to reward our love with the Kingdom of Heaven. So earnestly
does he desire our love. And as he desires so he deserves our love. If we
should give a man but his diet or houseroome, we would think we deserved he
should love us for it. How then does he deserve our love that gives us every
thing? The very bread which we eat, nay the breath which we breath, we have it
from him, in whom we live, and move, and have our being, and cannot live a
minute without his blessing. The least blessing he gives us deserves our love,
and we have nothing but our love to give him for all that he gives us. So
abundantly does he deserve our love. Great reason have we then to require his
love in some measure, by loving him unseignedly as the Church here does, I
sought him whom my soul loves.

FINIS.
The Twelveth SERMON.
PROVERBS. 30.8. Give me neither poverty nor riches.


THese words are part of Agurs Prayer, and his Prayer in the whole verse
consists of two parts, a deprecation of evil, and a Petition of good. The evil
which he deprecates or prays against is of two sorts, either such as is simply
evil in it own nature, as vanity and lying, against which he prays in the
beginning of this verse, Remove far from me vanity and lies: Or such as are
not simply evil in their own nature, but yet may be occasions of evil, as
riches and poverty, against which he prays in the next words, Give me neither
poverty nor riches. The good which he prays for is a competent Estate, in the
end of this verse, a mediocrity between the two extremes of want and
superfluity. Feed me with food convenient for me. And these are the parts of
the whole verse.

Here then he prays that God would give him neither poverty nor riches,
neither over little nor over much, that he may neither live in want, nor yet in
abundance; not because these in themselves are evil, but because they may be,
and many times are occasions of evil.

To begin with the former, Poverty may be an occasion of evil two ways,
first, of evil to him that is poor; and secondly, of evil to others, through
his being poor.

First, Of evil to him that is poor, because poverty does commonly make a man
discontented and envious: discontented with his present estate, because he has
so little, and envious toward those whom he sees to have more: and these two,
Discontent, and Envy, do commonly make those that live in want, to live in
misery. Though a man have but little, though he have no more then will suffice
nature, though he have but food and raiment; yet if he have the virtue of
contentation, if he have learned with Jacob, to desire no more, but bread to
eat, and clothes to put on; Genesis 28.20. Job 1.21.
if he have learned with Job, to bless God as well when all his goods are
taken away, as when he had them; if he have learned with Paul, in what estate
soever he is, therewith to be content, Philip. 4.11.12.
and be instructed both how to abound, and to suffer need: then any estate will
be pleasing unto him, because he lives contented; but where this contentation
is wanting, as it is for the most part in those that live in want, there the
life is unpleasant, as we see by the Israelites, Exodus 16.3.
who presently cried out when they were in want Would to God we had died in the
Land of Egypt

And as Poverty does make a man discontented because he has so little, so it
makes him envious toward those that have more: as Rachell envied her Sister
Lea, Genesis 30. Genesis 30.1.
because her sister had children, and she had none. For envy is a repining at
another vvelfare, and therefore whosoever he be that is envious, must needs be
miserable wheresoever he is: and if it were possible for an envious person to
be in heaven where there is nothing but felicity, yet because there are degrees
of glory there, and he should see others in higher glory then himself, he
would be miserable, and could not be well while he savv another better.
Therefore Sololomon calls envy Prove. 14. the rottenness of the bones, Prove.
14.30.
because envy is as hurtful to the mind and body, as rottenness is that lies
in the bones, which eats up the marrow, consumes the flesh, and makes the
body to pine and languish. And this is another evil which is occasioned by
want, that for the most part it makes those that have but little, to be envious
toward those that have more then themselves.

Secondly, as poverty is an occasion of evil to him that is poor, so of evil
to others through his being poor; because want commonly draws a man to use
unlawful means, for the bettering of his estate, and supplying of his wants,
even to the damage and hurt of others. As sometimes by borrovving and not
repaying. For he that is in want, is commonly more ready to borrow what he
needs then to pay what he borrows, he is forvvard in borrowing but backward in
paying, which David notes to be the property of a bad man, Psalm. 37.21.
The wicked (says he) borrows, and pays not again. For a man to be in
want, so he be not in want through his own fault, is no sin, and to borrow
what he wants, so he repay what he borrovvs, is no sin: but to fall into
want through his own fault, through idleness, drinking, unthriftinesse, and
the like, and so to be driven to borrow, to supply his wants, and afterward
to be careless to pay what he borrovvs, this is a sin, and this commonly is
the sin of such as are in want. Yet he that is in want, though he pay not
what he borrovvs, he thinks it no fault, because he of whom he borrovvs is
better able to bear it then he is to pay it. But what though he be? Would
thou be content, if another who is not so strong as thou art, having an heavy
burden lying upon him, should remove it from his own, and lay it on thy back,
because thou art stronger, and better able to bear it? Thy want is thy burden
which God has appointed thee to bear, and should thou disburden thy self
thereof, and lay it upon another, because he is better able to bear the same?
might thou not as well by the same reason, deny to pay thy Landlord the
rent of thy house, because he is better able to bear the loss of the rent then
thou to pay it? and therefore thy poverty will not excuse thee for doing wrong,
as thou do when thou borrovvest and payest not again. Yet poverty sometimes
does draw men to a greater evil then this, even to steal from others to supply
their own wants. For want is often an occasion of theft. This Agur implies in
the next verse, where he gives this reason, why he desired a competent estate,
and that he might not live in want; Lest (says he) I be poor and steal. Luke
16.
Thus the unjust Steward, Luke 16. fell from want to theft. For when he saw
that his Lord had given him warning to give over his stewardship, he bethought
himself what course of life he should take, to supply his wants when he was
turned out of service, and being unwilling to labor, and ashamed to beg, he
resolved to steal, and in his accounts to defraud his Lord for his own
advantage. And thus many will do if they be in want, and think that their want
will excuse them for it. But will thy want excuse thee for doing that which God
has forbidden thee? must God be dishonored because thou art in want? and were
it not better for thee to suffer want for a time, then that God should justly
condemn thee for ever, for thy disobeying him? God never suffers any so to be
in want, that their want will excuse them for sinning against him, but though
he give them not all that they want, yet all that they want is not so much as
that which he gives them, and they may find more comfort in that which they
have, then their wants can discomfort them. Though the poor have mean houses,
and hard lodging, yet this may be their comfort (which is a great blessing of
God) that they can sleep in their houses, and take their rest in the night
time, and commonly more soundly then rich men do, Qui vigilant in-pluma, as
Cyprian speaks, who lie awake and cannot sleep in their beds of down.
Therefore, says Solomon, Eccles. 5.12. The abundance of the rich will not
suffer him to sleep. Though the poor have many a hard meal, and very slender
fa^e, and though they want many necessaries for their bodies, yet they may
comfort themselves in this, that God has provided them a liberal diet, his
Word and Sacraments for the food of their souls, and hereunto they have a
right and interest as well as any others. Though the poor may not come into
great men's houses, but are kept out by Porters, yet they have free liberty to
come into Gods House; and though they have not access to rich men's tables, yet
they may have access to the Table of the Lord as well as the richest. And
though here the poor toil and take great pains to supply their wants, yet this
may be their comfort, That God has provided them (if they serve him) a place
of rest hereafter, and that the time is but short that they shall live in want,
and be forced thereby to toil and take pains, for when they die, they shall
be freed from their wants, and shall rest from their labors. Rev. 14.13.
And in the mean time though the poor do live in want, yet as that holy Martyr
said, when some threatened to famish her, Elizabeth Young.
If you (says she) take away my meat, I trust that God will take away my
hunger. So if the poor depend upon God for that which they want, instead
thereof he will give them contentment, by taking away their desire of that
which they want, that they shall not need it. And these things, if the poorer
sort considered, it would make their poverty less evil to themselves, and
less hurtful to others.

And as Agur here prays, That God would not give him poverty, so likewise that
God would not give him riches, Give me (says he) neither poverty, nor riches.
To pray against poverty (which many so fear) is no more then the most will do;
but to pray against riches (which the most so desire) may be thought a Paradox.
But Agur here desiring rather to be good then great, and fearing that riches
would make him worse, he prays that God would not give him riches. Though
riches be not evil in their own nature, yet they may be (as we heard before of
poverty) occasions of evil, occasions of evil to him that is rich, and of
evil to others through his being rich. First, Of evil to him that is rich.
For riches do often make men proud, and to forget God. This Agur implies in the
next verse, by giving this reason why he desired that he might not be rich,
Least (says he) I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? For none
are so prone to forget God, as they commonly are whom he has blessed with
riches, though their riches should make them the more to remember him, as gifts
call to mind the givers of them. Therefore Moses gave a special Caveat to the
Children of Israel to beware they forgot not the Lord when he had enricht them
in the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 6.10.
When the Lord thy God (says Moses Deuteronomy. 6.) shall have brought thee into the
Land, to give thee great and goodly cities which thou buildest not, and houses
full of all good things which thou filledst not, and wels dug which thou
diggedst not, vineyards and olivetrees which thou plantedst not, when thou have
eaten and art full, then beware lest thou forget the Lord. Deuteronomy. 8.11.
And again, Deuteronomy. 8. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, lest when
thou have eaten and art full, and have builded goodly houses, and dwelt
therein, and when thy herds and thy flocks do multiply, and when thy silver
and gold, and all that thou have is multiplied, then thine heart be lifted up,
and thou forget the Lord; implying that then they would be most prone to forget
him. For riches by the fair show they make, do steal away men's hearts from God,
2 Samuel 15.6. Psalm. 62.10.
as Absolon by his fair shows to the people, did steal away their hearts from
David. Therefore David gives rich men this counsel, Psalm. 62. If riches
increase set not your hearts upon them: because if the heart be set upon
riches, then not upon God, For no man (says our Savior) can serve two
Masters, Mat. 6.24.
ye cannon serve both God and riches: no more then the eye, as St. Augustine
says, can both look up to heaven, and down to the earth at the same time.

And as riches do steal men's hearts from God, and make them not to regard him:
so sometimes they steal men's hearts from themselves, that they regard
themselves less then they do their riches, and therefore toil continually to
get Wealth; and yet are not satisfied though they have more then enough.

And therefore Agur in the 15. and 16. ver. of this Chapter, compares the
covetous rich-man to those things that are the most insatiable of all other: as
to the Horse-leach which is ever crying give give, which sucks the blood until
she be filled, and then she falls off; and yet presently after she falls to it a
fresh and is as hungry of it as she was before: To the grave that never cries
it is enough, but though it receive never so many dead bodies, yet it consumes
all; and is still gaping as it were, and opening the mouth that it may receive
more: To the earth that cannot be satisfied with water, but though sometimes it
be so glutted with rain, and made as it were drunken, so that it vomits it up
again, that a man would think that it had taken such a surfeit, that it would
brook rain the worse for a long time after; yet ye know if it be but without
showers for a while, it will begin to chappe and chaune, and be as thirsty
thereof as it was before: And so likewise to fire, which is of so insatiable a
nature, that it cannot be exstinguisht with adding fuel unto it; but the more
fuel it has, the more greedy it is, catching hold of all that is round about
it; first of the chimney where it was first kindled, then of the roof of the
house, then of the whole building; and yet it will not stay there, but will
presently take hold of the house that is next it, and so will still go further
and further, till it have devoured and consumed whatsoever is nere it. Now as
these are insatiable, as the Horse-leach is not satisfied with sucking blood,
the grave with the dead, the earth with water nor the fire with fuel: no more
can a covetous rich-man be satisfied with riches, though he have never so much.

Hence it is, that such do make themselves drudges to the world to get wealth;
and yet grudge themselves any part thereof, as unwilling to lessen that which
they have. For the more they have, Viri divitiarum.
the more they desire; their riches which should be a medicine to cure them of
covetousness, increasing their disease, and making them more covetous, and
less willing to spend any thing upon themselves. For Mammon does commonly use
his servants, as Gardeners use their Asses in some Countries, loading them to
the Market with good herbs, which are a burden to them and food for others,
and turning them when they have done to feed upon Thistles. And thus does
Mammon deal with his followers, loading them with wealth, and not suffering
them to enjoy the benefit thereof, but makes them to fare the more hardly
themselves to leave the more for others. This is called by Solomon Eccles. 6.
an evil disease, whatsoever his heart desires, and yet he has no power to
eat thereof, but spares from himself and leaves it to strangers: And thus
riches are occasions of evil to him that is rich.

Secondly, To others through his being rich. For riches make many to be
scornful and contemptuous toward their inferiors. For as poverty makes men
to envy those that have more then themselves: so riches on the contrary to
despise those that have less. This made the Church being in captivity, to say,
Our soul, is filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy, Psalm. 123.
because they when they reprove do reprove scornfully. This we see by Nabal 1 Samuel 25. whom though David did reverence because he was rich, 1 Samuel 25.
and called him Father, Give I pray thee says he, to thy Son David; yet
Nabal gave him a scornful answer, Who is David and who is the Son of Jesse?
There be many servants now a days that break a way from their Masters, shall I
then take my bread and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my
shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not whence they be, Lucri genus
quoddam divites habent iram, odisse qua donare vilius constat. Martial.
Rich men do make a gain of their anger, and are more ready to reprove then to
give, because it is cheaper. It was fault enough in Nabal, to give nothing to
David being then in want; but withal to reproach him because he would give him
nothing, made his fault the greater.

Secondly, As riches make many to be scornful and contemptuous: so more ready
to offer then to suffer injuries. For many presume upon their wealth to do
wrong, as knowing that they to whom they do it must be feign to put it up;
because they are not able to contend with them. But God has not therefore
given men wealth, to arm them thereby to do injustice; but to enable them the
better to do good unto others. And therefore if God have made thee wealthy, thy
wealth should rather keep thee from wronging any, especially those, who are not
of ability when they are wronged to help themselves.

Thou would count it great baseness in another if he should fly upon thee
with a weapon in his hand and strike thee with it, when thou have none in thy
hand to resist him. And do thou not the same when thou fliest upon another,
and do him wrong, because thou have wealth to bear thee out, and the other
has none? How far would thou befro^ bearing with him if he should do thee
wrong? For then thou would say, should such a one as he do wrong unto me,
and were it not a shame and disgrace unto me if I should suffer him? But indeed
the meannesse of his condition should rather move thee to bear with him. I am
sure our meannesse moves God when we offend him to bear with us, our vileness
makes him to spare and pity us. For so says David, Psa. 103.14.
Psalm. 103. where he gives this reason why God does pity us, and pardon our
offenses, and the reason is drawn from the baseness of our condition, For he
(says David) knows our frame, he remembers that we are dust. And therefore
his meannesse that does thee wrong, should rather move thee to spare and pardon
him, as our vileness moves God to pardon us when we sin against him. We see
then the reasons why Agur prays that God would not give him riches, lest his
riches might be evil either to himself, or to others, to himself by making
him proud, and not to regard God, or by making him covetous, and to regard
himself less then he did his riches; or evil to others, by making him to
scorn and contemn his inferiors, and to be more ready to offer, then to
suffer wrongs

Here then observe from Agurs prayer to God, to give him neither poverty, nor
riches, that both riches and poverty come from God, who gives less unto some,
and more unto others, of his free-gift. God had enough to have given enough
unto all, that all might have been rich, and none poor. For the earth is the
Lords, Psalm. 24.1.
as David says, and all that therein is; Psa. 115.16.
and though he have given it to the children of men, yet the right of disposing
and distributing thereof he has reserved to himself, to give how much, or how
little, and to whom he please, and to take it again when he will from them, and
to give it to others. 1 Samuel 2.1^.
Therefore Hannah 1 Samuel 2. The Lord (says she) makes poor, and makes rich,
he brings low, and lists up. So the Virgin Mary, Luke 1. Luke 1.53.
He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty
away. Therefore God has so disposed, that when we are borne, we come naked
into the World, and bring nothing with us, and that again, when we die, and
leave the World, we carry away nothing, but leave all behind us, that thereby
we might know, that we have all from God, and naught of our selves. Si vestra
sunt tollite vobiscum, says Bernard, if they be yours, take them away with
you. But man (says the Psalmist) shall carry away nothing with him when he
dies, neither shall his pomp follow him. And therefore seeing we have them from
God, and that it is he that gives both poverty and riches.

This may first teach us, Use. 1.
To ascribe unto God Whatsoever we have, and to acknowledge him to be the
fountain from whence they spring, and the giver of them. Many make account that
the goods which they have, they have not from God, because they were either
left them by their predecessors, or such as they have got by their own labor
and pains. It is true indeed, that many are born to fair lands and
possessions, and have much left them by inheritance from their Ancestors;
others attain unto great wealth and riches, by their own labor and industry,
and other means. But is not the gift of God in all these? who was it at the
first that made their Ancestors rich, and enabled them to leave so much wealth
behind them? Dent. 8.18.
was it not God? It is not he (as Moses says) that gives us power to get
wealth and substance? Is it not he that preserves men's goods from fire, from
water, from thieves, from enemies, and from a thousand other casualties that
befall others? Is it not he that moves the hearts of our friends to be
beneficial unto us? Is is not he that gives men health and strength to labor
for their livings? that gives his blessing unto their labors? and that gives
men wit and forecast to attain unto riches? He could if he pleased have made
all our Ancestors as poor as La^arus, that they should have left nothing
behind them for us. He can if he please so visit us with sickness, that like
the woman in the Gospel, We may spend all that we have upon the Physicians.
Nay he can, Luke 8.43. Deuteronomy. 28.23.
if he please, make the earth as iron, and the heavens as brass, and send a
famine, as he did in the time of Elias, and then what would all that we have do
us good, if we were debarred from the fruits of the earth which should sustain
and preserve us? And therefore we must not ascribe what we have, to our selves,
or our friends, but unto God, who gives, as Agur says, both poverty and riches.

Secondly, Seeing it is God that gives them, this may therefore teach us, Vsc.
2:
To be content with that portion which God has given us, whether it be more or
less. Though we have a less portion then many others have, yet we must
remember that we have it of God, of his free-gift, and therefore ought to be
contented with it, and not to murmr that we have less then others, lest we
provoke him by our murmuring to lessen that portion which he has given us. The
Jews in their Talmud have an Apologue to this purpose. That the Moon, upon a
time, did murmr and complain that God had not appointed her for so good a
use as he appointed the Sun, because the Sun shines in the day, and she in the
night time; and that God therefore for her murmuring did, as they say, diminish
her light, and lessen her shining. Which though it be but a fable, yet it has
a true moral, that if we be not content with that portion which God has
allotted us, we do provoke him thereby to make it less. The Lord (says Job)
has given, and the Lord has taken, Job 1.21.
blessed be the name of the Lord. If we should fall into poverty by the hand of
God, as Job did, yet we are not to repine and murmr against him, because
whatsoever he takes from us he takes but his own, which he gave us before of
his free-gift, and not of our deserving. And indeed, if we consider our own
deserving, though we have but little, yet even he that has least, has more
cause to wonder, that he has so much, then that he has no more, because we
have more then we do deserve, though we have never so little. For that which we
have is of Gods free-gift, as Agur here acknowledges, Give me neither poverty,
nor riches.

Thirdly, Seeing riches are from God, Use. 3.
it may therefore teach us to use them well, and to employ them to good uses.
For God has given them, that we might use them to the glory of God, the
maintenance of our selves, and the good of others; which if we do not, we abuse
his blessings. Mat. 25.28.
The servant^which employed not the talent well which his Master had given him,
had it taken from him, and was cast besides into outer darkness. What then may
we think shall become of those that employ them ill, and abuse the blessings
which God has given them to surfeiting, drunkenness, and voluptuous living?
These God will call to a fearful account at the day of judgment, for abusing,
wasting, and mispending his gifts. And in the mean time, God many times suffers
them to want that which they have carelessly wasted, that they may see their
fault what it is to waste by their want of it. I have read of a Duke in another
Country, who seeing through his window a company of young Gallants that were a
hunting, and rid up and down over the cornfieldsd, and tread down the corn,
he sent to bid them the next day to dine with him. And when they were come, he
made them great cheer, but took order that no bread except a manchet for
himself should be set on the Table. One of the Gallants spoke to a Servitour,
to bring in some bread, he went out as if he would fetch some, but came not
again; another spoke to another, who likewise went out, but came in no more: at
last they told the Duke, that they wanted bread, And well says the Duke, do ye
deserve to want bread with your meat, who so trampled down the corn under your
horse-feet. And thus does God many times deal with those that do waste his
blessings, causing them to want what they have formerly wasted, as the
Prodigal did. Yet many that live wastefully will excuse themselves, and think
their fault the less, both because (as they will say) they have enough to
spend, and are able to do it, and because it is their own, and not another
which they spend. But will this excuse them? Though thou have enough, may
thou therefore use it at thy pleasure, and is it no fault to waste and mispend
it? If thy Cook that dresseth thy meat for thee, because thou allowest him to
have salt enough always lying by him, should therefore put too much salt in
the pot, or cast too much on thy meat, and when thou reproovest him, he should
excuse himself, and say that he did it, because he had salt enough, and
therefore need not to spare, would thou take this for a sufficient answer?
And will God take this as an answer from thee, That because that he has given
thee enough, thou may spend it wastefully, and though it were thine own (as
indeed it is not, for thou art but a steward to use what thou have as God has
appointed) yet if it were thine own and not another, may thou therefore
mispend it as thou please? may thou not say as well that thy tongue is
thine own, and may thou therefore speak what thou listest? but as thou shall
answer for the words which thou speak, so for the goods which thou spendest,
because thereby thou do wrong unto him who is the giver of them.

Lastly, Use. 4.
Seeing riches are the gift of God, therefore we are to be thankful to him for
them, Qui serit benesicium metere debes fructum, He that sowes a benefit, great
reason he should reap some fruit of it, the fruit of thankfulness for the use
of his benefits. Therefore they were commanded in the old Law, To offer unto
God their first fruits that so they might acknowledge that they had them from
him, and therefore were to return them to him from whom they had them, as the
rivers (says Solomon) return to the sea from whence they came, and as Hannah
did dedicate her Son Samuel to God, Eccles. 1.7. 1 Samuel 1.27.28.
from whom she received him.

FINIS.
The Thirteenth SERMON.
PSALM. 32.6. Therefore shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time
when thou may be found.


THe Prophet David having committed two heinous sins, Coherence.
one upon the neck of another, adultery, and murder, and having continued a
long time secure and impenitent, at the last, as we read 2 Samuel 12 Chapter, God
sent Nathan the Prophet to him, to denounce the judgments of God against him,
by reason of his sins, which when David heard, he presently acknowledged his
sins unto God, and so by his confession obtained pardon, whereupon he wrote
this Psalm, and gave it this Title, A Psalm of David to give instruction,
showing thereby both the Maker of this Psalm. and that is David, and the end
why he made it; to give instruction. The instruction which he gives, is of no
ordinary matter, but of one of the greatest matters that ever fell into
controversy, and that is man's felicity: teaching us in the first and second
verses wherein we are to repose our felicity and happiness, not in those
things which the Philosophers taught, but in that which they never once thought
upon, the forgiveness of sins. For the Philosophers being guided only by the
eye of reason which is more then purblinde in matters of religion; hence it
came to pass, that while they aimed at felicity, every one shot his bolt so
wide at the mark, one placing felicity in honor, a second in pleasure, a third
in riches; in a word, so many Philosophers, so many felicities. But David here
a divine Philosoph^^^ in regard of whom all the rest were but naturals,
confutes them all by his own example: for David here, that lived in more true
pleasure then the best of them, that had more riches then any of them, more
honor then all of them, he leaves all these, and ascribes felicity in the
first and second verses of this Psalm to the pardon of sin, Blessed (says he)
is he Whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose finis covered. Blessed is the
man to whom the Lord imputes no sin.

Now as a cunning and skillful builder, if he have, any goodly building in
hand, he will be sure to lay a very sound foundation: So David here having so
weighty a Doctrine to instruct us in, as the felicity of man, he grounds the
same upon a very excellent reason, a reason drawn from his own experience,
because he found himself to be most miserable and wretched till his sins were
pardoned. For (says he in the third and fourth verses) while I held my tongue,
my bones consumed so that I roared all the day long, for thy hand was heavy
upon me day and night, and my moisture was turned into the drought of summer.
Whereby he shows, That while he played the hypocrite, and cloaked his sin,
while he held his tongue agagg'd as it were his own conscience that he might
not confess his sin, what a coile God had with him, how he was fain to lay him
as it were upon the rack, and to stretch him asunder almost every joint from
other, before he could bring him to acknowledge his sin, and to ask for pardon.
And this was the misery which David was in while he continued in sin. Then in
the fifth verse he shows how he was freed and delivered from this misery, and
that is by the confession and acknowledgement of his sin, I said (says he) I
will confess my sin, and thou forgavest me the punishment thereof. Dixi
confitebor, I did but say, or I had no sooner said, I will confess my sin, but
thou O Lord that might have taken me at the vantage, and condemned me out of
mine own mouth, thou forgavest me the punishment of my sin. Whereupon being
struck with admiration of Gods mercy, he infers in this sixth verse a notable
consequence out of the former Doctrine, That seeing he had sped so well by the
confession of his sin, that therefore others should be moved by his example, to
do as he did, and to obtain pardon. Therefore (says he) shall every one that
is godly pray unto thee, therefore, wherefore? why because thou have been so
gracious unto me that was so grievous a sinner, because thou have met me as it
were in thy midway with thy mercy, so that I could no sooner think to confess
my sin, but thou likewise thoughtest to forgive me my sin: therefore shall
every godly man though he have committed never so many sins against thee, be
encouraged by my example, to pray unto thee. And thus we see the coherence of
these words with the former.

In the words for order we may observe these four things. Division.


First, The reason why men shall come unto God, employed in this first word
therefore.

Secondly, The persons that shall come unto him, every one that is godly.

Thirdly, The manner how they shall come, namely, by praye^.

And lastly the time when they shall come unto him, in a time When he may be
found. Therefore shall every one that is godly, pray unto thee in a time when
thou may be found.

And first, for the reason why men shall come unto God, the reason is drawn
from David's own example, as if David had said thus, As I did to obtain mercy
when I had sinned against God, so shall every godly man do, but I did pray unto
God in a time when he might be found. Therefore shall every one that is godly
pray unto thecin a time when thou may be found. Thus David alleges his own
example, to encourage us to come with considence to God for the pardon of our
sins, though we have been never so heinous sinners. And from hence we may
learn, That it is our duty to use well the examples of others, and to apply
Gods dealing with them to our selves. For therefore have the holy men of God
set their examples before our eyes, that we might be bettered by their
experience. For as they which first sailed over the seas, gave proper names
unto dangerous places, where they themselves hardly escaped with their lives,
as the Sagebed, the Lavander-bed, with other like names best known unto
Sailors: And as wain-men use to set up some bush, or other like mark where
their wagons stuck fast, for a caveat to them that should come after them. So
have the holy men of God furthered us in the Scripture by their experience, and
taught us to eschew many encumbrances, which they could not so easily see and
avoid, because they broke the ice first themselves.

The whole Scripture is written for our instruction, and there is not so much
as one example in the whole book of God, but a man may make excellent use of
it, if he will apply it unto himself. For to what end are there set down in the
Scripture so many examples, of the judgments of God upon unrepentant sinners;
but that their examples might be a bridle to us, to restrain us from falling
into the like sins for fear we undergo the self same punishment.

When we read? of the rich-man that is tormented in hell, because he did not
relieve poor Lazarus; Luke. 16.
are we not to apply this example to our selves, that if God have given us
wealth and riches, and yet we will not relieve those that are in want and
necessity; the like judgment will befall us which befell him.

When we read of that unmercifull Servant, Mat. 18.
who when his master had forgiven him ten thousand talents, he afterward
meeting with a fellow servants of his that ought him but an hundred pence,
demanded it of him, and because he was not of ability to pay the debt, he took
him by the throat and haled him to prison, and that the Master when he heard
thereof was so incenst against him, that he demanded again the ten thousand
talents (which before he had forgiven him) even to the utmost farthing; when we
read this I say, we are to apply the same to our selves, that if we will not
forgive those that have offended us, no more will God forgive us if we offend
him. And this use St. Paul teaches us, to make of these examples of Gods
judgments upon sinners. 1 Cor. 10. where having spoken of the Israelites that
perished in the wilderness, They says he, are examples to us, to the intent
that we should not Just after evil things as they did, 1 Cor. 10.
and perish in the wilderness three and twenty thousand.

On the other side, when we read in the Scripture of Gods wonderful mercies
toward repentant sinners, as here we have a notable example of Gods mercy upon
David, who having committed two heinious sins, adultery and murder; yet as
soon as God saw him ready to confess himself guilty, and to acknowledge his
sin, God did presently forgive him, are we not to make this use hereof, that
if we with David will acknowledge our sin, God will be as ready to forgive us
as he forgave him?

When we read of the poor Publican Luke 18. who being truly humbled with the
sight of his sins, went into the Temple and prayed unto God, O God be
mercifmll to me a finner, and that he went away justified, are we not to make
this use thereof, that if we will humble our selves, and acknowledge our sin,
God will likewise forgive us as he forgave this Publican.

In a word, when we read of the young unthrift in the Gospel, Luke 15.
who though he had left his Father and his Country, though he had spent his
patrimony and that very lewdly; yet after that he repented and returu'd to his
Father, his Father went out to meet him, fell on his neck and kissed him, and
was so joyful for his sons return, that he never expostulated why he had
left him, he never demanded how he had spent his portion; but forgetting all
his former lewd behavior he received him as gladly as if he had never offended
him, are we not to make this use thereof, that though we hvae rurme riot with
the Prodigal, and lived never so lewdly; yet if we will repent and return unto
God he will receive us into favor, as he did this Prodigal? For these things
are written for our instruction, that we might apply the same to ourselves and
find comfort in them. That as they among the Heathen, who had been cured of any
grievous sickness, set down in the Temple of Aesculapius their names and
diseases, and the means of their recovery, that if others fell in to the like
sickness, they might use the same means which others had done, and recover their
health: So have Gods Secretaries the penmen of the Scriptures instructed us
therein by their own examples. They have not been tender of their own credits,
but have Chronicled and Registered their own sins and infirmities to remain as
it were upon the file unto all posterities, to the intent that we observing
both how they fell and were afterward restored, might learn when we are
fallen into any sin, to do as they did, and obtain pardon. For what sin is
it that thou can possibly fall into, but some of Gods children have already
fallen into the same before thee? If thou sai'st thou have lived riotously and
luxuriously, the Prodigal will presently step forth and tell thee, that he
also once labored of the same disease, he lived as riotously as ever did any;
yet after that he repented and returned to his Father, he was received into
favor. If thou say, that thou have been a persecutor of the godly, Paul
will comfort thee by his example. If thou say thou have denied Christ,
though it were with perjury, Peter will lay his example before thee. If thou
say that thou art fallen into a relaps since thou were a Professor of
Religion, and since thou have been enlightened by the Word of Truth, why and I
says David, was in the very same case, all the World knows that I committed
both adultery and murder, long after I had been a principal professor.

Now what a glorious visitation of a sick soul is this, when all the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, who have all of them been subject to the
like infirmities, shall come to visit thee, and standing round about thy bed
to comfort thee, shall every one of them tell thee, that his life for thine,
though thy soul be sick to the death by reason of thy sin, though the
arrow-head of despair begin to rancle in thy bowels, and thou be ready to
despair of thy salvation; yet that it is impossible but that their examples,
which are as it were so many preservatives of the Holy Ghosts own compounding,
must needs do thee good, if thou will apply them, and if thou will use the
self-same means for thy recovery which they have done. For therefore has David
propounded his example unto thee, and says, That therefore every one that is
godly shall pray unto God, because he had prayed unto God, and had obtained
mercy. And thus much for the reason, why men should come unto God for pardon?
employed, as we have heard, in this word therefore.

The second thing which is here mentioned, are who they be that shall come unto
God? every one that is godly. Where we see who they be, that make good use of
these examples, not the wicked, but the godly. For, as for the wicked, as they
pervert the use of all things, so they abuse the examples of Gods mercies, and
turn the grace of God into wantonness. When they hear that David and others
have fallen sometimes into grievous sins, and that God did pardon them, they
will challenge to themselves the more liberty to sin by their examples: as if
David's being once overtaken with women, were an excuse for adulterers, and
Noah's being once overcharged with wine, were a warrant for drunkenness. For
they will argue thus with themselves, David committed adultery, and yet David
was saved, Peter for-swore himself, and yet Peter was saved, Moses was guilty
of murder, Paul was a persecutor, the prodigal child lived in riot and
pleasure, and yet all these were saved; and therefore why may not I live
riotously? why may not I swear and for-swear myself? why may not I commit
adultery, or murder? why may not I venture upon any sin whatsoever, and yet be
saved as well as they? Thus they encourage themselves to sin their examples. So
we read of Theodosius the Emperor, that having committed a bloody fact, he
excused himself by the example of David, but Saint Ambrose reproved the
Emperor for it, Secutus es errantem sequere paenitentom, Thou have followed
him in sinning, follow him repenting: for their falls are registied to keep us
from falling. And therefore the godly will make excellent uses of these men's
falls.

As first, To corsider our great weakness in that the best and most sanctified
children of God have fallen sometimes into grievous sins. For even David that
was so holy a man, Maximi peccatores optimi paenitentes.
that was furnished with such extraordinary gifts and graces, yet he himself
fell into adultery and murder. So Lot though his righteous soul was vexed with
the uncleanness of the Sodomites, yet he sell into incest with his own
daughters. So Noah though he were a just man, and perfect in his generations,
was over-taken with drunkenness, and was drowned himself with wine, after he
had seen the drowning of the world with water. I might instance in others, and
therefore when we hear how they fell, their very falls as Saint Ambrose says
may serve to instruct us, Instruct unt Patriarchae non solum docentes, sed
etiam errantes.

For first, we may learn by their falls (as I said before) to consider our
weaknesses, how prone we are to fall into any sin whatsoever, if God by his
grace do not continually uphold us. For even as a young infant, long as the
Nurse sets it down upon the ground, and holds it up with her hand, it will
stand upright, but if she take aw^^ ^er hand never so little from it, it will
presently fall of it is own accord: So it is with us, and the best of Gods
children, all the while that God does strengthen and uphold us, we are enabled
to stand, but if God do but withdraw his assistance from us, if he leave us to
our selves never so little, we are prone to fall into some grievous sins, as
David, Peter, and others have done. And therefore that we are to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, as knowing that though we now stand, yet
such is the frailty and weakness of our nature, that we may fall hereafter.
And this use the Apostle teaches us to make, 1 Cor. 10. (...) Cor. 10.
where having showed the Corinthians, That the Israelites though they were
partakers of Gods spiritual blessings, as well as themselves, though they did
eat of the same spiritual meat, and drark of the same spiritual drink; for
they drank of the same spiritual rock, which rock was Christ, and yet
afterward they murmured against God, and fell into sin. Wherefore (says the
Apostle, in the 12th. verse) let him that thinks that he stands, take heed lest
he fall. Let him take heed lest he fall. Why? Why, because that which was their
condition, the same may be thine, and therefore when thou hear how they
fell, take heed by their example, left thou fall hereafter, and be more
watchful and vigilant overthy self, considering the weakness and frailty of
thy nature.

Secondly when the godly hear, how the best have fallen into grievoussins, it
will teach them to beware of judging rashly of those who fall into the like
sins, that they are therefore reprobates, and not of the number of Gods elect.
For thus we ought not to judge of any whatsoever they be, whether they be yet
converted or not. Many live wickedly before their conversion, and follow the
lusts of their hearts with all greediness, who nevertheless through Gods
mercy are afterward converted and called to grace as Paul, Mary Magdalene, and
the thief on the Cross. Others again, God suffers even after their
conversion, and when they have been effectually called to grace, to fall as it
were into a relapse, and to pollute themselves with some horrible sins, as
David, Peter, and others have done, and yet has reclaimed them and renewed
them by repentance. And therefore we are not to judge of any by reason of
their sins, that they are not pertaining to Gods election, because whatsoever
their sins be, or whensoever they sin, yet God may either convert or renew
them, as David here was renewed ^^epentance after his heinous sins.

^^^tly. When we see that so holy a man as David was fell into such sins, it
may teach us, That there is no man so just and upright, as that he may stand
upon his own righteousness. The best and most sanctified servants of God have
their imperfections, so that none of them can say his heart is clean. Prev.
20.9.
Some have more sins, and some fewer, but all some, and he that sins the least
of all, has sins enough to condemn him. James 3.2.
In many things (says Saint James) we offend all: though he be an Apostle, yet
he exempts not himself, we (says he) offend, he exempts not any other, we
offend all, and that not in some, but in many things; in many things we offend
all. Psalm. 19.12.
Therefore David, who can tell how often he offends? Thus the best do sin, do sin
in many things, do sin often, and therefore if the best do sin thus, and some
of them fall into grievous sins, as David did, then who can stand upon his own
righteousness? These uses the godly will make of his fall, and many other, and
therefore he propounds this example to them, Therefore (faith he) shall every
godly man. And so leaving the persons, who through his example shall come unto
God. I come to the manner how they shall come unto him, and that is by prayer,
Every one that is godly shall pray unto thee.

Where we see both the necessity of this duty, Every one that is godly shall
pray, and so it is not left unto us as indifferent and arbitrary whether we
will pray or no; and the object of prayer, and that is God, shall pray unto
thee.

The necessity of prayer may appear by this, in that it is so absolutely
commended in the Scripture without any simitation either of the persons, time,
or place. Necessity of prayer.
That there is no time exempted from praying, the Apostle shows Ephesians. 6. where
having forewarned us what mighty enemies do stand against us, Ephesians. 6.
that we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against Principalities and
Powers, and the Prince of darkness; he therefore wills us, verse 18. to pray
continually with all manner of supplications and prayers. So that there is no
time when we are not to pray. That there is no person exempted from praying,
the Prophet David shows us both by making this a note of the wicked, Psalm. 13.
That they call not upon God; and saying here generally, Every one that is godly
shall pray unto thee. And that there is no place exempted from praying, the
Apostle shows us, 1 Timothy 2. where he wills us to pray in every place; 1 Timothy
2.8.
so that praying must needs be a very necessary duty, because it is so
generally and so absolutely enjoined us. Fasting is a duty which is much
commended in the Word of God, yet fasting has his limitation of time; for
there is a time when we are not bound to fast, and therefore our Savior excused
his Disciples for not fasting, by an argument drawn from the time. Can the
children of the Bride-chamber fast while the Bridegroom is with them, Mat. 9.15.
as long as they have the Bridegroom with them they cannot fast. Giving of
alms is another duty, which is much commended in the Scripture unto us, yet
giving of alms has a limitation of persons; for all are not enjoined to give
alms, but only such as are of ability, and they that are of ability are not
enjoined to give alms unto all, but only to such as are in want and
necessity; but as every one is enjoined to pray, so to pray for all men, I
exhort (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1.) that supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. So that if we put all
these together, That every one is enjoined to pray, to pray for all persons, to
pray at all times, to pray in all places, and to pray with all manner of
supplications and prayers; This must needs be a very necessary duty, because it
is so generally and absolutely enjoined us.

And indeed, there is great reason why prayer should have no limitation,
because every man may easily perform the same. If God had commanded us to
offer goats and bullocks unto him, the poor and the needy might have excused
themselves for want of ubility; if God had commanded us to go a pilgrimage into
fa^re Countries, and there do him service, the blind and the lame might have
excused themselves, by reason of their impotencie. But no man can pretend any
just excuse why he should not pray, because every man may easily perform this
duty. And thus much briefly: for the necessity of prayer.

The Object of prayer, Object of prayer.
ye see, is God, Every one that is godly shall pray unto thee. He does not say,
shall pray to Saints, or Angels, or the Virgin, but unto thee. For this is the
Title which David gives unto God, That he is the hearer of prayer, Psalm. 65.25.
O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. For prayer is a
part of Gods service and worship, and so to be given to no other but God.
Therefore God commands us to pray unto him, Call upon me, faith God in the
fifty Psalm. Christ teaches us to pray unto God. Our Father, which art in
heaven etc. The Spirit teaches us to pray unto God. For God (says the
Apostle, Gal. 4.6.) has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts,
crying Abba Father. So that if we would be instructed to whom we must pray, can
we have better instructers then these, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghest, who teach us to pray unto God only? Therefore if we search all over the
Scripture, from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of the Revelation, among
all the prayers which are registered therein, among all the Psalms, one hundred
and fifty, whereof two parts at the least are prayers, yet we find not one
prayer among them all, which was ever made to Cherubin, or Seraphim, to
Raphael, Gabriel, or any of the Angebs; to Abraham, or Isaac, or any of the
Patriarchs; to Moses, or Samuel, or any of the Prophets; to Peter, or Paul, or
any of the Apostles; to the blessed Virgin, or any of the Saints, but only to
God.

Thus if we would have presidents of prayer, can we have better presidents then
these which the Scripture records, and which have been made by the faithful in
all Ages? And the reason is plain, because they had no warrant out of Gods word
to pray to any other but God; and they knew besides, that God and no other
hears our prayers and sees our wants.

Indeed, the Papists who pray to Saints and Angels, hold that they cannot but
see our wants and hear our prayers. For How say they, should not they see all
things who sea the face of him that sees all things: as if by seeing God they
must see all things that God sees; which if it were true, their knowledge ye
know must needs be infinite as God is.

And besides, this is plainly confuted by Christ, for Christ who tells us,
Math. 18. Mat. 18.10. Mar. 13.32.
That the Angels do always behold the face of his Father in Heaven; He
likewise tells us, Mark 13. That the Angels are ignorant of the day of
Judgment. And for the Saints departed, the Scripture tells us, That they know
no more what is done upon the earth, and have no understanding of the affairs
of the living. So Solomon tells us, Eccles. 9. That the dead know not any
thing, neither have they any more a portion for ever, Eceles. 9.6.
in any thing that is done under the Sun. If any of the dead should have any
knowledge of the state of the living; then questionless Princes of the state
of their Subjects, and Fathers of their children; But that Princes after they
are departed have not any knowledge of their Subjects, we see by Josias, where
God graciously promises to take him away, 2 King. 22.20.
that he might not see the evil which he would bring upon the Jews. And that
Fathers have no knowledge after their departure of the state of their children;
Job plainly tells us in his 14. Chapter, the 20. verse, speaking of a Father
that is dead, and leaves children behind him, His Sons says he, come to
honor and he knows it not, and they are brought low and he perceives it not.
Nay, Abraham the Father of the faithful, to whom God promised, that he would
multiply his seed as the Stars of Heaven; yet he had no knowledge after his
departure what became of them. And therefore the Israelites Esaias 63.16. ver.
acknowledge, that Abraham and Jacob that were dead had no knowledge of their
miseries, Doubtless say they, thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant
of us, and Jacob know us not, yet thou O Lord art our Father and Redeemer, thy
name is for ever. Si tanti Patriarche etc. If (says St. Augustine) so great
Patriarchs were ignorant, what became of the people that came from their
loins? How shall the dead have ought to do in the knowledge or aid of the
affairs and actions of their dearest survivers. But suppose they did know our
affairs and actions, yet our hearts they cannot know; for this is proper to
God only who is the searcher of the heart.

Now our hearts ye know are the seat of our prayers, the lips do but vent them
to the ears of men. And therefore Solomon in the 1 of the Kings the 8.
Chapter, uses this as an argument why we are to pray to no other but God;
because God and no other can hear our prayers; because he only knows our
hearts. Hear thou says he, 1 King. 8.39.
in Heaven thy dwelling place, and do, and give to every man according to his
ways, whose heart thou know; for thou even thou only know the hearts of
all the children of men. So that he only is to be prayed unto that can hear our
prayers, and he only can hear them that knows our hearts, and understands with
what affection we pray unto him.

But suppose again, that Saints and Angels could hear our prayers, and did know
our hearts; and suppose that God had put it to our choice, whether we would
pray to him or to them, have we not more reason to pray to him who is the
fountain of grace, then unto them who are but vessels of grace? Would they be
so propitious as he is unto us? Would they be so ready to hear our prayers? As
he commands us to pray unto him: so he promises to gives us whatsoever we
ask, John 16.23.
Whatsoever says our Savior, John 16. ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he
will give it unto you. And because of our selves we know not how to pray, nor
what to ask, he gives us his Spirit to help our infirmity, and to teach us to
pray; He prepars our hearts as David says, Psalm. 10.17.
and his ear hearkens thereunto. And because we are not so ready to ask as he
would have us he therefore many times prevents our asking, and is more ready to
grant our requests then we are to make them. So he promises, Esaias 65.24.
Antequam clament ego exaudiam. Before they call I will answer, and while they
are yet speaking I will hear. So he dealt with David in this (32) Psalm, who
had no sooner said, he would confess his sin; but God forgave him. Nay, as
he prevents our asking: so many times he exceeds our desires, and gives us more
then we ask of him, 1 King. 3.13.
So he dealt with Solomon, when he begged of God, that he would give him a wise
and understanding heart, God gave him both that which he did desire and told
him besides, I have also given th^e that which thou have not asked, both Riches
and Honor. And can we have greater encouragements then these to pray unto God,
who is so ready to grant our prayers? And so there is great reason why we
should pray only to him. And thus much likewise for the Object of prayer, I
now procced unto the last point, The time when the godly shall come unto God by
prayer, nuncly, (...) time when he may be found.

But some man may say, why is there time when God may not be found? will God at
any time absent himself, and keep himself out of the way when men seek after
him? Indeed B^^als Priests, 1 King. 18. They sought and all to besought their
God s^^^ morning to noon, but could not find him. Cry (says Eluck) (...)
aloud unto your god, for it may be he is talking with some body, an^ does not
mark you, or it may be he is rid on: of town, and is in his journey, or it may
be he is taking a nap, and ^^ust be Wakened before he can hear you. Thus the
Prophet derided their counterset good, but it is not so with the God of Jacob,
Psalm. 12^.4.
the Keeper of Israel, neither slumbers, nor sleeps. If David seek him David
shall find him, nay David, and every godly man shall find him whenever they
seek him, Paul and Silas cannot pray at midnight, but the will hear them. Acts
16.25. Mat. 18.20.
Two or three cannot be gathered together in his name, but he will be in the
midst of them. Nay, he is so far from not being found, that if thou offer thy
self unto him with the Prodigal, he will go forth to meet thee; Luke 15.20.
Luke 15.4.5.
nay though thou be strayed away with the lost sheep, he will go after to seek
thee, and never lin seeking until he have found thee. Why, then, says David
here, In a time when thou may be found? why is there a time when God may not
be found? The answer is, That there is a time (as the very words imply) when
God may not be found, and therefore if we will find God, we must come in a time
while he may be found. The time when God may not be found, is twofold. Tempus
impossibilitatis, and tempus improbabilitatis. the time when it is impossible
to find him, and the time when it is unlikely to find him. The time when it
is impossible to find him, is when this life is ended. For after this life
there is no time for grace, no time for repentence, no time for good works.
Therefore it is that Christ says, John 9.4. I must work the Works of him that
sent me while it is day, the night comes, and then no man can work: by day
understanding the time of this life, and by night, death. Hie amittitur vita
aut reciperatur, says ^^prian. In this life, the life to come is either lost
or gotten. He that defers the seeking thereof till this life be past, he knocks
with the foolish Virgins when the gates are shut, and then it is to late, he
that seeks not for mercy till after this life, he shall find none, no not so
much as a drop of cold water to cool his tongue. For as the tree falls so it
lies, and as the day of our death does leave us: so shall the day of judgment
find us.

The time when it is unlikely to find God, is when he offers us grace, and we
reject the same; when he calls us by his Word, and we harden our hearts; and
when upon presumption of the mercy of God whenever we repent, we deferr our
repentance to the end of our lives, and so indeed do never truly repent. And
therefore the Counsel is very good, Ecclesiasticus 5.7. Make no tarrying to
turn unto the Lord, and put it not off from day to day; for suddenly shall the
wrath of God break forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed.

And as there is a time when God may not be found: so there is a time when he
may be found; and this time is likewise twofold, either more common and
general, or more proper and special. The common and general time when God
may be found, is this whole life time, from the beginning of our life till the
end thereof. And therefore if we must come unto God while he may be found, and
he may be found this whole life time, then we cannot begin to soon to come
unto him. Therefore Solomon counsels us, to remember our Creator in the days
of our youth, that so we may be seasoned with godliness, and Religion in the
beginning of our life.

The more special time when God may be found, is when he calls us unto him by
the preaching of the word; for then he offers his grace unto us, and knocks by
his Spirit at the door of our hearts, that he may have entrance. If we open
unto him, he will say to our souls, here will I dwell for I have a delight
herein; but if we refuse to give him entrance, if we harden our hearts when we
hear his voice, we know not when, whether ever or never he will come again.

And therefore to conclude with the words of the Apostle, Behold, now is the
accepted time, now is the day of Salvation; And therefore if thou will come
unto him in the time accepted, defer not the time; but come unto him while
salvation is offered. The time that is past is altogether irrevocable, the time
that is to come is altogether uncertain, only the time present, is the time
accepted; and therefore come now while he may be found.

FINIS.
The Fourteenth SERMON.
ACTS 7.59.60. And they stoned Steven, calling upon God and saying, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay
not this sin to their charge.


Jews in martyring Steven, and Stevens great piety in his martyrdom. Their
impiety is set down briefly in the first words, wherein is mentioned, both the
person that was martyred, and that was Steven; the kind of his martyrdom, and
that was stoning; and by whom he was thus martyred, namely by the Jews, They
stoned Steven.

Stevens great piety in his martyrdom, is set down more largely in the words
following; and herein is declared both his faith toward God, and his charity
toward men: both which he shows by a double prayer which he makes; first for
himself, He called upon God saying. Lord Jesus receive my spirit; then for his
persecutors, he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not this
sin to their charge.

First then concerning the impiety of the Jews; the person that was martyred
here was Steven, who according to his name, which in the Greek does signify a
Crown, was the first, who after the Ascension of Christ, 3. Sorts of Martyrs.
was crowned with martyrdom. Now there are Martyrs of three sorts.

(voluntate sed non opere) in will and desire, but not in act. So Eusebius
writes of Origin, that while he was young, he had such a desire to be a
Martyr, that his Mother was feign to hide all his apparel that she might keep
him at home: because otherwise he would have gone to his Father, who was then
in prison, to have suffered martyrdom with him. And so he was a Martyr in
will and affection.

And it is very memorable, which Sotrates, Theodoret and likewise Sozomen in
their Ecclesiastical Histories, do report of a woman who so affected
martyrdom, that when she understood that Valens the Emperor, had sent
Modestus the Governor of Edessa, with a band of soldiers to kill all the
Christians, that were assembled there at St. Thomas Church, she ran thither in
all have with a child of hers; Modestus observing how fast she ran, caused her
to be called, and asked her whether she was running? She answered, to the
Church where the Christians were assembled, Why, do you not know says
Modestus, that the Emperor has sent me thither to put them all to death? I
know it well, says the woman, and therefore I make the more have thither that
I may dye with them. But why, says he, do you carry your child with you? That
he, says she, may likewise be crowned with Martyrdom. This answer of hers, so
moved Modestus, that he returned back, and diswaded the Emperor from the
execution of it. And these were Martyrs in will and affection, but not in act.

Martyrs opere sed non voluntate Martyrs in act but not in will and
affection. Such were those innocent babes of Bethlehem that Herod slew, whom
St Augustine calls Primitias Martyrum, the first fruits of Martyrs; for these
dyed for Christ that was to dye for them, and were Witnesses unto him,
speaking with their blood (as Chrysostom says) that could not speak with
their tongue, and confessing and showing forth his praise, not in speaking, but
in dying. And such a Martyr was that babe, whereof we read in the book of
Martyrs, which sprang out of his Mothers Womb while she was burning at the
stake, and was by the Papists cast again into the fire, as thy brood of
Heriticks. A more horrible and impious act in them then it had been being
committed by any other, in regard of their doctrine; because they hold it as an
Article of their Faith, that all Children are damned that dye without Baptism;
and yet they vvilfully burned this innocent before he was Baptized, and so (as
they thought) did not only cast his Body into the fire; but his Soul into
Hell: though indeed this blessed Babe did not want Baptism, but was Baptized
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire; and was no sooner borne, but died a
Martyr, (Martyr opere non voluntate) a Martyr in act though not in will and
desire.

(Martyrs voluntate et opere) Martyrs both in Will and Act; and such a Martyr
was Steven, who both in Will and Act did suffer Martyrdom.

Now, because as St. Austin says out of Cyprian (Non paena sed causa facit
Martyrem) it is not the punishment which a man does suffer, but the cause for
which he suffers, that makes him a Martyr. Let us see for what it was that
Steven was here Martyred. And this was (as we see verse 52.) for the
Testimony of Christ. Which of the Prophets, says he, have not your Fathers
persecuted? And they have slain them, which showed before of the coming of the
just One, of whom you have been now the betrayers and murderers. He knevv that
they hated Christ to the death, and had therefore Crucified him; He knevv that
they had imprisoned his Disciples, and strictly charged them to Preach no more
in his Name; He knevv that for Preaching in his Name he himself was here
brought before the Council, and had false Witnesses suborned against him, and
so could not but know that his bearing witness to Christ must needs endanger
him; and yet with great boldness he bear witness to Christ; and for this it
was that he suffered Martyrdom.

Here then, in Steven we may observe a difference between true and false
Martyrs. True Martyrs suffer in a good cause, for the testimony of Christ and
the defense of the truth: but false Martyrs suffer in a bad cause, for the
defense of their errors. Epipha. contra Har. lib. 3. to 2. Har. 80.
So Epiphanius writes of a sect called Martyriani, who count themselves
Martyrs though they suffered indeed for their worshipping of Idols.

So many have been registered for Martyrs, and canonized for Saints, in the
Church of Rome, that have suffered as Traitors, and died for Treason But true
Martyrs do suffer in a just cause, and such only can have comfort in their
sufferings. Mat. 10.39.
He (says our Savior) that loses his life for my sake, shall find it: it is
not enough to lose it, unless it be lost for Christ's sake, otherwise there is
no promise made of finding it. Mat. 5.10.
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake: it is not
their suffering, but their suffering for righteousness that makes them
blessed. Therefore the Apostles did not simply rejoice in their sufferings,
Acts 5.41.
but that they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ's sake. This was that
which made Saint Paul so willing to suffer, that being foretold by Agabus,
Acts 21. That at Jerusalem he should be in bonds, and be delivered into the
hands of the Gentiles, and being therefore entreated by the brethren that, Acts
21.13.
he would not go to Jerusalem, What mean ye (says he) to weep and to break my
heart, for I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus. And this was that which here imboldened Steven,
because it was for the Testimony of Christ that he suffered Martyrdom. And so
leaving the first point, the person that was martyred, I come to the second,
the kind of his Martyrdom, and that was stoning. They stoned Steven.

Our Savior, ye know, foretold his Disciples of the great persecution which
they were to suffer, Luke 9.23. Mat. 10.22. Mat. 10.16. Mat. 10.17. Mat. 23.34.
That if any man would be his Disciple, he must take up his Cross every day,
and follow him; that they should be hated of all men for his names sake, that
he sent them as sheep among wolves, that they would be brought before the
Councels, and be scourged in their Synagogues, that some of them should be
slain, some stoned, and some crucified. All which not long after began to be
accomplished. To begin with the Apostles, whom Christ vouchsafes the name of
his friends: John 15.15. John 15.7. Revel. 1.9. John 21.17.
Saint John the Disciple that Christ loved, was condemned to banishment by the
Emperor Domitian, and was banished into the Isle of Pathmos, where he wrote the
Book of the Revelation. Saint Peter the Disciple that loved Christ, was
condemned by Nero to be crucified, and was hanged on the Cross (as Saint
Jerome writes) with his head down-wards, affirming himself unworthy to be
crucified in the same manner that his Lord was. Saint Andrew, Peter's brother,
was likewise crucified, embracing the Cross, (says Bernard) and saying, Per
te me recipiat, qui per te me redemit, Let him receive me by thee, who by thee
redeemed me: and hanging on the Cross three days before he died, converted
many in the mean time to Christ, Saint James the elder, the Son of Zebedec, and
Saint John's brother, was killed with the sword; and the person (as Clemens
Alexandrinus writes) that had accused him, when he saw him condemned, was so
moved therewith, that he professed himself to be a Christian, and having asked
forgiveness of Saint James, was beheaded with him. Saint James the younger,
the son of Alpheus, and Bishop of Jerusalem, because he would not deny Christ
to be the Son of God, was thrown down headlong from the battlements of the
Temple, and being still alive, though both his thighs were broke, his brains
were dashed out (as Egesippus writes) with a Fullers club. Saint Thomas who
would not believe that Christ was risen from the dead, except he might put his
hand into the wound which the lance had made, was afterward in India (as some
Authors report) thrust through with a lance, because he would not worship the
image of the Sun, which was worshipped by them. Saint Paul was beheaded in Rome
by Nero, on the same day (as some do write) that Peter was crucified, and so
that may not unfitly be applied to them, which David said of Saul and Jonathan,
They were lovely in their lives, and in their deaths they were not divided. 2 Samuel 1.23.
I might further instance in the rest of the Apostles, and in the bloody
persecutions which afterward followed, wherein there was made such havoc of
the Church, that if Ievemie, or David, had lived in those days, there had been
matter for the one to have made new Lamentations, and for the other to sit
weeping by the walls of Babylon, when he remembered Sion. Thus in these was
verefied what our Savior foretold, concerning the persecution which they were
to suffer; and the first of them all, which brake, as it were, the ice, and led
the way to the rest, was Steven here, who was stoned to death. A kind of death
which was appointed by God, for idolaters, blasphemers, and malefactors, that
others seeing what punishment they suffered, might be kept from committing the
like sins, for fear of undergoing the like punishment. So we see Deuteronomy. 13. That
the idolater that enticed the people to serve other gods, Deuteronomy. 13.10.11.
was by Gods commandment to be stoned to deat, that all Israel might hear and
fear, and the like might not be done any more in Israel. So he that blasphemed
the Name of the Lord, Levit. 24.23.
Levit. 24. was stoned to death by the whole Congregation, as God commanded. I
might instance in others, So that stoning was a punishment appointed by God for
wicked persons; yet Steven that was a holy man, was here stoned. Here then we
may observe from the kind of his Martyrdom, which was stoning, That we are not
to judge of a man by the kind of his death, because sometimes the godly die the
same kind of death that the wicked do. 1. King. 16.
Ahab, ye know, was a most wicked King, that served Baul, and polluted the
worships and service of God, so that it is said of him, that he did more to
provoke the Lord to anger, then all the Kings of Israel that were before him.
Josiah on the contrary, was a most religious King, that brought Judah and
Jerusalem from their idolatry, and restored Gods service, so that it is said of
him, That like unto him there was no King before him, 2. King. 23.
that turned to the Lord with all his heart, neither after him arose there any
like him. Yet these two brethren that were so unlike in their lives, were alike
in their deaths, both were slain in the wars by the hands of their enemies.
The like may be said of Jonathan and Saul, a good Son of a bad Father, yet both
of them slain in the field together. So seditious Sheba that conspired against
David, died the same kind of death that John the Baptist did, for they were
both beheaded: and Steven here dyed the same kind of death that Achan did, for
they were both stoned.

There is hardly any death that can be names, but some of the godly have been
put thereunto as well as the wicked. And therefore we are not to judge of any
by the kind of his death, that he died well or ill; because that kind of death
which befalls one, may befall an other. We commonly judge the worse of a man
if his death be sudden, and count sudden death a fearful thing: as indeed it
is, especially if it be a violent death vvithall.

It was a fearful kind a death which Charles the King of Navarre died, both
for the suddenness and violence of it, who feeling great anguish in all his
nerves, was, by the advice of his Physicians, to be close wrapped in linen
cloth, which had been well steeped in Aquavitae, and the cloth to be sowed
strait all about his body: one having sowed it, not having a knife ready to cut
the thread, took the candle to burn the thread in sunder, and the thread
flaming to the cloth took sudden hold of the same, and the Aquavitae, that the
King in this flame was burnt to death, before he could be helped by any. And
many come to such fearful ends, and yet we cannot judge of them by the kind of
their death, because even the godly, whose death is precious in the eyes of the
Lord howsoever they die, do sometimes die a violent death, and that suddenly:
So did old Eli that was a good man; who hearing that the Ark of God was
taken, 2 Samuel 4.18.
fell backward from his scate, his neck brake and he dyed. So Job's Children no
doubt were holy persons, having had godly education, and their Fathers prayers
laid up in Heaven for them; yet While they were feasting together in their
elder brothers house; Job 1.19.
the house on the sudden fell down and killed every one of them. If therefore
we judge of men by the kind of their deaths, we shall condemn the generation
of the righteous, and may bring on ourselves the like censure from others. For
we do not know, by what kind of death we shall glorify God, whether we shall
die an easy or a painful death, whether a natural or a violent death,
whether a lingering or a sudden death.

The times have been, (God grant the like times may never come again) when
there have been so great persecutions in the Church, that the faithful have
been put to all manner of deaths: whether God has reserved us to the like
times or no we do not know, we know we have no promise to the contrary; and
therefore ought to prepare our selves for the like times, that if they come, we
may constantly maintain the profession of Christ, though it cost us our lives,
as here it did Steven. And thus much likewise for the second point the kind of
his martyrdom. And so I come to the third, by whom he was thus martyred, namely
by the Jews, They stoned Steven.

Ye all know that the Jews, were the people whom God had chosen to himself
above all other Nations. Behold, says Moses, Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens
is the Lords, Deuteronomy. 10.14.
and the Earth and all that is therein, notwithstanding he has set his
affection on thy Fathers to love them, and has also chosen their seed after
them; Even you (says he) has he chosen above all people. For as for all other
Nations, God counted them strangers, and left them to themselves, and did not
vouchsafe them his Statutes and Ordinances; but suffered them to walk in their
own ways. But as for the Jews he first taught them himself, and delivered
them his Law from his own mouth: and because they desired to be instructed
rather by men like themselves; and therefore spoke to Moses, Loquere tu
nobiscum et audiemus etc. Speak thon (say they) with us and we will hear, Exe.
20.19.
but let not God speak with us lest we dye, God yielded to their request, and
first taught them by Moses, afterward by the Prophets, Luke 19.26.
of whom Abraham said to the rich-man, They have Moses and the Prophets, let
them hear them. But the Jews were so far from hearing these, that Steven could
here upbraid them Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? And
Christ complain of them, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, as here they did Steven.
Their sin then is aggravated, in regard of the persons by whom it was
committed. They were not the Gentiles, or any Heathenish people that knew not
God, for then their sin had been the less; but they were the Jews Gods chosen
people, who commonly if they were offended with any, upon every occasion were
ready to stone them. If they be offended with Moses, Exodus 17.4.
because they were thirsty and had no water to drink, they are presently ready
to stone him for it; If they be, offended with Caleb and Joshua, Numb. 14.10.
for contradicting the spies that were sent into Candan, and for giving a good
report of the Land they are likewise ready to stone them for it. And how often
in the Gospel, did they take up stones, to have stoned our Savior? And here
they stone Steven for bearing witness unto him. And this was a greater sin in
them, being the people of God, then if they had been heathen, The heathen shall
rise up in judgment against them, for they reverenced their Priests though
they were Idolaters. The Mariners that were so tenderhearted to Jonas, shall
rise up against them; for they hazarded their lives to save the Prophet, though
it were for his sins that they were in danger to perish; but these
merciless Jews did stone him to death, who sought to bring them to eternal
life.

And therefore, as the voice of Abels blood, did cry aloud in the ears of the
Lord against Cain that shed it, and was vox sanguinum, a voice of bloods as the
Scripture calls it, as being not only the voice of his blood; but of all the
blood that might have come of that blood, if it had not been shed. So here the
blood of Steven, did cry aloud against the Jews that shed the same, and the
blood of all those that might have come from him, nay upon them was laid all
the righteous blood that was shed before him: Mat. 23.34.
for so our Savior told them, Behold, I send unto you Prophets, and wisemen,
and Scribes, and some of them you shall kill and Crucify etc. that upon you
(says he) may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood
of righteous Abel, to the blood of Zacharias Son of Barachias, whom ye slew
between the Temple and the Altar.

We read of Tomyris the Queen of the Scythians, that because Cyrus the King of
Persia had slain her son, she gathered an Army and made War upon him, and
having vanquished the Persians, she took Cyrus, and cutting off his head, she
cast it into a barrel that was filled with blood, thus insulting over it, Thou
that wast so thirsty and insatiable of blood, that thou slewest my son, shall
now have thy fill till thou be glutted with it. And thus the Jews who were
so insatiable of the blood of the Prophets, had in the end their fill of blood,
when the blood of all the righteous who had been slain from Abel to Zachary,
was laid upon them. And that may fitly be applied unto them which the Angel
says Revel. 16. Thou art righteous O Lord, because thou have judged thus, Rev.
16.5.6.
for they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them
blood to drink, for they are worthy. And thus much for the persons by whom
Steven was here martyred, namely the Jews. I come now, from their impiety in
martyring Steven, to Stevens great piety in his martyrdom: which he shows,
as I said, in a double prayer which he makes, the one for himself, the other
for his persecutors.

Jews were stoning him. The happy condition of a godly man that he is able to
pray and call upon God in the greatest extremity that can befall him. The
wicked may rage and persecute the godly, they may cast them in prison, and lay
bolts upon them; they may bring them to the stake and burn or stone them, but
they cannot hinder them from praying unto God, this comfort they can never take
from them. Paul and Silas may be scourged, and imprisoned, and put in the
stocks. Elias may be persecuted by Ahab and Iezabell, till he be ready to
famish. Job may have his body afflicted by the devil with sores and ulcers.
Sampson may have his eyes put out by the Philistines, and Steven may here be
stoned by the Jews, yet God leaves them not destitute of this comfort, that
they are able to pray and call upon God in their greatest dangers. Nay the
greater extremity and danger they are in, God inables them to pray with the
more fervency unto him. Hezekiah did never pray more fervently then when the
sentence of death was pronounced against him, and he lay a dying. I beseech
thee (says he) O Lord remember now how I have walked before thee. As if he had
said, now O Lord when I am ready to die, and no other can succor me, 2 King.
20.3.
now when Physic and art do fail me, now when my strength is diminished and
nature decayed, now when thou have pronounced the sentence of death against me,
now O Lord, now, now remember me. But it is not so with the ungodly, they call
not upon God, they are least able of all to pray in their greatest necessity.
Psalm. 14.4. 1 Samuel 25.37.
If they be in danger, or hear any ill tidings, their hearts like Nabals begin
to die within them, and become as stones. For this is the privilege of none
but the godly, and an infallible argument of Gods mercy toward them, in that
he inables them when they are in any peril to pray unto him. Therefore David,
Psalm. 66. the last verse, Blessed be God, says he, that has not turned away
my prayer, nor his mercy from me. Upon which words Saint Augustine, Quamdin
Deus non tollit a te oration em tuam, non amovebit a te misericordiam suam, As
long as God does not take thy praying from thee, he will not remove his mercy
from thee, because it is his mercy that inables thee to pray. If therefore,
when thou art in any great danger, thou can call upon God for his help and
assistance, and can say with the Disciples, Mat. 8.25. Psalm. 6.2.
Lord save us, we perish: if when thou lie sick, and keep thy bed, thou
can pray with David, Lord be merciful unto me, for I am weak; Lord heal me,
for my bones are vexed. If when thou art drawing toward thy end, and art to
leave the World, thou can willingly resign thy soul unto God, and pray as
Steven did; Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Thou may well conceive great
comfort therein, because only the godly are enabled in their greatest extremity
to call upon God, as Steven here did. But let us come to his prayer, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit.

He called upon God, saying, Lord Jesus, which invicibly proves, that Christ is
God. This the Arrians, and some other Heretics have blasphemously denied, and
this the Jews to this day will not be brought to acknowledge. But the Scripture
is not more plain in any thing then it is in this. For besides, that the
Scripture gives him the Title and Name of God, that he is Deus in carne
manifestatus, i Tim. 3.16. Romans 9.5. John 14.1. John 14.14. Mat. 28.19. John.
5.23. Luke 8.28.31. Mat. 8.26. Mat. 4.23. Mat. 10.1.
God manifested in the flesh, and Deus in saecula benedictus, God blessed for
ever. And besides that we are taught in the Scripture to ascribe unto him
divine honor, that we must believe in him, that we must pray unto him, that we
must be baptized in his Name, and that we must honor him as we honor the
Father: The very works and miracles which he did, do testify of him, and prove
him to be God. For if he were not God how did the devils stand in aw of him?
how did the winds and the seas obey him? how did he cure all manner of
diseases, and enable his Disciples to do the like in his Name? Did ever any man
by his own power raise himself being dead? Did ever any man since the beginning
of the World, as the blind man says, John 2.19. John 9.32.
John 9. open the eyes of any that was born blind? but these things we know
were done by Christ, and do prove him to be God. If he were not God, how did he
pardon and forgive sins, Mat. 9.2. Mat. 9.4. Colos. 1.16.
which is proper to God, how did he know the thoughts of men's hearts, which is
proper to God, and how is he said to have created the World, which is the
peculiar work of God? And therefore Steven praying to the Lord Jesus, is said
here to call upon God. He called upon God. saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

The Papists do commonly at their death commend their souls to the Virgin
Mary. So did Father Garnet, and so did Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury,
two that are reputed for special Martyrs in the Church of Rome, though they
suffered for treason, they commended their souls at the time of their death to
the blessed Virgin. And it is a common prayer among them, Maria matter gratiae,
tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe. Mary the Mother of grace, do
thou defend us from the enemy, and receive us at the hour of death. But Steven
here the first Martyr, commended not his soul to the Virgin Mary when he
died, but to Christ that redeemed it, Lord Jesus (says he) receive my spirit.
And he joins these two Lord Jesus, together, acknowledging Christ to be both,
both his Lord and his Savior. Some disjoyne these, they will acknowledge
Christ to be their Jesus, they will say they look to be saved by him, but they
do not acknowledge him for their Lord, they will not serve him. Such are they
who go on in their sins, and follow the lusts of their own hearts, and yet do
look to be saved by grace. But such do greatly deceive themselves. For either
Christ will be our Lord, or he will be our Jesus, we must be content to yield
him obedience, and to live as becomes his servants, or he will not save us. And
therefore only the godly that serve him in their life, can with comfort commend
their souls unto him at the time of their death, and say as Steven did, Lord
Jesus receive my spirit.

He prays not for his body, but for his soul. Though it were his body which
was here in danger, while the Jews were stoning him, yet it is not his body,
but it is his soul that he prays for, as being more sensible of his future
estate then of his present condition, and not so much regarding this present
life, as the life to come. Many in their life, and at the time of their death,
are careful for their bodies, thinking of the great pain which their bodies
are to suffer when death siezes upon them, and taking care how they shall be
able to overcome the same. This care troubles many that are good Christians,
who are the more afraid of death for the pain thereof, and imagine the pain to
be greater then it is. That death is painful there is not any question, Si
nulla esset mortis amaritudo, non magna esset martyrum fortitudo, says
Augustine, If there were no sharpness and pain in death, it were no great
fortitude in the Martyrs to suffer it. But though death be painful, yet we
must remember this for our comfort, that it will be no more painful to us,
then it has been to the godly in all ages; and therefore why should we be
afraid to undergo that, which all the godly have undergone before us? Will not
any man be content to be put to that, whereunto the King puts his chief
Favorites? for he will think with himself, if I be put to no more then the
Kings Favorites are, I shall fare well enough. The godly, ye know, are Gods
chief Favorites, God loves and favors them above all others: if therefore
they have suffered the pain of death, and have not been exempted by God from
it, we may well be the less careful to undergo it, and may assure our selves,
that though the pain were never so great, yet Christ who has redeemed both
our souls and bodies, will enable us to bear it, and as Cyprian says, Qui
semel pro nobis mortem vicit, semper vincet in nobis. He that once overcame
death for us, will always overcome it in us. And therefore whether we die for
the Lord, or in the Lord, we may well lay the care of our bodies aside, and may
cheerfully commend our souls unto Christ, as Steven here did, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit.

That though the body do die, yet the soul is immortal. This is signified by
those words of Solomon, Eccles. 12.7.
That the body shall return to the earth from Whence it was taken, and the
spirit shall return unto God who gave it: Mat. 10.28.
and by that saying of our Savior, Fear not those that can kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul. But I will pass this over, and come briefly to
the prayer which he makes for his persecutours, He kneeled down, and cried with
a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Where first observe the
gesture he used, he kneeled down when he prayed. The Jews did commonly stand
when they prayed. Therefore Christ alluding to this their custom, Mark 11.
When ye stand, says he, and pray, if ye have ought against any man forgive
him, And the Jews have a saying Sine stationibus non consisteret mundus, that
the world could not consist without standing; that is, without praying, because
they were wont to pray standing. 1 Kings 19.4. 1 Chro. 17.16.
The Prophet Eliah when he fled from Iezabel, he prayed sitting. And we read
the like of David, that he sat and prayed. Other kind of gestures we use in
our prayers, which may be reduced unto these two heads, such as we use in
regard of our Hope, or in regard of our Humiliation and Reverence.

In regard of our hope, we lift up our eyes, and we stretch forth our hands, as
expecting and requiring Gods help and assistance. So David in the 121. Psalm, I
will lift up mine eyes to the hills, from whence comes my help. And Moses
praying for the Isracletes Exodus 17. That they might prevale against Amaleck,
he stretched forth his hands. For as Saint Austin says, Oculus erectus
expectat, manus extensa postulat, The eyes being lift up expect help, and the
hands being stretched forth, do seem to reuqire it.

In regard of our humiliation and reverence, we uncover our heads, we bow down
our bodies, and we kneel on our knees, we uncover our heads, which is
Magnificentia depositio, a laying aside of our greatness. And thus Kings and
Princes, when they pray unto God, do uncover their heads laying aside their
state, and acknowledging thereby, that they are Gods Servants: So we prostrate
our selves and fall down on our knees, as Steven here did, in token of the
reverence we owe unto God in offering our prayers. And this gesture of
kneeling, we find to have been often used by the faithful, and as the
Magdeburgenses (who wrote the Centuries) affirm, has been the most ancient
gesture in prayer, and the most used by the Church in all ages.

Peter as we see in the 9. of the Asts, and Paul in the 20. did pray kneeling:
so did the Prophet Daniel in his sixth Chapter. Saint James the first Bishop of
Jerusalem, was so frequent in praying on his knees, that he made his knees as
hard as the hoof of a Camel with continual kneeling. And the like did Asella
as we read in St. Jerome. It is true indeed, that it is the heart and affection
of him that prays, and not the gesture of the body which God respects, but
withal this is true, that he that makes no conscience of praying reverently,
does never pray heartily; and he that will not bend the knee unto God, much
less out of doubt will he bend the heart. O come let us Worship and fall down,
says the Psalmest, and kneel before the Lord our maker. Psalm. 95.6. Micah.
6.6.
Where withal shall I come (says the Prophet Micah in his sixth chapter)
before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? To show that he might not
come into his presence but with great reverence.

And therefore this serves, to reprove those that show no signs of reverence
unto God, 2 Chr. 6.13. Luke. 22.4^.
when they come before him to offer up their prayers, We see that Solomon, when
he consecrated the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 6. he kneeled down and prayed: and a
greater then Solomon, our blessed Savior, Luke 22. kneeled down when he prayed
be for his passion. If he therefore used such reverence in prayer, should not
we much more? For shall mercy bend her knee, and shall not misery? Shall the
Physician, and shall not the Patient? Shall the Master, and shall not the
Servant? Shall the Judge, and shall not he that is to be judged? unworthy is he
to taste of the well of the water of life, that will not stoop to take it.

And as Steven here kneeled down, so he cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not
this sin to their charge: His kneeling and crying, arguing both the
greatness of their sin, and his earnest desire and ardent affection, Quod
jussit g^ssit.
that they might be forgiven. It is Christ's precept Luke 6. Love your enemies,
do good to them that hate you, bless them that curse you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you. And he did himself what he wills us to do, praying
for his Crucifiers, even when they Crucified him Father forgive them, they know
not what they do. Luke 23.34.
Steven here follows his example, praying for his persecutors even while they
stoned him, Lord, says he, buy not this sin to their charge. And thus
according to Christ's precept and example, he loves his enemies, prays for his
persecutors, and requites good for evil. And this is the very perfection of
love, and an infallible argument, that they who can do it, are the children of
God.

A wicked man may perform many Christian duties, and commendable actions upon
by-respects; He may give Alms to the poor, that men may think the better of
him; he may Fast, because abstinence is good for his health; he may abstain
from adultery, theft, and the like, for the avoiding of shame and discredit;
and he may put up wrongs and not seek to be revenged, for fear of
inconveniences that may follow after it. But for a man to love his enemies, and
pray for his persecutors, this cannot be done in any by-respect; but must needs
be the work of grace in him.

This is that wherein the godly do most resemble God, in loving their enemies,
and rendering good to those that deserve evil at their hands. God is so good,
that he renders good for evil, as he took occasion from Adams sin, to send
his Son into the world for man's redemption; for which Gregory calls it, Felix
peccatum, a happy sin, because it had so sovereign a Medecin. The wicked
are so evil, that they render evil for good; sometimes to God, as the
Israelites did, taking their Eare-rings of Gold which God had given them in
Egypt, and making thereof a Calfe which they worshipped, to the dishonor of God:
sometimes to man, as Saul did to David, using all means to procure his death,
who had saved his life. 2 Kings 6.23.
But the godly do imitate their heavenly Father, rendering good for evil, as
Elisha made the Syrians to eat, and to drink, that were sent to take him, and
as Steven here prayed for the Jews that stoned him.

FINIS.
The Fifteenth SERMON.
JEREMIAH 4.2. Thou shall swear, the Lord lives in truth, in Judgment and
in righteousness.


SOcrates writes of Pambo the Herimit, that when one was reading to him the 39.
Psalm, and had read but the beginning. Psa. 39.1:
I said, I will take heed to my ways, that so I offend not in my tongue. The
Heremit willed him to stay there and to read no further; for this, says he, is
a lesson which will hardly be learned in a long time. Had the beginning of my
text been read unto him, Thou shall swear, he would rather have willed him to
have read on; because this is a lesson which is learned soon. For who cannot
swear without a teacher? We may see young children, who before they have
perfectly learned to read, have learned this lesson. So that if swearing were
all which God required, almost every one might answer as the Ruler did our
Savior, Luke 18.21.
All this have I done from my youth upward. But here is not only an Oath to be
taken, Thou shall swear, but the object of an Oath, or by whom we are to swear,
Thou shall swear, the Lord lives; and the conditions of an Oath or how we are
to swear, Thou shall swear, the Lord lives in truth, in judgment and in
righteousness. The first against the Anabaptists who hold it unlawful to
swear at all, Thou shall swear. The second against the Papists who hold it
lawful to swear by the Creatures, Thou shall swear the Lord lives. The third
against all profane swearers, that take either false or fraudulent Oaths, Thou
shall swear in truth, or inconsiderate or unnecessary Oaths, Thou shall swear
in judgment: or lastly pernicious and wicked Oaths, which are taken for the
performance of some unlawful action, Thou shall swear in righteousness. And
these are the several parts of these words.

And first, concerning the lawfulness of an Oath, I need not stand long upon
the proof thereof; because as the Lawyers say, Quod consuetum est praesumitur
esse justum, That is commonly held to be just and lawful which is ordinary and
common. And yet because the Anabaptists are of another opinion, and would
utterly take away the use of an Oath, something must be spoken of the
lawfulness thereof.

That it is lawful therefore to take an Oath, we may see, especially by these
three things.

First, By the express commandment of God. If to take an Oath were simply
unlawful, Exodus 20.
then God would not have forbidden us, to take his name in vain, but to take it
at all, as because it is simply unlawful to swear by false Gods, he does not
forbid us to take their names in yaine; but absolutely forbids us to swear by
them. And as he forbids us to swear by them: Exo. 23.13.
so he commands us to swear by him. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and serve him, and thou shall swear by his name. Which words are repeated,
Deuteronomy. 10.^0. with a little addition, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, him
shall thou serve; thou shall cleave unto him and swear by his name. So that the
taking of an Oath, is not left unto us as a thing indifferent; but commanded by
God, and that as a part of Gods service and worship. And therefore God
promises a blessing to those that swear by his Name, Jer. 12.16.
Jer. 12.16. It shall come (says he) to pass, that if they will diligently
learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, The Lord lives, as they
taught my people to swear by Baal; then shall they be built in the midst of
my people. And Psalm 15.4. He that swears, says David, though it be to his
own hinderance, and changes not, Psalm. 15.4.
he shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle. But if it were unlawful to swear at all,
he would not have placed him in Gods Tabernacle, that swears and keeps his
Oath, though it be to his own hinderance; but rather him that swears not,
though it be to his own advantage.

Secondly, by the example of those holy men in the Scripture, who have taken
oaths, and that sometime publicly. Thus Abraham swore to the King of Sodom,
Genesis 14.22. Genesis 31.53.
Genesis 14.22. And thus Isaac swore unto Abimelech, the King of the Philistines,
Genesis 26.31. sometime privately. Thus Jacob swore unto Laban, Genesis 31.53. And
thus David swear unto Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20.17. I might allege further the
example of Angels, and of God himself, who have taken oaths, and therefore to
swear is not unlawful.

Thirdly, by the end for which an oath was ordained. An oath is a means which
God has appointed for the ending of controversies, and for the decision of
strife and contention. And therefore the Apostle says of an oath, Heb. 6.16.
Heb. 6.16. that it is (...) the end of all strife. Thus for the determination
of doubtful causes, Exed. 22.11.
God appointed the Magistrate, Exodus 22. to put men to their oaths; and the
party suspected having thus taken an oath, was freed and acquitted. And this
custom has prevailed in all Countries. For all men being persuaded that there
is a God from whom nothing is hid, and that he is a lover of truth, and an
hater of falsehood, and therefore that he will be revenged upon those that
for-sweare themselves; hence it is that this custom has prevailed all over the
World, that men's oaths should be taken in doubtful causes, that so the truth
might be brought to light, and the matter decided.

Seeing then, that the taking of an oath it not only permitted, but commanded
by God; commanded as a part of Gods service and worship, and commanded with the
promise of a blessing to those that take it. Seeing it is warranted by the
examples of the Patriarchs and Prophets, of the Angels and of God himself, who
have taken oaths; and seeing an oath was ordained by God for so excellent an
end, as for the confirmation of the truth, and the decision of controversies,
it is plain against the Anabaptists, that there is a lawful use of swearing.
And thus much concerning the lawfulness of oaths. I come now to the object of
an oath, or by whom we are to swear, by God, and no other, Thou shall swear,
the Lord lives.

The Heathen in their oaths were wont to swear by all manner of creatures. Some
of them were wont to swear by themselves, or by some part of their body, as
Otho the Emperor used to swear by his beard, and Polypheme the Monster by his
one eye. Some of them were wont to swear by others, as the Ethiopians swore by
dead men's ghosts, Caligula by his sister and wife Drusilla, and some of the
Philosophers by the name of Socrates. Some swore by unreasonable and senseless
creatures, as Socrates swore by dogs and goats, the Germans swore by the names
of their horses, and the Egyptians by their garlic, leeks and onions. But to
pass them over, the Papists hold it lawful to swear by the Creatures. And
they allege to this purpose those words of our Savior, Mat. 23.21. Whosoever
swears by the Temple, swears by it, Mat. 23.21.
and by him that dwells therein; and he that swears by Heaven, swearth by the
Throne of God, and by him that sits thereon. From whence they infer, That
swearing by the creatures is referred to the honor and glory of God, and
therefore that it is lawful to swear by them. But I would ask them this
question, Whether Christ in those words does authorize the Jews to swear by the
creatures, and justify their swearing by the Temple or by Heaven? If they say,
he does not, how do they infer that God is honored by their swearing by
them? If they say, he does, then why does Christ say, Swear not by Heaven, for
it is Gods Throne? for if these oaths were lawful, Mat. 5.34.
Christ would not have forbidden them, and if they be unlawful, God is
dishonored by them. And therefore they cannot infer from those words, that
because while the Jews did swear by the creatures, they swore likewise by God:
and therefore God was honored by their swearing by the creatures, but rather
that in swearing by them they could not avoid, but they swore also by God, and
therefore dishonored him while they counted it nothing to swear by them.

An oath is a part of Gods service and worship, and so to be directed to no
other but God. Therefore God commands (as we heard before) to svvear only by
him. Deuteronomy. 10.20.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, him shall thou serve, thou shall cleave unto
him, and swear by his Name. And he complains of the Jews, Jer. 5.7. That their
children had forsaken him, and had sworn by those which were no Gods: implying
thereby, That we are to swear by God, and no other. And he threatens Zeph. 1.5.
That he will cut them off, that swear by the Lord, and swear by Malcham. It is
a true saying, Quicquid illud est, per quod quis jurat, illud deificat. If we
swear by any thing, whatsoever it be we deifie the same. For an oath is an
invocation of the Name of God, as the only searcher of the heart, whereby when
we swear, we call God to witness that we speak the truth, and wish God to
punish us if we do otherwise. So that whatsoever we swear by, we attribute
unto it these two things.

First, That it knows whether we speak the truth or no, and therefore it is
that we call it to witness. So says Thomas Aquinas, Jurare per Deum nihil
alind est, quam invocare ejus testimonium. To swear by God, is nothing else but
to call God to witness. So that while we swear by any thing, we call it to
witness, and so attribute the knowledge of the truth untoit.

Secondly, That it is able to punish us if we swear that which is false. So
says the same School-man. Nihil aliud est dicere per Deum ita est, nisi quod
Deus puniat me, si non it a est. It is nothing else to swear by God that it is
so, but that God punish me if it be not so. So that while we swear by any
thing, we give thus much unto it, That if we swear false, it is able to punish
us. But these two things are only proper unto God, and therefore we are to
swear by no other. Whenever then we swear by the creatures, as either by this
light, which was the oath of the Manichees, or by the Roode, by the Mass, by
our Lady, or the like; which as if we wanted oaths of our own, we have borrowed
of the Papists; they are all superstitious and idolatrous oaths. It was decreed
by the ^ouncel of Carthage, that if a Minister should swear by any creature, he
should first be sharply reprehended for it, and if he persisted in this vice,
he should be excommunicated, because it is an abuse of Gods holy Name to swear
by the creatures. And therefore Polycarp, as we read in Eusebius, chose rather
to be torn in pieces by wild beasts, as they threatened him at the first, or to
be burnt at the stake, as he was after, rather then he would profane the Name
of God by swearing, as they would have had him, by the fortune of Casar. So
heinous a sin was it thought by this Martyr to swear by the creatures.

If it be objected, That the Scripture makes mention of some holy men that
have sworn by the creatures, as that Joseph swore by the life of Pharaoh, Genesis
42.16. 2 King. 2.4.
Genesis 42.16. and that Etisha swore by the soul of Eliah, 2 King. 2.4.

The answer is, That either they are not oaths, but only vehement
obtestations, as some Divines do hold; or if they be oaths, yet because they
are contrary to the Word of God, that we are not to imitate their examples: but
we may say of them as St. Angustine said in another case, Haec quidem in
Scripturis santis legimus, non ideo tamen quia facta credimus, facienda
creaamus, ne duns passins sectamur exempla violemus pracepta. We read (says
he) indeed of such examples in the Scriptures, not that because we believe they
were done, we should therefore believe they may lawfully be done, left so we
violate the commandment of God, while that we seek to imitate the examples
of men. But thus much likewise for the object of an oath. I come now to the
conditions, Thou shall swear in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness.

The first condition which is required in an oath, is, that we swear in truth:
God to inflame us the more with the love of Truth, is called in the Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 32.4. John 14.6. John 15.26.1 Tim. 3.15.
the God of Truth. Our Savior calls himself the truth; the Holy Ghost is
called the Spirit of truth; Gods Word is called the Scripture of truth, and his
Church is called the pillar of truth. To note unto us; That they who are
Members of his Church, they who are instructed in his holy Word, they who are
led by his holy Spirit, they who are redeemed by his Son, and adopted by God to
be his children, they of all others are to stand for the truth, to imbrance it
in their hearts, to testisie it in their words, and when occasion requires, to
confirm it in their oaths. And to this end, God has given us his sacred Name,
as a Seal to ratify and confirm the truth, that in matters of importance, the
truth whereof cannot otherwise be known but by taking an oath, we might use
Gods Name, and call God as a witness to the truth of our speech. Whenever
therefore we take an oath, we must be sure that the matter be true which we
swear, otherwise we commit a most bainous sin; in calling God as a witness
to that which is false.

And whereas an oath is of two sorts; either assertory, of things that we
affirm; or promissory, of things which we promise to perform: we must be
sure that in them both we do swear the truth. For if either we doubt of the
truth of the matter, or have not a full purpose to perform our promise in
taking such an oath, we for-swear our selves. There are some that will make
conscience of an assertory oath, and will be sure they swear nothing but that
which they know to be the truth; yet for keeping their promise they make no
great reckoning, though they have bound themselves by oath for the performance
thereof. But every single promise, if the thing be lawful, which a man has
promised, does bind a man; conscience to the performance of it, and when an
Oath is added there is a double bond. And therefore it is said, Heb. 6.17. That
God widing more abundantly to show the stablenesse of his counsel to the heirs
of promise, bound himself by an Oath, that so (says he) by two immutable
things, (namely the promise which he had made, and the Oath which he had taken)
we might have strong consolation. So that taking of an Oath, does bind a man
doubly to the performance of his promise. Nay, if that a man have once taken an
Oath, though he were induced thereunto by fraud and deceit; yet the thing being
lawful he is bound to perform it. And this we may see by the example of that
Oath which was made to the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.19. for when the Gibi^nites
came craftily to the Jews, as though they had been men of a far country, and
had brought them to swear that they would not hurt them, and the Jews knew
afterward who they were, and therefore were offended that they should be
spared; yet Joshua and the Princes dia save their lives, in regard of the oath
which they had made unto them. And because Saul afterward brake this oath by
destroying the Gibeonits, there was a famine in the land for the space of three
years; and till seven of Saul's Sons were banged for this fact, God was not
appeased. So grievous a sin is the breach of an Oath in the sight of God. And
therefore whenever we take an Oath, we must always have an eye to this first
condition, that we swear in truth.

Now there are two things contrary to the truth of an Oath.

First fraudulent and deceitful swearing, when we take an Oath with an intent
to deceive them unto whom we swear, pretending one thing and intending another.

Such an Oath was that which Cleomenes took, who having made a truce with his
enemies for certain days, in the mean time set upon them perfideously in the
night, pretending that the truce was made only for the days.

Such an Oath was that which we read of in Theodoret. A woman with child was
hired by some, to Father her child upon Eustathius the Bishop of Antioch; The
woman being examined and put to her Oath, swore that Eustathius of Antioch was
the Father of it; whereupon the Bishop was deposed and banished. She afterward
falling into grievous sickness, confessed that she had wrongfully accused the
Bishop; and yet denied that she was forsworn, because howsoever she pretended
the Bishop, yet she meant it not of him, but of another in the City of the same
name.

And such an Oath was that which was taken by Lasus, when he had stolen a fish
out of a Fish-mongers shop, as we see in Atheneus. For Lasus having stolen it,
and another received it and both denyied it; being both brought before the
Magistrate and put to their oath, Athen. deipnos.
Lasus swore thus; that he neither had it nor knew any other that stole it; the
other swore thus, that he neither stole it nor knew any other that had it;
because he himself had it, and Lasus stole it. These are fraudulent and
deceitful Oaths.

Secondly, Contrary to swearing in truth, is false swearing or perjurie, when a
man takes an Oath, and yet knows that that which he swears is false. And this
has been always accounted both before God and man, a most horrible, odious
and damnable sin. Lying of it self is a heinous sin, and therefore called
Prove. 12.22. an abomination to the Lord: because that God who is the God of
truth cannot but hate and abhor falsehood. But now when a man binds a lie with
an Oath, he sins not only himself by lying; but endeavors to entangle God
in his sin by calling God to witness that which he knows to be false. Hence
it is that even the heathen themselves have always been religious in observing
their Oaths.

We read of Alexander, that leading his Army against a City with a full
resolution to have utterly destroyed it, he saw Anaximenes the Philosopher, who
had been his Tutor coming toward him, and thinking that Anaximenes would be
very urgent with him to spare the City, he swore in a fury, that whatsoever it
was that Anaximenes desired, he would not grant it. Anaximenes desired that he
would destroy the City. Alexander seeing that he could not destroy it, but he
must break his Oath, returned with his Army, and to save his Oath withal saved
the City.

And we read of Regulus and some other of the Romans, that Hanniball had taken
prisoners, that having taken an Oath that they would go to Rome, and if some of
the Carthaginians were not exchanged for them, they themselves would return,
when they came to Rome and effected not that for which they were sent; yet
they were so religious in observing their oaths, that though they knew for
certain that the saving of their oaths would be the loss of lives, yet they
returned again. So heinous a sin was perjury their accounted, even among
the Heathen.

And hence it is, that this sin has always been so grievously punished,
sometime with banishment as among the Romans, sometime with death as among
the Egyptians; for they inflicted no less then death upon every perjured
person, as upon one who was guilty of two horrible crimes, impiety to the gods
and insidelity to men. Nay in this one there is a threefold sin.

First, against God by an infinite wrong to his holy Name. If the King should
commit the broad seal unto any Subject, to seal some matter which were for
the honor of the King, and the good of the whole Kingdom, and the Subject
should seal some other matter with it, which the King utterly detested, as
being a dishonor to himself, a disadvantage to his subjects, and a benefit to
his enemies: in so doing he should be guilty of high Treason. And thus is he
guilty of high Treason against God, that abuses his Name to the ratifying of
falsehood. For God has committed his sacred Name as a seal unto us, Heb. 6.6.
for the confirmation of the truth, and the ending of strife; both which, the
confirmation of truth, and the cutting off of contention, make much for the
glory of God, and the good of all men. Now he that swears falsely, abuses Gods
Name to the confirming of a lie, which is most dishonorable to God, who is the
God of truth, most acceptable to the devil, who is the father of lying, and
most injurious to men, among whom there cannot possibly be any society, if
there be no truth nor fidelity among them. If a man having a Tower or Castle
committed to his keeping, should betray it to the enemy, he should be counted a
Traitor to his Prince and Country. Gods Name (says Solomon) is a strong
tower, whereunto the righteous resort. Prove. 15.10.
Now when a man swears falsely, he betraies this Tower unto the devil, who is
Gods enemy; which is an infinite wrong to Gods sacred Name.

Secondly, he that swears falsely is most injurious to men; for by this means
many times it comes to pass, that the Jurors give up a false verdict, the
Judge pronounces an unjust sentence, and the party that is innocent is
deprived of his right.

Thirdly, against himself: for by calling God as a witness to that which is
false, while he seeks to escape the censure of men, he falls most fearfully
into Gods hands, and to avoid a pecuniary mulct, or a bodily punishment, does
bind his soul over unto Gods judgments, who has threatened beforehand, that
he will not hold him guiltless.

This then being so heinous and horrible a sin, both before God and man, what
may we think of those who hold it lawful to swear and for-swear, and both
practice it in action, and defend it in writing? Thus the Romish Priests and
Jesuits, being brought before the Magistrate, and put to their oaths, they hold
it lawful to swear and for-swear themselves. For this is the doctrine which is
maintained among them, that unto dangerous interrogatories a man is not bound
to answer, according to the meaning of the Magistrates demand, but that he may
lawfully equivocate, and frame a safe meaning unto himself, and swear unto it.
As if a Priest being examined before the Magistrate, whether he be a Priest or
no; though indeed he be, yet he may mean that he is not one of Baals Priests,
and so he may equivocate and swear that he is not. Thus Garnet Superior of the
Jesuits in England, being examined before the Council, and put to his oath,
whether he had not had any conference with Hall the Priest while he was in
prison, he took it upon his oath that he had had no conference with him, and
when it was proved to his face to be false, and that he was for-sworne; he
answered only this, that he had offended, if equivocation did not help him.
Thus Tresham the Traitor, while he lay in the Tower upon his deathbed, and
died presently after, he took it upon his salvation that he had not seen Garnet
of sixteen years before, which being afterward found to be false, and that by
Garnets own confession, Garnet being asked what he thought of Tresham, he
answered, he thought that he did equivocate. And thus under the pretense of
equivocation, they hold it lawful to swear and for-swear any thing. But this
is most certain, that when we take an oath, and swear otherwise then that which
we know to be the truth, whatsoever we pretend we are reputed as perjured in
the sight of God. Quacunque art verborum quis utitur, Isidor. de summo bone
lib. 1.
Deus tamen (says Isidore) qui conscientia testis est it a hoc accipit, sicut
ille cui juratur intelligit. What cunning soever we use in swearing, yet God
that sees the conscience, takes it in the same manner, as he understands it to
whom he sweared. And thus much for the first condition of an oath, Thou shall
swear in truth. I come to the second, Thou shall swear in judgment.

Now there are two kinds of oaths, which are contrary hereunto.

First, inconsiderate and unadvised oaths, as when we take an oath of that we
do not understand, or when we swear to perform that which is not in our power.
Such an oath is that which the King of India always takes at his coronation,
namely, That he will make the Sun to keep his course, and to give them light,
that he will make the clouds to send them seasonable showers, that he will make
their rivers that they shall never be dry, but run continually, and that he
will make the earth that it shall not be barren, but bring forth fruit in due
season. Now these things are not in the power of man to perform. And such an
oath is that which the Papists take, when they vow virginity and a single life,
as if the gift of continency were in their own power and ability. These are
rash and unadvised oaths. The Romans had a custom, that he that should swear
by Hercules should first go out of doors, that he might think of the oath
which he was to take, and deliberate upon the matter which he was to swear. If
they were so careful that they swore not unadvisedly by the name of Hercules,
how careful should we be that we use not Gods Name, but with great advise. And
therefore before that we take an oath, we must pause upon it, and consider what
it is that we are to swear.

Secondly, contrary to swearing in judgment, is idle, frivolous, and
unnecessary swearing, when we swear without cause, or upon any light occasion.
Thus some, though it be but a trifle whereof they are speaking, yet if they be
not believed in every word which they speak, they will presently rap out an
oath to confirm it; and so God must be dishonored that they may be believed:
yet their swearing is so far from saving their credit, and making them be
believed, that it gives men occasion the more to suspect them. For who will
believe that he makes conscience of swearing truly, that makes no conscience
of swearing unnecessarily? or that he will be careful that he deceives not his
neighbor, that makes no reckoning of displeasing his Maker? For he that will
not stick to dishonor God upon no occasion, it may not be suspected that he
will for-swear himself, when by his oath he may gain any thing. But if the
matter be not weighty, and of some importance, such swearing is the profaning
of Gods Name: for thus the Name of God is brought into contempt, while it is
used in matters of no weight and moment. Exodus 18.26.
Moses, as we see in the 18th. of Exodus, being Judge over Isracl, he
substituted inferior officers under him, and appointed the Weightier matters
to be brought to himself, and referred all petty controversies to be decided
by them. If it were not sit for Moses to be called to the determining of
inferior causes, is it fit for us to call God as a witness to trisling
matters? If a man have a jewel, he will not lay it to pawn for every trifle,
and if he do, it is an argument that he makes little reckoning of it. And
surely he makes but small account of Gods sacred Name, that is ready to pawn it
upon every light occasion: yet this is a sin then the which there is nothing
more ordinary and common. Some there are that take a pride in swearing, and
will scarce speak a word but an oath must second it, as if swearing were not so
much a sin, as a grace to their speech, and a matter of complement. And these
are counted the great Gallants of the World. Others that are given to
unnecessary swearing, if a man chance to reprove them for it, they will say for
themselves, that they do not swear of any ill intent, for they swear many times
when they do not mind it, and therefore they hope that it is no sin, because
they mean no harm. But if that their tongues should speak treason, would it
help them to say, that they did not mind it? would not their hearts be thought
to conspire with their tongues, and should not their heads (think ye) pay for
it? Can they bridle their tongues, and mind what they say, for fear of
speaking treason against an earthly King, and can they not beware that they do
not blaspheme the King of Heaven? but the truth is, that they see in the one a
present danger, and not in the other. For should they speak treason, they know
that every man would be ready to accuse them, and that they should presently
suffer for it; but as for the dishonouring of Gods Name, because it is not
censured among men, they do not regard it; others that are given to unnecessary
swearing, will say, they have got such a custom of swearing, that they cannot
leave it; as if their custom of swearing did rather lessen then increase their
sin. Plato reprehending one for playing at dice, and he replying, do you
reprehend me Sir for so small a matter? The matter indeed, quoth Plato, is
small, but the custom of it is no small matter. And surely, if swearing of it
self were but an ordinary sin, yet it is made far the greater by ordinary
swearing. If a thiese being brought before a Judge for some robbery he had
committed, should acknowledge the fact, and yet desire to be excused, because
all his lifetime he had been so accustomed to robbing, that he could not well
leave it, would this excuse, think ye, serve his turn? And when he that has
daily robbed God of his glory, by profaning his Nune upon every light
occasion, shall be called to an account at the day of judgment, and shall
plead for himself, that he had so inured his tongue to swearing ever since he
was a child, that he could never afterward leave it, will God take this for a
sufficient excuse? Surely, if a man shall answer for every idle word that he
speaks, much more shall he answer for idle oaths. And indeed there is great
reason, that God should be a severe judge against those that swear
unnecessarily, and upon no occasion.

For first, Though this be reputed in the world but a small sin, yet there is
not almost any sin which a man commits, wherein he shows so insolent
contempt of Gods sacred Name, as he shows in this. For other sins which a man
commits, yet he may pretend some show of excuse. He that does not sanctify the
Sabbath day, will pretend it may be some extraordinary business; he that
steals from his neighbor, will pretend that he did it for necessity and want;
he that kills a man, will pretend that he did it for the wrong which he offered
him, and to save his credit and reputation; he that makes a lie that he did it
for fear: and so for any sin a man may pretend something; but for ordinary
swearing no excuse can be given, a man cannot pretend that he does it for fear,
or for his gain and profit, or for any thing whatsoever. And therefore there
is great reason, as I said before, that God should severely punish them, that
swear idly and vainly, and upon no occasion.

Secondly, Because there is not any one sin, that so ordinarily goes
scot-free among men, as this ordinary swearing and profaning of Gods Name.

If a man do but slander and defame his neighbor, the Law takes hold of him
and he shall under go the penalty; but for the ordinary dishonouring of Gods
Name, it is not censured among men. We have Bedlams provided for frantic
persons, we have Pesthouses provided for such as are infected, and we have
Goales and prisons for thieves and robbers, but for such as are a thousand
times more mad and infectious, for such as daly rob God of his glory, by
profaning his Name without any occasion, there is no place of restraint nor
punishment appointed. And therefore God who is jealous of his honor, has
taken the cause into his own hands, and threatens, that howsoever they that
abuse his name do escape before men; yet he himself will not hold them
guiltless. And thus much for the second condition of an oath, that we must
swear in judgment.

And so I come to the last condition, Thou shall swear in righteousness. I
will speak but a word or two of it.

This condition requires, that the matter whereof we take an oath be just and
lawful; And hereunto are contrary all wicked oaths, which are taken for the
performance of any unlawful actions. Such an oath was that which was taken
by Herod, Mark 6. Mark 6.26 Acts 23.21.
when for the saving of his oath John the Baptist was beheaded. Such an oath
was that which was taken by the Jews Acts 23. that they would neither eat nor
drink still they had killed Saint Paul.

And such are those oaths, which have been taken by the Jesuits for the
murdering of Princes, and for the concealing of their conspiracy and treason.
Thus when they went about the most horrible treason that ever was, their
Gunpowder-plot, the memory whereof vvil continue for ever to their perpetual
shame; they swore by the blessed, Trinity, and by the Sacrament which they
were then to take, that they would never disclose it. A most horrible sin,
while they could not be content to be Traitors themselves, but God must be made
an actor in their treasons, and his name must help to settle them forward
therein. Non ad hoc institutum est juramentum ut sit ini juitatis vinculum: an
oath was not ordained to this end that it should be the bond of iniquity, much
less of Treason. Such oaths are better broke then kept. And therefore David
(with which I will conclude) when he had sworn in a passion to kill Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.32.
yet afterward he spared him upon Abigails intercession, and blessed God for
sending Abigail to entreat for him. Juravit David temere says St. Augustine,
August. in Ser. de decollat. S. Johan. Bap.
sed non implevit jurationem majore pietate, David swore rashly, but he
performed I not his oath with greater Piety.

FINIS.
The Sixteenth SERMON.
JONAH 3.1. etc. And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time
saying, Arise, go to Nineveh that great City, and preach unto it the preaching
that I bid thee. So Jonah arose and went to Nineveh.


THey that dig into the Mines of the earth for silver or gold, or the like
metals, they find faith the Philosopher, parvum in magno, a little in a great
deal, but little good substance among a great deal of dross, but small store
of metal in a great compass. But they who search into the Mines of the
Scripture, they find on the contrary magnum in parvo, a great deal in a
little, great store of matter in few words, and much excellent treasure in a
small compass. This Prophecy of Jonas is very short; yet as St. Jerome faith of
some the Epistles in the New Testament, that they are (Breves pariter et
longoe) both short and long, short in words, long in substance; the same may be
said of this Prophecy of Jonas, it is short in words, but yet very full of
excellent matter; and among the rest, it contains in the compass of four
short Chapters, three memorable examples of the riches of Gods mercy upon
heinous sinners. The first upon the Mariners. The second upon Jonas. And the
third upon the Ninivites.

1 Timothy 2.4.
and to come to the knowledge of the truth, by his providence brought Jonas
into the ship among them, that he that was then flying from the true God, might
be a means to bring them to the knowledge of him, and that they who were in
danger by his means to perish, might by his means be kept from perishing.

Jonas, whose sins were more heinous and offensive to God, then the sins of
the Mariners, because he was a Prophet, and knew Gods will, and yet disobeyed
it, and the Servant that knows his Masters will, as Christ faith, Luke 12.47.
and does it not, that Servant shall be beaten with many stripes. God Commanded
him to go to Nineveh, he refused to go, and resolved to take ship, and to flee
to Tarshish: God was so offended with him for it, that he presently sent a
Pursevant after him, he pursued him with a tempest, and would not suffer the
Sea to be quiet, till he were cast into it: yet such was Gods mercy, that when
Jonas was cast into the Sea, God would not suffer him to perish, according to
his desert, but wrought his preservation after a strange sort, by causing him
to be devoured, that he might not be drowned, and making his devourer to bring
him safe to Land, and so saved his life, even then when he was in the very
jaws of death.

Ninevites, who were so heinous sinners, that their wickedness was come up
before God, and cried up to Heaven unto God for vengeance: and God was so
provoked, that the sentence was already gone out of his lips, that Nineveh
should be overthrown after forty days: yet upon their Repentance and
Humiliation, God that is infinitely rich in mercy, did spare the City, and
repented of the evil which he had intended against them. Nay, when Jonas, to
whom God had been so gracious, was offended that God would be so gracious to
the Ninevites, as to spare them when he had proclaimed their destruction: God
took upon him the defense of the Ninevites; and pleaded for them. All these
examples plainly verifying that which God faith by the Prophet, and confirms
it with an Oath, Ezekiel. 33. As I live, Ezekiel. 33.11.
faith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live. The two former examples, of Gods mercy upon
the Mariners, and Gods mercy upon Jonas, are set down before in the two former
Chapters: and in this Chapter and the next, it set down especially Gods mercy
upon the Ninevites, though the beginning of this Chapter contains his mercy to
Jonas. For in the words of my Text, we may observe these 3 things.

First, Gods gracious renewing of Jonas his Commission, when he had so highly
offended him, The word of the Lord came unto Jonas the second time.

Secondly, the Charge or Command which God gave Jonas, arise, go to Nineveh
that great City, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee.

Thirdly, Jonas his execution of Gods Charge or Command, so Jonah arose and
went to Nineveh.

Concerning the first, Gods gracious renewing of Jonas his Commission, God had
given Jonas this Commission before, and that almost in the very same words (in
the first Chapter, the first and second verses) yet because Jonas had made his
first Commission void by his disobedience unto God, it was requisite, that if
God would still have him to go to Nineveh, he should renew his Commission, and
give him a second Charge, about the same business, and that especially in two
respects.

First, to remove some scruples out of Jonas his mind, which otherwise might
have made Jonas to think that God would not employ him any more in it. For
Jonas did not know what was befallen Nineveh, whether Nineveh yet stood, or was
overthrown since the time that God had given him his first Commission, and had
appointed him to proclaim their destruction: he could not tell, whether God
had sent any other thither in his room, to execute the charge which himself
should have done, and he could not but think, that he had made himself unworthy
of such an employment, who had carried himself so rebelliously in it. And
therefore it was requisite, that if God would still have him to go to Nineveh,
he should renew his Commission, as here he did. So when Peter had denied his
Master, and had made himself unworthy of his Apostleship, by so foul a denial,
least Peter might suppose, that thereby he had deprived himself of his place,
and was no longer one of Christ Apostles, Christ was the more careful to
restore him to his Office. And therefore as soones as Christ was risen, the
Angel, Mar. 16.7. had the women that came to the epulcher, to tell the
Disciples and Peter, that Christ was risen. Mar. 16.7.
But why is Peter named more then any of the rest? was not he comprehended
among the Disciples? But if the women had said, that the Angel willed them to
bring the Disciples this Message, Peter might have thought that he was not one
of them, as having made himself unworthy to be Christ Disciple, because he had
denied him. And therefore Peter is more specially named, to assure him the
better that Christ had both pardoned the sin of his denial, and still counted
him to be one of his Disciples as he was before. And so least Jonas might think
that he had made himself unworthy of his prophetical Office, that had carried
himself so rebelliously in it, God therefore here renews his Commission, and
imployes him again in the same work whereunto he had before designed him.

Secondly, God renews his Commission, and gives him a new charge to go to
Nineveh, because otherwise if Jonas had gone thither, upon his first Commission
which he had made void, he had gone without his warrant from God, which had
been dangerous for him. This we may see by the like example of the Israelites,
in the 14. of Numbers. God had promised to give them the Land of Canaan, and so
they were to fight with the Canaanites, and God would assist them. The spies
that were sent thither did bring up an evil report of the Land, that the
Inhabitants dwelt in high walled Cities, that they were men of great stature
and very strong, and that they saw the Sons of Anak, who were Giants among
them: which when the people heard, they presently fell to their old vein of
murmuring, and distrusting Gods promise of bringing them into Canaan, they
would have chosen them a Captain to lead them back into Egypt. Hereupon God
sent a plague among them, then they would needs go and fight with the
Canaanites, but then Moses forbad them, go not up, faith he, for the Lord is
not among you, because ye are turned away from the Lord, therefore the Lord will
not be with you. But they notwithstanding went and fought with the Canaanites,
and were discomsited by them. For they had made themselves unworthy of Gods
help and assistance, by distrusting his promise, and so had not Gods warrant
for their fighting with them. And thus here it had been dangerous for Jonas, to
have gone to Nineveh upon his first Commission, which he had now made void by
his disobedience unto God, but that God sent him thither with a second Warrant.
Here then observe Gods wonderful goodness and mercy to Jonas, in not only
pardoning his former Rebellion, but restoring him to his prophetical Office
and dignity from whence he was fallen. God deals more graciously with his
Servants, then earthly Princes do with their Subjects. If a subject that is in
any high Office, do rebel against his Prince, though the Prince be so gracious
as to pardon his Rebellion, yet he will not suffer him to hold his Office, but
will deprive him of it, even in point of policy, that he may be the less
able, being in lower place, to rebel hereafter, and that the loss of his
Office may remain as a scarre and blemish unto him for his former Rebellion.
But God here deals more graciously with Jonas, who had carried himself so
rebelliously against him, both pardoning his sin and restoring him to his
place, that not so much as the least scarre of his former Rebellion, might
remain to be seen, which shows by the way, that the heresy of the Novatians
was very gross, in holding that all such as after Baptism fell into sin,
were cut off from the Church, and could not attain unto salvation, howsoever
they carried themselves afterward, and sought it with tears. But was not
Circumcision the same to the Israelites, which Baptism is to Christians? and
did not Johnas, after he was circumcised, rebel against God, and yet was
pardoned and restored by God to his prophetical Office? Did not David after he
was circumcised, commit adultery and murder, and yet did not the Lord put
away his sin upon his repentance? Did not Peter, after he was baptized, deny
our Savior, and yet was restored unto his Apostleship, and afterward proved a
glorious Martyr? Therefore when Acesius a Bishop of the Novatians, at the
Council of Nice, showed Constantine the strictness of their opinions, how a
man after Baptism, if he will be saved, must live without sin, the good
Emperor answered him, if this be so Acesius, then set up a ladder for thy
self, and climb alone into Heaven. For who could be saved, if none were
admitted into Heaven that sin after Baptism? But we know that Gods promise
to sinners is general, that at what time soever a sinner repents, God will
put all his wickedness out of his remembrance. Christ's invitation of sinners
is general, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are Weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
And Christ teaches us daily to pray unto God for the pardon of our sins, to
show that as we daily sin, so we are daily to pray for pardon, which ye
know were in vain, if no man were pardoned that sins after Baptism. But God
here not only pardoned Jonas, but set him again in his former place, and
renewed his Commission which before he had given him. The Word of the Lord came
unto Jonas the second time.

Did God then deal so graciously with Jonas who had so highly offended him;
Let us therefore first learn by Gods example, to deal graciously with those
that offend us, to pardon their offenses, and to receive them into favor as
God did Jonas. It cannot be while we live in this world but that offense will
be given us, and that we shall have just cause to be offended with others; yet
that we may not be so offended as to seek to be revenged, the Scriputre still
mentions Gods pardoning of them that offend him, to provoke us thereby to
forgive others: God speaking as it were by his example unto us, and saying as
Gideon did to his followers, Judge. 7.17.
Judges 7. Look on me and do ye likewise. But we see that God is prone to
pardon them that do grievously offend him, as here he did Jonas; and therefore
we must forgive those that offend us. This the Apostle requires of us, Ephesians. 4
Forgive one another, Ephesians. 4.32.
as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. This Christ requires of us, Math.
6. both with a promise, that if we forgive others, God will forgive us; and
under a penalty, that God will not forgive us if we forgive not others: and
binding us no otherwise to ask God forgiveness, then upon this condition that
we forgive others, Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass
against us.

Whenever therefore thou art offended with any, and think to be revenged
on him that wrongs thee, consider the great danger if thou do it, consider the
great benefit if thou do it not, and set GOD as a pattern before thine eyes,
and remember how he pardons our offenses. For what can thou or any one
pretend, why God should be willing to forgive thee, if thou be unwilling to
forgive him that offends thee?

If thou say, that he that has offended thee, is one that has many times
done thee vvrong, that thou have forborne him a long time and forgiven him
often; and therefore can not endure to forbear him any longer, seeing he
still provokes thee to be revenged on him. I would ask thee again, and have not
thou more often offended God, then any can possibly offend thee? Has not God
forborne thee ever since thou were borne, and do thou not still every day
offend him? Well therefore may thou forgive him that offends thee, if God
have so often forgiven thee; Forgive him that offends thee an hundred pence,
when God has forgiven thee ten thousand talents.

If thou say again, But I have been always a friend unto him that has
done me wrong, I have showed him much kindness, and never deserved but well of
him; and therefore seeing he requites me evil for good, how can I forgive him?
I would ask thee again, But has not God deserved always far better of thee,
then thou of him that offends thee? Is it not God that gives thee life and
health, and all things besides? Is it not he that gives thee rain from Heaven
and fruitful seasons, Acts 14.17.
filling thy heart, as the Apostle speaks, with food and gladness? Is it not
he that continually preserves both thee and thine from a thousand dangers? And
yet thou notwithstanding do daily requite him evil for good, by sinning
against him: and therefore if he do thus forgive thee, then why should not
thou forgive him that offends thee?

If thou sais;t again, But if I still pardon and forbear him that wrongs me, I
cannot but reap discredit thereby, because every man will think the more hardly
of me. I would ask thee again, But did ever any man reap discredit by doing
that which God commands him? And if thou should reap discredit thereby; yet
were it not better that thou should be discredited, then that God should be
disobeyed? Were it not better that men should think bardly of thee then that
God should condemn thee? men thingk hardly of thee for suffering wrong, then
that God should condemn thee for revenging the same? And therefore howsoever
thou art wronged or oftended, regard not what others will think of thee; but
what God commands thee; and let his example move thee to forgive others, who
here forgave Jonas, that had so highly offended him, and restored him to his
Prophetical office.

Secondly, Seeing God dealt so graciously with Jonas, that had so grievously
offended him; Let it therefore teach us, how heinunsly soever we have offended
God, not to despair of pardon. For Gods merty to others may well be a comfort
and encouragement to us. Ye know it was an encouragement to King Benhadad and
the Syrians to submit themselves to the King of Israel, 1 Kings 20.
and to hope he would pardon them: because they had heard, that the Kings of
Israel were merciful Kings. We know that God the King of Kings is merciful
and gracious. Psa. 116.5. Gracious is the Lord and righteous, ye our God is
merciful. Bis misericordiam posuit says Ambrose, semel Justitiam, He says
but once that God is just or righteous, but twice in one verse that God is
gracious: that as his justice might keep us fro sinning so his mercy and grace
much more might keep us from despairing. Therefore to show that he is gracious
and merciful, he commonly bears a long time with sinners, he does not punish
them so soon as they offend him, but does long forbear them, that his
forbearance and long-suffering might lead them to repentance. He cries to such
as go on in their sins, Prove. i. 22
Prove. 1. Vsque quo simplices, How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity,
and ye fools hate knowledge? He cries to Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37.
Mat. 23. Quoties volui. How often Would I have gathered thy children together,
as a her does gather her brood under her wings, and ye would net? He was
content (Luke 13.) to expect fruit of the fig tree the fourth year, when he had
forborne it three years before. He was able to charge them, (Numb. 14) that
though they had seen his glory, Number. 14.22 Psalm. 95.10.
yet they had provoked him ten times. Nay he was able to charge them, that
forty years long he had been grieved with that generation. So gracious is God
in forbearing them long that do offend him. And as he is long-suffering, so he
is slow in punishing, not inflicting his judgments altogether, and at once,
but by little and little, and by degrees. Therefore it is said, Revel. 16. That
the Angels powered out the vials of Gods wrath upon the earth. Revel. 16.1.
Now ye know a vial has a narrow mouth, that which is poured out of it, comes
but guttatim, drop by drop, and is long coming out. So it is when god punishes,
his punishments come slowly, that even while he is punishing, men might be
drawn to repentance. And if they repent, how many soever their sins have
been, how heinous soever, and how long soever they have continued therein, he
is ready to forgive them. You will say, indeed if I could repent of my sins, I
doubt not but God who is so infinitely merciful would receive me into favor,
and be reconciled unto me in Christ Jesus: but I have so hard a heart, that
still I go on, and continue in sin, and cannot repent. I would therefore ask
thee, But art thou not displeased with the hardness of thy heart? and do
thou not desire to forsake thy sins, and to be reconciled unto God? Oh this,
you will say, is that which I desire above all things in the World. Then know
for thy comfort, that thy state is better then thou supposest, and I may say
unto thee from Christ, as Christ said to the Scribe, Mark. i^. 34.
Mark 12. Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. For could thou be
displeased with the hardness of thy heart, if thy heart were hardened?
could thou be desirous to forsake thy sins, if thou were not weary of
them? and could thou desire to be reconciled unto God, If thou did not
love him? for these, though thou think thou can not repent, are signs of
thy repentance, which though it be weak, yet he who has promised, that he
will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smeaking flax, will accept of
it: and notwithstanding thy sins, will he gracious unto thee, as he was here
unto Jonas. And so from Gods gracious renewing of Jonas his Commission, I
proceed to the Charge which God gave Jonas, which contains two things.

First, The place which God sends him unto, Arise, and go to Nineveh that great
City.

Secondly, The work which God appoints him to do, Preach unto it the preaching
that I bid thee.

The place which God sends him unto is Nineveh. The Ninevites were so heinous
sinners, that their wickedness (as we heard before) was come up before God,
and cried up to Heaven unto God for vengeance, yet God would not destroy them
before he had sent unto them, that before their destruction, they might have
warning.

He commonly first sends to admonish them of their sins, before he inflicts
his judgments upon them. God might, if he pleased, and that without any breach
of justice, be revenged on the sudden upon the wicked, without sending unto
them, and giving them warning: but first, he threatens before he punishes, to
teach them thereby to avoid his judgments. Deuteronomy. 20.10.
God made this Law, Dent. 20. That no City should be destroyed, before that
peace had been offered unto it, that before their destruction they might have
warning, and might embrace, if they would, the conditions of peace to prevent
their ruin. As God will have us to deal in mercy with our enemies, so he
himself likewise deals with sinners.

First, Giving them warning, and threatening his judgments before be inflicts
them. Though God was highly offended with Pharaoh for dealing so cruelly with
the Children of Israel, yet God would not send his judgments upon him, till
Moses was sent to foretell him of them. Though God were so offended with the
old World for their sins, that he purposed to overwhelme it with water, and by
an universal deluge to destroy all flesh, yet he would not do it, till Noah
had forvvarn'd and admonisht them of it. And at the end of the World, when the
World shall be destroyed, and consumed by fire, Luke 21.25.
yet there shall be warning of it; for there shall be signs in the Sun, the
Moon, and the Stars, as our Savior says, that the very Heavens may become
Preachers (as it were) unto us to admonish us to repent, by fore-warning us of
the end of the World, and the day of judgment. And here though the Ninevetes
were so heinous sinners, yet he sends unto them, that being forewarned of the
danger they were in, they might repent, and avoid the same.

Now Nineveh whereunto God sends Jonas, is here said to be a great City, And
so it is else-vvhere called in the Scripture. Thus Moses speaking of Nineveh,
Genesis 10. Genesis 10.12.
The same (says he) is a great City; and here in the next verse, it is called
an exceeding great City of three days journey. And by that which Histories
report of it, it seems to have been the greatest City in the World, and fevv
ever since for largeness and beauty have been compared to it. Indeed, if it be
true, which some write of the City Quinsai in the Kingdom of China, it was a
City far larger then Nineveh, as being in compass a hundred miles, but
afterward it was overthrown by an earthquake, and another Quinsai built but
far less, being but thirty miles in compass, which is just half of that
bigness which Nineveh was. For Nineveh was in compass, no less then four
hundred and fourscore furlongs, which make threescore miles. The Walls of
Nineveh were an hundred foot high, and they were of that thickness, that three
Carts might go side-long together upon them, and upon the Walls were fifteen
hundred Turrets, and each of them an hundred foot higher then the Walls. The
City of Babylon was so great, that Aristotle in his Politics calls it a
Country rather then a City, and writes that when it was besieged, and the
enemy had taken one part of it; some part of the City did not hear thereof,
till three days after, so large was Babylon from the one end to the other. Yet
Babylon was not so large as Nineveh, but less in compass by almost an hundred
furlongs. Nineveh was many years in building, and by no fewer at once, then ten
thousand workmen, and it was so populous, that God tells Jonas in the next
Chapter, the last verse, That there were six-score thousand in it that knew not
their right hand from their left: and therefore if there were so many infants,
what a multitude were there of all other ages, no doubt but many more in that
one City, then there are now in some Kingdoms. But now what must Jonas do when
has was come to Nineveh? Preach (says God) unto it the preaching that I bid
thee.

What this was which he was to preach, we see afterward in the fourth verse,
namely, That Nineveh should be overthrown after forty days. This God commanded
him to preach, and gave him his message. And from hence we may observe, That
the Prophets had their direction from God what they were to deliver, God put
into their mouths what they were to speak, and they spoke only that which they
were appointed by God. 2 Pet. 1.21.
So says Saint Peter, That Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man,
but the holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. So says
Zachary, Luke 1. That God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets; because they
spoke only that which God put into their mouths. Therefore we see in the Old
Testament, that every one of the Prophets from the first to the last, have
still in their Sermons, Verbum Domini, or haec dicit Dominus, The Word of the
Lord came unto me, or, Thus says the Lord, to show that they were but Gods
Messengers, to deliver that which God appointed them, and that the Message
which they delivered, was not theirs that brought it, but his that sent them. 1
Cor. 15.3. 1 Cor. 11.23.
So Saint Paul in his Epistles, I delivered (says he) that which I received:
and I received from the Lord that which I delivered unto you. This was that
which Christ enjoined his Apostles, Mat. 28.20.
Mat. 28. Teach them (says he) to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you: and this is that which God here enjoins Jonas, Preach (says he)
unto it the preaching which I bid thee. And so leaving the Charge which God
gave Jonas, I come to the last point, Jonas his execution of Gods Charge, which
contains his obedience to Gods Command, So Jonah arose, and went to Nineveh.

When God commanded Jonas the first time to go to Nineveh, he was disobedient
unto God, and refused to go, but he paid so dear for his disobedience, that he
would have no more of it; God has so schooled him by affliction, that now he
is become another man, ready to go whithersoever God would send him, and to do
whatsoever God would command him, like Paul who being struck to the ground from
heaven, was content to do any thing that Christ would have him, Acts 9.6. Doct.
Lord (says he) what will thou have me to do?

Observe then from hence, That affliction is a very forcible means to reclaim
us when we do go astray, and to bring us to ebedionce. This David acknowledges
of himself in particular, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray,
but now (says he) have I kept thy word: and this Esaias testifies of others in
general, in his 26. chap. 9. verse, When thy judgments (says he) are in the
earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.

For Gods judgments are his Messengers which he sends to reclaim us, like
Officers which are sent after fugitive Servants to bring them home to their
Masters. So hunger (ye know) reclaimed the Prodigal, affliction Manasses, and
a tempest as Gods Pursevant reclaimed Jonas, and made him ready to execute that
which God commanded, which before he would not. Before, he thought it a very
hard Commandment, that he should leave his own Country to go to Nineveh,
leave the place where he had been bred and borne to preach among strangers,
leave the people of God to preach among Infidels. He thought it would be very
dangerous for him, to carry so unwelcome a Message to the Ninevites, that
Nineveh should be overthrown after forty days. He remembered besides, that God
was so gracious, that though God had sent him to proclaim their destruction,
yet if the Ninevites should repent, he would spare the City, and so he should
be counted a false Prophet among them. And many other scruples no doubt came in
his mind, for which he thought it a very hard Commandment; but now he stands
not upon any difficulty, but goes readily about it. His example then may teach
us this lesson, that when Gods will is made known unto us, we must readily
yield obedience thereunto, and do that which God Commands, though it seem
never so difficult, never so dangerous. It might have seemed unto Noe a very
hard Commandment, when God Commanded him to make the Ark, and there were many
difficulties which might have taken away the edge of his obedience, and
discouraged him from taking such a work in hand. He might have been discouraged
with the tediousness of the work, that seeing God would have him make it so
large and so great, it would hold him a long time before he could finish it.

He might have been discouraged by the great cost and charges which he was to
be at in making the Arc. For besides his extraordinary pains and labor, it
must needs be an excessive charge unto him. The sending up and down to provide
such a World of stuff and timber, the felling, sawing, and squaring of it, the
bringing it to the place where the Arc was to be made, the vvorkmens daily
wages for so many years, and the great store of food which was to be provided
and laid up in the Arc for the preservation and susterance of all the living
Creatures which were to abide in the Arc for a twelve-moneth and upwards,
must needs be a matter of excessive charges. He might have been discouraged by
the continual taunts of the wicked, who would scoff and deride him for
making the Arc, and make him a common byword among them, while he was about
it. But Noe having respect unto Gods Commandment, his disobedience brake
through all these difficulties, and he took the work in hand, and accordingly
finished it: so it might have seemed unto Abraham a very hard Commandment,
when God commanded him to sacrifice Isaac, and there were many difficulties
which might have discouraged him from the doing of it, and hindered his
obedience. He might have alleged that Isaac was his only Son, and that he
had no other to be his Heir, to inherit the goods which God had given him:
that God had given him Isaac to be a comfort unto him in his old age, and had
promised that all the Nations of the earth should be blessed in him: that he
and Sarah his wife were old, and so not like to have any more Children. He
might have pretended, that it was a most barbarous and unnatural Act, for a
Father to kill his own Son, that it would make him odious among his
Neighbors, and be a foul disgrace and reproach unto him, wheresoever he
came. and many pretenses he might have alleged why he should not do it; but
having Gods Commandment, he stood not upon any difficulty therein, but went
readily about it. For whatsoever it is that God Commands us, though it seem
never so hard unto flesh and blood, yet we are bound to yield him obedience,
because he has absolute power and Command over us. The Command of a Father
over his Son is very great, and what will not a Son do that lies in his
power when his Father Commands him? Nihil quod pater jubet grave nisi
sitimpossibile, Nothing is grievous that a Father Commands, unless he Commands
an impossibility. We see how the Rechabits, Jer. 35. were commanded by Jonadab
their Father, that neither they themselves, nor their Sons, nor their
Daughters, nor their Children and Posterity for ever after them, should ever
drink any wine, or build any houses, or sow any seed, or plant any Vineyards,
or have any, but that all their days they should dwell in Tents. Though their
Father hereby did abridge them of many commodities and comforts of this life,
which are both lawful and necessary, yet because it was the Command of their
Father, they abstained from every thing that he forbad them, and obeyed his
will. And we see that Isaac, when his Father was to offer him for a
burnt-offring, though Isaac was then about twenty five years old, as Josephus
writes, yet he resisted not his Father, but suffered him to bind him, and to
lay him upon the Altar, submitting himself to the very death to his Fathers
will. So the Command of Princes over their Subjects is very great, and what
will not a Subject be content to do for his Princes sake? 2 Samuel 23.16.
ye know when David did long to drink of the water of the well of Bethleem,
three of his Servants did break through the Host of the Philistines, and brought
him some of it even with the hazard of their lives. So when Xerxes was upon the
Sea in a dangerous tempest, and the Governor of the ship told him, that there
was no hope to escape, unless the ship were lightened: diverse of his Nobility
cast themselves into the Sea, that the King might escape. And we read of a
Prince of Syria, that his Subjects were so ready to do what he Commanded,
that when he called to a Sentinel that was on the top of an high
vvatch-towre, and bad him come down with all speed to him, he presently leapt
over the Battlements, and stood not upon the loss of his life to show his
obedience. If Children be so much at the Command of their Fathers, and Subjects
of their Princes, then what should not we do for our heavenly Father the King
of Kings when he Command us? For he has absolute power over us, our goods and
our lives, our bodies and our souls, and all that we have, are at his
disposing, and therefore whatsoever he Command us, though it seem never so
difficult or dangerous, yet we ought with Jonas here, to yield him obedience.

FINIS.
The Seventeenth SERMON.
PROVERBES 28.13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but he that
confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy.


he covers his sins, and his condition is, that he shall not prosper. The
penitent person is described (as you see) by a double property, he confesses
his sins and withal forsakes them; and his condition is, that he shall have
mercy. And these are the several parts of these words.

And first for the property of an impenitent sinner, that he covers his sins.
For our better understanding thereof, I purpose to explain these two things.

1. How sin may be said to be covered. And 2. What is the cause that makes a
man cover and hide his sins.
For the first, we are to know that the Scripture makes mention of a twofold
covering or hiding of sin; the one by God, the other by man. God is said to
cover our sins when he does forgive them, and does not impute our sins unto
us; and he that has his sins thus covered by God, is pronounced by David to
be happy and blessed. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven,
and whose sins are covered; Psalm. 32.1.
blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. He that has his sins
thus covered by God, need not care though they be known to all the World.

Secondly, there is a covering of sin by man, and this is likewise twofold,
when a man does cover either the sins of others, or his own sins. The
sins of others two ways especially, by charity or by flattery. By charity,
when we conceal the faults of others, to keep them thereby from shame and
disgrace, as Shem and Japhet covered their Fathers nakedness; for charity will
cover, as St. Peter says, a multitude of sins. Or else by flattery, for the
flatterer who is but a fawning friend, 1 Pet. 4.8.
knowing that men love to be commended, and not to be dispraised, he frames
himself to speak nothing but that which is pleasing, and therefore will highly
commend men for their virtues, or any good parts that he sees to be in them;
but for their faults or vices, he will be sure not to speak a word thereof, but
he will hide and cover them. But Solomon here speaks not of covering other men's
sins, but of covering of our own, when a man does what he can to conceal his
own sins, and to keep them hidden, as Achan hid and covered his theft that
it might not be known. Josh. 7.21.
And thus a man may be faid to cover his sins four ways.

First, by a plain and flat denial of them. 1. Negando.
Thus Sarah when she heard, Genesis 18. that she should conceive, Genesis 18.15.
and bring forth a Child in her old age, she laughed at it, 2 King. 5.25.
and being reproved by the Angel for laughing, she presently denied it. Thus
Gebezi, being reprehended by the Prophet for taking a bribe, he would have
covered his sin by denial of it. And thus many when they are suspected or
accused of any thing which indeed they have done, but think it cannot easily be
proved against them, they will never confess it, but seek by their denial to
keep it secret. They will never be brought to confess they have sinned, till
they be taken in their sin, so that the first time of their taking, shall be
the first time of their sinning; for they will be sure to confess no more then
can be proved against them. This is one kind of covering of sin. And hitherto
may they be referred, who hold with the Pelagians, that they do perfectly
fulfill Gods Law, and that they are free from sin: Luke 18.11.
or that say with the proud Pharisee, I am not an extertioner, I am not unjust,
I am not an adulterer like other men: or with the Church of Laodicea, Revel.
3.17.
I am rich, I am increased with goods, and I have need of nothing; for these do
hide and cover their sins by their denial of them.

In stead hereof, we must lay our sins open, and ingenuously confess them.
For he that does deny his fault, he is not therefore without fault, because he
denies it, but he both doubleth his fault by his denial thereof, and is the
further from obtaining pardon for want of acknowledging it: as he that has
received a wound in his body, both makes it the worse, and is the further from
being cured while he seeks to conceal it.

And therefore whenever thou have done any thing which thou should not have
done, though thou be ashamed to have it known, yet being charged therewith,
beware of denying it, but think thus with thy self, It is too much that I have
done already, let me not therefore double my fault by my denial of it, but
what I was not ashamed to do, yet let me not be ashamed to confess, that God
may pardon it.

So did David being reproved by the Prophet Nathan, he did not deny, but
acknowledge his sin, and obtained pardon, 2 Samuel 12.13.
I have sinned against the Lord (says David) and the Lord has put away thy
sin, says the Prophet; which question-lesse had not thus been put away, if
David had sought to have covered his sin by his denial of it.

Transferendo
and shifting it off from himself to another.

And this is a sin as old as Adam, and committed first by him. For Adam ye
know being reproved by God for eating of the forbidden fruit, to excuse
himself, he laid the blame upon Eve, Genesis 3.12.
The Woman that thou gave me, she gave me of the Tree.

And the Woman that the blame might not rest upon her, Genesis 3.13.
did lay it on the Serpent. The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

And this shifting off the blame from our selves to others, we have learned of
them.

If Saul be reproved by the Prophet Samuel, for transgressing the Commandment
of the Lord, in sparing the king of Amalek, and the best of the cattle; he
will post it from himself, 1 Samuel 15.20, 21.
and lay the blame on the people: I obeyed the voice of the Lord, but, says
he, the people took of the spoil, And if Aaron be reproved by Moses, for his
sin in making the golden calf, he will lay the fault on the people for it: Thou
know, says he, this people, that they are set on mischief. And they said
unto me, Make us gods. Exodus 32.22.
And thus many when the fault which they have committed, is so plain and
evident that they cannot well deny it, yet to excuse themselves, they will lay
the blame upon others. This is a second kind of covering of sin. And hitherto
may they be referred, who to excuse themselves, ascribe their sins unto fate or
destiny, as the Priscilianists did; or that make God to be the Author of their
sins as the Libertines did, for these do hide and cover their sins by laying
them on others. Instead hereof, what sin soever we have committed, we must take
the blame wholly upon our selves, and not seek that others may bear the blame
for what we have done. If we do any thing which we think is praiseworthy, and
deserves commendation, we would be loath that others should be sharers therein,
and would think our selves to be wronged by those, who should take to
themselves the praise of that which was done by us. And therefore when we have
done amiss, great reason we should take the blame to our selves, and not lay
it on others. So did Jonah when he had offended God, by flying to Tarshish, and
God therefore punished him with a tempest on the Sea, that they were all in
danger to be cast away; he took the blame wholly upon himself though it would
cost him his life: Take me up, says he, Jon. 1.12.
and cast me into the Sea, for I know that for my sake this tempest is upon
you. And so did David, when he had sinned against God, by numbering the people,
and God therefore sent a pestilence on the Land which swept away many
thousands; and David saw the Angel which smote the people, he took the blame
wholly upon himself, and said to the Lord, Lo, I have sinned, I have done
wickedly: but these sheep, what have they done? let thy hand I pray thee be
against me, 2 Samuel 24.17.
and my fathers house. And thus must we do, whenever we have sinned, we must
take the blame wholly to our selves, and not seek to hide and cover our sins,
by shifting them off from our selves to others.

Extennando.
and lessning the sin. Thus the harlot when she enticed the young man to commit
folly with her, she lessened the sin whereunto she enticed him, Prove. 7.18.
Come, says she, let us take our fill of love, and delight our selves in
daliance: giving it the name of love and daliance, which indeed was whoredom.
And thus many will lessen and extenuate their sins, making their sins to be
less then they are, and themselves less sinful, making great sins to be but
little, Luke 16 6.
and little sins to be none at all. Ye know how the unjust steward did with the
debts which were owing to his lord, he lessened the sum, setting down but
fifty for an hundred. So do many with their sins their debts unto God, they
lessen and diminish the sum of them, making talents but pounds, and pounds
but pence, and pence nothing. This is a third kind of covering of sin. And
hitherto may they be referred, who lessen and extenuate the heinousness of
sin, making some sins, as the Papists do, to be but venial, and that they do
not deserve eternal damnation. For these do hide and cover their sins by their
lessening of them. Instead hereof we must aggravate our sins, making our sins,
as indeed they are, out of measure sinful, Ezra 98.
the more to humble us. So did Ezra, O my God, says he, I am ashamed and blush
to lift up my face to thee: for our iniquities are increased over our heads,
and our trespass is grown up to the heavens. And so did St. Paul, who because
he had persecuted the Church of Christ, though he did it of ignorance, yet he
aggravates his sin, Act. 26.11.
that he persecuted the Church of God above measure, that he wasted or made
havoc of it, that he punished them often in every Synagogue, that he compelled
them to blaspheme, and that he was exceedingly mad against them. Thus in
extreme detestation of his sin, he strives to make it extremely heinous,
Ephesians. 3 8.1 lim. 1.15.
and thought himself for his sin not only the least of all Saints, but the
greatest of all sinners. So far was he from covering his sin by lessening the
same.

Justificando.
and defending of them. Thus Jonah being angry for the gourd that withered,
when God asked him whether he did well to be angry, he justified his fault, I
do well, says he, Jon. 4.6.
to be angry even to the death. And thus many when they have no other evasion,
when they can neither deny the fact, nor shift it off from themselves, nor
lessen the same, yet they will justify their faults, and stand in defense of
that which they have done. So do they, who when they have committed a sin, will
pretend very specious and plausible reasons why they did the same, that so it
may seem to be no sin in them. We read of Dionysius the tyrant, that coming
into a Temple where there were Idols that were richly adorned, he took away
from one of them a cloak of gold; and being asked why he did it, He answered,
that he did it to pleasure the Idol, because the cloak was too heavy for
Summer, and too cold for Winter: And afterward taking Sea, and finding the
winds to be favorable to him in his navigation, See, says he, how the gods do
approve of sacrilege: but these were but pretenses to cloak his covetousness.
And hitherto may they be referred, who to justify their faults, do allege
examples out of the Scripture of holy men, that have fallen into the same sins;
as Noah's example for their drunkenness, David's example for their adultery,
Peter's for their perjurie, for these do hide and cover their sins, by
justifying the same by the examples of others. And this is the worst kind of
covering of sin. For is it not a fearful thing to be imboldned to sin by their
examples, whose examples are set down to make us afraid to sin? to follow their
examples in something which they did, which they repented that they ever did?
and to mark how they sinned, and not to mark how they were punished for it? For
their punishment is registered as well as their sin, to keep us from falling
into the like sin, for fear of undergoing the like punishment. And yet these
are not afraid to commit the like sins, and will justify the same by their
examples. Instead hereof, of covering our sins by our justifying of them, we
must arraign and condemn our sins and our selves for them: otherwise if we
justify any of our sins, those sins which we justify, and do not condemn,
will condemn us. And thus having showed you, how men may be said to cover
their sins, I will now proceed to the causes of it. Causes why men cover their
sins.


The causes which make men thus to cover their sins, either by denying them, or
by laying the blame thereof upon others, or by lessening their faults, or by
justifying and standing in defense Fear.
sometimes self love, and sometimes hypocrisy. Sometimes fear, of suffering
either disgrace or punishment, or incurring displeasure if their sins should be
known, and not be kept hidden. Act. 5.2.
Thus Ananias when he had sold his possessions, out of a covetous mind he kept
back part of the price, yet he concealed what he had done for fear of disgrace.
Josh, 7.21.
Thus Achan hid his theft for fear of punishment. And thus Rachel hid the Idols
which she had stolen from her father, Genesis 31.34.
for fear of incurring her fathers displeasure, if they had been found with
her. But is not this a preposterous kind of fear, not to fear to sin, but to
fear what may follow when we have sinned? To fear displeasure, disgrace, or
punishment, and not to fear that which will bring us unto it? For this is all
one, as if a man should be afraid to be poisoned, and yet not be afraid to
drink poison. O but you will say, when I sin I am in hope to keep my sin
unknown, and therefore am the less fearful to sin, as hoping to escape
disgrace or punishment while my sin is kept hidden. But though thou may hide
thy sin from man, can thou hide it from God? can thou sin so secretly that
God shall not see thee? or can thou hide thy sins from thine own conscience,
that is as good as a thousand witnesses against thee? Quid prodest non habere
conscium, babenti conscientiam? What profits it thee, that no man is privy to
that which thou do, having a conscience that is privy to it, and will
condemn thee for it? And therefore thou should be afraid to commit sin,
because God and thy conscience knows what thou do, though it be unknown to
men.

self-love. For as when we bear any hatred to another, Self-love.
our hatred will make us aggravate his faults, and to lay them open; so
self-love will make us to lessen our own, and to hide and cover them. Thus
because the Pharisees hated our Savior, they never lin maliciously speaking
against him, backbiting his person, depraving his miracles, and carping at his
doctrine. But for their own sins, their eyes were so blinded with self-love,
that they could not see them. He that looks upon any thing through a
perspective, if he look one way through it, it makes every thing seem to be
greater then it is; but turning the perspective, and looking the other way
through it, it makes it seem less. So it is with us, while we look through
malice and ill will upon others, and self-love upon our selves, it makes other
men's sins seem greater then they are, and our own less; but let us turn the
perspective, that their faults and not ours may be lessened by us.

hypocrisy; whereby a man desires to seem better then he is, Hypocrisy.
and so for the saving of his good name and credit will conceal his faults. For
sin has this property, that it leaves a bad report, and an ill name behind
it; and therefore there is not any man though he delight in sin, but in regard
of the shame of it, he had rather conceal it then have it known. Therefore sins
are called the works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11.
because he that commits them will avoid the light, that his sins may be the
better concealed, and hidden. And therefore the devil, 2 Cor. 11.14.
who is called the father of sin and sinners, he transforms himself into an
angel of light, that so he may seem to be better then he is. For there is none
so bad, but he has a desire to seem good; and hence it is, that hipocrites
desire to seem religious, and though they serve the devil, yet they will mask
in Gods liverie that they may be counted his servants, not desiring so much to
be so indeed, as to seem to be so in outward appearance. For the health of the
body, every man had rather to be well, then to seem to be so; and therefore if
a man have received a wound he will lay it open before the Surgeon that it
may be cured, not caring for a plaster that will hide his sore, but for one
that will heal it. But for the health of the soul, many had rather to be
thought to be well, then to be so indeed, taking no thought for their sins but
this, that they may keep them secret, and so fearing more to be hardly thought
of by men if their sins were known, then to be condemned by God for their
covering of them. And thus much for the property of an impenitent sinner, that
he covers his sins: I come now to his condition, that he shall not prosper.

Where first we may observe, that impenitent sinners who cover their sins, are
crossed in that which they most desire. They desire nothing more then that they
may prosper and thrive in the world, and they think they shall prosper and
thrive the better while they conceal their sins; which if they were known,
would impair their credit and estimation. But God crosses them in that which
they most desire, Josh. 7.21.
for they shall not prosper. No doubt but Achan thought to prosper the better,
when he stole the two hundred shekels of silver, the wedge of gold, and the
Babylonish garment, and hid them in his tent; but it thrived not with him,
Josh. 7.25.
for God brought it to light, and Achan was stoned to death for it. No doubt
but Gehazi thought to prosper the better by the bribes he took of Naaman, 2
King. 5.23.
and would not confess that he had taken them; but it thrived not with him:
for though he ^id his sin, 2 King. 5.27.
yet he could not hide his leprosy which he got with them. No doubt but
Jezabel thought to prosper the better, when she caused Naboth to be stoned to
death, and got his vineyard, and yet covered her sin, under pretense that
Naboth had deserved to be stoned, for having blasphemed God and the King; but
it thrived not with her, for God brought it to light, and her to a miserable
end for it. So Herod no doubt thought to prosper the better, when hearing that
the King of the Jews was born, he intended to murder him, to prevent the
danger of losing his kingdom; and yet to cover his sin, willed the Wisemen as
soon as they had found the babe to bring him word, Matthew. 2.8.
pretending that he also would go to worship him; but it thrived not with him,
for God both brought to light his murderous intent, and himself to shame and
disgrace by it. And not to instance in too many examples, the Scribes and
Pharisees no doubt thought to prosper the better, while they devoured widows
houses; and to cover their sin made long prayers, that so they might be thought
to be devout and religious: but it thrived not with them, for Christ both
discovered what they did, Matthew. 13.14.
and denounced a woe against them for it. Thus God finds them out, and brings
them to light that cover their sins, not suffering them to prosper, and so
crossing them in that which they most desire. Yet when or wherein they shall
not prosper is not here set down, but only in general that they shall not
prosper; to the intent that they may never be secure, but may still expect
while they cover their sins, that God will punish them some way or other,
either in their own persons, or in their children, or in their goods, or in
their good name, or in them all together.

Secondly, here we may observe, that to prosper is the gift of God, who
therefore denies it to them that sin against him by covering their sins.
Therefore the Psalmist says of the godly man, that look whatsoever he does it
shall prosper: Psalm. 1.3.
but for the ungodly he says, It is not so with them. So it is said of Joseph,
that he was a prosperous man, Genesis 39.3.
and that the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand. So it is said
of that good King Hezekiah, That the Lord was with him, 2 King. 18.7.
and he prospered whither soever he went forth. I might instance in others.

But some man may say, may not the like be said of the wicked? do not they
often prosper in the world, and have success in that which they take in hand?
Job 21.7.9.
was it not for this which Job complained, that the wicked are mighty in pomer,
that they spend their days in mirth, that their houses are safe from fear, and
that the rod of God is not upon them? And was it not for this that David envied
the wicked, That they prosper in the world, Psalm. 7 3.12.
that they have riches in possession, and that they come in no misfortune like
other men? We must therefore understand, first, that though to prosper be the
gift of God, yet in his wisdom he gives in sometimes to the godly, and
sometimes to the wicked. For that which St. Augustine says of wealth, may be
said of prosperity, Ne putetur esse mala datur and bonis, and ne putetur esse
summum bonum datur and malis; Lest prosperity should be thought to be evil,
it is sometimes given to those that are good; and lest it should be thought to
be the chief good, it is sometimes given to those that are bad. If only the
wicked and none of the godly should prosper in the world, it would be a means
to draw many to ungodliness, that they might prosper by it. And if only the
godly, and none of the wicked should prosper here, it would be thought they
were godly for no other end but that they might prosper. This was that which
the devil ye know objected against Job, for his serving God, Does Job, says
the devil, fear God for naught? Have thou not made an hedge about him, and
about his bouse, and about all that he has on every side? thou have blessed,
says he, the works of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land.
But put forth thy hand and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to
thy face. And thus if God should give prosperity to none but the godly, the
wicked would be ready to object against them, that they therefore served God,
because God would prosper them, and that otherwise they would be as ungodly as
others.

Whereas the godly indeed do as well serve God in the time of adversity, as
they do in prosperity; as Job when all that he had was taken from him, did
bless God as well as he did when he had them. The Lord, says he, has given,
and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. And therefore
prosperity is commonly given indifferently by God, sometimes to the godly, and
sometimes to the wicked. But yet there is great difference between their
prosperity, for the prosperity of the wicked continues not long, but is soon
gone; They may cover their sins, and prosper for a time, but God at one time or
other, either here or hereafter, brings their sins to light, and themfelves to
confusion.

Therefore Solomon, ye see, speaks not here of the present time, but of the
future; he does not say they do not, but that they shall not prosper, because
though they may prosper for a while in this world, yet at last they come to a
miserable end; and miserable, ye know, is that prosperity which ends in
misery.

Such was the prosperity of Haman, and Herod, they prospered for a while, but
their end was miserable. But the godly on the contrary prosper more and more;
though their beginning be good, yet, as Job was, their end is better. Mark,
says David, Psalm. 37 37.
Psalm 37. the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace: and in the next verse, But the end of the wicked shall be cut off. For
God being the just Judge of the world, it cannot be otherwise, but that between
the end of the godly, and the end of the wicked, there must needs be great
difference.

Therefore when Abraham prayed for Sodom, that it might be spared for the
righteous sake that were therein, Genesis 18.23.25.
will thou (says he) Genesis 18. destroy the righteous with the wicked? that be
far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked,
and that the righteous should be as the wicked that be far from thee, shall
not the judge of all the earth do right? to show that it cannot stand with the
justice of God to respect them alike, and to make no difference between the
godly and the wicked. We see many times that the wicked do flourish, and
prosper in the world, and live in great credit and estimation: the godly on the
contrary, are many times vilified, and privily slandered, whereby their good
name (which is the godly man's Heir) is much called into question: but God who
never fails to help them to right, that do suffer wrong, at one time or other
brings the wicked to shame, and makes the innocence of the godly known.

This is that which God promises, Psalm. 37.6.
Psalm. 37. He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment (or just dealing) as the noonday: the meaning is, that though thy
innocence and just dealing, may be obscured and hidden for a time, as the light
in the night, yet God will bring it forth like the light in the morning, and
make it more and more, to appear like the Sun at noone; whereby both thy
innocence, and the falsehood of those that unjustly accuse thee, shall be
openly known. This we see by the example of Daniel, who was cast by his
accusers into the Lions Den, Dan. 6.16. Dan. 3.21.
and by those who were cast into the fiery furnace, yet God miraculously made
known their innocence, and brought those that accused them, to shame and
destruction. It is very memorable, which we find recorded to this purpose, in
the Ecclesiastical Histories.

Three grace le^e Companions accused Narcissus, a holy Bishop of an heinous
crime, and used fearful imprecations against themselves, if the thing were not
true whereof they accused him.

The first wished; that if it were not true, he might be burnt.

The second, that he might die of some grievous Disease.

And the third wished that he might lose his sight. And not long after, God was
revenged on every one of them in the same manner. For the first had his house
set a fire in the night, where both himself and his household were burnt to
death. The second fell sick of a fearful disease, and died of it. And the
third seeing what (...) befallen his Companions, confessed how they had
wrongfully accused the Bishop, and with weeping and mourning lost his sight.
Whereupon the Bishop, who had been deposed upon their accusation, was restored
unto his Bishopric, God having thus made his innocence known, and brought them
to shame that so falsely accused him. And thus much for the former part of these
words, the description of an impenitent sinner, who is described as you have
heard, both by his property, that he covers his sin, and by his condition,
that he shall not prosper.

The penitent person is described by a double property, he confesses his
sins, and withal, forsakes them, and his condition is, that he shall have
mercy. I will speak briefly of them in a word or two.

Those words of St. John. 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, are as it were a commentary upon
my Text, and the one place may serve well to explain the other. St. John names
only our confessing our sins. If, says he, we confess our sins, implying
under confessing our sins, our forsaking of them: because as St. Ambrose
says, Confessio peccati est professio desinendi, our confessing of sin, is a
profession of leaving the same. Solomon in my Text does name them both, who so
confesses and forsakes his sins, and so expresses what St. John implies. And
Solomon adds that he shall have mercy, but what mercy he does not show, St.
John therefore shows what this mercy is, that God will forgive him his sins,
and will cleanse him from all unrighteousness: which you know is the greatest
mercy. For if we consider how highly God is offended, with sinners, how deeply
we are indebted unto God by our sins, or the great benefit we reap by Gods
forgiving us, we cannot but see Gods infinite mercy, in forgiving our sins
upon so easy a condition, and requiring no more of us for the forgiveness of
our sins, but that we confess them. If a Creditor should require no more of
his Debtor, that were indebted in a great sum unto him, but to acknowledge
the debt, and he would freely forgive him; would not every man magnify the
Creditors bounty, in releasing his Debtor upon so easy a condition? but thus
deals God with us, he requires no more of us but to confess our sins, and
promises to forgive us. If (says St. John) we confess our sins, God is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins: faithful and just, and so we need
not make any doubt thereof, because his faithfulness and justice are engaged
upon it. But some may say, it may seem, that seeing God is just, he should
rather punish us, then forgive us our sins, because his justice requires that
we make him satisfaction, and that he reward us according to our deserts. We
are therefore to remember, that confession of our sins and faith in Christ
for the pardon of them do always go together: so that we cannot truly confess
our sins, but we must needs have an eye unto Christ, for the forgiveness of
our sins. God therefore cannot but forgive us our sins, because he is just,
for otherwise he should be unjust to his Son, who has made satisfaction to
God in our room, and by his active and passive obedience, has merited for us
that our sins should be forgiven. And herein appears the admirable wisdom
and goodness of God, in so contriving the work of our redemption, that his
justice should plead for the forgiveness of our sins, which pleaded before
for our condemnation. For if ye ask why God should condemn us for our sins:
the Reason is, because he is just, and justice requires that having offended
him, we should make him satisfaction: And yet if ye ask why he should forgive
us our sins, the reason is here given by St. John, because he is just, and
justice requires, that Christ having made satisfaction for us, we should be
forgiven. And so we see what mercy it is which he shall have, who confesses
his sins: namely, the pardon and forgiveness of them.

FINIS.
The Eighteenth SERMON.
1 THESE. 5.2. For you your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord comes
as a thief in the night.


THe first coming of Christ may well put us in mind of his second coming, his
coming as a Lamb, of his coming as a Lion, his coming in humility, of his
coming in glory. The day of his first coming ye know is past, and yet so past,
as that we are still to call it to mind, and must never forget it: the day of
his second coming is yet to come, yet so to come, as that it will come we know
not how soon, and we must always expect it. And therefore as it has been a
Custom in some Countries, that when they kept a feast, after other dishes, a
deaths head was brought in, and set upon the Table before the guests, to teach
them while they were feasting, to remember their ends: So I thought it not
unfit at the time of this feast, which we celebrate in remembrance of Christ's
first coming, to bring in as it were a deaths head among you, by choosing such
a Text as may put you in mind of his second coming at the day of judgment,
because that is a day which is always to be expected: whereof the Apostle in
the words which I have read, gives a double Reason.

First, because it is certain, that this day is coming. For you your selves
(says he) know perfectly that the day of the Lord comes.

Secondly, because it is uncertain when it will come. For it so (says he)
comes as a thief in the night, whose coming is uncertain, and upon the sudden.
So that the points to be handled in these words are these, the day it self, and
the coming of it, and in the coming of it, that it is certain that this day
will come, though when it will come, it is uncertain. And first, concerning the
day it self: The day of judgment is here called, the day of the Lord, and
sometimes in the Scripture, the great and notable day of the Lord. It is called
the day of the Lord, to put a difference between that day and all the days,
while we live in the world. While we live in the World, the days in the
Scripture are called ours. For though all days indeed be the Lords, because he
made them, as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 74.16.
The day is thine, and the night is thine, thou have prepared the light and the
Sun; yet in the Scripture they are said to be ours, because they were made
for our use. Therefore God speaking of the time of man's life, Genesis 6. His
days, says he, Genesis 6.3.
shall be an hundred and twenty years. Thus Job speaking of the prosperity of
the wicked, They spend, says he, their days in welthinesse. Job. 21.13. Psalm.
90.12.
Thus David speaking of the uncertainty of this life, Psalm. 90. Teach us, says
he, to number our days. Thus the days while we live in this world, are called
ours. But the day of judgment is always called, Esaias 13.7. Joel 2.1. 2 Pet.
3.10.
the day of the Lord. So Esaias 13. Behold the day of the Lord comes. So Joel,
The day of the Lord comes, and is nigh at hand. So St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3. The day
of the Lord comes as a thief in the night. Thus still it is called the day of
the Lord, because though all other days be ours, yet this day he has wholly
reserved to himself, to call us to an account of all our days. To some of us
he has given ten thousand days, to some twenty thousand, to some thirty
thousand; and all the days from the beginning of the World to the end thereof,
he has divided amongst us, giving more unto some, and sewer to others; to
himself he has reserved but one day only, and the last of all, yet such a
day, as wherein he will call us all to an account, of all things that we have
done in all our days.

At this day the Drunkard shall be called to an account of all the days he
has spent in drunkenness.

At this day, the idle person shall be called to an account, of all the days
he has spent in idleness.

At this day the voluptuos liver shall be called to an account of all the days
he has spent in pleasure. For this is the day which the Lord has appointed
for the examination of all our days. The days which he has given us are
days of mercy, wherein he offers grace unto all, and invites them to repent:
this day is only a day of judgment, wherein he will execute his justice on
those that are impenitent. Therefore it is that the time of this life is called
in the Scripture, Esaias 49.8.
Dies salutis, the day of salvation, as Esaias 49. I have heard thee (says God)
in the time accepted, in the day of salvation have I succored thee. Which the
Apostle expounds, 2 Cor. 6. 2 Cor. 6.2.
of the time of this life, while grace is offered. Behold (says he) now is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation. But the day of judgment is called
in the Scripture, dies irae, the day of wrath, Zeph. 1.15.
Zeph. 1.15. That day (says the Prophet) is a day of wrath. And Revel. 6. The
great day of the wrath of the Lord is come. And therefore God, who for the time
of this lise, is called by the Apostle the father of mercies. yet after this
life, when he shall judge the World, Psalm. 49.1.2.
he is called by the Prophet David, a God of revenge. For be that is so
merciful to all in this life, that he makes the Sun to shine, and the rain to
fall both on the good and the bad; yet after this life, at the day of
judgment, he will rain snares on the wicked, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest, this shall be their portion for ever to drink. Psalm. 11.6.
We see then the reason, why it is called the day of the Lord? because in that
day he will call us all to an account of all our days, that such as in their
days have done their own will, might therefore in his day suffor his will, and
because they would not embrace his mercy, while he offered them grace, in stead
of mercy, they might feel his justice. His power had a day when he created the
World, and all things therein, and by speaking the word made them all of
nothing. His mercy had a day when he redeemed the world, by giving his only Son
to suffer death for man that had so highly offended him. And his justice shall
likewise have a day when he shall judge the World: at which day he will appear
so terrible to the wicked, Revel. 6.16.
that when they see him, they shall cry to the mountains to fall upon them, and
to the rocks to hide them from the presence of him that sits upon the Throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb. But all in vain, because as they in their own
days might have found life, but would not seek it, so then in his day, they
shall seek death, but shall not find it.

And as here it is called the day of the Lord, Acts 2.20.
so elsewhere it is called the great and notable day of the Lord, Joel 2.11.
and the the great and terrible day of the Lord; because on that day, more
great and terrible things shall come to pass, then ever came to pass in the
World before. The Prophet Esaias was showed a vision which did so greatly
astouish him, that he says, his heart panted, and fear came upon him, Esaias
21.3.
that it made him to stoop when he heard of it, and dismayed him when he saw
it. What was that vision which was able to affright so great a Prophet? He saw
the fall of Babylen, how that mighty City, the glory of Kingdoms, as the
Scripture calls it, should be overthrown, and all the stately buildings thereof
should be brought to ruin. But on this day which is here mentioned, there shall
be a matter which is far more fearful, not the desolation of one City or
Kingdom, but the final overthrow and utter ruin of all the Kingdoms and
buildings in the World together. For on that day the very foundation of the
earth shall be shaken, so that all the buildings thereof from the least to the
greatest shall be shivered asunder, and quite overthrown. Though our walls were
as strong as the walls of Nineveh, which as Authors write of them, were made of
that thickness, that three Carts might go side-long together upon them: though
our Turrets were as high as the Spires of Egypt, or the Tower of Babell, whose
top they would have made to have reached up unto heaven: though our houses were
as sumptuous as the Palace of Alcinous, where the walls were of brass, the
entries of silver, and the gates of gold; yet on this great day, if they
continued so long, they should all be overthrown. For what shall be able to
stand on that day, when there shall be earthquakes on the one side, and fire on
the other, which shall overthrow and consume whatsoever is before them. On that
day there shall be so great an earthquake, as Saint John tells us Revel. Rev.
6.12.14.
6. That all mountains and istands shall be moved out of their places: On that
day there shall be so great a fire all overthe World, that Saint Peter tells
us, 2 Pet. 3.10.
The heavens being on sire shall be dissolved, the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, and the earth and all the works therein shall be burut up. On
that day there shall be the greatest number assembled together that ever were.
For then heaven and earth, as it were, shall meet together, on the one side
Christ and his Angels shall come from heaven, thousand thousands shall attend
upon him, and ten thousand thousands shall minister unto him: on the other
side, shall be Adam and Eve, with their whole offspring, even all that have
lived from the first to the last in all ages, from one end of the world to the
other in all Countries they shall all appear on that together. Genesis 13.16.
God promised Abraham the father of the faithful, that his seed should be as
the stars of heaven, Genesis 15.5.
and in number like the sand on the seashore, which ye know is innumerable:
yet all these in comparison of that infinite multitude which shall be assembled
together at the day of judgment, are no more then an handful. For then all
without exception, both Jews and Gentiles, believers and infidels, even every
one in his own person shall appear on that day, and not one shall be wanting.
Therefore, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that which he has done,
whether it be good or evil. All and every one, to show the generality, that
none are excepted, and we must appear, to show the necessity that it cannot he
avoided. When the King in the Gospel invited many to the marriage of his
Son, Luke 14.
they pretended excuses for their not coming, one saying, that he had bought a
piece of ground, another, that he had bought five yoke of oxen; another, that
he had married a wife, and could not come: so that of those which were invited,
there were many wanting. But no excuse shall be taken at the day of judgment,
but as all shall be summoned to appear on that day, so none shall be absent.
There shall not any be permitted to appear by his Attorney, but all must come
in their own persons, and none be suffered to put in sureties. We see many
times that such as are to come before earthly Judges, do break out of prison,
and escape the judgment that should pass upon them: but there can be no hope
for any to escape at the day of judgment, for indeed the whole World, is as it
were, Gods prisonhouse, every part whereof on that day, shall bring forth
their prisoners. Rev. 20.13.
The Sea, says Saint John, Revel. 20. did yield up her dead that were therein,
and death and hell delivered up the dead that were in them, and they were
judged every man according to his works.

Lastly, On that day there shall a final separation be made between the godly
and the wicked. While we live in this world, the good and the bad, the elect
and the reprobate, do live, ye know, promiscuously together. And therefore the
Church is compared in the Scripture, sometime to a floor, sometime to a field,
and sometime to a fold: to a floor, wherein is both come and chafe, to a
field, wherein is both wheat and cares, and to a fold, wherein are both sheep
and goats. Mat. 25.32.
But on this great and notable day of the Lord they shall be distinguished, and
an everlasting sep^ration shall be made between them. For then Christ shall
place the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his lest: the wheat and the
corn shall be carried into his barn, the chafe and the tares shall be cast
into the fire; the godly shall be taken up into heaven, the wicked thrown into
hell. And in these respects, it is called the great and notable day of the
Lord, because so great and notable things shall come to pass on that day. And
thus much concerning the day it self.

The second thing to be considered, is the coming of this day; and therein two
things are set down, that it is certain this day will come. For you your selves
(says he) know perfectly that the day of the Lord comes. And that it is
untertain when it will come, It comes (says he) as a thief in the night,
Whose coming is uncertain, and not known when he comes.

And first, concerning the certainty of the coming of this day, Saint Peter
tells us of some that make but a mock of Christ's coming, or the day of
judgment. 2 Pet. 3.3.
Know this (says Saint Peter) that there shall be scoffers in the last days,
Walking after their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming;
for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue (say they) as they were
from the beginning of the creation. And thus many because the World has
continued so long a time in the same state, do persuade themselves that it
shall continue so for ever, and that there shall be no end of the World, nor
day of judgment. These Saint Peter in the same place confutes by this reason,
That though the World have continued in the same state for a long time, yet it
follows not from thence, that therefore the World should continue so for ever:
for it wa a long time from the Creation of the world till the coming of the
flood, yet the world was then destroyed by one of the elemente whereof it was
made, namely, by water: and so though it seems a long time till the end of the
world, yet in the end it shall be destroyed by another element, namely, by
Fire. And as they who lived in the time of Noah, would not be persuaded that
the world should be drowned, till the flood came suddenly, and swept them away;
so the end of the world, and Christ's coming to judgment, shall as suddenly
come upon unbelievers, while they think not of it. Christ indeed, does defer
his coming in diverse respects, As that the number of the elect may be
fulfilled, whom God has decreed from all etermity to call in all ages by the
preaching of the Gospel, till the end of the world, that the patience of the
faithful, who wait and long for the coming of Christ may be tried and
exercised, and that the wicked may be left without excuse, being forborne so
long, and having had so large a time of repentance.

In these respects Christ defers his coming, but though his coming be deferred
for a time, yet in the end he will not fail to come, as the Scripture assures
us by evident testimonies, by visible signs, and by invisible reasons. The
testimonies are diverse, The Prophecy of Enoch which is alleged by Saint Jude
is plain and evident, Jude 14.15.
Enoch (says he) the seventh from Adam prophesied, saying, Behold the Lord
comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all the ungodly among them of all their wicked deads. Where ye see the
world was no sooner made, but that the end thereof was presently foretold; for
Enoch was but the seventh from Adam, and yet he prophesied of Christ's coming to
judgment, and that so plainly as if he had seen him coming, Ecce venit, Behold
(says he) he comes. Dan. 7.9.10.
So Daniel prophesied of the day of judgment, I beheld (says he) till the
thrones were prepared, and the ancient of days did sit, there issued forth a
fiery stream, and came forth from before him, thousand thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him, the judgment was
set, and the books were opened. I saw (says Saint John) the dead, both small
and great stand before the Lord, Revel. 20.12.
and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which was the book of
life, and the dead were judged, etc. Where to show the certainty of Christ's
coming to judgment, he speaks (ye see) thereof as if it were past, because he
shall come at the time appointed, as certainly as if he were come already. I
might allege many other places, wherein the coming of Christ to judgment is
plainly foretold. And as the Scriptures have foretold Christ's coming to
judgment; so to assure us the better thereof, it has likewise given us many
signs which go before it, whereby we may know that it will not be long before
he come. When the King, ye know, is come to a Town, he commonly sends his
harbingers before him, and when they see his harbingers, they say the King is
coming because they know by the coming of his harbingers, that it will not be
long before the King himself comes. Christ has given us many signs of the
end of the world, and his coming to judgment, which are as his harbingers sent
before his coming: and these signs which go before his coming, are of two
sorts, either such as go longer before his coming, and are further from it, or
such as go but hard before, and shall be nigh unto it. Of the former sort are
diverse signs as the preaching of the Gospel all over the world, foretold by
our Savior Mat. Mat. 24.2. These. 2. Romans 11. Luke 17.
24. The revealing of Antichrist that man of sin, and son of perdition,
foretold by the Apostle, 2 These. 2. The calling of the Jews, foretold by St.
Paul. Romans 11. The great security and want of faith which shall be found in
many, foretold by Christ, Luke 17. And many other signs which the Scripture
mentions many whereof are already past, and are forerunners of the end of the
world, and shall continue and prolong their course till the very day of Christ's
coming to judgment. Of the second sort are those fearful signs which the
Scripture mentions in diverse places, as that the earth shall tremble, and move
out of her place; Mat. 24.29. Acts 2.20.
that the seas shall roar, and make an hidcous noise; that the powers of
heaven shall be shaken, that the stars shall fall from heaven, that the Sun
shall be turned into darkness and the Moon into blood, before that great and
notable day of the Lord come. These things shall come to pass at the end of
the world, and when these things come to pass, they are evident signs that the
end of the world is then hard at hand. For like as it is in the body of man,
when the eyes wax dim, and the sight fails, when all the joints wax weak,
and the whole body trembles, it is a sign of old age, and a manifest token
that he in whom these signs are to be seen, is very near his end, and cannot
hold out long. So it is likewise in the great Body of the world, when the eyes
of the world, the Sun and the Moon begin to wax dim, and their light fails;
when the heavens shall be shaken as it were with a palsy, and the earth shall
tremble, and move out of her place, as the Scripture speaks, it is a manifest
sign that the world is ending Lastly, As the Scripture has foretold the end
of the world, and Christ's coming to judgment, both by evident testimonies and
visible signs, so likewise by diverse invincible reasons. For first, all other
things which the Scriptures have foretold, are come to pass, as namely, of
Christ's first coming in the flesh, of the destruction of Jerusalem, of the
dispersion of the Iows, of the coming of Antichrist; all which, and many other,
as they have been fore told, so they have been likewise accomplished: and
therefore the Scripture having likewise fore-spoken of the end of the world,
and of Christ's second coming, they shall also be fulfilled in their due time.
For Gods will is immutable, and what he has said must needs come to pass at
the time appointed.

Secondly, Gods justice requires, that all men should be rewarded according to
their works; and therefore that the wicked should hereafter be punished, and the
godly comforted: We see many times that the wicked do persecute and oppress
the godly, and such as are great do wrong the poor, and defraud them of their
right, and yet in this world they escape unpunisht: It remains therefore, that
if God be just, their judgment is reserved till another world, that the wicked
howsoever they live here in prosperity, may there be punished, and that the
godly who live here in affliction and misery, may be refresht, and comforted.
For it is a righteous thing with God (as the Apostle says) to recompense
tribulation to them which trouble you, 2 These. 1.
and to you which are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven with his mighty Angels.

Thirdly, If there should not hereafter be a day of judgment, then many sins
which have been committed here in secret should never come to light, and so
Gods justice in punishing offenders could not so well be made known and
manifest; and therefore that hypocrites may be known and discovered, and the
very thoughts of their hearts, and their most secret sins, which have been
concealed from the eyes of the world, may be laid open, it is necessary that
there should be a day of judgment, that so Gods justice may the better appear
in their condemnation. I might allege other reasons, but I think it
needless, seeing the coming of this day is so certain, that the Apostle says
here, You your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord comes.

And therefore I will come to the next point, That though it be certain that
this day Will come, yet when it will come it is uncertain; as the Apostle here
shows, by saying, it so comes as is thief in the night, Whose coming is on the
sudden, and when it is not expected. Therefore the coming of Christ to
judgment, is likened by him, sometime to the coming of the flood that drowned
the old world. So Mat. 24. Mat. 24.38.
As in the days that came before the flood, they were eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark,
and knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the
coming of the Son of man be. Sometimes his coming is likened to a snare. So
Christ having foretold us, Luke 21.34.35.
Luke 21. of his coming to judgment, Take heed (says he) to your selves, lest
at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
the cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares: for as a snare
shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Snares, ye
know, are laid for birds and wild beasts, while they do not suspect them, they
securely seek their food, and follow the prey as they use to do, and are
suddenly taken. So shall many be at the day of judgment, while they are
following the profits and pleasures of this world, as they are accustomed to
do, this day shall come as a snare upon them, when they think not of it. And
sometimes his coming is resembled to the coming of a thief in the night. A
similitude which is often used in the Gospel, first, by our Savior, and
afterward borrowed from him by his Apostles. Christ says, Mat. 24. Mat. 24.43.
know this, that if the good man of the house had known in what watch the
thief would have come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his
house to be broken up: watch therefore, for ye know not in what hour your Lord
does come. So Revel. 3. Revel. 3.3.
If thou shall not watch, I will come on thee (says our Savior) as a thief,
and thou shall not know at what hour I will come. So Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 3.10.
The day of the Lord comes as a thief in the night: and so Saint Paul here,
The day of the Lord comes as a thief in the night. To show that it will come
at unawares, and when it is not expected. A thief, ye know, will not come
openly to a house in the day when men may see him, but he will come in the
night when candles are out, and men are asleep, and think not of him. So will
the day of the Lord come, it will not come on the sudden before men be aware,
and take them unprovided, when it comes upon them. If then the coming of this
day be unknown, this argues their folly, who presume to set down the particular
time when this day will come; though our Savior says plainly, Mat. 24. Mat.
24.36.
That of that day and hour knows no man, no nor the Angels of Heaven, but his
Father only. For other matters God has revealed in the Scriptures the
definitive time when they should come to pass. So for the old World to repent
before the coming of the flood, Genesis 6.3. Genesis 15.13. Jer. 25.11. Dan. 9.25.
he set down an hundred and twenty years. So for the Israelites to be afflicted
in the Land of Egypt, four hundred years. For the captivity in Babylon, he set
down seventy years. And for Christ first coming, seventy weeks.

But for his second coming, he has not any where set down the time but
concealed it from us: and therefore for any man to enquire thereinto, as many
have done, is but vain curiosity; because it is not for us to know the times,
and the seasons which the Father has put in his own power. For God has
concealed this day from us, that we might continually expect this day, least it
come upon us at unawares. Therefore our Savior whenever he makes mention of
his coming to judgment, he wills us to watch, that we may be prepared and
ready at the time whenever he comes. And indeed great reason. If we have a
cause to be tried before an earthly Judge, especially if it be in a matter of
any great moment, as such as concerns our Land and inheritance, ye know what
great pains we will take beforehand, that we may be provided against our cause
be handled, we will search out our records, we will read over our evidences. We
will make ready our Witness, and not willingly omit any course we can take,
that sentence may be pronounced on our side, we have every one of us a cause to
be tried at the day of judgment, even the weightiest cause that ever was
handled, not concerning our Lands or inheritance, but concerning a matter of
far greater importance, even the everlasting salvation or damnation of our
bodies and souls, and therefore it behooves us continually to watch, and to be
always in a readiness, Mat. 22.11. Mat. 25.3.
that we be not found unprepared, like the guest in the Gospel, without our
wedding Garments, or like the foolish virgins without oil in our Lamps. To
this end we must often think of the day of judgment, and remember that
whatsoever we do, we shall be called to an account of it. Therefore the
Scripture does often propound the day of judgment unto us, and uses the same
as a special Reason, to reclaim us from sin, and to move us to repentance.

This Saint Paul tells the Atheniant, Acts 17.30.
Acts 17. That God admonishes all men every where to repent, because he has
appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world in righteousness. Thus
Solomon tells the young man, Eccles. 11.9.
Eccles. 11. That though he rejoices in his youth, and follows the lust of
his eyes, and the ways of his heart; yet he must remember withal, that God
for all these things will bring him to judgment. Therefore Basil gives us this
Council, to have always the day of judgment as a Schoolmaster before us, that
so we might be kept from committing evil, by having this day before our eyes,
as a scholar is afraid to do any thing undecent in his Masters presence.
Damascen makes mention of a certain King, who having the day of judgment
always in his mind, he was so affected with the remembrance of it, that he
wholly abstained from those pleasures and delights, whereunto he had been
before addicted. The Kings Brother seeing the King to be so strangely altered,
and knowing withal, the cause thereof, willed him not to think of the day of
judgment, but to pass his time in pleasure and recreation, as he had done
before when he thought not of it.

The King to argue his Brothers folly, caused his Herald the very next morning
to sound a Trumpet a loud at his Brothers door, which was a sign in that
Country, that, he at whose door the Trumpet was sounded, had offended the
King, and was therefore to be led to execution.

His Brother as soon as he heard the Trumpet, came trembling to the King, and
desired pardon, and promised that he would never offend him again. Why says
the King, art thou so afraid when thou hear this Trumpet, and should not I
be afraid of that great Trumpet that shall call me to judgment? if thou be
afraid, because of this Trumpet, of offending me; much more may I by the last
Trumpet of offending God. And indeed the most desperate sinner that is, if the
day of judgment were always in his mind, so that he were wholly possessed with
the remembrance of it, it would make him afraid to commit sin, and so hasten
his Repentance, because he may die and be called to judgment, he knows not how
soon, and if he be impenitent when he dies, he will be found impenitent at the
day of judgment. Hic hic amittitur vita aut recuperatur, says Cyprian, In
this life the life to come is either lost or gotten, lost by continuing
impenitent in our sins, or got by repentance. God made this Law, Levit. 25.
That if a man had had a house in a walled City, and had sold the same, Levit.
25.29.
yet he might redeem it within the compass of a year; but if he redeemed it
not within that time, it should afterward be too late to recover it again,
which Origin expounding, he says, that by this house is understood our
heavenly Habitation; that house whereof the Apostle speaks: We have a house
not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5.1.
but eternal in the Heavens: by him that sells this house is understood a
sinner, who sells as it were and forgoes Heaven by his sins, yet such (says
he) is the mercy of this Lawgiver, that he has given a sinner the whole year
of this life for the recovery thereof, that what he sold by his sins, he
might redeem by repentance; which if he redeemed not before the year of this
life be ended, it will be too late afterward. He that repents not till this
life be past, he knocks with the foolish Virgins, when the Gates are shut, Mat.
25.11.12.
and then he cannot be let in, Luke 16.24.
he that seeks not for mercy till after this life, like the rich man, he shall
find none, no not so much as a drop of cold water to cool his tongue. And
therefore now while it is called to day, think thus with thy self, God has
spared me hitherto, and not taken me away, that I might repent, how long he will
spare me I do not know, he may take me away before to morrow, and if he take me
away before I repent. Christ will condemn me for my impenitencie when he comes
to judgment: I will therefore now make a vow unto God, even now before I go
out of his house, that I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor the Temples of
my head to take any rest, till I turn unto God by unfeigned repentance, and
resolve with my self to lead a new life, that so I may be sure not to be found
impenitent whenever he comes.

FINIS.

