AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST ANTINOMIANISME. The first Dosis. The unjustifiablenesse of
justification before faith. Prescribed and administered in a soft Answer: I. To
seven Arguments. II. To the solutions of five Objections. III. To the novell
distinction of Gods reconciliation to man, without man's reconciliation to God.
Penned plainly, for the undeceiving of the plain-hearted Christian; and
mildely, for the regaining of our mistaken brother H. D. by D. H.

London, Printed for G. B. and R. W.

SEVEN ARGUMENTS to prove, [a]
that in order of working, God does justify his Elect, before they do actually
believe. With some Answers to the Objections that some make against the same.
For the confirmation of those that do truly believe, [b]
lest they should attribute any part of the Office of Christ to the act of
their believing.

Ezekiel 16.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [c]
Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations.

And say, Thus says the Lord God unto Jerusalem, Thy birth and thy nativity is
of the land of Canaan, thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite.

And as for thy nativity, in the day that thou wast borne, thy navill was not
cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at
all, nor swadled at all.

None eye pitied thee, to do any of these things unto thee, but thou wast cast
into the open field, to the loathing of thy person, in the day that thou wast
borne.

And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said
unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live: yea, I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy blood, Live.

Printed in the year 1643.

An answer to the Title.
In Order of Working God does justify his Elect, [a]
before they do actually believe.] So you.

1. Here you do more then seem, you do express your self, to mean
justification in act or actual justification, not justification merely in
Gods decree: For Gods decree to justify is not a working justification, so you
fly off from that extreme of making a precedence of justification before
faith in Gods decree, where indeed the decree of faith, is as old, as the
decree of justification; yet in your dispute you often fall on again upon this
extreme.

2. Here you seem (but you do but seem) to wave the other extreme, of holding
a precedence in time of justification before faith, you seem only to hold a
precedence in order of nature, because you say in order of working; but you
only seem: For if only the difference be in order of nature, this does not
infer a necessity that they should be severed in time, not an hour, not a
quarter of an hour. But more is intended, namely, that a man may be instified
many years before he believe, so in the 1. Argum: which is most false; yea we
cannot say that in order of working in the same moment, when whole Christ is
brought to the soul, that justification goes before faith, if there be any
precedence of one before another.

For, 1. Actual justification is by union with Christ, granted in 2. Argum. ad
Phil. 3.9. Now the very instant of union is of Christ's being in us, by spirit
of faith, Ephesians. 3.17. 1 Ioh. 3. ult. Ioh. 1.12. you confess the spirit unites
in 2. Argum. [e].

2. If faith has any thing to do in justification, it is an instrument, but
the tool is before the work, in order of nature.

3. Though the King purposes to pardon a fellon, yet he does not actually
pardon, and pronounce discharged, till he accept and plead that pardon.

4. The order of working set down Romans 8.30. is, Whom he predestined, them he
called, whom he called, them he justified; if effectual calling includes not
faith, it is not effectual, but only that which may be in hypocrites; but 2
Pet. 1.3. its plain, calling is to glory and virtue.

It is a part of the office of Christ to give gifts and graces, [b]
and so that of believing, to them whom he saves. John 1.16.17. And of his
fullness have all we received, and grace for grace: For the Law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. John 17.19. And for their
sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified, Ephesians. 4.7.8.
But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ: How proves he that? From an act of his Mediatorship, namely his
ascension; Wherefore he says when he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men.

Ezekiel. 16.2.3.4.5.6. To this we answer, [c]
that all that text does not hold out, that God justified Jerusalem one minute
before he restored her to spiritual life and holiness. For when he passed by,
he said, Live. And when he said, Live, he entered into Covenant with her and
washed her, v. 8.9. Christ's name and nature is not barely to save us in our
fins, but from our sins, Matthew. 1.21. to be as a Jesus, a Savior, so to be
Immanuel, God with us, Matthew. 21.23. Now this of God being with us, is applied
not merely to Gods decree, but to the execution of his decree of calling,
justifying and glorifying, Romans 8.30.31.

Seven Arguments to prove that in order of working God does justify his Elect,
before they do actually believe. With some Answers to the Objections that some
make against the same.
THis Proposition being contradicted, we are justified before God, before the
act of our believing: This is the Proposition which I do now undertake to
vindicate, by the affistance of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
honor is not a little concerned in it. [b]
I will first of all lay down seven Arguments for the confirmation of the
Truth; and then I will answer unto five Objections, brought by some against it.

An answer to the Preface.
I had thought by that touch you give upon universal Gratians (as you call
them) in the 5. [a]
Argum. * that you had been an opposite to the universal Redemptionists, the
Pelagians, Semi-Pelagians, and Arminians. But I find your doctrine in this
point to be very consonant and near of kin to theirs.

Herein you agree with them; So ^sher delivers their sense.
who do thus say, that the benefit of Christ's satisfaction is to be extended so
far, as that God for his part is actually reconciled unto men, and does
really discharge men from their sins, before they believe.

You differ in this only, that they say to all men God is so reconciled and
gives a discharge, before faith comes; you say he is reconciled to all the
Elect and discharges them before faith comes.

To deny this proposition in the sense you mean it, That we are justified
before God, before (you mean in time) the act of our believing, does nothing
derogate from the honor of the Father or his Son. [b]
Forth Father has committed all the business of the Church to Christ, Matthew.
11.27, 28. 1 Cor. 15. sends us to be advised and guided by Christ, Mat. 17.5.
And Christ is honored in that he must find the price of our redemption and
find an hand for us to receive it. So that the salvation and the application
by faith, is all of the gift of Christ, and of the power of Christ. Ephesians. 2.8.
By grace are ye saved through faith, (see Gods favor and Saints faith
conjoined) and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, who works to
will and to do, Phil. 2.13.

The Proposition: We are justified before God, before the act of our believing.
Argument. I.
LEt me speak for those that are not able to speak for themselves; I mean
the little Babes, to whom belongs the Kingdom of God; I argue thus: Infants do
not believe: [a]
But Infants are justified: Therefore some that do not believe, are justified.
Which if it be granted, it will follow, that some are justified before they
believe. That infants are justified, need no proof *; That infants believe
not, must be proved, [b]
(although the Church of England has long since put it out of doubt) First,
Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. How shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? shall we say, that infants in the Womb hear the Word?
Secondly, Faith is a Knowledge, as some say; a Persuasion, as others; a Trust,
as others: But Infants are capable neither of Trust, Persuasion, or Knowledge;
therefore Infants are not capable of Faith. But some have said, that infants
hear the Word of God, believe in God, and love God, in an unknown way; [c]
as sometimes John Baptist sprang in his Mothers Womb for joy, at the
salutation of the Blessed Virgin: But Saint Augustine did answer long ago not
more wittily then truly, That this was done by a singular Miracle. Neither does
this conclude, other infants to believe any more, [d]
then we may conclude, all Asses to be good Counselors, because we read, that
Balaams Ass spoke more wisely then her Master.

An Answer to Argument I.
* Yea if you would hold that infants are justified before they believe, you
had need exceedingly to prove that they are so justified, for we know no
Scripture for it. Justified infants do believe. [a]
Such an infant may be filled with the holy Spirit, Luke 1.15. And where is the
Spirit, there are its fruits; one of which is faith, Gal. 5. The inbeing of
grace no way depends upon the growing of the body: we know a reasonable spirit
is the subject of grace, and without respect to age. The Angels were full of
grace as soon as made. Grace does but perfect reason: The soul of an infant
is full of reason; Ergo, why not capable of grace, that does not hurt, but help
reason? how more capable is the soul of a man asleep of faith, then the soul
of an elect waking child? Yet, 1. God has appeared to men in dreams, why not
to a waking child, revealing Christ unto it? 2. The habit of faith saves, else
a believer dying in his sleep, cannot be saved; All infused habits depend not
on organicall knowledge that enters by sense. 3. Godly men in their deepest
sleep have often the most rational and divine notions: Ergo a child may, awake;
smiles are the property of reason: they will smile.

Infants do not believe, [b]
because Romans 10.17. Answer, that is spoken de Adultis, of ripe in years; for
there is mention of confession and supplication: The expression is affirmative,
not negative: By this argument, because it is said the spirit is given by
hearing, 2 Cor. 3. Ergo, it could not be given to John Baptist without hearing.

This confirms that spoken before, [c]
that John was filled with the holy Spirit from the womb: now manifesting an
apprehension of Christ, by that motion the body was organized unto, namely
leaping in the mothers womb.

For that of Augustine: 1. If men are to be urged in this point, then the whole
stream of all sound Divines run to this effect: We are elected before all
time: Created in the beginning of time: Justified in the fullness of time:
Glorified after all time: That the first is the decree, the other the execution.

2. Augustines speech must be interpreted, that he means by miraculum,
mirandum, or else his speech is false, (as in many things he mistook) for a
miracle is Mutatio naturae rei: of the water into wine: Moses rod into a
Serpent. Now John in the womb was not altered in nature.

1. [d]
It is not said that the Asses soul was capable of humane reason and speech:
The voice or fitness of speech was created in his mouth. But it is said John's
soul was filled with the holy Ghost. This infusion of the holy Spirit, in
regard of Gods acting, is the same with his infusion of the Spirit into all
other believers; though the subject not like to all other believers in regard
of body. But the Lord did not make the ass speak as he makes man to speak.
He makes man speak, by the natural instruments of speech. And speaks reason
from a reasonable soul. But the asses speech was created above the power of
nature.

And for that speech that John's condition does no more conclude that other
infants do believe any more, then we may conclude all asses to be good
counselors, because we read that Balaams ass spoke more wisely then his
Master: We answer, 1. This will conclude, that as all asses would so speak, if
God did work alike in them by creation; so all infants would believe if God
did work alike in them by infusion, as he did in John. Yea,

2. We can conclude more a fortiori; If God does put the spirit of faith (for
so it is called 2 Cor. 4.) into John, whom he intended should live to be a man
to see Christ and hear of him, if not hear him; how much more will he put the
spirit of faith into elect infants that shall never grow up to manhood, but die
in their childehood?

3. We can conclude that some one has had faith in infancy. But you can give
us on instance of any one that has been justified in infancy without faith; I
say no instance of example. As for your Arguments, we will answer to them in
order.

4. It seems more infants then John have had saving grace in their infancy,
Mar. 10. Else how were they pronounced blessed, and that to them did belong the
Kingdom of heaven; and were actually blessed of Christ?

Argument II.
HE that is in Christ, is justified: But we must be in Christ, before we can
believe: [a] [b] [c]
Therefore we must be justified, before we can believe. The Major is plain,
the Minor is proved, that we must be in Christ before we can believe: To
believe, is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. But we must be in Christ, before we
can bear fruit; Therefore we must be in Christ, before we can believe, Joh.
15.4. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine,
[d]
no more can ye, except ye abide in me. Secondly, if Faith be a good fruit, it
is required, that men must be good Trees, before they can bring it forth;
otherwise, Grapes should be gathered of Thorns, and Figs of Thisiles, Matthew.
12.33. If you will, [e]
the Argument may be this: He that has the Spirit of Christ has Christ; But
we have the Spirit before we believe; Therefore we have Christ before we
believe.

An answer to Argument II.
1. THe Argument is false in the form. For, 1. [a]
The conclusion is universal, (i.) that all justified persons are justified
before they believe; which must not be in an argument in the third figure. For
though expressly the proposition is but indefinit, yet you supposing it to be In
re necessaria, you yield it to be universal. For if the conclusion in this
figure may be universal, then I may infer many falsehoods. As thus, Every man
is rational; every man is a living creature; Ergo, every living creature is
rational. For the the Minor term must be the subject of the conclusion, and
the Mayor term the predicat. So by such a kind of argument as this I would
infer: All effectually called are saved: All effectually called do sin; Ergo,
all that sin are saved.

2. There is another fault in the form of the argument, which much concludes
against you, which is this. The Minor term as we said, must be the subject of
the conclusion, the Mayor term, the predicat; now believing is the Minor
term, and justification is the Mayor; and then the argument will according to
rule be thus,

He that is in Christ is justified: we must be in Christ before we believe:
Ergo we must believe, before we can be justified.

I answer artificially to Syllogismes because you pretend art, and use
Syllogismes.

2. The argument is false in the matter, namely in the Minor proposition: [b]
If by the word before you understand time, that we must be a certain time in
Christ, before we believe. For that cannot be: But in the same moment, that we
be actually in Christ, Christ is actually in us, Romans 8.1. to the end of verse
10. For Christ to be actually in us, or we in him, is an union; union is the
uniting of two into one, Ephesians. 2.13.14.15. Ergo, we cannot be in him to be one
with him, but he must be in us, one with us: Take up all the comparisons of
this union, they will import as much: As marriage; Is not marriage a mutual
consent? Is the man married to the woman, and not the woman to the man? They
twain shall be one flesh, can this be true of one, and not of the other? Has
Christ our nature? Have not we his? Are we not (as the Apostle speaks) jointly
one spirit? 1 Cor. 6.17. Or of a Vine and branches. If the Vine be united to
the branches, are not the branches to the Vine? Or of a body and members. If
the body be united to the members, are not the members to it?

Let any reasonable man under heaven tell me, nakedly, particularly, and
plainly, how actually we (I speak of true Christians) are in Christ, or Christ
in us, either Physically or morally, call it what you will, but all is under
the operation and notion of the Spirit of faith. 1. Physically, is there any
thing of Christ in us? This can be no other then the spirit of Faith: The habit
of the graces of the Spirit, one of which is faith, Ephesians. 3.17. For Christ
himself is in heaven. Are we any how peculiarly as true Christians in Christ?
This can be nothing else, but the actings of our faith carrying and casting of
our confidence, hope and expectation and desires and love upon him, Heb.
6.18.19. Most plainly, Ephesians. 3.17, 18. we have both Christ being in us, and we
in him by faith.

2. Morally, if the Lord imputes Christ's righteousness to me a true Christian,
my sins unto him, as 2 Cor. 5. ult. and so reputes me justified actually in
him, he does all this under the notion of faith, Romans 4.3. If any say, But we
are eternally justified in Gods election or purpose: We reply, just so, as we
eternally believe in Gods purpose. For he has purposed eternally both equally.
He that eternally purposed to justify, did eternally purpose to justify by
Faith. Though the purpose it self be not for any foreseen merit of faith. Now
if purpose of justifying, be actual justifying, then purpose is no purpose; or
if actual justifying be a purpose, then act is no more act. For while purpose
is, there is no act, whiles act is, it is no more a purpose. As we see in all
humane things: we purpose till we go a journey, when we go it, we no longer
purpose, but go it. So in divine things, Ephesians. 3.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.

The proof of this Minor is, [c]
to believe is a fruit of the Spirit, etc. Here is supposed that either the
Spirit must be in us a time, Spirit or grace of faith must have long previous
changes and preparations, essence being God, cannot be said at any time to be
out of any man, good or bad. It were contrary to its infinitnes to be excluded
out of any thing, or any nothing. It must needs fill all things, as it must
needs be God. If by the Spirit you mean the creating act of the Spirit, that
whiles it is every where, it create in this or that man, the habit of saving
graces, it does it just then when Christ comes. For you say Christ and Spirit
in a saving manner comes together. So [e]. For the 2. The Spirit needs no
previous antecedent change or preparations: If an angelical Spirit is full of
understanding, and act as soon as it is created; then the Spirit eternally
God, is eternally all act. For the third: Faith it self is the fruit of the
Spirit, as all the habits of graces are, by which the Spirit is said to be in
Saints; so that as soon as faith is in a Saint, there is a fruit. And faith
being above reason and senss, 2 Cor. 5. it acts without being beholding to
reason or sense. So that all this Argument proves no before of time.

You further prove the Minor: Secondly, (say you) if faith be a good fruit, it
is required that men must be good trees, before they can bring it forth.

Answ. I do entreat you, [d]
and all ingenuous men to consider whether this be a safe expression, to say
either that men bring forth faith, when as but now you said, it was a fruit of
the Spirit, or that men can be good before they have faith, when as faith is
that which makes the difference between good men and bad men, regenerate and
unregenerate, Act. 15.9. And therefore so commonly are good men in the new
Testament called by the name of believers: So that as soon as faith comes in,
the tree is good, it is made a vine, a fig tree, and so brings forth true
grapes and figs: If men have not faith, let them have what goodness they can,
all is naught, Heb. 11.6. Which place we shall further vindicate, when we come
to your reply to it.

For your last Argument: He that has the Spirit of Christ, has Christ, etc.
1. It is false in the form, just as your 1. Argument noted with [a]

For 1. as that, so this, is all universails (as you intend it) in the third
figure. [e]
2. As in that the conclusion according to rule, was to be inverted, so this:
So that the right conclusion is this: Therefore we believe before we have
Christ. For the Mayor term must be the predicat in the conclusion. And this
conclusion is true, not only according to form, upon your premises, but
according to matter in order of nature: For when Christ comes to give himself
in marriage to us, he gives us the hand of faith to take him by the hand of his
saving power; the sun is seen by its own light, and quickening life; so Christ
is received by the power of his own light and life of grace.

2. This argument in the Mayor or 1. Proposition clasheth against the proof of
the Minor, or 2. Proposition in the beginning of the 2. Argument, noted with
[b]. For there you say, we must be in Christ before we believe. To believe is a
fruit of the Spirit, etc. whence it follows by your Argument, that we must in
your sense have Christ before we have the Spirit, or else the Spirit must be in
us a barren Spirit without its fruits, or idle without working, which may not
be imagined.

Yet here you make the having of the Spirit to be the proof, if not the cause,
that we have Christ. For you make having the Spirit to be the Medius Terminus,
the sinew of your argument, which you know in point of art includes sometimes
the cause, sometimes the sign.

Therefore of necessity you must yield your self mistaken in one of these
assertions, unless you will close with us, that Christ, and the saving work
of the Spirit, and faith, and consequently justification, come unto and into a
man all at the same time.

Argument III.
ALL the Elect of God are justified before God; [a]
But some of the Elect of God do not yet believe: therefore some that do not
believe, are justified before God, and so by consequence, before they believe.
[b]
The major is proved: They that cannot be charged with any thing, are
justified; But none of the Elect of God can be charged with any thing:
Therefore the Elect are justified. The minor is proved: Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies: Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again, Romans 8.33.
He rose again for our justification, Romans 4.23.

An Answer to Argument III.
ALl the Elect of God are justified before God. [a]
This is an ambiguous proposition: Therefore we must pumpe out your meaning. If
you mean all the elect are justified before God, that is, in Gods thoughts,
ever since they were elected, then you may as well say that all the elect do
believe before God, in Gods thoughts ever since they were elected, for both are
equally within the eternal decree of God. And so you gain no before of time
of justification before faith.

If you mean that after the elect are borne before they are newborn, by
faith, they are justified before God, that is, in Gods thoughts or opinion: You
may say as well, so the elect after they are borne before newborn by faith,
are before God, in Gods opinion, children of the devil, of the world, and of
wrath, even as others. So evidently, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. to end of ver. 8. And
you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in times past
ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the
power of the air (observe) the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience; among whom also we all had our conversation in times past in the
lusts of the flesh, (observe now) and were by nature the children of wrath as
well as others. Till when was there no difference between them and others? Till
grace came, and faith came, and put them into Christ, ver. 4.5, 6, 7, 8. The
whole Chapter is to the same effect, ver. 12. to end of 18. They are without
God, without Christ, till they be in Christ, till Christ preached peace unto
them and gave them his Spirit, and then they come nigh and have access by one
Spirit unto the Father. Heed also, 1 Cor. 6 9.10, 11. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
fornicatours, etc. And such were some of you. Till when? Till now that ye are
washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified. See he puts now sanctification
before justification, that men may not conceive that they can be one minute
severed. All this while God thinks what he speaks, (for he cannot lie)
therefore before conversion we are no more actually justified, then we are
actually uniustified.

If you say, in Gods predestination we are eternally justified; we say as
truly, in Gods predestination we are eternally fallen in Adam. For both are
equally eternally foreordained, or else somewhat comes to pass that God did
not foreknow, or could not hinder, which would argue ignorance and impotency in
God; which to say were blasphemy.

To the Minor proposition of the argument to prove that all the elect are
justified before God, (before faith comes, [b]
for it is your meaning all along this dispute) And to the proof that the
elect cannot be charged with any thing: for which you allege, Romans 8.33. We
answer, 1. That whiles they are merely elected before justification by faith,
they stand charged with many things. God himself charge them with many heavy
things, as but now you heard out of Ephe. 2. As 2 Cor. 13.3, 4. (...).
Paul says to them in whom Christ was mighty, that they were refuse unless
Christ by faith were in them. They were but dross till the substance Christ by
faith were in them.

2. That the text you allege is clearly against you, look on it well and
submit: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Why Saint Paul?
Because it is (says he) God that justifies: what justification Paul do you
mean? a justification mental in God, or a justification actual received by
the believer? He shows us he means an actual justification received and
applied by the believer. For ver. 30. it is a justification, following vncation
according to Gods purpose; that is as effectual as ever he purposed to call:
And ver. 34. such a justification as has Christ's death and resurrection and
intercession and strengthening in tribulations accompanying it.

Argument IV.
THey that have their sins taken away, are justified; [a]
But the elect have their sins taken away before they believe: Ergo, the elect
are justified before they believe. The mayor is proved: Blessed is the man
whose iniquity is forgteen, and whose sin is covered, Romans 4.7. The minor;
That the Elect have their sins taken away before they believe, [b]
is proved Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world; and Esaias 35.^. The Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all; and 1
Pet. 2.24 Himself bare our sins in his own body on the Tree; and Romans 6.6. Our
old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed. Did
Christ take away sin, or not? Did he bear them? Did he destroy the body of
sin? If you say, [c]
No; how will you escape the Sword of the Spirit? If you say, Yea; I desire no
more.

An Answer to Argument IV.
YOu say, [a]
they that have their sins taken away are justified; you prove it Romans 4.7.
Blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. By
this you intend to prove a man is justified before he believes. But your own
expressions and allegations are against that. 1. Expression.
For sins are not taken away (which is a Physical act) by Gods mere mental
thoughts of justifying; but when he pronounces the blessing of justification
he says withal, in whose heart is no guile, Psalm. 32.1, 2. which is the place
the Apostle quotes, Romans 4. See real actual justification take our sins
from us, and our hearts from our sins. 2. Allegation.
And with the same breath almost with which the Apostle says, Blessed is the
man whose iniquity is forgiven, he says also, To him that believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, is his faith counted for righteousness, Romans 4.5,
6, 7.

You go about to prove that the elects sins are taken away before they believe,
[b]
by that, Isa. 53.8. 1 Pet. 2.24. Ephesians. 1.29. What do you intend by these
general places? would you by the two first places have it that Christ takes
away the sins of all the Jews, contrary to Romans 11.7. etc. or by the third
place, that Christ takes away the sins of the whole world? contrary to Romans
8.30. yet either you must take them in that false general sense, or else they
make nothing to prove justification before faith. That place you allege out of
Romans 6.6. is flat against you. For if sin be not destroyed, till crucified,
then not till mortified. For crucifying signifies mortifieation, which is a
part of sanctification, Gal. 5.22, 23, 24. And the body of sin signifies not
the guilt, but the filth and power, Romans 7. And therefore this place supposes
justification by faith, even as faith is mentioned to precede that crucifying,
in the place last alleged.

Yet in the close you seem to triumph, [c]
as if you had sheerly carried away the gerland upon the horns of an
unanswerable Dilemma. Saying, if we say Christ did take away sin, did bear
them, did destroy the body of sin, you desire no more. Thus you. We answer;
Christ does take away sin, does bear the sins of men, but for whom? only for
the elect. And when does he take away sin, and make his bearing to lighten
men? Even when comes that justification by faith, that, as you say, brings with
it a crucifying of the body of sin; when comes that justification, mentioned
Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4.

Argument V.
WE were made sinners in the first Adam, before we had done good or evil; [a]
Therefore we are made righteous in the second Adam, before we have done good
or evil. This consequence is proved, Romans 5.18, 19. As by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life: for as by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many
be made righteous. If you shall place the Emphasis of this Text, in All, and
many, you will cause the hearts of the * universal Gratians to leap for joy;
which (I believe) you would not willingly do. Therefore you must be forced to
place the Emphasis in As, and So: As we sinned all in the loins of the first
Adam; So were we all made righteous in the loins of the second Adam: The Lord
Christ. And this agrees with the ministry of Reconciliation; [b]
to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. Truly, this Argument was of
so great force, [c]
that it did wring out of Cardinal Bellarmine this confession, as the Apostle
teaches, Romans 5. That Christ may be put on, without a proper act of our soul:
I confess, I differ from the Cardinal, in his means of putting on Christ;
yet this his confession I acknowledge to be true.

An Answer to Argument V.
IT is plain by the place you allege, Romans 5. [c]
That you mean not a making of us sinners in the first Adam, by Gods bare
decree accounting us so. And if you do not so mean, but mean that we are
actually accounted sinners in the first Adam, since we came from his loins,
before we had done good or evil: I admire how you dare affirm a thing so
contrary to Scripture: For the Apostle most evidently affirms in that Romans 5.
That though all that are come of Adam, have not sinned after the similitude of
Adams transgression, ver. 14. that is, have not sinned actually in their
particular persons, as infants not any sin, nor any men that particular sin
of Adam, yet ver. 12. it is said expressy that death passed over all men, for
that all have sinned, or the Greek will bear it, In whom all have sinned.
(...).
The former part of the verse favors this reading in these words: As by one
man sin entered into the world. Then concludes all have sinned. Which how can
it be true of infants in their conception, as Psalm. 51. unless they be said to
sin in Adam?

But however we read, the same conclusion will necessarily follow, that all;
children and all; in the womb, even Jacob and Esau, have sinned originally in
the common nature at first existing in that public father of mankind: I say
originally; As true as we have our bodies from our Grandfathers, so from the
first Adam we had all the same corrupt senses and appetite in him: though
actually in our own persons we sinned not that sin, nor do infants (as Jacob
and Esau) actually sin, as persons of ripe years when (as the Law speaks)
they are capaces doli; can do evil, and give a seeming reason for it.

So then, in brief, our answer is: That Adams sin is imputed to all, because
all did originally commit it: All our natures were at and in the committing of
it; which natures we lineally derive from him. And that you say, we are made
sinners in the first Adam, simply and absolutely, before we have done evil,
the Scripture says no such thing, but the contrary, that in him we are all
sinners. Therefore, to retort the Argument upon you, we are not made righteous
in the second Adam, till we partake of his nature; that is, his Divine nature,
as 2 Pet. 1.4. which is that by which we escape corruption through lust. A part
of which is faith; after reckoned up, and commended to them, to whom Peter
writes, in verse 5. immediately following.

To that you urge out of 2 Cor. [b]
5.19. I answer, the Scripture is no friend to universal redemption: And then
what will follow on your behalf? Surely no more will follow, or can follow but
this, that in Gods ordinary way of Gospel administration, God is in Christ,
reconciling them of the world to himself, that are persuaded by him to believe
and receive the word of reconciliation: So evidently, immediately before and
after that 19. verse.

Yet you say, [c]
This Argument did so wring Cardinal Bellarmine, that he confessed Christ may
be put on without a proper act of our soul. Surely then, the saddle was
closer, and harder put on him by some other, then you have tackied it: or he
was more artificially wrackt, then you here stretch him.

But I am willing to imagine the urmost, you would, or could make of this
Argument: It may be you have this in your thoughts, that, as in Adam, children
are accounted sinners, though they cannot act sin, so, in Christ, children may
be accounted righteous, though they cannot act faith.

To which I answer: As there is a natural habit of corruption in infants, that
makes a foundation of a just relation of Adams sin to them; (For where there
is no habitual corruption of nature, there is no imputation of Adams sin, as
we see in Christ's conception and humane nature: He was not accounted a sinner
in himself, but is for them that are saved by him; but in himself he was, and
accounted most holy) So there is habitual faith in elect infants dying in
their infancy, through which they are accounted righteous in Christ; as we have
reasoned to the 1. Argument.

But that I am loath to wade too deep that little ones should not follow, more
might be said: If it might be said in some sense Christ can be apprehended
without a proper act of our soul, that is, as it is a mere peculiar act of
our soul; yet not without an act of Gods grace in that soul: Till that be put
into the soul, no more is done in any particular elect person then what was
done in the eternal election, which the Scripture calls a purpose, Romans 9. And
a purpose is not the practice of the thing purposed; and of that act of grace
the soul of the youngest elect infant is in a fair capacity. For the (...)
intelligere, the naked act of understanding depends not on the organs of the
senses; So the Artists that handle of the nature of the reasonable soul.
no nor does the representing of an intelligible object to the understanding
depend upon the senses, when God will in the dark, or in a dream represent as
in a vision of the mind, the species or images of some spiritual thing that
sense never apprehended. How much less does the acts of grace in this act of
understanding depend upon the body or senses? So that though the body be a
child, great may be the actings of the gratiated soul.

Argument VI.
Where there is full satisfaction made, and the party offended accepting that
satisfaction, and contented to rest in it, there must needs follow perfect
remission of sins; But in Christ crucified (before we believed) was full
satisfaction made, and God was contented to rest in that satisfaction:
Therefore there will follow perfect remission of sins, etc. First, [a]
that there was full satisfaction made in Christ, is proved Heb. 10.11, 12, 13,
14. verse. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. But the second, that God is therewith contented to rest in that
satisfaction, we have the witness of the Father, Matthew. 3.17. This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Acquiesco, says Beza. See Esaias 53.11.
He shall see the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied.

An Answer to Argument VI.
YOur sixth Argument, as you prove it, will answer it self: That Heb. 10.11,
[a]
12, 13, 14. shows expressly, that though Christ did make ready the satisfaction
for the common nature of men, before they knew of it, that after should
believe: yet it is not brought home, and made available, to any particular
person, but to the sanctified. The sanctified ones, for ever in all ages, and
for eternity, have the satisfaction, not only prepared, but perfected to them.
See you Pareus, etc. on the place, whether I deal not clearly with the place.

That place also Matthew. 3.17, is for us against you. It is, in whom, not with
whom. So that it imports that he is only well pleased with all he studes in
Christ: Else he does not acquiescere rest pleased, but is earnest till somewhat
else be done, 2 Cor. 5.20. This interpretation is as old as Augustines time;
whom I name because you named him. But look to the Scripture, which to show
that God is well pleased, only with those that are actual in Christ, adds to
this speech, Matthew. 17.5. Hear ye him, to draw men into Christ, that with them
God may be well pleased. Till men be actually in Christ, God is not well pleased
with them though they be elect. See a notable place, Romans 9.25. I will call
them my people, which were not my people, and her beloved which was not
beloved; who were they? Them whom he had called, ver. 24.

Argument VII.
IF we are not justified in his sight before we believe, [a]
then are we unjust sinners, workers of iniquity; then does the Lord hate us,
for he hates all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5. You know what absurdity
will follow, if you say, we must believe before God can love us: But it God
hate us to day, [b]
and love us to morrow, let Arminius with his disciples hear this, and wonder,
why they should be blamed that say: we may be loved to day and hated to morrow;
Children of God to day, and of the Devil to morrow: when they who would seem
their greatest Adversaries, will not spare to say; we may be hated to day, and
loved to morrow; the children of the Devil to day, and of God to morrow. But
that God loved us first, before we believed, when we were enemies, in our blood
etc. is so plain, that I will not willingly so dishonor you, as once to
conceive that you will deny it.

Here is an end of the seven Arguments, which (if need had required) might have
been seventie. Now I will answer the Objections.

An Answer to Argument VII.
IF we are not justified in his sight before we believe, [a]
then we are unjust, sinners, workers of iniquity: Answer. So we are, As we
have showed out of Ephesians. 2.2. Where we are said to walk after the course of
the world, to be guided by the Spirit that rules in the children of
disobedience, and to be children of wrath as well as others, till we be in
Christ by faith. v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. So 1 Cor. 6.9.10.11.

But then says the objection: If we be workers of iniquity, God hates us,
Psalm. 5.

1. Answ. We know no middle between Gods love and hate. And the text says
plainly, that till they be called, they are, in regard of actual love, a
people not beloved, Romans 9.24.25. Some reply that this is meant of the Gentiles.

To which, 1. We reply, that that is all one; In the Gentiles we see those that
were not beloved before the call, are beloved after.

2. That the text names Jews and Gentiles, and brings that of Hos. to prove
it, with which if we go on to end of 3. chap. of Hos. it is fully proved:
Chapters are of late invention.

Besides that 9. of Romans we allege that Ezekiell 16.8. It was a time of love.

This text is urged against us, but you may see it is for us. For it should
seem it was not the time of love till God passed by her, and spread his skirt
over her, the righteousness and excellency of Christ.

In order of nature, she lay in her blood before justified and loved. But in
order of time, at the same time, yea minute of time, she was in her blood, was
justified and loved. At the same time, the soul is created in man. But in
order of nature, the understanding acts before the will.

And whereas it is said, Esau have I hated, not Jacob: But Jacob have I loved.
This the Apostle applies peremptorily to Election and reprobation: Now Election
is every where in Scripture called a purpose. If any where it be called a love,
we must be forced to ioyn both together, unless we will set the Scriptures
together by the ears, and say; It is a purpose of love: Now a purpose is not
an act, nor an act a purpose; Gods decree is not the execution, nor the
execution the decreeing.

2. Answ. Isay 1.13. Your incense is abomination to me, the calling of
Assemblies, I cannot away with it, it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting,
your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hates, etc. And all because
their hands were full of blood.

But ver. 18. Come now let us reason together; though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow.

See here is as much said of hating those that should be pardoned, ver. 25. as
of Sodom and Gomorrah, ver. 10. God cannot hate the essence of the Devil,
being his creature, but only his manners. So of the justified before
justified, as we have showed.

Answ. [b]
What absurdity can be conceived by one principled with Divinity? For though
man could fall in the first Adam; yet he cannot fall from the second Adam,
being once in him: For the gifts and calling of God, Romans 11.
are without repentance. We can perfectly sin being out of Christ, and so
deserve to be hated. But we being in Christ, have a perfect righteousness in
him, that saves them to the utmost, that is, for ever, that come to God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. So that as he
breaks the power of corrupt nature, that it cannot sin perfectly with a full
will, Romans 7. so he perfectly pardons all sin, that there is no condemnation.
Romans 8.1.

Objection 1.
We are justified by Faith; therefore not before Faith.

Answer.
First, it should have concluded, not before the act of believing. [a]


Secondly, I deny the consequence, and say, we may be justified both by it,
and yet before, in a different sense.

This Proposition, We are justified by Faith, is very ambiguous. He was not a
Fool, who (an hundred years since) said, that this Proposition was one of
those things hard to be understood; which they that are unlearned and unstable,
wrest, as they do other Scriptures, to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. I
would our Age had not proved it true, that the misunderstanding of this
Proposition has turned upside down the Doctrine of Justification amongst
pudling preachers.

There is in this Proposition two words ambiguous and doubtful:

The first (Justified) which sometimes in Scriptures signifies to be reputed,
reckonned, or accounted Just; as, It is God that justifies. Sometimes it is
taken for to be declared, or manifested to be Just: as, By works a man is
justified, James 2.24. If you take Justified in the first sense, we say, we are
not reputed or reckoned Just by the act of believing. If you take Justified in
the second sense, I say, we are justified (that is, declared to be Just) by
believing: Faith manifesting to our consciences, that we are Just before God:
By Faith we understand, that God has freely justified us in his Son.

Another word ambiguous in this Proposition, is (Faith) which is diversely
taken: sometimes for the act of Faith, or believing; and sometimes for the
object of Faith, the thing believed: as, Faith was reckoned unto him for
righteousness, Rom 4. that is, the object of faith: So that it is all one as
if he had said, God or Christ was reckoned to him for righteousness. If we
understand the act of Faith, then I say, as before, we are not reckoned Just by
the act of our faith: if by faith we understand the object of our faith; then I
say, we are reckoned or reputed Just by God, in, by, or through Christ Jesus,
our Faith.

An answer to your reply to the 1. Objection.
We are justified by faith, therefore not before faith. Your Answer is: 1. That
the conclusion should be, not before the act of believing. We reply, the
conclusion should not have more terms in it, then the premises.

2. That if a man has the habit of faith, he cannot but be actually in Christ.
For it is part of Christ.

2. You answer: That you deny the consequence. We reply: That which is said to
be done by an instrument, inferres it is not done without the instrument.

3. You reply that a man may be justified by faith, and yet be justified before
faith in a different sense, distinguishing of the reputation of one just, and
the manifestation of one just. And of Fides qua and fides quam, of faith and
its object.

What is all this to the purpose, when your own former replies do intimaredly
confess that you took the Argument to mean justification it self, not the
manifestation, and faith the quality, not the object? For the Apostle does not
mean, Romans 5.1. that Christ is the isntrumental cause, but the meritorious
cause: And faith the instrument. And the text means justifying, not bare
manifesting of justification.

Objection 2.
He that believes not, is condemned already, John 3.18.

Answer.
This is all one with; He that believes not shall be damned: [a]
which you must understand of final unbelief, which I grant to be a note of
Damnation.

An Answer to your Reply to Objection 2.
This you say must be understood of final unbelief. [a]
As if a man were not in state of damnation till the last.

We reply; 1. What then means the terms: (...), is condemned already? 2. How
do you answer to the Antithesis? He that believes is not condemned: that is,
is actually out of state of damnation by faith: Ergo, without faith is actually
in state of damnation. 3, What say you to the reason? he is said to be in state
of condemnation for his past infidelity, because he has not believed.

Objection 3.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God: therefore we cannot be justified
without it.

Answer.
I deny the consequence; and I perceive so will you also, when you please: [a]
[b] [c] [d] [e] [f]
For you will affirm, a justified person may displease God, and then why is it
not possible for a man to displease God, and yet be justified? To please God,
is so to do those things which God approves in us to be well done, which we
cannot do, without Faith. That this is the meaning of the Apostle, is plain
by his reason: For he that comes unto God, must be (...), etc. We cannot come
unto God, before we believe, but cannot God come unto us before we believe? Now
Justification is Gods act upon a sinner, not a sinners act upon God.

This also answers the fourth Objection: Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.

An Answer to your Reply to Objection 3.
[You deny the consequence] Before we reply, [a]
note the meaning of the word please, it imports to be well pleasing or
acceptable.

1. So the Greeks take the word; So Basil, (...). Abel the first that is said
to be acceptable to God was a shepherd. So Bud. renders it: See you more
instances in Greek Authors.

2. Its spoken in this 5. ver. not of doing, but of receiving: God translated
him, for before his translation he had this Testimony that he pleased God,
which must be meant that he was well pleasing to God by faith in Christ, (which
is the Apostles scope, ver. 1. ver. 39.) or else you will make his doings the
cause of his translation.

3. This 6. ver. shows that the word please must signify to be accepted of
God through faith in Christ, because it is added, we must believe that God is,
there is his essence, or that he is Jehovah; And that he is a rewarder of them
that seek him; there is his attribute of mercy to them that come to him by
faith in Christ. For without faith no acceptable seeking him, Romans 10.

4. This Epistle being written in Hebrew, the Hebrew renders the word please,
(...) was a delight to him.

5. Either this must be the meaning, that he that pleases God, pleases God by
faith in Christ, or else the Apostles Argument drawn from Enoch to prove the
Excellency of faith, which is the maine business of this chap. comes to
nothing, for this is the Apostles Argument. He that pleases God has faith:
Enoch pleased God; therefore he had faith, and so by faith went to heaven.

Now to answer to your reply, you deny the consequence. 1. We answer by proving
the consequence. He only that is justified pleases, or is well pleasing to
God. This you yield in your 6. Argument, therefore if a man be not justified by
faith, he cannot please God: This inference is the Apostles in this 11. of
Hebr. 5.6. compared with Romans 5.1. For says the Apostle, being justified by
faith we have peace with God. And by faith Enoch pleased God, as sure as Abel
did. But says he, without faith it is impossible to please God. Observe and
observe the word impossible, and see how it can be possible for a man to be
well-pleasing to God without faith.

2. We answer, though one justified by faith may do some displeasing act, as
Thomas did in doubting of Christ's resurrection, yet a man justified by faith
cannot be displeasing to God in his person: God may chasten the corruption, yet
love the person, Revel. 3.19. We hate wantonness and whip it, but we love the
child. Faith brings in our Sonship, 1 John 12.

To your reason for denial of the consequence, [b]
we reply thus. That you seem to infer that because one justified may
displease God in some action, therefore he may a time be without faith and
displease God in all his actions, and yet be justified: which inference is very
much to be blamed, both for the consequent, and consequence.

To your definition of pleasing God in action, [c]
I demand, whether God can approve of a greater thing without faith, namely our
persons, (being as you say justified before faith comes) but cannot approve of
a less thing, namely our actions without faith? which seems strange.

By faith our persons are united to Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. And our actions are
but by a natural dependence united to us. Therefore the person, is 1. Accepted
by faith, then 2. Our actions are accepted, because our persons; the Apostle
says, by faith Abel offered a more excellent sacrifice: How? says the text
Genesis 4. God had respect to Abel, and his offering.

To your reason, [d]
that pleasing God in action must be the only meaning of the Apostle, I
answer: That from the effect the Apostle proves how a man must have faith to be
well-pleasing to God in his person, that so he may be well-pleasing in his
practice.

To your demand, whether God cannot come to us before we believe? [e]
I answer; his making us to believe is coming in and dwelling with us, Ephesians. 3.
Before that, God does but only purpose his coming, Ephesians. 1.

To your close, that Justification is an act of God upon a sinner, [f]
not a sinners act upon God; we answer, that Gods putting faith into a man, and
by it a man into Christ, is as well an act of God in justifying him, as Gods
reputing him just in Christ, imputing his sins to Christ, and Christ's
righteousness to him.

Objection 5.
We are by nature the children of wrath, etc.

Answer.
This were of some force, [a]
if you could prove us altogether in the estate of nature as well in Gods
account as in our esteem, and so quite exempred from grace until we believe:
which you cannot do, for the Apostle witnesses the contrary, 2 Timothy 1.9. [b]
According to his own purpose and grace given us before the world began: If
grace were given before the world began, surely before ever we believed.

God is Alpha and Omega: therefore what he promises shall come to pass to
his, [c]
is done with him, Rev. 21.6. For his works were finished from the foundation
of the world, [d]
Heb. 4.3. And so I rest,

A Servant of Jesus Christ to live and die. H. D.

An Answer to your Answer to the 5. Objection.
We reply, when God speaks those texts, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. and 1 Cor. [a]
6.9, 10, 11. (I pray turn to them and consider them) sure God speaks as he
thinks. And if God does not think mankind children of wrath before faith
comes, sure they will not think themselves so.

To that place of 2 Timothy 1.9. we say, [b]
that the place is express of Gods gracious purpose. For otherwise then in
purpose Christ himself cannot be said there to be given to us before the world
began.

To that Revel. [c]
21.6. God is Alpha and Omega, therefore what he promises shall come to pass
is done with him; we answer, all that ever any learned have made of that, or
you can make is, that the thing spoken of there, was as certain to be done in
process of time, as if it had been then done, when it was spoken. But the
certainty of a thing to be, does not put the thing into a present being. Genesis 3.
Gods promise of Christ in the beginning of time, does not actually give
Christ, till the fullness of time.

Yet if you will have a notion in your head of Gods actual doing in himself,
that which is yet but in his promise and purpose; we retort; then so is it also
in his threats. For the same expression as you allege out of Revel. 21.6. by
way of promise of a mercy, is used by the same Saint John, Rev. by way of
threat. So that if according to your position Gods promising to justify, be an
actual justifying of a man with him, then Gods threatening to condemn, John
3.18. is an actual condemning of a man with him. So that a man in this way, is
as much condemned as justified, before faith comes, and so you have gained
nothing.

Christ himself speaks of Gods justifying him from the imputation of the
sins of men to him, in the future tence or time, Isay 50.8, 9. He is near
that justifies me, (...)
or, as the Hebrew will very well bear it: The iustifier of me is near who
will contend with me, etc. Behold the Lord will help me, who is he that shall
condemn me? See by the opposite term condemn, the word help signifies
justifying according to the title of the father in 8. ver. The justifier. So
that if Christ was justified in time from sin merely imputed, then much more
is a man justified by Christ from sin inherent.

Or else on the other side if according to your sense Gods promise of
justifying be in God a justifying of a man, then Gods promise of giving faith
is in him a giving of faith to a man, and so faith is come as soon as
justification, justification has not got the start of faith.

To that Heb. [d]
4.3. we say, that it is expressly meant as it is explained, ver. 4. of Gods
resting on the seventh day in the beginning of the world; and therefore cannot
be understood of Gods finishing his works, before the world was made: Gods
purposes are not works, Gods works are done in time, those of the creation in
six days, those of his providence, 6000. years, but Gods purposes were before
all time from all eternity.

But of the nature of Gods purposes and decrees, and the Objection about its
unchangeablenesse in our answer to some passages in your Sermons entitled,
Grace, mercy and peace; containing Gods reconciliation to man, man
reconciliation to God.

An Answer to several passages in your Book, called Grace, mercy, and peace;
containing (as you say) 1. Gods reconciliation to man: 2. Man's reconciliation
to God.
Delivered (as I conceive by the division of your book) in two Sermons: The 1.
Concerning Gods reconciliation to man: The 2. Concerning man's reconciliation to
God.
Sermon I.
Page 1. You say, I will show how God comes to be reconciled to men; bear with
the term reconciled, although improperly spoken of him that was never an
enemy: So you.

Answ. 1. If God were never an enemy, why say you, I will show you how God
comes to be reconciled? How can there be any going or coming of his love to
man, if he never an enemy to him?

Answ. 2. Reconciliation and enmity are relatives; as a father and a son; take
away the relation of a father, and the relation of a son is gone, and so on the
contrary. So if you deny that there was ever any enmity between God and man,
you must needs utterly deny all reconciliation between God and man. Re
signifies (as you know) again, Con signifies together, Of Cico
ciliation to call or move to. How is there a moving to, where there was never
any removing? How a together of those that were never asunder? How an again,
unles there had been once an onenes or an agreement, which had been broken to
pieces, and now is made up again (as the of (...) alius, (...) permuto, Thence
(...) Commutatio, thence (...), commutatio, contractus, Thence (...) A
contracting again.
Greek word bears us out in all this) and so there is reconciliation? But
whiles I am speaking these things, I know you are gone for an appeal from the
bar of reason (in matters of faith) to the tribunal of Scripture. I go with
you, for that is nothing else but a better, a divine reason.

Say you that God was never an enemy to the Elect; and you make the fall of
Adam (in whom the Elect are included) a fiction, you make the story of the
Gospel touching Christ suffering a fable, as that Pope did, that said
blasphemously, How much have we gotten by that fable of the Gospel! you make
Christ's passion (if you grant he did suffer for the sins of the elect) to be a
very vanity, a more then needs.

You overthrow the nature of God, Hab. 1.13.
whose purity cannot endure any sin as sin, in whomsoever it is, but
reproves it sharply all along the Scriptures in all his Elect.

And you deny many Scriptures that testify that God was at enmity with his
Elect as well as they with him till they were believers, Ephesians. 2.2.3. As they
are said to walk as the worldly children of disobedience, so in regard of God
they are said to be children of wrath. All spoken of the Elect, for they were
now truly converted. Weigh the place, weigh also that Isay 63.10.11. Therefore
he was turned to be their enemy, then he remembered the days of old, etc. That
is, to have mercy on them.

Object. Nor is it available for you to say that Christ died to reconcile us to
God, not God to us.

Answ. For if that had been all the business, God might have reconciled our
stubborn natures into a love of him by the mere sanctification of his Spirit,
without the sufferings of Christ, as at first he made the blancke and
worthless nature of Angels and Adam holy of innocent without the merits of a
Savior. Till conversion comes, God is as well at enmity with the Elect, as the
Elect with him.
Yea indeed had not Gods enmity against Eve concurred with Eves enmity against
him, it is a question whether Eve (the mother of all the Elect) had fallen when
she did: We speak of the means and execution of the decree.

For if whiles Eve was talking with Satan, God had not upon displeasure (though
justly) withdrawn himself and left Eve to her self, she had not in all
likelihood then have eaten of the forbidden fruit.

And so since, had not God taken displeasure at the sins of Elect, he had not
suffered the doctrine of the Law so many hundreds of years to tyrannise and
terrify them in so many ages so much before their conversion, before the
fullness of the Gospel was revealed, as he has done. And why does God defer
the Call of so many Elect till the 6.9. and 11. hour of the day (and does not
call all at the 3.) but for this as one maine reason, to show his enmity
against sin in all men? And why when he begins to call, does he suffer them
to lie so long brined often times in hellish terror, as we know some by woeful
experience lie long so, notwithstanding the holding forth Christ never so much
to them? one reason must needs be Gods enmity against sin, and so to chase men
from it. Not to enlarge by way of discourse. The text is most evident that God
does walk in an enmity against the sins of his Elect till conversion, Levit.
26.40, 41, 42. If they shall confess their iniquity, etc. with their trespass
which they have trespassed against me, and that also they have walkea contrary
unto me, and that also I have walked contrary unto them (mark that) and have
brought them into the land of their enemies, if then their uncircumcised hearts
(mark that) he humbled, and then they accept of the punishment of their
iniquity, (observe that too) Then will I remember my Covenant, etc.

You go on in that, 1. Page 10. I will show you how God comes to be reconciled
to men; 2. How we come to be reconciled unto God.

Answer. Here you make these two reconciliations, not only two distinct
things, but do also conceive them to be two several and divided, and
separated things, so that God to an elect person may be a long time, if not
from all eternity, actually reconciled, before that elect person be actually
reconciled to God. This appears plainly by your own words in this first
Sermon. page 21, 22, 23. where you thus lay open your self; For us to say, or
think that Christ purchased the love of his father for us, is that which I am
confident the Redeemer of the world will not challenge unto himself, but say
(as in another case) It is not mine to give, but it was given to them, to whom
it is given before the foundation of the world was laid. Gods love was before
the gift of his Son. Did God love Paul with as great love when that he
persecuted the Church, as when he preached the Gospel? I will answer boldly,
He did. So you.

I will at this present only reply to the distinction it self, answering the
other passages in order after, as I shall trace you page after page.

I say then, That actually, God cannot be said to be reconciled to man, whiles
a man is not reconciled to him. The word Reconciliatio. q. d. Re-conciere.
(...), sign. contractum vicissitudinarium. (...) in compositione signif.
habitudinem and maiorem significationem.
Reconciliation, both in English, Latin and Greek (which is the word the holy
Ghost uses) signifies emphatically and fully, A making two several persons to
be at one again, that were fallen at odds. Two are not Reconciled, whiles one
stands out. Galat. 3.19, 20. The Apostle speaking of Reconciliation, says,
that Christ is not the Mediator of one, therefore as God is one party, so
transgressors are the other party, both which are reconciled by the Promise
leading to Christ, that were at odds by the transgression of the Law. So 1.
Tim. 2.5. There is one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus;
affirming evidently, that there is but one only mediation of Reconciliation,
and that of two parties, God and man into one. So Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, 12, 13,
etc. We are Children of disobedience to God; God is a God of wrath to us, till
faith in Christ comes, and then each to other at once are reconciled. So Romans
5.1, 2. It is as evident as evident may be, That by faith in Christ, both God
is reconciled to us; Being Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, that is
as the (...). We find peace in God, we find God at peace.
Greek is, from God, God is at Peace with us; as also we are reconciled to God,
By Christ we have access by Faith into this grace wherein we stand, and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

Add to all the Confession of our Brother, that was a while mistaken by the
false light of this distinction, that he was reclaimed by that place, Ezekiel.
16.63. That thou may be ashamed and confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
have done, says the Lord God. Where it is evident, from the 62. verse, that
then only, when the Covenant is applied, is God reconciled to man, as man is
then reconciled to God. We confess with the godly Learned, that there is of
the elect a purposed Justification, or Reconciliation, in Gods eternal Decree,
and a virtuall Jnstification, or Reconciliation, in Christ's Refurrection. He
rose again for our Justification. Then Christ had an acquitance from his Father
for all the debts of the Elect, for which he had paid. Before Christ's
suffering, the Father trusted the Son to satisfy for them he saved in the
old Testament. After Christ's suffering, the Son trusted the Father to save all
the Elect by virtue of that Suffering, that should believe for time to come,
till the worlds end. Both these are before our actual Reconciliation to God.
Before we Believe. The 1. is but that designing of the thing; the 2. the
preparing. But that 3d, namely actual Justification, or Reconciliation, of God
to us, is the finishing at the same instant, that we are actually reconciled to
God. The two former prepare the Justification, or Reconciliation, the last
only makes the justified man, makes God and man to be reconciled.

You see we are ingenuous to yield what with truth may be yielded. But further
we cannot; as to say, God is actually reconciled to us before we are to him:
you have heard the Scriptures, and Divine reason clear against it. And
therefore tremble you to say, That God loved Paul with as great love when he
persecuted the Church, as after when he preached the Gospel. For purpose, or
preparation of a ground of love, is not so great as actual Love. To purpose to
woo, is not equal unto the Love of wooing. Likewise tremble to say. That
Christ did not purchase his Fathers actual Love. For we are not actually
loved, till actually found in him.

If it were so, that God were always reconciled to us, why do you condemn
your self in your own words next following, page 11. I conceive, (say you, and
consider what you say) the drooping Conscience that sits in darkness, under
the clowdy apprehension of an angry Junge, etc. Attentive to hear how God may
be reconciled. So you. How is God an angry Judge? how is there a may be of his
Reconciliation to us. (terms importing future time) if he was never at enmity
with us? If it were so, that God may be reconciled to us from all eternity,
and so before we were in Christ, why do you say in page 11. 812. that God is
freely and fully reconciled to the Elect, and loves them in Christ? your words
following of persons polluted and sinful, being in Christ, import an actual
being in Christ, as sure as an actual pollution, when they come to him. So
much of this distinction.

Page 12 You say that God is freely and fully reconciled to the elect, and
loves them in Jesus Christ without any previous dispositions, without any
qualifications, without any performances of Conditions on their parts, unless
to be polluted and sinful be a previous condition, or qualification.

Answer. The Lord expresses it as the Cardinal condition of the Gospel, that
men must as well feel their sins, as be sinners. Matthew. 11.28. Come to me ye
that are weary, etc. Which Christ explaines, Luke 15.7. Joy shall be in heaven
over one sinner that repents (which is a sense of sin at the least) then over
ninety nine Just persons that need no repentance: who are they, but such as
think they have no need? whom Christ calls not, Matthew. 9.13. speaking to the
Pharisees, who justified themselves. Luke 16.15.

It is true, that the qualifications in man to prepare him for Christ (as John,
by telling men they needed to repent, calling them generations of Vipers, and
telling them, That the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand, Mat. 3. is said to make
ready a people prepared for the Lord) must be from God. If there be the
qualifications only of illumination, conviction, and humiliation, (for a man
blind, or stubborn, defieth Christ) they are the common works or graces of
the Spirit of God, which may be in a reprobate Esau, Judas, etc. Heb. 6.4. And
therefore we cannot be understood in these to ascribe to man, either merit or
efficacy toward his own salvation. If they be the qualifications of
Conversion-graces, as of faith, etc. they come in a special manner from the
Spirit of Christ, as the divine nature of Christ, and so cannot be imagined to
be of man, though in man, and acting upon man, and man by them. For we cannot
say, that Faith or belief does believe, repentance does repent, love does
love; but men acted and moved by these graces, are said to be Believers,
penitent, and lovers of God, So that though there be no qualifications on man's
part, from man, yet on man's part from God. And though there be no performances
on man's part by mere man, yet there are performances on man's part in man from
Christ's Spirit: when Christ will come and close with the soul actually, then
does he act desires, and faith into it, to make way for himself. Rev. 3. Christ
knocks before he let in. Christ opens Lydia's heart, then comes in. And Ephesians.
2.8. By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God: where it is evident, that besides the riches of Gods free
favor, explained in verse. 9. there must be Gods gift of Faith, to bring us
unto, and into Christ. So John 6.37. Him that comes will I in no wise cast
out. There must at least be a restless desire, that the soul cannot sit still
without Christ; (though that be an effect of the Fathers gift, in the same
verse; All that the father gives me, shall come to me) and then Christ will
not cast him out, or leave him out, but receive him in. The holy Ghost in that
11. Matthew. 28. Come, that is, believe, ye that are weary and heavy laden, that
is, weary of finne, and desire to come out of it; compared with Matthew. 5. where
there is such frequency and variety of expressions of desires, under the
notions of poverty, mourning and hunger, and compared with John 3. where there
is often mention of faith, as necessary to bring into Christ; and unto salvation;
I say, the Holy Ghost by these places sets forth unto us that there is a double
condition of the Gospel, Viz. Qua, and Quae. 1. The qualification in which a
man comes to Christ (that is, a sensible need of Christ.) 2. The qualification
which brings a man to Christ, that is Faith, required unto salvation; but both
of and from the Spirit, yea from the Spirit, as Christ's Spirit, as sent by the
Mediator, when effectual. So that still all is of God. But that which Christ
does to men before they come unto him, and into him, cannot be denied. And this
method of the Lord, is much for our comfort, that the King comes not, sine
magno strepitu, multo pulvere, without some hurry, somewhat to do, that we may
know the commings in of the Lord, and not derive all assurance from phanatick
Enthysiasmes, and fantastic dreams, that are neither from the word and work
of Christ, nor warranted there by him.

You think to comfort a sinner by this, that Christ is his without any
qualifications, performances, or conditions on man's part: But if there be no
conditions, qualifications, etc. performed by Christ in man's behalf, as to put
into him desires, faith, love, etc. How shall he know but that he is still a
miserable sinner, uniustified? How shall they say to their comfort, as 2 Timothy
1.12. I know whom I have believed, unless they do believe? And that Romans
8.28. We know all work together for good to them that love God, unless they
feel their Love to God? And that 1 Epist. John. 3.14 By this we know we are
translated from death to life, because we love the Brethren, unless they do
love the Brethren? But of these marks and signs in another place, if God
permit.

This Position being your main ground, together with the foresaid distinction,
I have been the longer in, confuting the one, and clearing the other. I shall
be briefer in taking down your props and superstructures, and that plainly and
lovingly. You offer to bring many Proofs, for the aforesaid unqualified
Proposition.

Proof I.
Page 12. Of Gods preaching salvation to Adam and Eve, in whom you would not
have us to think there were any qualifications. page 13.

Answer. 1. God made Adam afraid, by his voice in the garden. 2. God expounded
to him the cause of his shame, namely his sin. 3. Presses upon him his
sin, Genesis 3.17. and upon Eve hers, verse. 16. As for the Promise, it fell from
Gods mouth in his speech to the Serpent. And then verse. 20. is all the
intimation of Adams Faith, calling his wifes name Chavah (see the Hebrew and
the margin of the English Bible) that is, the mother of all living.

Your 2. Proof.
Page 13. Abraham receives the Promise in the uncircumcision of his flesh.

Answ. Be it so (though the Apostles observation touching Justification is,
That Faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness in his state of
uncircumcision) yet does it follow that all is done in the heart; Romans 49.10.
as soon as the Promise comes to the ear? Then all hearers are immediately
saved at their first hearing of the Promise. But to the point in a word. God
commands Abraham to come out of his Country, and God promises to bless
Abraham, and to make him a blessing. Genesis 12. But it was faith that did
actually derive all that upon Abraham. Romans 4. Hebr. 11. By faith he received
righteousness; and by faith he obeyed. And by faith must all the spiritual
children of Abraham receive blessedness. Gal. 3.9.26.

Your 3. Proof.
2. Tim. 1.9. page 14. Who has saved us with an holy calling, not according to
our workees but according to his own purpose, and grace which was given us in
Christ Jesus, before the world began. Now what conditions or qualifications
(say you) were there in us before the world began?

I am not willing to stay my self, or to stay you so long, as to tell you that
this phrase (...), here translated, Before the World began; is not so
infallibly evident, to signify eternity, as that Ephesians. 1.4. (...), Before the
foundation of the world. That Calvin translates this phrase, Ante tempora
secularia: Beza, Ante tempora seculorum, (seculum a sequendo) which may be
rendered, informer Ages, or before these latter ages. That Augustine has a
subtle dispute on this, confessed by Calvin. That the Greek word here (...),
sometimes signifies but term of life. Philem. verse. 15. As the Hebrew word
(...) Gnolam (Tempus homini absconditum, of (...) abscondere) which answers to
the Greek, sometimes signifies but the 50. years of the Jubilee, Exodus 21.6.
sometimes a man's life, 1 Samuel 1.28. But suppose this place to be meant of
eternity; yet, 1. cry you not out; What is there, that is not comprehended in
the word Grace? For that is your challenge. For though all follows upon that
grace or favor here meant; yet the words purpose and grace (as Calvin and Beza
well note) comprehend no more then a gracious purpose. So they; or at most a
purpose of grace, if you dare to understand it of any other grace, then of that
which in order of nature goes before purpose, God of his eternal grace or
favor eternally purposing to save. And then what actual saving is here,
before actual qualification of the soul, with somewhat from Christ for Christ.
2. Note the words, given us in Christ. So that, If given in purpose, it is
given in Christ, as when it is given in act, it is given in Christ. So that God
does still look at us in Christ, as qualified, or to be qualified in Christ,
from or by the power of Christ. Though in us and from us, there is no power or
merit, we disclaim the Arminians Foreseen Faith, and the Papists Overseen
Works, and both their power of Free Will; yet God says in his Word, that he
will save us actually by Faith in Christ, both which he gives us, Ephesians. 2.8.
He gives Christ to us by Election and incarnation, and us to Christ by
vocation, drawing us by the Word and grace of Christ unto and into Christ,
Cant. 1.4. Joh. 6.44. which is the Third thing here in this Text of 2 Timothy 1.9.
by you urged. That as God does intend us, and purpose us favor in Christ, and
gives it us intentionally in him, by election, so says the Text, We are saved
being called with an holy calling. Calling necessarily supposing hearing and
understanding our condition, and believing in Christ: or else, how is it an
holy Calling, and that which saves? If you do not yield to these things, you
set up Grace by diminishing Christ. And seem to make, as if Christ should not
be beholding to himself, because he is not to man. For as Christ merits, so
Christ also elects. As Christ offers himself graciously, so Christ gives man
grace to receive him. John 1.12. If this prevail not with you, look to the
very next verse to that you allcage, 2 Timothy 1.10. and you shall find, that the
place speaks not in verse. 9. but of Gods purpose of favor. And in v. 10. of
actual; But is now made manifest, etc.

Your 4th Proof.
Page 14. Ephesians. 2.4, 5. Verse. 4. But God who is rich in Mercy, for his great
Love, wherewith he has loved us,

Verse. 5. Even when we were dead in Trespasses and sins, has he quickened us
together with Christ (by grace ye are saved.)

Out of this place your great design is, to prove that men are loved with Gods
great love, when they are dead in tresposses and sins. And the better to make
way for it, you say, a stop may be made at the word sins; And so read the
Text thus continuedly, God loved us with his great love, even when we were dead
in trespasses and sins. And this reading, you say, the Text will bear either in
the Original, or in other Translations. But however; you say the text will
hold out the same conclusion.

Answer. If we say the text cannot be thus read after your new way, do not
say again (as it is in your book given before hand) that we are froward; but
with meekness of wisdom we would inform you: 1. That the Original will not
bear it. For after Gods love is described in verse. 4. A Comma being put at the
word us, (...) us, the next verse begins with (...) and? Hutter.
yea some Greek copy puts a Period, a full stop at us in the Fourth verse. As
if he had as boldly read it thus (as you the other way) I say thus; But God is
rich in mercy, for the love, or in regard of the love wherewith he has loved
us. They that know Greek, do know that this does not strain the text. And
then the sense concurs; in the Fourth verse is described, the what Gods love
is; it is rich in mercy. And verse 5. the wherein his Love is acted and
manifested: Viz. in quickening us, etc. And to put all out of doubt, that the
Text will not bear the removal of the stop, observe the Antichrisis or
opposition between our Passivenesse and Gods Act, verse. 5. There God is said to
quicken us, and that with Christ. Now how or whom shall God be said to quicken,
but by taking into construction that clause, us that were dead in trespasses
and sins? That as Christ being dead, was quickened, Hebr. 13: So we from the
death in sin, are quickened together with him. 2. As for other Translations;
The Hebrew Copy, and the Syriack Copy put at the word us in verse 4. their full
stop or Period. Nor do I fee any other Translations point it, as you would
point. 2. From words, let us come to matter. If we should lend you this
Proposition, that God loved us with his great love. WHEN we were dead in
trespasses and sins; what would you gain? For these kind of Whens in the
Scripture, as here, when you ware dead, and Romans 5. when we were enemies, and
Ezekiel. 16. When thou wast in thy Blood, do but import an order of Nature, or
working, not a difference of time. That is, at the same instant, when we were
dead, enemies, in our blood, in the same instant did God put us into Christ by
faith, and made us lovely, and actually loved us with his great love in him. So
is the very scope of the Apostle here, to show wherein did appear Gods great
love, namely in quickening us to a spiritual resurrection with Christ. verse 5.
And in raising us to a special Ascension with Christ. verse 6. And so Romans
5.8, 9, 10. God commends his love toward us, that when we were enemies, etc.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. And so in other whens.
They do but show the matter God makes lovely in Christ, not a sinful
condition, that he can love out of Christ.

In common Speech, When must of necessity so be taken, to signify order of
things, not antecedency of time. As one says, I married my wife when she was a
Widow. This cannot be meant, that when she was a widow, she was married, or
made a wife. And so God converted me, when I lay in a most profane
unregenerate condition. It cannot be meant, that when a man is regenerated, he
is unregenerated. So when it is said, God loved us with his great love, WHEN we
were dead in Trespasses and sins, quickening us together with Christ: This
cannot be meant, that God loved us with great love, being still in our state of
sin, and out of Christ. For why then is he said to be wroth with the self
same Ephesians, whiles out of Christ, and unregenerated, and unquickened? verse
1, 2.

Your 5. Proof.
Page 15. Romans 9.11, 12. The children not yet borne, and having done neither
good nor evil, that the purpose of God might stand according to election.

Answ. The Apostle expressly in your quotation, applies this to election. And
election is called even here (as often elsewhere) a purpose, and we cannot say,
that in regard of us, or upon us, that Gods purpose of love is actual love.
God distinguishes himself between his Purpose and Act, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. and 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. Of which at large before.

Upon this place of Jacob, you make an Objection. page 16. What if Jacob after
this had turned to be a notorious and profane Person, would, or could the Lord
have continued his love to such a person as this? I answer boldly, (say you)
yea. For Gods love, and mercy, are mercies of eternity. Psalm. 103.17. Ps.
136. Malach. 3.6. Should the Lord change as often as we change, he should be
more variable then the wind.

Answ. By these your words, and the Objections of some that hear you, as a
Commentary upon them, you seem to conceive, that if the Lord should not love us
with as great love in a profane and unconverted condition, as after, then there
were a change in God, and in his love: which to be your mind, is yet more
plain by many former Passages already alleged; and especially of that place
out of Ephesians. 2. And that touching Paul; after in page 23.

That God loved him with as great love, when he persecuted the Church, as when
he preached the Gospel.

But this inference will no ways follow, That if God does not actually love us
from all eternity in the same manner, that therefore there would be a change
in God and his love. O that in such deep things, you would speak debite, in
proper terms, as a man that has skill in Divine reason. Let me ask you a
question, Whether God, having chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the
World, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love, having
predestined us unto the Adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ, etc. can save
us without our being in Christ, without holiness, etc. If not (for his purpose
is unchangeable) whether he does not love to see us in Christ, rather then out;
to see us holy, rather then not, etc? If so, then there is a change in Gods
acts, though not in his purpose. O that you would discrecely mix your sweet
drinks, lost they make your Ratients burst. Poison is sooner taken down lap'd
in gold, or sugared. Keckerm. Syst. Theolog. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Evermore (say the Learned and Godly Schoolmen, we call not the Papists in)
put a wide difference between the Decree of God, and the execution of that
Decree: The Decre is eternal, but the bestowing or giving of the end, by the
means, is done in time. So Keck. And he says well. For though Gods Decree be
eternal, yet the World was made in time, in six days. Therefore when God
actually looked upon it, and approved all as exceeding good, Genesis 1.
that was done, was in time. So Christ was sent in due time to die for us; and
to save us in him, either at Third, Sixth, Nineth, or Eleventh hour, Romans 5.6.
Matthew.
therefore God does actually love us in him, in time. Yet all this does not
alter Gods purpose, but answers to his purpose, Medul. Theolog. lib. 1 cap. 6.
and is the perfection of his purpose, carrying on it self to its designed end.
To effect, work or do, (says D. Ames) taken actively as they are in God the
Agent, differ not really from God himself. For there is no composition or
change of Power and Act in Gods most simple and immutable Nature: mark; not in
his nature. But says he, to effect, work or do, does add a certain
relation of God to a real effect. And there belongs unto God an active power,
in regard of the creature, which gives to the creature a posse recipere, a
power to receive; which produces an appearance of that act, which formerly was
not. So he. So that Gods essential purpose is like himself, is himself,
eternal, and unchangeable; but his outward actual working is in time. And it
is as great contradiction, to conceive an outward action of God upon the
creature, without all time, as to conceive he should make a body that should
be in no place. Add what the said Doctor has touching creation; Ibid. cap. 8.
that you may not think me singular and selfish; Active creation, says he, is
conceived in manner of a transient action; in which is always supposed an
object, upon which the agent does act: yet is it not formaly transient, but
only virtuall, because it does not suppose the object, but makes it. So he.
How much more therefore is Redemption a transient act, and justification a
transient act: which does clearly suppose that praeexistent object, man, made
already? And therefore, as actual creation, done in time, though decreed
eternally, does not infer a change in God: so, nor does actual Redemption,
Justification, putting us into Christ, and loving us, as found in him, conclude
that there is a change in God hereby, which before was eternal, but only in
the decree and purpose. God from all eternity has the Idea and platform of
all in his mind; yea his essence, as understood by himself, is the Idea of
all. But to say that God does actually justify, whiles man is not actually
existent, is to charge God with contradictions. Or to say that God does
actually love, justify, etc. that which is actually nothing, is to frame
fantasies to our selves. God made man after his own Image.
God looks on us no otherwise, from all eternity, for matter of being, but as
he looks upon his own essence, the Idea, (as we said) and platform of all
things. Therefore God in his decree cannot be said to justify us from all
eternity, unless you dare say, God justifies himself.

There is the same reason of distinguishing of a man before conversion, and
after.

If Gods decree be, that 1. he calls effectually by the Word;

And then 2. justifies in Christ;

And 3. glorifies with grace and blessedness; Then it is impossible to
conceive or say, That it is done eternally before; that we are justified
eternally before, loved as justified eternally before; when the Decree is, That
is shall not be before we are actually called.

So this indeed is to defend Gods unchangeablenesse to maintain, that God does
Act all things in time, place, manner, and degree, exactly according to his
eternal unchangeable purpose.

Your Quotation of Romans 5.6, 8. of Ezekiel. 16. we answered before: The same
Answer serves to that you allege out of John 3.16. Thus, God purposed actually
to love some of the World. And after he did actually love those of the World
that were in Christ by faith. So that God actually loved those that were of the
world, but not whiles of the World. And this place of John. 3.16. does show the
order of Gods proceeding, to make us actually loved.

1. He having decreed to love. 2. Prepared a Propitiation, gave his Son, for
whom he might love. 3. So actually loves all that believe in that Christ, that
he saves them.
If you understand otherwise, of an actual love in God toward the world,
before they believe, then it will follow, that God does actually love all the
world, of which many never believe, yea, never were elected.

I wonder why you do so contend for this expression, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5.6.7, 8.
Romans 8.28.29. Romans 9.11.
That God does love the elect from all eternity. For, 1. If the holy Ghost in
Scripture calls it a Love once, he calls it a purpose, an election, a choosing,
a predestination, a fore-ordaining, a counsel, a determination, many times for
that once. And we are to follow the frequenter exposition of the holy Ghost, as
a commentary to that which is more rare. 2 You your self will call that actual
love, which God bears to us, when we are actually in Christ by Faith. So you
do, Sermon 2. p 3. p. 5. And the Scripture says, that before this, Gods love
is but a purpose, a predestination, an election, etc. Now a purpose, and an act
of love, are immediate contraries, no middle love between both. And therefore
what do you contend for? A mere imagination. 3. Cui bono, to what end do you
strive in this? For what more effectual argument lies in this, to tell a poor
forlorn sinner, that God loves him, then to tell him, God has elected him, or
purposed to save him in Christ; for his Election and Purpose are unchangeable.
And you may as safely say the one, as the other: yea, safer. For that
expression, to tell him, that God loves him being yet out of Christ, may give
an occasion of mistake, whereby to neglect Christ. Sure enough, on their parts
that use this phrase, God loves sinners out of Christ, many gross expressions
bud thence.
As that you have, p. 27, 28. following, That we are Predestined, chosen,
redeemed, sanctified, called, the heart opened, and all before Conversion
comes. I leave you and all ingenuous men to stand and wonder at these words,
till I come to answer them in their order, upon those pages of your Book, which
you see, we quote in order. There you, and all candid men may see how
unextricably you hamper your self.

Page 21.
You say, neither may we, nor will Christ himself say, that he purchased the
Fathers Love for us.

Answer. Here is another of those For you see, and say your self, page 22. That
you see a depth unsearchable and you cannot tell what to say to it. So you.
thickets you rush into, by understanding Gods election, or purpose to love, to
be a love. And that his eternal love contains more then a purpose. For if you
would keep to the frequenter expressions of the Scriptures of election,
purpose, etc. you would easily understand all.

Namely, that as well the Son and holy Ghost, as the Father, do elect and
purpose to save sinners. That all Three, as well as one of the Persons, must be
pacified by merit of a Savior, God and man.

That all Three Persons do purpose to love in this manner and method.

1. That they will send the Second Person to take humane nature (for Christ
sends himself, as he himself laid down his life, Ioh. 10.) to die, and prepare
a satisfaction for sinners.

2. That this Christ's sufferings shall be preached to sinners, 2 Cor. 5.20.

3. That the efficacy of the Spirit entayled on the Ministry of the Gospel 2
Cor. 3. shall make the elect by faith own these sufferings, as done for them to
discharge them, whereby they are united to Christ. Ephesians. 3.17.

4. Then God finding them in Christ, he confesses he is satisfied and
well-pleased with them, Matthew. 3. verse last. Matthew. 17.5. Twice spoken from
heaven, for the eminency of it. Which in sense is all one, as that Christ
merits Gods actual love to sinners. And that is the reason that Christ is so
often in Scripture Heb 9.26 Romans 3.25 Romans 5 11. Ephesians. 2.14. 1 Cor. 5.
called our Sacrifice, our Propitation, our Atonement, our Peace, our
Passover, etc.

For that your dangerous Distinction; That God can begin to love without
Christ, and after cannot continue it without the help of a Christ, I wade not
into it, because your self in part wave it. And you do well. For the grimnesse
of the thing it self will make a conscience afraid of it. For those your
Expressions, Page 23.
That Gods love to us in our blood was as great as ever afterward, and that
God loved Paul with as great love when he persecuted, as when he preached the
Gospel.

Because I find them there to be but words, without proof, I forbear to
confute them; unless in one word: that if before and when signify a time of
being out of Christ; your words are most false. For whiles the elect Ephesians
are out of Christ, they are without all hope, Ephesians. 2.12. And children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2.2. And before men are in Christ, God does but purpose to love,
not actually love, Ephesians. 1. Or else you must say, That God can actually love
without Christ's, making satisfaction to his Justice. If you say, that these
your assertions were proved before; as you do in that 23. page Then we can as
truly say, they were answered before. Those expressions in the 23. page That God
loves sinners with infinite love. Yea, his Love is God himself. 1 John 4.16. A
word will suffice. God in himself is as essentially Justice, as he is Love. And
therefore as necessarily must the one he satisfied, as the other communicated
to save. So that when his infinite justice is satisfied with Christ's infinite
merits, then he can exercise with honor to himself, his infinite love;
himself properly being the only Object of his infinite Love, because he is
infinite. It is enough for sinners, that he saves them to the uttermost. Hebr.
7.25. and that God Loves Christ infinitely, and loves us in him enough (if you
dare say that obiectively and properly, A creature is in a capacity of infinite
act upon it, or that God can love infinitely a finite thing; unless you mean
infinite in duration, that is, eternal for time to come) And before his
Justice is satisfied, he actually loves not, (Romans 9.25. I will call her
beloved, that was not beloved) but only purposes to love upon that
consideration and satisfaction, as we have before often proved, Heb. 9.26. etc.
Immediately before in the margin.

For that Passage, only breathed out, Page 24. Gods Act of love is immanent in
him: Gods actions of love are transient upon, and in the Creature.

That Gods Love cannot increase or decrease.

We say, That it is true of the Act of Love in God. But the actions of
Redemption and salvation from God to a creature, may as well increase, as those
of the creation, wherein the World was first a Chaos, etc. after was raising to
perfection six days. The more of Christ is in a man, the more of Gods actions
of love are manifested to him. Special graces, above common graces. God speaks
higher touching those his Martyrs, that have the suffering graces of Christ,
then of others. Phil. 1.29. Dan. 12. last. Revel. Heb. 6.4.9. The Apostle puts
a wide difference between common graces, from which there may be a defection,
and such as accompany Salvation.
20.4. If Actions of Gods love may not be more or less to a Believer within
the latitude of never falling from grace totally, and finally: then there are
no desertions, of which there are so many instances in Scripture. Mistake me
nor. My meaning is, Though God never cease to love those that are once in
Christ, according to that, Joh. 13.1. Romans 11.29. yet sometimes he may do
more, sometimes less for the inward comfort of such a soul; even as on the
other side, a Christian may more work his own discomfort at one time, then at
another.

The rest that you have in page 24.25. are in effect but repetitions of the
same things. Therefore we follow you to
Page 26, 27, 28.
God does not only love us before conversion, with his great love, but (say
you) with his greatest love, that ever was communicated to the creature. This
may appear by several effects of the love of God communicated unto men, by
God, in and through his Son, before conversion, faith, etc. As
Predestination, Choosing, Redemption, Justification, Adoption, before
repentance, faith, conversion, or calling. And Sanctification, Calling, opening
the heart, all of them gracious acts of God, communicated unto the creature,
before the conversion of the creature to God.

Answer. O Brother, that you would consider what strange doctrine is here,
which the Bible never knew. For that Scripture you allege is flat against you.
Namely, That God has chosen us in him [Christ] Ephesians. 1.4. Has predestined us
unto the adoption of Sons, by Jesus Christ: Has made us accepted in the
Beloved, in whom we have redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of
our sins. verse. 5, 6, 7. In whom we have obtained an inheritance. verse. 11.
For can any thing be communicated to the creature through Christ, (those are
your words) without Communion, Co-union with Christ by faith? Is not Christ in
us by faith? Ephesians. 3.17. Does not the Scripture speak as plainly as may be;
that we are the sons of God (which is Adoption) by faith? Ioh. 1.12.
Accepted in him through faith, Hebr. 11.6. That we have Forgiveness of sins
(which is justification) by faith? Romans 5.1. That the inheritance is not of the
law, but of faith? Gal. 3. So for the expressions you use above; the Scripture
is clear, that sanctification is by faith, 1 Ioh. 3.1.2. Acts 15.9. That
effectual calling is by faith, Heb. 4.2.

If you had only meant, that all these, choosing, redemption, justification,
etc. had been made a sinners by Gods decree and purpose: 1. You would not have
said, they were communicated to the creature. 2. You should not have numbered
Predestination with the rest. For by this means, you speak vain repetitions,
thus; Predestination is communicated by Predestination. For Predestination can
be no otherwise ours, then in Gods purpose. 3. Why did you not think upon this,
that in Gods purpose, faith, and repentance, and conversion, were eternally as
well thought upon by God, and intended for man, as Redemption and
Justification? He lincks the means and the end in an indissolvable chain, Romans
8.

So that in Gods decree, you cannot say that any one of those Acts is older
then another.

Let any man read your words over again, and speak truly, whether you can mean
any thing (if he make sense of your words, though false) unless he understand
a communicating, that is actual, and not mental merely in God. For you speak
of sanctifying an ungodly man: of effectual Calling (...) as some of the
instances of those things that you say, are communicated in Christ (another
note, that you mean actual communicating:) And then you fall upon your
Bead-roule (as they speak, if not your bad-roule) of a redemption,
justification, sanctification, calling, opening the heart, communicated to the
creature, before the conversion of a creature to God. Good Lord teach you
seriously to think what conversion that is, that has no effectual calling: or
what effectual calling that is, that may be without conversion.

For that speech (which in effect we had before, page 23.) though we have
answered it effectually (we hope) before; yet lest any should cast an eye upon
it here as unanswered, and so conceive it unanswerable, (though you do but
speak, not prove) we answer in a word.

Before Calling and Conversion, God does only purpose, predestinate, elect
sinners to be loved in time, Ephesians. 1. first 11. verses (a place of your own
quotation:) not actually love. Romans 9.23. I will call them my people that were
not my people, and her beloved that was not beloved. And in Gods predestination
God does as well purpose man's fall, and foresees him a child of wrath, Ephesians.
2.2. as his salvation. And therefore when God does actually give Christ to us,
and us to Christ, there is his great, and greatest love. For in him we have
all. 1 Cor. 3.22.23. Yet you will hold the conclusion. p. 30. That Gods love is
as great before faith, as after: yet you know, that God says, Without faith it
is unpossible to please him. Heb. 11.6.

Next, you come to answer Objections; and we to reply to them. Jn the Objection
against the Page 32. (which you have not answered to refute, yet we have spoken
to before.) that distinction of hating the sin, not the creature, which you
you reject, is a truth.

God cannot hate the entities or beings he made, Genesis 1.31.
Physically considered, no not the devil himself, for being considered so,
abstractively from sin, God saw all exceeding good. But morally considered,
as sinfully mannered, so he hates them.

He hates the workers of iniquity, because of that iniquity, Psalm. 36.2. He
flattereth himself till his iniquity be found to be hateful: which done away
in Christ, he loves them dearly, Ephesians. 2.1, 2.

Likewise that distinction Page 33. rejected by you,

Of Gods love of benevolence to the sinner before conversion, and his love of
Complacience to him after conversion.

It has more light in it, than all your assertions in this dispute, (which are
a very darkness) provided that it be meetly understood. Namely, that God has
a benevolent purpose of saving a sinner before conversion or faith in Christ.
And after these, he has an actual love of Complacency to him. And before that
not. Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. So August. In quo, non cum quo.
Your own proof shall assert it: This is my beloved son IN whom (not WITH
whom) I am well pleased: Hear ye him. So that men must hear and have, and be
in Christ, and then God is well pleased with them: Not before.

This you grant unawares page 38. in your own Answer to the Objection, and so
do yield the Question; namely, in your large parallel, or as least antithesis
in that page 38. between Justice and Mercy, Law and Gospel. The sum whereof
is, to use your own words, That the one declares wrath without forgiveness;
the other, mercy, grace, and peace in Jesus Christ.

Where also you put a difference very well of being under the Law, and under
grace.
The only piece of Divinity that we have had from you all this while. The Lord
keep us all to that.

In your Answer likewise to the second Objection, Page 40. which you propound
as against you, out of
Math. 6.15. and 18.35. If you forgive not men, etc. your heavenly Father will
not forgive you.

In sum you yield the question, and overthrow your eternal Justifification,
etc. For you yield that there is a time when a man does not apprehend or lay
hold on (for the words are the same in sense) Gods forgiveness. And that till
Gods pardon come to us, we cannot pardon men. And sure enough we cannot do
that till conversion, that makes the Wolf to dwell with the Lamb, as the
Prophet speaks.

Likewise in your last answer, Page 46. to the third Objection, Page 45. viz.
If God love us before conversion, as well as after, then to what purpose
serves faith? I say in your answer to this objection, you overthrow your own
position of justification before faith. For these are your very words. Faith is
to good purpose, that believing, you, who were under darkness, and in the
shadow of death, and saw no light, yet I say, ye might rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory, receiving the end of your faith. 1 Pet. 1.8, 9.
You durst not go on with the whole 9. ver. of that 1 Pet. but break off in the
middle, excluding that clause, Even the salvation of your souls. Because that
you thought did too apparently attribute salvation to faith. Read the place
wisely.
Romans 15.13. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing. So
you. Now where is life, where is peace, before faith comes, according to your
own answer, and your proofs of Scripture.

The other three last Objections, Page 51. etc. against your Doctrine of
Justification, and Reconciliation before faith. As
1. That then what need we take care what we do? if we believe, the Lord will
not love us the better; if we believe not, he will not love us the worse.

2. That then a man may dye without faith, and yet be saved.

3. Why then does God suffer us to live in profaneness, twenty, fifty, sixty
years?

I say these Objections following merely on your unsound Doctrine, are
stronger to do hurt, than all your declamations against desperateness and
looseness, and disparaging the power of being under grace, (beneath some
heathens morality) are likely to prevent. It is in vain for that man to forbid
young people the conclusion of committing fornication, that allows them the
premises of all wanton carriage. Corrupt men are in their kind rational, and
they will conclude according to the principles you teach them.
A maid led away with this Doctrine said boldly to me, that she knew not how
she could offend Jesus Christ by any thing she did. But I leave men to read the
Book of our brethren of New England, touching the tragical effects of these
Doctrines.

2. Part. Or Sermon, Reconciliation of man to God.
Page. 1. There is (say you) in Scripture a twofold Reconciliation: 1.
Original. 2. Actual. Parallel to the distinction of original, and actual
sin. Original Reconciliation is of our natures; Actual is of our persons.

Answ. 1. There are no such terms of distinction in all the Scripture. Those
places you bring for it, Romans 5.10. Ephesians. 2.16. Colos. 1.21. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.
let all men read and judge whether there be the least hint of any such thing.

For is this any argument, that because the Apostle says to the Romans,
Ephesians, and Colossians, that they were already reconciled, and tells the
Corinthians, that he was now but a persuading them to be reconciled, that
therefore the Corinthians had one reconciliation, and were to have another? For
nakedly this is the sense of your inference. For these are your very words, you
having quoted the former places.

Now (say you) compare we these three places forementioned, with that which we
find, 2 Cor. 5.20. In the former places the Apostle told us, we were
reconciled, and in this place he beseeches us to be reconciled: So you. If you
mistook your self, and intended to make the parallel between the 18. verse of
2 Cor. 5. God has reconciled us to himself, and verse 20. We pray you in
Christ's stead to be reconciled. Meaning herein, that the same Corinthians were
reconciled, and were yet to be reconciled. Know that in that 18. verse the
Apostle speaks of his, and his fellow Ministers reconciliation; verse 19. of
the reconciliation of others in the world. And therefore ver. 20. entreats and
beseeches the Corinthians, that were not yet converted, to be reconciled. For
as for the other, they were Saints, and a Church of God, Chap. 1.1. and
therefore actually reconciled.

2. Answ. If our first reconciliation be original, that is, has a beginning,
like as original sin: then our first reconciliation is not before the
foundation of the world; much less our second, which you call actual.

And whereas in your first part, or Sermon, you mention another reconorliation
before both these, namely Gods reconciliation of himself to us, we ask you
what shall be the object of this reconciliation, seeing that our nature and
persons are not (say you) reconciled but by the other two, namely, by that
original and actual reconciliation.

3. By bringing both ends of your Book together, we perceive that the whole
frame of your mouldring foundation is this. 1. God is reconciled to man, Sermon.
1. Page 2. And this contains such a love as Christ never purchased. Page 21.
Yea that God was never an enemy, page 2.2. There is reconciliarton of us to
God: and this is twofold.

1. Original, of our natures, 2 Sermon. Page 2. And of this you lay down this
Proposition, That we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, without
any previous conditions in us, page 3. Here you admit Christ's sufferings: but
Christ's grace and spirit of faith is excluded.

2. Actual Reconciliation of our persons, page 2. And of this you lay down
this position, page 5. of your 2. Part or Sermon. Man's actual reconciliation
(say you) to God, requires previous conditions and qualifications to be
wrought in man by the Spirit of God, before man can be actually reconciled to
God, or Gods reconciliation manifested unto him. For there are (say you) three
sorts of conditions. 1 Antecedent. 1 Knowledge of sin. 2 Knowledge of the depth
of misery by sin to such. 2 Present. 1 Without believing (the soul remaining
in the body) cannot be reconciled to God. John 3.36. That by believing the
soul is actually reconciled to God, John 3.33 John 1.12. Romans 5.1. Thus you.
Your third sort of conditions are rather effects than conditions. therefore I
mention them not.

Thus (brother) after you have filled the bellies of your auditory with
crudities; (I am loath to say poison) in your after service, or second course
you bring somewhat that is wholesome, in that one dish of actual
reconciliation. All the rest we must vomit up, or we die. To that end I go on
to administer my Dosis.

1. Ans. That there is but one only reconciliation; namely, that of God and man
into atonement by faith in the one and only. Mediator Jesus Christ. We proved
before On page 2 of 1. Sermon.
that the Scripture would yield you this one only, and not two; much less will
it now allow you three: one being enough; and therefore one only held out to
us in the word, whereof we have said so much already, that we shall add the
less now. 1. The quarrel between God and us is but one, namely our fall in
Adam, and continuance in that condition, Romans 5. it is the business of the
Chapter. 2. The satisfaction is only one, and made at once, Rom 6.10. In that
Christ dyed, he dyed unto sin ONCE. Likewise reckon ye also your selves dead
to sin, but alive to God. Hebr. 7.27. Christ needs not daily to offer up
sacrifice: for this he did ONCE. Heb. 9.12. Christ by his own blood entered in
ONCE into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us, (mark
that clause) Heb. 9.26. But now ONCE in the end of the world, has he appeared
to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. And ver. 28. Christ was ONCE
offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him he shall
appear the second time without sin unto salvation. 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ has
ONCE suffered for sins; the just for the unjust; that be might bring us to God.
And so in the fourth of Ephesians, the Apostle much runs upon one: That as
every Christian has but one God the Father, and one Lord (Jesus Christ) and
one and the same holy Spirit: so every one has one calling, one, hope, one
faith, and one Baptism, as a seal of those. Out of all we conclude, that if
Christ did not at once make a full reconciliation for all that shall be found
in him; then is he an insufficient Savior. If he did make a full and
sufficient satisfaction, whereof they have benefit by the individual act of
justification, Romans 5.1. then is he fully within the atonement in an instant.

2. Answ. Reconciliation, (...), That is, the Ecclesiastical, Church polity.
No members of a Church. Ismael in the Church circumcised. His posterity out of
the Church not circumcised.
and non-reconciliation are immediate contraries: therefore either a man is
wholly reconciled, or nothing reconciled. This immediate contrariety the
Apostle touches and intimates, 2 Cor. 6.14. where the Apostle makes the
opposition between believers, and unbelievers, to be as between righteousness
and unrighteousnes, light and darkness, Christ and Belial. And the Apostle
touches our conclusion or inference, that a man is either wholly irreconciled,
or reconciled, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Remember that ye in time passed
were Gentiles in the flesh who were called uncircumcision, etc. that at that
time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,
(or rather * Polity of Israel) and strangers from the covenants of promise,
having no hope, without God in the world. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who
sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ: For he is our
peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of
partition between us, having abolished the enmity, even the Law of
Commandments, contained in ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new
man, so making peace, and that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by
the cross. O golden place to our purpose! Read it, and read it; and weigh it
and read it. See 1. the Apostle sets down once and again a time in this life
wherein they were not reconciled. 2. Says, that the they were afar off. 3.
That as they were without hope, so without Christ; as without Christ, so
without God; God and they were not reconciled. And 4. That the blood of Christ,
the cresse of Christ (by the preaching of peace, verse 17.) had made believers
(verse 8.) Jews and Gentiles, one among themselves, and both one with God at
Peace. I know not what can be plainer to convince, that we are either
altogether at peace; God with us, and us with God; or else not at peace at all.

3. Answ. I remember it was the maine argument of the Orthodox against the
Arminians, that if we might fall totally (as the Arminians said) from grace,
and yet not finally; that they should produce the evidences of Scriptures set
down of one totally fallen, and not finally. If the Scripture set down none,
but of those that were totally off, or finally on, then the Arminian truth was
not sound. So may we argue, that the Scriptures set down no discoveries of one
half reconciled, or two parts reconciled, and not the third, (for you make
three reconciliations one after another) but set down a demonstration to know
whether we are wholly unreconciled, or wholly not. And therefore either we are
wholly reconciled, or wholly not, for the time, till Christ comes and makes the
change. This demonstration set down in the Scripture is only from the act of
actual justification by faith in Christ, Romans 5.1. By this we are blessed, or
else not blessed, Romans 4.6. Faith makes that there is no difference between us
and others in state of salvation, or else there remains the difference, that we
are not in state of salvation, for the time, till God comes and alters the case
through faith. This is evident Acts 15.9.11. And put no difference between us
and them purifying There is a purity by faith as well as of imputation, and of
sanctification. Romans 4.3.
their hearts by faith. But we believe that through the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ we shall be saved even as they.

The Postscript.
MUch more might be said; but I have been much larger than I intended, though
I had two several printed Tracts to answer; the material mistakes whereof we
have discussed, not letting one (as I know of) escape. I wish it had been
undertaken by a fitter man, and to such a one I had left it, but that I saw
most of the able men so busy; and the mean while some of my near friends, to
begin to be taken with these mistakes: I have answered with as much judgment
as I could, in so very a short time as I had allotted for this business,
still carrying with me a render conscience (the Lord knows I lie not) that I
nught not in the least grain or jota, prejudice or cloud the free grace of God
in Jesus Christ, which is more precious to me than my life, and the only
bridge that must carry me over the eternal Lake to heaven.

I have also used as much modesty and love in all my expressions as I could (I
appeal to the would for the truth of this) that I might not grieve any, but
guide them. If any apprehend any material mistakes, let them but with divine
reason clear them unto me, and I will print my retraction. Or if they will
needs print a confutation, let them but do by me, as I have done by this, for
the manner; and keep to the Scriptures for matter, and I will say well done.
Farewell.

FINIS.

