A LETTER OR WORD OF ADVICE TO THE SAINTS Known or unknown.

By Thomas Hickes, the elder.

ALTIMUS SAPERE NOLI
depiction of man under tree

London, Printed Anno Domini, 1653.

A word of advice to the Saints known or unknown.
I Thought it good, my loving brethren, whom I love in sincerity of heart, in
and for Christ Jesus sake, and all the Saints universal and militant hete upon
earth, and therefore I thought it good to speak a word of advice to the Saints
out of the Word of God, which the true Saints will be willing to hear, about
Baptizing of Children, and the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, of the Baptism of
Children.

First, in the last Chapter of Saint Matthew, the nineteenth Verse: our Savior
commands his Apostles to go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, a general command to all
Nations, teaching them to observe all things that Christ Jesus commanded them
now. Christ Jesus had taught them that they should not keep little children
from him, he was displeased when they did; and he commanded them to be brought
unto him, and he laid his hands on them, and blessed them; and said of such is
the kingdom of heaven: let us obey Christ Jesus command, and be charitable to
the souls of our little children, and bring them to Christ's Congregations to
be baptized and prayed for. The words of our Savior Christ Jesus in the third
of Saint John, the fifth Verse, Christ Jesus says, Verily, verily I say unto
you, Except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. This verily, verily, of our Savior should make the upright
hearted Saints to be careful of the souls of their children, and to have them
baptized and prayed for.

Was the Lord about to kill Moses, for not Circumcizing his son, which was the
Jewish covenant, and will not God be angry with you for neglecting the Covenant
of Grace in the seventeenth Chapter of Genesis, the second Verse, And God said
unto Abraham, thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, and thy seed after thee in
their generations, the tenth Verse. This is my Covenant which you shall keep
between me and you, every male child among you shall be circumcized, and you
shall circumcize the flesh of your fore-skins, and it shall be a token of the
Covenant between me and you, and he that is eight days old shall be
circumcized, every man-child in your generations, he that is born in thy
house, or bought with money of any stranger which is not of thy seed, he that
is born in thy house, and he that is bought with money must needs be
circumcized, and my Covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting
Covenant: fourteen Verse. And the uncircumcized man child, whose flesh of his
foreskin is not circumcized, that soul shall be cut off from his people, he
has broken my Covenant. Now you see this heavy burden which was laid on the
people of God before Christ, but now taken away by the Covenant of grace, the
fifteenth of the Acts and the eleventh Verse, But we believe that through the
grace of the Lord Jesus, we shall be saved as well as they, now God forbid, but
that our Children should be within the Covenant of grace as well as we:
Corinthians the seventh Chapter and the fourteenth Verse. Saint Paul faith, The
children of Believers are holy: the second Commandment, God will show mercy
unto thousands of them that love him and keep his Commandments. The hundred
and second Psalm, the last Verse, the children of thy servants shall continue,
and their seed shall be established for ever. The hundred and third Psalm, the
seventeenth Verse, But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting, upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens
children.

The Lord sanctified the Prophet Jeremiah from his mothers womb, and the Lord
loved King Solomon when he was a child, in the 14 Chapter of the first Book of
Kings, And all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him, For he only of
Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him is some good things toward the
Lord God of Israel. But again, observe the new covenant Hebrews the eighth
Chapter, and the eighth Verse, Behold, the day is come says the Lord, When I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah the
tenth Verse. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my laws into their mind,
and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be
to me a people. Why, then let us have a care to have our children baptized,
Gods promise is to us and to our children. Our Savior Christ Jesus shed both
water and blood for our sins upon the cross, let us then bring our children to
be baptized, and let the parents and the Congregation pray, that their sins of
original guiltiness be washed away, and nothing doubting of the mercy of our
heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, he called them unto him, and whosoever
received the Kingdom of Heaven, must receive it as a little child, and so I
leave of writing of this first Sacrament, desiring God to bless his good Word
unto us.

And now I come to write something of the Sacrament of the Lord Supper, of
which I am confident, there are many thousands about this City of London, that
have not received it this seven or eight years: this forces me in love to
write to the Churches of Christ Jesus, to remember them of these two
Sacraments, which Christ Jesus has left for our good to remember his death,
until he come to judge the quick and the dead. It is a soul devouring sin to
despise and undervalue the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

All the Families of Gods people, the Jews were by God commanded to eat the
Paschal Lamb, the twelfth Chapter of Exodus the third verse. This Paschal
Lamb was but a type and figure of Christ Jesus the Lamb of God, which takes
away the sins of the World. Christ is the living bread which came down from
heaven, If any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread
that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the World, The
sixth of Saint John the 52, 53. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
you have no life in you. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed. Who so eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I
will raise him up at the last day, 63 verse, It is the Spirit that quickens
the flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit,
and they are life, in the 26 Chapter of S. Matthew, and the 26, 27 verses, and
when they were eating, Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave
it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, This is my body, and he took the Cup,
and gave thanks, and gave it unto them, saying, Drink ye all of it. For this is
my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many, for the remission of
sins, in Saint Luke the 22 Chapter, 19 and 20 verses, and he took bread and
gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it unto them, saying, This is my body which
is given for you, This do in remembrance of me, likewise also the Cup after
Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Testament, in my blood which is shed for
you. The 14 Chapter of Saint Mark, the 22 and 23 verses, and as he did eat,
Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave to them, and said,
Take, eat, This is my body, and he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks,
he gave to them, and they all drank of it, and he said, This is my blood of the
New Testament, which is shed for many, Christ Jesus has shed his blood for
many: then come dear brethren, to the table of the Lord Jesus with faith and
repentance. Come to the Word of God preached by his Ministers, their lips will
increase thy knowledge. Read the Word of God, and try your faith, pray with
humility often. Use all Gods Ordinances as well as one. Let the weak in faith
come to the Sacrament as well as the strong, the Sacrament is a soul
strengthening Ordinance, it is a growing Ordinance, it is an Ordinance if it be
quickened with the spirit of faith, it seals and assures us of the forgiveness
of all our sins, then let not hous-keepers neglect it seven or eighe years
together, but prepare themselves, and let not young men and maids stay till
they are five and twenty years old, and never prepare themselves to receive the
Sacrament, and so become sottish and foolish in spiritual things: therefore I
humbly desire and request the Ministers and Overseers of Parishes and Churches
to have a care of the souls of these people, some has more then othets, the
Lord reward them, in S. Matthew the 20 Chapter and the ninth verse, Christ
says to his Ministers, Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as
you find bring them to the Marriage: so those servants went out into
highways, and gathered all, as many as they found both bad and good, and the
Wedding was furnished with guests, and when the King came to see the guests, he
saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment. Christ knows best the
wicked and ungodly men, let not us judge our brother where we have no witness,
and do not know nothing our selves. If sinful Zacheus, or sinful Mary Magdalen,
will come to their Father with faith, love, and repentance; let us not be like
the elder brother of the Prodigal son to grudge at it, Luke 15.28 verse. Ho,
every one that thirsts, come ye to the water of life, and he that has no
money, come ye buy and eat, come buy wine and milk without money, and without
price, Esaias 50.1. Our Savior Christ came to seek and save them that were lost,
and there is joy in heaven of on sinner that repents, then let us forsake our
sins, and seek out the communion of Saints, and mind heavenly rest and joy
more then we have. God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son
for it, that whosoever believed in him might not perish, but have everlasting
life and happiness: to the which everlasting life, the Lord God of his infinite
mercy bring us through Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

