THE RIGHT SEPARATION INCOVRAGED; IN A SERMON PREACHED To the Right Honorable
the House of LORDS, in the Abbey-Church at Westminster, on Wednesday, Novem.
27. 1644. being the day of the Monthly public Fast.

By THOMAS HILL, B. D. Pastor of Tychmersh in Northamptonshire, and one of the
Members of the Assembly of DIVINES.

Hebr. 7. 26. Such an high Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners.

Luke 3. 17. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor,
and will gather the Wheat into his Garner, but the chafe will he burn with
fire unquenchable.

Jude ver. 22, 23. And of some have compassion, making a difference. And others
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, hating even the garment spotted
by the flesh.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for John Bellamy, and Philemon Stephens, 1645.

Die Veneris 29 November. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this House does hereby
return thanks to Mr. Thomas Hill, for his great pains taken in his Sermon
Preached by him on Wednesday last before their Lordships in the Abbey Church
Westminster, it being the day of the Monthly Fast: And this House does hereby
desire him to Print and Publish the same. And lastly, it is Ordered that none
shall Print or re-print his said Sermon without being authorized so to do
under the hand of the said Mr. Hill.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.
I do hereby appoint John Bellamy and Philemon Stephens to Print my Sermon.

THOMAS HILL.



TO THE Right Honorable the House of PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT; Sitting at
Westminster.
My Lords,
GODS Providence has cast you into these times wherein there are very many of
Solomon's Puritans, Prove. 30. 12. There is a generation that are pure in their
own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthiness. Wherein Iudes
Separatists swarm, such mockers who walk after their own ungodly lusts, who
separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude ver. 19, 20. But I
hope his Spirit is teaching you to be Paul's Separatists, acquainting you with
such a pure Separation from unclean persons and things, as may well be the
object of your thoughts, the matter of your Counsels, the sum of your
Prayers, and scope of your Indevours. It will be a very great addition to your
greatness, to engage your selves fully herein. There are no men more miserable
then those who are Gratius est no men pietatis quam potestatis.
great and evil, none more happy then they who are great and good. It is
nobleness indeed to have an heroical spirit for God: It is true
high-mindednesse to be heavenly minded, to have pure minds.

This poor Church has had her Autumn, her declining under many pollutions,
and her Winter of Humiliation; Blessed be the good hand of God, we see some
hopes of a Spring, of pure Reformation, which will usher in a Summer of
deliverance.

It is true, we are still in the Wilderness, where we meet with many
Amalekites, who do oppose us, and with diverse false spies, who raise an evil
report of the promised Land, disparaging by their tongues and pens our hoped
for Reformation. The Lord keep us all from Wilderness sins, from repining and
quarrelling at his dispensations: far be it from any to desire such
Captains as would bring us back again to Egypt. Your Lordships have had the
honor to be our Ioshuahs, to be our Leaders in several steps of the
Reformation: (which will stand upon Record to the everlasting renown of the
House of Peers) and I hope you have tasted some such bunches of Grapes from the
Holy Land, as will quicken your desires after a more full separation from all
impurity.

There are two taking words abroad, grown very familiar in our discourses,
Purity and Liberty. Let Purity and Liberry go hand in hand.
Sweet words, precious things, it is pity they should ever be severed. It is
well worthy of your care to encourage such a purity as will adorn and sweeten
Liberty, and withal to countenance such a Liberty as will maintain and cherish
purity. God forbid, that any should expect countenance from you, for any thing
like licentiousnes, whereby purity should be in the least measure blemished
and betrayed.

Sometimes amongst Physicians there is as much in the Method, as in the
Medicine; I believe Politicians may find the same. I doubt not but in your
Treaty for Peace you will begin with Purity; the wisdom which is from above,
is first pure, and then peaceable; and rather abate in any thing which James 3.
17.
concerns your selves, then in purity, wherein the honor of God is so much
interessed.

Ride on prosperously in all your Marches after Scripture purity; If you meet
with Mountains of difficulty in the way, be not dismayed. Remember Lots Wife,
what it cost her who looked back only, though she went not back. You well know,
that Faith and Friendship are best tried in extremities, and in the heat of
opposition.

If the distractions still continue without, labor to get and keep a calm
within, no feast like that of a good Conscience, which is Meat, Mufick,
Welcome; No such Friend, who will be a cheerful Companion though alone, even
in the worst seasons: Be ye therefore doing much for your God in the cause of
purity, always abouding in his work, forasmuch as you know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord. Be pleased to accept 1 Cor. 15. 58.
this from a Remembrancer to

Your Honors

THE RIGHT SEPARATION INCOVRAGED.
2 COR. 6. 17, 18. 17 Wherefore comes out from among them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean^ thing, and I will receive
you,

18 And will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty.


IT need not seem strange that Chrysostom spent so many pages in the high
Commendation Seven Orations in the commendation of Paul. Chrysostom. tom. 8
of Paul being he was so superlatively* abundant in the work of the Gospel, 1
Cor. 1^. 10. None of the Apostles, has spoken, written, done, and suffered so
much; He being overcome with the love of his Savior, felt a sweet violence
constraining his spirit to study how he might express as much zeal for him,
as ever he had showed against him.

An Epitome of Paul's Journall concerning his Apostolical peregrination, you
have here drawn up in this sixth Chapter, (which yet he modestly expresses in
the plural number:) ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Giving no offense in any
thing, that the Ministry be not blamed, but in all thing ^oving our selves or
the Ministers of God in much patience, (...) in necessities, in distresses,
etc. He very well knew, that the good life of a Minister gives new life unto
his Sermons in the hearts of his hearers, and that the godly example of the
leaders, is the most compelling Rhetoric to engage the followers. Hereupon,
having besought the Corinthians, ver. 1. That they receive not the Grace of God
in vain, he would have them proportion the crop to the seed, and answer
Gospel Grace appearing to them with the graces of the Gospel shining in them.
This counsel unto them, he edgeth with the Summary of his own doings and
sufferings for them.

Then he renues his importunity with profession of great affection unto them,
and with expectation of the like from them, ver. 11, 12, 13. using this as an
engaging insinuation.

And so in the following verses, the better to advance his Gospel design, that
they may with improvement intertaine the Grace of God, he puts in caveats by
way of dehortation, against communion with the ungodly in their sinful ways,
and this by several arguments.

1. One drawn from the imparity that is betwixt Saints and unbeleevers, ver.
14. Be not unequally yoked; How unmeet a match is it for you Corinthians to
be yoked with such? you cannot well draw together in Gospel ways.

2. Another, from the high autipathy, and invincible contrariety, that is
betwixt them, ver. 14, 15. What concord? you may as well reconcile light and
darkness, Christ and Beliall, as Believers and Infidels.

3. The last, from the rich advantage they have by their interest in such
precious privileges and promises, ver. 16.

That he may make them perfect Separatists from evil, and the more
prevailingly persuade them to walk with God as becomes Saints, you shall
find in these words two general things to that purpose. Two general parts of
the words. Adhortation. Encouragement.


First, A serious Adhortation to make a full Separation from unclean persons
and things, ver. 17. and this as a conclusion out of the foregoing premises,
intimated in that particle of illation, wherefore, This (...), this wherefore
carries an engagement with it. Wherefore, come out from among them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing.

Secondly, A quickening encouragement to act it. ver. 17, 18. And I will receive
you, and will be a Father unto (...) and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. The Spirit of God knew we need strong
arguments to dis-ingage us from our Belived evils. Nothing below God himself,
can be a prevailing attractive, his love and favor is the best loadstone, to
draw us from sin to himself.

This Adhortation of the Apostle, ver. 17. is expressed almost First general
Part* Adhortation.
in the words of the Lord, by his Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 52. 11. Depart ye,
depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing, go ye out of
the midst of her, be ye clean; Thus our Translators following the Hebrew,
wherein likewise they have Hierome going before them, render the words. Indeed
the Seventy Interpreters, in their Greek Translation, make here some
difference. The word (...) which Hierome renders mundamini, and our
Translators, be ye clean, they read it (...), be ye separate. This Paul
makes use of by his Apostolical Authority, though it seem not every way so
answerable to the Hebrew.

I confess many have been puzzled about some places of Why many so much
unsatisfied about some places quoted out of the Old in the New testament. Non
verbis inhaeret, sed sensum proponit, Musc.
Scripture, quoted out of the Old Testament in the New, as in Hebr. 2. 13. etc.
partly because our narrow minds are not able to comprehend the whole wisdom
of the Spirit of God therein, as in Hebr. 5. 5. etc. partly because we do not
observe that Liberty which the Holy Ghost uses many times to follow the sense
rather then the words, as in 1 Cor. 2. 9. etc. partly because we do not
consider that in citing some places out of the Old Testament, the Original is
not always exactly followed, but sometimes the Septuagint, even where that
differs somewhat from the Hebrew Text. This appears, if you compare Act. 8.
33. with Isai. 53. 8. and also in diverse other places. The Greek Translation of
the Old Testament, was then most common, and amongst them then best understood,
and when the Apostles made use of it, if they did not find it, yet possibly
they might make it Scripture, they being guided by the Spirit of God
infallibly, what they revealed as the mind of God to the Churches, in what
words so ever, it was Canonical. Therefore, be not offended at any little
variation here, when you compare the words of the Apostle, Paul; and of the
Prophet Isaiah*

Only for your better direction herein, be pleased to remember, that whereas
the Prophet Isa. 52. 11. exhorted the remnant of Israel, that they would come
fully out of unclean Babylon, the Apostle here applies it to Christians, to the
Saints at Corinth, persuading them so far to renounce communion with the
wicked, that they be not polluted by them. Herein Three steps of renouncing
communion with the wicked.
they were to take three steps, wherein you are to follow them.

First, Come out from amongst them. Sometimes even locally, by a personal
withdrawing of your selves. The pollutions 1 Come out from amongst them.
may grow so general, that you cannot dwell amongst them, without infection
from them. You may hear a voice from Heaven, calling the people of God out of
Babylon, Rev. 18. 4. when ever Rome becomes a Sodom for filthy uncleanness,
an Egypt for cruel bondage, and a Babylon for Idolatry, and other R^v. 11. 8.
Rev. 18. 2, 3.
great abominations, it is high time for the Saints to leave it.

Secondly, Be ye Separate; if you do not always bodily 2 Be ye separate.
and locally renounce the society of all wicked men, yet evermore spiritually,
be ye separate from them, express your dislike of their wicked courses,
bearing witness against them. Possibly your Callings and Relations may oblige
you to civil converse with them, yet whilst you are constrained to stay
amongst them, think, affect, speak, act* as men of another spirit, maintaining
an holy separation from their impurity.

Thirdly, Touch not the unclean thing. Here the Apostle bespeaks 3 Touch not
the unclean thing.
a more full renouncing of fellowship with all uncleanness. Moses Law provided
against unclean touches; under the Gospel Saints should be as careful. He
does not only say, beware lest you (...). Chryso. Second general part:
^ncouragement.
wallow in filthiness, not only forbid them to act that which is evil, but
discharges them from touching the unclean thing. Suffer not your spirits and
consciences to be defiled in any degree, no, not with the least touch of
wickedness, by any voluntary compliance with it.

The encouragement backs the Adhortation. And I will receive you, and will be
a Father, etc. That you may be willing to act the Adhortation, separating your
selves from all uncleanness, you may find here almost as many encouraging
arguments, Duo Deus pro^^^tet, Receptionem. Adoptionem; Cajetan.
as words.

First, God promises receptionem, I will receive you: As if the Lord should
say, when I have called you out from amongst the wicked, and discharged you
from fellowship with the unclean, 1. Reception.
you must make account as you separate from them, they will with scoffs,
scorns, and persecutions disclaim you: when Saul was become a Paul, there was
a change in his old friends, as well as in him, his former Patrons became his
bitter persecutors, the more zealous he grew for his God, the more violently
did they oppose him. In such a case the Lord would have all Proselytes know
they shall exchange with advantage, Volo vos vaga^^ri, sed exeuntes, at
separatos ego suscipiam vo^, in mea domo spirituali loco tandem aete na in
caelis. Cajetan.
suppose by renouncing fellowship with their wickedness, you lose their
personal favors, yet be not discouraged, I will own you when they throw you
off, I will receive you into my spiritual and eternal House. You shall have
communion with me in my Church on Earth, and be made everlastingly happy by
the enjoyment of me in Heaven.

Secondly, God promises adoptionem, I will receive them as a Father does his
children. They shall have not only house-roome, 2. Adoption.
but also heart-roome. I will receive you, not only into my house, but into my
favor. Under the sweet relation of a Father, as beloved Sons and Daughters,
I will entertain you. I will express the affection of a Father, and you shall
enjoy the Officio paterno erga vos me^geram, amando, providendo, curam habendo,
etc. Cajetan.
privileges of children. The Lord Almighty will perform this. His love as a
Father will engage his power; his power as Almighty will secure and advance his
love. Here is the Saints Encouragement to a right Separation.

These two generals will commend to your consciences, and considerations two
suitable Observations.

God expects the Saints should make a Separation from uncleanness. 1
Observation.


It is a great piece of the Devils policy, agere (...), as much as he can at
least to pretend an imitation of the wise God in his actions. Hereupon, as the
Lord has communicated himself to his people by a Covenant, which he
publishes by his Minister^, and confirms by his Sacraments. So the devil by
way of resemblance conveyes himself by compacts, by sorceries, by charms; And
likewise, as the Spirit of God gains much upon us by names, inviting us to
Piety, under the name of wisdom, deterring us from sin, by calling it folly:
In the same See book of Solm. Proverbs
method Satan indevours to engage some in ways of intemperance, under the
title of good-fellowship; others in the ways of covetousness, calling it
good-husbandry. And withal often times does he most industriously practice to
discourage us from that which he knows to be good, by branding it with some
bad name.

Hence evermore the best Persons and things have been reproached with the worst
names. Even the sweet and precious Act. 11 26.
name of Christian, given to the Disciples at Antioch, was soon stained by
blasphemous wits and tongues. By the Jews they were in contempt called
Nazarites, by Julian scornfully termed Galileans, The Devil has made much use
of bad names to oppose good, both persons and things
by Vlpian under Severus, Impostors; by Demetrian, (whom Cyprian confuted)
procurers of all the Plagues of God that came upon the world. This afterward
proved to be the portion of the Waldenses in the Lateran Council to be
condemned as Catharists, Publicans, etc. They did indeed discover the Prelates,
and Briests amongst the Papists to be the grand Soule-deceivers; Deeeptores
animarum, Diaboli laqueos: Hereupon the Popish Clergy conceived themselves
concerned how to render them odious Vid. Catalog. Testium veritatis, l. 15.
Petr* de Buis.
to the world, under the most ignominious names.

The Saints in this Church have found the same design practiced against them
in these later times. Though the Scripture commands purity, and so highly
commends it, that our Savior makes it one of the Beatitudes; Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God; yet under the nickname of Puritans, the
most gracious Christians have been not a little disparaged. At Mat. 5* 8.
first indeed there were Ceremonial Puritans only, so they were traduced who
would not comply heartily with Prelaticall Ceremonies; Then afterward the
iniquity of our times rose to this height, that any Ministers Orthodox in
Judgment, and conscientious in practice, were opposed as Doctrinall and moral
Puritans; And at last such Nobles and Gentry, who had but good
State-principles, and were faithful to the public, were Many faithful
Servants of God in England cried down heretofore as Puritans, and now as
Separatists.
cried down as State-puritans, and accounted (...) many the Troublers of this
Israel.

The Devil and his agents are now acting the same part against the power of
godliness, though in another new dress. The beauty and purity of true
Christianity is amongst many in England at this time, clouded under the name of
Separation, as if the word Separate, did always carry a crime with it.

We do not enough consider that there is a Right desirable inoffensive
Separation, unto which the Scripture directs; Indeed because diverse do run
into unhappy extremities of ^^paration, (whom yet we should pity, and with
meekness of wisdom seek to reduce, because they seem to aim at purity
therein) hence it is grown so common to represent all such who conscientiously
endeavor to separate from sin, as guilty of a sinful Separation, not only
at Tables and Tavernes, but even in Pulpits too often* such as long to see
purity and unity meet in the Churches of Christ are by some involved in a
reproach full Separation; yea, our zealous Reformers, are by intemperate
tongues and pens lashed as odious Separatists. I hope therefore, it will not
be thought unseasonable to pres^^^ to this Noble Auditory, who have so far
engaged themselves for a pure Reformation, what that Right Separation is, which
is so much encouraged by God himself.

Two things I shall endeavor by the help of Gods holy Spirit to discover.

First, From what the Saints are to Separate:

Secondly, Why they are to make such a Separation.

There is a fivefold Separation which the Lord who is glorious God expects from
his Saints a fivefold Separation. 1 From unclean courses.
in holiness, challenges from all his Saints.

First, The Saints must separate from all unclean courses. They should all
accept and act that counsel which Daniel gave Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 27.
Break off thy sins by righteousness. It is not enough upon a day of
Humiliation, and now whilst God is breaking us by his Judgments, to be
somewhat broken for our sins, unless we by Reformation break off from them.
They are not worthy the name of Saints, who live in any gross sinful
practices, or allow themselves in any little ones. Paul, 2. (...). 1. calls for
this improvement of these gracious promises, that the Corintbians should be
cleansing themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. They should not stint themselves with any degree
of holiness, Gods own purity being their Copy, 1. Joh. 3. 3. but evermore be
purging out all defilements which fall either upon their bodies or upon their
spirits.

Secondly, The Saints must separate from unclean company: 2 From unclean
company.
What should Doves do amongst Crows? when David did appeal to God, Psalm. 26.
4, 5. in the integrity of his heart, he could m^ke this profession, which
would be as comfortable to you as it was to him. I have not sat with vain
persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers, I have hated the congregation*
of evil doers, and will not sit with the wicked. Possibly your callings, Qui
non dignoscitur exse, dignoscitur exsocio.
your relations may tie you to a frequent converse with some unclean persons,
(which is a sad portion where ever it falls) yet ^electively, it is not
agreeable to the spirit of a Saint, to single out such as your Companions, as
your bosom friends, as the people of your delight, to make a league and
combination with them. Wise Solomon advises, Prove. 22. 24, 25. Make no
friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not go: lest
thou learn his ways and get a snare to thy Soul. Angry men though they are
very dangerous, yet not the only dangerous companion^: All sinful and unclean
societies are infectious; You should always go into bad company as a
Physician goes into Plague-houses. He carries his Antidote with him to
preserve himself, and his prescripts for the health of others. So should
Saints fortify their own Spirits against danger, by praying and watching; and
by speaking healing speeches, and express such exemplary actions as may help
to cure the Souls of others. When the Sower went forth to sow, some seeds fell
by the ways side, and the fowls came and devoured them up, Mat. 13. 3, 4. who
are these fowls, but the devil and his factors? birds of this feather do
build very often in Tavernes, and Alehouses, the cages of unclean company; they
are the bushes which harbor them ordinarily, you had need beware of such
places. The more Saints meet in any company, the more of the Holy Ghost is
there, the more of Christ, it is a little corner of Heaven. The more unclean
and wicked persons there are in any company, the more of the devil is there,
who rules in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. Saints must turn away
from such.

Thirdly, Saints must separate even from the very appearance of 3. From the
very appearance of uncleanness.
uncleanness, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Abstain from the appearance of evil, not only
from all kind of sin, (as some render the Greek) but from all appearance of
sin; they should avoid the shows as well as realities; and that both
appearances of errors in Doctrine, and appearances of exorbitancy in
conversation. This There are re^ malae, and malae pariter species Bern.
was Daniels care, who was an Oracle for wisdom, Ezekiel. 28. 3. In Chap. 1. 8.
He purposed in his heart that be would not defile himself with the portion
of the Kings meat. Some Expositors V. Pembles and Estius his Notes.
say, some of the meats might be prohibited to the Jews, others, for fear
of superstition; the Babylonians meat being blessed by invocating their Idols:
another conceives he did decline it, to avoid scandal, he would not fare so
pompously, whilst his Brethren suffered such hard things. Learned Calvin
apprehends Daniel might at best see an appearance of uncleanness V. Calvin in
locum.
in it, therefore uses twice that expression, that he might not defile
himself. This holy man suspected the Court delights might prove a snare to
him, he might learn intemperance, and so lose himself and forget his God;
There was to him such a show and danger of uncleanness in it, he would rather
live with pulse then venture upon the Kings meat. He well knew that any one
may soon be plunged into great sins, who does not shun the very
beginnings and appearances of the least; and that he scarce makes conscience
of any evil, who does not make conscience of all.

It is true, in separating from the appearance of uncleanness, the Saints
should wisely consider whether the appearance of it be Real, when there is an
outward resultance of some inward pravity; or whether it be only imaginary,
when for want Appearance of evil, Real. Imaginary.
of knowledge, or of love, or of both, standers by conceive it has a show of
evil in it. To a mind not rightly informed, to an heart not charitably
affected, good actions may sometimes be mis-interpreted, as if they had an
appearance of uncleanness in them. In this case Christ himself did not
forbear to converse with sinners, though some through ignorance or malice, did
reproach him as a friend to Publicans and sinners, Luke 7. 34.

For want of a wise consideration, what is indeed an appearance of evil to be
avoided, many may be as easily, and as far transported as the Jews, who did
ignorantly task themselves with needless observances, and impose uncomfortable
burdens upon others. Where the Lord forbad them to eat or See Godwyns Jewish
Antiq. p. 152.
drink things sacrificed to Idols, they prohibited all drinking with Heathens,
because it is doubtful whether it were offered to Idols or no. The Lord
commanding them in the time of the Passover, to put away leaven out of their
houses, they would not take the name into their mouths all the time of the
Feast. But if there be real grounds, to call any thing an appearance of
evil; this golden Rule of the Apostle, Abstain from the appearance of evil,
will extricate you in many puzzling cases of Conscience. If one be inquisitive
about the lawfulness of Painting the face, patching, spotting, carding,
dicing, about many of your habits, customs, recreations; you may resolve
diverse such queries with this Aphorism, In all doubtful cases In dubiiis
elige tutissimum; Illa est pars tutior in qua non est periculum peccandi. Ames.
Cas. Confc. l. 3 c. 17. S. 26.
take the safest way; That is certainly the safest, where there is no danger of
sin; not so much as an appearance of evil. If you do such things, it may
prove a sin, it may be an appearance of uncleanness, there is not the least
show or shadow of uncleanness in forbearing such habits, such customs, such
sports, as becomes Saints; Therefore resolve to separate, not only from
unclean practices, and unclean society, but also from whatsoever does indeed
appear to be unclean.

Fourthly, Saints must separate from communion with a false 4 From communion
with a false Church, when unclean in the very substantialls.
Church, being grown unclean and corrupt in the very substantials of Doctrine,
Worship, and Government.

Learned and Godly Divines grant, that the Saints may hold some fellowship with
a Church which is much corrupted.

1. Though it be tainted with diverse gross errors in opinion, as, Matthew. 5.
20. to 43. 2. Though the public worship be stained with vile hypocrisy, as
Mark. 7. 6. to 13. 3. Though the public government become oppressive, with
tyranny and disorder, as Joh. 9. 22. 4. Though Church members be blinded with
ignorance; and carried away with superstition, as Matthew. 15. 9. 14.
Who knows not that such distempers were found in the Sea reverend* Mr.
Heldershant on John 4. p. 159, 160* See 1 Cor. chapters 5, 6, 11, 15.
Church of Jerusalem? yet the Apostles, and primitive Christians, as Christ
himself had formerly done, did join with them in the Ordinances of God, Act.
3. 1. etc. And when many weeds had overgrown the Church of Corinth, in
Doctrine, Discipline, and Conversation, Paul seriously persuades them to a
Reformation, and not presently to a Separation among themselves, but still
ownes them with all their defects, as the Church of God, 2 Cor. 1. 1.

And though the Church of Rome was very much degenerated, yet for a long time
the true Churches of Christ held communion with it. Indeed when it was grown so
abominably impure, in the very vitals and substantials of Christianity, then
God would send from Heaven to invite the Saints to make a Separation from it,
Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues.

I need not spend time to justify the Separation of Luther and the Reformed
Churches from Romish Babylon. The Schism began in Rome it self. They were the
Schismatics who forced Non fugimus, sect fugamur. Vide Davenant, ad pacem
eccles. adhort.
us to fly from them.

First, There was Monstrous Heresy in Doctrine maintained.

Secondly, Gross Idolatry in worship practiced.

Thirdly, Intolerable Tyranny in Government owned.

Fourthly, Another may now be added, The man of sin is revealed to be amongst
them, 2 Thessalonians. 2. which more fully Vide Camero. de eccles. Tract, de Schismat.
warrants a departure from them who now so clearly appear to be the
Anti-Christian-Church. Especially seeing after much means used for their
conviction, they continue to reject and blaspheme the Truth of Christ. As in
Act. 13. 46. and 19. 9. 5 From fellowship in any thing that is unclean even in
the true Churches of Christ.


Fifthly, The Lord will have his Saints separate not only from false Churches,
but also from fellomship in any thing that is unclean, even in the True
Churches of Christ.

Admit a particular Church having many corruptions in it, continue a True
Church, and so whilst Christ ownes it we may own it, and some communion may
be maintained with it, in that which is sound and good; yet when you cannot
live with them in external communion, unless you will hold fellowship with
them in some sins, as to approve some erroneous See Chilling worth in praef.
Ans. to 2 Motive
Doctrine, or practice some superstitious worship; If this Church will not
allow you her Communion, but upon such conditions, in such a case the Church
for requiring this condition is Schismatic, and not you from separating from
it. God will not allow you to do any evil, though you might thereby enjoy the
greatest good. Romans 3. 8. His Saints must rather forbear the sweetness of
fellowship with others in somewhat that is good, then suffer themselves to be
unavoydably engaged engaged in doing or justifying any thing which is unclean
and sinful in the pure eyes of God, Ephesians. 5. 11. If they be like to be
involved in defiling their consciences, if in danger to be compelled to
blaspheme, they should keep themselves from sin what ever they suffer;
better undergo the greatest then commit the least evil; by this Compass the
primitive Saints sailed, Act. 8. 1. and 11. 19.

Yet here remember Camerons distinction of a Schism into Schisma Negativum,
Positivu^. Fide Cameron de Eccles. Tract. de Schismat.
Negative and Positive. There may be in the Church a negative Separation, a
personal forbearing of any thing which will undoubtedly pollute us; when a
positive Separation, where there is not only a denying of communion with
others, but a sudden consociating of themselves into distinct bodies, into
little independent Corporations by themselves for the worship and service of
God, will not so easily as some imagine be justified to hold consistency with
that peace and order which is so desirable in the Churches of Christ: But of
this I shall speak more particularly in the Application.

Having showed you from what you must separate, with the several steps you
are to take therein, I will endeavor fully to engage you in that necessary
work, by the clear evidence of some arguments, either couched in the bowels
of the Text, or Reasons why the Saints should separate from uncleanness.
borrowed from the neighboring words; They are these four, which will
discover why the Saints should separate from uncleanness.

First, The Saints ought to proportion their carriage to their 1 From the
Saints privileges. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
privileges, (they are largely expressed, ver. 16.) all which bespeak a
Separation from uncleanness. They are the Temple of the living God. First,
they are new built by God himself, Ephesians. 2. 10. Secondly, Set apart from
profane uses for God, Psalm. 4. 3. Thirdly, yea dedicated and consecrated unto
him in a peculiar manner, Titus 2. 14. Again, the Saints are the Temple of the
living God, therefore it is most incongruous for them to converse with dead and
unclean company, and to multiply dead and sinful works. This is the argument
which the Apostle Paul uses, 1 Cor. 6. 19. why they should fly Fornication,
Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost in you? and by the
same reason all other uncleanness; Gods Temple should have no cob-webhs, no
unswept corners in them. (...).


Further, God says here, ver. 16. I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and
I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Here is an high degree of
owning them, and of greatest intimacy with them; God is in the midst of his
enemies as In Templo vis orare; in te ora; sed prius esto Templum Dei. Ille
enim in Templo suo audit orantem Aug.
ruling them; But he is in his Saints as in his House, as in his Temple, which
is for communion, there he dwells, there he walks, there he is pleased to
communicate himself to them, and hear them speak to him; They have not only
his presence, but also most sweet discoveries from him; as in Joh. 14. 21. All
which should hold them at a distance from sin and all uncleanness. 2 From
the filthiness of sin and sinners.


Secondly, sin is in the nature of it, of a polluting disposition, Heb. 12. 15.
One root of bitterness will defile many, it stains all who do not separate
from it, as being so directly contrary to the pure nature, holy will, blessed
Image and glory of God. Hence it is in Scripture frequently compared to the
most loathsome things. Sinners are Vipers, Swine, Dogs, yea, briars, Matthew.
3. 7. Matthew. 7. 6. Isa. 1. 6. Eze. 24. 11, 12 Hebr: 6. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 17: 1 King
8. 38.
thorns, etc. Sin is Dross, scumme, rottenness, and the worst of diseases,
Leprosy, Plague, etc. all which do proclaim a separation. It defiles the
body and soul, 2 Cor. 7. 1. It defiles the heart and conscience, Tit. 1. 15.
It puts mudde into the spring of all your actions, which will make the streams
very foul. It defiles our best duties, Prove. 15. 8. and it defiles our
society, 1 Cor. 15. 33. Whereas, the more you separate from sin unto God, the
more the soul is conformed to the pure law of God, which is both our rule and
beauty, and the more it will be transformed into Christ, which is our glory.

Thirdly, there is no possibility of reconciling Christ and sin, 3 No
reconciliation with Christ, but by separation from sin.
therefore the Saints have great reason to fall out with sin, that so they
may be in some capacity of falling in with Christ. They can expect no
communion with him, unless there be a separation from sin. When once they
have washed and made themselves clean, put away the evil of their doings from
before Gods eyes, ceased to do evil, Isa. 1. 16. then they are invited to a
sweet familiarity with him, ver. 18. Come now, let us reason together. Then,
and not till then they shall have communion with him to soule-saving purposes.
The same language James speaks Chap. 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw
nigh to you, cleanse your hands you sinners, and purify your hearts you double
minded. You cannot meet and enjoy fellowship with God, but in paths of purity.
Jesus Christ would not engage himself to sup with any of the Laodiceans till
they had separated from their lukewarmenesse, Rev. 3. 20. Here in verse. 14, 15,
16. the Spirit of God makes choice of five emphaticall words in the Greek, and
(...)?
expresses it by way of interrogation, which contains a vehement negation in
it. What fellowship? what communion? what concord? what part? what agreement
have the Saints of God with uncleanness. As if Paul should have said five
times over, the Saints who are in Christ, and have Christ in them, must not,
cannot reconcile themselves, to any compliance with sin and sinners, no more
then reconcile Christ with Beliall.

Fourthly, unless the Saints make a separation from uncleanness and
fellowship with wicked men therein, as they 4 Inevitable danger of
communicating with sin and sinners.
come to share in their sins, so will they be involved in their calamities. If
Israel had not separated themselves from Egypt, by the blood of the Paschall
Lamb, but had communicated with them in their Idolatry, they might have felt
the sword of the destroying Angel in their houses, as well as the Egyptians.
It did cost them very dear afterward, that they had such fellowship with
Achans offense, for his act they smarted, indeed because Josh. 7. 1. The
children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing, they were not
careful to keep themselves and one another from that evil as God had charged
them, Josh. 6. 18.

It was a seasonable prayer of that man of God; Lord deliver me from my other
men's sins; God knows we have personal finnes enough standing upon our score
to undo our souls eternally; the greater reason have we to renounce all
communion with other men's uncleanness. Hence Paul calls upon the Saints in
Ephesus, Ephesians. 5. 11, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but reprove them rather; make them not your sins, by command,
counsel, consent, connivence, nor any other way; but rather bear witness
against them, at least by a checking silence, if not by a seasonable speech, by
looks, by gestures, by some rebuking actions, if not by downeright reproves;
If you join hearts in sinning against God, expect Revel. 18. 4.
to go hand in hand under punishments from him.

If God looks that all his Saints should make such a separation Use 1.
Instruction.
as not to touch any uncleanness, then behold how much work you have this day
for deep humiliation!

So far are you from answering Gods expectation herein, that many of you are
drenched in great defilements, and wallow in gross impurity. The Lord help
you to behold it with weeping eyes over your selves and this unclean Nation.
May not the Lord send his Prophet to you, as once he did Ezekiel to
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 22. 24. etc. Son of man, say unto her, Thou Consider sadly
with reference to England, Eze. 22. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
art the Land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of Indignation?
(sometimes rain waters and makes a barren Land fruitful, sometimes there is a
rain of righteousness which washes away unrighteousness, Hos. 10. 12.)

25 There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof like a roaring
Lion, ravening the prey; They have devoured souls, they have taken the
Treasure and precious things: they have made her many Widows in the midst
thereof.

26 Her Priests have violated my Law, and have profaned my holy things, they
have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither have they showed
difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my
Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.

27 Her Princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey, to shed
blood and to destroy souls, to get dis-honest gain.

28 And her Prophets have daubed them with untempered mortar, seeing vanity and
divining lies unto them, saying, Thus says the Lord God, when the Lord has
not spoken.

29 The people of the Land have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and
have vexed the poor and needy, yea, they have oppressed the stranger
wrongfully.

It concerns you wisely to consider that the complaint in the 30 verse, be
not as justly taken up against you.

30 And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand
in the gap before me for the Land, that I should not destroy it, but I found
none.

What, no mourners? none that sigh and groan for Englands filthiness? then the
sad portion in the 31 verse may prove yours:

31 Therefore I have powered out my indignation upon them, I have consumed them
with the fire of my wrath, their own way have I recompensed upon their heads,
says the Lord.

May you not hear God speaking to this polluted Kingdom, as once to his
Jerusalem, Jer. 13. 27. I have seen thy adulteries, and thy neighings, the
lewdness of thy whoredom, and thine abominations on the hills in the field;
Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when shall it once
be? What not after so many years purifying Sermons? not after so many melting
mercies, which should have led thee to repentance? not after so many purging
judgments? What not yet cleansed by all these rivers of tears upon so many
praying days, by all these streams of blood, in so many cruel fights? Oh
when shall it once be? What? England never cleansed from her old abominations?
Doubtless, if we still tread in Hierusalems steps, we must expect her cup of
Trembling to be put into our hands, till we be utterly overturned.

Historians make a sad relation of the Desolation of Jerusalem, twelve
several times the heavy judgments of God fell upon them, Jerosolyma duodecies
in universum expugnata. Vide Perelium, Mellif. bist p. 24
as the woeful fruits of their abominations: So as at last it became the Jews
prison, and then their grave, and after an heap of carcasses, then of stones,
Luke 19. 41, 42, 43, 44.

I hope you will (Right Honorable and Beloved) seriously humble your selves
before God this day, for that you have in many things walked so unbecomming
Saints. Instead of Separating from all Impurity, the All-seeing God knows, you
have You may diverse ways help to fill up the measure of Englands uncleanness.
contributed very much to make England more unclean.

First, Every one of you has an unclean spring within, in your own corrupt
natures, which bubbles up daily in many impure thoughts, desires, etc. Jer. 4.
14. O Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved;
how long shall 1 When an unclean spring is within you.
thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? And in Matthew. 15. 19. 20. For out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false
witness, blasphemies, these are the things which defile a man. The heart is
the Fountain, which is full of filth, many carnal principles, sinful
inclination, etc. hence so many unclean streams in our polluting actions.

Secondly, You defile both your selves and others by corrupt 2 When by your
converse you defile others. Heb. 12. 15.
speeches, and sinful conversing together, Ephesians. 4. 29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good, to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers. Sometimes one rotten
hearted person in a family, like one rotten apple upon an heap, corrupts many
others; they little know what it is to speak to edify profitably, but rather at
a Table in a (...).
withdrawing room, pull down that in one hours discourse, which a faithful
Minister has been building up by many Sermons, ver. 30. And grieve not the
holy Spirit of God; such sinful discoursing does not only sad the spirits of
the Saints, but even grieve the Spirit of God himself, ver. 31. Let all
bitterness and wrath, and angor, and clamor, and evils speaking be put away
from you with all malice. One passionate word begets another, and so you do
mutually help to defile one another souls.

Thirdly, You add much to the common pollution, even 3 By the iniquity of your
holy things.
by the iniquity of your holy things. If you please to consult with Exodus 28.
38. you shall find there a course prescribed how Aaron was to bear the
iniquity of the holy things, among the children of Israel, that they may be
accepted before the Lord. Which clearly intimates that there are not only
evil doings, but also evil of our good doings, there are Sermon sins,
Prayer sins, Communion sins, Humiliation sins, many Sanctuary sins, which
do defile both our spirits and performances, and cast more mudde into Englands
unclean streams, whereby we become more obnoxious to the displeasure of the
Holy God: Hence you may observe, Ezekiel. 9. 6. God gave commission to the
destroyers, to begin at the Sanctuary. For the most part pollution begins at
the Sanctuary, and there should they begin destruction.

Fourthly, Possibly besides all your own personal sins, whereby the Land is
so much defiled, you may by compliance 4 By making the filth of other men's sins
your own.
own them, yea, and help to make the Kingdom guilty of all the sins that
are committed by any in the Kingdom; Hereby you who are advanced to such
authority in the State, may make those sins which were too common before, in
some kind to become National, and leave a destructive guilt upon the Kingdom.
As Ministers by not reproving their flock, so Magistrates by not punishing the
offenders, st^nd charged with their sins: The Lord teach you wisely to
consider how angry he was with Eli for his connivence, 1 Samuel 3. 13. God would
ruin his house, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained
them not. It is high time to look about you, lest your indulgence to any other
men's sins multiply so much uncleanness, as may both ruin your own-houses,
and hazard the whole Kingdom.

If God expects his Saints should separate, then give me leave here to enter a
Caveat against rash censuring, and condemning Use 2. Caution against rash
censuring of al separation
of all Separation. God himself by his Word, and by his practice teaches
there may, there must be some Separation.

First, in his own eternal counsels he makes a separation, his electing love
singles out some, choosing them to grace and glory, Romans 9. 13.
passing by others.

Secondly, his Spirit in the Ministry of the Gospel makes a separation,
picking out here and there one, drawing them to 1 Cor. 1 9.
communion with Christ.

Thirdly, when the Son of man shall come in his glory, with all the holy
Angels, he will separate the sheep from the goats, the sheep on his right
hand, the goats on the left. And here Paul Matthew. 25. 31, 32, 33.
invites you to a separation, and therefore doubtless there is no reason you
should be offended at the Name or Thing, when it is rightly stated and
practiced: This I shall endeavor to represent in these two following
Conclusions.

There must be no Separation made from fellowship with the Catholic Church. 1
Conclusion.


Such a separation would rend the very body of Christ himself. He is pleased
to call the Church his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all,
Ephesians. 1. 23. This would dis-joynt that sweet Harmony, which is the beauty and
strength of that body, Ephesians. 4. 16.

The improvement of the Gospel is the advancing of Saints to this honor and
happiness, Heb. 12. 22, 23. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the
City of the living God, etc. To the General Assembly, and Church of the
firstborn; In this your pilgrimage you must still be coming to this Church,
but never separating from it, because in coming hither, you come to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant, ver. 24.

You need not make a separation from a particular Church, because 2 Conclusion.
there are some defects found in it.

If you are bound to separate because of defects, to what particular Church
will you associate, which shall not be defective? Only the Church Triumphant
in Heaven is absolutely perfect, weeds will incessantly be springing up in all
Gods Gardens here on earth. This has evermore been taken for granted amongst
all sober spirits, that imperfections do not presently unchurch a True Church,
and so though they cry for a Reformation, yet do not warrant a Separation.

Quest. But what if some wicked persons continue in Church Society, does not
that give a just occasion of separation unto Reasons why separation not
suddenly to be made from a Church though some wicked persons be tolerated in
it. See Ames. Case consc. l. 4. c. 24. sect. 15.
others?

Answ. Such Divines to whom God has revealed much of his mind concerning
Church-affaires, give diverse reasons why the tolerating of some wicked persons
in a Church, is not a sufficient ground for others to separate suddenly from it.

First, because, that tolerating may be only an error or infirmity of the
Church, wherein you are to bear with it, and not thereupon to separate from it.

Secondly, Patience is to be used toward a particular Brother, when he is
overtaken, Gal. 6. 1. Much more must you in such a case express it toward a
Church.

Thirdly, The sudden separating of the godly, is not the best method to cure a
sick Church, but rather puts it into a more desperate condition, etc.

Quest. Does not the fellowship of wicked persons in the Ordinances make them
ineffectuall?

Answ. Their wickedness may make the precious Ordinances of God ineffectuall
to themselves, yet not to such others whom the Lord invited and for whom he
prepared these Gospel-dainties; Will a loving Father deny his own children
their bread, because some dogs creep under the Tables? Indeed as in Hag. 2.
13. If one that is unclean by a dead body, touch any of these, shall it be
unclean? And the Priests answered and said, It shall be unclean. To whom was
this uncleanness contracted, not to others, but to themselves? And hence, 1
Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine Himself, and so let him eat. He does not say,
let him examine all others that come.

It is indeed a very desirable and beautiful thing, which would much increase
our Communion comforts, to see none but Christ's Members at his own Table. Yet
how can the very being of an ungodly person there, enervate the power of the
Ordinances unto thy soul? It is most true, A little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump, 1 Cor. 5. 6. That incestuous person, (and so How a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump:
others) leaven a Church Physically, not by their presence, simply, because
they are there; Then the being of an Hypocrite in Church fellowship, (however
he creep in,) would leaven all, if bare presence did it; But Morally by his
Impurity, he being suffered without censure for so great an offense, does
imbolden and harden others in sin, whereby the whole Congregation might in time
be sowred with such leaven. The presence of an unclean person cannot hurt you,
further then you make his uncleanness yours, by not doing your duty against it.

What though 1 Cor. 10. 17. they being many, are one bread? If an unclean,
unworthy person, by creeping unto Gods Ordinances, and enjoying communion with
the Saints therein, do obtain this advantage, so as by profession to seem one
bread with them; yet this does not imply, that the Saints are thereby made one
with him in his wickedness. If an unclean person challenge more then belongs
to him, this does not divest the Saints of what is their due, and their
privilege, nor must it hinder them in performing that service, they owe to
their Savior, Incommoda faciunt aliquando ut praeceptum affirmativum desinat
obligare, quod alias non possit non observari sine peccato. Ames. Cas. l. 4. c.
24. sect. 15: Si ex separatione vel schisma metuendum, vel contagio peccandi
multitudinem invaserit, divinae disciplinae severa misericordia necessaria*
est: consilia separationis tunc inania plus perturbant infirmos bonos, quam
corrigant animosos malos, Aug. contra Parmen l. 3. c. 2. Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17.
being called to it. They must remember Christ and his death, though others
forget him, and their duty toward him.

Quest. But I cannot do any duty (as it is expressed, Matthew. 18. 15, 16. etc.)
remaining in Communion with such a particular Church, may I not then separate?

Answ. First, in this case a man had need be clearly satisfied, that to do
such things (soil. to admonish, to excommunicate, as in Matthew. 18.) be his
duty, pro hic and nunc, in such and such circumstances. Affirmative precepts,
though they do semper obligare, yet not ad semper. They do not bind me to act
in every juncture of things. In Morals, in matters of this nature,
circumstances have such an influence, that what was my duty in one posture of
things, may cease to be my duty, when it is otherwise circumstantiated. I am
not in all circumstances equally obliged to reprove offenses, or to proceed to
Church censures. Sometimes the disease has so far prevailed, the body will not
bear physic.

Secondly, a man likewise, before he separate from a Church because he cannot
do his duty therein, had need be sure that his not being in a capacity to do
his duty to the full, be a sufficient ground of Separation. The order in Mat.
18. is to cast off the offender, if he hear not the Church, not to cast off
the Church if she hear not him.

Qu. But may we not desire communion with the purest Church?

Answ. You may; yet withal observe how this may be sought, and obtained by
you with the peace, order, and edification of the Churches. It is possible to
remove to another Church, without a separation from your own. Only I wish
these two things were remembered by such as think of separating.

First, Try to gather purity into your own Church, and to separate all impurity
from it, before you separate to another, or gather a Church out of other
Churches. Endeavor to separate the dross from among you, before you separate
your selves from the gold.

Secondly, If at last you will separate, do not uncharitably condemn the true
Church, whose fell owship you leave. There is too often an error on both
hands, to cry up every thing we like, as Jus Divinum, and what we dislike, to
blast it as Antichristian.

When the Saints do separate, let it be; If you separate let it be*


First, A prudent Separation, from evil, not from good; from the vile, not
from the precious: Possibly they may sometimes 1 Prudently.
be necessitated to suspend communion from some particular Church, in somewhat
that is good, because then unhappily much evil was incorporated into that
Church, and yet not excommunicate themselves, but still own, and approve, what
is good therein, Romans 12. 9. abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is
good.

Secondly, A pious separation; from evil unto good, not from one evil to
another, not from extremity to extremity, not from 2 Piously.
Tyranny to Anarchy, not from Prelaticall usurpation to popular
licentiousness. So far as you concur with them* and bid them God speed in
any of their errors, you are partaker of their evil deeds, 2 John ver. 11.

Thirdly, A peaceable separation. Separate from the unclean, 3 Peaceably.
without a sebisme, (that is) without an unwarrantable rent, not rashly
condemning all who come not up to your height; not as one affecting a proud
singularity, but as one who is necessitated to withdraw out of pure tenderness
of conscience; not out of any passionate selfishnesse, but as one who labors
to please his neighbor for good to edification, Romans 15. 1, 2.

Fourthly, A loving separation. Though some Saints should differ and have a
kind of separation in some opinions and practices, 4 Lovingly.
wherein the holy Scripture allows a latitude, yet still united in affection,
(which the Devil most opposes) one soul though in diverse bodies, though in
diverse Churches, still striving together for the Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.
27.

Then, as you desire to approve your selves Saints, study how you may answer
Gods expectation, Mind purity in the whole Use 3. Direction. Exodus 15. 11.
Hab. 1. 13. Col. 1. 12.
course of your lives. Your God is an holy and pure God; Heaven is a pure
place; never expect communion with him in his Church here, or in heaven
hereafter, without purity and holiness. As you must be visible Saints, to
make you fit members of particular Churches here, so must you be real Saints,
that you may be members of the Church mystical, Heb. 12. 14. Follow
holiness, without which no man shall see God.

Many indeed will easily be persuaded to pretend to purity, and have gotten
their tongues tipped, in these times of Reformation, with some pure Gospel
Language, yet in conclusion will be ashamed, because their hearts are not
sound in Gods Statutes, according to David's prayer, Psalm. 119. 80. But tell me
thou Hypocrite, (says he) If it be a good thing to seem good Chrysostom. Aut
ergo esto quad appares, aut appare quod es.
why will thou not be that which thou would appear to be? for that which
is a shame for a man to appear to be, is it not much more shame for him to
be indeed? And if it be good to be a gilt Professor, is it not much better
to be a pure golden Christian? Means and method how spiritual purity is
promoted in the Saints. I watch against the least evil.


First, Watch against every evil, the occasions, the beginnings of it;
whatsoever defiles, though it be thy beloved, gainful, pleasing sin, away
with it, Psalm. 97. 10. Maintain constantly thy fortifications against all
assaults: If there be a train of importunate solicitations laid to overcome
thee, blow up all with Joseph's holy defiance, Genesis 39. 9. How then can I do
this great wickedness, and sin against God?

Secondly, Breathe after inward purity of spirit and conscience, Tit. 1. 15.
Unto the pure all things are pure, in their actions, 2 Labor after inward
purity.
as well as in their enjoyments. A chaste mind will keep you undefiled in the
way. A pure Fountain in your Garden will help to make all clean. Pray for
your selves, as Paul for his Thessalonians, 1 Phest. 5. 23. And the very God of
Peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole spirit, soul and body,
be preserved blameless unto the coming of the Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, Reach after pure Ordinances, that you may see and taste the
simplicity of Christ, in all divine administrations. The 3 Prize pure
Ordinances.
more of Christ in any Ordinance, the more sweetness and the more purifying
influence it has upon our souls: Humane inventions will stain and formalize;
Divine Institutions, when they are kept pure, have a most sovereign healing,
cleansing virtue. Hence Paul reduces all to the first institution, as he
received it of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 23. 4 Make choice of pure company.


Fourthly, Single out pure company; mingle not your selves in intimate
familiarity with such whose converses carry defilements with them. Remember
what encouragements Solomon Discamus ex hac part sanctam superbiam, sciamus
nos esse illis meliores, Hieron. ep.
gives to close with holy society, Prove. 10. ver. 11. The mouth of a righteous
man is a well of life. ver. 20. The tongue of the just is as choice silver,
ver. 21. The lips of the righteous feed many. Shun such acquaintance, where you
can expect no good, and can hardly escape without receiving some hurt. David
made this one Character of a Citizen of Sion, Psalm. 15. 4. In whose eyes a vile
person is contemned, but he honors them that fear God. 5 Get pure
affections in the use of lawful comforts.


Fifthly, Keep pure affections in the use of lawful comforts. It is not
enough for Saints to have a lawful use of temporal blessings, unless they
gain an holy use of them, that they may be spiritualized unto them, Col. 3. 1,
2. Saints should proportion their carriage to their hopes. Seek high things, if
you be highly born. If you would be great persons indeed, mind the great
things which are above.

Sixthly, Maintain pure aims in all your undertakings. The 6 Keep pureaimes in
all your affairs.
last end has a great Influence upon men's actions. Such men are, as their ends
are. Do not look asquint at carnal self, that will mis-leade you into
unclean ways, look at the sanctifying of Gods name, the coming of his
Kingdom, the doing of his will with a single eye. It kept Paul very even, and
gave him much occasion of glorying, that his aims were so pure, so full of
simplicity and godly sincerity, that he could with confidence appeal to a
threefold Tribunal. In 2 Cor. 1. 12. There was the Throne of his own
Conscience, and in ver. 13. The Throne of the Corinthians knowledge, and then
ver. 14. The highest Throne of all in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Having thus dispatched the Adhortation, let us now look into the second
general part of the words, and see what encouragement we can thence gather to
engage you in a separation from all uncleanness.

The Lord Almighty will undoubtedly as a Father receive all those 2 Observation
who are such Right Separatists indeed, that they renounce communion with any
impurity.

The pollution of sin made the first breach betwixt God and man, leaving him
unfit for communion* with so glorious a Majesty; there is no recovering
fellowship with the Lord, unless the great obstruction be removed, unless
we renounce sin, which provoked him to withdraw from us. Indeed when once
the soul bethinks it self, and begins to look after God, he is r^ady to
meet her with deal embraces, Luke 15. 20. But when he was yet a great way
off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and
kissed him. Yea, this whole 15. Chapter of Luke is spent in three encouraging
Parables to this purpose, discovering that no Shepherd is more desirous to seek
his lost sheep, no woman more inquisiti^^ after her lost groat; no Father more
careful of the return of his (...), then the Lord into entertain such as
unfainedly disclaim all impurity.

Here you have two particulars fit to be considered, in the prosecuting of
this observation:

First, Gods readiness to receive them. 1 Gods readiness to receive such as
(...)


Secondly, ^he kind entertainment he gives them. He receives them as a
Father.

Two Arguments may be produced which will evidence Gods readiness to receive
all such as separate from uncleanness.

1. The first is drawn from the gracious ^^sposition and inclination 1 Argument.
of our good God: He says, Isa. 30, (...) professed that he waits (...) also
pronounces them (...) for him. You can not (...) more ready to forsake sin,
then he is ready (...) Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and (...)
thoughts, and let him return (...) the Lord, (...) him, and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon, as in the Hebrew. He knows how to multiply pardons as
(...) multiply sin^. Though thou be a man of iniquity, as it is in the Heb. v.
7. (...).

2. The second Argument is taken from the Lords engagement 2 Argument.
to all (...) as come to him, renouncing all their impurity. He has
condescended to make himself their debton by his unchangeable promises, Matthew.
5. 3. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, and the more
purity of heart they have, the more they shall see in God, and enjoy the more
of God.

Christ ingages himself to the unclean Laodiceans, that if they will hear
his voice and open the door, Rev. 3. 20. He will come in and sup with them,
and they with him; whatever lukewarmnesse they have been stained with before,
yet now upon such terms, he promises they shall enjoy a sweet and intimate
communion with him. Yea, here lies a threefold engagement.

First, this is suitable to the Tenor of the Covenant of Gods Free Grace,
Ezekiel. 36. 25. Whom he cleanses he owns as his people.

Secondly, this is agreeable to the intention of Christ's death, who laid down
his life that he might purify a peculiar people unto himself, Tit. 2. 14.

And, Thirdly, this is the method of the Spirit of God, in the execution of his
eternal Counsels for the salvation of our Souls, it is in a way of
Sanctification, and cleansing us from the filth of fin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. that so
we may be meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

And as for the Lords entertaining such as separate themselves from all
uncleanness, it is most like a tender Father. 2 The kind entertainment God
gives them as a Father.


First, He welcomes them at their first return home to his house with joyful
embraces, Luke 15. 23. There is great triumph in Heaven at the recovery of a
lost sinner.

Secondly, He will kindly own them, and with candid interpretation, accept of
weak prayers, and small endeavors from them, Mal. 3. 16, 17. The lisping, the
stammering of a child is pleasing to the love of a Father.

Thirdly, He can indulgently overlook great weaknesses in them, Psalm. 103. 13.
forbearing their frowardness, their evil manners, expecting no more from
children then their strength will bear.

Fourthly, He takes care to secure them in time of dangers, and troubles: If
he be provoked to send a deluge of calamities, yet he will provide an Arc
for them against a storm, as for his Noah, Genesis 6. 18.

Fifthly, He will help them at plunges, carrying them through difficult
services; A father will, when his children come to a slippery bridge, or a
dangerous style, lead them over by his own hand: As in Deuteronomy. 32. 10, 11, 12.

Sixthly, He will be sure to make rich provision for their spiritual,
temporal, and eternal welfare. He knows what they have need of, and what is
best for them, Matthew. 6. 31. 32. Having given them Christ, he will withhold no
good thing else from them, Romans 8. 32. Yea, being children of God, they shall
be joint heirs with Christ himself, Romans 8. 17. Thus honorably does the
Lord receive all them, who come unto him upon his own terms, leaving their
impurity behind them, they shall understand and taste the loving kindness of
the Lord.

If the Lord be pleased so far to engage himself as a Father, Use 1.
Information.
to receive all such as make a Right separation from uncleanness: Then, when
God still denies to receive our requests, and suspends his Fatherly compassions
in our extremity, we have We may scare England is not yet cleansed.
great reason to suspect our selves; and yet to make more exact inquiry what
impure things, and persons there are amongst us. We in England may power out
Joshuahs complaint, Josh. 7. 8. O Lord what shall I say, when Israel turns
their backs before their enemies? and expect the Lords answer to him, ver. 10,
11. And the Lord said unto Joshuah, Get thee up; wherefore lie thou thus upon
thy face? Israel has sinned, and they have also transgressed my Covenant which
I commanded them. Now is a proper season to consider whether there be no Achan
in the camp, whether no Jonahs still asleep in a corner, which occasions the
storm, and indangers the ship. This were most suitable work for a day of
Humiliation. You may have many Praying days, yet if they be not cleansing and
scouring days, your Prayers will still miscarry, your Counsels be shattered,
and your grand undertakings be disappointed. Remember Judge. 10. 10. The
children of Israel cried unto the Lord, yet to little purpose, till they swept
away the unclean things. The Lord repulsed their prayers, and bade them, ver.
14. Go and cry unto the Gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in
the time of your tribulation. Indeed when they said, ver. 15. We have sinned,
and when, ver. 16. They put away the strange Gods from among them, and served
the Lord. Then, His soul was grieved England must be cleansed, else not
delivered.
for the misery of Israel. Could we in England act our prayers, not only
bemoane our uncleanness, but put it away from among us, renounce all our
impurity, we might hope to find our Heavenly Father, so far grieved with our
miseries, that our sorrows might be turned into rejoycings.

Then, let all the Saints who have indevoured to separate themselves from all
uncleanness, learn hence, with all humble Use 2. Encouragement. Let the Saints
fly to God as to a Father. Abba Father found 3 times, Romans 8. 15. Mark. 14. 36.
Gal. 4. 6. Abba Sir. Chrysostom. vocat verbu^. puerorum legitimorum quo parents
suos appellant.
boldness, to improve this blessed privilege, make use of this sweet Relation
you have unto God, run to the Throne of Grace, and cry Abba Father. Romans 8.
15. If he has bound himself to receive you as a Father, do you follow him
as children, do not only say, Abba Father, but cry, Abba Father; Sometimes a
child can say or do nothing to help it self, but cry after his Father;
Though he be stuck fast in the mire, yet looking after the Father overtakes
him, crying after him overcomes him. Oftentimes [Ah Father] proves an
effectual prayer, there is prevailing Oratory in the Name, in the Relation.
Therefore, if thou can do nothing else in the behalf of poor England, yet
put thy finger in thine eye and complain to thy Father, tell him how ill it
fares with thy poor Brethren and Sisters in gasping Ireland, in unsettled
Scotland, in bleeding England, and what a bitter cup of trembling, Germany, and
the Palatinate, have had in their hands for above twenty years together. As
Mary and Martha sent to Christ, Joh. 11. 3. saving, Lord, behold he whom thou
love is sick: Represent by thy Prayers, the sick and sad condition of many of
those whom the Lord dearly loves amongst us. Possibly thou may hear the
same gracious answer, concerning the cause and people of God here, as in ver.
4. Jesus said, This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that
the Son of God might be glorified thereby. Only he will have us to be
brought so low, that the sentence of death being passed upon us he may be
magnifyed in our Resurrection. O therefore suffer not your selves to be
discouraged from wonted importunity in Prayer.

You have here two excellent props of Faith; Gods power, Two props for faith in
Prayer.
and Gods will; The Lord Almighty is your Father; As he is Almighty, he is
abundantly able, as he is a Father, he is as cheerfully willing. He who is
Almighty can work, without means, as well as with means, by weak means as
well as by strong, contrary to means, as well as according unto means. He
who is a Father will help, when you may think your selves at losses, and in the
dark, as he has promised, Isa. 42. 16. And I will bring the blind by a way
that they know not, I will lead them in path that they have not known, I will
make darkness light before them, and crocked things straight, these things
will I do unto them, and not forsake them.

It the Lord Almighty will receive all Right Separatists, as Use 3. Direction.
Let the Saints love as Brethren as children of the same Father (...)
a Father, this may oblige all the Saints in their moving toward a pure
Separation from uncleanness to embrace one another as Brethren. It is most
wholesome counsel, 1 Pet. 2. 17. love the Brotherhood, not only love this or
that Brother, which may be done upon politic respects, because he is
learned, discreet, or useful, but love the brotherhood, the fraternity, the
whole corporation of Saints; Yea, 1 Pet. 1. 2. See that ye love one another
with a pure heart fervently.

First, It must be hearty love, not lip love only.

Secondly, From a pure heart, not out of carnal selfe-seeking.

Thirdly, It must have fervency as well as purity, such love as will not be
quenched by some passions, discourtesies, differences, etc. O this were most
becoming Saints, like children of the same heavenly Father, to join hearts,
heads, and hands with all Brotherly affection.

This State were not in so much danger to be broken by enemies, if we did not
give them advantage by breaches amongst our selves: And this makes our present
Church differences the more sad, because many of them are amongst Brethren; who
are indeed going from Egypt to Canaan, from Babylon to Jerusalem, but they
forget their Relation to God and one another, and most unhappily fall out and
quarrel in the way.

In King Henry the eighths days, there was a strange temper of things, both
Protestants and Papists were persecuted. About Anno 1540.
At one time three were burned for not subscribing the six Articles, and three
hanged for denying the Kings Supremacy; the sight whereof made a Frenchman cry
out: Deus bone quomodo hic vivunt Gentes, suspenduntur Papistae, comburuntur
anti-papistae! What a place is this, where Papists are hanged, and antipapists
are burned! Is it not more prodigiously strange to see Brethren, under the
names of Independents and Presbyterians, not only persecuted by others, but
even condemning and doing severe execution upon one another? I doubt you do
not often enough remember that of Moses, Act. 7. 26. Sirs, ye are Brethren,
why do ye wrong one to another?

They who have sweetly agreed in the destructive part of Reformation Since the
preaching of this Sermon our hope of agreement is much encouraged. On the 4 of
January 1644. when the Arch bishop of Cant. was condemned, the Directory passed
both Houses of Parliament, with the removal of Common Prayer book, Ceremonies
etc. And on the 10 of Ian. when his head was taken off, the chief head of our
Divisions in the Assembly about Excommunication was chopped off by
Accommodation.
for the pulling down Popish superstitions, and Prelaticall usurpations; They
who have joined like Brethren in one practical Directory, for public Worship,
by a prudent moderation, settling such an order therein, as may prevent
confusion in Church-Administrations, and withal leaving such liberty as may
relieve tender consciences; They who have taken diverse steps toward an happy
accord in the doctrinall part, in one Confession of Faith; and form of
Catechism; why should not they also as children of one Father, as Subjects of
the same King, (by the help of your Prayers and indevours) be brought to shake
hands in lesser things, harmoniously concurring in matters of Church Government?

The Devil has a great plot, a dangerous design upon us herein, (the Lord
make us more vigilant against it) when other attempts prosper not, he
indevours, by dividing our spirits, to weaken our Counsels of Reformation, he
knows how by the affixing of exasperating names, Presbyterians, Independents,
etc. to blow the coal, and inflame the differences in things. Come into some
companies, you shall hear people talk themselves and one another into a
passion against Independents; others will draw as ugly a picture of
Presbyterians, (and through both these names too many strike at the power of
godliness) yea, and by the words heighten the differences themselves more then
needs. Whereas, if there were such prudent love as the relation of Brethren
bespeaks, they might reason themselves into an hopeful agreement.
Presbyterians would appear in so many things Independents, and Independents in
so many Presbyterian, or rather Classical Divines will be so far
Congregationall, and Congregationall ones, so far Classical, (for indeed the
word Independent seems not so comely, either for creatures or Churches, the
very law of Nature will not allow the same persons to be parties and Judges
without an appeal) that both might be much satisfied. The meekness of
wisdom, in much love studying the Word of God, might possibly discover such a
reconciling way, wherein the Presbytery shall have so much power as will help
to bound the Liberty of the People, and withal the interest of the People be
maintained in such a manner, as may best balance the power of the Presbytery.
Whereas, if the differences be fomented, remember the Apostles doom, Gal. 5.
15. But if ye bit and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed
one of another.

If the Almighty Lord give such encouraging entertainment Use 4. Exhortation.
to the generation of Right Separatists, then, I hope, you will easily be
persuaded, both as patterns, and Patrons of purity, to cherish and promote it
in your selves and others. In these times of Reformation, so manage all your
counsels, that the Result may be a pure Separation from all uncleanness.

Never had any generation of Nobles in England, a more rich price put into
their hands: The Lord fill your spirits with that wisdom which is first pure,
then peaceable, and full Jam. 3. 17.
of good fruits, that you may with all your might improve it. Some of your
Ancestors had thirsty desires for the purging of England, but they wanted
opportunity. The set time for God to favor this Sion was not come. His good
hand has Psalm. 102. 13.
cast you into that juncture of things, lets you see such a concurrence of
providence, enemies as well as friends helping forward the work, Ministers
Preaching, the people petitioning for purity; O where (Right Honorable) are
your hearts, where are your proportionable affections to welcome such a season!
God forbid that this should lie at your door, that such and such Nobles in
England had a great price put into their hands, but they wanted hearts to
improve it.

In former days it was accounted a great matter, that a Commission was granted
to some persons to do somewhat toward the cleansing of England; following
Parliaments in Queen Elizabeth's A Commission granted to 32 persons, in Edward
the 6 days
time, cleansed some of the cisterns, but still left much mud in the Fountain.
God has reserved you to have an honorable share in this service; you will
allow me the liberty to say to yo^ as Mordecai to Esther, Chap. 4. 14. Who
knows whither thou a^^ come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? Whether
God has raised you to such a high station for this very service to help to
purify England? Let it be the everlasting honor of this Parliament, and of
you Noble Senators herein, to pluck up all our weeds, take away all our dross,
to remove all our (...), yea, to do your utmost to advance a pure Separation
from all uncleanness.

If any ask, (as I hope diverse of you are so truly Noble, that you will
inquire) What should we do that we may advance Directions for the advancing
a pure Reformation in England 1 Begin with your selves.
a pure Reformation in England?

Be pleased to observe and improve these few directions.

First, Begin with your selves, be cleansing your selves from all personal
(...) of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. O that all our Reformers were indeed
self-reformers! O that all our great Counsellor^ would often keep a become
Committee in their own Consciences, to examine and discover their own errors
and exorbitancies. You have many to humor, to flatter, and adore you, but few
will admonish, few dare reprove you, lest your smiles become frowns. You have
the more need to be searching and cleansing your selves according to the Word
of God, Psalm. (...). You should wisely consider your Greatness has an
influence (...) wayer. If you are good, your goodness will be the more
glorious, being joined with greatness; but if (...), your greatness grea^^ns
your sins, your height makes you the more notoriously* evil. We expect
Oracles in Noblemens Much good expected from great-men.
speeches, (...) by their action^, coppies from their conversations; we looked
at Judges should first judge themselves, and remember to condemn that in their
own pract^es which they sentence in other men's.

You may pass good ^ills, and Ordinances against swearing, and
Sabbath-breaking, yet if you continue to blaspheme his Name, and profane his
day, even our Lawmakers, by their unhappy examples, will teach others to be
Law-breakers; O be sweeping every day before your own doors! God forbid, that
whilst you condemn the Antinomians Doctrine, any of you should be found
Antinomians in practice.

Secondly, As friends to purity have a special eye upon the 2 Take care to
cleanse the springs.
chief springs: never expect pure streams, whilst the Fountains continue full
of mud.

There are three springs in England, the cleansing of which is of great
consequence. Universities, Innes of Court, Noble men's Families. Three special
Springs to be cleansed. 1 Universities.


1. The main Spring is the University: There your Sons, the hopes of your
Family, are bred; If they suck in unwholesome air thence, that may breed such
diseases as prove incurable. If those Nurceries be not well pruned, you may
receive such Chaplains thence, as may study to corrupt you and yours,
flattering you into everlasting misery.

2. Another Spring is the Innes of Court: Those Honorable 2 Innes of Court.
Societies, where the young Nobles and Gentry should be fashioned and shaped
for the service of their God and of their Country. As the University breed
Ministers for the Church, so the Innes of Court breeds Magistrates and
Parliament men for the State. If filth be tolerated there for want of
cleansing preaching, and purging Government, the whole Kingdom will be in
danger to derive pollution thence.

3. A third Spring, much to be considered, is, Noblemens Families. 3 Noble
Men's Families.
If there should be found Chapels to the Devil, in regard of ignorance,
profaneness, and superstition, rather then Churches in their houses,
maintaining Family Religion, worshipping God purely, and walking in holiness
of conversation. If there a Mercenary Chaplain be entertained, who is like one
of Baals, or Jeroboams Priests, rather then like a Timothy or a Titus, who
should learn in all things to show himself a pattern of good works; in
Doctrine, uncorruptnesse, gravity, sincerity. Tit. 2. 7.
If there be nourished a set of vicious Servants, who are slaves to the lusts
of their Lords or Ladies (besides the sad experience of the poisoning of many
young Nobles by such Chaplains and servants,) what a dangerous Influence will
all this have upon the Tenants and Neighbors? and so by this one muddy Spring,
many unclean streams shall be fed abroad in the Country.

Thirdly, As you desire to perfect a pure Reformation, extirpate 3 Leave no
filthy weeds growing in the Church. Matthew. 15. 13.
all noisome weeds. Pluck up every plant which is not of Gods planting, whether
persons or things, whether Offices, Ceremonies, Innovations, etc. A few weeds,
when rooted, and seeding, will soon over-runne a great deal of ground. To this
purpose it is good to consider where our defilements chiefly began. It was a
notable hint that Cassander gave, who by two several Emperors, Maximilian and
Ferdinand, was set on work as a Reconciler, to compose the quarrels of the
Church. The Principal cause (said he) of the calamity and distraction
Cassander Consultat. Misericorditer corripiat homo quod potest, quod autem non
potest patienter ferat, and cum dilectione gemat atque lugeat, donec aut ille
desuper emendet and corrigat, aut usque ad messem differat eradicare zizania
and paleam ventilare: and tamen securi de salute sua bonae spei Christi any
inter desperatos, quos corripere non valent, in unitate versentur, August. 4
Advance a pure Ministry in England.
of the Church is to be laid on those, which being puffed up with a vain
insolent conceit of their Ecclesiastical power, proudly, and scornfully
contemned and rejected them which did rightly and modestly admonish their
Reformation. Wherefore my opinion is, that the Church can never hope for any
firm peace, unless they make the beginning which have given the cause of the
distraction. There is the same reason for purity. We cannot expect a good and
sound peace in the Church of England without purity. Our pollutions being many,
occasioned amongst us great separation; (in diverse places tender consciences
were necessitated, at least in regard of some personal acts, to suspend
communion with their Congregations where they lived) Begin your cleansing
work there. We have great hope that such a pure Reformation as might satisfy
godly spirits, would produce an happy Reconciliation amongst sober minds, and
possibly would recover many who have incogitantly run into great extremities.
However do your duty, put forth your utmost indevours, and humbly wait upon
God till he appear in his glory, for the complete purging of this Sion.

Fourthly, Employ your power to advance the Ministry of the Gospel in the
purity of it, so will you much promote a pure Separation from all uncleanness;
Joh. 15. 3. Through the word ye are clean. Where are the filthy sinkes in this
Kingdom, but in such corners as have wanted a faithful Minister? This made
Cathedral air (for the most part) so impure, where they had so much empty
external pomp, in stead of the purity and simplicity of Christ. When a
Minister preaches in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit of God,
which is a most pure Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 4.
there the Sun of righteousness shines, and such light will purify: There
the Holy Ghost breathes, and such Gospel air is purgging; it will not endure
fogges of errors, or mists of superstition, where a man of God Preaches, his
Doctrine drops as the rain, his speech distills as the dew, as the small rain,
upon the tender herb, Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
and as the showers upon the grass, this will purify as well as sanctify. Yea,
by the Ministry of the Gospel, sinners are directed unto Jesus Christ, in whom
there is a full and overflowing fountain, for the washing away all their
pollutions. This was his Soule-cleansing method, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Out of
love to his Church, Christ gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of water, by the word, that he might present it
glorious without spot or wrinkle, etc.

If you would indeed befriend the Church in England, and make us an unspotted
people, concur with your great Lord and Master, in opening the passages for a
cleansing Ministry of the Word, all the Kingdom over. The Lord Almighty act
your Counsels, and prosper your undertakings, to make England so pure that it
may be glorious, Amen.

FINIS.

