O Hone! O Hone!

A Magpye-Lecture, By way of LAMENTATION, FOR THE Miscarriage of the Plot, And
the Loss of the late Intended French Invasion, As it was Delivered By a
Non-Swearing Parson IN THE Famed Congregation in Magpye-Atley, near
Fetter-Lane, London, the 15th. of this Instant May, 1692.

By D. H -- late D. of G.

Woe unto us, for the WIND was against us. London, Printed for J. F. and are to
be Sold at the Jacobite Conventicles of London and Westminster.

In the Epistle of St. Lodowick to the Gallicans, the ^th. and the 14th.
Woe unto us, for the Wind was against us.
MY Beloved, being here met together, like Jews at a Passover, with our Loins
girt, for a short bit and away, for fear of those Philistines and Moabites, the
Beadles and Constables, being met, I say, in this Most Christian (to borrow the
Title of our Great Lord and Master) Assembly, I have made choice of a Text
properly suitable to our present occasion: Woe unto us, for the Wind stood
against us.

Before I launch into so large a Field as lies before me, in the subject of my
following Discourse, I think fit first to prepare you for a due Attention and
Reception of the great Truths delivered in my Text, by giving you a short, but
glorious Character of the great St. Lodowick, the Divine Oracle that speaks it.

Our St. Lodowick, that great Boanerges of Mankind, the miraculous first born
of his Mother, after twenty two years Conception, and sent into the World for
the Conversion of Nations, by the Infallibility of ^ombs and Cannons. That
great College of Mahomet, the only Apostle Militant both of the Crescent and
Cross, speaks to his booted Disciples, the Gallicans, in the words of my Text:
Woe unto us, for the Wind stood against us. And why all this denuntiation of
Woe? Yea verily, my Beloved, never a more sad occasion for wailing and
lamentation. A Design so great and glorious as a Descent from France, an
Invasion of England, so politickly laid, and so hopefully carried on, and yet
to be so dismally blasted, blown up, as I may say, by a Wind! To be ready and
prepared so early in the Spring with 30000 Swiss, Irish, Scotch, and French
roaring Boys, to make a whip over, before the Heretic Williamites were awake,
to oppose 'em, invited over too by Us the Loyal and Dutiful Jacobite Vassals,
and Slaves to his most Antichristian Sultanship, all sworn upon the Alcoran,
so fat a squob as little dear England, so delicious a bit, just ready for his
Pounce and Talons, and all lost by a Wind: For woe unto us, the Wind was
against us.

And now my, Beloved, have we the faithful Non-Jurants; his true and trusty
Musslemen, so long Preached in Cellars and Garrets, the indispensable Duty of
Fidelity and Allegiance to our great Gallican Lord and Sovereign; even to a
Curse ye Meroz in his Cause. Oh the blessed Day, when the Gallican Miss, and
Gallican Patriots at the Helm, the Advancement and Exaltation of the Gallican
Greatness and Glory was the whole work and study of so many hopeful years, when
the humble English Effeminacy was so industriously planting and watering his
dear Flour-de-Luces: Even our very Lions of Judah all turned to his dutiful
assisting Isachars. Did we not see all this, and by the Duty of our Passive
Obedience, use all our Pastoral Eloquence and Authority to Preach and Inculcate
so divine a Cause. But not to call that happy Remembrance back again, so sweet
to our Ears and so dear to our Souls, alas! the present business of the day is
a more lamentable Subject; for, Woe unto us, the Wind was against us.

But how, my Beloved, was the Wind against us? Oh, verily most perniciously,
directly opposite to all our Hopes and Designs, that is to say, it stood in a
Protestant Corner, yea, in a Protestant Corner; a Woe indeed, too bitter a
draught of Gall even to be swallowed, or digested.

Oh the comfortable sweets and the heavenly Manna we had tasted, that Sovereign
Cordial to our drooping Souls, had we once feasted our Senses with so riotous a
pleasure, as to have seen the consecrated Daggers of our dear Irish Brethren in
the throats of our Heretic Enemies, to have battend in Massacre, and fatten'd
with blood: But, alas, that Divine delight is utterly dashed and defeated: For
woe unto us, the Wind was against us.

Now my Beloved we have a great many very sad Reasons to lament that the Wind
should be in the Protestant Corner. For first, what is Wind but Air? and the
Prince of the Air being of our Party, it is very hard that the Wind should be
against us.

Secondly, The Wind has yet stronger Obligations to be of our Party. For,
Beloved, it is written, that the Wind blows where it lists; that is to say,
Rules and Coverneth ala mode de France, at its own Arbitrary Will and
Pleasure. And under that denomination of Absolute and Arbitrary, the divine
Attributes of our Great Patron Lodowick, one would think the Wind should be a
Jacobite. But this wicked Rebellious and unnatural Wind is a Protestant one,
lay full in the Teeth of our Invincible Monarch, and overthrew all our Hopes
and Foundation.

Now, Beloved, as the Wind rules and governs, as I said before, what, or
what manner of Rule and Government is it, that that Rebel the Wind holds or
usurpeth: A very large one, my Beloved, a wide and and ample Dominion, my
Brethren, for it blows from the four Corners of the Earth; from the four did
I say? Yea, and from the twice fourteen By-Corners also. And this malicious and
spightful Protestant Air, lay in the North and By East, one of the BY-Corners,
my Beloved: And having named that short word or Particle [BY] which Heaven
knows is but a little one, yet, Beloved, it is a very Emphatick one: For
instance in several weighty particulars relating to our whole Designs.

As first, our great Jacobite Plot, which we were just hatching in the World,
proves an Abortive, or to use the Pagan Language of our Enemies, a Sooterkin,
nay, and what is worse, a BY-Blow. The great Champions and Heroes of our Cause
having given us the Go-BY, are thrown into the Tower, Newgate, Gate House, and
other BY-places; and to sum all, too many of 'em, to our great Sorrow and
Lamentation, are like to be hanged too by the BY. And their very names and
memories, my Beloved, no more than a Byword amonst our reviling and sneering
Enemies. And therefore, as I said before, this Particle [BY] is a very
Emphatick one. Nay 'to continue the Emphatickness of this woeful [BY,] By St.
Patrick and St. Loyala, our two great Jacobite Saints, never was Design better
laid and projected. A great Navy, and several hundreds of Transport Ships, all
ready by the beginning of April to stip BY, before the English Fleet could get
out, and land an Army of dear Teagues and Rapparees, our Trusty and Beloved
Sworn Brothers. But this Great and Invincible Armado, instead of getting BY, to
be forced to lie BY, to have a long five Weeks Wind lie in this damned
North-East, BY-Corner, and not only so, but a malicious Protestant Storm too to
fall foul upon our Thoulon Fleet, and give our Expedition so great a Put-BY,
till the whole Williamite Fleet is not only Equipped and Manned, but also
Sailed BY, and what is yet worst of all, resolved to Stand BY their great
Heretic Lord and Master. And all this through that calamitous Disappointment
of Woe unto us, the Wind was against us.

After this deplorable Catastrophie, let us hang up our Harps, our Irish Harps,
upon the Willows, and sigh and sob in the bitterness of Spirit, and anguish of
Heart, and mix our Cup of Affliction, even with the Lees of Vinegar, let it be
the true White Wind Vinegar, my Beloved, the Growth and Product of our own
still dear, though bitter Grapes; and no ^ophisticate Adulteration of Barley or
Crab, that Heretic Verjuice, our Loathing and Abomination. For let us not
start from our Cause, or our Principles, though Woe be unto us, the Wind is
against us.

Now Beloved, to give you some farther Light into my Text, it will not be
unseasonable to make some more large inquiry into the nature of Wind. And here
occurrs a very natural Observation, relating to the Extent or Power of Wind.
Wind therefore is twofold, not only that blustering Termagant Roarer and
Rover, the wicked Enemy of our Cause, that Anti-Jacobite Element, that blows
from the North and the East, or from any other Corner of the greater World;
there is a Wind likewise proper and peculiar only to the lesser World, blowing
and breathing from the ^orners and Crannies of that Microcosme of Man. And this
last Wind is of two kinds, both Learnedly displayed and deciphered by a very
Eminent Author.

Thus Wind in the Hypocondriack pent,
Turns but a blast, if downwards sent;
But if it upwards chance to fly,
It proves new Light and Prophecy.
You see, Beloved, here are two Winds, purely ^igning and governing in our
humane Microcosme. The one, as I may say, a kind of a Subterranean Wind
rambling and rumbling in the Internes and Cavernes of our Humane Terrestrial,
and issuing forth, as the Poet observes, down-wards in that formidable, though
short-lived obstreperous Fulmination, if I may so say, Learnedly called a
Blast. The second Wind, here dignified by the Title of New Light and Prophecy;
of which I Will speak in their Order.

To begin therefore with the first, the first in Order, though not the first in
Quality, a Blast: A Blast did I say, something an unsavory Conception, my
Beloved; but truly, Brethren, very proper to our Cause: For even under that
mean Class of Winds, that feeble homely puff, called a Blast, may many Heroic
Exploits be, not unjustly, ranked and numbered, as being the Determinating
point of too many Illustrious Designs and Achievements.

For instance, what did our Maudlin-Colledge Reformation, our Spiritual
High Commission, our Castlemain Nuntio-ship, and Tyrconnel Vice-Royalty, and
all the rest of our Popish Mines and Batteries, all the Grand Projections of
our late Eminent St are (...) kers, and Court-Locusts, end in, bu^ a Blast
(...) what came all our Formidable Silisbuty Expedition, (...) a Blast: Our
Running Fight on the blind side (...) Boyne, and indeed, all the rest of our
Irish Chival^ but Blast, Blast all Blast. And truly my Beloved, w^ aching heart
and we^ping eyes be it spoken, we ha^ but too much Reason to fear and dread,
that o^ whole Descent and Invasion will terminate in ju^ such another unsavory
Wh^ff, a Blast; what she I call it, a Puff, a Vapor, a little diminitive
Back^id Crack, that is All, my Beloved. For, Woe unto us, t^ Wind was against us.

Now to come to our second Wind, our New Lig'^ and Prophecy, under this Class
are to be reckoned (...) our Divine Gadbury's Predictions, and the rest of our
Great Prophecies, the Crutch and Prop of all our finking Hopes, such as our In
ternis Annis Rex Religioque redibunt.

And now I come to speak of Prophecies: Even those Superior Ebullitions of
Wind may not imp^perly be ranked under the notion or name of Bla^^ For as the
forementioned Blast is only a violent Eruption of some Corporeal Collection of
Vapo^rs, savored and hogoed in its Evaporation, according to the Odor of the
Internal Minerals through which it passes; The like may be said of all our
Great Jacob^te Propheticks and ^rognosticks, as being only a Spiritual sort of
Whiff, the Erruption-likewise of some Mercurials Volatiles, through the
Misfortune and Calamity of all our Deseated Expectations, Mundungofyed into a
Blast: For, Woe be unto us, the Wind sits against us.

Licensed, according to Order.

FINIS.

