A GAGG TO LOVE's Advocate: OR, AN ASSERTION Of the Justice of the Parliament in
the execution of Mr LOVE.

By J. H. Esquire.



London, Printed by William Du-Gard Printer to the Council of State. August 25.
1651.

TO THE PARLIAMENT AND Council of State.
GOD has led you through strange paths, and made you his instruments of
wonderful things; you have been carried on with such a series and continuation
of Miracles, that must needs extort a Confession of Providence from them that
deny it; and of astonishment from them that reverence it: there has been
nothing in Your affairs but extraordinary and sur-humane; when You were
encircled with enemies, You gathered strength at the Center, and burned through
them like stubble; when Providence had surprised You (as I may say, for never
so great an action had that event and suddenness) to the Execution of the great
Offender, he set You, contrary to all thought, firmer then You were before;
he has made You terrible and victorious, enlightened You with many strange
discoveries, and given glorious Issues to all Your Exspectations. To answer all
this indulgence, You have been in the measure of men just to Him and to Your
selves; Just to Him, in providing laws for His purer worship, and enlarging the
Liberty of His Saints; Just to your selves, by making many excellent Acts, and
Reformations for them whom you represent; Just both to Him and your selves, in
the execution of the Plotters of that Conspiracy, which has so troubled this
Land. But all men being not clear-sighted enough to see a Justice, or too much
prepossessed to prais your magnanimity, I thought it my duty by this Paper,
which I throw at your Feet, to assert both; that if it chance to survive,
future ages might know that this age produced some men heroically virtuous, and
others that did pay them their due adoration.

A GAGG TO LOVE'S Advocate: OR, A short confutation of those Reasons offered
for Mercy in his behalf.
IF there be any thing make's a State precious in the fight of Heaven or
Earth, it must certainly be their due attemperation of Justice and Mercy;
without the one they may be sanguinarie, and destroiers of them, whom they
ought to preserv; in the other they might be no less cruel; for the effects of
excessive lenity are more dangerous. To take away the life of a single man, is
no doubt highly blameable; but it rest's there: but to suffer a Plot to ripen,
when it may be prevented, or to have compassion on the chiefest Actors in it,
is to raise a new one out of it is ashes: and how dangerous even the smallest
beginnings of civil wars are, who know's not; and how seldom civil enemies com
to a perfect reconciliation; for though terror may over-aw them, it is impunitie
does confirm and settle them. And truly (if it be not flattery to speak a
truth) I think the Parliament of this Commonwealth have showed themselves, both
honorably merciful, and Christianly just in their deportment toward this
heinous Criminal, that this Advocate pretend's to plead for; and therefore, now
they have at last given him up to the hands of Justice, we must need's say
they have don nothing, but what has endeer'd them to God, and all good men,
unless we will look upon the state of the business through a falls light.

For the nature of the Plot, you have it faithfully from another hand, A short
Plea for the Commonwealth.
and one who had better opportunity to si^ i^. I durst undertak^ for to
parallel it with Catilines, if you will consider but the strictness and the
formalitie of the conjuration, after the solemn invocation of the almighty,
hearing of that which they call his word, oaths of secrecy, infusions of
Principles into the conspirators, whereby they might without danger of perjurie
be perjured, all which signify not much less then that bloody bowl of
Catiline, and the dark conventions of his fellow-Conspirators; Besides, the
sacking of Rome, and ruining of the present establishment, was all that
Catiline had in his eyes; and truly, though we cannot say, that directly
these men endeavored the sacking of London, and ruining of the whole Nation;
yet whether it would not have been a consequence of their endeavors, when we
consider with what persons they had to deal with, it may not well be doubted.
A banished King, one, whom even filial affection, besides the desire of a
Crown, and rapine, obliged to all ruin and devastation; one who was to be
maintained in a part, equal to what he pretended to, and yet was to miss all
the goods of his Father, as forfeited and justly sold; A sort of exploded
Courtiers, people of Criminal and luxurious lives, who with all their
appendages were to recruit their fortunes, out of a ruined and enslaved people,
and (which were enough to consummate utmost desolation, though the other two
were wanting) an Army of Scots, who, if even in the time of peace, and in
small numbers, they were such hors-leaches, it may easily be ghess'd what they
would have been, if they com with a victorious Army; when being but
mercenaries, they have proved themselves such excellent disciples of the Germane
Barbarism and rapine, that the North and Hereford-shire, though they found them
disguised in their best civilitie, found them such handsome leaches, that they
sucked away more blood then those people will recover these many years. And if
it be now so burdensome to us to pay a small tax, and that for the maintaining
of our present being, I wonder how able we should have been to have satisfied
the appetites of such insatiate Cormorants.

For the ruin of the present Government, which necessity and malice made
Catiline look upon with a blood-shot eye, I am afraid that some like causses
urged these men; the Hierarchy they aspire to, was wisely and rationally not
established, those Revenues of Bishops, and Dean and Chapters were diverted
toward the great necessities of the State, not parcel'd and squandered in
augmentations, and the King was disposed of by other hands, they not having the
execution of him; at whose ruin they did only aim, and were mainly, if not
chiefly, instrumental. These enraged them against that admirable change, which
God has signalized with so many of his Favors, and made glorious and terrible
to all our neighbors. Against this we have their weekly harangs, their sly
insinuations into their abused and credulous Proselytes, their many detorsions
of Scripture, and their keen satyrizing against those dispensations of
Providence, which daily broke out with such brightness. Hence their aversness
for putting up their thanks to Heaven for our successes, and trampling on all
those just Commands that Authority imposed upon them.

But these are but the actions of the Day, the actions of the night were,
Addresses to Charles Stuart; one, whom the Parliament call Traitor, they their
King; and (the better to have an influence on him) to his Mother, a bred and
settled Papist, and one for her high demerits to this Nation, impeached in
Parliament of high Treason; Jermin and Percie, declared enemies, and the one a
Papist; the assembly of the Scotch Kirk, a Conclave that have usurped and
overthrown the Civil Liberty of the Nation; precious Chancellor Louden, and
Apostate Massey; and all this for the ends aforesaid, and by the means
aforesaid, which were so refinedly Jesuitical, as might justly breed wonder in
a rational man, how it could fall into the imaginations of men of their
breedings and circumstances; but it may be they were but screws and pullies
made by some cunninger Engineers; Veritas temporis filia.

In this horrid attempt was M. Love the chiefest architect, and instrument; his
house, nay his study was the chiefest place of resort; and all missives and
transactions past under his Vote, nay, casting-voice; He it was, that was the
center to which all lesser lines referred; and certainly, since he has made it
appear, that he neither wanted dishonestie, cunning, or impudence, to make him
capable of such a Trust.

When it had pleased God by a miraculous manner, to bring some part of this
wicked design to light, the Council of State, among other, who were engaged in
this work of darkness, thought fit to apprehend Mr LOVE, (I presume to mention
this the rather, because the clemency and indulgence of the State, and the
stubbornness and prevarication of so horrid a Criminal may the better appear)
who being com to examination, and among some Questions certainly known, others
doubtful, to the one he answered, You must excuse him, (Which at his trial he
said, was Scripture Language) he would betraie no man, etc. To the others,
negatively, and elusively, as he saw occasion. Notwithstanding this, he was
sent for several times after, and fairly admonished not to walk in so
unnecessarie a disguis; nay, some hints were given him, from which he could not
infer, but that these hidden paths were thoroughly traced; but all this was not
enough, he stood to his innocence (as he called it) and defied Justice. When
he was told that he was brought thither by a power, that abhorred to be
unjust, and was too sensible of the Liberties of men, to imprison them for
nothing, but such as had a desire to make him rather a means of discovery,
then example of punishment, and therefore, if he continued to stand out, they
must be forced, even for their own vindication, to bring him to a trial, he
bid them do it, for his part he would answer any thing he had don, or words
to that effect.

The mildeness of the Council being so unsuccessful, his next scene was at the
High Court of Justice; where, after he had vainly attempted a penned oration,
which, in all probability, might, to no purpose, have emploi'd the whole day,
and contemptuously and impertinently urged some passages of Law, and John
Lilburn's trial to avoid pleading, it was very much ado, after the Lord
President, some of the Judges, and the Recorder had with the patience of three
hours tenderly persuaded him not to undo himself, after the fourth call, he
pleaded Not guilty; but Mr Attornie had scarce spoken in order to opening of
the evidence, but with three Protestations as high as dreadful, nay particular,
as I think can proceed from the mouth of man, he asserted his innocence, and
denied his concurrence to that design; when notwithstanding, by that daie's
evidence, there were few rational and indifferent men, that concluded him not
guilty, and wondered with what face and with what Conscience he durst appeal
to that All-seeing Tribunal of Heaven, when his crime was made so apparent to a
lower one on earth. What his defens was, let them that heard it remember; full
of equivocations, fallacies, misapplied Scriptures, Lectures to his Judges, and
threatenings, if they condemned an innocent man; yet were those honorable
Gentlemen so like Judges, that is to say, dispassionate, that they examined
the evidence with the greatest nicetie, and endeavored to satisfy themselves
both as to several supposed weaknesses, or if there had been contrarieties; but
it proved so full, and so clear, that there was not one man dissented from the
sentence, which notwithstanding, that he might be in the capacity of the
mercy of the Parliament, was delai'd, as to the execution, for ten days; yet
this man, though he lay under the stroke of death, and it should seem, had
not the greatest resolutions to die that ever were, continued still on his
guard, and would neither confess, what had been clearly proved against him, nor
yet acknowledge the Authority against which he had so highly offended; but he
tell's them he was justly condemned by Their Laws: He might as well have
said (and I believ Mr Calamie might have advised him as much) to a Company of
Robbers, (for Robbers and beggars have good constitutions as to their end) that
his purs was taken away by their laws; But to a just and a settled Authority,
to make such applications can be no other then mere dis-affection, or, to say
better, Rebellion against those great dispensations of Government which the
Almighty has been pleased to make appear unto the world. But the Tuesdaie
after, this not having been effectual, there appears a Medley of Ministers,
checkered Presbyterians and Independents (for Sampson's foxes may be applied
more ways then one) and these could not know Authority, but must write Power;
I wonder they had not that title too in their Address to the Army; but
nevertheless, such was the respect the Parliament had to show to a godly
Ministry, and compassion to a woman, whose throes were hastening upon her,
that (notwithstanding neither the Ministers nor Love acknowledged any offens,
which might need's obliquely tax the High Court) the Parliament was pleased to
say, He should live for a month: at the end of which, when too late, he
began to seek mercy; he put in a whole narrative of the proceedings of the
business, to the utter confutation of all that he had before protested or
affirmed of his innocence.

See now a history of this man; see his picture, though it be but
dead-color'd; see whether they have not had patience and-long-suffering for
him, his crimes and carriage considered; see whether the cruellest wickedness
may not lurk under the shape of formal Sanctimonie.

But because there have been a many who have not been contented for to receiv
satisfaction as concerning him, but have rather considered his coat severed
from his Person, or his Person from his crime; I shall here take a short view
of the reasons mentioned by his Advocate, who, I conceiv, had been instructed
by the Junto, with what could be rationally discussed for him. The Author that
lurk's under the name of G.L. does not unfitly subscribe himself to the
Parliament, The unworthiest and meanest of their servants. The book begin's with
as strange a piece of Logic as ever I met with, that because this design of Mr
Love's and his associates might have proved destructive, a wide door of
reconciliation is set open between the Presbyterian and Independent; I heartily
admit that God may bring light out of darkness, but how we may exspect either
from any rule in Scripture, example in History, or experience of the parties
themselves, that the pardoning of a civil Treason should make a reconciliation
between two different, and enraged Ecclesiastical parties, is, I confess, not
very clear to me, unless we may reconcile it thus, that either the whole
Presbyterian party will confess themselves to be allied to his guilt, and
conceiv themselves to suffer in him, and therefore take his life for such a
boon, as that their compliance (which I think is not very toothsom to them) can
only recompens, or else the Independents must turn their faces toward the tail
of the horse, and ride Scotland-ward; for certainly, if these two parties had
had such a great mind to peace, they had never had so many bickerings for so
many years, or else they might have found a more timely occasion; for I shall
never bode well of that peace that stand's on so unsteadie a base, and is
procured by such unworthy brokage.

And therefore our Author now, when he has don his part captandi
benevolentiam, pretend's to lay open the horridness of the design (which he
ever and anon tell's you was ineffectual, and therefore would infer that it
signifie's a dream, a trifle, or nothing); but indeed to no other purpose then
slily to conveigh into the minds of them that see not so clearly, that it was
a thing almost improbable, and that no man with such qualifications as Love and
his Associates, would undertake, for saie's he, Could Mr Love, an eminently
godly Minister, and publicly engaged for Church and State, side with men,
whose debauched conversations carry inevitable ruin in their foreheads? Thus
would a Counselor at the bar argue a probabili, yet all this was proved, and
whether or no to his credit, with all these pretenses of sanctimonie, that for
to carry on a design so malicious and damnable, to shake hands with these men,
and with that party whom he had so many times zealously and publicly
declared abominable both to God and man, and therefore in my opinion, I think,
it is not hard to conclude that the memory of all his former services, which
are not so high in my account, as in some of his adorers, ought to be blotted
out or rather made an aggravation of his present miscarriage. Yet
notwithstanding our Author even in the close of this convincing argument, as he
call's it, would have the favor showed that Solomon did to Abiathar, and, in
stead of accusing, bewraie's his defending him.

His second extenuation in regard of the Church, which as he well prosecute's,
so I am to note, that we might justly fear, that the power of Religion and
fear of God wrought very little upon the hearts of those that could entertain a
compliance with Papists and old Malignants, I dare not say, the gall of
bitterness was upon these men, but certain it is, that either their principles
are strangely altered, or else these men had forsook the principles, in the
prosecution of when; they had made their names formally precious in the eyes of
all good men.

He tell's Mr Love, that he has brought a general odium upon the Government
of Presbytery; For my part, as I think, Presbytery and High Treason not to be
so near a kin, that they must like Hippocrale's twins live and die together; so
I do utterly deny that Mr Love has brought such an odium upon it, for I
verily think, take any man in his senses that consider's the rise and growth of
it, and by what faithful Patriarchs and worthy Ministers it was lifted up
almost to a jure divino, and withal what an excellent government it is in it
self, how consistent with the civil power and humane Society, and what effects
it has produced, where it is established, must need's say, that it was odious
enough before this aggravation of Mr Love's, for in this point I must need's
clear him.

His third is in respect of the Nation, which he very sensibly aggravate's;
but if he had thought even by a civil analogy what these men must be in
their morals and religions that efferated by a private spleen, would give up
their Nation to ruin, I believ, He would not have put himself to a trouble to
a framing these merciful expedients; and I am to tell you that our Author has
cut the throat of all his after-arguments, for since it is the duty of a
Magistrate, qua Magistrate, to look only at the felicifying and preserving the
people he is entrusted with, and this Plot being by his own confession, to
the ruin and devastation of the whole Land, it will necessarily follow, that
the Parliament without breach of Trust, as Christians ought not to dispense with
it, because they know to whom they are to give an account of their Stewardships,
and what a vast exspence, both of blood and treasure this very Plot, though
defeated in the main has caused. And were they heathens, they were then as
much obliged, for then they had no higher Principle to appeal to then the
merits of the Cause; and certainly, he that cut off his son for breach of a
point of Military Discipline, would have found greater indignation, had it
laien in the power of humanity, for this man, whose very endeavors at one
time undermined the safety of his Country, and tended to strangle the very
vitals of all Justice, and correspondencie.

His fourth is for themselves, wherein he take's occasion, instead of
aggravation, to put us in mind of Mr Love's forwardness at the business of
Vxbridg; for my part, as I was at too much distance to be acquainted with the
passages of that Treaty; and the mystery of it has not been since discovered
to me, so I am to note, that I understand not that Mr Love did any more then
was in the ordinary road of his profession (though some blamed him of too much
heat); and it is an easy thing for one that has the Liberty to talk an hour
or two uncontrouled, and withal fallows but his custom; for to dogmatize as
much as he pleas; but granting he did service there (as I must only admit it
consequentially) yet does not this very Sermon rise up against him? and has
not he, to the sight of all men, fallen back from the maxims that he there
asserted? and how horrid a thing is this in a Minister, we have from hence to
consider. For he know's whose Ambassador he is, and if he deliver's his
Master's Embassy faithfully; for him to turn Renegado is much more heinous
then in any of those over whom he has the oversight. If he say that his
Judgment is altered, and he has new appearances, he leav's mankind in
suspense, and suffer's them to float in an uncertaintie of Doctrine, or else
like the Church of Rome, he must be unchangeable and infallible.

We have seen the Advocate impeach his Client; and since the matter of his
Plea branche's into two heads, I conjecture that he has a better success in
the former, then he will find in the later, which he must usurp in several
arguments, the first whereof is, That all men acknowledge (I profess, I doubt
it) him to be a man precious in God's account, and therefore a difference
ought to be put between him and the Grandees of our unhappie troubles, which I
think have not all been Cavaliers. From hence we are to infer (admitting this
Doctrine) that, because the man is a godly man, and a Traitor, he ought to be
pardoned, because he is a godly man; which must either invest the Magistrate
with a greater power then he has, that is to say, to pardon offenses which
strike at the very heart of the State, or else endow him with an omnisciencie,
to view both the heart and the reins; for he can look no more then at the
outward man; and for one tied to a formal profession, and sedentarie life, it is
easy to avoid most apparent scandal, to be reputed a virtuous person, when
notwithstanding, he may be one of the grossest hypocrites in all the world.
And this knew the Court of Rome very well, when they brought it (I cannot tell
how deservedly) against the famous Father Paul of Venice, whose excellent
endeavors of asserting the Civil Right against the Ecclesiastic usurpation
will scarcely be forgotten, and our Writer must give me leav, to put a
difference between the Cavaliers and Mr Love; I believ many honest men, were
surpised in the King's business, and had their eyes dazz'ld at the sight of
Kingship, not considering it was an opake body, and only shined by reflection
from the people; but Mr Love came fresh, and sincere to the business, bragged to
the High Court of Justice, that he was hindered of a degree, for opposing of
the Bishops, was a forward appearer; So it is not probable, but he was
satisfied with the Cause. The King was then in authority, and only owned with a
dictinction, and had an army in the field, that he was an equal enemy;
Providence had not cast the balance of the quarrel; many of them were
Prisoners of War, and had Quarter; many of them had articles upon the
rendition of Towns; most of them compounded upon Propositions offered by the
Parliament; some of them, nay the head, were marked out for Justice, and
suffered. If I understand this Text aright, he saie's, it is either injust to
let Rupert and Maurice live, or else they ought inferentially to pardon Mr Love;
But Mr Love lay not under the Qualification aforesaid, whilom he detested and
abominated Cavalierism, and cursed it bitterly, was a friend of the
Parlament's, sided, in all men's opinions, cordially with them, preached for and
before them, was beneficed by them; so that his crime is to be looked on
merely as a defection, non an encounter in the field; He was not at the head
of a Troop, but in his study, laying of Powder-Plots, not maintaining an open
war, but proditoriously ravishing, and stabbing the Freedom of this Nation: so,
that as the Italian praie's to be delivered from those enemies, which he
think's his friends, I may not only say that he was a friend in our bosom
that did thus, but he deserved to be punished as the Trumpetter in Alciat,
because he made others fight, though he did not fight himself.

Our worthy author does now com into his second, which is that, though Mr Love
and the rest were drawn into that desperate design, and condemned for it' as
Traitors, yet he believ's they had no treasonable intent. Reader! do thou
think, that if our Author were brought to Newgate, and were indicted for felony
at the Old-bailie, he would be acquitted, because he had no felonious intent;
Now every one know's accessories in felony there may be, but in Treason all
are Principals; for the Law look's more severely upon offenses that concern the
Public, then wrongs don to private persons: because by the one, the whole body
and system of a Republic may be broken, but the other only reaches to
particular men. The conjecture that this learned Writer give's that the parson
had no tresonable intent, is, that it was better to take off the Prince from
the Popish Hispanioliz'd faction of Digby, Cottington, etc. to be a
Covenanter, to promote the Government of the Church, according to the Covenant,
that is to say, to make the young man leap out of the frying pan into the
fire, or as the Spanyard saie's, come's out of God's blessing into the warm
Son. It was prudently designed of Tully in that great year of his Consulat, to
let that pestilent humor of Catiline break out, that the Commonwealth might
know its own strength, and not be weakn'd by the accession of such as fight on
the one side, and pray for the other; But Mr Love was more prudential, he was
not content to let his young Master stay among that party that bred him, and
possessed him both in person and Principles, that so he might have been
abominable to all honest men, and lovers of their Country, and kept up that
odious interest of his still unmingl'd, and undisguised; but (forsooth) they
must com into Scotland, and there make an intrique with a people that hated
him, as much as he hated them, and there he must bring in Kingship to advance
Liberty, and Popery, or the old Church of England to establish Presbytery.
But will you see what has followed those harmeless intents of Mart.
Christopher; Stuart was by his means diverted from Ireland, whither he
intended, and so we had had but one single interest to encounter with, and one
war to maintain, and it might have pleased God that Scotland might have been
our friend, but bringing him thither, raised up a cruel war between us, wasted
many lives, and some millions, almost ruined that Country, and brought a
ravenous and necessitous enemy into this. Now whether these be treasonable
intents or no, that have been attended with such sad consequences, let a child
with half an eye but see.

We must consider, for that is his third reason, that he formerly promoted the
Cause of the Parliament, which must be put in the scale with this late
disservice. In the former he was only concurrent and instrumental, here
principal and architectonical; then he had Authority for what he did, and did
a thing lawfully; now he was a rooting up of Authority, and had neither Law
nor Conscience to pretend; then he was public, which is part of our Autor's
Argument, here he was like a mole working under ground; and however our author
saie's, that the business was either perfected or effected, I believ he that
has read the answer to the former Argument will believ it had effect enough,
though not to the height and malice of the design. But because this Argument
would have Mr Love's accounts balanced, I could wish our Advocate to parallel
Mr Love with Joab, which though he had don David faithful service, yet for
fiding with Adoniah was cut off by Solomon.

He goe's on to a fourth, which is squandered into so many words, and
pestered with so various Propositions, that I must take it in pieces. he
tell's you his client had not engaged, had his Conscience been satisfied (this
very argument might serve a Romish Priest, whom our Law mark's as a Traitor,
for certainly many of them have zeal enough, though it be not according to
knowledge) as now it is, concerning the lawfulness of the present Government.
Certainly this blade has got some of those spectacles of Boccalini, to look
into the breasts of Priests, or possibly has found some new art to know more of
a man, then a man know's of himself, how else could he know Mr Love's
satisfaction of the present Government, when Mr Love never yet acknowledged it,
but obliquely, and only as much as was fit for an address, and would never
confess his fault till it was his very last refuge, and offered up as a kind
of a recompense for his pardon, and tell's you that people were startled when
the house was guarded, that is, when the betraiers of their Trust and Country
were thrust out, and all honest hearts rejoiced at it. He tell's you the next
age may be satisfied with this Government, though this is not; by which I
think, he conceiv's that the spleen and venom of the disaffected will be
spent; he would have free construction be made of men's words and actions,
though they be treasonable and inconsistent with the public safety, and in
the whole aer and visage of this reason make's it appear to you, that though
he be in the service of the Parliament to this day, that it is for some other
reason then affection.

The next thing the man bid's the Parliament consider, is, his intercessors;
truly for the ministers, we very well know the ingredients, and for Citizens
and women, we find their spirits soon conjured up, and in great numbers,
especially in matters that go against the hair. And though of the faithful to
the present Interest some have had tenderness for him, yet most of them
acquiesce in the judgment of the Parliament and High Court; and indeed I fear,
that among the promoters of his pardon, it were very hard to decimate a
faithful man to the present Establishment.

The next is, that we must disappoint the exspectation of the State, and bis
adversaries (they must be so upon different motives) that thirst after his
blood, and would have the Parlament's if they could. This indeed is a strong
inforcement; the Parliament must neglect their duty in executing justice,
because a sort of people led on partly by their own malignitie, partly
exasperated by his peevishness, are so malicious as to desire his death, and
others out of horror and resentment of his crimes exspect and claim it.

The seventh forbid's the Parliament to frustrate the prayers of their friends,
that had sought the Lord in his behalf. If they have sought God for him, as to
Repentance, sight of his evil, and for mercy, he is no good Christian, that
will not join; if for his life, the wisdom of the Parliament, I hope is too
steadie and settled, then to be biased and diverted by any private affections
or devotions.

Now reader, let me have thy opinion, whether this next argument be for him,
or against him; He is, an able minister, but a weak Statesman; and therefore
this is a fruit of his ignorance in civil affairs; and with my consent he
shall only have a civil punishment. But truly, Mr Love's education had not been
such as fitted him for the greatest transactions of State, yet by the cleanly
conveyance of this design, it appears he was fit enough to do mischief when
he had a mind to it, only it seems he would not bid at small iniquities.
But it is a shame to a profession and a mystetie of iniquity working strongly
(though its operations in the Jesuits and ours seem a little different) that a
man set apart for the ministry, which the Apostle saie's is work enough for
one man, should neglect a vigorous and a close persuance of that calling, and
mingle and interest himself into civil affairs. This very Parliament was so
sensible of it at the beginning, that they thrust all the black coats out of
Commission, and made them incapable of civil offices; but they cast out one
Devil, and seve, wors are entered in; for a grave Doctor in a cassock to sit
upon a bench at a Quartersessions, or to give out a warrant for a Hue and Cry,
was a thing though somewhat unfitting for them, not very heinous; but for a
young man, who has had only the slender breeding of the Universitie, and some
short acquaintance with systems to perch up into the pulpit, and hence give
laws to the State, subdivide the populacy to factions and interests, cry or
decrie as it come's to their passion; profit, or Ignorance, which I profess I
tremble at, and abuse that sacred and internal judge of man Conscience, leading
it in the seducible, and screwing it, and transforming it into what shape they
pleas. So that either like Santons they are hurried and transported with
agitation of every violent loos thought, or else like jugglers they either
deceiv the cie, or do things, by confederacy. Far be it from me to intend by
this, that precious and seraphical part of the Ministry, that daily bring in
souls, and shine like stars in their several orbs; These that move like the
heavens silently and constantly in their calling, yet daiely shed down rich and
happy influences. But I mean those other that tread out of their paths, and
in stead of preaching of Christ, faith, humilicie, obedience, etc. dispute
passes, fall upon rears, bring in Intelligences, and so distort the word to
varnish their own distractions. These the civil magistrate (to whom God has
entrusted the ways of saving his people) ought to beware as pests and banes of
mankind, as busybodies, which, though like monkies, they may look grave and
solemnly, yet such as know no idleness, and whose business is only mischief.

Certainly if it was accounted the greatest action of Regulus to leave killed
the great serpent, though he had the assistance of his army, and the Knights
errants live to this day in destroying of Monsters that were only offensive
to particular voisinage. I think it were no lefs heroic to extinguish these
firebrands that throw all Europe into flames and combustion.

Ninthly, He put's us in mind that he was a public instrument of the
Church, and has converted many souls (more shame for him to leav that good
emploiment and become a sower of sedition) and many poor souls must suffer with
him, for the saving of which (which is but a presumption,) the Parliament must
destroy themselves, and the people they are entrusted with, that is to say, do
evil that good may com of it.

His tenth is, the parties offended are Judges, and therefore to show mercy in
their own cause is most honorable. If the parties offended were private men,
this were a good and a Christian argument; but to public Ministers, for it is
not they, but through their sides, the public safety and majesty of a
people, which are the two indispensable maxims of Government, which caunot be
receded from without disturbance of the harmony and violation of the very
being of States. And from hence it is, that everic Judge on the bench is
conceived a party offended by a prisoner at the bar, because the one has
transgressed those Laws, which the other is to execute. Therefore I conceiv not
how the members of the Parliament can be called parties, when it was no private
injury to them that brought on the trial and sentence.

Eleventhly, He dreame's that because the month's reprival had procured a
weekly Junctillo, who labor to satissie themselves into a reconciliation, (which
I believ will be, when you can make two paralels meet in an angle.) Therefore
they may exspect upon a pardon some greater effects from this Treaty. This
seems to be a main argument of his, for it is the very same that he begin's
his book with, therefore shall I save paper in this mist; but the motive that
he adds anew here, is to my thinking a very strange one, That the
Presbyterian Party would-therefore become serviceable, for he tell's you
aminducement that any school-boie would have brought, Ingenious spirits are
led more on by the cords of love, then by a thousand stripes. For the
Presbyterian Ingenuitie, what it is, I know not, it has made it self so little
appear to the world, that I doubt not, but many inquisitive men are equally
ignoran't. Only we may suppose, that in almost three years they had time
enough for compliance, if they had had a mind to it, (whereas on the
contrary, no people so backward and malicious) and that now for the life of a
single Demagogue they should suddenly change their opinions, and lay aside
their perverseness, is a conjecture that seems to meeutterly groundless, if not
absurd.

His twelfth is a conmon place of God's mercy, wherein he assume's the
Parliament to be his vicegerents, and therefore like him, that they ought to
be merciful; but God's mercy is said to be above all his works, because the
emanation of all beeings is from him, and he rather love's to show compassion
then to execute judgment, yet want there not many sad Examples of his Justice
through the Scripture. As for the Kings of Israel, that it was their glory to
be merciful, I may say the clemency of this Parliament has been a noble
error of theirs, and he that will call to mind their proceedings will say,
that in all their executions of Justice, they have been absolutely
necestitated, yet in the midst of these necessities have not forgotten to
pardon.

13. For Shimei's building him a house; This man might have continued in his,
which was already built for him, besides the provision of a sufficient
maintenance, had he not broke his conditions, and plotted their ruin to whom
he ought his protection. And though Shimei was a persecutor of Saints, I
wonder what there wanted in the endeavors of this man, that during the reign of
Presbytery, was in the very gall of bitterness against these tender
Consciences, that desire but moderate liberty, and since that what a
persecution he has raised against asort of men, whom God has owned as
precious and dear unto him, let the history of his conspiracy make evident.
For Abiathar; it is true he was pardoned in respect he had born the Ark, which
was a Type of Christ, and therefore one of the highest ceremonies under the
Law; but this man in stead of preaching Christ, efferated the spirits of his
Hearers into rebellions and commotions; so the case is different besides
Abiathar was but an accessorie to an open insurrection; this man a principal
plotter of a close conspiracy. Besides Solomon took other blood which he
conceived more guilty, and therefore was easilier induced to show mercy on
Abiathar.

14. For Joseph's kindeness to his brethren was meeily the forgiveness of a
particular Injury, and that to brethren; this is a public injury, and that
from an enemy; and for David's forgiveness of Nabal, the offense was merely
denying, of Provisions to his Army, a crime somewhat less then high, treason;
besides, his wife met, him by the way with presents, which might be an
occasion of his pardon, which David was no doubt the more easy to grant,
because. Nabal was not in any capacity to do him any further harm, he being
once established. But this man not only denied us provisions in the day of
our necessity, that is, his prayers and assistance, but took away the hearts
of the people, which are the venie life and soul of every Governor.

In his last he falls pell-mell upon the Parliament, in defense of the
Ministry, never considering the provocations of the one, nor the temperate
proceeding of the other; for certainly, a hous-keeper had rather have his dog
muzzel'd, then that he should perpetually be flying at his throat, and how
much this has been the practive of most of our modern, especially Presbyterian
Ministers, he that has visited the Presbyterian Church may easily tell. There
is no doubt, besides their innate malignitie, several reasons of interest, and
peevishness that make them keep at distance, which, because our venerable Author
take's the boldness in their names to represent in his sens, I shall only add
my gloss.

The first is, Their long debate with the assembly about Church Government,
settling that which they take little care to protect, that is Presbytery, which
was only settled for three years, which being exspired they are no more
oblige'd unto it; besides, what their higher reasons may be, I know not;
certain I am, the generality of men find it a Government so usurping, so
lording in spirituals, that they have no mind to write after a Scotch Copy

The next is their suffering of heresies, that is to say, breaking down the
formalities, and knocking off the shackles of a rigid and specious Government,
and taking tenderer consciences from under the bondage of the oivil man, and
suffering meek spirits to breath a due, yet sweet Liberty. As for that
abominable crew of Ranters, or any that lift up their hand against the Scepter
of Christ; the Parliament both by their printed act, and severitie against
several offenders have sufficiently declard their detestation.

Thirdly, leaving them destitute of competent livelihoods. I marry, this the
is bone in their Throats; Had the Revenues of the old Church com to be divided
among them, and fatned their Vicarages to Episcopal Competencies, we had been
all quiet. But now (since the Assembly is broken up) and they cannot keep up
Pluralities, and are confined to ordinatie Competencies, they are enraged at
that Power that restrain's, and, under pretense of want of maintenance, really
complain of wans of superfluity. But if they would be just and charitable,
they might take into their Remembrance, the carefulness of the Parliament, to
receiv all Impropriations, that devolved to them: the several Augmentations
they daily grant, and the strictness to take for gathering Tiches, which is the
chief flower in their Garden.

The fourth is, their mistake about the Covenant, their pleading in positive
Terms for the King, whose decollation was as Judicial an Act as ever they did.
Judge whether this be not a roial Reason for their obstinacy, or rather a
cloak and varnish for their disgust of maintenance.

He bring's (to my thinking very impertinently) five grounds from whence some
men desire the death of Mr Chr. Love, which are first, Prejudice against
Presbytery. Secondly, Ignorance of the difference twixt it and Independencie.
Thirdly, slighting the later whilst the former was in Power. Fourthly, Too much
liberty given to such as despise all Government; I cannot tell what this
fignifie's, as to the end he bring's it for. Fifthly, because of his former
zeal, the Malignants hate him. Whereas any Rational must needs understand,
that as he was condemned for a civil Crime, he is to be looked upon as a
Civil offender, and all secondarie and personal considerations are to be laid
aside.

He take's upon him to answer three objections, in which how doutily he
behave's himself, attend O Reader!

The first is, he has been instrumental, and cause of much bloodshed; which
he would alleviate by these notable inducements. 1. Had it taken effect, as
though it has not product a Scotch war, and spent thousands of lives. 2. He
was instrumental to unite King and Scots, but had not he been, the Scotch
Commissioners would have don it. This is false, for it was proved before the
High Court, that after they had once broke off, Love and his Party were a
means to bring the Treaty on again, and writ Letters to the little Qu.,
Jermin, etc. a purpose to work the King toward it. Agents they had at Breda,
where it took effect. 3. God has so ordered that the blood that is spilt is
only of his enemies, and very little else, as though bloodshed is no guilt at
all; But we know it has wasted no small number of precious and dear lives,
though the smallest number of them by a conquered enemy, blessed be God. 4.
We must compare his former services which (he saie's) overbalance the
later. This is one of his Tautologies to which we have anser'd before. 5.
Bloodshed might be Intentional to his accomplices, accidental (this man has
very stupid charity for him) in him, as though he that joined with others to
the same end, must not exspect to obtain it by the same Means: for was it
possible for any man in his senses to exspect that, when a Nation was wholly
garrisoned by a prevailing Authority, backed with a stout veterane Army,
engaged to a detestation and enmity to any pretender what ever, would become
so tame and stupid (especially being English, not Scots) as to give their
Liberties, Fortunes, Religion, and all that was dear to them, without dispute?
which how it could be maintained without letting open a wide flood-gate of
Blood, let our Author (whom some call a Colonel) consider.


The second Objection is, That Justice ought to be administered without respect
of persons; which he first wrest's to matter of change, and not to matter of
Judgment; and so he never com's near the objection. He tell's us also that
there is a difference between one misguided by opinion in Churchmatters, and
another that purposely set's himself against God, and his Cause, under both
which predicaments we have cause to fear Mr Love may be reckoned. He tell's
us Justice has been showed in his condemnation, and therefore, he would
acknowledge it a mere Act of mercy to save his life; As though Justice were
Justice without execution, or that he would never acknowledge an Authority,
would not rather laugh in his sleev, then thank them for an act of grace. For
the sparing of Goring, etc. Mercy found them out in the midst of a crow'd, and
they were open enemies, not arch-conspirators.

Thirdly, He sdie's Mercy in them would be no left-banded error; But I am
afraid, had he found mercy, God had punished it in his abettors, as a
left handed error.

Fourthly, He tell's us that summum jus is summa injuria, which in the
balance of Civil and Criminal Cases, and allaying the rigor of some positive
Laws is very true, but after condemnation to take of execution, what man that
ever took it into his mouth intended it? Besides, here is no extremity of
forcing of Justice to any rigor, but a clear sentence grounded upon several
Statutes, upon a crime manisestly and apparently proved, so that the execution
is but a mere effect of the sentence, which if ineffectual might appear to be
unjust.

The fist is, That doing Justice in the Scripture Language is not always
punishing the offender, and therefore because it has another signification, our
Author would allaie the severitie of, Judgment, and the safety of a Nation; for
certainly Mr Love even in this sens deserv's that which his Advocate plead's
against; for, if a fellow picked my pocket, or steal my horse, shall he not be
hanged? and shall a man lay a train to blow up my Liberties, and for ought I
know, my life and fortune, shall he not be beheaded?

The third Objection is, That the Souldierie should be unsatisfi'd, if he
should despair. To this he tell's you first that soldiers are men of blood,
and severe in point of execution, which is as much as to insinuate, that they
were no better then Barbarians and Cannibals, whose only thirst it was, or
such as should make no difference of shedding the blood of a Citizen before a
Tribunal, and the taking away the life of an enemy in the open field. And
certainly though they had stood to expostulate the life of this man, yet it had
been but Justice to have had all their toil and blood recompensed with the
effusion of his, who had been the occasion of such mischief to them. He tell's
us secondly, that there are many in the Army, that neither care for Minister
nor Magistrare, which is a desperate falls scandal on that brave sore of people;
for my eles have seen as much piety, civilitie, prudent and hearty thoughts
for their Country among them, with as little of their contraries, as is
possible (I think) to be found among such a generation of men; and therefore
this blackmouth'd Rabshekah has taken but the old Malignant and Pre^byterian
course, to defame those with odious slanders, whom in the field, or by reason,
they could never overcome. He tell's us thirdly, That the Genetal and the
Army are but servants, and therefore ought to sit down at the determinations
of the Parliament, which indeed our Author was very right in; for that noble
Chieftain, and the Military Council, after consideration of that Petition
which was brought down by Fortescue (who, I believ went not for that end only)
utterly rejected all interest in the matter, and left it solely to the
consideration of the Supreme Authority. And indeed as we are to note the craft
of the enemies, that thought to engage the Army at that tickle time, in a
buslness wherein they were to find the Parliament avers, and consequently sow
dissension among them; so the modesty and prudence of the Army ought to he
commended and remembered.

You have heard both the Plea, and the Counter-Plea, and every Reader
according to his prejudice or unpossession must be adjudg'd just or unjust.
For my pard I had only this to say; that I might show how unvalid the reasons
were, that were brought for mercle. It had been easy to have branched out into
a long and positive discourse, but I forbore it, in respect I believ that it
will be supplied by another hand, when the trial and execution of Mr Love is
made Public.

The End.

