THE GOOD OLD WAY, GODS WAY, TO SOVLE-REFRESHING REST: DISCOVERED In a Sermon
Preached to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the
City of London, at their Anniversary meeting on Wednesday in Easter Week at
Christ-Church, Apr. 24. 1644. being the day of the Monthly public Fast.

By THOMAS HILL B. D. Pastor of Tychmersh in Northamptonshire.

Prove. 14. 2. There is a way which seems right unto a man, but the end
thereof are the ways of death.

Psalm. 139. 23, 24. Search me O God, and know my heart, try me and know my
thoughts: And see if there be any wickkednesse in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting.

Isa 2. 3. And many people shall go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
of his ways, and we will walk in his paths.

Imprimatur, Charles Herle.

London Printed by Ric. Cotes, for John Bellamie and Philemon Stephens, 1644.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, with other
Citizens of the Renowned City of LONDON.
I Doubt not but there are many amongst you, Right Honorable and Worthy
Citizens; yea, very many who seriously set their faces toward Sion; The whole
Kingdom has abundantly tasted the excellent fruits of your real
forwardness in this good way. Travelers are usually as glad of Guides, as of
Companions, especially in doubtful ways: And we are fallen among so many
Questionists, and such thick mists of strange Doctrines, obscuring the good way
so much, that we had need seek clear direction, otherwise Many mists of new
opinions which much puzzle Travelers.
we may soon be at a loss. We hear of Antinomians who deny the Law, to be
a rule of life to Saints: We hear of Socinians, who in a manner overthrow the
Gospel, denying the satisfaction of Christ: We hear of Arminians, who
undermine the Covenant of Free Grace, that they may gratify Free Will: We
hear of Anabaptists, who withold Baptism the Seal of that Covenant from
the Infants, even of such as are in Covenant: We hear of others, who question
the Truth of our Church, and of our Ministry, in and by which so many thousand
souls have been newborn to God: Yea, we hear of some grown to that
desperate height, that they say, there is no need of Ministry or Ordinances,
flattering us with hope of new Apostles, and glorious discoveries by them.
Hereby Religion is much mangled, and well meaning minds not a little
distracted, which way to take. It is the Ministers work to warn against
enemies, to direct Ezekiel 33. 7. Matthew. 5. 14 Joh. 5. 35. Psalm. 119. 105.
against errors, to carry the Lantern and Candle of Gods Word, before people
in the dark, that they may find the best way. What sparks of light this
plain Sermon holds forth, were at first blown up by your desire, and now by
your importunity being made Public are kept burning. The good Lord (who
despises not the day of small things) quicken your Spirits hereby in
Heaven-way; I shall heartily rejoice if your attention in hearing, shall be
seconded with intention in acting over that Counsel which was given you from
the Word of God. This is the best commendation of a Sermon, to walk in the
light and heat of it in your conversation* what is wanting in the strength and
luster of this Discourse, will in part be supplied by its seasonablenesse.

In these times of Reformation we should be often put in mind, to stand, see,
inquire: As in building we beware of mistakes in the foundation; In Physic,
of errors in the first concoction; in both these they are dangerous, because
hardly corrigible; So in journeys we should wisely watch against erring, both
at our first setting out, and especially when we come to a great turning, if
then we mistake the right way, we shall not easily recover. How careful was
Ezra to seek of God a right way, when he was going from Babylon to Jerusalem?
He proclaimed a Fast for that purpose at the River Ahava, and that a most
religious Ez^a 8. 21.
ground, Ver. 22. We in England are now engaged in counsels of Reformation,
that w^e may remove further from Babylon toward Jerusalem. And by the good
hand of God upon us, we are under his own Ordinance, an Assembly of Ministers
is called to discover the Scripture way. It is worth much importunity, in
Fasting and Praying; that being come to so great a turning, upon so grand a
change in the Church of England, we may clearly find the good old way: We
must expect Satan Zach 3. 1.
who stood at Joshuahs right hand to resist him, when he was about
Temple-worke, will now use all his methods to p^rplexe and to mis-lead us, to
involve us in difficulties, and in angle us with errors: If he cannot wholly
turn us out of the good way, he will endeavor to cast stumbling blocks in it,
and by variety of opinions, to multiply divisions about it; yea, he knows how
by fair pretenses, and by good words, to cosen us into bad ways. New England
affords us a sad instance of this policy. A worthy Divine of their own tells
us, by what sleights the Antinomians, Familists, and Libertines, infected the
Churches there, As they would lift up themselves, (says he) so also their See
Mr. Well^ Preface to a short Story of the rise, and reign, and ruin of the
Antinomians, Familists, and Libertines which infected New England. p. 4.
opinions, by guilding them over with specious terms of Free grace, glorious
light, Gospel Truths, as holding forth naked Christ, etc. and this took much
with simple honest hearts, who loved Christ; especially with new Converts, who
were lately in bondage under sin and wrath, and had newly tasted the
sweetness of Free Grace, being now in their first love to Christ, they were
exceeding glad to embrace any thing that might further advance Christ and
Free Grace, and so drank them in readily.

Yet be not discouraged, I beseech you; your wise and powerful Isa. 9. 6.
Savior has the Government upon his own shoulders; he Zach. 3. 2.
can easily rebuke Satan, well knowing how to confute errors, resolve doubts,
and compose differences, he can conquer the greatest difficulties, or remove
them with advantage to his own Cause, and your Souls. Do not despair but
Gods Counsels are ripening toward such a time, when you may find rest after
your long motion, stability after your many shakings, and when you shall reap
the harvest of all the prayers and good endeavors you have sown, and receive
rich interest for all the blood and Treasure you have expended in his Gospells
Cause. Who knows but London, by the Free Grace of God, after all these black
and bloody clouds, may have cause to coin Money, (as they did in worthy Mr.
Farrells time, who had S^ul^et. Annal. p. 384. 474. Post tenebras lux. Deus
noster pugnat pron^^is.
been so much opposed and threatened in reforming Geneva and other Cities?) with
this Posie on the one side: Light after a long darkness; and on the other
side: Our God fights for us* You have had many visible Providence, as well as
precious promises, encouraging you to persevere in the good way. He has
wrought wonderfully for you, and by you; his good hand remain upon you, till
he bring you to ervelasting rest.

The Lord refresh London with the comfort of those good Zach. 2. 5.
words he sp^ke unto Jerusalem: I will be unto her a wall of fire round about,
and will be the glory in the midst of her. So prays heartily,

Your Servant wherein he may promote your Souls in the good way, THOMAS HILL.

THE GOOD OLD WAY, Gods Way, TO SOVLE-REFRESHING REST.
Jer. 6. 16, 17, 18, 19. 16 Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and
see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and
ye shall find rest for your souls; but they said, We will not walk therein.

17 Also I set watchmen over you, saying, hearken to the sound of the Trumpet:
but they said, We will not hearken.

18 Therefore hear ye Nations, and know O Congregation, what is among them,
etc.


AMongst all the objects upon which you lay out your most serious thoughts, and
strongest affections, there is none next to God himself, so worthy of a large
share, as your immortal Souls: (one soul is worth more then a world, Mat.
16. 24.) And what more desirable for the best good of our Souls (especially in
stormy times) then to find a Rest, an haven of tranquillity, which would be
like the mountains of Ararat, to a tossed Arc, as Genesis 8. 4! Behold, here is
Rest for your souls; Who can direct you poor pilgrims in a method to find
this rest, whilst you go up and down, feeling after God, Acts 17. 27. being
in the dark, stumbling at you know not what? Prove. 4. 19. None doubtless so
well as God himself, who is our Haven, our happiness, whose presence is
heaven, and who best knows what path leads to the enjoyment of himself. Thus
says the Lord, stand in the Way, and see, and ask for the old pvth, where is
the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest for your souls. All
this bespeaks your ingenuous entertainment of that Counsel, that admonition,
that here the Lord gives, teaching viatores, how they may become
comprehensores. In the words themselves there is enough to persuade you to set
open the doors of your Souls, to welcome them, as seasonable. Three general
parts.


Herein you have,

First, A gracious expression of Gods indulgent carriage toward a sinful 1.
and unworthy people of Judah. Thus says the Lord, stand, see, ask, for the
good way, etc. He invites them most seriously, to those ways, which
infallibly lead to their everlasting welfare, ver. 16, 17.

Secondly, Judahs ungratious, and uncivil rejecting of this wholesome 2.
counsel. Proud Self-will, (a most dangerous bosom Malignant) maintained
such a potent faction, within them, against God, and their own Souls; that
they repel his kindness, with this unmannerly answer; We will not walk
therein, ver. 16. We will not hearken, ver. 17.

Thirdly, The dangerous consequence of their wretched carriage toward 3.
so good a God. The Lord being sensible of so high an affront, done to his
Majesty, summons up judgments against them, v. 18, 19.

In the first general part, which is Gods gracious carriage toward First
general part.
his people of Judah, there are diverse particulars.

First, The Speaker, God himself; Thus says the Lord. Good 1.
reason we should be attentive hearers, when the Preface to the Sermon,
beings with it such a commanding intimation from the Lords own mouth. Our wise
and gracious God, was ever careful to give his people monuments of that great
respect he bears toward them: And therefore in the Ark, there was, as the
pot of Mannah, an evidence of Gods care to feed them, and the rod of Aaron, an
Ensign of government, showing, that he would rule over them; So also the
Tables, in token of his teaching of them; When afterward he sent abroad his
Prophets: still the people should understand, that God himself was their
Teacher, by a frequent repetition of Thus says the E^^k. 36.
Lord (no less then foureteen times in one Chapter.) Sometimes, by way of
command, sometimes by way of direction, sometimes for confirmation; and often
for all these, and other heavenly purposes.

Secondly, Consider, the language God speaks, the wholesome counsel 2.
he gives them: When Jehovah preaches, you may expect wise hints, excellent
doctrine to be propounded by him. Here you have four particular branches in a
few words.

First, stand ye in the ways: The least you can do when God speaks, is to
stand still, and bethink your selves, fixing your thoughts upon the ways;
Consider, ponder them, suffer not your selves to be hurried away by a
heedlesse incogitancy, which undoes may thousands.

Secondly, And see. Travelers should improve their eyes: The wise man's eyes
are in his head. Look about you with deliberation, Eccles. 2. 14* Luke 1^. 4*
Zacheus climbed up into a Sycomore tree, to get a ^ight of Christ: So take you
all advantages, to spy out the good way.

Thirdly, Ask for the old paths, where is the good way; because possibly
carnal affection may bribe your judgment, and you may be^ led away with the
error of the wicked: do not only stand and see, (indeed that is one point of
wisdom) but make a further discovery by your serious inquiry. Consider by your
self, consult with others, it is as good in divinity, as in policy, knock at
every door, that you may learn the good way.

Fourthly, and walk therein. When you have found out the good way, all your
work is not done, the former acts are to little purpose, without walking,
which is the complement and perfection of them. You may stand, see, and enquire
out of curiosity, it is walking in the good way, which both argues your
sincerity, and infallibly leads unto your happiness. This motion is the way to
rest.

Thirdly, Consider the motive the Lord uses to engage their diligence: 3.
and you shall find rest to your souls. He puts them upon the exercise of
diverse acts, which require much serious attention of mind, and contention of
endeavors: You must be industrious, inquisitive, persevering travelers;
keep your eye upon your journeyes end, look home-ward, look Heavenward;
though the Journey it self be long from Hell to Heaven, the way narrow, full
of difficulties, sometimes hedged in with Thorns, yet it leads to life, M^t 7.
14. When a Son is going to a loving Fathers house; when a wife is traveling
toward her dear Husband, though many discouragements in the passage, yet
hopes of welcome entertainment sweetens all. This did uphold Christ himself,
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the
shame, Heb. 12. 2. and may serve to support you.

In the second general part, Judahs uncivil rejecting of Gods wholesome
Second general part.
counse^l; you may perceive the rebellious humor of self-will (the worst of
Tyrants) working very strongly. The spring of corrupt nature opened in this
vent, proud self perking up above God. They speak the very dialect of all the
Sons of Adam, when left to themselves, We will not: The grand question on
foot in the world, is this, whose will shall prevail; whether God shall have
his will, or we sinful creatures our own wills ful^illed. Nothing so
frequently disputed, nothing more hotly debated; and when it comes to trial,
men will deny themselves in any thing, rather then their will; yea, they will
deny God himself, rather then suffer themselves to be crossed therein. We
are all ready to return that unmannerly answer with them, Jer. 44. 16. thus
they here, Verse 16. We will not walk; the language J^vere^unde responden^,
Sanct.
not only of dull sloth, but even of impudence it self. And when God had set
watchmen over them ( speculatores) Priests and Prophets, both ordinary and
extraordinary, says Junius (O the admirable Vide quo Divina provehatu^
Clementia, Sanct.
riches of Gods patience, toward such unthankful rebels!) Yet Verse 17. they
add obstinacy to their impudence, doubling it with a sturdy emphasis, We will
not hearken. Who would have expected such an answer as this, to have been the
ec^ho to such soule-refreshing counsel? Yet thus they put off the great God,
as enemies to him, and their own souls, peremptorily rejecting him and his
Law.

No wonder if according ( to the third general part) their wretched Third
general part.
carriage toward God, be of such dangerous consequence. In Verse. 18 the
Righteous God calls the Congregation, the Nations, to take notice Peccata
quo^um isti pe^aguntur rei, and sen^en^^^m meam. lun. Je^. 2. 12.
of what is among them, (s^il.) what sins, what Judgments. This is an high
strain of Rhetoric which God sometimes uses, that he may give a visible
account of the justice of his proceedings, he will make as it were a publik^
appeal to others, how just he is against them. They were not ashamed, (Verse
15.) now he will expose them to open shame. Then Verse 1^. he calls upon
the Earth t^ behold what evil he is bringing upon them. Patience and
indulgence being abused, is turned into fury. They shall know, that it is Jer.
^. 1^. Volu^ sert a nobis v^l de nob^s.
an evil and bitter thing to forsake God, Jer. 2. 19. He will be sanctified
either in an active way by them, or in a passive way upon them. If they will
not do what he requires, for his honor and their good, he must d^e what he
intends for his own glory, though in their confusion. Some might possibly
mis-interpret Gods severity against them, wondering that they who had been his
darling people in a National Covenant with him, should now be broken with
judgments by him: he will let them know, the holiness of his Justice now
calls for it; sometimes the sins of a people grow so great, they make
themselves as it were incapable of mercy, Jer. 5. 7. How shall I pardon for
this? God is now resolved to give them the woeful fruits of their own
thoughts, (Verse 19.) He brings upon them, fructum cogitationum ipsorum, The
fruit of their own thoughts. As they did sow, so shall they reap, Prove. 1.
31. they shall eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own
devices. They may seek to palliate their sins, with some pompous, specious
formalities of Religion, and fetch Incense and other most noble fruits from
far; yet find no better entertainment, then Verse 20. To what purpose comes
there to me Incense from Sheba, and the sweet Cane from a far Country?
Notwithstanding all these complements, God knows the corrupt fruits of the
thoughts of their hearts, and will accordingly reward them. As Jer. 17. 10. I
the Lord search the heart, I try the rein^s, even to give every man according
to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

After this general account of the words, let us more particularly enquire,
what genuine and seasonable observations they tender to our consideration:
Whereas the Lord here calls on them to stand in the way, see and ask for the
old paths, the good way; this is obvious. 1 Observat.


In the concernments of your souls, the Lord would not have you
over-credul^^s, but very carefully inquisitive after the good old way.

Before I produce reasons for confirmation hereof, I will for the clearing of
the passage, premise and resolve a question.

In what ways should you stand and see. Quest.


First, it is good beginning with your selves; ^ixe your thoughts at least Answ.
for some time, on your own ways wherein you have walked. Religion 1. Stand
in your own ways.
as well as reason appears in self-reflecting, in considering our selves: in
Hag. 1. 5. 7. Thus says the Lord, consider your ways. Hebr. set your heart on
your ways. Read them over, compare your actions with the rule, that you may
find out your own obliquities, and accordingly be broken hearted for them,
and broken off from them. Too many ordinarily mind their comforts more then
their duties; and consider much more other peoples ways to c^n^ure them, then
their own to judge themselves for them.

But you will never learn to be happy travelers in Heaven way unless you
sometimes look back, even with weeping eyes, upon your own former ways. The
Prophet David found benefit in this course, Psalm. 119. 59. I thought on my
ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. A serious consideration is the
Scripture method to a sound conversion. This Jeremy commends unto the people of
God, La^. 3 4^. let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord:
let us re^urne into our selves, that we may return unto the Lord.

Secondly, It Is very sit likewise to stand in the ways of your Forefather^
Stand in your Fore fathe^s ways. In^et^oga^dum de semins antiquis ^ive
sempiternis, quae multo^um sancto^um tritae sunt vestigiis, Hieron. I^m. 2. 23.
H^sea 12. 4. Numb 14. 24. Acts 13. 22.
the good old Servants of God, that you may write after their Copy. As Deuteronomy.
32. 7. Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations, ask
thy Father and he will show thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee. As what
God has done for thee in his paths of truth and goodness, so proportionably what
thou should do for him in thy ways of obedience and thankefulnes. It was a
prudent direction the heathen Doctors gave to their Disciples: consider what
Socrates, Cat^, and other re^ined M^ralists did, and how they behaved
themselves: we have better Oracles to consult with, patterns more worthy of
our Imitation. Enquire what Abraham did, who was a friend of God: what Jacobs
ways were, who was so potent with God himself: what paths Galebs were, who
was a man of another spirit, more excellent then ordinary, following God Stand
in the Lords ways discovered by his Prophets. Standum in Prophetis and
diligentissime contemplandum, Hieron.
fully: Ask what ways David walked, in who was a man after Gods own heart,
fulfilling all his will.

Thirdly, and most especially, stand in the several paths which God makes
known unto you, as tending to the good way, and seriously con^ider them.

Hierome he distinguishes plures semitas and viam unam, diverse paths, but one
good way.

To the same purpose Theodoret; There are many Prophets which Multae quidem
v^ae sunt sancti Prophetae, via au^em ve^e bona est Dominus noster. V^ae plures
sunt plura Dei mandata. (...).
point to this way. As there is the Kings highway, which leads to great
Cities, but diverse lesser paths coming from Villages which will bring you into
that way.

Hilarie makes these ways to be the many commandments of God, and many
Prophets which lead to Christ the way, truth and life, John 14. 6.

According to Cyrill, these ways are the wholesome writings of the Prophets, if
any one will set his mind on them, he shall find the good way Christ Jesus.

Doubtless, there is one Sovereign Soule-saving way which leads to Pervias
patriarcha^um and prophetarum tendendum ad unam evangelii viam, Hieron.
God, the center of our happiness; this the Patriarchs and Prophets have been
discovering from time to time, our thoughts should be active how to find it
out. Herein we must not suddenly take things upon trust, but with much
circumspection consider and enquire after it, the necessity whereof will
appear by these following Reasons.

The Lord would have you carefully inquisitive after the good 1 Reas. 1 There
are many by-waies
way, because there are s^ many wrong and by-ways, wherein you may miscarry.
Matthew. 7. 13. Our Savior tells us, the gate is strait, the way is narrow which
leads to Heaven, the passage is so difficult, the passengers are but few: But
the way to Hell is a broad way, having a d^c^itfull latitude: naturally we love
elbow-roome for our lusts; in this broad way there are bypath, and secret
turnings, many poor souls, too too many walk herein: A thousand crooked
paths, into which Psalm. 12^. ^*
deluded sinners turning aside, like lost Sheep, go wandering up and down
till at last they be irrecoverably entangled in a Wilderness.

It is observed by the Learned, if you divide the world into thirty Breerwards
enquiry, Cap. 14.
equal parts, nineteen of those thirty according to their computation, are
still overgrown with Heathenish Idolatry. Six of the eleven remaining are
overspread with Mahumetisme, then there remain but five parts of thirty, where
christianity has taken possession. Amongst those Christians many seduced
Papists who are led captive in by-ways, and Rev. 17. 2.
of the remaining Protestant Party, how few that are Christians and Protestants
indeed? Some have a form of godliness, but deny the power: 2 Timothy 3. 5.
others though they glory in the name of Christianity; yet scarce so much as
any external show of Piety, still the most walk in a way that is not good.

This more fully appears in that excellent parable of Christ concerning the
sower who went out to sow his seed upon four sorts of Matthew. 13. 3*
ground; some fell by the highways side, upon profane Atheistical spirits,
where it made no impression, this word sunk no more into their hearts, then
seed into a trodden path, ver. 19. some fell upon stony ground, they receive the
word with some joy, ver. 20. yet because they were not deeply humbled to make
sin their greatest sorrow, and Christ their greatest joy, in time of
persecution they are offended and fall off, verse. 21. some seed is sown upon
thorny ground; a generation of Professors that make some further progress in
entertaining the Gospel for a time, yet at last the riches and cares of the
world choakes the word in them, they become unfruitful, prosperity is as great
a snare to them, as adversity was to the stony ground.

The fourth which is the good ground is but one quarter; (I wish it were so
much in every Christian Congregation) few receive the seed of Gods word with
good and honest hearts, bringing forth fruit unto perfection. This is but a
little spot in comparison, look into most Families, most Congregations, not a
fourth part ordinarily, that looks like good ground, enclosed and set apart to
bring forth fruit to God, but rather like a common wast over-growne with weeds,
like a Wilderdernesse, sine cul^u, sine fructu, sine ornatu. Here is a
multiplicity of by-ways; wherein the most do lose their God, their Souls,
their Hopes, their Happiness; therefore you should be carefully inquisitive.

There are many false guides, as well as crooked by-ways, which Reas. 2. ^
There are many false guides. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. (...): praeter sanam Evangelii
doctrinam. Pisc.
will cunningly endeavor to mislead you into self-undoing courses; upon this
ground also you had need be the more carefully inquisitive after the good way.
The Apostle Pete^ assures us there were false Prophets among the people, even
among the people of God, there shall also be false Teachers among you, who
shall privily bring in damnable heresies: they mingled noisome weeds with some
sweet flowers, scattered their poison upon Gospel truths. And ver. 2. many
shall follow their pernicious ways, scil. their corrupt doctrines and evil
examples; they loose the reins to all manner of licentiousness of the flesh,
under the pretense of Christian liberty, ver. 18. by reason of whom the way of
Truth shall be evil spoken of, the Gospel much reproached by the adversaries;
and so others diverted from the right way: as long as the Devil has a
Kingdom here, he will send abroad his Emissaries acting this part to draw
people into pernicious ways.

How came the man of sin to rife from so small beginnings to so great 1 Timothy 4.
1.
an height; look into 1 Timothy 4. 1. the spirit speaks expressly in the latter
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits. The
Devil and the Pope have had many industrious Chaplain^, who boasting as if
they were inspired and sent by God, pretending devotion; and by insinuating
strains of Rhetoric, have first scrued themselves into men's consciences, then
picked their purses, first cheated them of their Religion, of their Salvation,
and then consened them of their Estates, got their Kingdoms to enlarge the
Popes Territories: And all Verse 2.
this carried on (...), by the Hypocrisy of those who speak lies, with most
cunning devices, deluding many poor creatures, As Ephesians. 4. 14*
obtruding gilded errors upon them in stead of Truths. Possibly you may be
seduced by such spirits, unless you be vigilant and inquisitive.

It Is worthy your observation, in 1 King. 22. 20, when ever the Lord intends
to suffer any poor creature to be deluded, you shall find the Devil is always
at hand. No sooner did God speak these words in Verse 20. The Lord said, Who
shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead? (God had a
quarrel against Ahab, and he was resolved to suffer him to engage himself in
such a War, and to go up that he might be there undone.) But the Question is
now, how this should be brought about? In Verse 21. There came forth a spirit
and stood before the Lord and said, I will persuade him. No sooner does God
express any intention, to suffer any one to be seduced, but the Devil is most
ready to be employed in the service. The Lord says unto him, Wherewith? In
Verse 22. he says, I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the
mouth of all his Prophets; And he said, Thou shall persuade him, and prevail
also, go forth and do so. The Devil knew Ahab had a company of Trencher
mercenary Chaplains, that would easily be wrought upon to say any thing to
the King; so the Devil undertakes them, and he knowing the length of their
foot, that he could prevail with them; says he, I will go, and be a lying
spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets. Hence it comes that Ahab himself
was seduced to those ways that lead to his own destruction. Unhappy King,
he had such corrupt Chaplains, that were false guides; and there was a Devil
that was very ready, to make use of all advantages, how to mis-lead them, that
they might mis*guide Ahab. Such engines as these are, the Devil in all ages
sends abroad, who come like ignis fatuus to poor people in the dark; and
carry them headlong, sometimes till they stumble and fall, and if not break
the neck of their salvation, yet hazard it very much, dishonor God, wrong
themselves, and cast stumbling blocks before others. Therefore still let us
see, observe and take counsel, not receive things upon trust, without exact
inquiring, being there are many false guides, that will mis-lead you into
dangerous ways.

We have all so much of that sin within us, which does easily beset 3. Beas.
There is that within us which will betray us to be easily misled.
us, betraying us into by-ways, and unto false guides, which may yet lay a
further obligation upon us to be vigilant, and inquisitive after the good way.
Three things there are within us, which expose us to be misled.

First, there is in us much blindness of mind, much ignorance 1 Blindness of
mind.
of Jesus Christ, and soule-saving Mysteries, whereby we are both alienated
from the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. and likewise always ready to err in our
hearts, not knowing Gods ways, Heb. 3. 10. As also hereby more subject to be
deluded by Satan, Ephesians. 6. 12. It is an easy matter to abuse any one in the
dark; you may cosen him with Copper in stead of Gold, with a counterfeit
Jewel in stead of a true one. The Devil knows how to take advantage of the
darkness of our minds, to entangle us with corrupt opinions to engage us in
licencious practices, thereby mis-leading us, till at last he has plunged us
into utter darkness.

Secondly, there is in us deceitfulness of heart, as well as blindness 2
Deceitfulnes of heart.
of mind, which lays us more open to be seduced from the good way. It is a
full expression, discovering the depth of deceit in our spirits, Jer. 17. 9.
The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know
it? There are many deceitful things in the world, false weights, false
measures, deceitful coin, deceitful books; but the heart is deceitful
above all things. A deceitful heart is the greatest Impostor in the World: So
many anfractus, such re^^ssus, so many sly corners, and turnings, and windings,
that none can know it, none can find it out but God, who has an all-seeing,
all-searching eye. The ignorance of our minds fills us with self-conceit, our
sinful heart is as full of self-deceit, as of sin, and where there is a self
conceited mind, and a selfe-deceitfull heart, it is no wonder to see such
misled.

Thirdly, There are also in us many prejudi^es against the go^d way, 3 Many
(...) prejudices in us against the good way.
which make us more apt to be seduced. It is one of the great Engines whereby
the Devil manages his designs ( a part of his strong (...) 2 Cor. 10. 4.) to
fill people with prejudicate opinions against the ways of God, as if they were
either Melan^holy and dis-consolate ways, (never considering that the ways of
wisdom are ways of pleasantness, Prove. 3. 17.) or as if they were
unprofitable ways, not minding, 1 Timothy 4. 8. That Godliness is profitable
unto all things, having the promises of this life, and of that which is to
come. This is the language too many speak from this distemper of spirit, Mat.
3 14. It is vain to serve God; and what profit have we that we have kept his
Ordin^n^^s? This prevailed to mislead people in Christ's time, Job. 7. 48. Have
any of the Rulers, or of the Ph^^^sees believed on him? And afterward when Paul
preached Christ cru^isied, 1 Cor. 1. 23. Unto the Jews he was a stumbling
bl^ck; (they stumbl^d, because they did not ^ind so many miracles under this
G^^pell, as under the Ministry of Moses) To the Gentiles he was a r^^ke of
offense; they were so fond of Philosophical subtilties, and humane Eloquence,
that they were offended with Apostolical simplicity in preaching Christ
crucisied.

As there are many by-ways, many false guides, diverse evils within 4. Reas.
The good way is not easily found out.
us; which betray us to mis-leading; so consider, the good way is not easily
found out: our blessed Savior presses this, Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in
at the strait gate; for I say unto you, many shall seek to enter in, and shall
not be able. It is an awakening expression, if seriously minded; Strive to
enter in, strive to overcome thy self, strive to overcome the Devil, strive
to overcome the World, and all little enough; many shall seek, and shall not
be able: the ^ivill Hypocrite he seeks by complying with duties of the
second Table; and the religious Hypocrite, he will seek by correspondence
with duties of the first Table; the Papist he will seek in the ways of
superstitious devotion; and all kind of people in the world, that have any
sense of a deity, and any apprehen^ion of the immortality of their souls, they
will seek after some kind or other; but all seeking will not serve, many
seekers shall not be able to enter: and therefore says he, (...).
Strive.

Two things increase the difficulty in finding out the good way. Difficulty in
finding out the good way. 1 The secrecy of the good way.


First, This good way lies deep, it is a hidden way: Religion is the greatest
Mystery in the world. In any ordinary trade, before a man can be acquainted
with the secrets of it, you bind him Apprentice for six or seven years; truly,
there are so many mysteries in Religion, that require the service of diverse
Apprentiships to be well acquainted with them. Religion it seems a Paradox, a
Riddle, and that is the reason, that so many out-stand, out-sit so many Sermons,
outlive so many Ministers one after another, and yet are where they were, it
may be ten or twenty years agone: grow more wise for the world, and more
provident, and more politic for their own secular advantage: But still as
great strangers to the power of godliness as ever: How comes this to pass?
The way lies deep, there*s nothing in Religion, but it has a mystery in it.
Paul when he speaks of chastity, uses this expression, that every one should
know how to possess his Vessel in holiness and honor, 1 These. 4. 4. There
is a virginal and a conjugall chastity not easily learned. And he tells you,
Phil. 4. 12. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every
where and in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry;
both to abound and to suffer need. There was a mystery in all this; to know how
to avoid the sins, to resist the temptations, and exercise the graces of all
these conditions, was a lesson not easily learned: Therefore Paul says here
(...) I am initiated in this mystery. As in regard of the doctrine of the
Gospel, without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
So indeed it is very true, in practical godliness, in all the duties that you
and I are to practice in Religion there is a mystery. To know how to live by
faith, to act self^-deniall, to perform duties, so as to enjoy communion with
God therein, requires a secret and heavenly skill. Many a man has merely an
outward shell and husk of duty, a carcass of Religion, but wants the kernel,
and soul, that should enliven it. To do Religious duties, from Religious
grounds, upon Religious motives* for Religious ends; that you may please God
therewith, as well as profit your selves; is such a secret, as some who have
been hearers for twenty or thirty years, are little acquainted with.

Secondly, as the good way lies deep, so even the best guides may 2 The best
guides may be mistaken.
be mistaken; the mostable, learned, godly Ministers in some things, may
possibly be deceived themselves, and deceive others. It is observable, 1 Cor.
3. 12, etc. Ministers may build upon the right foundation, and they themselves
be saved, being godly; yet their work shall be lost; because though upon the
right foundation, yet they build hay, stubble, wood, such trash of errors, or
ai^y and empty speculations; not gold, silver, and precious stones, wholesome
and substantial heavenly truths; not considering that the foundation, as it is
the strength, so it should be the rule of the building, and all the
superstructions should be commensurate to the foundation* every way
correspondent to the will, mind, and glory of Jesus Christ. Learning and
goodness does not exempt men from these mistakes.

If you look into 1 King. 13. you shall find an amazing example of an old
Prophet, who discovers some goodness, ver. 30, 31, 32. Yet you have him ver.
18. seducing another Prophet, who had been zealously active in the cause of
God, as appears in the beginning of the Chapter: the greater pity that he
should be so much abused; This old Prophet speaks like a grave Father to him,
ver. 18. I am a Prophet also as thou art, and an Angel spoke unto me by the
word of the Lord, saying, Bring him back wi^h thee into thine house, that he
may eat bread, and drink water; But he lied unto him. He pretends a
Revelation from God, to bring back the Prophet, expressly contrary to what
instructions he had received of God, ver. 9. An Angel spoke to me by the Word
of the Lord. It is possible, you see, for grave Ministers to palliate their
untruths with pretended Revelations. Hereby this Prophet was misled out of the
good Way, and put upon that disobedience against God, which cost him his life.

Indeed soon after (which is fit to be observed) ver. 21, 22. God reproves
his disobedience by the old Prophet, who was the occasion to bring him into
error. We speak, we act, as God is pleased to assist or withdraw. When God
will use a man, then he shall be a Counselor, a reprover; but when he is
left to himself, then even an old Prophet may be a seducer, a deceiver. No
wonder to see so many of our younger Prophets, and other Christians misled in
these latter days, when old Prophets may and do too often pretend the greatest
authority, abusing Gods own name, to countenance their errors. The primitive
times afford us too many sad instances, that the greatest Lights may have a
mixture of darkness. Origin and Vincent. Lirin. c. 23, and 24.
Tertullian erred so foulely, one amongst the Greeks, the other amongst the
Latins, that each of them was accounted in those times Tentatio magna in
Ecclesia, A sore temptation, a great stumbling block in the Church. Augustine,
upon a very weak ground, Joh* 6. 53. countenanced stiffely, that Infants should
receive the Lords Supper: which error of (...), as sandy a bottom as it had,
Maldona^.
continued in the Church diverse hundred years.

Jereme, though learned to admiration, doted on the merit of virginity. It were
easy to show the naevi, the blemishes of others, but why should we uncover
our Fathers nakedness? only thus far improve* it; being that the greatest
Oracles of learning and piety may in sundry points be deceived, ( Prophets and
Apostles only, whose call was extraordinary, ^ad an unerring spirit) good men
may sometimes lead us out of the good way.

Therefore, by all this, we are the more strongly engaged to stand, see, and
inquire what is the good old way, and not suddenly to take things from any upon
trust, in the great concernments of our souls.

Does the Lord call upon you to be carefully inquisitive in the Vs^.
Direction. Be wise to try ways before you trust them.
concernments of your souls? O then learn to be p^^d^n^, to be serious in
trying every way before you engage your self therein. Certainly the wise God
(who never thinks or speaks in vain) would not have spent so many several
words, Stand, see, ask, had not the business been of singular consequence. I
with Christians would learn of Politicians, when they have to do with men like
themselves* non cito credere, not to be too credulous. It was a noble strain
of prudent piety in the Bereans, Act. 17. 11. They did receive the word with
all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether th^se things
were so, even when Paul and Silas were the Teachers: How vigilant would they
have been in these times, when there are so many suspicious Doctrines preached,
so many adulterate ways obtruded upon ignorant well-meaning hearers.

It is good counsel which is given, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Try all things, ^old fast
that which i^ good, take in nothing, upon trust, whosoever be the Teacher,
unless you be sure it be God himself. If God speak, then we must never
dispute, but obey; But, unless you know it comes undoubtedly from God, try
all things, try all practices, Try Practices Try Doct^^nes Try Revelations
that are commended to you, try all Doctrines, that are held forth as a rule of
these practices; yea, try all revelations, that any man shall pretend, by which
he receives these doctrines: for this you must know, those practices, those
evil ways are most dangerous, in which men are confirmed by any doctrine, by
any settled opinion. If a man rush suddenly by incogitancy, and by temptation
into a bad way, he is more easily recoverable; But if he shall be rooted in
a bad way, by an unsound rule of doctrine, that doctrine had need especially to
be considered: When the man that commends such a way, shall pretend he had
this by a discovery from God himself, and that he has such and such a
Revelation. As Montanus, and some of the old Heretics in the primitive times,
pretended to such opinions by revelation, and so there was no disputing against
them. If a man would tell you he is in such and such an opinion, and that for
such and such reasons, possibly you may overthrow his reasons, and so convert
him from the error of his way: But if he shall come and tell you, I hold such
and such an opinion: How came you by it? I had such and such a revelation for
it; It is a hard matter to convince such a man, because he will fondly stick
to his Revelation, and confidently obtrude it upon other^: But let these be
tried: Try every spirit, 1 John 4. 1. Make account there are false Teachers
gone out into the world, such as God himself never sent. Believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God, because many false
Prophets are gone out. True Prophets, they are sent out by God, they are called
out in Gods way, but false Prophets, they go out (are not sent.) without a
Commission, and without instructions from God: And therefore, because there are
many such that go abroad, great reason that people should try before they
trust. You that are Tradesmen, and who receive money, you will have a balance
to weigh your gold, you will have a Touchstone to try your metal; Kings, they
Chrysostom.
will have a Taster, to try the meat, possibly there may be poison abroad, in
stead of good wholesome food; and shall not we be as wise for our Souls? If
you were to let out a little money to use, you will be sure to have a Bond
made by good advice, you will have witnesses; why? Oh you love your money,
therefore you will be sure to be upon good terms. If you were to make a
purchase, you will have the conveyances examined, and it may be, ove^-looked
by one Counselor after another, because you value your worldly estates; And
are not our immortal Souls of greater concernment then any of these? And
therefore in what has reference to them, let us take this wise direction,
Stand, see, inquire.

Here you may desire resolution in three particulars: A threefold inquity.


1 Who must inquire? 2 Where must we inquire, or from whom? 3 To what purpose
must we inquire?
Quest. First, who must inquire?

Answ. The Lord here directs his speech to all the people. Indeed 1 Who must
enquire.
if you were to ask the Papist, who it is that must consider and try and
examine things? Bellarmine and his followers would fain persuade you, that
belongs only to the Bishops and Doctors, and the great learned men, to try,
examine, and to judge things; But people, they by an implicit faith must be
carried hood-winkt, and pin their faith upon their leaders sleeves, till at
last poor wretches, they be plunged into Hell; God would have us more wise,
and expects that every man should make use of his reason, as carefully for the
good of his Soul, as for the welfare of his body, swallow not things
credulously, but consider, examine them. Whom does Paul exhort to try all
things, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. not only Ministers, but even such as were under the
Ministers, ver. 12, 13. Such as were to know them, who labored among them, and
were over them in the Lord, such as had Prophets prophesying among them, whom
they must not despise, these undoubtedly were the People, private Christians
they must try.

Indeed the supreme judgment belongs to the Head of the Church the Lawgiver
Jesus Christ, Ministerial judgment and trial belong to them who have a
public Office from Christ, to that purpose; as Aliud est judicare, aliud
judicem age^o^ Davenant.
for a practical judgment, a judgment of discretion, every man and woman is
to make use thereof, it is not safe for any to receive matters of Religion
without serious examination. This has been taken for granted by Prelaticall
Divines, and was the Doctrine even of such as were too willing to lead poor
people captive by a blind obedience. They acknowledged, if a thing commanded
were indifferent, you might do it, if unlawful, you might not do it; But how
should every one discern whether that which Superiors enjoined, were
indifferent or unlawful, unless they had liberty to try and examine. How
otherwise should Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, have known how Dan. 3. 3, 5.
10, 11.
to carry themselves, when the King commanded them to bow to his golden Image?
had they by credulity without consideration or trial complied with
Nebuchadnezzars injunction, they might soon have committed Idolatry to escape
the fiery furnace ( too many have been thus unhappily surprised in these later
times) and so have hazzarded the undoing of their souls to secure their
bodies. As in Philosophy, so in Divinity, credulity has bred many Heretics,
and carried captive many thousands, because they resolve to believe, as such a
learned man believes, and will not stand, see, and inquire what is the good
Way.

Quest. Secondly, Where should we inquire, from whom?

Answ. We need not run to Rome, nor be beholden to the pretended
infallibility of the Pope for resolution. The Papacy being the grand Apostasy
from the Truth of God, that heavy judgment lies upon them, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11.
They are given up to strong delusions, to the power of error, and so the blind
leading the blind, both will fall into the ditch. Neither must we depend upon
the Authority of the Church, for the deciding of controversies, and determining
matters of Re^igion; we should look higher. Its true, the name of Church has
evermore been very specious, and used among all sorts with pomp. Come to
Papists, they will cry, The Church, the Church, though it be but the Pope
himself, yet that must carry all. When you were to deal with the Prelaticall
party, their dialect was, The Church must be obeyed, still the Church, (though
but the Prelates themselves in their sense) must carry it* And when the people
begin but to apprehend their own liberties, they will cry, The Church, the
Church, (as they think themselves) so Coeli mysterium me d^ceat Deus ipse qui
condidit, non homo qui seipsum ignoravit: Cui magis de Deo quam Deo ^red^^^
Ambr. Ep 31. Audi, dien Dominus, non dici^ Hilarious aut Augustinus, sed dicit
Dominus, Aug. Ep. 48.
judges, so resolves. But who ever be the Church, the Authority of it is not
sufficient; possibly the Church may err, and therefore we must fly to the
Throne of Jesus Christ the Head of the Church, for satisfaction. Whom shall we
rather believe concerning God, than God himself? If there were a Council of
the most learned Doctors that ever the world had, yea, if an Assembly of
Angels, yet in matters of Religion, concerning the Good Way, the last
Resolution must be into Thus says the Lord. Here it is not, What says
Hilary, what says Austin, but What says the Lord, he only can resolve and
satisfy conscience, of him we must inquire.

Quest. Thirdly, To what purpose must we inquire?

Answ. That we may learn which is the good way werein we should walk.
Something has been spoken to quicken you all to be inquisitive, and that you
might be engaged to knock at the right door: I hope you are now in some
measure prepared to ask. Amongst all bywayes, Three discoveries of the good
way. 1 That way which comes from God.
how shall we discern which is the good way?

First, the good way is that way which comes from God, which God himself has
taught and prescribed in his holy word. None knows the way to Heaven so well as
the God of Heaven: Its a seasonable prayer, Psalm. 25. 4. Show me thy ways O
Lord, teach me thy paths: we walk safely when we follow Gods own teaching.
It is the very tenor of the Covenant of grace, by which he saves his people,
they shall be all taught of God, Joh. 6. 45. hence he commands us to Non
de^emus a^^endere, quid aliquis ante nos faciendum p^tave^is, sed qui ante
omnes est, Christus prior fecerit, Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 3.
hear what his beloved Son says, in whom be is well pleased; Hear him,
Matthew. 17. 5. where does Christ speak to us but in his word, and by his
spirit? The holy Ghost is the Tutour, the book in which he reads Lectures to
his Scholars, is the Bible; therefore if you desire to know which is the right
way, to the word and to the testimonies, Isa. 8. 20. Is it there prescribed or
no?

Judge then of the goodness of the way, by the Rules of holy Scriptures, and
not only by the seeming light of your own conscience. Conscience may conclude
that to be a lawful way which is unlawful, Dr. Ames gives five strong
reasons why an erroneous conscience cannot oblige us. Cas. Cens^. l. 1. c. 4.
s. 10.
and in such a case it does not oblige thee to practice, neither can it warrant
thee therein. Yet among many other noisome weeds which spring up in the garden
of the Church in these luxuriant times; this is one very dangerous principle,
and indeed the more dangerous, because the language seems plausible: I am
persuaded in my conscience it is the right way, and therefore I may walk in
it. But stay a while! Do you find this held forth in Scripture, that your
conscience is an adequate and sufficient Rule for your actions? No such matter,
rather thy Conscience by the fall of Adam was defiled, Tit. 1. 16. and even in
the regenerate is sanctified but in part, not freed wholly from darkness and
error; and so cannot be a pure and Dr. Ames Cas. Consc. l. 3. ^. 17. s. 20.
perfect rule. If you make your conscience your only guide, you will soon be
misled into gross offenses, as Jo^. 16. 2. Act. 26. 9. I verily thought with
my self (says Paul) that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of
Jesus of Nazareth: who will say, (unless they be shamefully ignorant) that
Paul did well herein, though he might follow present light, which too often
proves indeed but darkness?

If you were to deal with a Papist, and should ask him, Why do you pray to
Images? why do you go to Mass? were this a satisfying Such Divinity will
help to patronize and protect Papists, Jews, Turks, and whom not?
answer, I am persuaded in my conscience it is lawful to go to Mass, and
therefore I may do it? The good Lord discover and confute such poysonfull
opinions! Doubtless such an erring Conscience does not warrant, will not
excuse and justify thy sinful practice. Conscience is but a subordinate rule,
and a rule to thee only so far as it receives information from the word of
God; when the subordination is maintained, conscience acting according to
punctual instructions from God himself; the^ thou may go on with comfort
and confidence: But whilst thou art under an erroneous Conscience, thy duty is
not to follow it, but rather to seek clear and full information, that thou
may be delivered from all thy seducing errors, Obligatur home ad talem
conscientiam dep^ne^d^n, Ames.
Romans 12. 2. Learned Divines observe that in Negatives conscience may be more
observed then in Affirmatives. When it does judge a thing not to be lawful
which is lawful in it self, we are not to do it, Romans 14. 23. we may
sometimes abstain from a lawful thing without sin; but we can never do an
unlawful thing (though conscience affirm and conclude it) but we offend God
therein.

O then, that you and I, when so many new and strange ways are commended, may
form a right judgment concerning the good way, let us look above the examples
of others, not setting our watches by their clocks, let us look higher then the
mere dictates of our own Consciences: Let us appeal to the holy Scripture as
the perfect and ultimate rule of our actions, and judge of all our
controversies, let that Basil. Ep. 80.
umpire and arbitrate all. Only here remember an excellent rule of one of the
Ancients. He is the best reader of Scripture, who fetches Optimus Scripturae
lect^r qui sen sum non a^tulerit, sed retulerit, Hilat.
the sense out of Scripture, not who carries the sense unto Scripture. On
these terms let all the opinions and practices which are now on foot in
London, in England, yea, in the whole World, be tried by Scripture. When we
read Gods word, could we singly and humbly enquire the mind of Jesus Christ,
and listen impartially what language he speaks therein; and not, as too many
do, with minds engaged to such a sense, which they must either find in
Scripture, or will impose upon it; we might much more readily learn the good
way. Heretofore indeed too many of the Prelates and their factors, that they
might the better put off their adulterate wares, having first resolved to
practice such Ceremonies, and bring in such Innovations, would then read
Scriptures and Fathers, to see what expressions they could thence draw to
countenance them. Let us all now beware of that which we condemned in others:
what way soever of Doctrine, Practice, or Discipline we are engaged into in our
present thoughts, whether to a congregational or classical, whether to this or
that way, let us not study and dispute, that we may bring down the Scripture
to our own sense, but rather endeavor to shape, frame, and raise all our
opinions, desires and practices to the genuine sense of ^holy Scripture, and
according to the mind of Jesus Christ therein discovered; that will prove the
good way which God himself makes known.

Secondly, the good way is that which leads directly unto God himself, 3. That
way which leads unto God.
to interest in God, service of God, and communion with God. The (...) ad ^e,
and inquietum est ^or nostrum don^^ requies^at^^ ^e. Aug. Heb. 11. 6. Joh. 6.
44.
Lord at first made us for himself, our immortal souls will never find solid
satisfaction, till they return back unto him. It is the proper work of true
Religion, the good way, to bring back the wandering soul unto it*s Maker; What
is Religion but a coming unto God in Christ, with engagement of the heart to
stay with him? And the more steps we take in this good way of pure Religion,
the nearer still we come unto God.

The profane Atheist he wallowes in his sin, prostituting his precious soul
to this ignoble service, to make provision for his lusts, that is his Element;
and all this while (poor creature) without God in the World, Ephesians. 2. 12. at
a great distance from him, and his own Salvation. The carnal Worldling he
would be content uti Deo, to make use of God, but then he must f^ui
creatu^is, enjoy the creatures; he serves God no more then may serve his own
turn, gratify his own carnal purposes; neither minds he, in this way,
fellowship with God. The lukewarm Politician he would by his politic
reconcilements, arbitrate between God and self, hoping thereby to drive on
his own designs, but in conclusion he likewise in this way, falls short of
Heaven, losing his God in the inordinate pursuing of Carnall-selfe. But the
good way will lead us off from our sins, above creature comforts, out of our
selves unto God. Some may take diverse steps toward God, insomuch that it may
be said of them, as of him, Mark 12. 34. Thou art not far from the Kingdom
of God, Jo^^ 2. 12.
the good way carries thee further, it leads thee even unto God into the ways
of nell-pleasing servi^e, into union and communion with himself. It brings
thee not only to serve God, but also to enjoy God in an Ordinance; not only
to obey him in doing a duty, but also to have a sw^et communion with him in the
performance thereof. Hence it is that a Saint who travels in this good way is
not satisfied, unless he find and enjoy his God in the duties of his worship;
he rests not in attending upon so many sermons, in making so many prayers; but
he observes what converse his soul has with Jesus Christ therein, what God
looks from him, what influence from Heaven, what holy imp^^s^on upon his
spirit by duty. He knows that in this good way, God brings down part of
Heaven into his people before he advance them unto Heaven: He has happily
tasted, that a day of Humiliation may prove a soule-melting day, a day of
Thankesgiving a soule-cheering day, a Communion day, a healing and healing day*
a Sabbath, a day of blessing and sanctification; so directly does the good way
lead unto God.

Thirdly, the good way coming from God, leads unto God, and 3. The good way is
according unto God.
that according unto God, according to the will of God; tending unto his
Honor, and the magnifying of his Name. That is undoubtedly the best way which
leads to happiness by holiness, He^r. 12. 14. The soulesaving way will be a
soule-sanctifying way. In 2 These. 2. 13. God chose the Thessal^nians to
salvation through the sanctification of the spirit and ^e^e^^e of the Truth. In
the execution of his eternal counsels, this is the Method. No satisfying
evidence to us, that we were chosen to salvation from eternity, unless we
have within us this undoubted pledge of his electing love and spirit of
sanctification. That way which is not a way of sanctification as well as of
Justification, is not the good Scripture way to Salvation. It lies as a great
disparagement upon any new way (however many may ignorantly cry it up) when
Tit. 2. 11, 12.
peoples opinions mar their practices* if whilst they contend for
justification, they weoken the power of sanctification; if in their
entertaining Beware of those books which lead you into such dangerous ways.
the Gospel of Christ, they turn out the holy love of God from being a rule of
life; without question that is not the good way, wherein peoples spirits grow
dry and barren, which opens a back-doore to Sabbath-breaking and other
licenciousnesse. Suspect your selves and ways, I beseech you, if by any of
your opinions practical Christanity wither, if thereby you become formal and
loose in the duties of your places and relations. The good way is a
soul-emproving, a spirita^lizing way.

In the 1 Timothy 6. 3. Paul directs Timothy thus to judge of Teachers and their
Doctrines, and accordingly to own or decline them, as they teach and consent
unto the wholesome words of Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is according
unto godliness; clearly holding forth that Christ's words are wholesome,
soule-saving words, his doctrine purifies the heart, it is according to
godliness.

This age is very fruitful in multiplicity of opinions. If you would know how
to judge of them, together with your examining of them by the word of Truth,
observe diligently what influence peoples opinions have upon their spirits, and
upon their conversation.

Under the Tyranny of the Prelates many congregations had almost lost the power
of Religion in a crowd of needles Ceremonies; and now in too many places the
vigor of practical piety is much abated (to say no more) by multitudes of
dispute about some such opinions as might well be spared; This renders the way
very suspicious, because it is no more according unto godliness.

I confess if we should judge of peoples way by their language Semper in o^e
habent Evangelium Evangelium, cum tota vita disc^^pet ab Evangelii
praes^^^p^^^, Cyprian.
only, good words are very frequent, many mouths are full of Christ,
Free Grace, light, liberty, etc. God forbid that such sweet and precious words
should be abused to countenance either darkness of error, or licenciousnesse
of practice. Yet alas, how many speak the highest Gospel language, who live
far below Gospel privileges, and below Gospel hopes!

The subtle Devil knows how to hide his snares under the most speci^us, even
under Scripture words; Try therefore over and over, it much concerns you; O
that it might appear that the way wherein you walk is the good way, being
according unto God, expressing the reality of godliness in the course of your
conversation.

These things being laid down for the awakening of your vigilance in enquiring
after the good way, something must be added, concerning your asking for the old
paths; Herein you shall do like wise travelers, to consult with such as have
discovered and trodden the good way before you. The good way is an old way.
Ask then,

First, what is the good old way of Doctrine, what is the old 1 What is the
good old way of Doctrine.
pattern of wholesome words? 2 Timothy 1. 13. Enquire what Truth Jesus Christ, who
is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Hebr. 13. 8. did reveal unto
his servants; and verse. 9. hold that fast, and be not carried about with
diverse and strange doctrines, new and uncouth Doctrines, (...), ^ Sanam
Evangelii doctrinam t^ae fidei commissa^^ u^ eam in ecclesia adminis^^es, Pis^.
Vincent. Li^in.
not recommended to us by the Apostles. O Timothy, says Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 20.
keep that which is committed to thy trust. Depositum serva; that which has
been committed to thee, not what thou have invented; that which thou have
received, not that which thou have found out, wherein thou must not be an
Author, but whereof thou art a Guardian; not an ordainer, but a Disciple, not a
guide, but a follower; what t^ou have received in gold, re-deliver the same in
gold, etc. He had this trust for the Churches use, let us diligently enquire
after it, that we may be guided by it.

Secondly, what is the good old way of divine Worship. Here you must 2. What is
the good old way of Gods worship. Isa. 29. 13, 14.
consult, not with the precepts of men, but with the word of God revealed of
old unto his Church. The not minding of this ancient Land-marke, has brought
in many superstitious Innovations into Gods service, and misled thousands of
simple souls out of the good way. A Statesman of our own could observe diverse
causes of superstition. 1. Pleasing and sensual Rites and Ceremonies. 2.
Excess of outward Bacons Essay of Superstition.
and Pharisaicall holiness. 3. Over great reverence of Traditions. 4. The
Stratagems of the Prelates for their own ambition and lucre. 5. The favoring
too much of good Intentions, which opens the gate to conceits and novelties. 6.
The taking an aim at Divine matters by humane, which breeds mixture of
imaginations. In all which there was a neglecting of the holy will of God, the
only rule of pure Worship. And all this while, alas poor hearts! people
taking much pains to little purpose. In vain do they worship me, teaching
for doctrines the commandments of men, Matthew. 15. 9. They overlooke Gods will,
he over-lookes their devices, so indeed the new way proves a bad and
uncomfortable way; you must enquire for the good old way, if you desire to
please God in his Worship.

Thirdly, what is the good old way of practical piety. The beauty 3. What is
the good old way of practical pi^ty.
of Religion much appears in the duties of our places and relations; to have
such a conversation as Paul expressed, 2 Cor. 1. 12. in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, would much
commend the Gospel, and fill us with rejoicing in the testimony of our own
conscience; much of this practical godliness might be learned, as from
Scripture precepts and practices, so both from the Doctrine and examples of
Ancient Worthies.

Amongst others there are two very good advantages by the writings of the
Ancient Fathers; They will afford us light in points of Faith, and heat in
matters of practice. I wish we were better acquainted See an excellent
discourse of Mr. Youngs, called Dies Domini^a. l. 2. c. 16. p. 128, 129.
with those old strains of piety, which Origin, Chrysostom, B^sil, put their
hearers upon for sanctifying the Lords day, recoun^ing Sermons, holy
conference, they had their Mensarii Sermones, their Table discourses to feed
their souls, etc.

It were a work worthy of a second Jewel, to make an Apology* for the
strictness and purity of practical piety out of the Ancient Fathers, against
profane Atheists, as that learned Bishop did out of their writings Apologize
for our Doctrine against the Papists; so might we better learn the good old
way of sound Christianity.

Thirdly, forget not to enquire what i^ the good old way of discipline. When
you have found the good old way of Doctrine, of Worship, 3. Wha^ is the good
old way of Discipline.
and of practical piety, you will need an hedge of Discipline to fence it,
lest dogs and swine creep in, and so mar and pollute it with their
defilements. There may be indeed an extremity, in laying out more thoughts
about the hedge, then upon the Corn, (too many Matthew. 7. 6.
are ready to slight the power of godliness in their vehement enquiries after
some points of Discipline) yet suffer not I beseech you good corn to be
spoiled for want of an hedge of Discipline about it. Let us seriously consult
what was the good old Scripture Order. Paul joyed when he beheld the
Colossians order, and the steadfastness of their faith in Christ, Col. 2. 5.
The Lord grant that after all our enquiring, consulting and debating, we may
find that good old Order in the Churches of Christ amongst us; This will be
great matter of rejoicing to us.

Quest. But how far may we in enquiring after the good way consult with
antiquity, and observe the old paths wherein the Ancient Fathers have trodden?

Answ. Though many make Antiquity their Diana, adoring too much every fragment
of the Ancients, not minding that there are some gray headed errors, the
mystery of iniquity working in the very Apostles times, 2 These. 2. 7. though
others, especially the Papists, use the Fathers, as Merchants use their
counters, sometimes they stand with them for pence, sometimes for pounds, as
they be next and readiest at hand to make up their account.

Yet doubtless in searching after the good way, we may safely consult with
Antiquity; the newest Philosophy may excel, having the Optimum est majo^um
sequi vest^gia, si recte praecesserunt. Cato.
advantage of new experiments, but the eldest Divinity is the best; there can
be no better way to Heaven, then that which the Ancient of days has
discovered: and without question there were in the Primitive Church many
glorious lights, whom the Lord acquainted with his Gospel secrets, and used
them as special Instruments to convey much precious Truth unto us.

For better direction herein, I will take leave to suggest these few hints,
(which in some Auditories I should much enlarge) That when you advise with the
Ancient Writers about the good way, you must not credulously embrace their good
Intentions, their received Customs, nor swallow all their free expressions,
which after ages have wretchedly abused, emproving them to justify their own
errors and superstitions. But wisely consider;

First, that the most ancient and ^earned Fathers should be received See Mo^n^y
of the Sacrament in the end of the Preface.
and read* as expounders, not as Lawgivers. Secondly, you should labor to
discern what books of theirs are spurious, and what legitimate. Thirdly,
observe diligently whether the Doctors you consult with, understood the
original language of the holy Scriptures, whether the Translation they
followed was sound. Fourthly, enquire what consent and concurrence there was
amongst them in this particular. Prefer that which they have spoken, either
all, or the greatest part of them, and that very manifestly, often, constantly,
assuredly, etc. Fifthly, and still all they say, must be weighed in the
Vincent. Lirin. c. 39. Hac lege credendum est, quioquid omnes, vel plures,
manifest, frequenter, pe^severanter firmaverint, etc
balance of the Sanctuary, examined by the Scriptures, the truest and best
Antiquity.

Perkins his Prepara^. Demonst^at. Problem* beg.
Reverend and Learned Mr. Perkins will give you a very rational account, how
it came to pass that the Ancient Fathers spoke oftentimes incommode, letting
fall many unapt and unhappy expressions: First, sometimes they were carried too
far, even into another extreme, by heat of disputation. Secondly, at other
times, in their exhortations you shall find them transported by some vehement
strains of Rhetoric; not always so cautelous in the Pulpit, as in the
Chair. Thirdly, before controversies were started, they spoke more securely,
and too loosely in some points, till they were quickened to circumspection by
the vigilance of an Adversary. Fourthly, they borrowed too many forms of
speech from the people, and speaking often populariter, giving too much credit
to rumors, they may mislead their Readers. Fifthly, sometimes you see them
carried away with the stream of the multitude, even into superstition. Sixthly,
and you have them often speaking of things (...) rather then (...), only
historically See Dr. Rive^ in Crit. Sacr. c. 11. to this purpose.
relating, not asserting what they say. Therefore when you look through them,
yet withal look above them, unto Christ Jesus in his holy word, that you may
certainly find the good way.

And so much for the first Observation, in the second I will join the motive
and the duties together.

When you have found out the good old way, walking therein i^ Gods 2 Observat.
method for you to obtain soule-refreshing Rest.

You have a great journey to take, from Hell to Heaven, from Egypt to Canaan,
through the wilderness of this World; you had need have a good guide; and
after so long, so wearisome, and such a conflicting passage, me thinks a
resting place should be very welcome; It is Gods indulgence thus to offer
himself to poor Travelers, allowing them this sovereign cordial in the
way, that going on they shall find rest for their souls. There is rich
encouragement in that place of the Prophet, Isa. 57 18 I have seen his ways,
and will heal Deus se exhibe^ u^ ducem and medicum* Sanct.
him; I will lead him also, and restore comfort to him. God tenders himself as
a Guide, as a Physician, and as a Comforter; black clouds shall be blown
over, the storm shall cease, travelers toward Sion shall enjoy an haven of
tranquillity

Here I will consider three things.
1. The nature of this walking. 2. What rest is here to be found. 3. What
evidence: That walking in this good old way, is Gods method to soul-refreshing
Rest.
For the first of them, walking in this good way. 1. It presupposes 1. It
presupposes a renouncing of our own former evil way.
that you have renounced your former evil ways, and are now come into Gods
way, into this good way. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked man forsake his way, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts; forsake his wicked ways, and his own
thoughts. There is no wicked man in the world, but he has some way of his
own wherein he walks, and he has some stock of carnaol principles, that
are, as it were, the Lantern, and the Candle to guide him in that way; you
can never convert a man, till you have confuted his principles, over-turned his
thoughts, and then you may soon persuade him to forsake his ways; and both
these must be done before he come into the good way. Therefore you shall find
in Isa. 65. 2. the Lord tells you, I have spread out my hands all the day long
to a rebellious people, that walk in a way that is not good, after their own
thoughts. There is not a man or woman in this Congregation, that has outstood
the ministry all this while, and per^isted in their own wicked ways, but
they walk still after their own thoughts, and let the Minister say what he
will, they will hold the conclusion, and resolve to keep to their own
principles, and their own thoughts. Now when you are come to this resolution,
My own thoughts shall not guide me, my own way cannot save me; but I will
apply my self to Gods way; this is the first step toward walking; This is
presupposed indeed, before you can walk in this good way, it must be done. You
must turn your back upon your own evil ways.

Secondly, Walking is a moving forward, taking step after step, as travelers
use to do, so that you make some progress: Though you 2 Walking implies a
progress in the good way.
be in the right way, yet if you stand still, you do not walk; But in that
you hold compliance with the Commandments of God, and go along with them,
maintaining a correspondency to Gods will, this is walking.

En^^h walked with God, in Genesis 5. 24. And so likewise in the Epistle Genesis 6. 9.
to the Hebrews, 11. 5. He was then translated, going along with God in
well-pleasing ways: Whatsoever duty God prescribed him, his Spirit closed with
it, whatsoever lesson was commended to him, he took it out, acted over the
truths that were proposed; And this is indeed walking with God in the good
way, continually improving of his Ordinances, observing of his daily
providence, obedientially delivering up your selves to his Commands, moving
according un^o them.

Thirdly, This walking must be a voluntary, a willing motion. 3 Walking is a
voluntary motion.
There is much in that expression, Prove. 20 7. A righteous man walks in his
integrity: it is in that conjugation in the Hebrew, that (...)
signifies he sets himself going. Every godly man has an inward principle,
he moves not like a terrifyed hypocrite, from outward motives, he is not
whipped to duties by fear, he is not carried on only by carnal hopes (as
many a man does worship the rising Sun, and love reformation when it is a
plausible thing) but now a godly man has a new nature, and there is an
internal principle, and a motive within himself, that he walks in this
way, he is not drawn nor driven, but he spontaneously moves: and this it is
that God here expects, therefore you should inquire what is the good and the
right way, and then walk in it. Gods people are volunteers, a willing people:
And the very tenor of the Covenant is this, Psalm. 110. 3.
Gods people should be a repenting people, a believing people, an obeying
people. By repentance we seek the way, by faith we find the way, and by
obedience we keep the way: this would discover you indeed to be such a
people, as walk with God, had you but the exercise of these three Cardinal
substantial graces, such repentance as to renounce your sins, your former
ways, and seek the way of God, such faith that you close with Gods way, and
then withal, such obedience as to fix, and continue in the way: and all this
with a willing mind, as David directed Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. This is walking
in the good way.

After the discovery of the nature of this walking, the next thing is, what
Rest is here offered: Here is a plaster every way as broad What
Soulerefreshing rest to be found by walking in the good way. 1 Rest from
terrors of Conscience.
as the wound, a satisfaction proportionable to the exigents and necessities of
poor travelers toward Canaan.

First, Rest from terrors of Conscience: Sometimes a Servant of God lies
under such, and those are sad and black troubles indeed, to be under the
accusing of a condemning conscience; you need not dispute where hell is, for
they that know what terrors of conscience mean, they will tell you. God can
make a Hell in a man's bosom, in his heart; if any spark of Gods wrath fall on
Conscience, there is an Hell. Who gives rest from these terrors of
conscience? God himself, he being satisfied by the blood of Christ, can
easily satisfy conscience; If our own hearts condemn us, 1 John 3. 20. God
is greater then our hearts, who knows all things. Oh, it is a sad thing, when
we have a condemning conscience. Our blind consciences know but little evil
by our selves, in comparison of what God sees, and if that condemn us, what
will God do then, that is much greater then our consciences, and knows all
things? On the other side, If our conscience condemn us not, then have we
confidence toward God, as it is there expressed, ver. 21. Here is heaven on
earth, here is sweet rest, walking in the good way, thou have a good
conscience, purity is the ready way to Peace; When thou have a conscience that
does not condemn thee, but a conscience that does absolve thee, and a
conscience that does approve thee, a conscience that is sprinkled with the
blood of Jesus Christ, then have thou confidence toward God, such a soul
dares come to Prayer with boldness, and come to Gods Table with confidence,
such a soul is not afraid of death, nor terrified with thoughts of the day of
Judgment. If all be well at home, it argues all is well in Heaven, if
conscience be at peace upon good grounds, then thou may be sure God is at
peace. Here is sweet Rest.

Secondly, as there is rest from terrors of conscience, so there is 2 Rest
from scruples and fears in our minds.
rest from scruples, and doubts, and fears. Sometimes though the mind lie not
under such Hellish terrors, yet it is in a sad, dejected, scrupulous, unsettled
condition, knows not what to do, nor what course to take. Conscience is a
tender part: a little bit of gravel in a narrow shoo, oh! it will much pinch
and trouble the foot; and so a little scruple in conscience, much perplexeth
the spirit.

Scruples are indeed like Thistles, though very bad weeds themselves, yet they
argue the ground to be good where they grow: in many honest hearts there may
be abundance of them. Poor souls! sometimes they are so miserably puzzled,
they dare not pray, they dare not come to the Lords Table: Where shall they now
find Rest? The more they yield to scruples, the more they are involved. Why,
the knowledge of the good way revealed in the Scripture, the Doctrine of grace
stablisheth the heart in the midst of all doubts, Heb. 13. Neque hoc est agere
contra conscientiam, sed secundum conscientiam. Scrupulus enim est formido
temeraria, a^que adeo non potest obligare. Ames. casc. consc. l. 1. c. 6.
9. The more we walk in this way, the more we conquer scruples. We must not
give way to scruples against a duty, but rather do duty, even contrary to
scruples; neither is this to do against conscience, but according unto
conscience: This will bring rest and sweet tranquillity of spirit, when Gods
way, the good way, is walked in. Sometimes a poor Soul that goes to prayer,
hanging the wing, in a drooping estate, God breaks in upon him in prayer, and
he goes out of the presence of God, as one in another world; Why, God has
given him rest, and God has met him, walking in the good way, confounded those
scruples and fears that did possess him; Through custom of doing against
such like scruples, conscience it self is made more strong and settled.

Thirdly, Rest likewise under the impetuousnesse of inordinate passions, 3 Rest
under spiritual assaults.
under the buffettings of Satan and our own corruptions. Sometimes a godly man,
or woman, find themselves like a troubled sea, transported with passion,
hurryed away with lust, and it may be feel a Thorn in the flesh, as Paul
himself did to keep him low, in 2 Cor. 1^. 7. A thorn in his flesh indeed, a
messenger from Satan, the devil so far let loose, as to exasperate, to
stir up the corruption of nature that is in him, that might be a daily
affliction to him, here was the great trouble that Paul had, how did God give
him rest? with such an answer as this from Heaven, My grace is sufficient for
thee. That God that quiets a terrified conscience, that God that satisfies a
scrupulous mind, that God can likewise subdue an unruly lust, and moderate an
inordinate affection, support under a furious temptation, according to his
word; and thus does he dispense himself to such as walk in the good way of
obedience to him, and dependence on him, either he removes the evil, or gives
them this refreshing under it; His grace shall be sufficient for them. 4 Rest
from out* ward enemies.


Fourthly, Rest from Tyrannical enemies. The Church has many bad neighbors,
many Canaanites, who desire to be pricks in her eyes, and thorns in her
sides. Sometimes it is the portion of Gods Servants, to be hunted up and down
like a Partridge upon the mountains, persecuted from place to place, as David
and Paul, and other of the Worthies have been. God knows how to chain up
enemies, he knows how to sweeten the greatest troubles, and to give in so
much comfort as may support and satisfy the soul under all persecution, and
in his good time to give rest from them. Consider that excellent place, Psalm.
81. 13, 14, 15. O that my people had harkned unto me, and Israel had walked in
my ways! I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against
their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto
him; but their time should have endured for ever: England as well as Israel
might obtain victory over cruel and bloody enemies, could we learn to walk
in Gods ways.

Fifthly, Rest in Heaven. In Heb. 4. 9. you find, there remains 5 Rest in
Heaven.
a rest to the People of God. In this Chapter is mentioned a threefold rest:

First, The rest of the holy Sabbath, v. 4. (where diverse observe a strong
Argument in the New Testament for the institution of the Sabbath from the
beginning.)

Secondly, a Rest of Canaan, v. 5. 8.

Thirdly, A remaining rest, a divine and heavenly rest, from the troubles of
this life, to live wholly to God, and with God; This is called a Rest from
labors, all the labor of this world that thou groanest under, Rev. 14. 13.
Blessed are they that die in the Lord, or dye for the Lord, they shall rest
from their labors, and their works shall follow them; here you must be
Soldiers, you must serve out your generation in a conflicting course, you must
labor night and day, God will have none of his servants idle, the time will
come, when you shall have rest from all your labors, and then all your good
works will follow you: many good works thou have done, are now forgotten by
thee, thou shall hear of them then, at the day of Mat. 25. 36. etc.
judgment, they will then appear: Jesus Christ knows more good by them, then
they do by themselves, you did visit me, you did refresh me when I was in
prison, and refresh me when I was hungry, and all these good works shall
follow you, not a good work you have done, not a good word you have spoken,
but they shall follow you. Here is the happy rest your souls shall find at
your journies end, having walked in this good way.

It follows now that evidence be produced, whereby it may appear, that
walking in this good way, is Gods Method to obtain sweet Soule-refreshing Rest.

Here three considerations.

First, That God who bids you Stand, see, and inquire after the 1.
good way, is a God of Peace, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. who has made known Eviden^^s
that walking in the good way leads to Rest.
an unmovable Covenant of peace, Isa. 54. 10. Engaging himself thereby to
embrace all those who wait upon him in his own way. Yea, Isa. 64. 5. The Lord
meets him, who rejoices in righteousness, such as remember him in his
ways. Walking in the good way, leads undoubtedly to communion with God, and a
sweet enjoyment of him. As in Luke 15. 20. When the Prodigal Son was a great
way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him; which discovers what God is ready to do; to meet them with the
dearest embraces who travel toward him in the good way.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is a Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6. and in the 2.
Gospel of Peace has seriously invited all that are weary, and heavy laden, to
come unto him, and he will give them rest, Matthew. 11. 28. Yea, the Soul
coming unto him in this good way finds peace and rest, Romans 5. 1, 2. and such
peace in his Kingdom, and under his government, of which there shall be no
end, Isa. 9. 7. First, the Soul find rest in him, by resting upon him, and
then rest with him for eternity: This Christ discovers to his Disciples with
much sweet, ingenuous, loving faithfulness, Joh. 14. 2, 3, 4. In my Fathers
house are many Mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you; I go to
prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come
again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.
And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. The good way which he has
prescribed, will infallibly bring you unto it. Now some little joy enters into
you by drops, the time is coming when you shall enter into your Masters joy,
dwelling in joy and rest for ever; you are not so ready to come unto Christ, as
he is to come into you.

Thirdly, walking in the good way, will according to the very tenor 3.
of the Gospel, undoubtedly lead you into the new and living way, Heb. 10. 20.
into Jesus Christ, and communion with him, who is the only means of
reconciling us unto God, and by him to Heaven it self. This way to an eternal
Rest in the fruition of Gods incarnation, is indeed new. First, comparatively,
in regard of the more clear manifesting of the way to Heaven under the Gospel.
Secondly, new, because it waxes not old, it is now established, and never to
be altered, and withal it is a living way; Herein Jesus Christ is found, who
is the fountain of life, who lives for ever, to quicken dying, and refresh
weary Travelers. They who walk in the good old way by repentance, faith, and
obedience, may with boldness, with liberty, expect hereby to enter into the
Holiest, into the place where Gods Holiness dwells, into the Heavenly
Sanctuary. Jesus Christ came down from Heaven, to open this new and living way
to advance them to Heaven.

Let us now see what emprovement may be made of this Truth, in the application
of it, to provide you in your journey toward Sion.

Behold, here, Beloved brethren, and behold it with admiration, 1. Use.
Instruction. The good way most advantageous; the neglect of it very dangerous.
the rich advantage that poor sinners have by coming into this good way: It
leads unto God himself, and soule-refreshing rest, in the enjoyment of him:
whatsoever God is, whatsoever God has, whatsoever sweetness there is in God
to satisfy a poor troubled soul, that is to be expected, if you come to
God, in Gods own way; and therefore doubtless they are much their own
enemies, that keep at a distance from God, they that will not be taken off
from their old wicked ways, those haunts of sin in which they have walked
all this while; they that repulse these offers, those admonitions which God
gives; the time may come that they will befoole themselves, and bemoane their
own unhappiness, that they did not choose the ways of Gods fear. Consider
that of Wisdom, Prove 1. 25. 26, 27, 28.
and tremble; what if calamity come on you? who shall help you? God will laugh
when your calamity comes, and mock when your destruction, and desolation,
and fear shall seize on you; Why? because you would have none of his Counsel,
you would have none of his reproof; You did not choose the fear of the Lord.
I wish you would all expostulate the case with your selves, now, seriously in
the presence of God.

What ^is this true doctrine, that the good old way, is that which leads to the
rest of my Soul? What an enemy have I been to my soul that have inslaved my
self to my lusts all this while, that have turned my back on God and his
ways, and will not by any importunity, though God himself speaks from heaven,
be brought into this good way? Many please themselves, if they walk in such
ways as lead to their own profit, and to their own worldly pleasures, O but
what will be the issue? Why, look into the 4 of Judges, ver. 18, 19. You shall
find the other ways wherein you walked, are those that deceived, that
promised good intertainment, who will Judge. 4. 18, 19. 21.
deal with you just as Jael did with Sisera, she came out indeed in the 18
ver. Turn in my Lord, turn in to me, fear not; Oh what flattering language
do the profits, and pleasures of the world speak to engage young people, and
to entice others, Turn in; And when he is come in he says unto her, Give
me, I pray thee, a little water to drink, for I am thirsty; she opened a
bottle of milk, and gave him drink and covered him.

The world has bottles of milk, sweet pleasures, satisfying contentments, men
may suck out of the breasts of the world a great deal of satisfaction for a
time, but when you are wrapped warm in the world, and fall asleep in the very
arms of creature comforts, what will be the issue? See how she deals in the
21 ver. She took a nail of the Tent, and took an hammer in her band, and
went softly unto him, and smote the nail in his Temple, and fastened it into
the ground (for he was fast asleep, and weary) so he dyed. This is the
intertainment that worldly Temptations give to many people; They will hug you
for a time, and they will give you milk, and they will seem to cover you, and
wrap you warm, but when once you are gotten into a dead sleep, a nail is
driven into your Temples, and there is an end of an old worldling, there is an
end of such a deluded sinner, that would not come into Gods ways, but gratify
the devil, and still continue in such soule-deceiving ways: (I wish rather
there were many among you, that had Joshua's Heroical resolution this day,
(for a day of humiliation, it is a day to renew your resolutions, and to renew
your Covenant with your God) that would Josh. 24. 15. Joshua an excellent Copy.
say in defiance to all bad examples, with an holy singularity, whatsoever
others do, I and my house will serve the Lord. Joshua did not say only, I
must serve the Lord, so a terrifyed hypocrite will say; or I ought to serve the
Lord; so a dull hearer, it may be, will yield a formal assent sometimes, or I
would serve the Lord, so a lazi^ professor will say, I would fain serve the
Lord: But Joshua says, whatsoever others do, if they will go to hell, let
them go along for me, for I am resolved, I and my house will serve the Lord:
Come therefore, I beseech you into this way of God, this good way: I would be
glad, if the Lord would please to prosper my weak and unworthy indevours so
far, as to persuade but any one Soul, that has yet been a stranger to these
ways, to come and begin to try conclusions; It may be thou have served three
or four apprentiships in wicked ways, and followed the devil and thy
deceitful heart, twenty or thirty years together, will thou intertaine the
Counsel of a Minister of Jesus Christ, so as to come and try? venture some
pains, and venture some steps in this way of God, possibly thou may find so
much sweetness in the way, and advantage by the way, that if once you did but
taste it, you would not for ten thousand worlds, turn your backs on this way
again; It is a good days work, even to set your faces on this day toward
God, to begin to look toward this good way; Do not mind your own profit, and
your own advantages, your own ends, your own ease, let this be the great
business you have to do, you have an immortal Soul, that is capable of an
eternal condition, that must Math. 16 24.
either eternally triumph in Heaven, or everlastingly fry in Hell. Thou can
not say but God has sent from Heaven this day, by his own word to call thee,
to stand, to consider, to look about thee, and to make provision for thy
soul; Do not now hear what worldly profit says, or listen only what secular
advantage, but hearken what God says, for the good of thy soul: It may be if
you were now to make your wills, some rich man among you, has so many hundreds
for such a Child, and such a proportion for Wife, and such Legacies for
Friends, O but what has your poor Soul all this while? Oh! you will
bequeathe your bodies to the ground, and so much to such and such good
purposes; and you will give your Souls to God; O but what if God will not
accept of your souls, then thou art utterly and everlastingly undone; This you
should know and consider seriously. The first meeting between God and the Soul
must be here on earth in this Good way; they run a desperate hazard, that
will venture an immortal Soul, and hope of Heaven upon a Lord have Mercy upon
them, at the last day, when they know not, whether God will then accept of it,
or embrace and own their Souls; yea, or no? Oh it is a sad thing to think we
should put off God with the dregs of our old age, and after our Souls have
been drenched and steeped in profaneness, and covetousness, and ungodly
cours^s, forty, fifty years together, then to think he ownes our prayers, and
to be as cock-sure of Heaven as any: Do not deceive thy self on such
uncertain terms, if thou will have the right Method to obtain indeed rest
for thy soul, Oh! come into Gods way, and the sooner you come the better:
Whatsoever competition comes between thee and secular advantage, let all
stand by and resolve first to provide for the rest of thy Soul.

There is a Story of one Marinus, a Soldier, having hopes of preferment to
some place, being a Christian; It was suggested to him, that he must first
forsake his Religion, before he should be invested in his preferment; It was
so strong a temptation to him, that he began to stagger between his
preferment, and his Christianity: But by the providence of God, there comes
one Theodistus to him, brings him into the Temple, and lays by him a Sword
and the Gospel, the Sword was the Ensign of his place and preferment, he was
to have but one; now says he, whether will you have rather, the Bible or the
Sword? and dealt so seriously with him, that it pleased God at last to overcome
him, he would rather have the Bible, and let go the Sword, and preferment,
and hopes, and all worldly pomp, and chose the Gospel, that so he might save
his Soul; Oh that there were many in this Congregation, raised to this Heroic
resolution this day, whatsoever the competition be, Is it a place, is it
preferment, is it an Office? Lay the Testament by it, and think, if ever thou will save thy Soul, thou must let go thy hopes, preferment, and possession,
and deny thy self in them, rather then let go thy share in the Gospel,
whereby thou have a title for the eternal happiness of thy immortal soul;
Let soul be more dear and precious to thee, and the enjoyment of God, and
finding communion with him, then all other worldly blessings whatsoever.

It was a rare disposition worthy of imitation in that great Soldier
Terentius, when he might have asked what he would of the Emperor, Theodor. l.
4. c. 29.
this petition he would only beg, a Temple for the Orthodox Christians, when
the Arian persecution did so much prevail; the Emperor denying him that in
the behalf of Christians, though he had leave, he would not ask any thing more
for himself: here is a man that did value Religion, and the good of souls at
an high rate, what ever becomes of his own preferment, of his own dignity:
Let us say, let Religion flourish, let the Gospel of Christ run, and be
glorified, in the power and purity of it, what ever become of our 2 The^. 3 1.
preferment. And truly did you know the excellency, the sweetness, the
goodness of walking in the ways of God, you would not now like lukewarm
reconcilers and moderators accept of a reformation upon any terms, so you
might save your own advantages, and promote your own designs: there is many
a Cassande that would be such a reconciler, that would undertake the
arbitration between God and man, so he might drive on his project, he would
be content to abate somewhat in Religion, so he might serve his own carnal
purpose. But let us not be thus penny wise and pound foolish, and in the mean
time neglect coming into Gods way; this is the only method that leads to this
great advantage; to soul-refreshing rest.

If walking in the good way be Gods method to find soule-refreshing rest; then
show your selves good travelers, and be sure you do 2. Use. Direction.
Approve your selves good travelers in this good way.
indeed walk in this way; do not satisfy your selves in that you know the
way, but rather say as they in Micah 4. 5. every one will walk in the name of
his God, Come, we will walk in the name of our God for ever and ever, you must
be walking, stirring, moving on; many people if they have but got a little
smattering knowledge, and have their tongues tipped with some Gospel Language,
that they are able to discourse of Religion, they think they have made great
progress therein, we know indeed so much as we practice, they only are good
Scholars in Christ's School, that have learned to turn the knowledge into
action, and turn precepts into practice, to draw confidence out of promises,
and imitation from good examples. Neither is it enough to come into the way,
when known, and to stand still there.

Many men if they be once got into a religious form, if they be but
accounted professors, they move in such a track of duty, and go plodding on
from year to year* and if you had a picture drawn of them now, and a picture
seven years ago, no more light nor no more heat, nor no more spiritual
vigor then formerly they had, this is not to walk in Gods way: what progress
make you? what addition to the stock of graces, what fruit bring you forth, the
Apostle gives this counsel in 2 Pet. 1. 5. Add to your faith v^ etc.

First indeed, if you would be good Christians, you must have faith, 2 Pet. 1.
5, 6, 7.
for the justification of your persons, faith for the warranting of your
duties, faith to carry you to Christ, to fetch strength to enable you to your
duties; But then add to your faith virtue, there must be grace conforming the
duty to the rule of Gods Word, do it in a gra^ious manner, virtue; add to
your virtue knowledge, you must rightly circumstantiate your actions, do them
with a proper hi^ and nune; and add to your knowledge, temperance, you must
be sober and temperate, in the exercise of gifts, and in the enjoying of
comforts; and add to your temperance, patience, as you must have sobriety in
the use of comforts, so you must have patience in your trials; and add to your
patience Godliness, you must not have a sullen Stoics patience, be patient of
affliction, be impatient of sin, and therefore add to your patience
godliness; and then further add to your godliness, brotherly kindness: Oh,
love all the members of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Love the brotherhood, the
corporation, the society of Saints; And what? must you have no love to them
that are not yet Saints? add to your brotherly kindness charity, you have a
love of complacencie to them that are Saints, but you have a love of pity to
them that are without; what though they scoff at you? pray for them; what if
they cannot afford you a good word? go mourn over them, and if it be
possible, by a contribution of prayers recover their sinking souls, this is to
be Christians indeed, add to your brotherly love charity, lay not out all
your love to the Saints, there is a love due to them as members, but when you
delight in the people of God, the household of faith, yet withal pity them
that go astray and be charitable to them, and try all conclusions how you
may win them on, and engage them in the good* way: Christianity is sometimes
called a way, it is other times called a race, Heb. 12. 1. Let us run with
patience the race that is set before us, a Christian should move so fast that
he should be running, making swift progress that were walking to purpose; The
Lord knows how many, even among those that would be accounted good
Christians, are still dwarfes in Religion, still novices, children tossed to
and fro with every wind, and many that think their penny good silver, yet it
appears they are but dead creatures, they are but hypocrites in that they do
not grow; as a Picture though never so lively drawn, it grows not, it stands
at a stay, so many that are formal professors, they show indeed they are but
pictures, they do not increase, not out-grow corruptions, nor over-grow their
wonted passions, nor grow above common temptations.

If you would approve your selves good travelers in the way to Sion, you must
be walking, it were an excellent thing, that now as we have monthly
Sacraments, and monthly days of humiliation, to be drawing pictures of your
selves, compare your selves with yourselves, observe how much more humble and
broken hearted you are, how much more weaned from the world you are, and what
fruitful walking you express after so many heavenly showers falling upon you.

Thousands in England would be glad of the very crummes of your Gospel
comforts. The more sad will your account be, if when the Lord shall reckon
with you for so many years soule-quickning-liberties, it shall appear that
neither Sabbath nor Sacrament-opportunities, nor days of Humiliation, nor
days of Thanksgivings have engaged your hearts to walk on in this good way.
The Lord persuade your spirits, that in an holy revenge of your former
negligence, you may now mend your pace, and double your diligence in Sion way,
yea and quicken not only your selves, but one another, as they in Jer. 50. 5.
Come and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that
shall not be forgotten. Let us endeavor as those that have a mind to dwell
in heaven together, hand in hand to make constant progress in this good way.

Quest. Is there but one good way to soul-refreshing rest, must all travelers
toward Sion come into the very same way?

Answ. Without doubt Jesus Christ is the one way, Joh. 14. 6. by his blood that
one new and living way is opened, Heb. 10. 20. there is one way of repentance
for our sins, of faith in Gods promises, of obedience to his commands, in
which all Christians should walk, as being the only way that leads to
communion with Jesus Christ, and to an heavenly rest by him. It concerns all
Christians of all ranks, of all sorts, to come into this one way, and with
oneness of heart to walk herein. In it self it is a mercy very desirable,
that w^e might enjoy the blessed fruit and accomplishment of that promise, in
the full extent of it, Jer. 32. 39. I will give you one heart, and one way.
This being part of the Covenant, you should have it in your eyes, make it the
matter of your Prayer, and the object of your endeavor.

The happy conjunction of purity and unity, Zeph. 3. 9. was an argument that
God was making a restoration of his Israel. Then I will turn to the people a
pure language, that they may call on the name of the Lord to serve him with one
consent. In the Hebrew pure lip, and one shoulder. This is most lovely, to see
the people of God, having a pure lip in his Worship, and one shoulder, in doing
his Work. This promoted Temple work not a little, after the return from the
Captivity, when the people gathered themselves together as one man to
Jerusalem, Ezra 3. 1. This was the beauty of the Primitive Church, that there
was such an Harmony of spirits amongst the Christians of those times, Act. 2. 1.

It is an observation of a Learned Divine, from that passage in 1 Kin. Quam
maxim curandum est ut ne in Ecclesia strepitus contenti^^^ a^t schismatu^
audiantur. V^inam hoc Deus tandem elargiatur ut omnes in domo sua i^ them
dicamus and sentiamus. P. Mayr. in 1 Reg. 6. 7*
6. 7. while the Temple was in building, there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor
any tool of iron heard in the house; that thence we should learn, in Church
affairs, in matters of Religion, to manage all with sweet peace and unanimity;
That no noise of contentions and schisms (says he) might be heard, O that
God would grant this mercy, that in his house we might all think and speak
the same thing.

But it was a great blemish to the Church of Corinth, that the Church which
should have preserved unity within it self, broke into diverse parties, into
several little Corporations, some crying up Paul, others Apollo, others
adhering to Cephas, 1 Cor. 1. 12. notwithstanding those strong reasons against
divisions, mentioned, ver. 13. Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you?
or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? how uncomely then are such divisions
amongst you? Paul was very serious and affectionate, Romans 16. 17, 18. I beseech
you Brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, for they are such as serve not
our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words, and fair
speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. Church divisions do both weaken
friends, and strengthen enemies, and so much disparage Religion, that they
discourage comers on to it; and make some candidates, 1 Cor. 14. 23.
some probationers, fly off. Yea, too many are ready to resolve to be of no
Religion, because they see so many Religions in England. It were worth rivers
of tears, could we obtain that mercy from God, that these differences
amongst us might be reconciled, that all you in London, who inquire after the
good way, might once come into the same way.

Quest. Though unity joined with purity be very desirable, yet what if there
should be a toleration of diverse ways in a Church, in a Kingdom? why not?

Answ. First, Here we must wisely distinguish betwixt opinions and practices;
It cannot be expected that all good men should ever come to be of the same
opinion in every thing. Neither indeed do all Truths equally concern us; There
are several degrees of necessity about matters of Religion, which will admit
variety of opinions in some of them.

1. Some things are always and simply necessary, as necessary means
Necessitas, 1. Causae. 2. Conditionis. requisitae. 3. P^aecep^i.
and causes by which we must be saved; Thus faith in the Trinity.

2. Other things are necessary, as requisite conditions, without which a man
cannot be saved; Thus conversion from sin to God.

3. Some other things are only necessary, in that they are commanded by God,
or may be deduced from his Word, and therefore are to be obeyed according to
that knowledge a man has, or may have of them; About some of these, such as
are of the lowest degree, not being fundamental, godly and learned Divines
may differ in some opinions.

Again, these opinions are either kept private or made public. Doubtless
when they are not published and propagated to the disturbance of others, much
indulgence may be shown to dissenting Brethren, who peaceably enjoy their
own opinions. And as diverse Truths admit a latitude, so likewise some
practices, into which those Truths lead, in both which some differences may be
borne. It is observed, Paul and Barnabas jarred, yet both Preached the Gospel;
Cyprian and Cornelius differed in judgment, yet both pillars of the Christian
Faith; Chrysostom and Epiphanius disagreed, yet both Enemies to the Arians.
Indeed if men will vent their own conceits, (as commonly they are big with
them, longing to be delivered) whereby they puzzle and distract others, it
much alters the case, and makes them more incapable of connivence, and that
especially when their opinions tend to such practices, as undermine the power
of godliness, or peace of the Church. Christ blamed it in the Church of
Pergamus, that such were suffered there, Rev. 2814. who held such doctrine, as
taught one to cast stumbling blocks before others.

Quest. May any compulsion be used by Magistrates, to draw people into the one
good way?

Answ. It is concluded by most able, godly, and sober Divines, that in some
cases power may lawfully and seasonably be employed in matters of Religion.

1 Power may and must endeavor to hinder the blaspheming of the True Religion,
and to suppress the propagating of a false Religion. See Dr. Ames his cases of
Conscience. l. 4. c. 3. quest. 9.
Consider Deuteronomy. 13. Inticers to Idolatry were to b^e stoned to death, and that
doubtless in a judicial way.

2. Though men cannot be compelled to the profession of the True faith; yet by
Authority they may be even constrained to attend upon the means of knowing
God, and that good way which leads to him.

Consider zealous Josiahs example, 2 Chronicles. 34. 33. If you cannot persuade men
to be good Protestants, yet strive to keep them from acting Popery, bring
them into the light of the Sun of Righteousness, possibly they may learn
thereby to abhor Popish darkness.

And now especially when we have so solemnly Covenanted for the extirpation of
Popery, far be it from any to dispute for a toleration thereof, or to give way
to any such Principles as will by natural consequence infer it.

Quest. What then shall we do with all those in England, who are engaged in
different ways, both in regard of their opinions and practices?

Answ. It should make us lie in the dust and melt into tears, that we have so
many distractions in the Church by reason of differences amongst us. One
extremity has begotten another. Many desiring to run far from Popery and
Prelacy, (which formerly oppressed their spirits) have now before they were
aware, engaged themselves in the very quarters of the Arminians and Socinians,
joining with them to undermine the Civil Magistracy, the calling and power of
the Ministry, to enervate the Sacraments, and question the immortality See
Peltz. Harmon. A^^^c. 17. 19, 20, 21.
of the soul. (Witness a dangerous Book lately written, pleading for the
mortality of the Soul, which will open the floodgates of profaneness,) and
so poor hearts are in danger to lose the good way* Yet alas, how much do
they perplex themselves and discourage others, as if the Reformers in
Parliament, and Assembly were acting the part of the Horns, Zach. 1. 21. to
scatter Judah and Jerusalem, uttering these sad expressions, We shall not be
tolerated, we must be banished, the persecution is like to be as hot as
under the Prelates, and so much more inflame the present troubles? I shall
briefly suggest two things for resolving this great doubt proposed, which
puzzles so many.

First, Before we speak or think of tolerating or banishing, let us all, both
Minister and people, labor to reduce all those from their errors, who are gone
out of the good Way. Too many weary themselves and others, in projecting what
shall become of people, who are of this and that way, but rather let us lay out
our most serious thoughts, how we may recover them who are seduced, Jam. 5.
19, 20. It is an high act of Mercy to convert a sinner from the error of his
way, we shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, do
what you can to save them, as Jude directs, ver. 22 23.

Secondly, Let us endeavor not only to reduce some from their gross errors,
into the good way, but also seek such a reconciliation of lesser differences,
with others, that Brethren who hope to spend eternity in Heaven together, may
walk peaceably and lovingly in this good way. Inquire what latitude in opinion
and practice the Scripture allows. No good Christian will desire more. Some
things the Apostles commanded as being necessary, some things they commended
and advised as being expedient, some other things which were merely
indifferent, they left indifferent without the least violation of the Churches
Liberty. Let every one of us please ^i^ neighbor for his good to edification,
Romans 15. 2. O that we could all endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of pea^^! Paul presses this upon us by seven strong reasons in three
short verses, Eph^s. 4. 4, 5, 6. and indevours to ingageus hereunto with most
sweet affectionate expressions, in Phil. 2. 1, 2. If therefore any consolation
in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any
bow^ls and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye may be like minded, having
the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. A reducing of some into the
good way, that leads to Soule-refreshing rest, a composing of differences
amongst others who walk therein, will so answer this question, as to prevent
the inconvenience of such a toleration as some desire, and the danger of that
banishing which others fear.

Give me leave, Right Honorable and beloved, to bespeake the improvement 3.
Use. Exhortation. Endeavor to bring others into that good way which leads to
soulerefreshing ^est.
of your wisdom and zeal, of your interest and influence, for the carrying
on of this soule-refreshing design* Do not satisfy your selves, that God
has brought you into the good way. It is indeed an admirable mercy, worthy of
everlasting praises, that when your faces were Devill-ward and Hell-ward, he
has turned so many of them Christ-ward and Heavenward. I hope you love the
souls of your children, friends, servants and people, so well, that you will
easily be persuaded to bestirre your selves seriously how to bring them who yet
go astray by ignorance, profaneness or security, into the good way, that
they may all find rest with you therein.

It will stand upon record for the honor of this renowned City what you have
done since these public troubles began for the good of the Church, and for
the good of the State, what you have given to quench these sparks ere they
brake out into devouring flames; And I question not but when ever the
Chronicles of these times shall come to be written, the zeal, the fidelity,
the self-denial, the courage, the diligence of this famous City will fill
whole Pages with your just and due commendation. Not only families, but houses
of Parliament; not only Countries, but Kingdoms are sensible of your
forwardness; and (do daily) bless God for it. Well! give me leave now as a
poor Minister of Jesus Christ, to press one thing more upon you, viz. that
you would erect some further monument, holding a proportion with what you have
done already; something worthy of this religious, this renowned City, That you
would lay a train how to reduce poor souls that go astray, and how to bring
them into a good way, that leads to eternal rest. It is my advantage that I
have the opportunity to speak in such an auditory, upon such an argument.

There is great reason that we should take notice of what cost and 1 122.
Maimed Soldiers and other diseased persons cured this last year in Saint
Bartholomews Hospital.
charges you have been at this last year in the four Hospitalls of this
City, and in the maintenance of the great number of poor children and others;
I need not go over all the particulars, they have been read again and again
to your honor; many whose wounds have been healed by you, are blessing God for
you, and many hungry bellies which you have fed, are magnifying him, and many
children I hope are learning to bless the name of that God that has put it
into your hearts, to do so much good for them: and I am confident Mat. 25. 42,
43, 46.
you will hear comfortably of it hereafter at the day of Judgment: Possibly
all this may be done, and yet some further care to be Directions for the
bringing others into this good way.
taken for the reducing of souls into such a good way, that might lead them to
their eternal rest; and to this purpose I will be bold to suggest some few
directions.

First, Lay a train for the education of youth in the knowledge of 1. Lay a
train for educating Children in the good way.
this good way, for the multiplying of such faithful guides as may discover
and lead others into this way. It is a piece of Luthers counsel: if ever you
would have a good Reformation, look to the education of Children; You cloth
their bodies, and you feed them. Prove. 22. 6.
It is mercifully done, it is good Gospel fruit, it is worthy of Christianity:
But I beseech you withal take care for their precious souls; Acquaint them
betimes with Gods ways.

And you more especially, that have the government of this famous City, look to
your City Schools; look that there be principles of Look^ ^o your School^s,
and Schoo^e* maste^.
Religion, as well as Learning, laid, and sown, and scattered among these young
Generations. So you will lay a train indeed to bring their souls into the
good way; and to this purpose, provide that there may be more faithful guides
to steer and direct them in this way: That were indeed an enterprise worthy of
such a City as this is. Let us not be ashamed to learn any thing from the
Jesuits, (which is fit to be learned from them) who are most studious in this
Jesuits ^o^^y.
art; they go up and down, and observe what youths are most pregnant, who are
likely to be good disputants, and who are likely to be good Statesmen, and
who are likely to be good Orators; and out of each of these, they will take a
number, whom out of the public charge they will maintain, that their parts
and abilities may be improved to the greatest advantage, both to themselves,
and the Commonwealth. I doubt not, but this City might honor God, and honor
themselves, in some such course as this is: In all your Hospitalls, in all your
Schools, let there be a wise observing by those that are able to discern
what is the proper genius, spirit, and disposition of young Youths, where is
any of special parts, that has not only seeds of piety, but singular
indowments of nature: And though I would be loath to press upon so bountiful
a City as this, any thing that might add to your vast charges which you have
been already at, yet I could wish with all my heart, that some public Stocks
were raised, in some way most suitable; that such as I speak of, might be
maintained and consecrated to the study of Learning; and being sent to the
Universities, might prove in their generations, faithful guides in this good
way.

God has been pleased already to shine upon us in the hopeful beginning of
Reformation of Universities; and every one of us in our way and place, are to
further that work wherein we are all, more or less, especially concerned.
This will most Succesfully be done, by sending such persons thither, as may
be most capable of improvement there; which may not for want of parts be
discouraged from following those studies which shall there be required of
them; and then for want of employment in their studies, runneout into such
vicious courses, as may make them to rue the day that ever they came thither.
The rule which Parents have gone by formerly, in making such and such Children
Scholars, has been a respect to their own education; They have been Scholars
it may be themselves, and therefore think that their Sons (however qualifed)
must needs be so also; and others, by very sinister respects; Gentlemen, if
they have diverse Children, to make Scholars of those which are the youngest, as
a shift, rather then a calling, and somewhat whereby they might rather provide
for their worldly subsistence, then for the service of the Church and
Commonwealth. Now that which I commend to your Wisdoms in this point of
public Education, is to be carried by another Consideration; to wit, of the
pregnancy of parts and capacity in Children; such being cherished and promoted
in Learning, they may by Gods blessing prove able guides to bring others into
the good way.

Secondly, look to your Family Religion: For as your Schools have 2. Look to
Religion in your Families.
a subordination to Universities; so Families to Schools. The reformation of
the one, will not so much avail, without reformation of the other. And both
have a subordination to the Church.

To this intent, let Masters, let Parents, (Oh that Husbands and Wives likewise
would love one another Soul, so well as to be quickening and helping forward
one another in this good way!) I say, let Masters, let Parents catechize their
Children, and Servants, and instruct them in the principles of Religion:
Doubtless this is the way to make them fit to be useful Church Members. You
expect the Minister should do all, truly there will not so much be done,
unless you maintain an harmony of Ordinances. When a Minister shall Preach,
and Catechize, and instruct in Public; and when a Father shall deal with his
Children when he comes home in private, and call them to an account of their
profiting by the public administrations; Oh this harmony being maintained, it
will still lay a better train, how to reduce those that go astray. It is a
most unhappy thing, that many times the Master and Mistress come to Church
themselves, when it may be the servants in the mean while, are in Tavernes and
Alehouses, and up and down in one corner of the Suburbs or other, and
possibly you never so much as question them at night, where they have been,
and what account they can give of the Sermon which has been Preached, what
Manna they have gathered this day; if you would reduce your Servants Souls, if
you would have them obtain happy rest, love them so well as to be preparing
them by Religious principles, to walk in this good way. D^ale not with your
Servants, as you do with your Horses; let them work out their strength and
spirits, and when they have served you so long, there is an end; what becomes
of their souls and eternal condition, many of you care very little; whereas
indeed you should rather consider, you are as well entrusted with their Souls,
as they entrusted with your Estates; may be thy Servants Sins stand upon thy
account, some of them may now be roaring in Hell, for those offenses, which
either they learnt from thee, or were borne in by thee. O be entreated to have
an eye upon your Families; too many of them look too like the Devils Chapels;
give diligence Josh. 24. 15.
rather that they may be little Churches to the great God. How sweet will this
Rest be, if after thy praying and use of all good means, that thy Children
may be found Gods Children, thy Servants, Gods Servants, walking in the good
way; Parents and Children, Masters and Servants may keep house together
eternally in heaven?

Thirdly, encourage your faithful Ministers, not only in Preaching; 3.
Encourage your Ministers who are your guides in this good way, to Catechize and
to expound the Scriptures.
but in short Catechizing and brief expounding the Scriptures; such exercises
might prove a very compendious method to lead many into the good way: Let able
Ministers study to Preach plainly, yet ordinary hearers are not at the first
capable of the series of a set Discourse, unless they be prepared for this,
by teaching them the A. B. C. of Christanity in the very principles, and by
giving them line upon line, and precept upon precept in some easy and familiar
manner. If the Lord please to bless us with this fruit of Reformation, that
reading of long Liturgies, be turned into short expounding of Scriptures, when
they are read in the public Assemblies; by some brief hints to clear
difficult, and press most seasonable places upon the hearers; doubtless it
might reduce many, and much edify other peoples souls in the good way. Many
parts of England have already tasted the sweetness^ of this exchange. I know no
place which might more easily obtain this 2 Timothy 2. 15.
precious advantage then this City, where you have so many able Teachers, who
know how to divide the word aright. Why should not you Westminster Abbey.
have such morning Exercises in London, as are lately set up in your Neighbor
City; wherein your good Scribes might open their Treasures, Matthew. 13. 52.
bringing forth new and old, to the enriching of your souls? Hereby you might
recover much precious time, out of the hands of sleep and sloathfullnesse, and
without making any great breach in your ordinary employments, get a good
Gospel breakefast next your heart in the morning: You would trade the better
all the day, if you begin first to trade with Christ in the morning: Yea hereby
your Soule-Nurses, giving you the sincere milk of Gods word, drop by drop, you
would be better prepared for strong meat, and enabled to walk actively in the
good way.

Fourthly, forget not to throw stumbling blocks out of the good way. Throw all
stumbling blocks out of the good way. 1 Pet. 2. 12.
If ever you would reduce souls, represent Religion, as a lovely and
beautiful thing, that so you may commend it to the hearts and consciences of
them among whom you live: O this might gain many into the good way. People
judge of Religion as they find; you may spend many hours in your Closet, and
they taste it not; You may spend many days in public Fasts, they taste not
that presently; but now if your Religion makes you also just, and makes you
merciful, and good Neighbors, and good Landlords, and good in your Relations,
all you deal with will taste of your Religion; but though such a man or woman
hears so many Sermons, and such a Lord and Lady frequents so many Fasts, if
still as hard hearted, and as proud, and as censorious, and as vain, as ever;
here you cast a stumbling block in the way of Religion. O that this might be
the varnish of every ones Religion; the more you profess the Gospel, labor
to be the more exact and just in your walking, expressing a Phil. 1. 27.
Gospel conversation: It is a great scandal to the Gospel when every good
man is not a good husband to his wife, and every good woman is not a good wife
to her husband, nor every good man when he is called to it is not a good
governor, nor every good Christian in his place is not a good servant; why,
there are graces fit for every condition, there are conjugall graces, a spirit
of government, a ministerial spirit; now I heartily commend this to you, as
you would commend Religion, and win reputation to it, throw all stumbling
blocks out of the good way, expre^sing such a gracious carriage as your
relation and condition requires. In Col. 3. 12, 13. see what a chain of graces
there the Apostle linkes together; Put on as the elect of God bowels of
merci^s; It were an excellent thing for all good Christians to have a merciful
disposition: Oh pity poor wounded men, pity poor blind souls, pity those
that go astray: And as you should have bowels of mercy, so kindness, have not
only a mere pity of them, but also do kindness to them; And withal put on
humbleness of mind toward them. It may be if you are able to do them good
and kindness, you will proudly insult over them, therefore put on humbleness
of mind; and if you be kind to them, and they injurious to you, add meekness
to it; and what if they be very injurious? put on long-suffering; here is
Christianity in that you will have bowels of mercy, and kindness, and though you
be able to be kind you will not be proud of it, and if they be not so
thankful as they should, yet you will be meek, and if they go on to add
injury to injury, you will be long-suffering: And I pray forget not the rest,
and forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you; you will say you will
forbear at least for a time; but though you forgive you will not forget, but
you will watch an opportunity to revenge: Oh but you must both forbear and
forgive one another, thus to represent Religion that it may be known; In such
an house there dwells such a people, they are famous for Religion, and (blessed
be God) not only religious, but just, and merciful, and meek, and not rash,
and censorious, and precipitant, and the like: doubtless this will contribute
much to draw poor souls into the good way. 5. Maintain a strict and holy
observation of the Lords (...).


Fifthly, there is another thing that must be remembered, Improve your power, you
wh^ are Magistrates and governors in families, and others; Improve your power
to keep up the honor of the Lords day, our Christian Sabbath, blessed be God
that put it into the hearts of the great Counselors in the high Court of
Parliament lately to set forth an Ordinance for the The Church in England has
been famous for family ^eligion, and Sabbath Religion* and ^ound much blessed
fruit thereof* Exodus 20. 11.
strict and solemn observation of the Lords day* I hope you will act it, and
indeed if ever you would maintain Religion in a place, main^^ine the Lords
day, and the solemn and holy observation of it; God has given a spetiall item
to that precept Remember, Exodus 28. 8. he would have all other Commandments
remembered no question, but he knows we are ready to forget that, and it is of
much consequence to be remembered; It is a day of blessing and of
sanctification: If you would have your peoples hearts sanctified, Oh train
them to sanctify Gods day, and to attend on Gods Ordinances; It may be that
he may drop the grace of sanctification into them, Let the fear of God, I
beseech you, and conscionable observance of this pious Ordinance, set all the
wheels of Authority on going, and moving regularly in their several spheres,
that the Lords day may be more carefully observed; suffer not (as many
governors do) buying and selling, not sporting and playing on that day,
whereby so many are hardened in profane and ungodly ways, you will find the
comfort of it, Religion have a sensible progress, God delights to show
himself to his people on that day. And therefore do what you can to engage
all others to attend on public ordinances that day, doubtless many, many
souls may be reduced to the good way, if this method be wisely observed.

Lastly, remember your solemn Covenant whereby you are engaged 6. Promote the
keeping as well as the taking of the solemn Covenant.
to such personal and public reformation, as would bring many into that way
which lead^ to rest, we are happily brought under the bond of it, the three
kingdoms were united among our selves and to our God hereby: Oh be as careful
to keep it, as you were cheerful in the taking of it; Rest is the precious
fruit of the Covenant, 2 Chronicles. 15. 15. they took the Covenant cheerfully,
and God gave them Rest, let us not only take it but keep it, and engage
others what we can thereto; let us all be Covenanters indeed according to our
obligation, and walk in the good way of obedience to God, that so this
Covenant may be a Covenant of peace, and a Covenant of rest to us; a Covenant
of rest to all our souls, a Covenant of rest to the Church, a Covenant of rest
to the kingdom; yea to all the three kingdoms which are united together in it.

I should now come to the third observation drawn from the 18. and Verse 18,
19.
19. Verses, from the last general part of the Text, the woeful fruit of their
wretched self-will. We will not (say they) we will not hearken, but what says
God, he calls the nations, he calls the earth to take notice of it what he
will do against them, he will bring evil upon this even the fruit of their
thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto my words, nor to my Law, but
rejected it.

The wilful rejecting of Gods gracious admonition is a most provoking evil, 3
Observat.
which betrays a people into the hands of heavy judgments.

The more of God there is in any admonition, in any of his dispensations, the
more glorious they are; The more of our self^-will there is in any of our
carriages, the more odious and abominable they are in the sight of God; When
Matthew 7. 1. Romans 12. 19. Isa. 42. 8. Tres h^min^ species ma^im^ Deo faciunt
injuriam: Regidi ^^i anf^runt ei ^udicium, i^acundi, qui vindictam* superbi,
qui gloriam. Use.
our proud spirits boil up to such an height of de^iance against him (as here
they did) the Lord seeing himself so much affronted, is engaged to vindicate
his honor by bringing some great evil upon them. God has three Prerogatives
which he will not part with; judgment is his, he will not allow us to judge
one another; vengeance is his, he will not allow us to revenge our selves, his
glory is so dear to him, that he will not give it to another; when any one
through pride shall incroach upon that royal prerogative, he will make it
appear that he resists the proud by bringing some breaking evil upon them, as
Exodus 18. 11.

One word to end all is this, and it is a proper work for the day, This
justifies God in all the judgments, and calamities that now lie on sinful
England, a day of humiliation should be a day of selfe-abasing, and a day of
justifying our God, and when we consider how Gods gracious admonitions have
been slighted, what unanswerable entertainment they have had in England, how
ill we have requited all the gracious offers, and tenders he has made unto us,
we may all go mourning home, and even bemoaning the sad fruit of our own
wretched carriage that now lies on us, and still all must speak this
language, The Lord is most righteous, it is Gods mercy that England has not
been in Irelands condition before this day, so many gracious, so many loving
admonitions have been slighted, and that with so high affronts, when God has
sent to us by his Prophets, when God has called upon us, when God has sent
mercies Ambassadors, when God has preached from heaven by his judgments, yet
we have still given him a negative, a proud and stubborn negative, we have
again and again answered him, We will not: me thinks we may look upon
our selves if God would deal with us according to our deservings, even in
Jerusalems case, and we might even weep over poor England Luk 1 9. 41, 42.
as our Savior wept over Jerusalem, that because they were not sensible of the
day of their visitation, they did not consider and know those things that
belonged to their peace, now they are bid from their eyes, now thy house shall
be left unto thee desolate. It is a miracle of patience and goodness, that God
should bear with us all this while, when he has had such high affronts; when
his own Name, when his dear Son, when his blessed Spirit, when his Covenant,
when the Minister of the Covenant, when the seals of the Covenant, when all
these dispensations of God, have bin so affronted, so contemned in England; and
when we have so much slighted the day of our Visitation: it is a wonder that
Countries, that Cities, that al is not left desolate before this time. Yea,
when we consider that in Ezekiel. 24. 13, 14. In thy filthiness is lewdnes, because
I have purged Ezekiel. 24. 13. 14
thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness
any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee; It might sad our hearts
to think, Oh! if this should be unworthy, sinful Englands portion; in thy
filthiness is lewdness, and because I have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged, God has put us into the fire, to see if we will let go our dross,
but the Lord knows we are not purged: what if God should throw England off, and
give us up to Popery and Slavery, and leave us as a prey to bloodthirsty men?
What if God should cause his fury to rest upon us? O still we should justify
him in these sad tokens of his displeasure, for we have peremptorily, out of
proud, rebellious selfwill, denied to submit to God, and to stoop to him, and
to come into the good way, when he has called us. This City has been an Arc
to this poor Kingdom, and many of his faithful Servants have been sheltred in
this Arc: You have sent out (it is true) your Doves; you have sent out Regiment
after Regiment, and one Messenger after another, and though God has brought
them back again with Songs of preservation* and victory, and deliverance, yet
they have not brought an Olive branch of peace, yet we cannot hear that
welcome news: Me thinks we may take up the sad complaint in Psalm. 74. 9. We
know not how long, there is no Prophet amongst us, that can tell us how long It
would pose all the Prophets in England to tell you, when these unnatural
sparks shall be quenched; and when God will call back the Commission he
has given to this Sword, to do that execution in several parts; still there
are abroad Nimrods, Sons of violence, that drive apace, even after Hannibals
cruelty; That when he saw a pit filled with man's blood, he cried, O formosum
spectaculum, O beautiful sight! The Lord if it be his will, put a check on
those that are so barbarously cruel: yet, howsoever the malice, and the fury
of men may be let out, we must still justify God in all this; and let us
begin at home, and let you and I now lay our hands on our hearts in particular;
O my self-will, and my rebellion against my God, and my checking the motions of
his Spirit, and my slighting Gods gracious offers! I have gathered some sticks
to kindle this fire.

That fire that is in the North, and that fire that is in the West, and that
fire that has been in several parts of the Kingdom; and there is not a man
nor woman here present, but has given in some fuel to those fires, by their
self-will: O now let us abase and humble our selves, and honor our God in
justifying him, and let us accept of the punishment of our iniquities, that the
Lord may remember his Covenant, and remember the Land. It is tree, the Lord
has been pleased to show various dispensations toward us, he^ Lev. 26. 41, 42
has been calling upon us, wooing and soliciting England to come into this
good way. Sometimes he has given us Physic, many potions; we Diverse means
used by God for our recovery.
have had a great deal of strong Physic, he has made us sick at heart, many
great shakings there have been; he has not only given us strong potions, but
he has likewise let us blood, and he has opened many vei^^^ we have lost
Noble blood, and precious blood, a great deal of blood of the Gentry; and a
great deal of precious City blood too, and a great de^^ of blood in the
Country. Yea, and as God has given us potions, and strong Physic, and let us
blood; so he has given us Cordials, we have Yesterday, April. 23. 1644. A day
of Thank^sgiving for the good success the Lord gave at Sel^y in Yorkshire.
had good success, witness our solemn days of Thankesgiving; God has
visibly owned his cause in time of need; and though we be not ripe for mercy,
God will not suffer us to be ruined, he gives such and such Victorier* that
shall at least be preservations of us. O let us take heed that we provoke not
our God to withdraw his loving kindness from us; and if he let ou^ more blood,
that City and Country both should swim in blood, let us rather stir up
ourselves, and one another* That we may get into such a^ Humiliation, into such
a Reforming posture this day for our particulars, (and beg the like mercy for
all the Congregations in England) that we may find God turning his gracious
hand on us, and making good that place of Scripture to us, Isa. 1. 25. I will
turn my hand upon thee, and purely Isa. 1. 25, 26. 27.
purge all thy dross, and take away all thy tin, and will restore thy Judges
^^ ^ the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning, afterward thou shall
be called the City of righteousness, the faithful City; Sion shall be
redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness. Were not this
worth rivers of tears, worth many more days of humiliation, and seeking of
our God* That the Lord would be merciful to the Country, and merciful to ou^
Armies, and merciful to our Counselors, and merciful to this City* that the
Lord would grant us to be so purged, that it might be an evidence to us that
we should be redeemed; that this City of London might become a City of
righteousness, a faithful City; that being a righteous City* and a faithful
City, it might be a City of Peace, both within her self, and toward all
others that seek it of her; that she may be always a terror to the Churches
enemies, and their adherents; but a friend and support to all those that love
the truth, as the truth is in Jesus? And to this (I hope) you will all say,
Amen.

FINIS.

