THE Foundation OF THE Font DISCOVERED To the view of all that desire to behold
it.

AND, The baptizing of Men and Women when they believe (in rivers and
fountains) proved to be a standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ to the end
of the world; By plain Scripture Proof.

In Answer To Mr. Cook's Font uncovered, for Infant Baptism; And To Mr.
Baxter's Plain Scripture Proof for Infants Church Membership and Baptism.

With a word sometimes upon occasion to Mr. Hall's Font-guarded; which is more
fully answered by Thomas Collyer.

BY HENRY HAGGAR, A servant of Christ, and the Congregations of his Saints.

And they were all baptized of John in the river of Jordan, confessing their
sins.

Mark 1.5. And whom they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the
kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and
women.

Acts 8.12. And John also was baptizing in Enon, near to Salim, because there
was much water there: and they came, and were baptized.

Joh. 3.23. And the eunuch said, See, here is water; what hinders me to be
baptized? And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may,
etc.

Act. 8.36, 37. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-eagle at
the west end of Paul's. 1653.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader.
BY this I give thee to understand, that I should not have troubled thy
patience with these ensuing lines, knowing there are so many books extant, but
that many whose judgments are not rightly informed in the truth, would still
have thought (as they have many times said) that the things which I here write
against are not, nor cannot be answered; although they were answered even
before they came forth, both by the holy Scriptures, which they seem to lean
upon; and also by other men's writings gathered out of the Scriptures: yet a
great number of men remain very confident that these books (viz) Mr. Cooks Font
uncovered for Infant Baptism, and Mr. Baxters Plain Scriptureproof for Infants
Church Membership and baptism, do still remain unanswered and unanswerable. For
which cause, I thought my self in conscience bound (being also concerned in one
book by name, and challenged to answer) to use the talent that God has given
me, for his glory, the vindication of his truth and people, and also for the
good of those which as yet are not the people of God: that so I may remove the
reproaches and slanders cast upon my self and others falsely, for the truths
sake; and take away those stumbling blocks which are laid before those which as
yet walk in darkness, and know not whereat they stumble, because the God of
this world has blinded their eyes (so)by setting their Faith in the wisdom of
men, and not in the power of God, that the light of the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ does not yet shine into their hearts, neither do they believe what
is written in the holy Scriptures for their instructions; but do turn aside
their ears from the truth, and are turned unto F^bles, 2 Timothy 4.4. therefore I
have resolved in the strength and wisdom of the Lord, once more to present my
self publicly in Print to the view of all men, whether friends or enemies; not
questioning the courteous and loving acceptance of the one, nor fearing the
subtilty and malice of the other: but do earnestly desire the good and
happiness of all, being also fully assured that the Lord will not fail me of a
blessing upon these my weak endeavors: for he dispiseth not the day of small
things.

Furthermore, I give thee to understand, that the persons I have to deal with
in particular are two (viz.) Mr. Cook, and Mr. Baxter, as aforesaid; their
volumes together no less then sixty two sheets: therefore let not the Reader
think me too tedious in eighteen sheets; neither let any think me too short,
for these following reasons.

1. Because in their writings there is abundance of superfluous words, by which
they darken the counsel of God, and labor to subvert them that read and hear
them, but we are commanded to lay aside all superfluity of naughtiness, and to
receive the ingrafted word of God, which is able to save our souls, James.
1.21. 2. Because in the multitude of words there wants no sin, Prove. 10.19.
therefore I shall take heed of using any more then need. 3. Large Volumes are
in danger never to be read over; because some will not, and others are poor,
and cannot spare time or money for them. 4. Because I am commanded not to
answer a fool according to his foolishness, lest I be like him, Prove. 26.4. Now
if these men have spoken many words wherein there wants no sin, and have not
consented to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and the doctrine which is according to godliness; then they are fools,
knowing nothing, (as they ought to know) 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. but doting about
questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth; supposing that gain (viz. an hundred or two a year) is godliness: from
such we are commanded to turn away, and withdraw our selves: therefore none
can justly take exception at these words: for if it does appear still, when the
Reader has perused my lines, that there is no folly in their words, then my
folly will return upon my self, and they and their cause will be exalted.
Thus have you the reasons why I will be as brief as may be.

And if any shall say that I have been so brief, that I have not answered the
matter I took in hand;

I answer to all my Antagonists, Its the better for them if I come short of a
full answer, and they will have the greater advantage against me; and let them
take it, and spare not: therefore I desire all whom it may concern, to read and
consider wisely, and try it by the holy Scriptures of truth: judge impartially,
asking the Lord for wisdom to discern between things which differ: and the
Lord give you all understanding in all things that concern his glory and your
comfort: which is and shall be the prayer of me his unworthy servant, who
desires to remain to the utmost of my power,

Yours in the service of Christ Jesus my Lord, till death, Henry Haggar.

The Method and Order of this Book is a follows.
1. I Shall show what foundation the Saints ought to build upon. 2. I shall
discover the foundation of the Font, and show whence and how it came to be in
use; and that by the confession of those which make use of it. 3. Concerning
Infant Baptism, I shall show whence it came, and by whom it was brought into
the Church. 4. I shall answer to the beginning of Mr. Cooks Book, and to Mr.
Baxters 10 Positions; upon which (himself says) his whole Book stands, and
without which he confesses it caneot be understood (in his 3 page.) 5. I shall
answer in general to their Arguments about Infants Church Membership and
baptism; showing by the Scriptures, I. Why Infants that cannot speak nor
understand, cannot be Church Members under the Gospel. II. Why they cannot be
Christ's Disciples.
6. To Mr. Baxters 8. Arguments, by which he says he proves the Anabaptists
way of baptizing sinful. 7. Lastly, I shall show the reasons of our separating
from the Church of England; which stands upon these four Legs (viz) 1.
InfantBaptism. 2. Humane learning. 3. Tithes, their wages of unrighteousness.
4. The Magistrates sword: which they have used, 1. to support themselves. 2. to
persecute and pull down others.
ERRATA.
Page 71. line 4. for send nothing, can speak no salutations, read speak
nothing, can send no salutations.

NOw, according to the method propounded, I shall proceed to show,

First, What foundation the Saints ought to build upon; which Foundation is
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. for other foundation no man lays then that which is
laid; which is Christ Jesus: and the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.20. that we are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, of which Christ himself
is the chief cornerstone; in whom all the building fitly framed together,
grows to an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom you also are builded together,
for an habitation of God through the Spirit.

To this also agrees the words of Peter, 1 Pet. 2.3, 4, 5. If ye have tasted
that the Lord is gracious, to whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed
indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as living stones, are
built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices
holy and acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And again, it is also plain in the
words of Christ to Peter, when Peter said, Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God (then says Christ to him) Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Observe
upon what Rock; not Peter, as the Papists say, for Peter is called a stone, but
Christ is called a Rock, 1 Cor. 10.4. for they drank of that Rock which
followed them, and that Rock was Christ: and who, that is a Christian, knows
not, that the Church of Christ is built upon the Rock Christ? and therefore
David says, 2 Samuel 22.2. The Lord is my Rock, fortress and deliverer: and
verse 47. The Lord lives, and blessed be the God of the Rock of my salvation,
etc. All which I suppose will not be denied by any that own Christ.

But the (...) Question is, How the Saints may or ought to build upon this Rock
Christ?

Which is clearly answered by these following Scriptures, Mat. 7.24. in these
words:

Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them, I will l^ken
him to a wise man that built his house upon a Rock: and the rain descended, and
the floods came and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not,
because it was founded upon a Rock. etc.

From all which we learn that to build upon the Rock Christ, is to hear his
sayings, and do them: and those that hear his sayings, and do them not, are
likened unto a foolish man that built his house upon the sand etc. and to this
agrees the saying of the Apostle, Act. 3.22, 23. for Moses truly said to the
Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren,
like unto me; him shall ye hear, in all all things whatsoever he shall say unto
you: and it shall come to pass, that every soul that will not hear that
Prophet, shall be destroyed from the people: and that destruction is an ever
lasting destruction from the presence of God, and the glory of his power, 2
These. 1.8 9. Now seeing these things are so, it stands every soul in hand to
search after the sayings of this great Prophet Christ Jesus; and in searching
they shall find, that he sharply reproves all those that call him, Lord Lord
and yet do not the things which he says: Luke 6.46. and so says the Apostle,
1 John 2.4. He that says I knew him and keeps not his Commandments, is a
liar and the truth is not in him: and all Liars shall have their part in that
Lake which burreth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Rev. 21
8. And thus we see the imminent danger that all those are in, which say or
think they are Christians, and that they know Christ, and will call him Lord,
Lord; and yet not do the things that he has commanded them, nor keep his
sayings: the which danger to prevent, I shall briefly endeavor, by putting
down his Commandments and sayings in order as they were spoken by him, and
practiced by his Apostles and Saints in that generation.

And first, The sayings of the Lord Christ after his Resurrection, when he had
obtained of God the Father all power both in heaven and earth, are as
follows, Mat. 28.18.19.20. And Jesus came and spoke unto them saying. All
power is given unto me both in heaven and in earth: go ye therefore and teach
all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit;
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I
am with you always, even to the end of the world.

To this agrees his words in Mark. 16.15, 16. And he said unto them, Go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature: he that believes
and is Baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned,
etc.

These are the words, sayings, and Commandments of the Lord Christ, which we
ought to hear and obey as aforesaid.

From all which words we observe, 1 That he commanded the Gospel to be preached
to every creature, or all Nations. 2 The end was, that they might believe it. 3
That those which did believe it, should be baptized into his name. 4 That those
baptized believers were after to be taught to observe all other things
whatsoever Christ had commanded his Apostles to teach them. 5 To this practice,
viz. to a people thus walking according to this rule, hearing his sayings, and
doing them, the Lord Christ has promised his presence, saying, And lo, I am
with you always, even to the end of the world: but the end of the world is not
yet, therefore Christ is still with those baptized believers which do thus walk.

Thus have I showed the order of the words, as they were spoken by the Lord
himself: I shall now proceed to the example of the Apostles, and see whether
they did act accordingly, or whether they baptized children, as well as
believing men and women; or whether John the Baptist did baptize any children.
And if it can be proved by any word of God, that any baptized little babes that
cannot speak or understand, then I confess they that practice it may be born
with; and they which cry it down as Antichristian, superstition, and man's
traditions, may be to blame: now therefore to the words and testimonies of the
Lord.

Mark. 1.3.4.5. where we read first, of the voice, of one crying in the
wilderness, to prepare the way of the Lord, and to make his paths straight:
Secondly, that John baptized in that wilderness: and whom he baptized, is
evident in the following words: And he preached the Baptism of Repentance for
the Remission of sins: and there went out unto him all the Land of Judea, and
they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the River of Jordan,
confessing their sins, etc.

Thus we see that all that were baptized of John of the Inhabitants of Judea
and Jerusalem, were such as could and did confess their sins. But little
children that cannot speak, cannot confess their sins; therefore, none such
were baptized by John. See also Matthew. 3.5 6.

Thus it being clear by the Scriptures that John baptized men and women that
could believe and confess their sins, and not a word spoken of sucking
children, I shall now proceed to the works of the Apostles, to whom Christ gave
Commission as aforesaid, and see what they practiced.

Act. 2.40.41. we read; that when they preached and exhorted the people with
many words to save themselves from that untoward generation, then they that
gladly received his word, were baptized and added to the Church, etc. But
little babes of eight days, weeks, or months old, cannot gladly receive the
word of God, because they understand it not; therefore none such were baptized
there.

Object. But some will object, from ver. 39. that the Promise was to them and
their children; and therefore children may be baptized.

Answ. I grant, the Promise was to them, verse.38. that if they did repent; and
be baptized in the name of Christ for the Remission of sins; they should
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: and this is true also to their children, if
they did repent and obey the Gospel, as aforesaid: and so it is to us and to
our children, though never so far off, upon the same condition of Faith,
Repentance, and Baptism: for it is to all that the Lord our God shall call: but
they must be called first, observe that, ver. 39. And thus is the objection
fully answered.

Again, If ever the Apostle baptized children, it must needs be now, according
to their Argument who say, the Promise is to children, and therefore. But that
they baptized no such children, is evident, because they that were baptized,
were such as could and did gladly receive the word, and continued steadfastly in
the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread and Prayer: all
which little babes, that cannot speak words, nor understand Reason, cannot
possibly do: therefore none such baptized.

The next place is Act. 8.12. where we read that when they believed Philip
preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus
Christ, they were baptized both men and women, in express terms: but we never
read a word of little children.

Again, ver. 36, 37. we read that the Eunuch said to Philip, See, here is
water, what hinders me to be baptized? and Philip said, If thou believe with
all thine heart, thou may. But such little babes as these baptize, cannot
believe with all their hearts, therefore they may not be baptized; neither do
we yet in the least see that any such were baptized by the Apostles.

The next is Act. 10.46, 47 48. in these words, Can any man forbid water, that
these should not be baptized that have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?
And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. By all
which we see, that no such babes were here baptized: for all that were in this
place baptized, were such as had received the Holy Ghost as well as the
Apostles: and they heard them speak with tongues and magnify God; which
children, that cannot speak at all, cannot possibly do, all rational men will
grant.

The next is Lydia and her household, Act. 16.14, 15.

Now some say thus; Who knows but she might have little children?

To which I answer, if none know, then all ought to be silent, and not to
believe and affirm things they know not; for that is wickedness and folly: but
thus much we know: 1 That Christ commanded them to baptize them which believed.
2 Hitherto we have found them baptizing of none else. 3 The Scripture speaks of
no children she had, nor yet of any husband; and therefore silence gives no
commands to obey, nor no Promises to believe, nor no examples to follow.

Again, if she had an husband, he was baptized; for she and her houshoald were
baptized. Now if he had been baptized, he would surely have born the name in
the history, rather then she, being the head of the house.

Lastly, we read, ver. 40. that when Paul and Silas came out of prison, they
entered into the house of Lydia, and comforted the brethren, and departed: but
little babes are not capable of such comfort, therefore no such brethren in
Lydia's house, nor any ground at all to believe it from Scripture nor Reason.

The next is the Jailer, who was baptized with his household: from whence some
would draw the same Argument as from Lydia's, and persuade us that there were
children in his house: but the Text is plain against it; for it says, Act.
16.32, 33 34. that they spoke the word of the Lord to him, and to all in his
house: and he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes,
and was baptized he and all his, straight ways: and when he had brought them
into his house, he set meat before them, and rejoiced believing in God with all
his house. Thus the Scripture in plain words as it says the one, that he and
all his were baptized: so also it says, he with all his house believed in God:
and therefore if Mr. Cook will evade the one by his learned Exposition, in his
17 page, he may as well evade the other, and so conclude that none but he was
baptized. But consider the result of his labors: when he has labored by all
his wit and skill to pervert the Text yet he confesses that the Syriack.
Translation reads it thus: And he exulted, and all the children of his house,
even all of them, in the Faith of God. I pray let all rational men consider
what difference is between their all rejoicing and believing God, and exulting
even all of them in the Faith of God; but that the man labors to darken the
Counsel of God by these words words without knowledge, As in Job 38.2. And thus
the Lord takes the wise in their own craftiness: and the Lord knows the
thoughts of the wise that they are vain, 1 Cor. 3.19.20.

But one thing more I had like to have forgotten, viz. his seeming sophistical
answer to Act. 8.12. where the Text says plainly, that when they believed,
they were baptized both men and women. To this he answers in his 16 page,
that these words men and women are applyable to sexes rather then to ages; and
instanceth in Evah, who when Cain was born, she said, I have gotten a man from
the Lord. But what is this to our purpose? for she does not say that this man
believed the things concerning the kingdom of Jesus Christ: but those men and
women, Act. 8.12. were such as believed all these things: therefore your
Argument is false, and your self deceitful, and wise to do evil, as appears
by this your cunning craftiness, wherewith you lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians.
4.14.

Now the last Text is (in Act. 18.8.) that Crispus the chief Ruler believed in
the Lord with all his house: and many of the Corinthians, hearing, believed,
and were baptized.

Thus we have seen the command of Christ, and the practice of the Apostles
agreeing together; by which the foundation of the Saints is discovered, upon
which they ought to build, which is the words and sayings of Chirst, and the
practice and example of his holy Apostles: but not a word that I can find in
all the holy Scriptures, or sayings of Christ, the Prophets, or Apostles, about
the Baptizing in a Font, nor baptizing little infants, that can neither speak
nor understand: my, not so much as the name of that abominable Idol the Font,
is once mentioned in all the holy Scriptures; much less that the people of God
should sacrifice their children to it, as the children of Israel once
sacrificed their Babes to Molech: See Jer. 32.35. Therefore we may most safely
conclude, that it is none of the Council of God: for Paul says, Act. 20.27. I
declare unto you the whole Counsel of God: but in all Paul's writings, it is
nowhere declared: therefore it is none of Gods Counsels, nor for us to follow.

And now seeing there is no foundation nor footing for the Font, nor
Infant Baptism in all the word of God, we must (if we will discover it) seek
for it somewhere else: the which I confess is not worth the doing, were it not
to discover and make manifest the folly of them that uncover it, and guard it,
for infants baptism; and to that end, I shall do it.

Look into a book entitled A view of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law,
written by Sir Thomas Ridley Knight, and Doctor of the Civil Law, printed by
William Turner Printer to the University of Oxford, 1634. (Cum privilegio.)

In that book, page 176. he, although an enemy to us, yet confesses, that, the
Rites of baptism in the primitive times were performed in Rivers and
Fountains where the persons baptized received that Sacrament: and this manner
of baptizing (says he) the ancient Church entertained, from the example of
Christ, who was baptized of John in the river of Jordan: and some say, that
this was very tolerable in the of Eastern parts; but (says he) most certain
it is, that it was most convenient for that time, because their Converts were
many, and men of years; a reason also may be (says he) for that those ages
were otherwise unprovided of Fonts, and such conveniences as are now in use.
(Thus he confesses that Fonts were not then in use.) Again, says he, And
this has been the cause why this manner of baptizing was resumed in
aftertimes, and other places: for (says he) our venerable Bede tells us of
some that were baptized here in England in the river Swale, which runs
through part of Yorkshire in the North Riding; and he gives the same reason.
Nondum enim Oratoria vel Baptisteria in ipso exordio nascententes ibi Ecclesiae
poterant aedificari: Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 2. cap. 14.

And then he says, The days we now live in, have no other remainder of this
rite of baptizing in rivers and fountains, then the very name, and hence it is
(says he) that we call our vessels that contain the water of baptism, Fonts,
or Fountains. From all which, let the Reader consider, 1. That he confesses
that baptism in the ancient times was administered in Rivers and Fountains. 2.
That nothing of that is remaining but only the name. 3. That from thence it is
that they call those vessels they baptize in, Fonts.

And thus we have begun to discover the foundation of the Font.

But he proceeds further, and confesses, saying, This custom of baptizing
in Rivers and Fountains being discontinued, or left off, Fonts were erected in
private houses. Hence let the Reader observe, 1. He says the primitive
practice was to baptize is in Rivers and Fountains, which the ancient Churches
received from the example of our Savior, who was baptized of John in the River
of Jordan, Mat. 3.13, 14, 15, 16. 2. He says that was left off: observe, They
left off the example of Christ. 3. They erected Fonts in their own private
houses: observe here is the words of the Prophet Jeremiah fulfilled, Jer. 2.12
13. Be astonished O ye Heavens, at this; and be ye horribly afraid: be ye very
desolate, says the Lord: for my people have committed two evils; they have
forsaken (...)

2. There is a being without the law; that is, all the true knowledge of the
law; as infants, ignorants, Atheists; of which Paul himself said of himself,
that he was without the law: and this is from the sense and understanding of
it, Romans 7.9. 3. There is a being under the law in the external government of
it, in a Commonweal, and in the condition of the soul, as it is in unbelief,
Gal. 3.23. before faith came, we (even Jews and Gentiles) were shut up under
the law.
1. Those under the law internally, are to be under the external form of the
law, to be guided and instructed thereby, as by a Schoolmaster to bring them to
Christ. 2. Those without the law, are not freed from the law, though they are
judged by another law, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has shut up all men under sin;
that is, the law; even all those which are without law, and those under law
also. 3. All which prove the law of God to be the rule to judge by, that it is
indeed the Magna Charta, Suprema Lex, and Salus Populi: and now only is
judgment the Lords.
The second General to clear that that follows, is Deuteronomy. 6.1. These are the
Commandments, the Statutes, and the Judgments.
1. By the Commandments, I understand the 10 words given in two Tables by God
to Moses on Sinai, Exodus 20. which was the ground of Statutes. 2. The Statutes
are the several cases depending on each Command, and arising out of them, and
set down to direct the Judges how to Judge according unto God, in the matters
of God, laid down, in the first Tables; and in matter of men, in the second:
they being the absolute decrees of God, Judges and Judged must rest in, from
whence is no appeal; and is the ground of Judgment. 3. The Judgment contains
the sentence added to the breach of every law for punishment, or to obedience
of the law, for couragement therein, the promises of good and mercy, and is
only proper to Gods law: and curses added to his law, not man's; which is an
empty law.
Third General.
I. That though in the 4 last books of Moses is an often repetition of the
Statutes and Judgments, yet usually there is inserted in each of them some
weighty distinction, and not without great reason repeated: which, because of
my necessity, and brevity of time of writing, with my other employments, I have
omitted to observe, leaving it to your selves to do, as being the sole object
of your study and rule of life to live by. II. That as in the beginning God
divided government, committing some to Moses in the judicials, and other to
Aaron in the ceremonials, 1. Moses government in the law is not destroyed, Mat.
5.17. and cap. 23.2. 2. Aarons Priesthood, and with that his government,
cease; and in the place thereof, Jesus Christ, by the Fathers appointment, is
set up. Heb. 7.11, 12, 15, 16. 3. So that now as first there was Moses and
Aaron so now there is to be, to the end of the World, Moses and Christ, to rule
and govern the World by. 1. Moses in the World or State, under the covenant of
works, also the servant of Jesus Christ, ruling for him, because he is not of
the World. 2. Christ in the Church, among the Saints or believers, under the
new covenant of grace, among whom the Lord himself is, being one of them.

III. Those words, Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord thy God, cannot be said of, nor
applied to, any in that way as the words are delivered, but to those, 1. That
have covenanted with God in the way of the law, as the Israelites did. 2. That
are under the rule and government of the commands, the Statutes and Judgments
contained in that law.

Object. That was spoken only of those God brought out of Egypt, and concerns
not us.

Resp. As the Jews were under the bondage of Egypt, and were restrained from
Gods service, and were then not in covenant with him, nor had not his law to
judge by; so we have been under Antichrist, in Babel, and have been restrained
from Gods service, and were then not in covenant with the Lord, as they were
not; nor is his law set up as a rule to judge by among us: so that when God
shall have brought us out of Babel, and set up his laws, and brought us into
covenant with himself, according to Moses, it shall then be as binding to us,
that God brought us out of Babel, as to them, that he brought them out of
Egypt, Jer. 16.14.15. They shall no more say, The Lord Lives that brought them
out of Egypt, but out of the north countries, Jer. 23.7, 8, 9.

Note. Under the first covenant God was (...) under the second, (...), Hos.
2.16.

In the one, God is as Abram to Hagar, whose son she had by him was to be cast
out under the Gospel-estate; which was fulfilled in the casting out of
unbelievers from the society of Saints, they being not to inherit the promise,
that is Jesus Christ, Gal. 4.30. which work was then done, and shall be most
certainly done again in this age of ours. In the other, God is as Abraham to
Sarah, whose son Isaac being born of the freewoman, signifies the state of
the Church under the Gospel, under the name of Jerusalem from above, which are
a society of believers joined to the Lord Jesus in the fellowship of the
Gospel, in whom the better promises are conferred, and made over to the Saints,
born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.30.

Conclusion. The covenant of works was after the covenant made with Abraham of
grace; but being renewed in Christ, it is called new, and the new old, Gal.
3.17. The now first covenant, though it has not the best, yet, it has many
excellent promises necessary for the life annexed to it; which we wanting,
bodily are reduced to great necessities; and the breaking thereof brought ruin
and desolation suddenly to the Jews.

And though at this time it be not in esteem among men, yet the prophecy of
Isaiah 42.19, 21. incourageth me, that after Gods servant comes, who the blind
world accounts blind, though God says he is his servant, and perfect, and
which the Scripture before clearly shows was to come after the grand Apostasy
of Antichrist; I say, after he comes, the Lord will magnify the law, make it
great, though all the world have endeavored to make nothing of it, or of no
use at all a long time, when they shall again judge by it, and punish by it,
and rule by it, etc. yea, and more, the Lord will make it honorable also; they
shall never set up traditions in the place thereof again. O Parliament, This
God will do; but whether God will do this by you or not, and honor you herein
or not, I do not know: you see it is my desire, if it be his will, ye are
witnesses, and God also, that the work may be yours, who have door much of the
work of the Lord in the Nation; that the Honor here, and reward thereof
hereafter, may be yours: and let me speak freely to you thus, that if you will
not do it, God in few years will not want them that will do it; upon whom, and
whose posterity, the blessigs of God and the Nation will fall in great
abundance, who did that in their generation for them, was never done; it being
then, and never until then, fulfilled, that of Paul, Romans 10.19. I will
provoke you to jealousy by them that are not a people; that is, some heathens,
which none never yet did do, should, as the Jews, nationally covenant with God
in the covenant of Moses; with which the Jews, as awaked, begin to think that
people Jacob-like steal away, or God gives away his birthright from him: the
not doing whereof, delays their call. Now what Nation in all the world is like
to do this, as England! O that it might be offered them who would not refuse it.

The fourth General.
That to the Elders, Heads, and Judges, were other inferior subordinate
officers, to serve in the same rule, who have their authority from the
Scriptures, and from God, as the rest, Josh. 23.2. Deuteronomy. 16.18.

Command the First.
Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have no other gods before me.

Statutes.
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. Chap.
10.20. Fear the Lord thy God; him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou
cleave. Exodus 34.12. Take heed to thy self, that thou make no covenant with the
inhabitants. Verse 15. Lest thou and they go awhoring after their gods, and one
call thee, and thou eat of their sacrifice. Deuteronomy. 11.6. Take beed to your
selves, that your hearts be not deceived to turn aside to serve other Gods, and
worship them. Deuteronomy. 8.19. If thou forget the Lord thy God, and walk after other
Gods, and serve and worship them etc. Deuteronomy. Thou shall not go after other gods,
the gods of the people round about you. Exodus 23.24. Thou shall not bow down to
their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works: thou shall utterly
overthrow them, and quite break down their Images.
Judgments for serving strange Gods.
I. On the earth. Deuteronomy. 11.17. I will shut up heaven, and the land shall not
give her fruit. 1 Kings 17.1. This was fulfilled in the days of Ahab.
II. On the people or Nation. Deuteronomy. 8.19. Ye shall perish as the Nations god
destroyed before your face.
III. On particular persons. Numb. 25.3. Those joined to Baal-peor -- verse. 4.
were hanged by the head against the Sun, Dent. 4.3. Exodus 22.20. He that
sacrifices to any god save to the Lord alone, he shall be utterly destroyed.
Deuteronomy. 17.2. lf a man or woman have transgressed the covenant, and has served
other Gods, and worshipped them, either the Sun, or Moon, or any of the host
of beaven, which I have not commanded thee, verse. 4. If it be told thee (that
is, the judge) and thou have heard of it, and inquired diligently; and behold,
if it be true. and the thing certain that such abomination is wrought in
Israel, verse. 5. thou shall bring him or her forth to the ga^es -- and stone
them with stones until they dye -- and so shall thou put away evil from amongst
you. Note, so by the executing this sentence, and not any other of thy own:
then it abides with thee; for it was not the judges condemning, but the peoples
executing Gods command, Put away evil.
IV. Deuteronomy. 13.12. Contains judgment on a City for idolatry unpunished. 1. The
inhabitants and cattle are to be smitten with the sword. 2. The spoil thou
shall gather into the midst of the City, and burn both City and spoil. 3.
There shall naught of the wicked thing cleave to thy hand.
V. Deuteronomy. 18.6. If thy brother, son, daughter, wife, or friend, entice thee
secretly, saying. Let us go and serve other gods which thou have not known, nor
thy fathers, verse. 7. Thou shall not consent, hear, nor pity, nor spare, nor
conceal him; verse. 9. The people shall stone him with stones, that he dye. VI.
Deuteronomy. 13.2. If a prophet or dreamer give a sign or wonder, and it comes to
pass, and he say, Let us go after other gods thou have not known (it is to try
thee) thou shall not hear him; he shall be put to death, Deuteronomy. 18.20. If a
Prophet presumes to speak on my name, that I have not spoken, or speaks in the
name of another god, he shall dye. VII. Naboth 1 Kings 21.13. Levit. 24.14. was
stoned for and under the pretense of blasphemy.
Rules to he observed on the judgment.
1. That God required the execution thereof only of those that had
transgressed the covenant (which Moses renewed often) as appears in that statute,
Deuteronomy. 17.2. who were to suffer the sentence of the law, and none else; and so
in most other eases. 2. Though those were hanged joined to Baal-peor, were
hanged after strangled, contrary to our custom; and was the most ignominious
death, for joining themselves to Baal-peor or Priapus, that ignomnious idol. 3.
The Lord being the Lord of life, is not left to any to take away the life of
any but as God has appointed; which for idolatry is generally stoning by the
hands of all the people. 4. It is observed by some, that when it is said, His
blood be on him, then stoning is meant; or otherwise when the death is not
expressed, then strangling: but usually, though the death be not set down in
one place, it is in another. 5. In stoning, the people were to show their
hatred of the evil committed, that they and theirs might be free of the curse
and judgment threatened against them for the same; one man not being able to do
the same, by that or any other way of putting to death.
Judgment.
1. Jenebel and the Priests of Baal slain 1 Kings 18.22. and 2 Kings 10. 2.
Ahazia sends to Baal-zebub, and dies, 2 Kings 1. 3. Belshazzar slain praising
his gods, Dan. 5.4.5.30.
Numb. 25.2. The Moabites called the people to the sacrifices of their gods,
and the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods; in which ( verse. 3.) they
were said to be joined to Baal-peor.

Statute.
Levit. 17.7. They shall no more offer their sacrifices to devils, after whom
they have gone a whoring. Judgment.
Verse 9. Shall be cut off from among the people. The command binds
affirmatively, Thou shall have me to thy God.
Now the way of Gods calling a people, and becoming a God to them nationally,
is by giving them laws, and they taking them from him, and professing
subjection to them, as to their Gods commands whom they ought to serve.

To the keeping whereof, God adds by promise many blessings; as David, Psalm.
19.11. In keeping thereof is great reward.

To the breach whereof, are added many curses of body, soul, goods, name,
family, earth, and heaven; all are shut up to men for it.

The which giving of laws royally to his people, is the only work and
prerogative royal of God; and therefore is the law moral called the Royal law,
Jam. 2.8. and thus the Scripture says, There is but one lawgiver, who is able
to save and destroy: who art thou that judge another? Jam. 4.12.

And hence are all laws of heathens said to be no laws, and they without law;
and all the ordinances, and the corrupt expositions of the law, made by ancient
expositors, and received by their children among the Jews, called traditions;
and they were such as made void the law among them that had it. In which it
appears, there is no law but Gods, nor no true lawmakers but God; law,
government, and judgment, among Gods people especially, being his.

Lastly, As we must not have another God, so we must not have other laws then
Gods: God will not govern by any other then his own laws.

Behold, I pray, by men's deelining Gods laws, what laws have been brought out
since the reforming times; as in the 6 Articles in Hen. 8. time, the book of
Sports, and many laws since repealed. What is become of the Judges, Justices,
and men, made and executed those laws so contrary to the Lord and his law?

Solomon brings in wisdom, Prove. 8.15. saying, By me kings reign, and the
princes (that is, those of the supreme council) do describe Justice (that is,
to those judges consult with them about difficult cases, without whom the
difficult cases would as well be hid to them as others.) Now if justice be so
hard a thing to be executed by men who not only have the law, but use the law,
and the help thereof to do justice, by that, without wisdom or Christ's help
they cannot describe it; how shall those describe it, that use not the law to
help them, which ought to be their help; and so tempt God not to help them
extraordinarily, for not using the ordinary help of God? And that he speaks
here of the great council, is clear, they being next to the king; and then he
speaks of the ordinary Juges in the verse following, to whom justice was to be
described: which is significantly set down, Deuteronomy. 17.11.

From Jeremiah 35.6. some there are contend to maintain the law and customs
we have in this Nation received from our fathers, because the Rechabites stuck
so close to theirs: To which I answer, 1. That the Rechabites were subject to
the judicial law, as the other Jews were. 2. These traditions of theirs were
not forbid nor commanded of God, that the magistrate could not forbid the doing
what they did. 3. Nor cause, etc. says, In the Congregation of God, confession
of sins is always the first, the which in times past went before before
baptism, for commonly children were baptized when they came to their
understanding, etc.


Idem super Mat. Christ has nowhere commanded to Baptize infants.

19 Calvinus in Institutionibus lib. 4. cap. 16. Confesses that it is nowhere
expressly mentioned by the Evangelists, that any one child was by the Apostles
hands baptized.

20 Dathenus in the Frankendalische Colloquium fol. 549. We believe that
christian children ought to be baptized, albeit it stand no where plainly with
such words written, That Christian children shall in the New Testament be
baptized.

And folio 605. Now we have plainly confessed that we have no such express
commandment that you should baptize the Christians children.

And fol. 663. Also in Protocol. Printed in Netherlandish, 274. 1 He confesses
that there is no evident example that the Apostles did baptize children.

21 Beza in Annotationibus super Matthew. John taught those that were to be
baptized, and admitted none to baptism, but those that gave testimony that they
believed the forgiveness of their sins; such Confession was also in the
Primitive Church required of the Catechumens before baptism. For in that the
Sacraments are Seals, it is requisite that Doctrine or Instruction should go
before the use of those things by which the Doctrine it self is to be sealed.

22 Luther in his book of the civil Magistrate: The Sacraments neither can nor
may be received without Faith, but with great hurt. Wherefore we hold our
selves to the words of Christ, He that believes and is baptized, so that
either before or else even then present when Baptism is administered, there must
needs be Faith, or else there is a contempt of the divine Majesty, who offers
his present grace when there is none to receive it.

Thus much out of those Teachers own writings, which observe and use childrens
baptism: from whence the Reader may take notice of the unsoundness of their
principles, and what little ground, 1 There is for it in the Word of God, as
they themselves confess. 2 Therefore what great cause have we to search the
Scriptures for better information, let the sober-minded judge.

Moreover, I shall further prove out of their own writings, that the baptism of
infants and sucklings is a Ceremony and Ordinance of man, brought into the
Church by Teachers after the Apostles times, and Instituted and Commanded by
Councels, Popes, and Emperors.

Proofs out of the Ancient and latter Teachers.
1 Origin calls Baptism of children a ceremony and tradition of the Church.
In Levit. Hem. 8. In Epist. ad Romans lib. 5. 2 Augustine calls it a common
custom of the Church, De baptismo contra Donat. lib. 4. cap. 23. Et de Genesi
ad literam, lib. 10. cap. 23. 3 Pope Gregory the 4. calls it a Tradition of
the Fathers, In decretis distinct. de consecrat. 4 Erasmus lib. 4. de ration.
concio. says, that they are not to be condemned that doubt, whether
Infant Baptism was, or was denied by the Apostles, and think that the same is
to be received as the placita Scholasticorum theologicorum, which cannot be
proved by sacred Scripture. 5 Eckins calls it a commandment and ordinance of
man, In Enchiridion. 6 Luther in his book of Anabaptism acknowledges that it
cannot be proved by sacred Scripture, that childrens baptism was instituted by
Christ, or begun by the first Christians after the Apostles. For many years
since it came to be in use in the Church, and was established by Pope
Innoceneius. 7 Cassander in his book de infantium Baptismo, says, That it came
to be used by the Fathers which lived three hundred years after the Apostles. 8
Cyprianus lib. 3. Epistolarum 8. Epistle. 9 Augustinus Epist. 28. ad Hieroni.
10 Cassander de infantium baptismo. 11 Bullinger in his House-book. 12 Justus
Menius of the Spirit of the Anab. 13 Melancthon in his Answer to the Anab.
Articles.
About the year of our Lord 248, and after the departure of John the oldest
Apostle, 158 years, lived a Priest called Fidus, the same would that men should
according to the manner of Circumcision, baptize young children upon the eighth
day. Against whom Cyprianus: with sixty six Bishops and Elders more gathered
together, opposed themselves, ordaining that every one without delay should
receive Baptism, and that the young children should timely be brought thereto.

Thus have you the time when, and the persons by whom it was brought in. viz.
The time when, in the year of our Lord 248. the persons by which it was brought
in, namely Fidus by name, who was a Priest who then lived. Thirdly, the
opposition that he then had by Cyprianus and 66 other Bishops and Elders: so
that, by their own Confessions, it is an Ordinance and Tradition of man, which
will and must perish with the using. And that it is Willworship and Idolatry,
appears by their own Confessions, as follows.

14 Bullingerus in ex Augustino contra Julianum lib. 1. cap. 2. says, The
Carthaginian Council concludes thus to Innocentium, Forasmuch as we believe
that Christ the Son of God was holy, born of the pure Virgin Mary, to fulfill
and ratify the promise of God, which excludes not children from salvation,
but much rather comprehends the same within the Covenant, We will therefore
that they be baptized. Thus we see it is We will, therefore Willworship. 15 In
Tomis Conciliorum and Synodorum ex Concilio Carthag. 5. cap. 6. says,
Concerning Infants, we will that they be baptized: if there be no certain
witness to testify that they are baptized, etc. 16 Item Gregorius quartus
Bonifacio. Those young children whose parents are absent, or unknown whether
they be baptized or not, let them according to the Tradition of the Fathers be
baptized.
Here the Reader may take notice that it is a Tradition of the Fathers,
according to their own confession.

17 Ex Concilio Miletano cui interfuit Augustinus and Anselmus Romae Ecclesiae
legatus: It is also our will that all those that will not that children which
are new born from their mothers womb should be baptized to the washing away of
Original sin, let them be excommunicated. 18 Ex Tomis Conciliorum Franck. in
Chronologia. In the second Bracharense Council holden 610. Baptism of children
was adjudged and holden to be needful. 19 Tuicensi Divinis officiis, lib. 4.
cap. 18. In times past the children in the Church were throughout the whole
year instructed in the word. And at the feast of Easter to rehearse the Faith,
which they were to make confession of at their baptism. But that Christendom
might increase and be filled with the word of God, the Church has thought good
for mortalities sake, that the children of Christians should be timely
baptized. 20 Johannes Bohemius, lib. 2. De gentium moribus says, In times past
it was the custom to administer baptism alone to those that were instructed in
the Faith, and seven times in the week before Easter and Pentecost, Catechized
or asked questions, and then upon Confession of their Faith they were baptized.
But afterward when it was thought and adjudged needful to everlasting life to
be baptized, it was ordained that newborn children should be baptized, and
that Godfathers or sureties were appointed, who should make confession of their
Faith, and renounce the Devil in their behalf. 21 Bilander de Trinitate.
Justinianus the Empererour ordained Novella institutione 144. That children
should be admitted to haptism and those that are come to their full growth,
should be taught before they were baptized.
Thus have you it out of the mouths of their own Poets, and by them confessed
that baptizing of babes is Wili-worship, which the Scripture says, shall all
perish with the using, after the Commandments and Doctrines of men, Col. 2.22,
23. and thus having discovered the foundation of the Font, and having shown
whence and when, and by whom Infant Baptism came in, I shall leave it to the
view of all, and proceed to the next.

Now for better and more full satisfaction, the book is suddenly to be
reprinted, and will be sold by Giles Calvert, at the Black spread Eagle at the
West end of Paul's, and is Entitled, as follows:

A very plain and well-grounded Treatise concerning Baptism. Wherein is very
clearly shown, and out of good grounds demonstrated, that Baptism was
instituted and ordained by the Lord Christ, for those that believe and Repent,
and was so taught and used by his Apostles, and observed and followed by the
Primitive Church. As also, how that in process of time, the baptism of children
in stead of true Baptism, was brought in and received; and by diverse Councels,
Popes, and Emperors, commanded to be observed.
Now we come to answer something to the beginning of Mr. Cooks book, and to Mr.
Baxters 10 Positions, upon which himself confesses his whole book stands,
and without which it cannot be understood: See his third page before he lay
down his first Position.

But first I shall desire the Reader to take notice, that after the truth of
the Gospel had a long time been preached, and publicly at Stafford both by my
self and others, who constantly affirmed according to the Scriptures, that men
and women (when they believed in Jesus Christ for the remission of their sins)
were to be baptized into his name, as in Mark 1.5. with Act. 8.12. is evident,
with ver. 37. these things being preached in the presence of many people and
some Ministers, to the number of seven or eight at a time, who stirred up the
people to oppose it, as indeed they did very much; we desired them lovingly to
bring their Teachers, that they and we might reason about it before them; the
which the people were very confident they should have obtained, but never
could, insomuch as I was carried forth to declare my earnest desires in public
before some Priests and many people diverse times, thinking that then they could
not in Civility have denied it: but yet we could never attain ours, nor the
peoples desires; but they rather sought to satisfy them in private, using
diverse Reasons and Arguments to persuade them to the contrary; as if they were
afraid to come to the light, lest their deeds should be manifest: as indeed we
told the people at last, we judged they were, because they so much incensed the
people against us privately, and yet would never come to speak to our faces in
the open Congregation: although the honorable Governor Danvers did freely
offer to engage himself, that not the least wrong nor abuse should be offered
them, yet these men were in great fear, where no fear was (as its written Psalm.
53.5.) as appears by Mr. Cooks Epistle (in his Font uncovered) to the
inhabitants of Stafford. Notwithstanding we diverse times offered them to reason
with them twenty miles from Stafford, as we have done since, but it would never
yet be received: but rather paper-conference, which for my part, I was always
against, and was then, although I was persuaded by the Governor and Captain
James Brown, to set my hand to that paper which was then sent them, which did
not exceed a quarter of a sheet; to which they have answered seven sheets, but
to what purpose, I shall leave it to the Reader to consider, when he has
perused my following lines in answer to Mr. Cook and Mr. Baxter. and first to
Mr. Cooks Font uncovered.

Page 1. our words which he has there put down, are these:

You having avoided public dispute by your selves so much pressed for at first,
and since have rather desired paper-conference; we, to gratify your desires
therein, have written these few lines, hoping thereby to beget some discussion
of the truth, wherein we affirm that the baptism (or sprinkling) of infants,
whereby the national Churches of Spain, England, France, and Rome are
Constituted, and from thence called Christians and Christendom, is not the
baptism (or dipping) of believers, which Christ Jesus ordained, and his
Disciples practiced for the right constituting of Churches under the Gospel,
whereby they rightly became and were truly called Christians.

To all which you begin to answer thus: saying,

Cooks In this our stating the question, diverse things must be animadverted,
that we deceive not our selves and others, through darkning the truth, by words
without knowledge (for say you) we take it for granted that you hold, that by
the baptizing or sprinkling of infants: Churches are constituted: (but) this
you deny, and proceed to affirm, that 1 As Faith or interest in Christ or the
Covenant of Grace, constitutes a Christian; so the joint and orderly profession
of faith and interest in that Covenant, or Gods owning a people to be in his
Covenant, is that which constitutes them a Church. 2 You say baptism is not
essential to the constituting of a Church, being but adventitious or
additional, as a sign or pledge of peoples entering or admission into the
Church: the penitent Thief on the cross was a true believer; though unbaptized,
and a multitude of such penitent ones jointly professing Christ should be a
true Church, though they wanted opportunity to be baptized, etc. 3 You tell us,
that the Church of England received its constitution in, or anon after the
Primitive times, when by the Ministry of the word, some were converted from
heathenism to Christianity, at which time you grnnt persons of years were
baptized upon their profession of Repentance, etc.


H. To all which I answer:

1 It is to be observed, that Mr. Cook, can say nothing, nor give any Answer in
the least to our writings, as we wrote them: and therefore he cunningly says,
that in the stating the question many things must be animadverted or changed in
the mind, and then he states the question according to his own mind, and then
falls on answering (not ours) but his own words; and thus he darkneth the
Counsel of God, by words without knowledge, and so deceives the hearts of the
simple; but he tells us that we take it for granted, that he holds, that by
baptizing or sprinkling of infants, Churches are constituted; but he denies it.

Answ. 1 If you deny that you differ from the rest of your brethren and
forefathers, who all generally and with one consent (till within these ten or
twelve years at the most) did conclude that children were made members of
Christ, children of God, and heirs of heaven in their baptism: witness your old
Catechism, which you all concluded was Orthodox, till the beginning of the
first Parliament, 1640. and therefore out of your own mouths you are condemned:
for if in Baptism they were made members of Christ, children of God etc. then
they were not so before: and if not members nor children before, then not
constituted members: and thus is your folly manifest.

And now if you shall (for an advantage) seem to disown the Common Prayer book,
and that Catechism,

Then I answer, You may as well disown your baptism which you had by it, and be
baptized again, as we are.

2 I suppose you will not be so absurd, as to own any unbaptized person for a
Churchmember (that has an opportunity to be baptized) neither do I think any
of you that are zealous in your own way, will have communion with any such
persons in the Lords Supper, or other Ordinances. 3 No people in Scripture
since the Resurrection of Christ, and his Ascension (the time that all power
was given into his hands to give to his Church Laws and Commandments) were ever
called a Church of Christ without baptism; prove it if you can by the
Scriptures. Therefore baptism does constitute a true Church, being done upon
right subjects, viz. such as can believe and gladly receive the word of God; as
in Act. 2, 41 they that gladly received the word were baptized, and the same
day were added three thousand souls. And ver. 47. the Lord added to the Church
daily such as should be saved. 4 Your self says than faith and interest in
Christ constitutes a Christian. Very well then: but why do you baptize such as
cannot believe in Christ, nor yet make out their Interest in the Covenant of
Grace? it is clear to all that will understand that if faith in Christ, and
interest in the Covenant of Grace do constitute a Christian, then they that do
not believe in Christ, and cannot make out their interest in the Covenant of
Grace, are no constituted Christians; but all the infants baptized into the
Church of England, could do neither; therefore no constituted Christians. What
they are to God, is nothing to you nor me: secret things belongs to God, Deuteronomy.
29.
Again, you say that joint and orderly profession of faith and interest in the
Covenant does constitute them a Church. Very well: and I pray then, is not
repentance and baptism an orderly profession of faith? does not the Apostle
say, Act. 2, 38. 1 Repent, and 2 be baptized, etc. and, 3 So many of you as
have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27 and is not
putting on [Christ] profession? Consider it again, does not a man that puts on
a garment, profess to wear it to all that behold him, whilst it is upon him? so
likewise they that put on Christ by baptism, do [profess] to own [him] before
all men: and Mr. Baxter calls it a listing engaging ordinance, himself. I
hope you will not deny his Doctrine to be Orthodox, although you cavil with the
Scriptures. And now seeing that baptism is an Ordinance by which believers do
put on and profess Christ, then its evident out of your own mouth, that it
constitutes a Church; or else you must say they are constituted before they put
on Christ.

5 You say, that baptism is a sign or pledge of peoples admission into the
Church.

Well then, if so, then it follows that they are not in before, to any man's
sight: and if not in the Church, much less constituted and established members
of the Church.

But you proceed to prove, by instancing the Thief upon the cross to be saved
without baptism.

Answ. We deny it not, because he declared openly his faith in Christ; and
owned him, when he was disowned almost of all; which shows plainly, that if
he might have had liberty to come down, he would have quickly been baptized
into his name, and therefore the Lord accepting the will for the deed, as 1
Cor. 8.12. he said unto him, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. But
what makes this for the baptizing of Infants, to tell us of a man that was
saved and was never baptized at all? You might rather, if you would have dealt
honestly with the Text, have proved that little babes may be saved, though not
baptized, for alas they can profess no faith, nor confess no sin: neither has
Christ anywhere required them to obey any command, before they can understand
and believe the Gospel: for what soever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. But
you are pleased to say, that we do not apply that Scripture right. And why, I
pray? because it spoils your practice: but does not the word what soever
include all matters and duties we owe to God? Consider it again: cannot the
Scriptures be in quiet for you? But because this offends you, we will give you
another, Heb. 11.6. without faith its impossible to please God. Now consider
whether you please God or no, when you baptize babes that have no faith in
them: neither have you any word of God for it.

Again, this your president of the Thief upon the Cross, will not at all help
you, except you finds some men in the like condition, or some men upon the
Gallows, that would gladly come down, and become new creatures; then I confess,
as you say, 2 multitude of such penitent ones might be reckoned to be in a
saying condition, though not baptized. But sir, I suppose that neither you nor
I are in that straight the poor Thief was in, as yet; therefore it wall be no
plea for us: but if either of us be unbaptized, we have time and liberty enough
to consider our ways, and to turn our feet to the testimonies of the Lord:
therefore let us make haste, and not delay the time: see Psalm. 119.59, 60.

Lastly, You tell us, that the Church of England was constituted in or anon
after the Apostles days, and by the Ministry of the word were converted from
heathenism to Christianity; and then persons of years were baptized, upon
profession of Faith and Repentance.

Answ. What then? what is your Church now the better for that which was done
1600 years agone, if you walk not in the same footsteps which they did then? I
can prove as well, the Church of Rome was then a constituted Church, according
to the order of the Gospel, Romans 1.7. but I pray does that make the Pope and
his crew now to be a true Church? If they be, why do you separate from them?
But they are not, neither are you, though a true Church might be in England
1600 years agone, and possibly may be found now.

Again, you say that they and their children were then admitted into the
Covenant and Church, as Abraham and his family were by Circumcision.

To which I Answer, It still remains for you to prove that they and their
children were admitted into Church Fellowship: I deny it: prove it if you can,
or else you have done nothing. As for Abraham and his family being circumcised,
I grant it, because the Scriptures say so; but you have no Scripture for
Infants baptism: if you have, show it if you can: and as for that Covenant that
Circumcision was a token of, its far different from the Covenant now under the
Gospel, as I shall show by and by.

The next thing you speak of, is a National Church, which you seem to prove
thus: in that the Lord said, Genesis 22.18. to Abraham, that in his seed all
Nations should be blessed.

Answ. But he does not say that All of All Nations shall be blessed, nor yet,
that All of any Nation shall be blessed; and I am persuaded that you think in
your own Conscience, that some in this Nation are not blessed; for by your
writings you pronounce us accursed: and I suppose there are many that live in
known sins, as drunkenness, whoredom, wichcraft, murder, theft, etc. of your
own Church, and yet you dare not judge them blessed in Christ: if you do, why
do you hang them up every Assizes and Sessions? If they be members of Christ,
their bodies are Temples of the Holy Ghost, and he that destroys the Temple
of God, him shall God destroy: therefore if your Argument be true, take heed
what you do in such cases.

2. You bring this Scripture, Psalm. 22, 27, 28. which says, All the ends of
the earth shall remember and turn to the Lord; and all kindreds of the Nations
shall worship before him: for the kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Governor
among the Nations.

Answ. When that day shall come, and that Prophecy be fulfilled, we will grant
you it is fulfilled: but for present, I think you will be our witnesses that
all Nations do not serve him: for the Turks, and Moors, and Indians, with many
other, do not serve nor worship God; neither do all in this, Nation worship him
as aforesaid: but Peter's words are true, if you please, Act. 10.34, 35 viz.
that in every Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness, is
accepted: for God is no respected of persons. But there are many in this Nation
which do not fear God and work righteousness: therefore, no National Church.

3 You say, Isa. 49.23. that kings shall be nursing fathers, and Queens shall
be nursing mothers to the Church.

Answ. That it shall be so, I deny not; but prove you that it is so, if you
can: As for Englands King and Queen, it is well known how they would have
nursed the Church, if they had but had their minds: or if you please to side
with them and the Cavaliers party, and own them for a Church, yet are the other
that oppose them contrary minded: therefore you can have no National Church.

4 You say Isa. 52.15. that Christ shall sprinkle many Nations.

Answ. Its granted: but it does not follow, that he does sprinkle whole
Nations: it is also true, as the Apostle says, Heb. 10.22. that believers have
their hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and their bodies washed with
pure water: but it does not follow therefore that all men, and such as are
wicked and profane, have their hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience:
therefore no National Church. And I much wonder that you Ministers of the
Church of England, who for the generality of you hold and preach that Christ
did not dye for all men (but only for some few elect persons) should yet
preach up national Churches, and impudently say all England are so far in
Covenant, as all their children ought to be baptized. I confess you had all
need to have seven years education at Cambridge or Oxford, or else you could
never make these things hang together, but that the people would see your folly.

5 You say from Matt. 28.19. Did not Christ command his Apostles to go into all
Nations, and preach and baptize?

Answ. But do not you know that they never baptized whole Nations, nor yet
whole Cities? but most men hated and abused them, so as they were forced to
shake the dust off their feet against them: and we read but of seven Churches
in all Asta, which is one quarter of the world; and they were so far from
converting and baptizing whole Nations, that we read but of four or five whole
households in all the Scriptures, that were baptized; therefore not likely to
baptize whole Nations: but if they did any such thing, we desire to see it.
Moreover, we grant you, if a whole Nation can be converted by the preaching of
the word, they ought to be baptized: but you baptize little babes, that know
not what the word is; contrary to the primitive practice, Act. 8.12.

6 You bring Rev. 11.15. which says, The kingdoms of this world are become our
Lords, and his Christ's; and he shall reign for ever.

Answ. I told you already, that I believe such times shall be; but they are not
yet; if they were, then we should no longer need to pray, Thy kingdom come, and
in that day Satan shall not deceive the Nations: See Rev. 20.3. but, Sir, I
suppose these things are too hard for you to understand, though you be a
scholar: for they are hid from the wise and prudent, and revealed to babes: See
Luke 20.21. with 1 Cor. 2.8, 9, 10.

7 You say from Rev. 21.24. that the Nations of them that are saved shall walk
in the light of the New Jerusalem.

Answ. That's granted: but that new Jerusalem is not yet here below, for
drunkards and wicked persons to walk by: but Paul says, Gal. 4.26. that its
above, and is free, and is the mother of all the Saints.

8 Lastly, you say, If a company of believers in one house have been called a
Church domestical, then a multitude of believers in a City or Nation may be
called a National Church.

I answer, That's granted, if they be all believers, as you said at first: but
little babes are not believers: therefore your Argument will not hold.

One thing more I have to answer to you in your sixth page, which is this.

You say we affirm a negative; namely, that the baptism or sprinkling of
Infants, is not the baptism of Christ etc. and here you follow us on to
purpose, and tell us that we are such as the Apostle speaks of, when he says,
The end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart, a good Conscience,
and faith unfeigned; from which some having swerved, have turned aside unto
vain jangling, desiring to be teachers of the Law, understanding not what they
say, nor whereof they affirm: and here you think you hit us home.

Answ. Sir, I must confess, now you have catched us out of our Element, and in
your own: for we know you are scholars, and have learned to contend about words
to no profit, which tends to the subverting of the hearers: but be it as it
will.

Seeing we erred in saying we affirm a Negative, we will either confess our
error, or else show you a president which may justify us in our practice,
Romans 3.12. Paul says, There is none that does good, no not one: here Paul
affirms a Negative, saying, There is none, for there is, is an Affirmative:
therefore if you had been by him you might have taught him to have said, I deny
that any does good, no not one; and then he had spoke as like a scholar as your
self. Again, Isa. 45.5. the Lord says by the Prophet, I am the Lord, and
[there is] no God besides me: now Sir, if you dare presume to be a teacher
here, it should have been thus: I deny that any God is, but my self. And I pray
show us the word negative in the Scripture if you can. Lastly, to conclude,
Job. 1.20. When they sent to John to know who he was, the Scripture says, He
denied not. I pray observe, if he denied not, then he affirmed: and what did he
affirm? Answ. He said, I am not the Christ: here John affirmed a negative,
confessing and saying. I am not etc. now that I am is to affirm, is evident:
for verse 23 he says, [ I am] the voice of one crying in the wilderness, etc.

And now let me show poor souls the mystery of Mr. Cooks iniquity, about the
affirming a negative. 1 The word negative is not to be found in all the Bible,
but hatched up in the schools, and now is nursed by them; and grown to such a
stature, that none must say they affirm a negative, without great dishonor
amongst them: and yet to affirm, is but to say a thing is so; and to deny, is
also to say a thing is not so: As if I should say or affirm, when the Sun
shines, it is day; and when it is down, I should say or affirm it is night, all
honest men will understand me without prejudice.

Again, that man that says, he will prove a Negative, is among scholars much
derided, because they stand upon punctilioes: but yet the thing may be honestly
done, thus: If I say I will prove a man is not alive, if I show others that he
is dead, do not I prove he is not alive? Again, if I affirm or say a man is not
in his house, if I go and show others his house and he is not in it, do not I
prove he is not in it, and so prove a negative, viz. that he is not there? etc.

And now seeing you will make us offenders for a word, may not we justly say
that you are one of those the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 6.3.4. in these words:
If any teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine that is according to godliness, he is
proud, and knows nothing; doting about Questions, and strife of words,
whereof comes envies, strifes railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings
of men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, supposing gain to be
godliness, etc. And now do not you dote about words, viz. the affirmative, and
negative? whereby you gender envy, strife, etc. And do not you count gain
godlinese, viz. an hundred or two hundred a year, for Preaching and Baptizing
Infants? and rather then you will part with it, you do dispute perversely, like
a man of a corrupt mind, destitute of the truth as it is in Jesus. I beseech
you, in the fear of God, consider it.

And know also, that although we have affirmed a Negative, yet you cannot
justly apply that Scripture to us, 1 Timothy l. 5, 6, 7. because we desire not to
be teachers of the Law; and therefore Mr. Baxter says we are Antinomians, and
deny the Law.

But I answer: Both you and he desire to be teachers of the Law; witness your
running to Moses, to prove Baptism of Infants and Church membership from
Circumcision and the Old Covenant, that was faulty, and therefore done away,
Heb. 8.7. and another to be established upon better promises; verse. 6. and in
this I am sure you nor Mr. Baxter know not what you say, nor whereof you
affirm: therefore take the Scripture wholly to your selves, and consider it
well.

And thus, Mr. Cook, I shall at present take leave of you for a time, and apply
my self to Mr. Baxter.

Sir, in the first place, to your Positions; in the first of which, p. 3 you
say thus: It has pleased the holy Ghost to speak of some things in the
Scriptures more fully, and of others more sparingly: and where God spoke more
sparingly, the thing must needs be more difficult, and yet truth still.

Answ. But he never speaks of Infants Baptism in all the Scripture, neither
fully not sparingly; therefore none of his Truth, nor ever was.

But you instance in four particulars: but that which is pertinent to the
matter in hand, is your fourth, wherein you say, The New Testament speaks
more sparingly of that which is more discovered in the Old: and (say you) what
need the same thing to be done twice, except men should question the authority
of the Old? and if God should reveal his mind in one part of the Scripture,
what use should we make of the other? Therefore (say you) how silent is the New
Testament concerning a Christian Magistracy! which made the Anabaptists of old
deny it. And say you further, Where find you a Christian in the New Testament
that exercised the place of a King or Parliament Man, or Justice of Peace, or
the like? And so of an Oath before a Magistrate, of war, and of the Sabbath,
how sparing is the New Testament! and why? say you, because it is said enough
in the Old.

To all which I answer: You have spoken many words to no purpose, except it be
to deceive the hearts of the simple: for whereas you say, That which is spoken
on in the Old Testament, need not be spoken of again; I answer: Infants baptism
is nowhere spoken of, neither in the Old nor New Testament; therefore you ought
not for shame to speak of it. 2. As for your saying, Where find we a Christian
Magistrate in the New Testament? I answer: Surely you have forgotten the Deputy
that was turned to the faith by Paul, Act. 13.12. Sergins Paulm by name:
Likewise the Eunuch; a man of great authority under Candace, Queen of the
Ethiopians who had the charge of her treasure, who believed, and was baptized
by Philip, Act. 8.27.37, 38. and what say you to Erastus the Chamberlain of
the City? Romans 16.2, 3. and likewise of those Saints of Caesar's household,
Philip. 4.22.

And for an Oath, did you never read in the New Testament, Heb. 6.16. that an
oath for confirmation, is an end of all strife? And for War, did you never
read, Luke 3.14. that the soldiers came to John and asked what they should do?
and he did not bid them lay down their arms; but be content with their wages,
and do violence to no man. And did you never read of Cornelius a Censurion of
the Italian band? Act. 10. and does not the Apostle Peter put us in mind to
subject Magistrates? 1 Pet. 2.13, 14 15. Likewise, Paul to Tit. chapter 3.1. and 1 Timothy 2.1.2. and Romans 13. Is not the Scripture full of these things? and yet do
you call for Scripture? Surely you read so many other books, that you forget to
read the Scripture. For I well remember, in your third position you say, that
some 8 years ago you had read some hundreds more then most of them you call
Godly Christians, and thought yourself as wise as most of them; and some
thought you wiser, you say: but it seems you are not yet wise enough to lay
aside those hundreds of books, and give your self wholly to read and study the
Scriptures, which are able to make you wise to Salvation: if you were, you
would be better acquainted with the matter contained in them.

And thus I proceed to your second position, finding your first so frothy and
full of superfluous words.

In your second, you say, that The great difficulty of a point, is no proof
that it is not truth: and a thing is not therefore to be rejected as not of
God, because it is not easy to understand. You affirm also, that multitudes of
silly ignorants do the same: In all which I shall not oppose you.

But your next considerable is this: you say, If a subtle Pagan should come
amongst the people, and dispute that the Scripture is not the word of God, and
that Christ Jesus is not the Son of God, he would silence them more then the
Anabaptist con do.

Answ. Here Mr. Baxter makes himself very suspicious, and his words very
unsavory, in that he rather sideth with Pagans and Atheists, that deny both
God, and Christ, and the holy Scriptures, then with those which are falsely
called Anabaptists, though we honestly own God, and Christ, and the Scriptures;
and desire to plead nothing else for our practice; for which cause he cries
out against us in his 10. position, calling us brute beasts, and nothing but
because we call to him for Scripture for to prove his practice: and yet now he
makes as if the Atheists and Pagans had more to say for themselves then we: all
which I leave to God, and the impartial Reader to judge.

Again, Mr. Bextar speaks a great swelling word of vanity, saying, he will
hazard all the reputation of his understanding on it, that there is ten times
more to be said for free will, then can be said against Infants baptism: yea, it
is twenty times more difficult; (and yet you offer to dispute it with any man)
and must it therefore be true? say you.

Answ. 1. Sir, as for the reputation of your understanding, I will not say what
I judge its worth. 2. If you had said there is ten times more to be said for
free will, then is to be said for Infants baptism, you had hit it right.
Lastly, whereas you say free will is such a difficult point, I am not of your
judgment in that: for I believe its easy to them that will understand, to
know that no man, in himself, or of himself (without God) has any free will or
power to think or do that which is good: for In him we live, move, and have our
being, Act. 17.28. in and through God that gives all men life, and breath, and
all things, to the end they may seek him. Act. 17.25, 26, 27. Even the
wickedest, and Hypocrites: the worst of men, have a will and power to do more
good then they do; and that is one cause of their just condemnation: Moreover,
its evident that wicked Balaam had a will and desire to die the death of the
righteous, and that his latter end might be like unto theirs, Numb. 23.10. And
Paul says plainly, To will is present with me but how to perform that which
is good, I know not: Romans 7.18. by all which it is evident, that free will is
not such a difficult point as you would make it: but its an easy matter with
you to call Light darkness, and darkness light, Isa. 5.20. But I leave this at
present, and proceed to your fourth position, wherein you say.

That if never so clear evidence of truth be produced, yet it will still be
dark to them that are incapable of discerning it: for its Gods work to make
people understand. And then you instance in the Author to the Heb. cap. 5.11,
12, 13 14. who had many things to say to them concerning Melchisedec, which
were hard to be uttered, because their ears were dull of hearing.

Answ. We grant you all this: I That though there be never so clear truth for a
thing, yet it will still be dark to some. But however, let us see some clear
evidence of truth first, and show where its written that babes must be
baptized; and then if we do not believe it, be it upon us. We know it is Gods
work to persuade the heart, but its man's work to declare the truth, by which
the heart is persuaded. The Apostle often preached very plainly, that men should
Repent and be baptized: but there were many that heard them which rejected
their words though very plain, as they are still upon record: but you bring us
no Scripture for what you affirm about Infant Baptism, but call us unreasonable
men and bruit beasts, for requiring Scripture of you for your practice: and yet
you would bear the world in hand in this your Position, that you have proved
clear evidence of truth for it: but we will not believe it, but I say once
more, show us but where its written in the word of God. which alone is able to
make us wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15 16, 17. and then if we will not nor
cannot believe it, our blood be upon our selves: but till you show us something
written, we have nothing to believe.

As for your saying we had need study the controversy at least seven years; I
answer: What Rule have you for that? Did the three thousand in Act. 2.41, 42.
study this controversy seven years, or seven days either? Consider it again;
and those men and women, Act. 8.12. that believed Philips preaching, and were
baptized; and the Eunuch in the latter part of the chapter, and Lydia, and the
Jailer Act. 16. and Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, with his
household; and many of the Corinthians, who did not stand reading other books
seven years; but hearing and believing, were baptized, Act. 18.8.

You say further, that men think they can understand plain Scripture if they
hear it; but they cannot: and then you cry, O that pride would let men know,
that they cannot understand the plainest Lecture of Geometry or Arithmetic
that a man can read unto them; and read the Grammar to a boy in the Primer, and
be understands not a word you say.

Answ. Is it possible you would make men believe they cannot understand plain
Scripture if they hear it? but I pray try us with some first, and see: I
confess we cannot understand this book of yours to be Plain Scripture Proof for
Infants Church Membership and baptism, because you have packt it so full of
such whimsies as these, Geometry, Arithmetic, Grammar, etc. But Sir, we would
have you to know, that the word of God is of another nature: for it gives
light to the blind, and understanding to the simple, Psalm. 19.7, 8. Yea, it
makes men wiser then their enemies, and gives them more understanding then all
their teachers, yea more then the Ancients, Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100. All which I
believe you will find to be true before we have done.

You say, Pos. 4. When the cause is so difficult, we must follow the most
probable way. So then; it seems its very difficult for you to prove that
Infants ought to be baptized, by your own confession; and indeed so I believe:
for that must needs be very difficult to prove that there is not one word of
God in all the Bible for. I cannot blame you for saying its difficult to prove.
But you say we must follow the most probable way; come on then, that we will.

Now whether is it most probable that that practice which is nowhere commanded
nor written in Scripture, should be of God, or of Satan? Judge ye. Now that
Infant Baptism is such a practice as is not written in Scripture, both Mr. Hall
and your self confess; and therefore in your 10 Position you do abuse us, and
call us bruit-beasts for demanding a plain Scripture for it; therefore its not
of God: and its most plain, that if that which is written in the word of God,
be the way of God, then that which is not written in it, and yet practiced as
an ordinance of God, must needs be of Satan.

In your 5 Position, in short, you tell people that if any have taken up this
opinion, and have not Read and studied Mr. Cobbet and Mr. Church, and other
chief books, and been able to confute them, they have but discovered a seared
Conscience, which either dare venture on sin without fear, or else do count
error no sin.

To all which I answer: How now Mr. Baxter! Are you grown to this height? what,
must not men obey what they find written in the holy Scripture, till they have
asked Mr. Cobbet and Mr. Churches counsel? I pray where learned you this
divinity? at Rome? I thought all this time the holy Scriptures had been able to
make us wise unto salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus: but it seems they
are not, if you say true; but we must be beholding to Mr. Cobbet and Mr.
Church. But I pray how did men before Mr Cobbet and Churches books were
written? and how do those now that cannot come by their books, or never heard
of them, if it be as you say? you may do well to send some men up and down the
Country to sell them. But I believe this is but one of your scare crows, with
which you use to affright silly souls, that set their faith in your wisdom, and
not in the power of God: but your folly is a making manifest, and light and
freedom is breaking forth to them which you have kept in darkness and bondage.

Now to your 6 Position, wherein you say, That you will discover a most
frequent cause of men's falling into errors; which you say is this: All men in
the beginning do receive many truths upon weak or false grounds; and so hold
them a while, till they are beaten out of their old Arguments, and then
presently they suspect the cause it self: and you are persuaded this is Mr.
Tombs his own case.

Ans. As for Mr. Tombs, he is of age, and able to answer for himself, I
question not: and as for your saying that men receive Infant Baptism and other
Truths upon weak grounds at first; I answer, I never knew any receive
Infant Baptism upon any ground at all, weak nor strong; neither can they: for
they are not capable of what they do, because they want understanding when they
receive it: therefore you may well say, they are or may be quickly beaten off
it again, when they come to reason with themselves or others about it.

But you say, Alas, there is far better grounds, which they are not aware of.

Answ. That is, it may be, because you baptize them so soon: if you would let
them alone till they are men and women, before you baptize them, as you have
example in Scripture, they might receive baptism upon better grounds.

In your 7 Position, you confess, some Divines have reasoned very weakly for
Infant Baptism, and used unfit phrases, and misapplyed Scriptures: and to these
some have wrote three or four books, and easily answered, and seem to triumph;
and yet the truth is not shaken: but it may be, all the best Arguments and
Plain Scriptures have never been answered, say you.

Answ. I desire to answer the Plain Scriptures no way, but by faith and
obedience, by believing and doing of them: therefore if you know of any that
speaks of Infants Baptism, bring them forth, and I will be silent. The first I
see: but as for your best Arguments you talk of, I look upon them but as so
many cunning devised fables, wherewith you lie in wait to deceive simple souls,
by speaking things you ought not, for filthy lucre sake, Tit. 1.14.

You say Pos. 8. one sound Argument is enough to prove any thing true.

Answ. Then either the great number of yours in the book of plain Scripture,
are not sound, or else you need not to have brought so many, by your own grant.

But you say, What if all the Texts were put by save one? Were not that enough?

Answ. Yes, its enough, if you can show us but one: but I pray where is that
one? I cannot find it in all your book: but it seems you are afraid that all
should be put by save one: therefore you make this apology: but I suppose all
will do you little good.

In your 9 Position, you say, The former and present customs of the holy Saints
and Churches, should be of great weight with humble Christians.

Answ. If the present customs of Churches now be according to the Primitive
pattern, I grant it: else not. But I am sure the customs of the Churches in the
Apostles days was to baptize men and women when they believed with all their
hearts, and gladly received the word. Act. 2.41. c. 8.12. v. 36, 37, 38. c.
10.47. c. 16.33, 34. c. 18 8. therefore I pray let this custom be of weight to
your self; and do not baptize little babes that cannot believe, nor understand
what they do; especially because you say there was weight in that Argument,
when Paul said, We have no such custom, nor the Churches of God.

Again, you say that you can prove that Infants Baptism was used in the Church
as high as to the Apostle, as there be many sufficient histories extant inform
us; and that the deferring of baptism came in with the rest of Popery, upon
popish or heretical grounds.

Answ. O Sir, have I now found you out? truly seeing I have, I must not conceal
your wickedness, lest I become guilty with you of the blood of souls; and
therefore I do by this declare to all men, that you are both a deceiver and a
blasphemer: the which charge I now come to prove.

I That you are a deceiver, it is evident, in that you have entitled your
book, Plain Scripture Proof for Infants Church Membership and baptism; by which
you persuade many hundred souls, that there is plain Scripture indeed in the
Bible for Infants Baptism, when there is no such thing: but your self confess,
in your 9 Position that your proof is from some histories extant, which you
judge sufficient. O that poor ignorant souls would but see and consider your
cunning craftiness wherewith you lie in wait to deceive them, before it be too
late.

2 That you are a blasphemer, is plain, if the Scriptures may be heard to
speak: for you say deferring of baptism came in with the rest of Popery.

Answ. But Sir, do you not know that our glorious Lord Jesus Christ deferred
his baptism till he was thirty years of age? Luke 3.21, 22, 23. and yet he was
the child of believing parents, I think you dare not deny. And now do you not
see your wickedness in affirming that deferring of baptism came in with the
rest of Popery? or do you think wickedly that Christ brought in any part of
popery? take heed.

Again, does not the Commission of Christ defer baptism till believing, Mark
16.15 16. saying, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved? and does
not Philip defer baptism upon the same account to the Eunuch, Act. 8.36, 37.
when the Eunuch said to him, See, here is water, what hinders me to be
baptized? Philip said, if thou believe with all thine heart, thou may:
showing by these words, plainly, that if he did not believe, it was to be
deferred; and that unbelief would hinder. And thus is your folly made manifest;
though I fear you will not see it: but however, I leave it to the consideration
of all rational men; desiting that the Lord will give them wisdom to consider
how you delude poor souls by this means, persuading them that there is very
plain Scripture for infants baptism; when at last you confess there is none,
but some histories, which you judge sufficient: and thus have you made
proselytes, and when they are made, they are sevenfold more the children of
Satan then they were before: for before, they were forced in their nonage to
receive the mark of the beast spoken of Rev. 19.20. which was not received by a
few despised people, as you say the Anabaptists are; but he caused all, both
free and bond, rich and poor, small and great, to receive it: yea, and that
none may buy or sell save he that had the mark, etc. See Rev. 13.16, 17. and
this is most properly applied to you: for there is never a small child in the
Nation, if it were but eight days old, but you would look it should be
Rantized, and in that receive the mark on its forehead, namely, to be signed
with the sign of the cross, in token, etc. and this was so universal throughout
England, that if any did but stand up to oppose it, they must neither buy nor
sell amongst you; but must be imprisoned, banished, or hanged. So that all,
both rich and poor, free and bond, small and great, were glad to be and suffer
their children to be baptized, or rather Rantized, or else they could not be
suffered to live, for to buy and sell amongst you, to get a livelihood. And
thus I have presented you a glass to look in; that you may behold what manner
of persons you are.

Again, its impossible that you should apply these Scriptures to those you call
Anabaptists, because now they have their liberty to declare their mind freely,
they do not desire small and great to receive the mark of baptism which they
practice, but only great ones which can understand what they do, and give a
resson thereof; even as we read, Act. 2.41. They that gladly received the word,
were baptized, and added to them etc. and Act. 8.12. when they believed Philips
preaching, they were baptized both men and women. And Act. 11.8. Crispus the
chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed in the Lord with all his house: and many
of the Corinthians hearing believed and were baptized: And thus you may sue,
that the more we do look in the glass of the Gospel, which is the perfect Law
of liberty to them that fear God, Jam. 2.12. the more we see our selves
conformable to the image of Christ, and walking according to the Primitive
pattern: and we are so far from compelling rich and poor, that we would have
neither rich nor poor to be baptized until they believe the truth of the
Gospel, and amend their lives, and can give an account thereof to those that
ask them a reason of the hope that is in them with meekness.

Again, you say Position 10. Evident Consequences or Arguments drawn by Reason
from Scripture, are as true proof as the very express words of a Text: and if
we have the words without the meaning and reason, we have no proof at all: for
the devil used the words of the Scripture to Christ.

To all which I answer, As for your saying, that Consequences or Arguments
drawn from Scripture, are as true proofs as Scripture; this is but one of your
untruths: for most certain it is, that what the Scripture says, we need not
prove by Consequence for that would be but darkening the Counsel of God, by
words without knowledge: as for example, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created
the heavens and earth, now what need you prove this by Consequence? again, ver.
3. God said, Let there be light: and there was light. And what can any
Consequence do in this case? And again, ver. 7.8. And God made the firmament,
and divided the waters which were under the firmament, from the waters that
were above the firmament; and it was so. And this I do believe without any
Consequence: and if you will deny it, because it is plain Scripture without any
Consequence, you may if you please: but your folly will be manifest, as it is
to me already. When you say, if we have the word without the meaning and
reason, we have no proof at all; I answer, this is a most subtle sophistry,
much like to that of Satan when he beguiled Evah, saying, In the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall not dye; but your eyes shall be opened, and you shall
be at Gods, knowing both good and evil: all which was both true, and a lie: for
they did learn to know evil by it to purpose; and as for good, they knew it
before; and now they learned to know it was good by the loss of it. And after
the same manner is your reasoning, when you say, If we have nothing but the
bare words, without the meaning and reason we have no proof. To which I answer:
The truth is, that if we have not the meaning of God, and the reason reason why
he speaks to us, how can we understand as we ought? but now, Sir, I shall make
it appear, that both Gods meaning, and the reason of his meaning, is plainly
declared to the sons of men, by his word of truth; and so plainly, that if you
or an Angel from heaven shall add to it, or take from it, you shall be
accursed; and he will add to you all the plagues written, and take your name
out of the book of life. All which if you do not knows, I pray read Prove. 30.6.
Gal. 1.8, 9. Rev. 22.18, 19.

But you would make us believe, that what is written is not able to inform us
aright, but you, or such as you are, must add to it, or take from it, at your
pleasure; and those your additions and substractions, you call the meanings and
reasons of the word of God. But now I shall prove that the word of God (alone)
is able to make us wise to salvation, without your adding to, or taking from:
and to that end, see 2 Timothy 3.15 16, 17. in these words: And from a child thou
have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make us wise to salvation,
through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for correction for
instruction in rightcousness; that the man of God may be perfect, and thoroughly
furnished unto all good works. Again, the Apostle, Jam. 1.21. exhorts us to
lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and to receive with
meekness the ingraffed word, which (says he) is [able] to save your souls.
Again, when Paul left the Saints in a dangerous condition, because of
deceivers, he commits them to God, and the word of his grace (saying) It is
able to build them up, and give them an inheritance amongst them that are
sanctified.

Thus you see, 1 That the Scripture is able to make us wise to salvation, 1
Tins. 3.15. 2 That all Scripture is given by the inspiration of God; and
(therefore) profitable for Doctrine, reproof, correction, instruction in
righteonsness, ver. 16. 3 To make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly
furnished to all good works, ver. 17. 4 Its able to save our souls; Jam. 1.21.
5 Its able to build us up, and give us an inheritance amongst them that are
sanctified, Act. 20.32.


And now seeing the holy writings are able to do all these things, I will
boldly and safely conclude, that we have no need of your Reasons and Senses, to
help them; but you have need to help your Reasons and Senses by the holy
writings, or else you will be but one of those insensible unreasonable men that
Paul prays to be delivered from, because they had not faith: and how can you
have faith, as Christ says, How can you believe, when you receive honor one of
another? John 5.44. and do not you receive honor one of another when you prefer
one another words above the words of God, which Christ and the holy men of old
spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost? 2 Pet. 1.21.

But whereas you say wickedly, that if we have the words of God, without the
meaning and reason, we have no proof: Answer, I am sure I may honestly and in
the fear of God conclude, that if we have your words, and meanings, and
reasons, without the word of God. we have no proof that we may safely trust:
for Let God be true, and every man a liar: and cursed be he that trusts in
man etc. Romans 3.4. Ier. 17.5. And thus your folly is manifest: but because this
is the very place, in which, and slight, by which Satan does deceive and murder
so many souls; the Reader must give me leave to enlarge my self in answering.

Now to your proof, which is this: you say, The Devil used the words of God to
tempt Christ.

I Answer, does it follow that because the Devil and wicked men do sometimes
use the word of God to deceive with, that therefore the Saints must not use it
make them wise to salvation? I trow not. Again, Sir, You much mistake the
matter: for the Devils deceit did not ly in bringing the Scriptures, but in
adding to, and taking from, as I shall make it appear, by comparing the words
the Devil brought, Mat. 4.6. and Luke 4.10 11. with those words in Psa. 91.11,
12. which are these. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep
thee [in all thy wayes] they shall bear thee up in their hands left thou dash
thy feet against a Stone. These are the words of the Prophecy, Psa. 91.11, 12.
but the words of the tempter are these: Cast thy self down; which is nowhere
written; Just as you say Baytise your Children, which is no where written: but
the Devil would prove he might, thus: for (says he) it is written, He shall
give his Angels charge concerning thee [to keep thee] as in Luke 14.10. and
with their hands they shall bear thee up left [at any time] (that is added)
thou dash thy feet against a Stone. Thus it is clear, the tempter added [ at
any time,] and left cut [ in all thy ways.]

Again, Luke 4.9, 10, 11. We read, Cast thy self down: for it is written, He
shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee; and in their hands they
shall bare thee up left [at any time] thou dash thy feet against a stone. Thus
we see in both Scriptures, that the tempter added Cast thy self down, and [at
any time] and left out [in all thy wayes] So that here is both adding and
diminishing, which is accursed of God: and yet Mr. Baxter takes the Devils
part, and says, the Devil used the words of the Scriptures to Christ. But
this is but a small fault with you, Sir, for you have learned to take the same
leave your self, as I now shall make it appear, thus:

If thou be the Son of God, The Devil said to Christ, cast thy self down;
which is nowhere written, as the Lord says, but the contrary, viz. Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God. So do you say,

If you be the Children of God, and in Covenant, baptize your Children; which
is nowhere written, but the contrary, thus:

Teach all Nations batizing them, etc. Mat. 28.19. And Preach the Gospel to
every Creature: he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16.15,
16. And repent and be baptized, etc. Act. 2.38. But you know well that little
Babes know not what repentance is. And ver. 41.

They that gladly received the word were baptized: but you know well (or else
you have lost your senses) that such Children as you baptize cannot gladly
receive the word. Again, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may.
Act. 8.37. And when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the
Kingdom of God and the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both
men and women, Act. 8.11, 37. But you know that there is no Children in the
Text; and you know also (if you be not wilfully blind) that they cannot
believe with all their hearts: but yet, notwithstanding all this, you are so
impudent, as to do the works of Satan; and as he tempted Christ, and would have
had him cast himself down before Gods time was come to send his Angels to
take him down; and to that end, would have applied a promise falsely, saying,
It is written, He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee,
leaving out in all thy ways: even so do ye tempt men and women to baptize
their Children, before Gods time is come, of his own will to beget them by his
word of truth, James 1.18. That they might be born again, not only of Water,
but also of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. And to that end, you tell them it is written
they are Disciples, and Church Members: and they were circumcised under the
Law, and therefore they must be baptized under the Gospel: and thus you
mis^pply and wrest the Scriptures, putting in and leaving out what you please:
and then when poor Souls ask you for plain Scripture for Infants baptism,
and would gladly see where it is written, then you tell them, the Devil
brought the words of Scripture to Christ; and if they will have the words
without the reasons and consequences, they have no proof: and thus you labor
with your consequences and reasons, and words without knowledge, to darken the
Counsel of God, Job 38.2. But I hope by this time your folly is made more
manifest.

But you proceed, and tell us, that if we have the meaning and reason, we have
enough for evidence: for words are but to express sense.

To which I answer, Then it seems the meanings and reasons you talk of without
the word, are without sense by your own confession: for you say. If we have the
meanings and reasons, we have enough, etc. As for the words, they are but to
express sense: therefore it seems if we be without the words of Scripture, we
are without sense. And thus you see, or may see, that God by weak instruments,
can take you wise ones in your own craftiness. But, good Sir, consider once
again are not the words of the Scriptures which were given by the inspiration
of the Spirit, as good and better sense and reason then any words and reasons
you can speak or give? if you deny this upon your second thoughts. I must
needs conclude, that you are far gone and very high flowne.

But you are pleased to say further, Would it not make a man pity such
senceless ignorant wretches, that will call for express words of Scripture,
when they have evident consequences? Is Scripture-reason no reason?

Answer. Sir, methinks you are very pitiful: but yet you are a miserable
comforter; for when you have done, you fall a railing on us calling us
senceless ignorant wretches, that will call for express words of Scripture,
when we have your consequence. But, Sir, I have told you already why we dare
not trust your consequences. But you say, Is Scripture-reason no reason? I
answer, Yes, its goodreason; and its that we would have from you: but you call
us ignorant senceless wretches, for so doing. But there may be a mistake
betwixt us: for we call Scripture reason, written reason: now if you would but
show us where your reason is written in the book of God, the holy writings, the
controversy were at an end: but till then, you have done nothing. But you
might inform the ignorant wretches, that the holy Scriptures in English are
holy writings; for Scriptures are writings; and holy Scriptures, are holy
writings: and thus the people might learn to know what you mean by
Scripture-reasons; which are in plain English written reasons.

Further, You are pleased to say that we disclaim Reason, and therefore not to
be reasoned with: and if we once renounce Reason, we are brute beasts; and who
will go to plead with a beast? its Reason that differs a man from a beast,
etc.

Answ. Sir, truly you do put me in mind how like one of your forefathers you
are: for (to my best remembrance) you speak his very words: and I question not,
but if you had an opportunity, you would do his deeds. The man I speak of, was
Doctor Story to Mr. Philpot the Martyr, who suffered for what he saw in that
dark age: The place where you may find it, is in Fox his book of Martyrs, page
1972. in these following words:

Philpot After this, Doctor Story came in, to whom I said, Mr. Doctor, you have
done me great wrong, and without Law have straightly imprisoned me, more like a
dog then a man; and besides this, you have broke promise with me: for you
promised I should be judged the next day after.


Story. I am now come to keep promise with you. Was there ever such a
fantastical man as this is? Nay, he is no man, he is a beast: yea, these
Heretics be worse then brute beasts; for they will upon vain singularity take
upon them to be wiser then all men, being indeed very fools and Asse-heads, not
able to maintain that which of an arrogant obstinacy they stand in.


Philpot. I am content to abide your railing judgment now, say what you will:
yet I am no heretic, neither shall you or any other be able to prove that I
hold any jot against the word of God, but as a Christian man ought.


Story. The word of God (forsooth) the word of God! its but a folly to reason
with these heretics: for they are incurable and desperate: but as I may reason
with thee, not that I have any hope to win thee. But whom will thou appoint to
be Judge of the word, whereunto thou stand?


Philpot. Verily the word it self.


Story. Do you not see the ignorance of this beastly heretic? he will have the
word to be judged of the word: can the word speak?


Philpot. If I cannot prove what I have said, by good authority, I will be
content to be counted an heretic or ignorant person or what you please.


Story. Let Us hear what wise authority you can bring for it.


Philpot. Its the saying of Christ, Joh. 12.48. The word that I have spoken,
the [same] shall judge you in the last day: and if in the last day, much more
now our doings ought to be judged by it. I am sure I have Christ my Judge on my
side for this.


Thus you may see and consider how like your forefather Doctor Story you speak
and behave your self; and to that end, I have writ it; and that the Reader may
consider, that even as these wicked Tyrants dealt with the poor Martyrs that
suffered in Queen Mary's days for that part of truth which they, then, saw, in
those times of ignorance and darkness, even so would Mr. Baxter and his
brethren deal with us now, if they had but their liberty; witness these words
of Doctor Story, compared with Mr. Baxters tenth Position: by which it
appears, that they are children of one father, whose works they do, Joh. 8.44.

And now whereas you say we disclaim Reason, I answer, Its but one of your
false accusations: we own all things written in the Scriptures of truth, and
they are better reason about heavenly matters, then any you can bring: for they
are able to make us wise to salvation, as aforesaid.

But now I come to the great invincible Argument of Mr. Baxter and Mr. Cook,
which is this: says Mr. Baxter, Do you think the Lord Jesus knew a good
Argument, or the right way of disputing? why how did he prove the Resurrection
to the Sadduces from that Text, I am the God of Abraham and Isaas, and of
Jasob? would not one of these men if they had stood by, have chiddeu Christ for
this Argument, and have said, Give us a Text that says the dead shall Rise?
what is this to the Resurrection, that God is the God of Abraham? would not
these have reported abroad that Christ could not confute the Sadduces, or bring
any Scripture for his doctrine? thus far Mr. Baxter: the same says Mr. Cook,
in his 24, and 25 page

To all which I answer, that the Lord Jesus knew a good Argument, and the right
way of disputing, better then Mr. Baxter, Mr. Cook, or my self, or any man
else, I humbly confess to his praise: and therefore I desire to make use of his
words that he has already spoken, knowing that he has reasoned and proved all
things better then I can.

But Mr. Baxter, although he confess (for his own ends) that the Lord Christ
knew the best reasoning; yet he is not content with his reason but adds to it
these words, in his 10 Position: 1. If God be the God of Abraham, then it will
follow that Abraham in soul is living 2. This is not directly proved from this
Text; but another principle must be taken in to support it, viz. That God is
not the God of the dead, but the living. 3. If Abraham's soul be living, then
his body must needs be raised. 4. If Abraham's body shall rise, then there is a
resurrection, and others shall rise also.

To which I answer, 1. Mr. Baxter, in all these consequences that he has
drawn, has but darkened the council of God spoken by the mouth of Christ. 2.
The resurrection is more plainly proved by the words of Christ, without all his
consequences, as appears by the word of the Text, Luke 20.35, 36, 37. But
they that shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection
from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage; neither can they die any
more, for they are equal with Angels, and are the Children of God, being the
Children of the resurrection. Thus Christ himself (in plain terms) has
proved the resurrection already, speaking plainly of the happiness of those
that shall obtain the resurrection from the dead: and then when he had done,
he concludes, that the resurrection of the dead is so plain that even Moses
showed it at the Bush, etc. 3. Let Mr. Baxter prove, if he can, that Christ did
draw any consequences from his own words, but left them barely as he spoke
them, as sufficient proof, without the help of any of Mr. Baxters consequences.
4. If Christ had used never so many consequences to prove any thing, yet his
words were all Scripture, and infallibly true; So true, that whosoever of Men
or Angels, should add to, or take from it, they were accursed. But Mr. Baxters
are none such: therefore we weigh them not. 5. Whereas Mr. Baxter is pleased to
say, If we had stood by, we would have said to Christ, Give us a Scripture that
says the dead shall rise;


I answer, So Christ did give them two Scriptures, though Mr. Baxter is so
blind he cannot see them: for he tells us, ver. 35. of the world to come; and
the Resurrection from the dead, in plain terms saying,

They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage. And in
ver. 37. he says, that the dead are raised. And we would have Mr. Baxter and
all men know, that we take all the sayings of Christ to be as good Scripture,
and of as great authority, as any part of the Bible: therefore now Mr. Baxter
and Mr. Cooks folly and wickedness is manifest, who would insinuate into
peoples minds, that Christ did not bring Scripture to prove the resurrection
of the dead; but they must help him by their consequences.

But their deceit lies in this; namely, in that they did conclude, that
because Christ did not bring some other Scripture that was written before to
prove the resurrection, therefore he proved it by consequence: never minding
that what he said was [ Scripture] and what he approved of is [ approved] and
ought to be approved of all, without murmurings or disputings.

But now to make their folly manifest, I will reason with them another way: and
if they prove as plainly that Infants ought to be baptized, as Chirst did
there prove that the dead should rise, they shall have it, and I will confess
my self in an error. And now to the matter.

1. Mark 12.25. For when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor
are given in marriage. Now do you show a Scripture that says, And when they
shall baptize little Children, they shall etc. 2. Ver. 26. And as touching the
dead, that they rise, have you not read, etc. Now do you produce such a
Scripture if you can, that says, And as touching little Children that they be
baptized have you not read, etc. bring you but Scriptures that come but thus
near the matter, and we will grant you Infant Baptism: but till then, you are
unreasonable in your reasoniags; and while you accuse others, you are guilty
your selves.
Obj. It may be some will object and say, that I will tie Mr. Baxter and Mr.
Cook to plain Scripture, but yet I have written many words in this Book my
self that are not plain Scripture.

Ans. Its one thing for a man to use words to express himself to those that
will not believe the Scriptures as they are written; and its another thing to
bring the holy Scriptures to show men a Rule to walk by, and what their duty is
in matters of faith and obedience.

We will freely give Mr. Baxter leave (or any man) to express themselves how
they can to cause men to understand and believe the holy Scriptures as they are
written: but this we dare not allow, neither to them nor our selves, viz. to
put men upon believing or doing any thing as a duty, that is not written in the
holy Scriptures. And herein lies the depth of all deceipts: namely, because
Christ expounded the Scriptures of the Prophets, therefore men will take in
hand to expound his expositions; as if we could make them plainer then he has
left them; or make anything true that is not written in them.

Again, because Philip opened the Scriptures to the Eunuch, Act. 8. therefore
men will take in hand to open the words of Philip, so as to make them appear
otherwise then they are written: and therefore for the plainer manifestation of
the truth, I desire all impartial men to consider these following things: 1 If
I would prove to any man by the Scriptures, that God created the heavens and
the earth, then I must bring a Scripture that speaks of Gods creating the
heavens and the earth, as Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the heavens
and the earth. Again, 2 If I would prove that God created man upright, I must
bring a Scripture that says so, as Eccles. 7.29. Lo, this only have I found
that God has made man upright etc. 3 If I will prove that all men since Adams
fall were finners, I must bring a Scripture that speaks so as Romans 3.23. For
all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, etc. 4 If I would prove
that God sent his son to redeem those sinners, I must bring a Scripture that
says so, as 1 Timothy 115. Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of
whom I am chief, and c. 2.6. Who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified
in due time, 5 If I would prove the dead shall rise, I must being a Scripture
that speaks of the Resurrection of the dead: and so did Christ, Mar. 12.25, 26.
for when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in
marriage, etc. And As touching the dead, that they shall Rise, have ye not
read? etc. And what if Christ had not spoken nor named the Resurrection of the
dead at all in this place? if it be proved anywhere in Scripture, its enough:
for Christ spoke many times darkly and in parables to them that were without,
but expounded all things to his Disciples, Mark 4.33.34. with Matt. 13.10, 11.
and its most plain, Job. 5.28, 29. that Chirst faith thus, The hour is coming
in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth;
they that have done good unto the Resurrection of life: and they that have done
evil unto the Resurrection of damnation: and ^. 11.25. he says to Martha, I am
the Resurrection and the life, etc. Thus we see how frequently Christ proves
the Resurrection in plain words.


And now let Mr. Baxter, Mr. Cook. Mr. Hall, or any man else, prove that either
Christ, Moses, any of the Prophets or Apostles, did ever speak one word about
baptizing of infants, and then we will grant it: and if this be not rational
and honest, let even our enemies judge.

To conclude, if I would prove that men and women should, be baptized when they
believe the word preached, I must bring a Scripture that says so; as Act. 8.12.
When they believed Philips preaching, they were baptized both men and women:
and ver. 37. If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may.

And now if Mr. Baxter, Mr. Cook, or any man, will prove that little babes
should be baptized, let them bring one Scripture to prove it, and then they
will do honestly; otherwise I must needs conclude (with all that fear God
aright) that they are mere deceivers of men, and unjust Stewards to Christ,
whom they profess to serve.

But now a word to Mr. Cook, who in his seventh page says, that we never read
in the Scriptures, Go Henry Haggar, and James Brown, teach all Nations, and
baptize, etc. nor do we read that Christ gave a command to you two to preach
the Gospel, etc. These and such like cunning devised fables has Mr. Cook in
his seventh page.

To all which, I answer, This is but a subtle sophistry of Mr. Cook to deceive
the heart of the simple: but easily discovered by them to whom the Lord has
given understanding as thus: we do not desire Mr. B. or Mr. C. to bring a
Scripture that says, Go William Cook, or Go Richard Baxter, and baptize
children that cannot speak nor understand what you preach, neither do we desire
a Scripture that says, Go Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Cook, and teach all Nations, and
baptize all the children that you can lay your hands on. But we desire you or
any man to prove by the holy Scriptures, that Christ did ever say to [any] of
his disciples, Go and baptize children; or that ever any that preached in the
name of the Lord, did baptize children, either under Law or Gospel; and we will
grant it. Give us command or example to show us where it ought to be done, or
ever was done, and you do like men: but till then, as I have told you before, I
tell you again, that you are unreasonable men, such as Paul prayed to be
delivered from.

But now we can prove that Christ commanded those which he sent to preach, to
baptize those that did believe, which was likewise practiced by them, as I have
showed before, by these Scriptures, Matt. 28.18.19.20. Mark. 16.15, 16. Act.
2.41. Act. 8.12. and ver. 37. c. 10.47.48. c. 16.32, 33, 34. c. 18.8. to which
I refer the Reader. And what they did, Saints in all ages are commanded to do:
for Paul says, Be ye followers of me, and mark them that walk so as you have
us for an example, Phil. 3.17. Again those things which you have learned and
heard, and seen in me, do; and the God of peace shall be with you, cap. 4.9.
But now we have heard and learned that Paul and the other disciples did baptize
men and women when they believed; therefore, if we do the same, the God of
peace will be with us: but we never heard nor learned in all the Scriptures,
that they baptized babes of a week, or month, or year old: therefore we dare
not do it, left we should be counted such as transgress, and abide nor in the
Doctrine of Christ.

But I remember what Mr. Hall says to these Scriptures, in his fourth
objection, page 91. that these are the chiefest strong holds of the
Anabaptists: and being pursued, hither we run for refuge: but all in vain (as
he says.) To which I answer, Its well the Anabaptists do run to the word of
God for refuge: they are then sure to be safe, without all question: for his
word is settled in heaven, Psa. 119.89. and Christ says, Joh. 8.31. If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed, and you shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free. And again, cap. 15.7. If you abide in
me, and my [words] abide in you, ask what you will, and it shall be done unto
you: and the word is able to save our souls, Jam. 1.21. and the Lord will have
respect to them that are of contrite spirits, and tremble at his word, Isa.
66.2. but, whose despises the word shall be destroyed; but he that regards
the Commandment, shall be rewarded. Pro. 13.13. And thus its evident, that if
we run to the word for refuge, we do wisely, and are safe in so doing.

But as for Mr. Hall, he has never a word to run to for Infantbaptism, as he
himself confesses, page 30. in his fifth Argument, in these words: In express
terms, so infants baptism is not commanded, nor a thousand things more, which
get we are bound to observe.

I shall now conclude with showing some undeniable Reasons why the word of God
must beunderstood and obeyed, as it is written, without adding to, or taking
from: 1 Because God did never without words make known his mind to the sons of
men: therefore we read that God at sundry times in diverse manners spoke to our
fathers by the Prophets, but now in these last days he has spoken by his own
son, etc. Heb. 1.12. 2 By words the mind of God is completely made known, so
that to fear God, and keep his Commandments, is the whole duty of man, Eccles.
12.12, 13. 3 Because Christ blames men for erring from the Scriptures, saying,
You err because you know not the Scriptures, Mark 12.24. 4 Because we are
commanded to hear the words of Christ in all things what soever he shall say
unto us, Act. 3.22. 5 Because they that consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ and the Doctrine which is according to
godliness, are proud, or fools, knowing nothing, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. 6 Because the
Scriptures are able to make us wise to salvation, through faith in Jesus; and
to make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly to furnish us to all good works,
2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. 7 Because when Paul left the Church in a dangerous
condition because of deceivers, he committed them to God, and to the word of
his grace, affirming it is able to build them up, and to give them an
inheritance amongst them that are sanctified. 8 Because if men or Angels shall
preach any other Gospel then what is already preached, they shall be accursed,
Gal. 1.8.9. 9 Because those that preach are commanded to preach the [word] in
season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.12. and not their own words. 10 Because
Christ will judge all men by his [words] that he has [spoken] in the last day:
and then, they which do add to his word, he will add to them all the plagues
written; and those that diminish from it, he will take their names out of the
book of life, and their part out of the holy City, and he will come in flaming
fire, to render vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not his holy
Gospel, Joh. 12.48. Rev. 22.18, 19. 2 Thef. 2.7, 8, 9.


Lastly, I shall propound these following Queries, with a desire to have them
answered by any who will or can.

1 Whether God does require the sons of men to believe any thing in point of
Justification, that is not recorded in the holy Scriptures of truth. 2 Whether
God does require or command us to obey any thing after believing which is not
contained in the word of truth? 3 Whether the Saints have any ground to believe
the Resurrection from the dead, and eternal life in glory, but as it is
recorded in Scripture. 4 Whether if a man believe and obey all the known
precepts and promises contained in the word of God (as much as in him lies)
will God condemn and punish him at the great day, because he has believed and
done no more. 5 If the Scriptures be not a perfect rule of faith and obedience
(without the help of any man's inventions) what is? Or who may we trust? or at
whose mouth must we seek wisdom? 6 If the Scriptures ought to be believed and
obeyed as they are written, then how dare some deny faith in, and obedience to
some part of them; and impose things not written in the Scriptures, to be
obeyed in stead of the ordinances of Christ? 7 Whether there be any sin or
corruption incident to man, that the Scriptures does not reprove and make
manifest in express terms. 8 Whether there be any virtue or praise in any thing
that the best of men ever did, but what is expressly commanded or commended in
the Scriptures of truth? 9 I appeal to every man's Conscience in the sight of
God, whether their Consciences do not condemn them when they walk contrary to
what is written in the Scripture. 10 Whether every man's Conscience do not
justify him when he walks according to what is contained in the word of God.
Now if all these Queries be granted (as they are stated) to be true; then it
follows, that those that teach and persuade men to do any thing in matter of
Justification or salvation, more or less then is plainly written and expressed
in the word of God, are such as do add to or take from what God has spoken to
the sons of men for instruction, and are guilty of those plagues pronounced,
Rev. 22.18, 19. but infants baptism is nowhere written nor expressed in all the
Scriptures, as Mr. Hall, Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Cook do confess: therefore they,
and all they that plead for it, are guilty of the plagues aforesaid, except
they repent.

And thus have I answe^^d to Mr. Baxters ten Positions, which he says page 3.
must necessarily be well understood, before we can understand the point in
hand. So that the Reader must take notice, that if these Positions be not well
understood to be true, then all the rest of his book cannot be understood to be
true by his own confession. For, says he, If people be mistaken in that which
goes before, no wonder if they deny the consequents, or that which follows
after etc. So that if I have fully answered these Positions, I need say but
little to the rest of the book. All which I leave to the Reader to consider of.
But howsoever, I shall not fail (by the assistance of God) to speak so much to
the two first parts of his book, as may undermine his building, and lay it in
the dust.

As for the last part of his book, from the 162 page to the end; himself
confesses that they are but such vain contendings as he is like to be guilty
of, and Mr. Tombs also, as you may see in his Epistle to the Church at Bewdley
toward the latter end.

Likewise Mr. Cooks Arguments, being the same with his, the substance of both
tending to prove that infants are in Covenant, and that they are
Church Members: and Disciples of Christ, and therefore ought to be baptized:
for which cause I shall now come to Answer to their Arguments in general, and
to show by the Scriptures why infants that cannot speak words nor understand
Reason, cannot be Church Members under the Gospel, nor Christ's Disciples: the
which being cleared, it will plainly appear, they are not fit subjects for
baptism by their own grant.

For the clearing of which, I shall first speak something concerning the
Covenant that God made with Abraham, upon which Mr. Cook and Mr. Baxter do
pretend to build, making the Covenant with Abraham and his natural seed under
the law, all one with the Covenant made with Abraham and his spiritual seed
born of the spirit under the Gospel.

In answer to which, I thus Reason:

1 That there is two Covenants, is evident, Gal. 4.24. in these words; for
these are the two Covenants. Now if there be two Covenants, then either we are
under the old Covenant still, or else the new is come in place: but that we are
not under the old Covenant still, is evident, because Christ is come, whose
blood is the blood of the new Covenant, which is everlasting Heb. 13.20. and
Luke 22.20. he says, This cup is the New Testament in my blood: giving us to
understand, that as the old Covenant or Testament was sealed with the blood of
Bulls, and Goats, and Calves, Heb. 9.19, 20. So the new Covenant that is
established upon better promises, is sealed and confirmed by the blood of
Christ the Son of God, who has obtained a more excellent ministry, in that he
is the Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. for finding fault with the
first, he says, Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel and Judab. not according to the former, etc.
ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. what is that? he will put his Laws, in their minds, and
write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to
me a people: which Covenant the Saints are now under, and are heirs of these
better promises upon which it is established: therefore Paul applies the same
to the Saints, 2 Cor. 6.16. saying (as God has said) I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people, etc. And
thus have I proved, that we are not under the old Covenant, which did properly
belong to the fleshly seed, which had but the promise of an earthly Canaan,
under the curse; and Jerusalem which is in bondage* with her children, See Gal.
4.24.25. but believers are under the new Covenant, which has better promises,
viz. that they shall inherit that new Heaven and new Earth wherein dwells
righteonsness, and that new Jerusalem which is above, and is free, and is the
mother us of all; see 2 Pet. 3.13. with Gal. 4.26.

Again, I believe Paul knew as well the intent and meaning of the Covenant of
God made with Abraham, as Mr. Baxter, or Mr. Cook; and yet he applies it not
to a fleshly seed, as appears thus: Genesis 17.7. God said unto Abraham, I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their
generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee and thy seed etc.
Now the Question is, who are the seed to whom the Covenant and promises do
belong? which Paul answers, Gal. 3.16. saying, Now to Abraham and his seed
were the promises made: be says not to [seeds] as of many, but as of one; and
to thy seed, which is [Chrst.] Thus we see that it is not every one that is
born of the flesh to Abraham, that had right to the Covenant and privileges
thereof; but as he says, ver. 29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed,
and heirs according to the promise, as it is written, Romans 4.13. The promise
that Abraham should be the heir of the world, was not to him nor his seed
according to the Law, but according to the righteousness of Faith, as Romans
9.7.8. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they all Children, but
in Isaac shall thy seed be Called: [that is] says the Apostle. They that are
the Children of the flesh, are not the Children of God; but the Children of the
promise are counted for the seed.

Now if the Children of Abraham were not the Children of the Covenant, nor
heirs of the promise by fleshly birth, much less can the [Children] of
believing Gentiles, that are inferior to Abraham, be in Covenant: for, that
which is born of flesh, is flesh. Joh. 3.6.

Likewise the Apostle does not say that it was Esan, though he was the elder
(that was in Covenant) but Jacob, though the younger, who believed in the God
of his Father Isaac. And indeed I do much wonder how the Preachers of the
Chureh of England dare affirm, that believers Children are in Covenant before
believing, by virtue of their Parents faith: and yet they hold that God did
hate and had reprobated Esau, before he was born, or had done good or evil;
and so notwithstanding his Parents ( Isaac and Rebecea) were both precious
beleivers, yet Esau their own Child was never in Covenant before he was born,
nor after, by their own grant.

Thus all men may see how they confound their own principles; no marvel then
although they labor to confound other men's: and if this very thing were but
well weighed, and rightly considered, it is sufficient to discover the folly
and falsehood of all Mr. Baxters and Mr. Cooks arguments.

Again, If beleivers Children be in Covenant, because they are beleivers
Children; then grace comes by generation, and not by regeneration: the which to
affirm, is absurd.

Again, If beleivers Children be in Covenant by virtue of their beleiving
Parents; then all the World ever since righteous Noah must needs be in
Covenant, for they and we all came of righteous Noah.

But Mr. Cook says in his Font uncovered, page 45. That he does not hold
falling from the inward efficacy of grace, and true sanctification,
justification and adoption,

Answ. So then it seems by his own confession, its not true; and then it must
needs be false; and its well if they fall from false grace, and false
sanctification, and false justification, and false adoption: for they that fall
from false, must needs fall to true, as certainly as they which fall from
true, must needs fall to false: or else they fall from nothing, but abide as
they were.

But to make the folly of these wise men manifest, I pray consider with me, 1.
what the new Covenant is, and then 2. you shall judge whether Infants are, or
can be in it or no: Heb. 8.8.9, 10, 11.

The Lord says, The days come when I will make a new Covenant with the house
of Israel and Judah, not according to the Covenant that I made with their
Fathers when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt,
etc. but this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; after
those days says the Lord, I will put my laws in their mind and write them in
their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people:
and they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me from the least to the greatest,
etc.

This is the new Covenat of [grace.] Now that Children that cannot speak nor
understand cannot be in it, is evident, by the following reasons.

1. Because they that are in this Covenant, have the Laws of God put in their
minds, and written in their hearts: but little babes that cannot speak nor
understand, have not the Laws of God in their minds, nor written in their
hearts: therefore they are not in this Covenant. Now that such little Children
are not in a capacity to know the mind and Laws of God, is most plain, Isa.
7.14, 15, 16. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call
his name Immanuel: butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know how to refuse
the evil, and choose the good: for before the child shall know how to refuse the
evil and choose the good, the Land that thou abherrest shall be for saken of
both her Kings.

Thus its evident, that even the Lord Christ, as he came in the flesh of the
seed of David, there was a time in which he was not capable of discerning
between things which differ: and therefore it is said again, that he grew and
waxed strong in spirit; and the grace of God was upon him, Luke 2.40. And
again,

Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man, ver.
52.

From all which I conclude that if it were thus with the Lord Jesus Christ
according to the flesh, as he was man; much less do other Children understand
the Laws of God in their nonage to have them written in their hearts and
minds: and therefore not in Covenant.

Obj. But it may be some for want of wisdom will object, that upon this
account Christ will be excluded the Covenant in his infancy.

Answ. To which I answer, Such people know not what they say: for the Lord has
given him for a Covenant of the people, and for a light of the Gentiles, Isa.
42, 6. chap. 49, 8. And he is the Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. 12.2.4.
And his blood is the blood of the everlasting Covenant, chap. 13.20. with Luke
22.40. And he is the seed to whom all the promises were made; and in him they
are yea, and in him amen, Gal. 3.15, with Cor. 1.20. and without him could be
no Covenant of life and peace; for he is the substance and life of the Covenant.

Therefore vain and foolish it would be for any man to make such an objection.

Again, those that are in the new Covenant, shall know the Lord, from the
greatest to the least, Heb. 8.11. but little babes born of the flesh, of a week
or a month old, cannot know the Lord: for they know not their own parents, nor
their right hand from their left, Jonah 4.11. therefore the Lord says plainly,
that children are innocent, yea the children of those which worship and do
sacrifice to the devil. Psalm. 106.37.38. in these words, They sacrifice their
sons and daughters to devils, and shed innocent blood, even the blood of their
sons and daughters, whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan: therefore
little babes, though innocent, are not nor cannot be in Covenant: for that
which is born of flesh is flesh; but the new Covenant is a spiritual Covenant,
and they which enter into it, must be born again: for those that worship God,
must worship him in Spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.24. Thus have I plainly proved,
that little babes that cannot speak words, nor understand Reason, cannot
possibly be in the new Covenant.

Obj. But now follows that great and unanswerable objection, as Mr. Cook and
Mr. Baxter supposes, which is this:

If children be not in Covenant, they cannot be saved: therefore, says Mr.
Baxter, in his 21 and 22 Arguments, page 71, 72. that Doctrine that leaves us
no sound grounded hope of the justification and salvation of any dying infants
in the world, is certainly false Doctrine. But that Doctrine which denies any
Infants to be members of the visible Church, does leave us no sound grounded
hope of the justification and salvation of any Infants in the world: therefore
it is certainly false Doctrine.

The same says Mr. Cook in his 13. Argument, page 44. That Doctrine and
practice is to be abhorred as most contrary to the Covenant of God which puts
the Infants of Christians into the same condition with the children of Turks
and Infidels, and leaves them in the visible kingdom of the devil, as no
visible members of the Church, etc. But the Doctrine of the Anabaptists is
such, therefore to be abhorred.

To all which I answer: first, denying that any children are saved by virtue of
visible Churth-membership, or being in the Covenant, as believers are: and let
Mr. Baxter, Mr. Cook, or any for them, prove it by the Scriptures if they can.

Secondly, I answer: there is no difference between the children of believers
and unbelievers in their nonage: for the children of believers are but
innocent, when we make the best of them: and the children of unbelievers also
are innocent, Psalm. 106.37, 38. yea, though their parents be such as worship
and do sacrifice to the devil, yet the Lord has pronounced them innocent, ver.
38. saying, They shed innocent blood, [even] the blood of their sons and
daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the Idols of Canaan. Thus it is plainly
proved by the word of the Lord, that the children of the murderers and
Idolaters that worshipped and sacrificed to the devil (as ver. 37.) were
innocent: and those that are innocent, God will not destroy. See Exed. 23.7.
with Job 22.30. and Prove. 6.16, 17.

Again, there can be no difference between the children of believers and
unbelievers, because no such children have actual sin: and the best of children
of men have that which is called original sin: viz. the sin that came by Adams
transgression, for which they must all dye, and return to their dust, even the
best of Saints, as well as the worst of sinners: for its appointed for all once
to dye, and after that comes judgment: but the Scripture does not say that
any shall be judged according to their original sin, or condemned for Adams
transgression; but it says, They shall be judged according to their works,
Rev. 20.13. and that every one shall receive according to that he has [done]
in his body, whether it be good or bad, 1 Cor. 5.10. therefore no ground to
fear the salvation of children dying in their nonage: for although they must
dye for Adams sin, yet Christ is become their Resurrection, and they have no
actual sin to be judged for. For, Whosoever commits sin, transgresses the
Law, for sin is the transgression of the the Law, Joh. 3.4. and where there is
no Law, there is no transgression, says Paul, Romans 4.15. but in such little
babes there is no Law, therefore there can be no transgression imputed. And
indeed I much wonder that men should be so wicked, as to think that God, who is
so merciful as to forgive the worst of sinners their sins and transgressions,
should yet cast poor babes into hell and everlasting torments for Adams sin.

Obj. But has God one way to save Men and Women, and another way to save
little Children?

Answ. Yea, or else Children must never be saved, as I shall show, thus: for
the Scripture says, Romans 5.18. that as by the offense of one, Judgment came
upon all to condemnation; [even so] by the righteousness of one, the free gift
came upon all to justification of life.

And if none but men and women that can hear understand, and believe the
Gospel, may partake of the benefits of Christ's death, to life and salvation;
then no Infants that are capable of receiving faith, (which comes by hearing
the word preached) could have any salvation by him. But that some Infants as
saved by him, all will grant.

Therefore I conclude,

First, concerning Infants that fell in Adam without any actual sin, or
knowledge of Adams transgression: [even so] they dying in their infancy, before
they know good or evil, they are saved by virtue of Christ's death, without any
actual faith, or knowledge of Christ's obedience; or else it is not even so, as
Romans 5.18. says.

Secondly, concerning Men and Women that have lived to commit actual sins
against conscience and knowledge, of such God requires actual faith in
Christ, and actual obedience to Christ; without which, they have no promise of
salvation by Christ.

And thus its plain, according to Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one (viz.
Adam) Judgment came upon all to condemnation [even so] by the righteousness of
one (viz. Jesus Christ) the free gift came upon all to justification of life.

Again, that God has one way to bring Men and Women to life and salvation, and
another way to bring little baces to it, is evident, thus.

We find the Lord speaking words to Men and Women, that are to be understood
and observed by them that have Ears to hear, and Hearts to understand: and
therefore we find the holy Ghost crying out so often in the Scriptures, to them
that have Ears to hear, that they should hear what the Spirit says to the
Churches: see Rev. 2.7. ver. 11. ver. 17. ver. 29. chap. 3.6. ver. 13. and 22.
with many more places to that purpose: but we never find him calling to little
babes in the flesh to hear and obey Commandments, and believe pomises.

Again, we find the Scripture pronouncing life and Salvation to all those that
believe in Christ, and obey his voice, Joh. 3.15, 16. with Heb. 5.9. but we
never read that litte Children are promised it upon these terms.

Again, the Scripture threatens death and damnation to those that know not
God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of God, and the glory of his
power. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 6. But little babes, of 8 days, weeks; or months old,
cannot know God, nor yet obey the Gospel of Christ: for they know not their
right hand from their left: and yet we find them not threatened with this
punishment: and if it were but this, it were enough to satisfy all rational
men fearing God, that God has one way to bring Men and Women to life and
salvation, and another way to bring little babes to it: (that is to say,) he
requires faith in Christ and obedience to Christ, as necessary to salvation,
to those of ripe years; but in Infants he requires none: let any man prove it
by Scripture, if he can.

Lastly, Gods ordinary means by which he brings Men and Women to life and
salvation, is by the preaching of the Gospel, which is the power of God to
salvation to every one that beleiveth, Romans 1.16. and it pleases God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them which believe; 1 Cor. 1.21. for with the
heart man beleiveth unto righteousness; but with the mouth confession is made
unto salvation, Romans 10.10.

But little babes, that can neither speak nor understand, cannot believe with
the heart unto righteousness, nor confess with the mouth unto salvation: for
they cannot speak at all: therefore they are not saved by that ordinary means
that Men and Women are saved by. And thus is their great and invincible
objection, (or rather cavil) answered clearly and plainly by the Scriptures of
truth.

And the truth is, they may as well debar little babes from food, because the
Scripture says, He that will not work, let him not eat, as to debar them of
salvation, because they are not Church Members: for it is as easy for babes to
work and get their own bread; as to perform the work of a Churchmember.
Therefore he that gives them food without labor in their nonage, will also
give them salvation without observing of Church-ordinances: for the Scripture
speaks to Men and Women that have Ears to hear, and not to babes in their
nonage.

Thus having taken away the chief ground upon which Mr. Cook and Mr. Baxter
build, I shall now proceed to show the rottenness of their building, by the
following Arguments; by which I come to show, that such infants as they baptize
cannot be Church Members, neither can Church Membership do them any good, but
rather the contrary.

Argument I.
My first Argument is from Joh. 15.2. in these words:

Christ faith, I am the Vine, and my father is the husbandman: [every] branch
in me that bears not fruit, be takes away, etc. What the fruit is, is
expressed in the seventh and eighth verses: If ye abide in me, and my words (or
Commandments) abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done
unto you: herein is my Father glorified, that you bring forth much fruit. From
whence I Argue:

If every branch in Christ must bring forth fruit, and the fruit be to abide in
his words, that God may be glorified; then infants that cannot speak nor
understand, cannot bring forth such fruit:

Therefore they are not branches in him, nor members of him: or if they be,
then they must be cut off and cast into the fire, because they bear no fruit:
which is absurd.

Argument II.
My second Argument is from Act. 8.1.4. where we read, that the Church at
Jerusalem were all scattered abroad except the Apostles; and they that were
scattered abroad went everywhere preaching the word: Whence I argue thus:

If all the Church were scattered abroad except the Apostles, and those that
were scattered did go up and down preaching the Word, then there were no
infants that could not speak nor understand, in the Church at Jerusalem: for as
for the Apostles, they were no infants; and as for those;e scattered, they were
no infants, for they went every where preaching the word; which infants that
cannot speak nor understand, cannot possibly do.

Therefore no such infants in the Church at Jerusalem.

Obj. But questionless there were women scattered as well as men; and then it
must follow they preached also: and then we have women preachers.

I answer Although the Ministers in out days would have neither women nor men a
preach but themselves, yet the Scripture tells, 1 Cor. 11.4, 5. that in those
days women did use to pray and prophecy, and they did it with their heads
covered: and Philip had four daughters virgins, and they did prophecy, Act.
21.9. and the Lord says he will pour out his spirit upon all flesh upon his
servants and handmaids, and they shall prophecy, Act. 2.17, 18. and they that
do prophecy do speak to men to edification, exhortation, and comfort, 1 Cor.
14.3. therefore women may preach or declare the mind of God to others, to
edification, exhortation, and comfort, if they be endued with gifts and
abilities, provided they do not usurp authority over the men, 1 Timothy 2.12. And
thus is the objection answered.

Argument III.
My third Argument is from 1 Cor. 1. where Paul says, in the second verse, he
wrote to them at Corinth, which were Saints by calling, with all that in every
place call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, etc. and in ver. 10. he exhorts and
beseeches them to speak all one thing; ver. 12. he says, that Every one of
them did speak; and one said I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, and I
am of Cephas, and I am of Christ.

But infants that cannot speak nor understand, cannot call upon the name of the
Lord Jesus, as ver. 2. nor speak all one thing, as ver. 10. (for they cannot
speak at all) neither can they say for their parts who they are of, whether of
Paul, Apollo, or Cephas, or Christ:

Therefore no infants that could not speak nor understand, were members of the
Church of Corinth: its evident, for every one that was a member there, could
speak, and say they were of one of these.

Argument IV.
My fourth Argument is from 1 Cor. 6.4. If then ye have judgments of things
pertaining to this life; set them to judge that are least esteemed in the
Church.

That he meant them that are least esteemed for wisdom and judgment, is plain
in the 5. verse.

But infants of eight or ten days or weeks of age, cannot either judge or speak
in such cases.

Therefore I conclude there were none such members of the Church at Corinth.

Argument V.
My fifth Argument is from 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. compared with chapter 11.28, 29. which
words are these: The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? and the bread that we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ? for we being many, are one bread and one body: for we are
all partakers of that one, bread: and Whosoever does eat of this bread and
drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord, and eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the
Lords body etc.

But infants that can neither speak nor understand, cannot discern the Lords
body from the world (as it is sanctified and separated from it by faith and
obedience) neither can they discern his body broken nor his blood blood shed
for them, which is so lively represented and holden forth in this bread and cup
to every discerning believer till he come, ver. 26.

Therefore such infants are no visible Church Members: or if Mr. Baxter or any
will yet have it so, then we must needs conclude with the Scripture, 1 Cor.
11.29. that they eat and drink damnation to themselves, not discerning the
Lords body: which would be absurd.

If any object and say, that Infants must not nor do not eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup, till they be of riper age;

Answ. They discover abundance of ignorance, like those 1 Timothy 7. which desired
to be teachers of the Law, and yet knew not what they said, nor whereof they
affirmed: for if they be Churchmembers, as Mr. Baxter and Mr. Cook say, then
they are to partake both of the bread and the cup: for the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 10.16, 17. that both the cup and the bread are the Communion of the body;
and also that the members of the body being many, are all partakers of that one
bread, etc. Therefore, either little infants that can neither speak nor
understand are no members; or else if they be, they eat and drink damnation to
themselves, not discerning the Lords body, as aforesaid: let Mr. Baxter, Mr.
Cook, or any man alse, avoid this absurdity if they can.

Argument VI.
My fixth Argument is from 1 Cor. 10.17. compared with 1 Cor. 11.28. in these
words: for we being many, are one bread and one body; for we are all partakers
of that one bread: but let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, etc. whence I argue thus:

If all that are members of the body, do partake of that bread, and they that
do partake of it, must examine themselves, and so eat; then little infants that
can neither speak nor understand, are no members visible of Christ's body the
Church: for they can neither examine themselves, nor none else for them,
because they cannot speak nor make answer.

But all that are members of the body, do partake of that one bread, 1 Cor.
10.17. and all that do partake of it, must examine themselves, and so eat of
that bread, etc.

Therefore no such infants are visible members of Christ's body, which is the
Church.

Object. If any shall object that we may as well exclude women as children: for
the Text says, Let a man examine himself, etc.

I Answer; first, it discovers but a wicked cavilling spirit: for conscience
tells them, that both men and women did partake of it, because its the
communion of the body, as I have proved: and that women are members of the body
of Christ, which is the Church, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. I think none fearing God dare
deny; but lest any should, I shall prove it, Gal. 3.27. for as many of you as
have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: There is neither Jew nor
Gentile, bond nor free, male nor female; but ye are all one in Christ etc. and
we read, when they believed Philips preaching, they were baptized, both men and
women, Act. 8.12. Again, that women are members of the body, is evident: for
Paul writing to the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.4, 5. Says, Every man that
prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head; but every
woman that prays or prophesies with her head uncovered, dishonors her
head: and ver. 11. he says, the man is not without the woman, nor the woman
without the man in the Lord. And Act. 9.36. There was at Joppa a certain
Disciple whose name was Dorcas, a woman full of good works. By which we see,
women were Disciples. And Romans 16.1. Paul writes of Phebe our sister a servant
of the Church: likewise Priscilla the wife of Aquila: and 2 John 13. Now
whether it be proved by all this, that women are members of the Church, which
is the body of Christ, I leave it to the godly wise to judge: and if members of
the body, then all partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.

Now as concerning the word man in the Text, it is no more then that in Genesis
5.1, 2. where it is said, that God created man in his own image, male and
female created he them, and called their name Adam, etc. by which it appears,
that the word man does include both man and woman: and so in this place, Let a
man examine himself, etc. as scholars do also confess it in the Greek to be
Anthropos, and in the Latin homo, which is a common name for all men, or both
sexes.

Argument VII.
My seventh Argument is from 1 Cor. 12.25, 26. where we read that there should
be no schism in the body, but that the members should have the same care one of
another,

But infants that can neither speak nor understand, can cannot have the same
care that Church members ought to have over one another; for they have no care
at all.

Therefore no visible members of the Church, which is the body of Christ. If
they be, then they are to be dealt with, and reproved for not having that
Christian care as aforesaid,

Argument VIII.
My eighth Argument from Ephesians. 2.23. where Paul speaking to the Church of
Ephesus, says that they All had their conversation in times past according to
the course of the world, in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of
the flesh and the mind, etc. But little infants that can neither speak nor
understand, being a month or a year old, could not have their conversation in
times past after such a manner, for they know not what belongs to the lust of
the flesh, nor the desires of the mind, till they come to speak and understand
the practices of others: all that can be laid to their charge before, is but
original sin.

But the Church Ephesus had all their conversation, thus in times past.

Therefore no little infants were Church Members amongst them.

Argument IX.
My ninth Argument is from 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 4, 5. where the Apostle says, ver. 2.
that they All knew perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief in
the night. That he speaks of all is evident, ver. 4, 5. in these words: But ye
brethren are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief: ye
are all the children of the light, and of the day, etc.

But little children that cannot speak nor understand, are no such children of
the Light, as to know perfectly, or in part, of the coming of the day of the
Lord; for they know nothing at all of it.

Therefore no such infants were members of the Church at Thessalonica.

Argument X.
My tenth Argument is from 1 Thessalonians. 2.11. where we read thus you know how we
exhorted and comforted, and charged every one of you, as a father does his
children, that ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you to his kingdom
and glory, etc. whence I argue thus:

If Paul did exhort and charge every one of the Church to do these things, then
indeed it must needs follow there was no infants, that could neither speak nor
understand amongst them; for they are not capable of exhortation, nor comfort,
nor any charge a man can give them.

But Paul did exhort, comfort, and Charge every one of the Church, ver. 11.

Therefore no such Infant amongst them.

Argument XI.
My eleventh Argument is from Heb. 6.11, 12. where we read thus. And we desire
that every one of you do show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope
to the end, that you be not slothful, but followers of them who through faith
and patience inherit the promises.

But little Children, of 8 or 10 days or weeks of age, can show no such
diligence to the full assurance of hope to the end; neither can they show such
diligence in following of them who through faith and patience did inherit
promises; for they have no undetstanding in earthly things, how then can they
understand heavenly? John 3.12.

Therefore no such babes were Church Members in the Church of the Hebrews.

Obj. If any one shall object and say, The exhortation was not to [all] and
therefore not to Children;

I answer, The text Heb. 6.11. says, We desire that [every] one of you may
show the same diligence, etc.

Argument XII.
My twelfth and last Argument is from Philip. 4.21, 22. where we read thus:
Salute every Saint in Christ Jesus: and, the brethren that are with me salute
you: all the Saints salute you, chiefly them of Caesar's house. From whence I
argue, thus.

If all the Saints at Rome, whence this Epistle came, did send salutations to
the Saints at Philippi, then there was no little Children amongst them, that
could neither speak nor understand: for they that can send nothing, can speak
no salutations, all rational men will grant. But all the Saints with Paul did
send salutations to the Saints at Philippi.

Therefore.

Secondly, I argue thus.

If Paul himself with all the Saints at Rome, did send salutations to every
Saint in Christ Jesus that was at Pilippi, then every Saint in Christ Jesus was
capable of receiving salutations, the which babes of 8 weeks or months old are
not.

But Paul did send salutations to all the Saints at Philippi, and so did all
that were with him at Rome. By all which it appears plainly, that all the
Saints at Rome were capable of sending salutations, and every Saint at Philippi
was capable of receiving salutations from them: but little Children that can
neither speak nor understand, are capable of neither.

Therefore its evident that there were none such neither at Rome nor Philippi
Church Members.

Obj. If any shall object and say, that children are not concerned in these
salutations;

I answer: Then they are not visible Saints in Christ Jesus nor visible members
of his body the Church, as Mr. Baxter says they are: for the text says
plainly, Phil. 4.21. Salute [every] Saint in Christ Jesus, etc.

There yet remains many probable Arguments, by which it might be made
manifest to every impartial Reader, that Infants which can neither speak nor
understand, cannot be visible Church Members upon the earth: but there would (I
know) be many seeming answers made to them; which would take much with those
that have their faith set in other men's wisdoms, and not in the power and
wisdom of the word of God, as we read, 2 Cor. 2.4, 5. Therefore I shall omit
them, because these are undeniable, having not only the word [Church] in
general in them, but also such words as speak to [every] Saint in Christ and
member in particular, as the word [all] the Saints, [every] Saint in Christ,
and [every] one of you, and [every] branch in me, etc.

But for example, I shall give you one probable Argument from Mat. 18.15, 16,
17. in these words.

If thy Brother sin against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and
him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother: if not, then
take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses,
every word may be established: and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to
the Church: and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee an Heathen
man and a Publican.

From all which I argue thus:

First, If it be the duty of Church Members to watch over one another, and
proceed in order according to this rule, then they must be such as understand
this rule.

But little [babes] of 8 days, weeks, or months old, cannot understand this
rule:

Therefore they cannot be visible Church Members.

Secondly, If it be the duty of [Church-members] to tell one another of their
fault, then they must be such as can both speak and judge what a fault is, or
else how can they tell one another of their faults.

But little Babes can neither speak nor judge in such cases.

Therefore they cannot be [Church-members.]

Thirdly, If the faults of particular [members] in such cases may and must be
brought before the whole Church, for them to hear and judge; then the whole
Church ought to be such as can judge and likewise declare their minds.

But little Infants are not such;

Therefore no visible [Church-members.]

But it may be the objection against all this will be, That this rule does not
reach or concern all Church Members, because the word all, or every one, or
whole Church, is not found in the text. But I shall leave it to the judgment
of the wise, that fear God, and are worshipers of him in spirit and truth.

Many more such Arguments as this might be brought, of which the time would
fail to relate, therefore I shall omit them, and proceed to prove in opposition
to Mr. Baxters and Mr. Cooks other Arguments, that little Children, that cannot
speak words, nor understand the Gospel if they hear it, are not nor cannot be
Christ's Disciples.

Arguments I.
My first Argument is from Mat 28.19. in these words: Go ye therefore, and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Spirit. The plain English of which, Mr. Baxter himself
confesses to be, Go make Disciciples, baptizing them, etc. From whence I argue
thus.

If those Disciples which Christ commanded the Apostles to baptize, must be
first made so, then they were not so born: if they had, they should not have
need to be made so. Again, the word says, Teach all Nations, or make
Disciples, says Mr: Baxter. Whence I argue thus: If make Disciples all
Nations, and teach all Nations be all one, as Mr. Baxter affirms; then its
clear that Disciples are made by preaching the word.

But Infants that cannot speak words, nor understand earthly things if we tell
them, can much less understand the things of the Kingdom of Heaven, declared by
the preaching of the Gospel.

Therefore

Here Mr. Baxter and I must have some discourse before we part a for he tells
us of diverse ways to make Disciples, besides teaching of them; which in plain
terms is to say, There is diverse ways to make Scholars, besides or without
teaching of them: which to me is a Paradox.

Again, Mr. Baxter being very willing to prove Infants Disciples, says, page
22. line 1, 2, 3. that its enough to make them Disciples, that they are devoted
to learning if they live; and that they are consecrated to Christ as their
Master, who can teach them hereafter: So that he would prove them Disciples or
Scholars first, and have them taught afterward: strange doctrine, and
unheard of Divinity! the which lest any should object against, he stoutly backs
with a learned Argument, as he would have it, thus.

Is it not a common thing to call the whole Nation of Turks, Mahometans, old
and young? why then may we not call our selves and our Children Disciples of
Christ?

And then he tells us another story of a man that hired a Philosopher to teach
him and all his Children, and were they not all then Disciples of that
Philosopher?

Answ. But is this Mr. Baxters plain Scripture Proof that he tells us of in
the title of his book? I do much admire that a man prosessing so much
seriousness in his matters, and soundness in his judgment, tenderness of
conscience, and zeal for truth as Mr. Baxter does (in his first chap. page 2)
should so turn aside his ears from the truth of the word of God, unto such
fables as these, as if he were resolved to make the Apostles words true upon
himself, 2 Timothy 4.3.4. which are these: The time will come, when they will not
endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves
teachers, having itching ears: and they shall turn aside their ears from the
truth, and be turned unto fables, etc.

But let me a little speak to Mr. Baxter in his own language, lest he be wise
in his own conceit, and think I cannot answer such learned Questions.

Suppose I should grant that little Children, as soon as they go to School and
begin to learn their letters, are Scholars; does it therefore follow that they
are then fit to learn the things of God, and be immediately (nay long before
that) the Disciples of Christ? I think not; for the Lord Christ says, John
2.12. If I have told you earthly things, and you believe them not; how shall
you believe if I tell you Heavenly? But such Children that go newly to School
to learn their letters, you may tell them of many earthly things, that they
cannot understand nor believe at all.

Again, What if we grant Mr. Baxter that little Children are Scholars the
first day they are sent to School, and having learned but the first letters?
This would make nothing for his purpose: for do we ever know any man so idle,
and foolish, and void of understanding, as to send his Child to School to
learn its letters, before it could speak or understand? would not Mr. Baxter
himself say such a man were void of reason? but Mr. Baxter does affirn such to
be Disciples of Christ, and would have them sent to Chrits School: but if this
be equity or godly wisdom, let the godly wife consider and judge.

But Mr. Baxter would teach men by parallels (and lay aside the word of God, he
might have made the comparison thus: As little children, the first day they go
to School to learn their letters, are commonly called the Scholars and
Disciples of Men; even so those little Children, or babes in Christ, 1 John
5.21. the first day they go to Christ's Schools to learn the first principles of
the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. may be also called the Scholars or Disciples of
Christ.

Again, as men commonly call all the Turks old and young that are born of the
flesh into [ Mahomets] Kingdom, which is of this [world] [ Mahometans] [even
so] we call all converts old and young, which are born again of the Spirit into
the Kingdom of [Christ] which is not of this [world] (Christians.) By old and
young converts, I do not mean beleivers born of the Spirit, and their Children,
as they are born of the flesh: but I mean such as are spoken of 1 John 2.13,
13. in these words: I write to you little Children, because your sins are
forgiven you for his names sake; I write (...) ^^^hes, because you have known
him that is from the beginning I wr^^e to you young men, because you have
overcome the ^^^ked (...). And chap. 5.21. Little Children keep your selves
from Idols. Amen. By all which we see that the least Children that were in the
Church that John wrote unto, were such as had known the Father, chap 2.13. and
such as could understand exhortations to keep themselves from Idols.

Now as for Mr. Baxter's man that hired the Philosopher to teach his children,
he neither tells us what man it was nor how old his children were, nor what
the Philosophers name was: and therefore I shall pass that over, as a cunning
devised fable, not worth the answering; and proceed to the next, which is,

That mothers can teach their children partly by action and gesture, and partly
by voice, to take off from vices, and infom in virtue. And methinks (says he)
ye should not make an Infant less teachable then some brutes. But (says he)
nurses witell you more in this, then I can.

O excellent Divinity, and plain Scripture proof! from where we learn these two
things:

First, that if it be a piece of good Divinity to prove that little children
that can neither speak nor understand, are the Disciples of Christ, then Nurses
are better Divines then Mr. Baxter: for (says he) they can tell you more is
this then I can, page 23.

Secondly, he says, What will you make an Infant les teachable then some
bruits? from whence Mr. Baxter seems to imply, that some bruits are capable of
being Christ's Disciples; or else why should he say, Will you have infants less
teachable then some bruits? As if he should say, Some brutes are teachable
enough to be made his disciples: and, what will you deny infants to be his
disciples? methinks (says he) we should not make an infantiess decible then
some brutes.

I remember he cries out against Mr. Tombs, in page 19. for arguing
ridiculously, when he proves plainly out of Psalm. 119.89, 90. that the heavens
and earth are Gods servans, in his answer to his proving infants, Lev. 25.41,
41. and if servints, then disciples, says Mr. Baxter. In answer to which, Mr.
Tombs says, The heavens and the earth are his servants, are they therefore his
disciples? to which Mr. B. for want of a better answer says, O what cause have
we all to look to the tenderness of our Consciences in time, before engagement
in a sinful cause has ben^^med and made the word of God to be of none effect
tous! But I leave it to the impartial Reader to judge whether the same sayings
may not more fitly be applied to Mr. Baxter in this place? I hope Mr. Baxter is
not so void of judgment, as to think brutes teachable enough to be made
Christ's disciples: but I am sure his words imply no less.

Indeed I remember Mr. Baxter does say in the beginning of his book, that he
will not meddle with such Arguments as other men have wrote of before, but new
ones that never yet were handled: and I must confess these are such new ones as
I never heard; but how much to the purpose, I leave it to the Reader wisely to
consider, and then judge.

Again, he has another Argument from Act. 15.10. the which Mr. Baxter says,
does prove Infants disciples, to all that will not grossly overlook the Text,
and pervent it.

Ans. An heavy charge against us, I confess, to be perverters of the Scripture:
but how true it will prove, you shall see by and by. The whole substance of Mr.
Baxters Argument, in the 15, and 16 page of his book, is this, from Act. 15.10.
Why put ye yokes upon the neeks of the disciples? etc.

But that yoke was, to be circumcised according to the Law of Moses; and
according to the Law of Moses, children as well as parents were circumcised;
therefore children as well as parents are disciples.

But I wonder what Mr. Baxter would do with this Argument, if we should give it
him, and answer nothing to it: I confess, amongst ignorant and sottish people,
that do pin their faith upon Mr. B. words, it may be taking: out amongst those
that are of noble spirits to search the Scriptures before they believe, as the
noble Bereans, Act. 17.11, 12. it can have no influence, nor take no
impression, because its but half an Argument, and so he has done his work that
he has taken in hand but to halves.

If we grant him all he says that it is but half an Argument is evident, thus:
The yoke that they would have put upon the neck of the disciples, was to be
circumcised according to the Law of Moses: but according to the Law of Moses,
none were circumcised but menchildren, therefore none else are disciples, and
therefore none but menchildren are to be baptized, by his own grant. And so he
has done but half his work as I told you.

Secondly, if Mr. Baxter please; I will lead him step by step into the right
understanding of this Scripture, by Gods assistance, thus: What was the yoke?
Answ. To be circumcised according to the Law of Moses: and who was it laid upon
then under the Law? Answ. Upon the Jews and their children. And who would they
have laid it upon? Act. 15.10. Answ. Upon the disciples; as is plain in these
words, Why put ye a yeke upon the neck of the diseiples? etc.

Who are disciples?

Here sticks the question still, and it remains still for Mr. Baxter or Mr.
Cook to prove infants disciples, and then we grant they are those upon whom the
false teachers would have put the yoke of Circumcision: but the disciples of
Christ are such as could deny themselves, and take up his cross and follow him,
Luke 14. but little infants that can neither speak nor understand, cannot so
do: therefore no disciples of Christ.

Lastly, I shall clear it by the words of the Text, that the Apostle speaks of
no children there, thus: Act. 15.7. we read, that when there had been much
disputing Peter rose up and said unto them, Men and brethren, you know that a
good while ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should
hear the word of the Gospel, and believe: and ver. 8. God that knows the
hearts, bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did to us:
ver. 9 and put no difference between them and us, purifying their hearts by
believing. Now therefore, says the Apostle, ver. 10. why tempt ye God, to put
a yoke upon the neck of the disciples? etc. But now who were these disciples?
Answ. v. 7. those that heard the word of the Gospel by the mouth of Peter, and
believed; to whom God also gave the Holy Ghost, and purified their hearts by
faith, as is plain, ver. 89. but little infants that can neither speak nor
understand, could not hear the word of God, and believe by Peter's preaching:
therefore they are not at all concerned in this place.

Another Argument that Mr. B. has, to prove infants disciples, is in page 18,
19. thus: If infants are capable of being Gods servants, then they are capable
of being Christ's disciples. And he proves them servants, from Levit. 25.41, 42,
where the Lord commands the children of Israel in the year of Jubilee to set
free all their brethren with their little ones; for they are my servants:
whence he concludes his Argument thus: If God calls them servants, why may not
we call them disciples?

To which I answer, Methinks its very strange he should take upon him to prove
children disciples, and when he cannot find such a word in all the Scriptures,
then he would turn us off with the word Servant, and presume to call it
Disciples; and then say, If God call them one thing, why may not we call them
another? It seems Mr. Baxter will take leave in this thing, to walk contrary to
God; and therefore I dare not trust him in another. But I will show him, not
only in things, but also in persons, that we must not call them Disciples of
Christ, which God calls Servants: for in Jer. 25.9. chap. 27.6. chap. 43.10.
in all these places God calls Nebuehadrezer his Servant, the King of Babylon,
an Enemy to the house of Israel, whom the Lord made use of to destroy it, and
make it an astonishment and an hissing: but yet I hope Mr. Baxter will not take
leave to call him Christ's Disciple: if he does, I think his folly will be
manifest to all men, as it is now to me.

Another such Argument he has, page 21. where he reasons thus: If Infants be
capable of being Christ's subjects, then they are capable of being his Disciples.

A learned Argument, and I will endeavor that all men may see the depth of it,
thus: All the Children in this Nation are capable of being Subjects of this
Commonwealth; therefore they are capable of being University-Scholars: This is
the same with Mr. Baxters Argument: but what truth is in either, I leave to the
wise to judge. That Infants are capable of being subjects here or in any
Kingdom upon earth, Mr. Baxter affirms, page 21. and therefore I need not
prove it.

Thus having answered I proceed to his third Argument, page 22. which is this:
If Christ would have some Children received as Disciples, then they are
Disciples: but Christ would have some Children received as Disciples;
Therefore. All the question (says he) is of the Antecedent (namely) whether
Christ would have some Infants received as Disciples or no: the which he seems
to prove, by these Scriptures, in his 22 page Luke 2.47, 48. compared with
Matthew. 19.5. and Mar. 9.41. the which Scriptures I shall set down at large to
the view of all, that they may see and consider whether they prove such things
as he brings them for, or not.

The Scriptures speak thus: Luke 2.47, 48. And all that heard him were
astonished at his understanding, and answers: when they saw him they were
amazed; and his Mother said unto him, Son, why have thou so dealt with us?
behold, thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing. Mat. 19.5. And said, For
this cause shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife; and
they twain shall be one flesh. Mar. 9.41. For whosoever shall give you a cup of
water to drink in my name, because ye belong to me, verily I say unto you, he
shall not lose his reward.

Now what the two first Scriptures are to the purpose, I leave to all that can
read and understand Eaglish to judge. But it may be he will say the Printer
has done him wrong. I answer, Then I have done him none, as all may see, that
read the place, and consider the quotations page 22. and I looked also in his
Errata, but there is nothing spoken of it: and truly I dare be no interpreter
of his meaning, without his words: therefore it remains that I only speak to
that. Mar. 9.41. and Luke 9.47. Which I find after were quoted in that page,
thus: And Jesus pereeiving the thoughts of their hearts, took a Child and set
him by him, and said, Whosoever shall receive this Child in my name, and
whosoever shall give a cup of water to you to drink in my name, shall not lose
their reward.

To which I answer, First, Let the Reader take notice that the word Disciple is
not to be found in the Text, therefore it cannot prove Infants Disciples: for
if we prove the resurrection and the eternal judgment, we must bring a
Scripture that speask of the word resurrection and eternal judgment: and so
did Christ to the Saddnees; he says, That the dead shall rise, is evident, and
his sayings we take for as good Scripture as any is in the Bible, although Mr.
Baxter says we would not, in his tenth position; to the answer of which I
refer you.

Secondly, To that in Mark 9.41. its evident he speaks to the twelve, saying,
Whosoever shall give you a cup of water, etc. And that he spoke of actual
believers, is evident, ver. 42. in these words: And whosoever shall offend one
of these little ones that believe in me, etc. Now that little Infants, that can
neither speak nor understand, are beleivers in Christ, I utterly deny (and let
Mr. Baxter or any man prove it by Scripture if they can.) for Faith comes by
hearing, Romans 10.17. therefore he speaks of such little ones as John writes to,
1 John 2.12. which had known the Father.

Thirdly, To that in Luke 9.48. Whosoever receives this Child in my name,
receives me, etc. I answer, The Lord Christ himself answers, or rather
clears this to purpose, as you may read Mat. 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. at large.
Now that Matthew and Luke do speak of one and the same thing, is clear, by
comparing Luke 9.46. which words are these: Then there arose a reasoning among
themselves, which of them should be the greatest: with Mat: 18.1. which words
are these: At the same time came the Disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? by this we see it is all one thing. Now to
the following words of Christ, which are these: And Jesus called a little Child
unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you,
Except ye be converted and become as little children, you shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little
Child, the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of heaven.

Observe, He does not say that the little Child was or should be greatest in
the Kingdom of heaven; but whosoever of his Disciples did humble themselves as
this little Child, the same is greatest, etc.. And then says he, verse. 5.
Whosoever shall receive one such little Child in my name, receives me.

Thus it is plain and clear (as the mouth of the Lord himself has spoken it)
what children he would have received as Disciples in his name: not little
children of a few days old, that can neither speak nor understand; but such as
humble themselves, and are converted from their sins, and become as little
children.

But some will say, How do you mean they should become as little children?

Answ. I mean as Christ in this place, that they should be humbled and
converted; and as Paul means, 1 Cor. 14.20. that they should become Children
in malice, but in understanding be ye men: and as Peter means 1 Pet. 2.1.
that men should Lay aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and
envies and all evil speakings and as newborn Babes desire the sincere milk of
the word that they may grow thereby: and whosoever shall receive one such
little one as a Disciple, in the name of Christ, receives me says Christ: bur
whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in him it were better
for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he were drowned in
the depth of the Sea ( Mat. 18.5.6.)

Again if we shall understand that little Children are believers in this place,
then it follows, that whosoever is a believer, and chastises his son
betimes, as Solomon advises, It were better for him to have a millstone hanged
about his neck, and to be drowned in the depth of the Sea: for certain we are,
that whosoever corrects his Child, will offend him. And thus you see the
absurdity which will follow.

Thus having answered all his Arguments, or rather Cavils, that have any weight
in them, or color upon them; I leave it to the wise to judge, and proceed to
prove, that little children, that can neither speak nor understand, are not nor
cannot be Christ's Disciples. And having proved already, both by Scripture and
reason, that Disciples of Christ are such as are capable of the teachings of
Christ, I go to my second Argument.

Argument II.
My second Argument is from John 8.31, 32. in these words: Then said Jesus to
those Jews which believed on him, If you continue in my word, then are ye my
Disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth; and that shall make you free.

But little Children, that can neither speak nor understand, cannot abide in
the words of Christ, (for they know not what they are) neither can they be made
free by knowing the truth; for they know nothing at all of it.

Therefore such little Children are not Christ's Disciples indeed.

Argument III.
My third Argument is from John 15.8. in these words. Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit: So shall ye be my Disciples: whence I argue
thus.

If the Disciples of Christ be such as must bring forth much fruit to the glory
of God, and so be his Disciples; then little Infants that cannot bring forth
much fruit, are not his Disciples.

But the Disciples are such:

Therefore:

Argument IIII.
My fourth Argument is from John 13.34, 35. in these words: A new Commandment I
give unto you, that you love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also
love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, etc.
from whence I argue thus:

If this be the mark that Christ has given to all men to know his Disciples
by, (namely) if they love one another as he has loved them, then no man can
know little Infants, that can neither speak nor understand, to be the Disciples
of Christ, because they cannot so love one another as Christ has loved them,
neither do they know it is their duty.

But by this shall all men know Christ's Disciples:

Therefore little Babes cannot be known to be his Disciples.

Argument V.
My fifth Argument is from Luke 26. (compared with Mark 13.37.) Watch and pray
always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things, and to
stand before the Son of man: And what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch.

But little Children, that can neither speak nor understand, cannot watch and
pray, as Christ commanded all his Disciples; neither does God require it of
them:

Therefore none of Christ's Disciples.

Argument VI.
My sixth Argument is from Mat. 13.10, 11. in these words: And the Disciples
came and said unto him, Why speak thou unto them in Parables? He answered
and said unto them, Because it is given to you to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom; but to others it is not given: From whence I argue thus:

If the Disciples of Christ be such as it is given unto to know the mysteries
of the Kingdom of heaven; then little children that do not know the mysteries
of the Kingdom, are not his Disciples.

But it is given to the Disciples of Christ to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom, and that is their privilege:

Therefore little Children that do not know them, are not his Disciples.

Thus far I have gone to prove, that infants that can neither speak nor
understand, [are not] Christ's Disciples; and now it follows that they [cannot
be] his Disciples; the which I prove by my seventh Argument.

Argument VII.
My seventh Argument (by which I prove that Infants cannot be Christ's
disciples) is from the same Text, Matthew. 13.11. To you it is given to
understand the mysteries of the kingdom, but to others it is not given. From
whence I argue thus:

If it be given to none but the disciples of Christ to know the mysteries of
his kingdom; then children (to whom it is not given) cannot at that present be
Christ's disciples.

But it is given to none but the disciples of Christ to know the mysteries of
the kingdom, (for to others it is not given, verse. 11.)

Therefore children (to whom it is not given) cannot be Christ's disciples.

But I remember Mr. Baxter said, If God call children Servants, why may not we
call them disciples? Now it may be he will object (here) and say, If Christ say
that little children are of the kingdom of heaven, Why may not we say they
understand the mysteries of the kingdom? I answer, The cause is plain: all
children that are freeborn subjects in a kingdom, are of that kingdom, and
belong to that kingdom, and may enjoy all the privileges in that kingdom, so
far as little children need to enjoy: but yet none of them know the mysteries
of the Government and Order of that kingdom, nor the Rights and Customs of it,
till they come to understanding to learn them; and when they learn, then they
are scholars or disciples; and to them that learn it is given to know etc.

So also I believe that little children, according to the Scriptures, do belong
to the kingdom of heaven, and partake of the privileges of divine protection
and likewise of the redemption that is in Christ Jesus although they know nor
believe nothing of it, till they be of years and discretion to be disciples of
Christ, and begin to learn of him; and then, To them it is given to know the
mysteries of the kingdom, as aforesaid.

Argument VIII.
My eighth Argument is from Luke 14.27. in these words: And whosoever does not
bear his cross and come after me, cannot be my disciple. Whence I reason thus:

If none can be the disciples of Christ, but those that bear the cross of
Christ, and so come after him; then little children, that know not what the
cross of Christ is, nor yet what belongs to following of him as dear children
in love, cannot be his disciples.

But none can be his disciples, but such as do bear his cross and follow him:

Therefore little babes cannot be Christ's disciples.

Argument IX.
My ninth Argument is from Luke 14.33. in these words: So likewise whosoever he
be of you that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my disciple. From
whence I reason thus:

If none can be Christ's disciples, but such as considering before what it will
cost, are willing to forsake all that they have, yea and their own lives also
for his sake; then little children, that can neither consider what it will
cost, nor yet resolve in themselves what to do, cannot possibly be Christ's
disciples.

But none can be Christ's disciples, without they have the use of their Will,
Reason, and Affections, so far as to consider before what it will cost, and to
resolve after, whatsoever it cost, to forsake all, and their own lives also, as
is proved by all these Scriptures, Luke 14.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
compared with Matthew. 10.37, 38. and Mark 8.34. Matthew. 16.24, 25.

Therefore, they which say little children, that can do none of these things,
are Christ's disciples, it is much to be feared that they never yet learned to
know what a disciple of Christ is, and are none themselves.

Thus having showed the deceit of Mr. Cooks and Mr. Baxters Arguments in
general, by which they would prove that Infants are Church Members and Christ's
disciples, and so fit subjects for Baptism; I leave it to the view of all, both
friend and foe; and proceed to answer Mr. Baxters eight Arguments, by which he
says he proves the Anabaptists way of Baptizing sinful.

His first Argument is this:

If there be no word of precept or example for baptizing the child of any one
Christian at years of discretion; then to delay their baptism till years of
discretion, and then to baptize them, is not the Scripture-way.

But there is no one word of precept or example, in all the Scripture, for the
baptizing of the child's of any one Christian at years of diseretion:

Therefore, to defer it till then, and then to baptize them, is not the
Scripture-way.

Answ. 1. I would gladly know whether. Mr. Baxter do or dare judge Mary the
mother of Jesus to be no Christian, who said, Luke 1.46, 47. My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, etc. if he
will deny her to be a Christian, who rejoiced in God her Savior, then I will
be bold to say he does not know what a Christian is, yea and that he is none
himself.

Again, if he confess her to be a Christian, then his Argument is worth
nothing: for her child. viz. her Son Jesus, was baptized at years of
discretion, when he was thirty years of age, Luke 3.21, 22, 23. And thus I have
given him an example. And our way of baptizing of people at years of
discretion, is a Scripture-way, and therefore not sinful.

And now I shall retort his Argument upon himself, that all men may see his
folly; thus:

If there be no word of precept nor example in all the Scripture, for baptizing
the child of any Christian before they come to years of discretion; then [so]
to baptize them, is not the Scripture-way.

But there is no word of precept nor example in all the Scripture for baptizing
the child of any one Christian before years of discretion.

Therefore, to baptize them before years of discretion, is not the
Scripture-way, and therefore sinful.

And thus is Mr. Baxter wounded with the edge of his own sword, and his folly
manifest.

Now to the second Argument which is this:

That practice which is utterly inconsistent with the obeying of Christ's rule
for baptism, is a sinful practice.

But the baptizing of children of Christians at years of discretion, is utterly
inconsistent with obedience to the rule for baptism:

Therefore, such baptizing is a sinful practice.

Answ. This is the same with the first Argument; therefore the same answer may
serve. But yet to make Mr. Baxter's folly manifest, I shall give him his
Argument again, thus:

That practice which is utterly inconsistent with the obeying of Christ's rule
for Baptism, is a sinful practice.

But the baptizing of children of Christians, or others, before they come to
years of discretion, is utterly inconsistent with the obedience to Christ's rule:

Therefore, it is a sinful practice.

2. Whereas Mr. Baxter would make us offenders for doing of nothing, that is to
say, for not baptizing children in their nonage;

I answer: He can never make it a sin, till he show us what command we have
broke in not baptizing them: for, all sin is the transgression of some law:
therefore says the Apostle, where there is no law, there is no transgression.
But there is no law nor commandment in all the Scripture to baptize little
babes that cannot speak before they come to years of discretion: Therefore, no
sin to let it alone.

3. There is both precept and example for baptizing men and women at years of
discretion, viz. when they believe, Mar. 16.16. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved: and Acts 8.12. When they believed Philips preaching,
they were baptized, both men and women. And Acts 10.48. Peter commanded them to
be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, etc. And now seeing there is both
precept and example for it, therefore it is no sin to baptize men and women at
years of discretion.

4. That Mr. Baxters, Mr. Halls, and Mr. Cooks way of baptizing is sinful, is
evident,

First, because they baptize little babes before they come to years of
discretion, for which they have neither precept nor example, therefore utterly
inconsistent with Christ's rule for baptism, and a sinful practice, as Mr.
Baxter himself has granted in these former Arguments: and thus out of his own
mouth he is judged and condemned for a sinner.

Secondly, that this their way of baptizing infants before they come to years
of discretion, is sinful, I further prove,

Because they, by their tradition of Rantizing or Sprinkling babes before they
understand and believe the Gospel, do make the command of Christ (which is, To
baptize men and women when they believe and understand) of none effect; and so,
in vain they worship God: and they which take his name in vain, he will not
hold them guiltless. See Mar. 7.7, 8, 9. Matthew. 15.8, 9. and thus they bind
two sins together, and in the one they shall not go unpunished.

Now to his Third Argument, which is drawn from that which he has spoken
already, as he himself confesses: which he lays down thus:

That practice which goes upon mere uncertainty, and has no Scripture-Rule to
guide it, is not according to the will of Christ.

But the practice of baptizing of children of Christians at age, goes upon mere
uncertainties and has no Scripture-rule to guide it:

Therefore it is not according to the will of Christ.

Answ. Who would think Mr. Baxter could have chopped one Argument into so many
pieces, to multiply words? for this Argument is the same in substance with the
two former, only put down in other words. But I further answer thus:

1. That to baptize men and women when they believe, is not an uncertain rule,
but very certain, both from the command of Christ, and example of the Apostles,
as Mar. 16.16. [He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.] And Acts
2.41. [They that gladly received the word were baptized and added], etc. chap.
8.12. [When they believed Philips preaching, they were baptized both men and
women.] And verse. 37. [If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may be
baptized.] Thus we see that it is guided by Scripturerule; and therefore it is
most certain, by Mr. Baxters grant.

But I must needs give Mr. Baxter his own Argument again, thus:

That practice which goes upon mere uncertainty, and has no Scripture-rule to
guide it, is not according to the will of Christ (says Mr. Baxter.)

But (say I) the practice of Baptizing little Babes before they come to years
of discretion, goes upon mere uncertainties, having no Scripture-rule to guide
it:

Therefore it is not according to the will of Christ, by Mr. Baxters own
confession.

His fourth Argument is this: That practice which will necessarily fill the
Church with perpetual contentions, (as being about a matter that cannt be
determined by any known rule, is not according to the mind of Christ.

But the practice of baptizing Christians children at age, upon their
profession, is such as will necessarily fill the Church with perpetual
contentions:

Therefore it is not according to the mind of Christ.

Answ. But the baptizing of men and women when they believe, is a matter that
can be and is determined by a known rule in Scripture; therefore no just cause
of contentions, because it is acccording to the will and mind of Christ, as I
have proved by those Scriptures quoted in the a foresaid Argument.

Again, I shall retort his own Argument upon himself thus:

That practice which will necessarily fill the Church with perpetual
contentions (as being about a matter that cannot be determined by any known
Rule) is not according to the mind of Christ.

But the practice of baptizing little Babes before they come to years of
discretion, is a thing which there is no known rule for in all the word of God:

Therefore it is not according to the mind of Christ, and there is just cause
to contend against it, and that perpetually.

And thus, Mr. Baxter, I have thrown your own Arguments upon your own head,
and you are fallen into the same pit which you dug for others; and thus is
your folly manifested in the fourth Argument.

Your fifth Argument is thus: That doctrine which would turn the Ordinance of
Baptism out of the Churches of the Saints (or near turn it out) is contrary to
the doctrine of Christ.

But this Doctrine of theirs (that those only should be baptized that are
directly made Disciples by the preaching of men sent, according to the text,
Mat. 28.19, 20.) would turn baptism for the most part out of the Churches of
the Saints:

Therefore it is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ.

To which I answer: It seems it is Mr. Baxters judgment, that they which
preach and baptize according to the Commandment Christ has given to his
Diseiples, Mat. 28.19, 20. are those which turn baptism out of the Church: and
yet he will not show us one Scripture to prove that any else ever were baptized
but such as were made Disciples according to the will and mind of Christ,
(viz.) by the preaching of the Gospel. But I confess such a Doctrine does not
almost, but altogether turn Mr. Baxters baptism out of the Church: for we
have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, as to baptize little Babes that
can neither speak, nor understand what the Gospel is.

2. I shall give Mr. Baxter his own Argument at first, thus: That Doctrine
which would turn the Ordinance of Christ's baptism out of the Church (or near
out) is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ.

But this Doctrine of Mr. Baxters and the rest of the Priests of England, which
is, that all Children should be baptized in their nonage, according to their
practice does turn the baptism of Christ, (which is, to baptize men and women
when they believe) quite out of the Churches of the Saints:

Therefore it is contrary to the doctrine of Christ, and is to be abhorred as
sinful.

And thus is Mr. Baxters sword turned with the edge against himself.

To Mr. Baxters sixth Argument, which is against the manner of baptizing by
dipping, the which he makes a breach of the sixth Commandment (Thou shall not
kill) and therefore no Ordinance of God, but an heinous sin; and so exhorts the
Magistrates (page 134. and page 136. in the conclusion of his Argument) to
destroy the Anabaptists as well as highway-murderers.

To which I shall answer in order as follows.

First, Observe how Mr. Baxter proves it murder: he uses not one Scripture,
therefore none can believe him, that desires to make the word of God a ground
of their Faith. But he labors to prove it thus; by affirming out of his own
mouth only, that its flat murder, being ordinarily used. And then insinuates,
thus: Its undeniable to any understanding man: for (says he again)

That which directly tends to the overthrow of men's lives, being wilfully
used, is plain murder.

But dipping men over head in cold water, ordinarily does tend to the overthrow
of their health and lives:

Therefore wilful murder.

Answ. In all this, the Reader shall do well to observe, that Mr. Baxter has
used many vain words which prove nothing, except we grant him that dipping
people after this manner does tend to the overthrow of men's lives: which we
cannot do, because Scripture and experience has taught us the contrary, as I
shall show anon.

But he proceeds thus: I dare say that in Cities like London, and among the
Gentlewomen that have been tenderly brought up and ancient People, and weak
People, and Shopkeepers, especially women that take but little of the cold air,
the dipping them in cold water in the course of nature would kill hundreds and
thousands, either suddenly, or by casting them into some Chronical disease.

Answ. Observe: all Mr. Baxters proof is nothing but he dare say so; let the
Reader observe that: but was there ever such a piece of Divinity seen as this?
Surely Mr. Baxter is much afraid of losing of Gentlewomen that are tenderly
brought up, and such as take but little of the cold air, and Shopkeepers: he
knows well that such usually have the heaviest purses; and if he lose them,
he loses a great part of his Religion; as its well known to most men, that
they will preach no longer then they are paid for it; nay they will be sure of
it beforehand: and therefore now he speaks things that he ought not, for filthy
lucres sake, ( Titus 1.11.) saying in effect, that if they obey the Ordinance
of Christ, it will kill hundreds and thousands of them, if not suddenly yet
afterward: He could not nor dare not positively say suddenly, because there
are hundreds and thousands now alive not only baptized people, but also
others, yea of his own judgment, that can prove him a false speaker, by what
they have seen and known.

But it seems it will cast them into diseases that will kill them afterward.

Answ. But he did not tell us how long after: it may be they might have dyed as
soon, if they had never been dipped: for all must dye afterward, or else never;
therefore every fool may see his folly in this. But he desperately proceeds,
like a man resolved not to take heed to his tongue, which as James says, chap.
3.6. is set on fire of hell, and wherein is a world of iniquity.

I know not (says he) what trick a covetous Landlord can find out to get his
Tenants to dye apace, that he might have new fines and heriots, likelier then
to encourage such preachers, that he may get them all to turn Anabaptists; and
covetous Physitinas (methinks) should no be much against them: Catarrhes and
Obstructions, which are the two great fountains of most mortal diseases in man's
body, could scarce have a more notable means to produce where they are not, or
to increase them where they are: Appolexies, Lethargies, Palsies and all
Comatious diseases would be promoted by it: So would Cephalalgies, Hemicranies,
Phthises debelity of the Stomach, Crudities and almost all Fevers
Dissenteries, Diarrhaeas. Colic, Iliack Passions Convulsions, Spasmes,
Tremors, etc. all Hepatick, Splenetick Pulmoniack Persons Hypocondriachs, will
soon have enough of it: in a word, its good for nothing but to dispatch men out
of the world that are burdensome, and to rank Churchyards. And all this is
proved by Mr. Baxters dare say so. Sound Divinity, and plain Scripture Proof;
even such as Mr. Baxter has made use of all over his book. But was there ever
such doctrine as this preached by Christ or any of his Disciples? would not any
Rational indifferent man take Mr. Baxter for a Mountebanck rather then a
Divine, and that he has more skill in curing bodies then souls? And may not
any man that has read and believed the Scriptures, and desires to walk
according to that blessed rule prescribed in them, and to contend earnestly for
the faith once delivered to the Saints by them; may not such say of Mr. Baxter,
as Paul said to Elymas the Sorcerer, when he would have turned away the deputy
from the faith, O full of all subtility and all mischief! thou Child of the
Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness; will thou not cease to pervert the
right ways of the Lord?) And though I cannot say as Paul said, Thou shall be
blind for a season; yet I can truly and with a good Conscience say he is
spiritually blind already, and to prove it to his face: for Peter exhorts the
Saints that have the eyes of their understanding opened to give all diligence
to add to their faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to
godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity: but he that
lacks these things, is blind, and cannot see afar off, and has forgotten
that himself was purged from his old sins, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.etc. but
whether he has showed any of these forenamed virtues in all this Argument, I
leave it to the wise to judge.

But I leave him to stand or fall to his master, and proceed to Answer a fool
according to his foolishness as I am commanded, Prove. 26.5. lest he be wise in
his own conceit.

And first, if it be the only way for covetous Landlords and Physations, as he
says; then if the Devil had not put it in their heads before, yet Mr. Baxter
(like a diligent Servant) has done it now.

Secondly, as concerning his newfound diseases he talks of, I shall ask him
two questions:

First, Whether he can say in his conscience that he ever did know of his own
knowledge any baptized person dye of it, or fell into any of these diseases
afterward? I question not, if he had known any such, he would have put down
their names in his book; although all rational people know, that they may fall
into some disease after they are dipped in water, and yet that not be in the
cause of it, no more then it is to them that never were dipped. Again, we have
through mercy plenty of faithful witnesses, both old and young, Gentlewomen and
Ladies wise and honorable, with many other people both of strong and weak
constitutions, that can prove Mr. Baxter a false accuser, and an inventer of
evil things in this particular. And as for my own part, I can boldly say with
a good conscience, in the presence of God, to his glory, that I have known many
weak and sickly before, that have recovered health and strength afterward: and
some immediately, in a few days; yea and that when they have been so ill, that
all Doctors have given them over: but I never knew any miscarry in my life; so
mightily has God gone along with us, owning his own Ordinance

If any shall be so foolish as to say, that people become Ranters afterward,
and that's a sign of judgment, and not of Gods owning it as his own ordinance.

I answer, that is after they are again gone away from the faith, and deny the
Ordinance of Christ which once they owned: then, as Peter says, It had been
better for them that they had never known the way of truth, then after they
have known it to turn from the holy Commandment once delivered to them. But
more of this in answer to his last Argument.

My second Question is to Mr. Baxter, Whether he be not convinced in his
conscience that some or all of these diseases that he speaks of, do not
frequently reign upon a multitude of persons in London or elsewhere, that never
were dipped in cold water: let him or any man deny if they can. Now if Mr.
Baxter do know none of his own knowledge that have perished or are like to
perish by dipping, by any of his aforesaid strange diseases, and is also
convinced in conscience that thousands in the Nation do dye of them that were
never dipped in cold water, then let all impartial people judge whether Mr.
Baxter be a good tree, by the fruit he brings forth. If his intentions seem
in his own eyes to be good, and that he aymeth hereby to undelude some souls,
and keep others from being deluded; yet he must needs be one of those Paul
speaks of in Romans 3.8. which do evil, that good may come thereof; whose
damnation is just.

The next thing Mr. Baxter speaks of, is Mr. Tombs his salving up all this,
with saying that they may be baptized in warm water.

I answer, I am not of his Judgment in that; for I believe its his weakness.

But then Mr. Baxter says, we cannot agree among our selves; and therefore
people have no reason to believe us.

I answer, We do not desire people to believe us, if we did agree never so
well, but to search the Scripture, to see whether the things we speak be so or
no, like the noble Bereans, Acts 17.11. and therefore to believe: we would not
have them hanged out of the way, because they believe not us, as Mr, Baxter
would have us, because we believe not him: but we know the Wheat and Tares must
grow together in the field, which is the world, until the harvest, according to
the commandment of Christ.

2. What if we do not agree together in every thing, does it follow therefore
that the truth must not be believed and practiced? I hope not: for its easy to
prove that the Disciples of Christ in the first Churches did differ in their
judgments, although it was not their wisdom, nor yet to the glory of God;
when one was of Paul, and another of Apollo, and another of Cephas, and another
of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.12. etc. and I believe that Paul and Barnabas were not of
one mind, when the contention grew so sharp between them that they parted; and
walked no more together, Acts 15.39. and likewise Paul and Peter, when Paul
withstood him to the face.

3. It is no marvel he tells us of this, because Mr. Baxter and his brethren
the Ministers of England agree so well: does not one hold for baptism with the
sign of the Cross, and another against it? for Baptism in a Font, and another
in a Basin? one for baptizing children of believers only, and others for the
baptizing of all? one for Railes, and bowing at the Altar, and others against
it? one for the Common Prayer Book, and others for the Scotch Directory? nay,
do not they persecute one another to Prison, Banishment, even death it self
sometimes? If Mr. Baxters Argument be good, then let all people take good heed
how they believe him and his brethren: and so I desire they may do however,
except they bring plainer Scripture-proofes then Mr. Baxter has done in his
book for Infants Church-member-ship and baptism.

The next remarkable thing of Mr. Baxter, is denying of dipping of believers to
be the custom of the Church in the primitive times; and he is not ashamed to
give the Scripture the lie before all men, saying, It is not proved by any.

Answ. And why is it not proved, I pray? it may be, because our Translators
have not put the word Baptize into English, and called it Dipping, therefore he
will not grant it: but yet I question not the proving of it by the Scripture,
notwithstanding his subtle evasions of the truth, saying, They might well be
said to go down into the water, because the country was mountainous.

To which I answer; If this be all that Mr. Baxter have to prove it was not
dipping in those days, I think I have more to prove it was dipping: and first,
I shall take what Mr. Baxter and his Brethren have granted me: for Mr. Baxter
in his 135. page says, the word signifies as well to wash as to Dip: so that
by his own words, it signifies Dipping as well as Washing. And in the
Catechism made by the learned of the Land, when they question what is the
outward form in baptism; their own answer is, Water, wherein the person
baptized is dipped, etc. thus much (as Paul says to the Atheniens) Acts 17.28.
their own Poets confess.

From whence I argue thus: If the word do signify Dipping as well as Washing,
then they can no more blame us for practicing dipping, then we may blame them
for practicing washing.

Secondly, If the word signify Dipping and Washing one as well as another, as
Mr. Baxter and others say it does, then how are they to be blamed that do
neither; but only sprinkle a few drops of water upon the face of a child? for
if the word signify both Dipping and Washing, and sprinkling be neither
Dipping nor washing, then they have deluded the People all this while, and at
leaft there quarters of the People of this Nation are still unbaptized. And
what an horrible thing is this, that a whole Nation almost should thus be
deceived by a company of learned self-seeking Men, who profess themselves to be
eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and to teach others that they should
not deceive, and as yet have not taught themselves?

Thirdly, If the word signify both washing and dipping, then it must needs be
washing by dipping, or wetting all over: for who can wash a thing that is not
wet?

As for Mr. Baxters objection, that Christ says, Ye need not but wash the
seet, and ye are Clean every whit;

I answer, If Christ had spoken that about baptism, as he did about washing
the Disciples feet, to teach them humility, it had been a good proof: but he
did not; therefore its none: but for to show their humility, and make them
clean every whit from pride, the washing one another feet did show it, as well
as if they had washed their whole Bodies: but now Christ, when he speaks of
baptizing believers Mar. 16.16. he does not say, He that believes and is
baptized on his Feet, shall be saved every wit; but, He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved: and Philip and the Eunuch went both down into the
water, and he baptized him, and not his feet only; for then they should not
have needed to have both gone down into the water. Again, If the word him or
them includes the whole man or men, as all that have understanding will confess
it does, if they be not partial in this case; then whole man or men and women
were baptized of John in the River of Jordane confessing their sins, and of
Philip, Acts 8.12. and the Scripture says, Mar. 1.10. that when Christ was
baptized, he came up out of the water: which plainly shows, that he went
first down into the water, or else how could he come out of it? and the
Scripture says, John 3.23. that John baptized in Enon, near to Salem, because
there was much water there, etc.

But Mr. Baxter has given a learned answer to that Scripture: (viz.) That
Travelers report that the River Enon where John baptized, is but a little
Brook, that a man may almost step over: and that he had from some lying
Traveller or other: for the Proverb is, that Travelers may ly by authority. O
fearful wickedness: and surely want of the fear of God, and love to the truth
of his word, that a Divine, a professed teacher of others should turn aside his
ears from the truth of the Scripture, that says there was much water there,
and that was the cause that they carried there to baptize; I say, that he
should turn aside his ears from such plain Scripture, to believe a Man, nay a
traveling Man, who are suspected of all Men to be liars in many things. A
desperate afrront to the word of God which is true from the beginning. Why may
not Mr. Baxter as well believe Sir John Mandevil as well as another, that
tells us of Men that are born with but one foot, and yet go as fast with it
as we can do with two; and it is so big, that in the heat of the day they can
lay them down on their backs, and hold up their foot against the Sun, and it
shades their whole Body? and of other Men that have no head at all, but their
eyes and their mouth stand in their Breasts? This is Travelers news, if Mr.
Baxter will believe it: and Sir John was to believed be (for ought I know) as
soon as the Taveller that told Mr. Baxter that the River Enon was but a little
Brook that a man might almost step over. But its a good turn the almost is in:
but is this Mr. Baxters plain Scripture Proof? Then the Lord be praised that
has delivered my Soul from believing of him and such as he is: and let every
poor Soul labor to save themselves (as Peter says, Acts 2.40.) out of the
hands of such an untoward generation, which speak things they ought not, and
believe Travelers reports rather then the truth of the word of God, and all
for filthy lucres sake.

But again, What if we grant that the Travelers words are true, will it
therefore follow that the River Enon is no bigger in no place, then it was
where the Traveller could almost step over? Are there not many Rivers in
England that are very little in some places, and yet in other places very
large? I cannot think but Mr. Baxter does know that it is so: and if so, then
Enon might have much water in another place though but a little where the
Traveller was.

Further, He says the Jailer in the night in his house was baptized: but the
Scripture says, that He took them the same hour of the night and washed their
Stripes. and was baptized he and all his straightway; and then he brought them
into his house, and se^ meat before them and rejoiced believing in God with all
his house. Now if the Jayler took Paul and Silas, it implies they took them
out: and the next words prove it plainly; for it says, He brought them into
his house.

His next is this: Mr. Baxter says, that we desperately conclude, that if it
be Gods way, he will save our lives, how probable soever the danger may seem to
be: to which he answers four things:

1. He says this is to beg the question, nay he says he has showed, and is a
showing, that it is not Gods way.

Answ. 1. If he has showed any thing already in these six Arguments, which do
prove baptizing of believers not to be Gods way. I leave it to the Reader to
judge, when he has considered his Arguments and my Answers, and compared them
both with the word of God, by which we ought to try all things.

Again, He says he has showed, and is a showing, that it is not Gods way: by
which the Reader may take notice, that Mr. Baxter is conscious to himself that
he has not yet proved it to any purpose; and therefore he says he is a
showing that it is not the way of God.

Answ. Well then, we will take notice how he proves it hereafter: for by his
own confession, it seems he has not proved it yet.

2. He says God must not be temped. This was the Devils trick, to have drawn
Christ, under pretense of Scripture, and of trusting God, to have cast himself
into danger of death.

Answ. But therefore that way which the Devil tempted Christ to walk in, was
never the way of God: but baptizing men and women when they do believe, has
been and is the way of God, Act. 8.12.

Again, whereas you say the Devil tempted Christ by pretending the Scripture; I
answer, it is true, he did so: but there was no Scripture that said Cast thy
self down, nor yet that said, He shall keep thee [at any time] as I have
showed you already at large, in answer to your tenth Position. And so likewise
when [you] tempt men and women to baptize their little children, you also
pretend Scripture; but you have none that say they should or ought to be
baptized, nor any Scripture that shows that ever they were baptized in all
the word of God, and therefore I well remember how angry you are with us in
your 10 Position, for asking you for a Scripture to prove baptism of Infants,
calling of us bruit beasts, etc. Therefore whose practice is most like the
tempters, yours or ours, I leave it to the impartial Reader to judge.

3. You say, we might have said to the Disciples, That if it were Gods command
to keep the Sabbath, then they needed not to rub the ears of corn; for God
could sustain them without.

Answ. So we might, if it had been Gods command so to keep the Sabbath, as not
to eat on the Sabbath day: but it was not; for they might eat and did eat on
the Sabbath days, Exodus 16.22, 23, 24, 25. although they were not to kindle
files, to bake, or sees, or roast on that day: and therefore this your
Objection is worth nothing; for there is both command and example to baptize
men and women when they believe, all the world over: See Matthew. 28.19, 20. Mark
16.15, 16. with Act. 10.48. and chap. 8.12. but there is no command nor example
to compel or persuade men to fast on the Sabbath day more then of another day;
therefore your Argument is frothy, and vain.

4. You say, If it were a Duty, yet when it is inconsistent with a greater
duty, it is at any time sinful; for it is always a sin to prefer a less duty
before a greater: But the duty of self-preservation is a moral duty and
baptizing is but positive; therefore it is a sin to prefer it before
self-preservation.

Answ. Now I hope Mr. Baxter has laid himself open to purpose; so that all men
may know him to be one of those that Paul speaks of, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. in these
words: This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come: for
men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, etc. Now whether it does not appear that Mr. Baxter is a lover of
his own self more then of Christ, when he prefers self-preservation before
obeying the command of Christ, and following the example of Christ; I leave it
to them that fear God to judge: for Christ says, If ye love me, keep my
commandments, John 14.15. and He that has my commandments, and keeps them,
he it is that loves me, verse. 21. But he that loves Father and Mother, Wife
or Children; yea or his one life, better then me (says Christ) is not worthy
of me: and, He that will save his life shall lose it, Mat. 10.27, 38, 39. And
truly if Mr. Baxter make so much of following Christ into the water, how will
he follow him through the fire, if he should be called to it? It is very
probable he would write as big a book against suffering with Christ, as he has
now done against obeying of Christ in this Ordinance of baptism; of which
Christ says thus: It becomes (not only him, but also) us to fulfill all
righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. and yet for all this, it is Mr. Baxters judgment
that self-preservation does become us better then fulfilling of righteousness
in obeying this command, or following this example of Christ as aforesaid.

Lastly, I desire the Reader may diligently, and in the fear of God consider
how like Mr. Baxters counsel to us, is unto Peter's counsel to the Lord Christ,
Mat. 16, 21, 22, 23. When Christ began to show to his Disciples that he must
suffer many things of the Elders, and chief Priests, and Scribes, and be
killed, etc. Then Peter began to be rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee
Lord; this shall not be unto thee: even so does Mr. Baxter say to us, and
especially to Gentlewomen old and weak People, and Shopkeepers, and women that
take but little of the cold air, then he tells them, O be it far from you;
this shall not be unto you: for I dare say, in the course of nature, it will
kill hundreds and thousands of you, either suddenly, or by casting you into
some Chronical disease etc. Thus we see how Mr. Baxters counsel and Peter's do
agree in these cases; therefore let all that truly fear God, learn of Christ
to answer Mr. Baxter as he answered St. Peter, verse. 23. in these words; Get
thee behind me Satan; for thou art an offense unto me; for thou savourest not
the things that be of God, but those that be of men.

And thus I leave what I have written to the judgment of them that fear God:
and proceed to his seventh Argument.

His seventh Argument (as he says) is against another wickedness in the manner
of baptizing, which he says is our dipping of Persons naked, as is usual with
the modestest that he has heard of; which, he says further, is a breach of
the seventh Commandment, which says, Thou shall not commit adultery, and
therefore is intolerable wickedness, and not Gods Ordinance. To all which I
answer.

Answ. 1. I am sure it is an intolerable wickedness in Mr. Baxter, and a breach
of the ninth Commandment, which says, Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy Neighbor, for him to say we baptize people naked; and a thing
which he never saw with his eyes, as he confesses when he says he hears so.
It may be indeed that some which he accounts Christians, have so little grace,
and of the fear of God in them, as to tell him such lies as these, and he is
willing to belive them; although for my part I believe I have baptized and been
at the baptizing of many hundreds, if not a thousand, and never saw any
baptized naked in my life, neither is it allowed nor approved of amongst any
that I know of. But suppose that some men have been baptized naked, when there
were none but men together, would this be such an unheard of wickedness as Mr.
Baxter talks of? or can it be a breach of the seventh Commandment for men to
see each other naked? or if it be such an immodest thing as Mr. Baxter speaks
of, then the Disciples of Christ were immodest, and broke the seventh
Commandment; for they were together a fishing, and Peter was naked amongst
them, the Word says expressly, John 21.7. therefore if at any time any should
have baptized a man naked, being none but men together, it is not such an
offense as Mr. Baxter would make it to be. I do not think but Mr. Baxter will
allow that men may go into the water together to bathe them, and yet not sin.

But Mr. Baxter does confidently charge us with baptizing Maids naked, as if he
took it for granted that it were certainly true: and therefore he breaks out
into these words, and says, If Mr. Tombs could baptize all the Maids in
Bewdly naked, and think it no immodesty, he has lost his common ingenuity and
modesty with the truth.

Answ. I confess if he does such things, I should think he had lost his modesty
indeed: but Mr. Baxter should first prove that Mr. Tombs or any man else did
ever baptize any Maid or Women naked, in any place in England: he should prove
this first, and then he did something, and had some ground to reason thus: but
till then, he does but wickedly labor, by saying all manner of evil sayings on
us falsely, (as Mat. 5.11.) to cast dirt upon the truth of Christ, 1. by
supposing the thing to be so without proof, saying, [If] Mr. Tombs could do
such things, etc. 2. by insinuating into the affections of men and women,
persuading them that it is so, (without question) and saying, Is not every good
man sensible of the deceitfulness of his own heart, and that he needs all
helps against it? etc. and would it be no tempation to Mr. Tombs to be
frequently employed in baptizing Maids naked? let him search and judge:
Methinkes (says he) the very mention of it, could I avoid it, is immodest.

Answ. I wonder why Mr. Baxter says, If he could avoid it: what, could he not
avoid speaking of untruths? Is he predestined to be a Liar, and insinuate
into peoples hearts, as if the things were certainly true, which are but his
own suppositions?

And then he says again, Methink, Ministers should have regard to themselves,
and not go so frequently into the cold water so often to baptize others.

Answ. Truly they are careful enough; for they never meddle with so good a
work: but I know Mr. Baxter is a lover of his own self, and can give others of
his brethren the same counsel; and great need; for good men are scarce; they
had need take heed they do not kill themselves in the service of Christ. But it
is very like that the zeal of Gods house will never eat up nor destroy Mr.
Baxter nor his Brethren the Priests of England: for I never knew any of them go
into the water to baptize either men or women, for it is against their
principle; therefore he might well hold his peace in that thing: and if the
Anabaptists do it and it be so dangerous as he says it, his best way is to let
them baptize as many as they will, and then they will kill themselves the
sooner, if it be as he say, and then he shall be quit of them.

But to conclude. 1. We find that in the days of Christ and the Aposties they
baptized both men and women in Rivers: See Mark 1.5. with Acts 1.12. verse. 37,
38. and in AEnon near to Salem, because there was much water there, John 3.23.
all this was allowed of and practiced by Christ and his Apostles. Now if they
baptized men and women in Rivers, where there was much water; we will be bold
to follow their good holy, and righteous Example, notwithstanding Mr. Baxters
foul mouth, who does not only reproach slander and belly us* but also the Lord
Christ and his Apostles; therefore we can through mercy well bear it, knowing
that the Servant is not greater then his Lord; and if they have called the
master of the house Beelzebub how much more them of his household? Through mercy
we can rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer any reproaches for the name
of our Lord Jesus. But let Mr. Baxter and his Brethren know, that they must one
day give an account of all their words and actions to him that is ready to
judge the quick and dead at his appearing, 1 Pet. 4.5. who will come with ten
thousands of his Saints to execute judgment upon, and to convince all the
ungodly of all their ungodly deeds, and of all their hard speeches, which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him: And then all Mr. Baxters serious
protestations for the truth in one place of his Book, chap. 1. page 2, 3. and
his cunning insinuations against the truth almost all over his Book, will do
him little good: for then those which now are so zealous, that they think they
should do God good service if they should kill us, John 16.2. will see their
error. But I heartily desire Mr. Baxter and the rest of his Brethren may see
theirs before, if possible.

And now to your eighth Argument, which is as follows.

That party and practice which has been still branded and pursued with Gods
eminent Judgments but never evidently with his blessings, is not likely to be
the way of God.

But the Anabaptists way and practice is such: Therefore not likely to be of
God.

The same says Mr. Hall in his 19. Argument, in his Fontgaurded.

To all which I answer, If this Argument be good, then thus: the Amorites were
followed on with blessings, and enjoyed the best of the Land of Canaan 400.
years together, while the People of Israel were in bondage and in misery; will
you therefore conclude that the Amorites were the Children of God, and that the
Children of Israel were not the Children of God? And likewise remember the
poverty and sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Disciples; and how
they were branded as much for Heretics, and wicked persons, and such as knew
not the Law, and were accursed, John 7.39. as you now brand us: but dare you
say that they were not Goods People? Truly I remember the Prophet says, Psalm.
73.3, 4, 5. that when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, and that they were
not in trouble, nor plagued like other men, that he had like to have stumbled
at their prosperity, and to have said that they were Gods People: but it seems
ye have stumbled, and are fallen, so as to speak evil of Gods People, because
of their sufferings. You further say, What an hinderance the Anabaptists were
to the Gospel in Germany, by resisting the most painful godly Ministers:
there be few Divines of note who do not bear witness of it frequently in their
writings as Luther, Melancthon, Illyricus; Zuinglius, Bullinger, Leo Juda,
Calvin, with multitudes more: and in page 140. you tell us Zuinglius was
constrained to resist them with all his strength: but it seems that was too
little; for you tell us presently that the Senate was fain to deal with them
with banishments, prison, and death: and then you tell us that Calvin did write
a Treatise against them, wherein he shows (page 141.) that the Anabaptists
were divided especially into two Sect; one more moderate and simple, that did
boast of Scripture; and pleaded Scripture with confidence for all they held:
but the other was a sort called Libertines, which were above Scriptures and
these (you say, page 142.) are such as forsake their Wives and Children, and
laying by all labor, do live idly, and feed on other men's labors: and when
they abourd with filthy abominable lust, they say its the command of their
heavenly Father; persuading Women and honest Matrons that its impossible they
should be partakers of the Kingdom of Heaven, unless they filthily prostitute
their Bodies; alleging that we must renounce all things we love best, and that
all kinds of infamy are to be swallowed by the godly for Christ's sake; and that
Publicans and Harlots go first into the Kingdom of Heaven: and of the
treachery, lying, and sedition wherewith these People everywhere do abound,
there is no end nor measure. And, I pray (say you) are these your virtues? do
you yet think they design nothing dishonest? or can you deny the truth of
these things? no, (you say) nor can any man show you one of the Anabaptists who
is not blemished with some of these forenamed wickednesses, etc.

And now I hope by this time you have vented your deadly poison (that lay under
your tongue) against the Anabaptists.

To all which I answer, first, If all these things should be true that Mr.
Baxter has said, (as they are not) yet it seems Mr. Baxters Religion is so
tottering and ready to fall, that he is feign to underprop it with the
Anabaptists failings; or rather with the grossest wickedness of those that have
Apostatized from us; and is glad to discover the gross darkness of the worst of
men, or else his own light is so small, that it will not shine: and when he
has reckoned up the worst of all wickedness that those that have apostized
from us have committed, he would lay it all upon us; and wickedly affirms
that there is none of us free from it. And when he should prove what he
promises, (namely) that the Anabaptists hindered the preaching of the Gospel in
Germany, his proof is nothing, but telling us most writers of those times do
testify it.

To which I answer, He might as well have asked his fellow-Preists if it had
been lawful to take Tithes, and he had been sure to have had the testimony
both of their words and writings for it, as he has now against the
Anabaptists. And we know very well, that the poor Anabaptists had rich and
potent Enemies wrote the stories against them: for by Mr. Baxters own
confession, page 140 and 141. Zuinglius was constrained to dispute and try his
strength with the poor Anabaptists: and when he could not stop their mouths, he
had the help of the Senate, who imprisoned, banished, and put them to death:
such Arguments (I confess) as neither Paul, nor Peter, nor John could answer,
but were forced to yield to them, and suffer as Heretics, pestilent Fellows,
movers of Sedition, and ringleaders of Sects: see Acts 24.5. and so were these
Anabaptists served at Germany: for Mr. Baxter says, page 140. They did not
suffer as Anabaptists, but as men perjured, disobedient, and seditious: and so
I thought indeed: for as there is no such way to have a silly sheep worried and
torn in pieces, as to put on a Bears skin on the top of him: so these learned
Divines (as they call themselves) know very well that the only way to have the
Anabaptists prisoned, or banished, or hanged, is to cloth them with all the
filthy names and reproaches they can devise, and then all people will be ready
to stone them: for alas they think whatsoever their Priests and Teachers say,
must needs be true: or if any should question it, he is presently suspected to
be an Heretic amongst the rest. And this is Mr. Baxters way, page 136. he
would by Logic prove that we are guilty of the breach of the sixth
Commandment, because we dip men in water; and then he cries out to the
Magistrate to hang us up as soon as high way-murderers: and this is and has
been the practice of their Forefathers in the Prophets times, and Christ and
the Apostles.

Lastly, You tell us that Calvin wrote a Book against them: very well then; it
seems Zuinglius disputed with them, and rendered them odious to the Magistrate,
and cast out their name as filth for the Son Man's sake, as you do ours now,
Luke 6. and so the Magistrate prisoned, and banished, and hanged them: and when
they were dead and laid in their Graves, Calvin falls a writing against them,
when he was sure they were past answering for themselves; but Mr. Baxter, I
write to you, and Mr. Hall, and Mr. Cook while you are alive, and may answer
for your selves; therefore I expect an answer from you: if you have any thing
to say according to truth, or else you may forbear.

But now to Calvin's Letter, wherein you say, page 141. he shows that the
Anabaptists are divided into two sorts: one of which did boast of Scripture,
and pleaded Scripture with great confidence for all they held.

Answ. If they boasted of the holy Scriptures, they boasted of no evil, but of
that which is good; which we ought to make our boast of, and to rejoyee in: for
Paul says, 2 Cor. 11.10. As the truth of Christ is in me, no man can stop me
of this boasting, etc. and in God we will boast all the day long, and praise
his name for ever, Psa. 44.8. and if you would boast of them more then you do,
it would be better for you.

But you say further, they pleaded Scripture with confidence for all they held.

Answ. I wonder Calvin and you were not ashamed to speak of these things: what,
does it displease you to hear men plead Scripture for what they hold? are you
such enemies to the holy Scriptures, which are able to make us wise to
salvation? then take heed lest while you boast your selves to be wise without
them, or above what is written, you become not fools: for the Lord knows the
thoughts of the wise, that they are but vain; and takes the wise in their own
craftiness: therefore let no man boast nor glory in man, but in God and his
word. See 1 Cor. 3.19, 20, 21. but Mr. Hall and you have found out a way beyond
the Scripture, affirming that there are a thousand things not written in the
word of God, which you ought to obey; to which you have a large answer to your
tenth Position.

But to conclude this point, if that be the worst you and Calvin can say of
those Anbaptists (namely) that they made their boast of the Scripture, and
pleaded Scripture for all they held; I shall not be ashamed to own them for
Christians, before all men.

And as for your other sort you talk of, which are above Scripture, and
confound all things good and bad, God and Satan together; I, and all that own
Scriptures, do deny and defy them and their ways as abominable and
detestable; and you do very wickedly to call them Anabaptists, thereby to cast
odiums upon us: for your self confess, page 141. that Calvin calls them
Libertines; and why then I pray, are you so wicked and malicious as to call
them Anabaptists? I suppose all men that are impartial and rational, will see
your folly and wickedness: for in the conclusion of all you would heap all
their wickedness upon our heads, page 142. saying, No man can show you one man
of the Anabaptists that is not tainted with some of these foresaid wickednesses.

Answ. If any one of us should say we never were liars, then we should be still
liars, like your self: for all men are liars, or have been: and there is none
righteous, no not one; but all are gone out of the way, and with their tongues
have used deceit: the poison of Asps is under their lips: their mouth full of
cursing and bitterness, and their feet swift to shed blood. See Romans 3.10, 11,
12, 13, 14 15. and so are yours (Mr. Baxter) or else you would never persuade
the Magistrates to hang up the Anbaptists as well as highway-murderers, page
136. but this I confess is the condition of all men, before faith and
repentance: for the Lord Christ says, that those 18 upon whom the Tower of
Siloam fell, Luke 13.2, 3 4. were not greater sinners then others; but except
they repented, they should all likewise perish: and so must you (Mr. Baxter)
and others; for God is no respecter of pers;ons. Again, I read, 1 Cor. 6.9,
10, 11. the Apostle speaks thus to the Saints; Know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God: and in the 11. verse. he says, Such were some of
you: but now ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, and justified, in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Now if there were such in the
Church of Corinth, as had been thus wicked, and yet were washed, justified, and
sanctified from their sins by the Lord Jesus; then I dare not say but such as
have been gross sinners, may have repented and converted, and come into the
Churches of the Anabaptists (as you call them) in these days: for I find that
Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; and even
those that killed the Lord of life obtained mercy, Mat. 9.13. with Acts 2.36,
37, 38, 39. and so did Paul the worst of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15, 16. therefore if
any that are now Anabaptists, have formerly been gross sinners, it was while
they were of your Church, and its no more then some of the best of Saints have
been, before conversion and repentance. But I suppose Mr. Baxter would make the
world believe that the Anabaptists are all so now, after they become
Anabaptists; and would make that the cause of it; and would persuade the world
that its our principle and judgment.

Answ. If Mr. Baxter had known any such in fellowship with us when he wrote his
Book, he should have done well to have named them: but neither Mr. Saltmarsh,
Paul Hobson, Mr. Williams, are in fellowship with the Anabaptists: and as for
Mr. Erbery and others that have apostatized, what have we to do with them? we
have cast them out from us long since, and they are returned to you again. As
for Mr. Denis amongst the Levellers, he confessed his fault before God and man,
and obtained mercy: and then what have you to do to play the Devils part to
accuse him again? I believe his offense was not bigger then Peter's, who denied
and forswore his Master: its like therefore if you had lived in those days you
would have been so wicked as to have cried down Christ and his ways, as you
do now, and have said (with the rest of your Forefathers the Scribes and
Pharisees) Its not likely that he and his way should be of God; for in his
prosperity none followed him but a company of poor people that knew not the
Law, and were accursed: As for the Scribes and Pharisees, and Wisemen, and
Rulers, few or none of them were so simple as to be led aside with him: and now
see what an end he comes to, and how God follows him on with judgments: one
of his own Disciples betrayed him, and sold him for 30 pieces of silver; and
the other denied and forswore him. See what they are; one a covetous wretch and
a Traitor, and the other a liar, for he said he knew not his Master; and a
perjured fellow, for he forswore him; and their followers the Church of Corinth
such as denied the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.12. and were incestuous persons: And
afterward Peter and some of the Saints dissembled, so as other were fain to
withstand them to the face, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13. Now is it possible that Mr.
Baxter should be so blinded as to conclude, that because of these things
happening amongst them, that therefore they were not the People of God, and
their way not the way of God? Surely he speaks evil of things he knows not:
for he cannot possible prove worse things among us that are in fellowship, then
there were some in those Churches; but now since he and Mr. Hall (in his
nineteenth Argument) have begun, I am engaged to answer them according to their
foolishness, lest they be wise in their own conceits, Prove. 26.5.

And first, I much wonder that Mr. Baxter and Mr. Hall should reason thus
against the Anbaptists, when none are more deeply under the same condemnation
then themselves. Its strange they should complain of others for lying, and are
so notorious in it themselves: for the very Title of Mr. Baxters book is a lie;
for he calls it Plain Scripture Proof for infants Churchmembership and
Baptism, and brings not one Scripture to prove either.

Now for Treachery, let them remember Mr. Love who was beheaded for a Traitor.
And for Perjury, its easy to prove most of the Priests in England perjured:
for they have renounced the Bishops and their Orders, which once they took an
oath to he true unto. And as for disobedience to the Magistrates, and stlrring
up of sedition in the Nation, its daily manifest by their praying and
preaching, to all that hear them. And as for idleness, I would have them for
shame to forbear speaking of that: for they are all idle, and know not how to
work; and were brought up idle, and are such as Paul speaks of to Timothy,
which go up and down not working at all: nay, they think it a great dishonor
to their cloth to put their hands to labor: and if you be not the men that
live upon other men's labors, when you would take away the tenth of all their
increase and labors by a Law, let the poor people judge.

Now as for your saying that the Anabaptist desert their wives, its a lie among
the rest of your evil invented things: for there is none amongst us that do or
dare do such wickedness: or if you know any such, why do not you prosecute them
according to Law? you have a Law to hang up your own Church Members for such
things, and then why do you spare us? We may know by this, your accusation is
false: for if we did as you report wickedly, we were sure of no mercy at your
hands: and you are very simple, if these things be true, that you do not
prosecute the Anabaptists, and get them hanged out of the way, and then they
should not trouble you: but your tongues are no slanders, as it happens:, and
that I hope all men will shortly see.

But I pray let us look a little further into your Church of England, and see,
are not all the whores, and rogues, and thieves, and murderers, and witches,
that are hanged all the year through, at every Assizes or Sessions, are they
not of your Church? did you not baptize them into it, in their Infancy? and
have they not continued in it some of them many years? Nay, is it not your
practice in the Gayles after they are condemned, to give them the Sacrament on
the Sunday, and one Churchmember to hang up another on the Munday-morning? And
yet for all this, are you so audacious as to say the Churches of the
Anabaptists cannot be of God, because they have corrupt members amongst them?
Who sees not your wickedness and partiality? And now may I not be bold to use
the words of the Lord Christ ( Mat. 7.3, 4, 5.) to you Mr. Baxter, and to you
Mr. Hall, and others? And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy Brothers
eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? or how will thou
say to thy Brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye, and behold a
beam is in thine own? Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine
own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy
Brothers eye.

Now lest you or any should think I deal too hardly with you in this case, I
answer you according to your folly, lest you should be wise in your own
conceits; and that I am commanded to do by the word of the Lord, Prove. 26.5.
But to pass by the poor deluded people that are hanged up for their oftences
every Assizes and Sessions, we will now come to the teachers and leaders of
them, and see what they do, and and how they behave themselves for examples:
and now I shall not trouble you with outlandish news from Germany and other
places beyond the Seas, neither will I foolishly, and maliciously invent things
against you; but I will refer you to a book that is printed by the order and
authority of Parliament, entitled, The first Century of scandalous, and
malignant Priests, etc. printed by George Miller, dwelling in Blackfriars:
wherein you shall find the Persons names, the places where they had their
benefices, and the reasons why they were sequestered. And that you may the
better understand what manner of creatures these Ministers and Teachers were, I
shall briefly put down the names and causes of some few of them word for word,
as it is in the book, which was printed by the authority of Parliament; to
which I refer the reader for further information: where you shall find no less
then a whole hundred of these vile and abominable wretches, called Ministers of
Christ by some, and so looked upon, as if the Parliament had done them wrong.
All these were found in eight or nine Counties at most, about London: therefore
we may judge how many of these Locusts are in England, Scotland, (amongst the
Covenanters) and in Wales: of which persons, and their practices, I now come to
speak particularly.

Page 1. The Benefice John Wilson Vicar of Arlington in the County of Sussex is
sequestered, for that he in most beastly manner diverse times attempted to commit
buggery with Nathaniel Brown, Samuel Andrews, and Robert Williams, his
Parishoners, and by persuasions and violence labored to draw them to that
abominable sin, that (as he shamed not to profess) they might make up his
number 18. and has professed that he made choice to commit that act with
mankind rather then with women, to avoid the shame and danger that often ensues
in begetting of Bastards: and has also attempted to commit buggery with a
Mare: and at the baptizing of a Bastard-Child, blasphemously said openly in the
Congregation, that our Savior as he was in the flesh was a Bastard: and has
in his Sermon much commended Images in their meeting houses, as good for
edification: that baptism takes away original sin etc. and has openly said
that the Parliament were Rebels, and endeavored to starve the King: and that
whatsoever the King commands, we are to obey, whether it be good or bad: and
has openly affirmed, that buggery is no sin: and is a great drinker. 2. The
Benefice of Robert Hiliard, Vicar of the Parish Church of Ewell in the County
of Surry is sequestered, for that he said the Parliament is a Parliament for the
Devil, and the Devils Court; and that the Petitions of the Parliament to the
King, are like the Petitions of Jeroboam to Rehoboam (viz.) commands and not
Petitions: and that he had rather live under the government of a Heathen, then
of the Parliament: and is a common frequenter of Taverns and Alehouses, sitting
tippling and quarrelling there: is often drunk; is a common curser and swearer,
and has jeered the holy Spirit of grace, saying, We have Ministers now (for
sooth) will preach and pray by the Spirit: and has threatened to kill those
that have exhibited articles against him; and went about with the Cavaliers at
Kingstone, directing them to plunder honest men. Mr. Baxter says, the
Anabaptssts are traitors to the State; but I wonder who are traitors now. 3.
The Benefice of John Peckham Rector of the Parish Church of Hosteedparva in the
County of Sussex, who gives out that he is the Kings Chapline is sequestered,
for that he has been very negligent of his cure, absenting himself from his
Parishioners sometimes a whole month together: without leaving any to
officiate for him; and has resufed to adminster the Lords Supper to his
Parishioners that would not come up to the railes: and is a common drunkard,
and a notorious adulterer, and unclean person, having drawn diverse women to
commit uncleanness with him: and has bragged that he could lie with diverse
women, and never get them with Child: and has used sordid and beastly
carriages toward women, to entice them to satisfy his lust, not to be named
amongst the Heathen: and has expressed great Malignity against the Parliament
and proceedings thereof, and has affirmed publicly, that a man might live in
murder, adultery, and other gross sins, from day to day, and yet be a true
penitent person. 4. The Benefice of Richard Heart Rector of the Parish Church of
Hargrave in the County of Suffolk is sequestered, for that he is a common
Ale-house-haunter, an upholder of private Alehouses and commonnly sits
drinking in them diverse days together, as from Tuesday to Sunday-morning; and
then being come home, durst not come to Church, his face was so battered and
beaten: and forced his Parishioners to go to other places, by reason of his
inabilities either to preach or read service to them: and used on the Lords
day, on the afternoones, to draw his Parishioners with him to his house,
forceing them there to drink until they be drunk; causing every one to to cast
a Die in their course, and to drink so many cups as fell to their chance;
persuading them that if they would take their cups, he could forgive them their
sins. And when he has preached on Fastdaies, he has told his Parishioners,
that he knew not wherefore the Fast was. And on Whit-Sunday last, though he had
administered the Communion in the fore-noon yet in the afternoon he drew a Man
and his Wife to a private Alehouse, and there kept them drinking till night,
and then led them to his own house, and there made the man so drunk, as he fell
asleep, and then enticed the man's Wife up into his Chamber, where they were all
night together, drinking and taking Tobacco: and has expressed great Malignity
against the Parliament, professing he would rather curse them, then pray for
them. 5. The Benefice of Nicholas King Vicar of Priston and Snape in the County
of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he is a common Ale-house-haunter, and a
companion of scandalous persons, and men of evil fame, and often drunk; and
attempted the chastity of Elizabeth Scotchmer; who going to his house to pay
him some moneys, he enticed her to lie with him, and did strive a long time to
abuse her by force, and would have corrupted her thereunto with moneys: but she
protesting unto him that she would not sell her soul to the Devil for money, he
replied to her she was a fool, for God did forgive the greatest of sinners: and
he has expressed great Malignancy against the Parliament. 6. The benefice of
John Wells Parson of the parish Church of Shimplin in the County of Suffolk is
sequestered, for that he is a common Ale-house-haunter, and common drunkard; and
in his drunkenness has lain abroad in the fields; lost his Hat, fallen into
the Ditches, and so bemyred himself, that he has been fain to be washed: and
has attempted the chastity of diverse women; sold his tythe-calves for kisses
with them; and having locked himself up in a Chamber in an Inn with a lewd
woman, after a long time the door was broken upon him, when he refused to
unlock it, and he found in a very suspicious manner upon a bed with her; after
which, he conveyed her secretly away, and sent gifts unto her; and has
affirmed that the Land is governed by wicked men, and that the Papists were the
Kings best subjects: and is a common swearer of very great Oaths. 7. The
benefice of Humphrey Dawes, Vicar of the ParishChurch of mount Nezing in the
county of Essex, is sequestered, for that he has discouraged his Parishoners
from assisting the present defensive war; affirming, that they are damned, and
are Traitors to the King, that have lent money to the Parliament; and that he
has read the book of sports, and encouraged his Parishioners to profane the
Sabbath; and has been often drunk; and came so drunk to Church on the Lords
day, as he bade his people sing a chapter in the Hebrews in stead of a Psalm,
not knowing what he did. 8. The benefice of Anthony Hugget Parson of the Parish
of the Cliff in the County of Sussex is sequestered for that he has preached,
that it was more lawful to Steal or to do any work on the Lords day, then to go
to other Churches to hear Sermons, though they have none at home: and has sued
diverse of his parish for going to other Churches, and forced two of them to do
penance for it: and has been bound to the good behavior (at quarter Sessions)
for several misdemeanors; and instead of a Sermon did read to his people the
late new Cannons; and is greatly suspected of incontinency; and has had the --
and was cured thereof by one Mr. Abel for ten pounds promised him: and the said
Huggets Wife asking him for a piece of Gold which he took from her and gave to
a light Woman, in fury he spurned her on the belly when she was quick with
Child, so that she was forced presently to her Chamber, and was delivered of a
dead Child; notwithstanding which he vowed he would never have more Children by
her, etc. who is now without natural fection. 9. The benefice of Peter Allin
Vicar of the Parish Church of Tolsbury in the County of Essex is sequestered,
for that he has lived incontinently a long time with several Women: that is to
say. Mary Time, who went from his house with Child by him: Frances Smith, by
whom he had a bastard: and Anne Cooper, whom he has kept for the space of
seven years last past, and yet he keeps her in his house, who miscarried a of
Child begotten by him: refused to administer the Sacrament to such as would not
come to him at the railes there; and has been very negligent of his cure, so
that he absented himself: that the dead have been left unburied several days:
and has expressed great Malignity against the Parliament. 10. The benefice of
John Hurt Vicar of the Parish Church of Hordon upon the Hill, in the County of
Essex is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter of Taverns or
Alehouses, and a common drunkard and gamester, a common swearer and curser,
and has been convicted before the Justice of peace, of six oaths at a time,
and then swear by-God he did not swear: and has a very ill report of
uncleanness and abuse of Women: and has spoken basely of the Parliament
expressing great Malignancy against them. etc. 11. The benefices of Paul
Clapham Vicar of the Parish Church of Farnham, in the County of Surry, and
Parson of the Parish Church of Martinworthy in the County of South-Hampton are
sequestered, for that he has lived in Adultery with several women, and has had
diverse bastards, and has charged the Parish with keeping them: and has two
bastards at this time kept, one of which he pays for the maintenance of, and
is bound with his Son to pay for the maintenance of the other; and has called
the Parliament and their adherents Rebels and Traitors, and exhorted men to
contribute and take up arms against them: and has deserted his cure, and
betaken himself to the Army of the Cavaleers, etc. 12. Lastly, The benefice of
Robert Sheppard, Parson of the Parish Church of Hep-worth, in the County of
Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he is a common drunkard and frequenter of
Taverns and Alehouses, lying and continuing drunk in the said houses diverse
nights, sometimes twice or thrice a week: and greatly suspected of
incontinency, having had many Maidservants depart from his house great with
Child, none living in the house with him but himself, and some have returned
again to live with him, and within a short time have been with Child again:
and he has been a great practiser of the altar-worship, and inforcer of his
Parishioners to receive the Sacrament at the rails, and has put fifteen at a
time from the Sacrament, for refusing to receive it there: and in his
Catechizing and preaching calls his Parishioners, black-mouthed hellhounds,
limbs of the Devil, firebrarnds of Hell, plow-joggers, bawling-dogs,
weaverly-jacks, Church-robbers, affirming that if he could term them worse, he
would: and has endeavored to persuade poor men to forswear themselves for
him, and has affirmed that the Parliament were but a company of factious
Spirits, etc.
And thus have you a relation of the practices and carriages of some of them,
(verbatim) as it is written in the forenamed Book, entitled The first Century
of Scandalous and Malignant Priests (Ordered to be printed by authority of
Parliaments.) Therefore none may think I devised it, or any of it, because the
Book is still extant, (by which all that I have written here about them, may be
tried) more I was not free to write, First, because of the tediousness of it.
And Secondly, because some things are gross and abominable, that I judged them
not fit to be named: (although the Parliament was forced to record them, for
the vindication of themselves, in showing their reasons to the World why they
ordered them to be sequestered,) and what they have recorded of these men, and
the grossest of their wickedness, is proved by no less then five or six
witnesses, as is affirmed in the Epistle to the Reader: but the truth is, I
should not once have mentioned any of these things, but as Paul says to the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.11. (in another cause) I am become a fool in glorying,
but you have compelled me. So say I in this, I confess I have but acted a fools
part in laying open their nakedness, (by repeating of what was formerly written)
but Mr. Baxter and Mr. Hall has compelled me, by letting their tougues and
pens fly at such uncertainties accusing us of things they cannot prove, as their
Forefathers Ananias the high Priest, and the Elders of Israel, with Tertullus
the Orator, did by Paul, Acts 24.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. with 13.

But I have proved all what I have here wrote, by good authority; the which I
suppose they will not nor dare not deny: but if they do, the books remain still
to be seen: and now seeing these things are so, I shall desire the impartial
Reader seriously and in the fear of God to consider whether this generation of
men (although some of them more transformed into Angels of light and Ministers
of righteousness then others) as the Scripture says, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. yet
whether these be not those spoken of, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. in
these words. This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come:
for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, (for they accuse us, and are in
fault themselves) incontinent, fierce, dispisers of those that are good,
traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God;
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; and from such we are
commanded to turn away: for of this sort are they that creep into houses, and
lead captive silly women laden with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able
to come to the knwledge of the truth: and as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so do these also resist the truth: Men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith: but (the Lord has promised) they shall proceed no
further; for their folly shall be manifest to all men, as theirs also was. 2.
Whether they be not like their forefathers of old that are spoken of, Jer.
23.14 15, 16, 17. in these words, I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem
an horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also
the hands of evil doers, that none return from their wickedness: they are all
of them unto me as Sodom, and as the inhabitants of Gomorrha: therefore, says
the Lord of hosts, concerning these Prophets that cause my people to err,
Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make then drink the water of Gall:
for from these Prophets is Profaneness gone forth into all the land: therefore
thus says the Lord of hosts; Hearken not unto the words of the Prophets that
prophecy unto you; they make you vain: they speak a vision of their own
hearts, and not out of the mouth of the Lord: but they say still to them that
despise me, Ye shall have peace, and to every one that walks after the
imaginations of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you. 3. Thirdly, Whether
they be not like those which the Lord speaks of by Ezekiel, chap. 22.26, 27,
28. in these words: Her priests have violated my law, and profaned mine holy
things; they put no difference between the clean and unclean, and have hid
their eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned by them: her princes in the
midst of them are like wolves ravening the prey to shed blood, and to destroy
souls, to get dishonest gain. And the cause of it was, Her prophets had daubed
them with untempered mortar, seeing vanities, and divining lies, saying, Thus
says the Lord, when the Lord has not spoken. And it is not unknown how some
of them did daube up Charles the first deceased, with his princes and nobles
that followed him, with their untempered mortar, till they made him such a King
as Solomon speaks of, Eccles. 4.13. in these words: Better is a poor and wise
child, then an old and foolish King, which will no more be admonished. The
same did another party of them by Charles the second, (though more strict and
zealous, but not according to knowledge) and would have drowned this land in
blood, and then cried out the Anabaptists are the cause of it, had not the Lord
in mercy discovered their plot, and turned all their councels into foolishness;
insomuch that some of them were branded and putsued with Gods eminent
Judgments, which Master Baxter speaks of: therefore let him remember Master
Love and his party. 4. Whether they be not like those;e that the prophet Micah
speaks of, Chap. 3.11. when he says, The priests teach for heir, and the
Prophets Divine for money: and yet they will lean upon the Lord and say, Is not
the Lord amongst us? and no evil shall come upon us. 5. How like the men Paul
speaks of Phil. 3.18.19. when he says, Many walk, as I have told you often,
and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies to the cross of Christ, whose
end is destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame,
who mind earthly things. 6. Consider how the words of the Apostle Peter are
verified in these men, 2 Pet. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. which
are these: The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment, to be punished; but chiefly them
that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government:
presumptuous are they, self-willed; they are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities: whereas the Angels which are greater in power and might, bring not
railing accusation against them before the Lord. But these, as natural
bruit-beasts made to be taken and destroyed speak evil of things they
understand not; and shall utterly perish in their own corruptions, and shall
receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they count it pleasure to riot in the
day time. Spots they are, and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own
deceivings, while they feast with you; having eyes full of adultery, and that
cannot cease to sin; beguiling unstable souls: an heart they have exercised
with covetous practices: Cursed Children, which have for saken the right way,
and gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bozor who loved the
wages of unrighteousness, but was rebuked for his iniquity: the dumb Ass
speaking with man's voice, forbad the madness of that Prophet. These are wells
without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest, to whom the mist of
darkness is reserved for ever. For when they speak great swelling words of
vanity, they allure through the lust of the flesh, through much wantonness,
those that were clean escaped from them that live in error: while they promise
others liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption, etc. So that we
may say with Jer. 5, 30, 31. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the
Land: the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means,
and my people love to have it so; and what will ye do in the end thereof?
And now in all that I have written, none can justly say that I have wronged or
abused them at all: for 1. I do but repeat what is recorded (and that by the
consent of those then in Authority) of their words and actions: and 2. I
compared them with these forenamed Scriptures, to the end that we might know
and judge of them by their fruits: but there are some are more transformed into
the Ministers of righteousness, and can (as Paul before his conversion) out of
zeal persecute the Church of God, thinking they should do God good service if
they should kill us, Phil. 3.6. with John 16.1, 2. and these are a generation
which, as Solomon says, Prove. 30.12. are pure in their own eyes, and yet are
not washed from their filthiness: and notwithstanding they preach and prophecy
in the name of Christ, and call him Lord Lord; yet they do not the things he
says, Luke 6.46. but cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles; witness their Rantizing of Babes, instead of baptizing
of men and women when they believe, Acts 8.12. So that they contend not for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. but for a new up-start business
which themselves confess they cannot find written in the Scripture: See Mr.
Baxters tenth Position, page 8. and Mr. Halls fifth Argument, page 30.
therefore they serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies; and by
good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple Romans 16.17, 18.

Thus having made an end with Mr. Baxter, I shall conclude with Mr. Cooks last
end of his font uncovered, page 46. where he seems to answer this objection.

Object. But what need you write so much, in answering so little? it seems your
cause is not good, you take so much pains about it: why did you not answer as
briefly as the other party propounded?

This objection Mr. Cook makes against himself; by which all men may perceive,
that he is sensible of his own vanity, in multiplying words without knowledge,
whereby he has labored to darken the counsel of God, which is already so
plainly declared in the Scriptures of truth: and yet notwithstanding his being
so sensible, he labors to hide himself under this cloak, 1. by making the
objection, and 2. then to answer it himself, thus.

1. He says the truth often lies deep, and will not easily be found out: as it
is more precious then Gold and Silver, so it requires more diligent search:
Gold-mines are not obvious to every eye; much skill and labor are requisite to
find them out: and bring the Gold to light.

Answ. Sir, I am afraid indeed that this is your Gold that you have deceived so
many poor souls withal, which you have taken great pains to dig out of the
mountain of ancient Fathers, the mines of men's inventions: and indeed you may
well compare your work to digging, for you have dug deep to hide your
counsel from the Lord, like those in Isaiah 29.15. But, Sir, we would have you
understand that the sayings and commandments of [Christ] and practice of the
[Apostles] are the right Silver and Gold-mines, to which we have dug through
all your deceivableness of unrighteousness, false consequences, Syllogisms, and
Sophistries; and are come to that sure Rock, Luke 6.47.48. which is the sayings
of Christ.

But what have you to do to call Christ Lord, Lord, and yet will not do the
things which he says or commands you, Luke 6.46. which is, to preach the
Gospel to all, and baptize them that believe it, and gladly receive it, Mark.
16.15, 16. with 2.41. chap. 8.12. this Gold will endure the fire, and the
building will stand upon this foundation, in despite of all the power and
wisdom from beneath; when your tradition of rantizing little Babes will fall
and perish with the using, after the commandments and Doctrines of men,
notwithstanding your great pains and skill which you exercise daily to uphold
it: and your folly will be manifest to all in time, as it is already to some,
who observe what a heap of confused stuff you make of Christianing (as you call
it) or rather cozening pour Children in their Cradles, which you plead for: and
when you have done, you have made them seven times harder to be coverted to the
Faith of the Gospel, then they were before; because now they plead (as you have
taught them) that they are Christians, members of Christ, Children of God, and
heirs of heaven, made so in their baptism before ever they knew it: and that
they cannot fall away: for you say, Once in Christ and always in Christ; and
so all the men and women in England, that were baptized in their infancy, must
needs be saed, by a consequence: and if this be not the broad and easy way,
judge all men. But if this Gold be not Brass, by which you deceive poor souls,
I am mistaken: for notwithstanding that it is affirmed they are made
Christians, and they are within Covenant, and they are Church Members in their
infancy; yet 20 or 30 years after you preach to them, to convert them, and to
bring them into Covenant, or else you will tell them thousands that were
baptized in their infancy, they will be damned. Who sees not your folly?
surely I cannot think but some of you see it your selves: yet I confess the
Scripture says, that evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse;
deceiving, and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13. But (Sirs) you know that by this
craft you get your wealth, some an hundred a year, some two hundred, some more,
some less; therefore I confess, Mr. Cook, you may say you have been in the
Silver and Gold-mines: but take heed that the earth do not fall upon you, and
swallow you up: for such casualties do sometimes happen to those that work
under the ground in darkness; and you will not come to the light, lest your
deeds should be manifest: but if you shall escape judgment in this world, yet
remember the day is coming in which men shall call to the mountains to fall
upon them, and to cover them from tha face of him that shall sit upon the
throne; whose commands of baptizing men and women when they believe and
understand the truth, have you made of none effect, by Rantizing Infants before
they can believe, understand, or give a reason of their Faith: which things are
utterly unprofitable amongst men, and abominable, in the sight of God.

But you say again, that though we have now briefly propounded our judgments
in these Papers; yet it is known what large discourses we have made amongst the
People, and how many treatises are written on this subject.

Answ. If we have had large discourses amongst the people, to declare nothing
but the word of God to them; you cannot blame us: for it is lawful to preach
the word both in season and out of season; and thereby to reprove, rebuke and
exhort with all long suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.2. Secondly, whereas you
say we have written may treatises on this subject, I answer, That is because
you have written so many against it: but yet our Treatises do not exceed yours
in bigness, so much as yours do exceed ours, as appears thus: we you gave
about a quarter of a sheet of paper, and you have answered it in seven sheets:
and now I have answered yours and Mr. Baxters, which consists of near sixty
sheets, in about eighteen sheets. Now let all men judge betwixt us.

If you shall say it is no full answer: I answer, It is the better for you; and
your cause will be the more advanced: and I pray take your advantage, and spare
not. But time will manifest all things.

Again, I remember you say, that we are the people that subvert whole
households.

To which I answer; Sir, you much mistake your self, as Ahab did when he told
Elijah that it was he that troubled Israel: who answered and said, I have not
troubled Israel, but thee and thy Fathers house, in that ye have for saken the
Commandments of the Lord, and followed Baalim. So say I to you: It is not we
that subvert whole households: for we baptize none of any house, but those that
believe and manifest their says, according to the commandment of Christ, and
example of his holy Apostles, Mar. 16, 15, 16. Act. 8.12. with ver. 37. but it
is you (Mr. Cook) that subvert whole households, when you baptize Children and
all, and by that means you subvert whole nations, for filthy lucre sake: so
that you may well say (with Demetrius, Act. 19.25.) to the rest of your
Brethren; Sirs, you know that by this craft we get our wealth: the which
mystery of your iniquity, I shall now make more manifest, in showing the
reasons of our dissenting from the Church of England, and all other Churches;
which stand upon these four Pillars: that is to say,

1. Humane learning: for, take away that which you had at Cambridge or Oxford,
and you have no Ministry; but all men may preach as as well as you; nay, I
might say better. 2. Your Rantizing or cozening of poor Babes in their Cradles:
take away that, and you have no Church. But others who have faithfully preached
the Gospel, and converted Souls to the faith, and baptized them to in the name
of Jesus Christ, have a far greater. 3. Your Tithes or forced maintenance, The
wages of unrighness, 2 Pet. 2.15. after which you all go astray: take away
that, and we may preach who will, for all you. By which it appears, you are
all hirelings, and will labor no longer then you are paid for it: neither do
you care for the flock, any longer then you are paid for it: by all which you
make that old papistical Proverb good upon your selves (which is) No penny, no
Paternoster: so say all you in effect, No money, no Preaching, etc. 4 The
Magistrates sword, by which you have been upholden these many years, unto which
you have applied your selves: when poor Souls out of conscience have denied you
to eat of the Milk of that flock which you never sed, and to taste of the
fruit of that Vineyard which you never planted, then you have gone to the
Magistrate for assistance that you might take it away by force; pleading that
you have right to it from the Scripture, and that you can prove your right by
the Scripture, when it is no such thing. And thus have you made the Kings and
Rulers of the Nations drunk with the Wine of the wrath of your fornications,
and have caused them by your delusions to give their power and strength to the
Beast, and to make war with the Lamb; but he shall overcome them: for he is
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and they that are with him are called, and
chosen, and faithful: See Rev. 17.13, 14. These therefore are the reasons of
our dissenting from you,
1. Because you take Tithes, or a forced maintenance, even from those which you
call Heretics: whereas the Priests under the Law, when they were at the worst,
never demanded Tithes of the uncircumcised Gentiles that were not of their
religion, but counted it an abomination.

Again, Though Tithes were by the Law to be paid to the Priests by the people
under the Law, yet when the Gentiles were converted by the preaching of the
Gospel, and questioned what things they should observe concerning the Law,
Act. 15.24. the Apostles answer was, ver. 28, 29. It seems good to the
Holy Ghost and us to lay upon you no greater burden then these necessary
things: viz. That you abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and
from things strangled, and from fornication: from which if you keep your
selves, you shall do well, etc. these we see were necessary things: and this
was all the burden, as conserning the Law, that it seemed good to the holy
Ghost and the Apostles to lay upon the Gentiles; wherein there is not one word
nor syllable spoken about that intolerable burden of Tithes, which is
Antichristian, and denies Christ to be come in the flesh, who changed the
priesthood, and therefore there is of necessity a change of the law, see Heb
7.11, 12. Now seeing that both the Priesthood and Law are changed, I pray where
is your ground to take Tithes as Priests? or what law compels the people to pay
Tithes to you, as unto Priests? answer, if you can.

But it may be you will say, you are Ministers of the Gospel; and the Ministers
of the Gospel must live of the Gospel.

Answ. Then it seems you have granted they must not live of the Law: but Tithes
are by the Law: therefore they must not live by Tithes.

Secondly, whereas you say they must live of the Gospel; I answer: why do you
not then, and be quiet, and take what people will give you, and eat what is set
before you, as Christ has commanded Gospel Ministers to do, and be content?
Mat. 10.10. with Luke 10.6.7. But it may be you will say this maintenance, is
not sufficient: and if it be left to the people, they will starve you.

Answ. If it be not enough, then you may labor with your hands the thing that
is good, to supply your wants, as Paul and the other Apostles did, which were
as good, and better Ministers of Christ then you are: See Act. 18.1, 2, 3. with
1 Cor. 4.11, 12. and 2 These. 3.7 8.

2. Whereas you say, (as I have heard some) that the people would starve their
Ministers if it were left to them; I answer, Then they are no Christians, as
you have born them in hand they were: for if they were Christians, they durst
not let their Teachers starve, if he took but any honest course to live. But to
conclude, the truth is, if you can neither trust God for a livelihood whilst
you are about his work; nor be content with what the people will freely give
you; nor yet labor with your hands to supply the rest of your wants; you are
not yet fit for the work of the ministry: and therefore you may leave it to
those that are better able to go through the work; and to be content with the
wages that Christ has allowed them.

Your next is 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes a warfare at his own Charge?

Answ. It is true: neither do any go a warfare at their enemies charges: but
the Separates and Anabaptists you say, are your enemies: therefore you cannot
in conscience expect any from them, because you war not for them, but against
them. All you can have from that Scripture is, that you should have charges of
them you fight for: and if they judge the quarrel good that you have in hand,
its but reason they should maintain you in it: but it must be freely or else,
if you force them, you fight not for them, but against them, and make them your
enemies, and lose your privileges.

Again, You will say, Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not the fruit thereof?

Answ. It is true: but you never planted the Vineyard of the Separates and
Anabaptists, as you call them, therefore you may not eat of the fruit of their
labors, except you buy it, or take it from them wickedly by force: nay, you
say we are not the Lords Vineyard, but rather an accursed people, like the
ground that brings forth thorns and thistles: therefore you cannot possibly
expect any fruit of us: for men cannot gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of
thistles.

Again, you will say, Who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk thereof?

Answ. Truth: but you do not feed the flocks of the separated people and
Anabaptists; nay, you will and do say, they are not the flock of Christ, but
Wolves and Tigers: therefore, if there be milk to be had amongst them, you have
no right to it, because you feed them not; neither can you in the second place
expect any from them, because you deny them to be a flock.

Lastly, You will say, We must not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out
the corn.

I answer, It is not true; but what is that to the other beasts that tread out
no corn, but rather destroys it, and will not suffer it to grow till the
Harvest; but will pull up Wheat and Tares together, contrary to the command of
the Lord of the Harvest. Mat. 13.28, 29, 30. and this is one reason of our
dissenting or departing from all those Churches whose Ministers do thus covet
after the wages of unrighteousness, whose Priests teach for hire, and whose
Prophets divine for money; and yet are so impudent as to lean upon the Lord,
and to say, Is not the Lord amongst us? and no evil can come upon us, 2 Pet.
2.14, 15. with Micah 3.11.

The second reason is their pride, because they plead humane learning to be the
glory of their Ministry, as appears by their slighting of all those that have
not served an apprentiship at Cambridge or Oxford; calling themselves Orthodox
Divines, and the other illiterate mechanic men: and sometimes, when you are so
put to it, that you have nothing to say for your selves, then you will confess
that learning is but the handmaid, and grace is the Mistress. But I pray what
part of Scripture do you find this saying written in? or is not rather one of
your cunningly devised fables, which Peter says he never followed, 2 Pet.
1.16. But does any wise Christian think that grace being in the heart of a man
or woman, cannot do her own work without a maid? or did any man ever read in
the Scripture that humane learning was graces handmaid? if there be such a
place, let us see it: but if there be not, for shame leave this idle
fantastical reasoning; and know, that it is but to set up self, and flesh, and
the Devil in men's hearts: for he that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved, Mark 16.15, 15. if they endure to the end, Mat. 24.13. and Christ's sheep
are those that hear his voice and follow him, and he give will them eternal
life, and none shall pluk them out of his band. John 10.27, 28. but he does not
say, If they have humane learning, or if they were educated at Cambridge or
Oxford, or at some University: nay, God is so far from taking delight in the
words that man's wisdom teaches, that he says he will destroy the wisdom of
the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent, 1 Cor. 1.19.
and he chooses not many wise men after the flesh, nor many mighty, nor many
noble; but God has chosen (as James says, chap. 2.5.) the poor in this world
rich in Faith, and heirs of the kingdom promised to them that love him: and
God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; and God
has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things which are
mighty and base things, and things that are despised, has God chosen: yea, and
things that are not to bring to naught things that are: and this he does, that
no flesh should glory in his presence, See 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. and yet you
will glory in your humane leaning, saying at least, it is graces handmaid; when
the truth is, if grace be truly in the heart of a man, it is able to do its
work without an handmaid: for the Lord says, My grace is sufficient; and his
strength is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. and the Lord is so far from
setting up learned men above unlearned, that Christ says, Luke. 10.21. I thank
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and revealed them to Babes; even so, O Father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight. And it was always Gods way, (or for the most part)
to choose his Prophets out of unlearned men, and honest laboring men, that knew
what it was to get their living by the sweat of their brows; and not such as
were brought up idly, so that they cannot dig, and are ashamed to beg: and
therefore prove unjust Stewards. These are not fit to be Ministers of Christ,
because they must preach for hire, or else they cannot live; therefore they
must please men, and have men's persons in admiration because of advantage, as
Jude says, ver. 16. or else men will give them little or no wages: but the
Lord chose other manner of persons, as Moses a Sepherd, Exodus 3.1, 2. Elisha a
plowman, as he was plowing, 1 King. 19.19, 20. David a shepherd, as he
followed the Ews great with young, Psalm. 78.70, 71. Amos an herds-man, and one
that gathered Sycomore: The Lord took him as he followed the flock, and said,
Go prophecy to my people Israel, Amos 7.14, 15. and Fishermen, as they were
about their honest callings and mending their nets, like people that intended
still to follow their callings; them Christ called to follow him, and to preach
the Gospel: he did not say to them, as the learned Priests now a days to
honest tradesmen, You must abide in your calling; you must not preach, but
leave that to the learned Divines that have been brought up to it: you must not
presume to take such a work upon you, etc. but Christ was not of their minds,
as you may see, Mat. 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Likewise he chose ignorant and
unlearned men, as Peter and John, yea, and they were so when he had left them,
(in the judgment of the learned Priests and Rulers) as appears, Act. 4.13.
Thus all men may see how contrary the Priests of this Nation do walk to Christ
and his Disciples.

Object. But Christ was able to teach them all wisdom, and did give them
extraordinary gifts for the perfecting of his work: but now there is none such;
therefore men must get abilities by humane learning.

Answ. This is a gross mistake, for we have nothing else to do but to believe
and obey that word which was by them preached, when they were so endued with
those gifts aforesaid. And now if any man preach, he must preach that word, 2 Timothy 4.2, 3, 4. for that is able to do all the work of conversion and
sanctification, and to make us wise to salvation through faith in Jesus, and to
make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly to furnish him unto all good works,
chap. 3.15, 16, 17. And if men or Angels preach any other Gospel then what
they preached, let them be accursed: see Gal. 1.8, 9. and therefore we are
commanded to stand fast, and hold the traditions which they have taught us,
whether by word or epistle: see 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. and the Lord Christ prays for
all those that shall believe in him through their word, John 17.20. therefore
they are the Preachers by whom I do believe; and the word is already preached
that I must believe and obey: therefore no need of a little dirty humane
learning, to make a man a preacher of that which is so plainly preached
already, but every English man may declare it to his Native Countrymen, and so
may Men in all Nations.

2. Whereas you say Christ taught them then himself: I answer, so he does now
teach those that desire to be taught of him: and I question not but some are so
well taught by him that they are able to stop any of your mouths by sound
Doctrine, that shall oppose them. And thus have I given you another reason of
our dissenting from the Church of England.

The third reason is their lying and deceit, even when they are exercised in
the holy ordinances of Christ, as I shall make appear, by showing the depth of
their deceits concerning their baptizing of Infants, which they have no word of
God for, but have successively brought it along with them from Rome, as
appears thus: When Luther and others separated from Rome, they were not
baptized again after they separated, but brought Romes baptism along with
them, notwithstanding they confess that it is a false antichristian Church, a
den of thieves, a cage of unclean and hateful birds, from which all Gods
people are commanded to separate, and touch no unclean thing; and then he will
receive them, 2 Cor. 6.17. yet they will and do still touch their baptism,
which is the ground and root from whence all other branches do spring: for
without baptism there is no visible Church, all will grant, that own
ordinances: but they being thus far charged, they presently fly from the Church
of Rome, and plead their own innocence and purity in separating from them: the
which I deny, so long as they retain the Popes or Devils baptism. But they will
tell, that the Ministers of England have given us great satisfaction, in
showing the reasons why Infants ought to be baptized; which are as follows in
the Sacraments, or things so called.

Quest. What is required of persons that are to be baptized?

Answ. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God made to them in that Sacrament.

Quest. Why then are infants baptized when by reason of their tender age they
cannot perform it? namely, this faith and repentance.

Their own answer again is this.

Answ. Yes; They do perform it, by their sureties, which promise and vow both
(that is to say, both faith and repentance) in their names.

Well, thus far we have drove the matter; and now we will hear what the
Scriptures say for themselves, and the children they answer for, thus:

When a poor Child is to be Christened, as they call it, (or rather cozened, as
I call it,) then the Minister does demand of the Godfathers and Godmothers (as
they call them), these ensuing questions:

1. Do thou forsake the Devil and all his works, the vain pomps and vanities
of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh, so as thou will
not follow or be led by them?

Answ. I forsake them all. I say, It is well if they do.

Quest. 2. Do thou believe all the Articles of the Christian faith? etc.

Answ. All this I steadfastly believe. I say, it is well if they understand them
first.

Quest. Will thou be baptized into this Faith? says the Priest to the sureties.

Answ. It is my desire, say they: when they never intended it, because
according to their own judgment, they were baptized in their infancy, before
they knew it. Thus all rational men may see what abominable lies they tell,
when they are about baptizing infants; the Godfathers and Godmothers saying
it is their desire to be baptized into that faith, when there is no such thing
intended: and then they take the poor child (that knew nothing of what they
said or did together) and sprinkle a few drops of water upon its face, putting
to or taking the name of Christ in vain over it; and then they say it is a
Christian, and fall a praying that it may lead theremaining part of its life
according to this beginning. And now let all that fear God judge whether there
be not wickedness, lying, and deceit used in them baptizing, or ingrafting
members into the Church of England; yea, such lying and deceit, as all men may
see, if they be not wilfully blind. Therefore now let all men take heed
henceforward, how they satisfy themselves with such frothy stuff, with such
lying and deceit, instead of the truth of Jesus Christ, which is able to save
their souls that cleave to it, and contend earnestly for it: but all liars, and
whosoever does either love or make lies, shall have their part in that lake
that burns with fire and brimstone; which is the second death: See Rev. 21.8.
with chap. 22.15.

But now the great Objection by which men think to save themselves from the
guilt of all this evil, is this: O, say they, but we have laid aside the
Common Prayer Book, and we will no longer own the things therein contained.

Answ. Then it seems you grant that it was not of God, but of Satan; and
therefore you have laid it aside: for if it were of God, it is your grievous
sin to lay it a side, and not practice it: for you, and I, and all Christians,
ought to lay down our lives for the truth of Christ, rather then let it be laid
aside.

2. But have you laid aside your baptism that you had by the
Common Prayer Book? I speak to all you that are 16 or 20 years of age, and
upwards: if you have not, how have you laid aside the Common Prayer Book? or
why do you lay it aside, and yet retain the baptism that you had according to
it, and the rules prescribed in it? is not this plain dissembling, deceiving
your selves, and mocking of God? consider it well in the fear of God, before it
be too late: had you ever any baptism but that you had in your infancy? or
were you baptized since you believed? if you were not, then you are still
unbaptized persons, and no visible Christians by profession, because you have
not put on Jesus Christ, by being baptized into him since you believed: See
Gal. 3.26, 27. you have but received Common-prayer-Book-baptism, which is full
of lies and deceit, as I have already proved at large, showing that the
Godfathers and Godmothers stood by and said they desired to be baptized, when
they never meant it: and then their taking the poor Babes that said nor knew
nothing of their doings, and baptizing them, and making them Christians as they
think, before they know either Christ or their own Parents, or their right
hand from their left. Thus have you the third reason at large, why we separate
or dissent from the Church of England; which is the Priests lying and deceiving
the people, by false baptism instead of a true.

Our fourth and last Reason is, the Priests their teachers cruelty and
bloodthirstiness: for they are them that would build up. Sion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity; as Mic. 3.10, 11. for they do not only preach for
hire, and divine for money; but they would have the life and blood of all that
will not be of their mind and judgment; and the weapons of their warfare are
not mighty through God, by his Spirit, and the sword of the Spirit, which is
the word of God, to cast down high imaginations of men, and to stop their
mouths by sound doctrine, as 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. with Ephesians. 6.17. but the weapons of
their warfare are carnal, and mighty through the Magistrates, to pull down
men's houses, and hale them to Prison, and convert them with Prisons, and
stocks, and whips, and Gallows; these are the weapons of their warfare: men
must believe as they believe, or else be hanged or banished, or at least be
imprisoned, and disabled to get an honest living by the labor of their hands.
And how does this their doings agree with that saying in Rev. 13.16, 17. which
says, that none might buy or sell, but they that worshipped the beast and his
Image, and received his Mark, etc. let all that fear God, and understand
themselves, judge.

Object. But they do not persecute now: for now all opinions have liberty
enough.

Answ. We will never thank them for it: for we know it is against their wills,
witness Mr. Baxters incensing the Magistrate against us, to cut us off as soon
as highway-murderers; and their daily preachings and printings extant:
therefore praised be the great God, in whom we trust, who has changed the
times and seasons at his pleasure, for the good of them that fear him; and has
given his Churches rest for a little season, to the end we might renew our
strength, and walk in the comfort of the holy Ghost, and be edified. And thus
have you four reasons at large of our dissenting or separating from the Church
of England.

1. Because of the Priests or -- Ministers covetousness, as appears by their
taking tithes and forced maintenance greedily; looking every one for his gain
from his own quarters, as Isa. 56.11. 2. The Ministers pride, in advancing
themselves, by reason of their humane learning, above those that have the
Spirit and truth of God in them more then they. 3. Because of the Ministers
deceit and falsehood, in administering Antichrists baptism, piecing and patching
of it together with lies and deceits, to make the poor people believe it is the
baptism of Christ. 4. Reason is, their cruelty and bloodthistiness as
aforesaid, in that they would have all suffer that are not of their minds, and
believe as they believe; being the same that is done at Rome, to those that
will not believe as the Church believe. From all which I reason thus:
If these things be in the Teachers and Leaders of the people, what may we
expect from the poor deluded people, thus blindly led, but only Christ's words
fulfilled, (viz.) If the blind lead the blind, they will both fall into the
ditch.

Thus having labored to manifest the truth of Christ to those that know it
not, and to vindicate the truth against those that do speak evil of it, and the
professors of the same; I having also labored to make the folly and wickedness
of deceivers (who transform themselves into Ministers of righteousness)
manifest to all; I commit my lines to the view of all, both friends and
enemies; not doubting the favorable acceptance of the one, not at all fearing
the subtilty nor malice of the other: but desiring the blessing of God upon my
weak and unworthy labors, for the good of all men, I remain,

Yours engaged in the service of Christ, Henry Haggar.

FINIS.

