His Majesty's GRACIOUS MESSAGE To the ARMY for PEACE.

and His Desires touching the Treaty: With His Royal Promise to them, upon the
re-inthroning of His Royal Person, and disbanding of their Forces. And Lieut.
Genesis Cromwels Declaration, for an Agreement with the King, and His Propositions
touching the Treaty.

Signed, O. CROMWELL.

Also, a Petition of the Citizens of London, to the House of Commons on Monday
last, concerning his Majesty; and the Armies Proposals to the City of London,
in relation to the King and the Treaty.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

October. 10. London Printed for R. Emerson. 1648.

JOYFUL NEWS From Lieutenant General CROMWELL Concerning The Kings Majesty,
and the Treaty; and His Resolution for Peace.
ON Satterday last being the 7. of this instant October, a Letter came to the
Committee at Derby house from Lieu. Genesis Cromwell, purporting, his great and
earnest Desires for Peace, and his Propositions touching the Kings Majesty, and
the Commissioners for the Treaty; Desiring, That nothing may retard or obstruct
so great and happy a Work, but that the Treaty may go on with all possible
speed; to the end, that all differences may be composed between the King and
his people, without the shedding of more blood, and that a general peace may
be unanimously concluded of, and effectually established throughout all his
Majesty's Realms and Dominions.

The said Letter further intimated, that the differences in Scotland are
brought to a period, and all arms and acts of hostility fully concluded of,
Monro and Lanerick to depart the Kingdom, and some Officers of note, the rest
of that party to depart to their own homes, and to take an Oath never to
engage against the Parliament of England for the future.

There is many other excellent and declaratory speeches contained in the said
letter, expressing the ardent affection of the Lieut. Genesis for peace, which was

Signed O. Cromwell.

A Declaration of the Marquis of Argyle, and Lieut. Genesis Cromwell.
SIR,
THe Marq. of Argyle entered Barwick on Satterday last, seven hundred of the
other Scots marched out, and are disbanded, Argyle forthwith surrendered it to
Lieu. Genesis Cromwell, who has placed Col. Overtons Regiment in it, and the
Lieutenant Colonel is Deputy Governou^ at present, and Orders are gone out for
the surrender of Carlisle.

The Marq. of Argyle has invited Lieut. Genesis Cromwell to march with him to
Edinburgh, whither they are now going, but the Lieutenant General intends not
to stay, but forthwith to return back for England.

Mordington 4 October. 1648.
Monday a petition was presented to the house of Commons to this effect,
she^ing, That whereas the petitioners have long lien under the burden of these
intestine and devouring wars, and are now lifted up with the hopes of a blessed
Sunshine of peace breaking forth, for the dispelling of all those mists that
have wrapped us up in this long misery: In which peace well settled, none shall
more rejoice then the petitioners, being ready to accept it as the fruit of all
their labors, losses crosses, yea all their hazards in this great adventure;
but desire satisfaction touching those provoking crimes to Heaven, from his
Maj. viz. About the death of his Father, the betraying of Rochel, his
proclamations to cry down parliaments, his correspondency with Rome, the
private articles of his Marriage, his Commissions to the Rebels in Ireland, the
inviting of foreigners to instave the three Nations, his proclaming the Parl.
of England Rebels, etc. The premises considered, they desire they may not be
left in the dark concerning these Suggestions and Charges, which if true, that
proceedings may be accordingly: but if otherwise, that his Maj. may be cleared.
This petition was read in the house, and M. Speaker returned answer,

That they are engaged in a treaty with the King wherein they will take care for
the preservation of Religion, Laws, Liberties, and protection of those that
have engaged with them.

The Declaration of the Army concerning the Treaty. presented to the Lord
General Fairfax.
May it please your Excellency,
WE make bold being pressed in spirit, to represent to you, as the ground of our
fears, so the matter of our desires. It has pleased God after much plottings
and endeavors of the old and new malignants to crown the Army with great
success; and although that calls for Justice, little or none is done, and less
is like to be done, unless your Excellency presently appears to do something,
and the Army with you, to be a leading cause to us; we wait for it. Instead of
Justice, behold a Treaty with them for Peace, that God speaks no peace to: and
instead of owning just Petitions, they are laid aside, and not countenanced;
some employed in the Treaty not long since voted the Army Rebels; what that
prognosticates in the future, when they have power, we leave to your Excellency
to judge. So hoping you will so far honor, us, as to stand by the Kingdom and
the Army in their just rights and privilege, We subscribe in behalf of the
Officers and Soldiery,

Lieu. Col. Paul Hobson, Capt. Clark,

The Army has further declared to his Excellency, That it is not the sense of
the Army, to have a personal Treaty with the King, but desire Justice to be
execued upon those Lords and Commons, Aldermen, and Common Counsel men of
London, who invited the Scots into this Nation; as also against those Common
council men of London, that durst join with the Prince (while in arms against
the Parliament and people) in his Desires, concluding that all these
wickednesses must be salved up with a personal treaty, etc.

A Letter from the Army, to the Citizens of London.
GEntlemen, and Fellow-Commoners. As we all languish apd groan under the
insuportable weight of the public oppression of the Land, so it is our duty to
struggle and strive jointly together for the relief of each other, for to our
Neighbor we are bound as to our selves; and we are all the sons of one Nation
and brethren by Nature, whose several Weal and woe is included and wra^t up
in the fold of one Commonwealth; that we must even stand or fall together. We
though we have our swords in our hands, cannot be without you, nor you without
us, in this day of public calamity, as we with you so you with us are
sufficiently sensible, which to all conscientious and judicious men may be
sufficient to tie us firmly together in one Common bond of unity against all
our oppressors, and opposers of freedom whatsoever, but in this we give you
the pre-eminence, for though we are with you in heart and affection, for the
principles of Common Right and freedom to the Laud, yet we must give you the
right hand of fellowship in appearing and going before us therein. For to the
great refreshments of our spirits we find, that God has provided yet thousands
for us, that have not bowed their knee to Baal, and are yet firm and untaynted
with the poysonus principles of oppression and Tyrany, as by your two late
Petions appears. And as you have bin an encouragement unto us, to raise up
your spirits, and put us upon action, so let us be an encouragement unto you to
pursue you with the uttermost vigor and might in those happy beginning of
yours, and we shall by Gods assistance second you with our most power against
all opposers whatsoever. And we shall say no more at present, but that we are,

Your most affectionate friends till death, etc.


By letters further from the North it is said, that col. Martin begins to grow
powerful, having a very considerable party: but most of them have declared
against the treaty, and shows a great dislike thereof.

There are many thousands of the Soldiery which have signed a petition to come
to the Parliament desiring them to look to themselves, and clear their power
and protect the peoples interest against all their Enemies.

It is reported, that the King has sent a Message to the army, intimating,
That He earnestly desires a safe and well grounded peace, throughout this
bleeding and distressed Church and State, requiring them to be isntrumental
therein: and that in so doing, He will take care for the payment of their
Arrears.

FINIS.

