THE STUMBLING BLOCK OF Disobedience and Rebellion, Cunningly laid by Calvin in
the Subjects way, Discovered, Censured, and Removed.

By P. H.

ROMANS 14. 13. Offendiculum fratri tuo ne ponas.

Let no man put a Stumbling Block, or an occasion to fall, in his brothers way.

1 SAMUEL 24. 6. And David said to his men, The Lord forbid that I should do this
thing unto my Master the Lords anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him,
seeing he is the anointed of the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstans Church
in Fleet Street, 1658.

THE PREFACE.
IT will appear to any who shall read this Treatise, that it was written in the
times of Monarchical Government, but in the later and declining times thereof,
when the change of that Government was in agitation, and in part effected. In
which respect I doubt not but the publishing of this Discourse at this present
time may seem unseasonable unto some, and yet it may be thought by others to
come out seasonably enough for these following reasons.

1. To give warning to all those that are in Supreme Authority to have a care
unto themselves, and not to suffer any Popular and Tribunitian Spirits to grow
amongst them; who grounding upon Calvin's Doctrine, both may, and will upon
occasion, create new disturbances.

2. To preserve the Dignity of the Supreme Power, in what Person soever it be
placed, and fix his Person in his own proper Orb, the Primum Mobile of
Government, brought down of late, to be but one of the three Estates, and move
in the same Planetary Sphere with the other two.

3. To keep on foot the claim and Title of the Clergy unto the Reputation,
Rights, and Privileges of the Third Estate, which does of right belong unto
them; and which the Clergy have anciently enjoyed in all, and to this day in
most Christian Kingdoms.

4. To show unto the world, on whose authority the Presbyterians built their
damnable Doctrine, not only of curbing and restraining the power of Princes,
but also of deposing them from their Regal Dignity, whenever they shall
please to pretend cause for it. For when the Scotch Commissioners were
commanded by Queen Elizabeth to give a reason of their proceedings against
their Queen, whom not long before they had deposed from the Regal Throne; they
justified themselves by those words of Calvin, which I have chosen for the
Argument of this Discourse. By the authority of Calvin (as my Author has it)
they endeavored to prove, that the Popular Magistrates are appointed and made
to moderate and keep in order the excess and unruliness of Kings; and that it
is lawful for them to put the Kings that be evil and wicked into prison, and
also to deprive them of their Kingdoms. If these reasons shall not prove the
seasonableness of this Adventure, I am the more to be condemned for my
indiscretion, the shame whereof I must endure as well as I can. This being said
in order to my justification, I must add somewhat of the Book or Discourse it
self; in which the canvassing and confuting of Calvin's Grounds about the Ephori
of Sparta, the Tribunes of Rome, and the Demarchi of Athens, has forced me
upon many Quotations both Greek and Latin; which to the learned Reader will
appear neither strange nor difficult. And for the sake of the unlearned, which
are not so well verst and studied in foreign Languages, I have kept my self to
the direction of St. Paul, not speaking any where in a strange tongue without
an Interpreter, the sense of every such Quotation being either declared before,
or delivered after it. Lastly, whereas the Name of Appius Claudius does many
times occur in the History of the Roman Tribunes, it is not always to be
understood of the same Man, but of diverse men of the same Name in their
several Ages; as the name of Caesar in the New Testament signifies not one man
but three, that is to say, the Emperor Tiberius in the Gospels, Claudius in the
Book of the Acts, and that most bloody Tyrant Nero in the Epistle to the
Philippians. Which being premised, I shall no longer keep the Reader in Portch
or Entrance; but let him take a view of the House it self, the several Rooms,
Materials, and Furniture of it; long Prefaces to no long Discourses, being like
the Gates of Mindum amongst the Ancients, which were too great and large for so
small a City.

The Argument and occasion of this following Treatise.
Joh. Calvini Institution. Lib. 4. cap. 20. sect. 31.
NEque enim si ultio Domini est effrenatae dominationis correctio, ideo
protinus demandatam nobis arbitremur; quibus nullum aliud quam parendi and
patiendi datum est Mandatum. De privatis hominibus semper loquor. Nam siqui
nunc sint Populares Magistratus ad moderandum Regum libidinem constituti
(quales olim erant qui Lacedaemoniis Regibu^ oppositi erant Ephori; aut Romany
Consulibus Tribuni Plebis, aut Atheniensium Senatui Demarchi; and qua etiam
forte potestate, ut nunc res habent, funguntur in singulis Regnis tres Ordines,
cum primarios Conventus peragunt) adeo illos ferocienti Regum licentiae, pro
officio, intercedere non veto, ut si Regibus impotenter gr^ssantibus, and
humili plebeculae insultantibus conniveant; eorum dissimulationem nefaria
perfidia non carere affirmem, qua populi libertatem (cujus se, Dei ordinatione,
tutores positos norunt) fraudulenter produnt.

NOr may we think because the punishment of licentious Princes does belong to
God, that presently this power is devolved on us, to whom no other warrant has
been given by God but only to obey and suffer. But still I must be understood
of private persons. For if there be now any popular Officers ordained to
moderate the licentiousness of Kings (such as were the Ephori, set up of old
against the Kings of Sparta; the Tribunes of the people against the Roman
Consuls, and the Demarchi against the Athenian Senate; and with which power
perhaps, as the world now goes, the three Estates are seized in each several
Kingdom, when they are solemnly assembled) so far am I from hindering them to
put restraints upon the exorbitant power of Kings, as their Office binds them;
that I conceive them rather to be guilty of a perfidious dissimulation, if they
connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the common
people, in that they treacherously betray the Subjects Liberties; of which they
knew they were made Guardians by Gods own Ordinance.

Syllabus Capitum.
CHAP. I. The Doctrine of Obedience laid down by Calvin; and of the Popular
Officers, supposed by him, whereby he overthrows that Doctrine.
(I) THe purpose and design of the work in hand. (II) The Doctrine of Obedience
unto Kings and Princes, soundly and piously laid down by CALVIN. (III) And that
not only to the good and gracious, but even to cruel Princes and ungodly
Tyrants. (IV) With Answer unto such Objections as are made against it. (V) The
principles of Disobedience in the supposal of some popular Officers ordained of
purpose to regulate the power of Kings. (VI) How much the practice of CALVIN'S
followers does differ from their Masters doctrine in the point of Obedience.
(VII) Several Articles and points of Doctrine wherein the Disciples of CALVIN
are departed from him. (VIII) More of the differences in point of Doctrine
between the Master and his Scholars. (IX) The dangerous consequences which
arise from his faulty principles in the point or Article of Disobedience. (X)
The Method and distribution of the following work.
CHAP. II. Of the Authority of the Ephori in the State of Sparta; and that they
were not instituted for the ends supposed by Calvin.
(I) The Kings of Sparta absolute Monarchs at the first. (II) Of the condition
of that State when Lycurgus undertook to change the Government. (III) What
power Lycurgus gave the Senate; and what was left unto the Kings. (IV) The
Ephori appointed by the Kings of Sparta to ease themselves and curb the Senate.
(V) The blundering and mistakes of Joseph Sc^liger, about the first institution
of the Ephori. (VI) The Ephori from mean beginnings grow to great Authority;
and by what advantages. (VII) The power and influence which they had in the
public Government. (VIII) By what degrees the Ephori incroached on the Spartan
Kings. (IX) The insolences of the Ephori toward their Kings altered the State
into a Tyranny. (X) The Spartan Kings stomach the insolency of the Ephori, and
at last utterly destroy them. (XI) An application of the former passages to the
point in hand.
CHAP. III. Of the Incroachment of the Tribunes on the State of Rome; and that
they were not instituted for the ends supposed by Calvin.
(I) The Tribunes of the People why first instituted in the State of Rome. (II)
The Tribunes fortify themselves with large immunities before they went about
to change the Government. (III) The Tribunes no sooner in their Office, but
they s^t themselves against the Nobility and the Senate, contrary to the
Articles of their Institution. (V) The many and dangerous Seditions occasioned
by the Tribunes in the City of Rome. (VI) The Tribunes and the People do agree
together to change the Government of the State. (VII) By what degrees the
People came to be possessed of all Offices in the State, both of Power and
Dignity. (VIII) The Plots and practices of the Gracchi, to put the power of
Judicature and Supreme Majesty of the State into the hands of the People. (IX)
The Tribunes take upon them to commit the Consuls, and bring all the Officers
of the State under their command. (X) The Office and Authority of the Tribunes
reduced unto its ancient bounds by Cornelius Sylla, and at last utterly
destroyed. (XI) An Application of the former passages to the point in hand.
CHAP. IV. Of what Authority the DEMARCHI were in the State of ATHENS; and of
the danger and unfitness of the instances produced by CALVIN.
(I) Athens first governed by Kings, and afterward by one S^veraign Prince
under other Titles. (II) The Annual Magistrates of Athens what they were, and
of what Authority. (III) By whom and by what degrees the State of Athens was
reduced to Democratie. (IV) Of the Authority of the Senate, and the famous
Court of the Areopagites. (V) What the Demarchi were in the State of Athens,
and of what Authority. (VI) The Demarchi never were of power to oppose the
Senate, nor were ordained to that end. (VII) Calvin's ill luck in making choice
of three such instances, which if true would not serve his turn. (VIII) The
danger which lies hidden under the design of such Popular Magistrates, as are
here instanced in by Calvin. (IX) What moved Calvin to lay these dangerous
Stumbling blockt in the Subjects way. (X) The dangerous Seditions and practices
which have hence ^nsued in most parts of Europe. (XI) The Sect^^f Calvin
professed Enemies to Monarchy, and the Power of Princes.
CHAP. V. What are the Three Estates in each several Kingdom, of which CALVIN
speaks; and what they are particularly in the Realm of ENGLAND.
(I) Of the division of a people into Three Estates; and that the Priests and
Clergy have been always one. (II) The Priests employed in Civil Matters and
Affairs of State, by the Egyptians, and the Persians, the Greeks, Gauls, and
Romans. (III) The Priests and Levites exercised in Affairs of Civil Government
by Gods own appointment. (IV) The Prelates versed in Civil Matters and Affairs
of State in the best and happiest times of Christianity. (V) The Clergy make
the third Estate in Germany, France, Spain, and the Northern Kingdoms. (VI)
That anciently in the Saxons times the Ecclesiastics of this Realm were called
to all public Councels. (VII) The Prelates an essential fundamental part of
the English Parliament. (VIII) Objections answered, and that the word Clerus in
the Legal notion does not extend unto the Prelates. (IX) That the inferior
Clergy of the Realm of England had anciently their votes in Parliament to all
intents and purposes as the Commons had. (X) Objections answered, and that the
calling of the Clergy to Parliaments and Convocations were after different
manners, and by several Writs. (XI) The great Diffranchisement and Slavery
obtruded on the English Clergy, by the depriving of the Bishops of their Votes
in Parliament. (XII) A brief discussion of the question, Whether that any two
of the three Estates, conspiring or agreeing together, can conclude any thing
unto the prejudice of the third.
CHAP. VI. That the three Estates of every Kingdom whereof CALVIN speaks, have
no authority either to regulate the power, or control the actions of the
Sovereign Prince.
(I) The Bishops and Clergy of England, not the King, make the third Estate;
and of the dangerous, consequences which may follow on the contrary Tenet. (II)
The different influence of the three Estates upon conditional Princes, and an
absolute Monarch. (III) The Sanh^drim of no authority over the persons or the
actions of the Kings of Judah. (IV) The three Esta^es in France of how small
authority over the actions of that King. (V) The Kings of Spain not overruled
or regulated by the three Estates. (VI) Of what authority they have been
anciently in the Parliaments of Scotland. (VII) The King of England always
accounted heretofore for an absolute Monarch. (VIII) No part of Soveraigntie
invested legally in the English Parliaments. (IX) The three Estates assembled
in the Parliament of England, subordinate unto the King, not coordinate with
him. (X) The Legislative power of Parliaments is properly and legally in the
King alone. (XI) In what particulars the power of the English Parliaments does
consist especially. (XII) The Kings of England ordinarily overruled their
Parliaments, by themselves, their Counsel and their Judges. (XIII) Objections
answered touching the power and practice of some former Parliaments, and the
Testimonies given unto them. (XIV) No such Authority given by God in holy
Scripture to any popul^r Magistrates, as Calvin dreams of and pretends. (XV)
The Application and Conclusion of the whole discourse.
THE STVMBLING-BLOCK OF Disobedience and Rebellion, Cunningly laid by CALVIN in
the Subjects way, Discovered, Censured and Removed.
CHAP. I. The Doctrine of Obedience laid down by CALVIN; and of the Popular
Officers supposed by him, whereby he overthrows that Doctrine.
(I) The purpose and design of the work in hand. (II) The Doctrine of Obedience
unto Kings and Princes, soundly and piously laid down by CALVIN. (III) And that
not only to the good and gracious, but even to cruel Princes and ungodly
Tyrants; (IV) With Answer unto such Objections as are made against it. (V) The
Principles of Disobedience in the supposal of some popular Officers ordained of
purpose, to regulate the power of Kings. (VI) How much the practice of CALVIN's
followers does differ from their Masters Doctrine in the point of Obedience.
(VII) Several Articles and points of Doctrine, wherein the Disciples of CALVIN
are departed from him. (VIII) More of the differences in point of Doctrine
betwixt the Master and his Scholars. (IX) The dangerous consequences which
arise from his faulty Principles, in the point or Article of Disobedience. (X)
The method and distribution of the following Work.
SOme Writers may be likened unto Jeremies Figs, Ierem. 24* 4.
of which the Prophet says, that if they were good, they were very good; if
evil, very evil, such as could not be eaten they were so evil. Of such a temper
and esteem was Origin amongst the Ancients, of whom it was observed (not
without good cause) that in his Expositions on the Book of God and other
learned Tractates which he writ and published, where he did well, none could do
it better, and where he failed at all, no man erred more grossly. And of this
sort and composition was Mr. Calvin of Geneva, then whom there is not any
Minister of the Reformed Churches be^ond the seas, who has more positively and
expressly laid down the Doctrine of Obedience unto Kings and Princes, and the
unlawfulness of Subjects taking Arms against their Sovereign; nor opened a more
dangerous gap to disobedience and rebellions in most States of Christendom. In
which it is most strange to see how prone we are, (such is the frailty and
corruption of our sinful nature) to refuse the good, and choose the evil; to
take no notice of his words when it most concerns us, when we are plainly told
our duties both to God and man; and on the other side to take his words for
Oracles, his judgment for infallible, all his Geese for Swans, when he says
any thing which may be useful to our purposes, or serve to the advancement of
our lewd designs. The credit and authority of the man was deservedly great
amongst the people where he lived; and in short time of such authority and
esteem in the world abroad, that his works were made the only rule to which
both Discipline and Doctrine was to be conformed: and if a Controversy did
arise either in points Dogmatical, or a case of Conscience, his (...) was
sufficient to determine in it, at least to silence the gainsayers. And as it
is observed in the works of Nature, that corruption optimi est pessima, and that
the sweetest meats make the sowrest excrements; so the opinion and esteem which
some of the Reformed Churches had conceived of him (which to say the truth was
great and eminent) and the ill use they made of some words and passages in his
writings, which most unfortunately served to advance their purposes, have been
the sad occasion of those wars and miseries, which almost all the Western parts
of Christendom, have been so fatally involved in since the times he lived.
Which words and passages as they are cautelously laid down, and compassed round
with many fair expressions of affection to the Supreme Powers, that they might
pass without discovery, and be the sooner swallowed by unwary men: so by his
followers (who are exceeding wise in their generations) have they been hidden
and concealed with all art that may be. For though they build their dangerous
Doctrines upon his foundation, and toss this (...), this ball of discord and
dissension from one hand to another; yet do they very cunningly conceal their
Author, and never use his name to confirm their Tenets. And this they do upon
this reason, that if their Doctrine give offense unto Christian Princes, and
any of their Pamphlets be to feel the fire, or otherwise come under any public
censure, (as not long since happened to Paraeus) the Patron of their Sect might
escape untouched, and his authority remain unquestioned, to give new life unto
their hopes at another time. In which respects, and withal seeing that the
heads of this monstrous Hydra of sedition do grow the faster for the cutting,
and that the lopping off the Branches keeps the trunk the fresher; I shall pass
by the petit Pamphleters of these times, and strike directly at the head; and
without meddling with the boughs or branches, will lay my Axe immediately to the
root of the tree, and bring the first Author of these factious and
Antimonarchical Principles (which have so long disturbed the peace of
Christendom) to a public trial. A dangerous and invidious undertaking I must
needs confess; but for my Countries and the Truths sake, I will venture on it:
and in pursuance of the same will first lay down the doctrine of Obedience as
by him delivered, which I shall faithfully translate without gloss or descant;
and next compare his Doctrine with our present practice, noting wherein his
Scholars have forsook their Master, with application unto those who do most
admire him: and finally I shall discover and remove that Stumbling Block which
he has cunningly laid before us, (but hid so secretly that it can hardly be
discerned) at which so many a man has stumbled, both to the breaking of his
own neck and his neighbors too. This is the race that I am to run; the prize I
aim at is no other, then for as much as in me lies to do good to all men, to
those especially who think themselves to be of the household of Faith. And
therefore (...), Let us on in Gods Name.

Subditorum erga suos Magistratus Officium primum est, Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c.
20. sect. 22.
de eorum functione quam honorificentissime sentire, etc. The first duty of the
Subjects toward their Magistrates, is to think wondrous honorably of their
place and function, which they acknowledge to be a jurisdiction delegated by
Almighty God; and therefore are by consequence to respect and reverence them,
as the Ministers and Deputies of God. For some there are, who very dutifully do
behave themselves toward their Magistrates, and would have all men do the like,
because they think it most expedient for the Commonwealth, and yet esteem no
otherwise of them then of some necessary evils which they cannot want. But St.
Peter looks for more then this, 1 Pet. 2. 17.
when he commands us to honor the King; and so does Solomon also where he
requires us to fear God and the King. Prove. 24. 21.
For the first under the the term of honoring, comprehends a good esteem, a
fair opinion; the other joining God and the King together, shows plainly that
in the person of a King there is a ray of sacred majesty. And that of Paul is
richly worth our observation, where he commands us to obey, not for wrath only,
Romans 13. 5.
but for conscience sake. By which he means, that Subjects are not only to
contain themselves within the bounds of their obedience, for fear they should
incur the anger and displeasure of their Prince or Governor (as men submit
themselves to an armed enemy, whom they see ready to chastise them, if they
should resist); but also to persuade themselves that the expressions of their
duties which they make to them, are made indeed to God himself, from whom what
ever power they have is devolved upon them. Nor speak I of the men themselves,
as if the vizard of authority were enough to hide either their follies or their
sloth, on their lusts or cruelties, or gain the name of virtues to their
filthiest vices, but that the function is so venerable and so full of honor,
that they who execute the same and bear rule over us, are to be worthily
esteemed and reverenced for their Office sake.

"The second duty of the Subjects does arise from this, SECT. 23.
which is that we express the reverence and respect which we owe unto them by
the actions of obedience; whether it be in yielding obedience to their Laws,
or in paying tributes, or undergoing such public services and burdens, as do
relate unto the preservation of the public, or executing such commands as are
laid upon us. Let every soul (says Paul) be subject to the higher powers; Romans
13. 1.
for he that does resist the power resists the ordinance of God. Put them in
mind (says he to Titus) to be subject to Principalities, Tit. 3. 1.
and powers, to obey Magistrates, and to be ready to every good work. And Peter
thus, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet.
2. 13.
whether it be to the King* as Supreme, or unto Governors as to those which are
sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well. And to the end the subject may not think that it is sufficient to
counterfeit or pretend obedience in the outward show, but to perform it truly
and sincerely from the very heart, Paul adds that we commend the health and
flourishing estate of those under whom we live, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
in our prayers to God. I exhort (says he) that first of all supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; for Kings,
and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life
in all godliness and honesty: Let no man here deceive himself. For seeing the
Magistrate cannot be resisted, but that God is resisted also; though the
unarmed Magistrate may possibly be contemned and slighted without fear of
punishment, yet God is armed sufficiently to revenge those insolences, which
are thus offered to himself in them. Now under this obedience, I also do
include that moderation and discretion, which private persons ought to have and
to impose upon themselves as a rule or law, that so they neither intermeddle in
affairs of State, nor invade the office of the Magistrate, nor put themselves
on any public undertakings; if any thing be amiss in the public Government,
which stands in need of Reformation, it appertains not unto them to be
tumultuously active in it, or to put their hands unto the work, whose hands are
tied (and to be tied) on all such occasions; but that they make it known unto
the Magistrate, whose hands are only left at liberty to effect the same. My
meaning is, that they do nothing uncommanded. For when the power or precept of
the Governor does intervene, they are then armed with just authority, and may
do accordingly. For as the Princes Privy Council are said to be his Ears, and
Eyes, so those inferior Ministers, by whom he executes his commands or
mandates, are not unfitly called his Hands."

Magistrate being such as he ought to be, SECT. 24.
and as before we have described him, that is to say, The Father of the
Country, the Shepherd of his people, the preserver of the public peace, the
great distributer of justice, and the avenger of the innocent; he must be
somewhat more then mad who is not pleased with such a Government. But seeing
that all Ages do afford examples of negligent and slothful Princes, who have no
care at all of the public safety; of others who are so intent of their private
profit, as to make markets of all laws and privileges, and to expose their
justice and their favors both unto open sale: of some who drain their peoples
purses to no other end, but to maintain a vain and wastful prodigality, and
some who spend their time in nothing more, then either the rifling of the
subjects houses, the deflouring of their wives and daughters, or in the
slaughter of the innocent: that these should be received for Princes, and their
commands obeyed at all, even in lawful matters, is such a thing, as some will
hardly be persuaded to consent unto. For where men find so much unworthiness,
and such filthy facts, as do not only mis-become a Magistrate, but a private
person; when they see no resemblance of that Image of God, which ought to shine
most brightly in a Christian Magistrate; when they behold no track nor footstep
of such a Minister of Gods, as is ordained for the encouragement and praise of
those that do well, and for the punishment of those that are evil doers: they
take him not for such a Governor whose office and authority is extolled so
highly in the Scriptures. And to say truth, it has been always naturally
implanted in the souls of men, not more to love and reverence a just virtuous
Prince, then to abominate and detest an ungodly Tyrant.

"But if we look into Gods Book, SECT. 25.
we shall there be taught not only to submit our selves to the command of those
Princes, who faithfully and as they ought do discharge their office; but of all
those who are advanced unto the highest place of Government, though they do
nothing less then perform their duties. For though the Magistrate be one of the
greatest blessings given by God for the good of mankind; and that he has
confined the Magistrate within certain limits: yet he declares, that whatsoever
they are they do receive their power from no hand but his* that if they
principally do intend the public good, they are the greatest testimonies and
examples of his goodness to us; if they prove insolent and unjust, they are the
executioners of his wrath and judgment for the sins of the people; that all
are equally invested with that sacred Majesty wherewith he has apparelled the
most lawful powers. I shall proceed no further in this present business, till I
have made some proof of that which is said before. Not that I mean to spend my
time in the proof of this, that a wicked King is one of Gods curses on the
earth: for besides that there is none who gainsay the same, we should say no
more in this of Kings, then of the Thief that steals thy goods, or the
Adulterer that defiles thy marriage bed, or the Murderer that seeks thy life,
all which are reckoned for Gods curses in the holy Scripture. The point we
purpose to make proof of, goes not down so easily; that is to say, That in the
vilest men, and most unworthy of all honor, if they be once advanced to the
public government, there does reside that excellent and divine authority,
which God has given in holy Scripture to those who are the Ministers of his
heavenly justice: who therefore are to be reverenced by the subject, for as
much as does concern them in the way of their public duties, with as much
honor and obedience, as they would reverence the best King, were he given unto
them.

"And first the reader must take notice of the especial Act and Providence of
Almighty God, SECT. 26.
(not without cause so often remembered in the Scriptures) in disposing Kingdoms,
and setting up such Kings as to him seems best. Dan. 2. 21, 37.
The Lord (says Daniel) changes the times and the seasons; he removes Kings,
and sets up Kings. And in another place, That the living may know that the
most High rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever he will.
Which kind of sentences as they are very frequent in the Scriptures, so is
that prophecy most plentiful and abundant in them. No man is ignorant that
Nebuchadnezzar who destroyed Jerusalem, was a great spoiler and oppressor, yet
the Lord tells us by Ezechiel, that he had given unto him the land of Egypt,
for the good service he had done in laying it wast on his commandment. And
Daniel said unto him thus; Dan. 2. 37.
Thou O King art a King of Kings, for the God of Heaven has given thee a
Kingdom, power and strength and glory; And wheresoever the children of men
dwell, the beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven has he given into thy
hand, and has made thee Ruler over them all. Again to Belshazzer his son, Dan*
5. 18.
The most high God gave unto Nebuchadnezzar thy father a Kingdom, and majesty
and glory and honor; and for the majesty that he gave him, all people,
nations, and languages trembled and feared before him. Now when we hear that
Kings are placed over us by God, let us be pleased to call to mind those
several precepts to fear and honor them, which God has given us in his Book;
holding the vilest Tyrant in as high account, as God has graciously vouchsafed
to estate him in. When Samuel told the people of the house of Israel what they
should suffer from their King, he expressed it thus, 1 Samuel 8. 11.
This will be the manner of the King which shall reign over you, he will take
your sons and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be his
Horsemen, and some shall r^n before his Chariots; And he will appoint him
Captains over thousands, and Captains over fifties, and will set them to ear
his ground and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and
instruments of his Chariots; And he will take your daughters to be his
Confectionaries, and to be Co^ks, and to be Bakers; And he will take your
fields, and your Vineyards, and your Olive-yards, even the best of them, and
give them to his servants; And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your
Vineyards, and give to his Officers, and to his Servants; And he will take your
men^servants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men and your
Asses, and put them to his work; He will take the tenth of your sheep, and ye
shall be his Servants. Assuredly their Kings could not do this lawfully, whom
God had otherwise instructed in the Book of the Law: but it is therefore called
Jus Regis, the right of Kings upon the subject, which of necessity the
Subjects were to submit unto, and not to make the least resistance. As if the
Prophet had thus said, So far shall the licentiousness of your Kings extend it
self, which you shall have no power to restrain or remedy, to whom there shall
be nothing left but to receive the intimation of their pleasures, and fulfill
the same.

"But most remarkable is that place in the Prophet Jeremie, SECT. 27.
which (though it be somewhat of the longest) I will here put down, because it
does so plainly state the present question. Jer. 27. 6.
I have made the earth (says the Lord) the man and the beast that are upon the
ground, by my great power and by my outstretched Arm, and have given it unto
whom it seemed meet unto me; And now have* I given all these lands into the
hand of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon my servant, and the beasts of the field
have I given him also to serve him; And all Nations shall serve him, and his
son, and his sons son, until the very time of his land come; And it shall come
to pass that the Nation and Kingdom which will not serve the same
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the y^ke
of the King of Babylon, that Nation will I punish, says the Lord, with the
sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence; Wherefore serve the King
of Babylon, and live. We see by this how great a measure of obedience was
required by God toward that fierce and cruel Tyrant, only because he was
advanced to the Kingly throne, and did by consequence participate of that Regal
majesty, which is not to be violated without grievous sin. Let us therefore
have this always in our mind and before our eyes, that by the same decree of
God, on which the power of Kings is constituted, the very wickedest Princes are
established: and let not such seditious thoughts be admitted by us, that is to
say, that we must deal with Kings no otherwise then they do deserve; and that
it is no right nor reason, that we should show our selves obedient subjects
unto him, who does not mutually perform the duty of a King to us."

SECT. 28.
viz. that that command was only proper to the Israelites; for mark upon what
grounds the command was given. I have given, says he, the Kingdom unto
Nebuchadnezzar, wherefore serve him, and ye shall live: and thereupon it needs
must follow, that upon whomsoever God bestows a Kingdom, to whom we must
address our servrce; and that as soon as God has raised any to the Regal
Throne, he does sufficiently declare his will to be, that he would have that
man to reign over us. Some general testimonies of this truth are in holy
Scripture; Prove. 24. 2*
For thus says SOLOMON, For the transgression of a land many are the Princes
thereof; Job 12. 18.
and JOB, He loses the band of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a Girdle.
Which if confessed, there is no remedy at all, but we must serve those Kings,
if we mean to live. There is another text in the Prophet Jeremy, by which the
people are commanded, Jer. 29. 7.
to seek the peace of Babylon, whither God had caused them to be carried away
captive, and to pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof was their
peace to be. Behold the Israelites being dispoiled of their estates, driven
from their houses, carried into exile, and plunged in a most miserable
thraldom, are yet required to pray for the prosperity of the Conqueror: not
only as we are commanded in another place to pray for them that persecute us,
but that his Empire might continue in peace and safety, that they themselves
might quietly enjoy the protection of it. Thus David being appointed King by
the Lords own Ordinance, and anointed with his holy Oil, when undeserved^y he
was persecuted and pursued by Saul, would not give way that any corporal hurt
should be done to that sacred person, whom God had raised unto the Kingdom. 1 Samuel 24. 6.
The Lord forbid, says he, that I should do this thing unto my Master the
Lords anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed
of the Lord. Again, But mine eye spared thee, and I said, I will not put forth
my hand against my Lord, for he is the Lords Anointed. And again, who can
stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? As the
Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he
shall descend into battle and perish. The Lord forbid that I should stretch my
hand against the Lords Anointed.

"This reverence and dutiful regard we ought to carry toward our Governors,
SECT. 29.
to the very end, however they may chance to prove. Which therefore I repeat
the oftener, that we may learn not to enquire too narrowly into the men, but to
rest our selves content with this, that they sustain that place or person by
the Lords appointment, in which he has imprinted and ingraved a most
inviolable character of sacred Majesty. But some will say, that Rulers owe a
mutual duty to their Subjects. That has been formerly confessed: from which
if any should infer, that no obedience must be yielded but to their just and
legal power, he were a very sorry disputant. Husbands are bound in mutual bonds
unto their Wives, and so are Parents to their Children. Suppose that both
neglect their duties, that Parents who are prohibited by God to provoke their
Children unto wrath, be so untractable and harsh to them, that they do grieve
them above measure with continual sowreness; and that husbands who are
commanded to love their wives, and to give honor to them as the weaker vessel,
should use them with contempt and scorn: should therefore children be the less
obedient to their Parents, or wives less dutiful to their husbands? We see the
contrary, that they are subject to them though both lewd and froward. Since
therefor nothing does concern us more, then that we trouble not our selves
with looking into the defects of other men, but carefully endeavor to perform
those duties which do belong unto our selves; more specially ought they to
observe this rule, who live under the authority and power of others. Wherefore
if we are inhumanely handled by a cruel Prince, or by a covetous and luxurious
Prince dispoiled and rifled; if by a slothful one neglected, or vexed for our
Religion by a lewd and wicked: let us look back upon our sins, which God most
commonly corrects with this kind of scourges; the thought whereof will
humble us, and keep down the impatience of our angry spirits. Let us consider
with our selves, that it appertains not unto us to redress these mischiefs;
that all which does belong to us is to cry to God, in whose hands are the
hearts of Kings, Prove. 21. 1.
and he turns them whither soever he will. He is that God which stands in
the Congregation of the mighty, and judges amongst the Gods: before whose face
all Kings shall fall and be confounded, and all the Judges ^f the earth who do
not reverence his CHRIST, but make unjust laws to oppress the poor, and offer
violence to the man of low condion, and make a spoil of Widows, and a prey of
Orphans.

"And here we may as well behold his goodness, SECT. 30.
as his power and providence. For sometimes he does raise Avengers from amongst
his servants, and furnishes them with power sufficient as well to execute
vengeance on such wicked Rulers, as to redeem his people so unjustly vexed, from
the house of bondage: and sometimes uses to that end, the fierce wrath of
others, who think of nothing less then to serve his turn. Thus he redeemed his
people Israel from the tyranny of Pharaoh, by the hand of Moses; from Cushan
King of Syria, by Othoniel; from other thraldoms by some other of their Kings
and Judges. Thus did he ^ame the pride of Tire by the arms of Egypt, the
insolence of Egypt by the Assyrians, the fierceness of Assyria by the
Chaldeans, the confidence of Babylon by the Medes and Persians, after that
Cyrus had before subdued the Medes. Thus did he sometimes punish the
ingratitude of the Kings of Judah and Israel, and that ungodly contumacie which
they carried toward him, notwithstanding all his benefits conferred upon them,
by the Assyrians first, the Ba^ylonians after. But we must know that though
these several instruments did the self same work, yet they proceeded not in the
self same motives. For the first sort being thereto lawfully authorized and
called by Almighty God, by taking up Arms against their Kings, did nothing less
t^^n violate that sacred Majesty, which is inherent in a King by Gods holy
Ordinance, but being armed from heaven, did only regulate and chastise the
lesser power by the help of the greater; as Princes use sometimes to correct
their Nobles. The later sort, though guided by the hand of God as to him seemed
best, so that they did unknowingly effect what he had to do, intended only the
pursuit of their own designs."

" SECT. 31.
the Lord did justly use them to effect his business, when by their means he
broke the bloody Scepters of those insolent Kings, and overthrew their wicked
and tyrannical Empires. Hear this ye Princes, and be terrified at the hearing
of it. But let not this afford the least encouragement unto the subject, to
violate or despise the authority of the Magistrate, which God has filled so
full of majesty, and fortified by so many Edicts from the Court of Heaven,
though sometimes an unworthie person does enjoy the same, and such a one as
does dishonor it by his filthy life. Nor may we think because the punishment
of licentious Princes does belong to God, that presently this power of
executing vengeance is devolved on us* to whom no other precept has been given
by God, but only to obey, and suffer. De privatis hominibus semper loquor. Nam
si qui nunc sint populares magistratus ad moderandum Regum ^libidinem
constituti (quales olim erant, qui Lacedaemoniis Regibus oppositi erant Ephori;
aut Romany Consulibus Tribuni Plebis; aut Atheniensium Senatui Demarchi: and
qua etiam forte potestate, ut nunc res habent, funguntur in singulis Regnis
tres Ordines, quum primarios conventus peragunt): adeo illos ferocienti Regum
licentiae pro officio intercedere non veto, ut si Regibus impotenter
grassantibus, and humili plebeculae insultantibus conniveant, eorum
dissimulationem nefaria perfidia non carere affirmem; quia populi libertatem
cujus se Dei Ordinatione tutores positos norunt, fraudulenter produnt.
But still I must be understood of private persons. For if there be now any
Popular Officers, ordained to moderate the licentiousness of Kings, (such as
the Ephori of old set up against the Kings of Sparta, the Tribunes of the
people against the Roman Consuls, and the Demarchi against the Athenian Senate;
and with which power, perhaps, as the world now goes, the three Estates are
furnished in each several Kingdom, when they are solemnly assembled): so far am
I from hindering them from putting a restraint on the exorbitant power of
Kings, as their Office binds them, that I conceive them guilty rather of a
perfidious dissimulation, if they con^ive at Kings when they play the Tyrants,
or wantonly insult on the common people; in that they treacherously betray the
subjects Liberty, of which they know they were made guardians by Gods own
Ordinance and appointment.

"But this must always be excepted, in the obedience which we have determined
to be due to the commands of our Governors, and first of all to be observed,
that it draw us not from that obedience which is due to him, to whose will all
the commands of Kings must be subordinate, to whose decrees their strongest
mandates must give place, and before whose Majesty they are bound to lay down
their Scepters. For how preposterous were it to incur his anger, by our
compliance with those men, whom we are bound no otherwise to obey, then for his
sake only? The Lord is King of Kings, who when he speaks, is to be heard for
all, and above them all. We must be subject to those men who have rule over us,
but in him alone. If against him they do command us any thing, it is to be of
none account. Nor in such cases is the dignity of the Magistrate to be stood
upon, to which no injury is done, if in regard of the more eminent and supreme
power of God, it be restrained within its bounds. Dan. 6. 22.
In this respect Daniel denied that he had trespassed any thing against the
King, in not obeying his profane and ungodly Edict, because the King had gone
beyond his proper limits, and being not only injurious against men, but lifting
up his horns against God himself, had first deprived himself of all Authority.
The Israelites are condemned on the other side, for being so ready to obey
their King, in a wicked action, when to ingratiate themselves with Jeroboam,
who had newly made the Golden Calves, they left the Temple of the Lord, and
betook themselves to a new superstitious worship. And when their Children and
posterity with the like facility applied themselves unto the humors of their
wicked Kings, the Prophet does severely rebuke them for it. So little praise
does that pretense of modesty deserve to have, with which some Court-Parasites
do disguise themselves and abuse the simple, affirming it to be a crime not to
yield obedience to any thing that Kings command: as if God either had resigned
all his rights and interess into the hands of mortal men, when he made them
Rulers over others; or that the greatest earthly power were a jot diminished,
by being subjected to its Author, before whom all the powers of heaven do
trembling supplicate. I know that great and imminent danger may befall those
men, who dare give entertainment to so brave a constancy; considering with what
indignation Kings do take the matter, when they once see themselves neglected,
whose indignation is as the messenger of death, says the wise man Solomon. But
when we hear this Proclamation made by the heavenly Crier, Act. 5. 29.
that we ought to obey God rather then men; let this consideration be a comfort
to us, that then we yield that obedience unto God which he looks for from us,
when we rather choose to suffer any thing, then to deviate from the way of
godliness. And lest our hearts should fail us in so great a business, S. Paul
subjoyns another motive, 1 Cor. 7. 23.
that being bought by Christ at so great a price; we should not re-inthral our
selves to the lusts of men, much less addict our selves to the works of
wickedness."

Calvin, from which his followers and Disciples most extremely differ both in
their doctrine, and their practice. First, for their practice, CALVIN requires
that we should reverence and respect the Magistrate for his Office sake Sect.
22.
; and that we entertain no other then a fair esteem, an honorable opinion both
of their actions, and their Counsels. His followers (like filthy dreamers as
they are) do not only despise dominion Jude 8.
, but speak evil of dignities; that is to say, they neither reverence the
persons of their Supreme Magistrate, nor regard their Office: and are so far
from cherishing a good opinion of those higher powers to which the Lord has
made them subject, that their hearts imagine mischief against them all the day
long; and though they see no cause to condemn their actions, they will be sure
enough to misconstrue the end. CALVIN requires that we should manifest the
reverence and respect we bear them by the outward actions of obedience Sect. 23.
; and to the end, that this obedience should proceed from the very heart and
not to be counterfeit and false, he adds that we commend their health and
flourishing estate in our prayers to God Ibid.
. His Followers study nothing more then to disobey them, in every one of those
particulars which their Master speaks of, refusing to obey their laws, and to
pay them tribute, and to undergo such services and burdens as are laid upon
them in reference to the public safety, and spare not as occasion serves to
manifest the disaffection of their hearts, by such outward acts as disobedience
and disloyalty can suggest unto them: and a^e so far from praying for them,
that many times they pray against them, blaspheming God because he will not
curse the King, and making that which they call Prayer so dangerous and lewd a
libel, that their very prayers are turned to sin. CALVIN requires such
moderation in the subject, that they neither intermeddle in affairs of State,
nor invade the Office of the Magistrate; and that if any thing be amiss in the
public Government which stands in need of Reformation, they presume not to put
their hands unto the work, or be tumultuously active in it Sect. 23.
. His followers will not trust the Magistrates in the performance of their own
Office, but are all Counselors and Statesmen; and think that nothing is done
well, but what is done as they would have it, and by their own hands too, none
other. Whether things be amiss or not, they must needs be doing. Not by
presenting their desires for a Reformation, and making known the fault (if such
fault there be) to their Supreme Magistrates, which was the way their Master
taught them; but by raising tumults to affright them: The attempt of the French
Hugonots at Ambois upon Charles the ninth, and the two tumults at Edinburgh,
the one about the year 1593. against the person of King James, and the other in
the year 1637. against the Ministers of King Charles, will not be forgotten
whilst Calvin and his Institutions are in print amongst us. CALVIN requires
that we should yield obedience not only to such Kings and Princes, which
faithfully and as they ought do discharge their Office, but even to all those
also which do nothing less then perform their duties Sect. 25.
, not only to the meek and gentle, but even unto the fiercest and most cruel
Tyrant, if any such be raised by God to the Kingly throne Sect. 27.
. His followers resolve not to yield obedience to their Kings and Princes,
though they can charge them with no fault but their too much lenity; unless it
be that they have caused them to surfeit upon peace and plenty, or that the
people grew too rich, and lived too happily, and drove too great a Trade, under
their command: and are so far from yielding obedience to a Tyrant, or a severer
and cruel Prince, call him which you will, that neither the innocent minority
of Charles the ninth, nor the moderate Government of the Duchess of Parma, in
the Netherlands; nor the mild peaceable temper of King James when he reigned
in Scotland, could save them from their insolences and insurrections. Finally
CALVIN does declare that though we be inhumanely handled by a cruel Prince, or
by a covetous and luxurious Prince dispoyled and rifled; though by a slothful
one neglected, or vexed for our Religion by a lewd and wicked, yet it pertains
not unto us to redress these mischiefs; that all the remedy that we have is to
cry to God Sect. 29.
, and till God takes the work in hand, to obey and suffer Sect. 31.
: and absolutely condemns those seditious thoughts, (which some men are too apt
to harbor) that we must deal with Kings no otherwise then they shall deserve
Sect. 27.
: His Followers, if they think themselves oppressed, though indeed they are
not; or that Religion is in danger, though indeed it be not; or the honor of
the State neglected, though never of so much repute, nor so bravely managed:
will not descend so low as to cry to God, or be so pusillan^mous and so poorly
minded, as only to obey and suffer (that were a weakness fit for none but the
primitive Christians); but take the sword into their hands (be it right or
wrong) to force their Kings to come unto a reckoning with them, as if they
would have reparation from them for their former sufferings, and could have
reparation no way but that. And as for dealing with their Kings no otherwise
then they do deserve, although the maxim be unsafe, and the very thought
thereof seditious, as their Master tells them; would they would hold themselves
to that, which had they done, so many Kings in Christendom had not been so
unjustly handled, driven from their Palaces, expelled their Cities, robbed of
their Fortresses and Revenues, assaulted in the open fields, and forced
sometimes to change both their Counsel and their Guards, (the ordinary practice
by the Hugonots in France, the Presbyterians in Scotland, the Calvinists in the
Netherlands, and indeed where not?) had they been dealt withal no otherwise
then they deserved.

doctrine, and we shall find the Scholars and their Master at a greater
distance, then before we saw them at in point of practice. CALVIN determines
very soundly that Kings have their authority from none but God, non nisi a se
habere imperium Sect. 25.
, that the supreme Magistracy is a jurisdiction devolved from God upon the
person of the Magistrate or delegata a Deo jurisdictio Sect. 22.
; that it is the singular work or act of God to dispose of Kingdoms, and to set
up such Kings as to him seems meet, which he calls Singularem Dei actionem in
distribuendis Regnis, statuendisque QUOS ILLI VISVM FVERIT REGIBVS Sect. 26.
, and finally that in every King or Supreme Governor, there is inviolabilis
majestas, an indelible character of Majestia imprinted by the hand of God. His
Scholars tell us that Kings are only creatures of the peoples making; and that
whatever power they have, is derived from them. The Observator, and the Fuller
Answer unto Dr. Fern, and almost all our later Scriblers do resolve it so. They
tell us secondly, (which must needs follow from the former) that the people
have the sole power of disposing Kingdoms, and setting up such Kings as they
list themselves; and being so set up, that there is no more Majesty, no
brighter beam of Gods divinity in them, then in other men. Buchannan so
affirms for certain, Populo jus est, imperium cui velit deferat Buchannan de
jure regni.
; and confidently reckons those reverend attributes of Majesty and Highness,
which usually are given to Kings and Princes, inter soloecismos and barbarismos
Aulicos Id. in Epist. ad
, amongst the Solecisms and absurdities of Princes Courts. CALVIN determines
very Oxthodoxly, that though the King degenerate and become a tyrant, though he
infringe the subjects liberties, and invade their fortunes, persecute them for
their piety, and neglect their safety, and be besides a vicious and
libidinous person; yet still his Subjects are to look upon him, in all things
which pertain to their public duties, with as much honor and obedience, as
they would do the justest and most virtuous Prince that was ever given unto a
people. Eadem in reverentia and dignatione habendum, quantum ad publicam
obedientiam attinet, qua optimum Regem si dare^ur habituri essent Sect. 25.
. His Scholars sing another song, and use all arts imaginable to excite the
people to rise against them and destroy them. The Author of that scandalous and
dangerous Dialogue, entitled Eusebius Philadelphus does expressly say, that of
all good actions the murder of a Tyrant is most commendable Eusebius Philadelph.
Dial.
. Buchannan accounts it a defect in Polities, proemia eorum interfectoribus non
decerni Buchannan de jure regni.
; that public honors and rewards are not propounded unto such as shall kill a
Tyrant: and some late Pamphleters conclude it lawful to rebel in the case of
tyranny, because forsooth, If a King exercising tyranny over his subjects may
not be resisted, (that is to say, if the subject may not take up Arms against
him) he and his followers may destroy the Kingdom. And now we are fallen upon
the business of resistance, CALVIN allows of no case (for ought I can see) in
which the Subject lawfully may resist the Sovereign; quandoquidem resisti
magistratui non potest quin simul resistatur Deo Sect. 23.
, for as much as the Magistrate cannot be resisted, but that God is resisted
also: and reckoning up those several pressures whereof Samuel spoke unto the
Jews, and which he calls jus Regis, as himself translates it, he concludes at
last, cui parere ipsi necesse esset, nec obsistere liceret Sect. ^6.
, that no resistance must be made on the Subjects part, though Kings entrench
as much upon them, both in their liberties and properties, as the Prophet
speaks of. His Scholars are grown wiser, and instruct us otherwise. Paraeus
says, that if the King assault our persons, or endeavor to break into our
houses, we may as lawfully resist him, as we would do a Theif or Robber on the
like occasions Paraeus in Romans cap. 13.
. And our new Masters have found out many other Cases in which the Subject may
resist, and which is more then so, is bound to do it, as namely in his own
behalf, and in Gods behalf, in behalf of his Country, and in behalf of the
laws; and in so many more behalfs, that they have turned most Christian Kings
out of half their Kingdoms.

CALVIN determines very rightly, that notwithstanding any contract made or
supposed to be made between a King and his people, yet if the King do break his
Covenants and oppress the subject, the subject can no more pretend to be
discharged of his Allegiance, then the wife may lawfully divorce herself from a
froward husband; or children throw aside that natural duty which they owe
their Parents, because their Parents are unkind, and it may be cruel. Those
which do otherwise conclude from the foresaid contract, he calls insulsos
ratio cinatores Sect. 29.
, but sorry and unsavorie disputants: and reckons it for a seditious
imagination, that we must deal no otherwise with Kings then they do deserve,
nec aequum esse ut subditos einos praestemus, qui vicissim Regem nobis non se
praestet Sect. 27.
, or to imagine that it is neither sense nor reason that we should show our
selves obedient subjects unto him, who does not mutually perform the duty of a
King to us. His Scholars are grown able to teach their Master a new lesson, and
would tell him, if he were alive, that there is a mutual contract between King
and Subjects; and if he break the Covenant, he forfeiteth the benefit of the
Agreement, and he not performing the duty of a King, they are released from
the duty of subjects. As contrary to their Masters Tenet as black to white;
and yet some late Pamphlets press no doctrine with such strength and eagerness,
as they have done this: Nor have the Pulpits spared to publish it to their
cheated Auditories, as a new Article of faith, that if the Ruler perform not
his duty, the contract is dissolved, and the people are at liberty to right
themselves. What excellent uses have been raised from this dangerous doctrine,
as many Kings of Christendom have felt already, so posterity will have cause
to lament the mischiefs which it will bring into the world in succeeding Ages.
Finally CALVIN has determined, and ex^eeding piously, that if the Magistrate
command us any thing which is contrary to the Will and Word of God, we must
observe S. Peter's rule, and rather choose to obey God, then men: and that
witha^l we must prepare our selves to endure such punishments as the offended
Magistrate shall inflict upon us, for the said refusal; Et quicquid potius
perpeti quam a veritate defiectere Sect. 32.
, and rather suffer any torments, then forsake the way of Gods Commandments.
The Magistrate, as it seems by him, must at all times be honored by us, either
in our active obedience, or in our passive; if we refuse to do his will, we
must be content to suffer for it. His Scholars are too wise to submit to that,
and are so far from suffering for the testimony of the Gospel and a good
conscience, that they take care to teach the people that it is lawful to rebel
in behalf of God, to preserve the true religion when it is in danger (or when
they think it is in danger) by force of Arms, and to procure the peace of
Jerusalem by the destruction of Babylon. Which being so, the difference being
so great and irreconcilable between the Followers and their leader in the
point of practice, between the Master and the Scholars in the points of
doctrine: me thinks it were exceeding fit the man were either less admired, or
better followed; that they who cry him up for the great Reformer, would either
stand to all his Tenets, or be bound to none; that they would be so careful of
the Churches peace, and their own salvation, as not to swallow down his errors
in his points of discipline, and pass him by with a Magister non tenetur, when
he does preach obedience to them, and does so solidly discourse of the powers
of Government. Tully Philip. 2.
Aut undique religionem [suam] tollant, aut usquequaque conservent, as Tully
said of Antony in another case. But of this no more.

CALVIN has done well, few better; of the Genevian Doctors none, ne unus
quidem, not so much as one. But there is an herb which spoils the pottage, an
HERB so venomous, that it is mors in olla unto them that taste it. The figs in
the next basket are evil, Ierem. 24.
very evil, not to be eaten, (as it is in the Prophets words) they are so
evil. In that before he did exceeding soundly and judiciously lay down the
doctrine of obedience unto Kings and Princes, and the unlawfulness of Subjects
taking Arms against their Sovereign. In this to come he opens a most
dangerous gap to disobedience and rebellions in most States in Christendom, in
which his name is either reverenced or his works esteemed of. For having fully
pressed the points before delivered unto the conscience of the subject, and
utterly disabled them from lifting up their hands against the Supreme
Magistrate, or any occasion whatsoever: he shows them how to help themselves,
and what course to take, for the asserting of their liberties, and the recovery
of their rights, if the Prince invade them; by telling them that all he spoke
before was of private persons Sect. 31.
, but that if there were any popular Officers, such as the Ephori of Sparta,
the Tribunes of Rome, the Demarchi of Athens, ordained for the restraint of
Kings, and Supreme Governors, it never was his meaning to include them in it.
And such power he does suppose to be in the three Estates of every Kingdom,
when they are solemnly assembled; whom he condemns as guilty of perfidious
dissimulation, and the betrayers of the Subjects liberties, whereof they are
the proper and appointed Guard^ans, if they connive at Kings when they play the
Tyrants, or want only insult on the Common people. This is the gap through
which rebellions and seditions have found so plausible a passage in the
Christian world, to the dethroning of some Kings and Princes, the death of
others. For through this gap, broke in those dangerous and seditious doctrines,
that the inferior Magistrates are ordained by God, and not appointed by the
King, or the Supreme Powers; that being so ordained by God, they are by him
enabled to compel the King to rule according unto justice and the laws
established; that if the King be refractary and and unreclaimable, they are to
call him to account, and to provide for the safety of the Commonwealth by all
ways and means which may conduce unto the preservation of it: and finally
(which is the darling doctrine of these later times) that there is a mixture in
all Governments, and that the three Estates conveened in Parliament (or by what
other name so ever we do call their meeting) are not subordinate to the King,
but coordinate with him; and have not only a supplemental power, to supply
what is defective in him, but a coercive also to restrain his Actions, and a
corrective too to reform his Errors. But this I give you now in the generals
only; hereafter you shall see it more particularly, and every Author cited in
his own words for the proof hereof. Many of which as they did live in CALVIN'S
time, and by their writings gave great scandal to all sovereign Princes, but
more as to the progress of the Reformation; so could not CALVIN choose but be
made acquainted with the effects and consequences of his dangerous principles.
Which since he never did retract, upon the sight of those seditious Pamphlets,
and worse then those, those bloody tumults and rebellions which ensued upon
it; but let it stand unaltered to his dying day: is a clear argument to me,
that this passage fell not from his pen by chance, but was laid of purpose as a
Stumblingblock in the Subjects way, to make him fall in the performance of his
Christian duty both to God and man. For though the Book of Institutions had
been often printed in his life time, and received many alterations and
additions (as being enlarged from a small Octavo, of not above 29 sheets, to a
large folio of 160) yet this particular passage still remained unchanged, and
has continued as it is from the first Edition of it, which was in the year
1536. not long after his first coming to Geneva.

10. But to proceed in our design. What fruits these dangerous doctrines have
produced amongst us, we have seen too plainly; and we may see as plainly, if we
be not blind, through what gap these doctrines entered, on what foundation they
were built, and unto whose authority we stand indebted for all those miseries
and calamities which are fallen upon us. Yet to say truth, the man desired to
be concealed, and not reputed for the Author of such strange conclusions which
have resulted from his principles: and therefore lays it down with great art
and caution. Si qui, and Forte, and ut nunc res habent, that is to say,
Perhaps, and as the world now goes, and if there be such Officers as have been
formerly, are the three disguises, which he has masked himself and the point
withal, that he might pass away unseen. And if there be such Officers as
perhaps there are, or that the world goes here as it did at Sparta, or in the
States of Rome and Athens; as perhaps it does; or that the three Estates, of
each several Kingdom have the same authority in them as the Ephori, the
Demarchi, and the Tribunes had, as perhaps they have; the Subject is no doubt
in a good condition, as good a man as the best Monarch of them all. But if the
Ephori, the Demarchi and the Tribunes, were not appointed at the first for the
restiaint and regulating of the Supreme Powers, as indeed they were not; and if
the three Estates in each several Kingdom have not that authority, which the
Ephori, and the Tribunes did in fine usurp, and the Demarchi are supposed to
have, as indeed they have not; perhaps and peradventure will not serve the
turn. The subject stands upon no better grounds, then before he did. Therefore
to take away this stumbling block and remove this rub, I shall propose and
prove these three points ensuing. 1. That the Ephori, the Demarchi, and the
Roman Tribunes were not instituted at the first, for those ends and purposes,
which are supposed by the Author. 2. If they were instituted for those ends,
yet the illation thereupon would be weak and childish, as it relates to Kings
and Kingdoms; And 3. That the three Estates in each several Kingdom without all
peradventures have no such authority, as the Author dreams of, and therefore
of no power to control their King. Which if I clearly prove, as I hope I
shall, I doubt not but to leave the cause in a better condition then I found
it. And in the proof of these, the first point especially, if it be thought
that I insist longer then I needed on the condition of the Spartan Ephori, the
Roman Tribunes, and the Demarchi of Athens, and spend more cost upon it then
the thing is worth; I must entreat the Reader to excuse me in it. I must first
lay my grounds and make sure work there, before I go about my building: And
being my design relates particularly to the information and instruction of the
English Subject, I could not make my way unto it, but by a discovery of the
means and Artifices, by which some petit popular Officers attained unto so
great a masterie in the game of Government, as to give the Check unto their
Kings. Which being premised once for all, I now proced unto the proof of the
points proposed, and having proved these points, I shall make an end. Haec tria
cum docuero perorabo, in the Orators language.

CHAP. II. Of the Authority of Ephori in the State of Sparta; and that they
were not instituted for the ends supposed by Calvin.
(I) The Kings of Sparta absolute Monarchs at the first. (II) Of the declining
of the Regal power, and the condition of that State, when Lycurgus undertook to
change the Government. (III) What power Lycurgus gave the Senate; and what was
left unto the Kings. (IV) The Ephori appointed by the Kings of Sparta to ease
themselves, and curb the Senate. (V) The blundering and mistakes of Joseph
Scaliger about the first Institution of the Ephori. (VI) The Ephori from mean
beginnings grew to great authority; and by what advantages. (VII) The power
and influence which they had in the public Government. (VIII) By what degrees
the Ephori incroached on the Spartan Kings. (IX) The insolences of the Ephori
toward their Kings altered the State into a Tyranny. (X) The Spartan Kings
stomach the insolency of the Ephori, and at last utterly destroy them. (IX) An
application of the former passages to the point in hand.
Kings of Sparta were but titularie Unlawfulness of resistance, p. 90.
, that they were little more then Subjects, at best of no more power and
influence in the public Government, then the Duke of Venice at this day in
that Republic. And to say truth, they were but little better in the latter
times, (though not altogether so restrained) after Lycurgus first, and the
Ephori afterward, had by their power and practices entrenched upon them; and
pared away so many of the fairest Jewels in the Regal Diadem. But ab initio non
fuit sic, it was not so from the beginning: the Spartan Kings being at first as
absolute Monarchs as any other of those times, ubi addictius regnabantur Tacit.
Annal.
, when men were most devoted to the will of Princes. For if we look into the
ancient stories of the States of Greece, it will there be found, that at the
return of the Heraclidae into Peloponnesus, under the conduct of Temenus,
Ctesiphon, and Aristodemus, the sons of Aristomachus of the race of Hercules;
Temenus possessed himself of Argos, Ctesiphon of Messene, and Aristodemus
conquered the City and Dominion of Sparta; which, dying very shortly after, he
left unto his two sons Eurysthenes, and Procles Pausanias in Lacon. l. 3.
, with the authority and name of Kings. So that acquiring the estate by
conquest, and claiming by no other Title then by that of Arms, there is no
question to be made but that they governed in the way of absolute Monarchs: it
being not the guise of such as come in by conquest to covenant and capitulate
with their Subjects, but to impose their will, for a law, upon them; In the
first times, and in Dominion so acquired, Arbitria Principum pro legibus erant
Justin. hist. l. 1.
, as we read in Justine. It Is true, the Royal Family was divided from the very
first, into two Regal Stems or Branches, both honored with the name of Kings,
both ruling the Estate in common by their mutual Counsels; of which the eldest
house was that of Agidae, so called from Agis, son and Successor unto
Eurysthenes; the second that of the Eurypontidae, denominated from Eurypon, the
third from Procles Pausanias l. 3.
. It was appointed so to be by Aristodemus, confirmed by the Oracle of Apollo,
and so continued till the subjugating of all Greece to Macedon. But this
concludes no more against absolute Monarchy, then if it should be said on the
like occasion, that the Roman Emperors were no Monarchs, or that State no
Monarchy, because Carus and Numerianus, Diocletian and Maximianus, Constantius
and Maximinus ruled the same together; as after Valentinian and his Brother
Valens, and the two sons of Valentinian and Theodosius did by their example.
And so it seems it was conceived by Cleomenes, who having rooted out the
Ephori, and being grown almost as absolute in the State of Sparta, as any of
his Predecessors, caused his Brother Euclidas (upon the expiration of the
Eurypontidae) to be made King with him Plutarch. in Agis and Cleomen.
: which certainly he would not have done, had he believed that the assuming of
a partner would have made him less. For that the Spartan Kings were as absolute
Monarchs as any others of those times (when there was almost no form of
Government in the world but that) does appear by Plutarch, where speaking of
the condition of that Government in the time of Eurypon (whom he calls
Eurytion) he says that it was (...) Plutarch. Lycurgo.
, sufficiently Monarchical, if it were not more. And hereto Aristotle does
agree, who styles the Government of Sparta under Charilaus; before whose times
(by reason of the negligence and connivence of some former Kings) the people
were become too headstrong to be kept in order, by the name of (...) Aristot.
Polit. lib. 5. cap. 12.
, the tyranny or absolute command of Charilaus in the State of Sparta.

Eurypon the Nephew of Procles, (...) Plutarch. in Lycurg.
, affecting to be plausible and gracious with the common people, improvidently
let loose the reigns of Government, and was the first that laid aside that sole
and absolute power of a King; whereupon followed great disorder and
distraction, which continued long. For the people finding themselves at
liberty, became very bold and disobedient; some of the Kings which did succeed
being hated to the very death, because they did endeavor the recovery of their
old authority; others being forced to dissemble and wink at any thing, either
in hope thereby to gain the love of the people, or because indeed they were not
strong enough to rule them. And this did so increase the stomach of the
dissolute and rebellious multitude, that Eunomus the Father of Lycurgus, being
the fifth King from Procles, and the third from Eurypon, was slain amongst them
in a tumult. At such a dear and costly rate did Eurypon procure the favor and
good will of the rascal rabble; by which he purchased nothing but the loss of
Royalty, besides the empty honor of having the second house of the Royal
Family to be called by his name, the Eurypontidae. Things growing thus from bad
to worse, and both the Kings and people waxing weary of that disorder and
confusion which did reign amongst them; both parties cast their eyes upon
Lycurgus, of whose integrity and wisdom they had conceived a great opinion.
For the people finding that their Kings had nothing but the name and title,
(...), and nothing else whereby they differed from the rest, sent many a
several message to him to require his counsel: And on the other side, the Kings
were as desirous that he should return (being then gone abroad to travel) in
hope that the authority of his presence would bridle and restrain the people
from their insolency and disobedience toward them. Id. ibid.
But herein they were both deceived. For Lycurgus seeing how things stood,
resolved to apply himself to neither party; but presently began to project and
cast how he might change and alter the whole frame of Government: which to
effect, he armed himself and his Associates, and possessed the marketplace,
and so proceeded to the alteration which he meant to make. Id. ibid. et in Agis
and Cleomen.
Charilaus who was then King, being forced to fly for sanctuary to the Temple
of Juno. But Plato says there was another motive which induced him to attempt
this change, which was the ill success the other Kings his kindred of the house
of Hercules had found at Argos and Messene; where by degrees degenerating from
a Monarchy unto a Tyranny, they were in a fair way (...), to overthrow
themselves, their subjects, and their whole estates. To prevent this at Sparta,
which he dearly loved, and to preserve his Family and the State together, (...)
P^at. Epist. 8.
, he set up the authority of the Senate as the only medicine, to cure the
miserable distemper which the State was in. So far, and somewhat further Plato;
of which more anon.

Senate was, we see best from Plutarch. In Lycurgo.
(...), etc. "In this change of State (says he) which Lycurgus made, his
chiefest alteration was in the constitution of a Senate, which he made to have
a Regal power and equal authority with the Kings in matters of the greatest
weight and importance; and was to be the healthful counterpoise of the whole
body of the Commonwealth. The other State before was ever wavering, sometimes
inclining to tyranny, when the Kings were too mighty, and sometimes to
confusion, when the people did usurp authority: between which two, the Senate
was ordained as the fittest medium to keep even the scale, and fortify the
State of the Commonwealth. For taking sometimes the Kings part, when it was
needful to pull down the fury of the people; and sometimes holding with the
people against the Kings, to bridle their tyrannical Government; they were the
means that neither of the two did oppress the other." This Court or Senate had
the supreme direction and command in all things of moment, which did concern
the Commonwealth, both for peace and war; and had the highest jurisdiction and
dernier resort, from which there could be no appeal: in which regard
Pausasanias calls it (...), Pausanias in Lacon. l. 3.
the sovereign Court of the Republic. It consisted of 28. Senators, all chosen
out of the Nobility and chief men of the City; who together with the two Kings
(who were allowed their voices in it) made up thirty in all; and unto these it
did belong to call the assemblies of the people, to propound that to them which
they thought convenient, and to dissolve them too when they saw occasion.
Plutarch. ibid.
But for the people so assembled, it was not lawful for them to propound any
thing to be debated or determined, nor to deliver their opinion in the point
proposed: there being nothing left to them, but to testify their assent to the
propositions, which either by the Senate or the two Kings had been made unto
them. So that whatever the Kings lost, the people got little by the alteration,
being left out of all employment in affairs of State, and forced to yield
obedience unto thirty Masters, whereas before they had but two. And as for the
authority which remained unto the Kings, it consisted especially in the
conducting of the Armies, and the supremacy in matters that concerned Religion
(for this has always gone along with the Kingly office). (...), etc. Xenophon
de Repub. Lacedamon.
For it was ordered by Lycurgus, that the King should offer sacrifice for the
prospetity of the Commonwealth, when the necessity of their affairs did
require the same, as one descended from the gods; that they should participate
of the thing sacrificed when the gods were served, and have a pig of every
litter, that they might never want a sacrifice, if upon any sudden accident the
gods were to be advised withal. (...), etc. It also appertained to them to
command the Armies, as often as they were sent abroad on any military employment;
and had a Pavilion allowed them at the public charge, for entertainment of
such company as repaired unto them. In these two points the honor and
authority of the Kings consisted principally, which Aristotle also has
observed. (...) Aristot. Politic. l. 3. c. 10.
. Supremacy in Divine, command in Military matters, was all in which they
differed from the other Senators; and this command (I mean in military matters)
was both perpetual and hereditary, as the same Author tells us there and in
other places Id. ibid. and l. 2 c. 7. and l. 3. c. 11.
. For matters which were merely honourary, they had some prerogatives: the
Kings being allowed a double Mess in all their Ordinaries, the Senators and
all the pople arising from their seats to do him reverence, when he came
amongst them, yielding him more then humane honors when he was deceased, as to
a Demi-god at least. And for their maintenance and support when they were
alive, there was allotted to them a proportion of the richest lands in many of
the Villages and fields adjoining Xerophon in Repub. Lacedaem.
; enough to keep them out of want, though not sufficient to make them either
rich or powerful.

Kings being thus impaired, the people absolutely discharged from having any
hand at all in the public Government, and the authority of the Senate growing
every day more insolent and predominant then at first it was, by reason that
they held their place for term of life, as we find in Plutarch in Agesilao.
Plutarch; the Kings resolved upon a course of putting the people into such
condition as might enable them to curb and control the Senators. To this end
Theopompus the ninth King of the second house, with the consent of Polydorus
his Associate, ordained certain Officers, being five in number Aristot. Pol. l.
2. 8.
, and chosen out of the body of the common people Id. Polit. l. 2. c. 7.
, and annually renewed or changed, as occasion was Plutarch in Agesilao.
; to whom authority was give, (...), even in the highest points, and of most
importance, as we are told by Aristotle Aristot. Politic. l. 2. c. 7.
, and shall see anon. These Offices he caused to be called by the name of
Ephori, that is to say, the Overseers, and Superintendents of the State, (...)
Snidas.
, because they had the charge and oversight of the Commonwealth. And as amongst
the Archontes in the State of Athens which were nine in number, one of them was
called the (...), or the Archon in the way of excellency, after whose name the
year was called, and their reckonings made (as Titio and Sempronio Coss. in the
State of Rome); so had the Ephori their Eponymus, one who by way of eminency
was called the Ephorus Pausan. lib. 3. in Lacon.
. But for this first reason of their institution, take it thus from Plutarch,
Plutarch in Lycurgo.
(...), etc. " Lycurgus having thus tempered the form of his Commonwealth, it
seemed notwithstanding unto those which came after him, that this small number
of thirty persons which made the Senate, was yet too mighty and of too great
authority. Wherefore to bridle them a little, they gave them (as he cites from
Plato) a bit in their mouths, which was the authority of the Ephori, erected
in the time of King Theopompus, about 130 years after the death of Lycurgus." A
second reason which induced those Kings to ordain these Ephori, was to ease
themselves, and delegate upon them that remainder of the Royal power, which
could not be exercised but within the City. For the Kings having little or no
command but in wars abroad, cared not for being much at home, and thereupon
ordained these Officers, to supply their places. Concerning which Cleomenes
thus discourses to the Spartans Id. in Agis and Cleomenes.
after they had destroyed the Ephori, and suppressed the Office: "informing
them that Lycurgus had joined the Senators with the Kings, by whom the
Commonwealth was a long time governed, without help of any other Officers;
that afterward the City having great wars with the Messenians, the Kings were
always so employed in that war that they could not attend the affairs of the
State at home, and thereupon made choice of certain of their friends to sit in
judgment in their stead, whom they called the Ephori, (...), and for a long
time did govern only as the Kings Ministers, though afterward by little and
little they took unto themselves the supreme authority." Another reason has
been given of the institution, which is, that if a difference grew between the
two Kings in a point of judgment, there might be some to arbitrate between
them, and to have the casting voice amongst them when the difference could not
be agreed. And this is that which Lisander and Mandroclidas (two that had been
Ephori) suggested unto Agis and Cleombrotus the two Kings of Sparta; declaring,
Id. ibid.
"That the office of the Ephori was erected for no other reason, (...), etc.
But because they should give their voices unto that King who had the best
reason on his side, when the other would wilfully withstand both right and
reason; and therefore that they two agreeing might lawfully do what they would
without controlment; that to resist the Kings was a breach of law, considering
that the Ephori, by law, had no power nor privilege, but only to arbitrate
between them, when there was any cause of jarre or controversy." And this was
so received at Sparta, for an undoubted truth, that Cleomenes being sole King,
upon the death of Agis of the other house, recalled called Archidamus the
brother of Agis from his place of banishment, with an intent to make him King,
not doubting but they two should agree together, and thereby make the Ephori of
no power nor use. So then we have three reasons of the institution, (and more
then these I cannot find) of which there is not one that favors the device
of CALVIN; or intimates that the authority of the Ephori was set up, to pull
down the Kings. And to say truth, it is a most unlikely matter that the Kings
of Sparta having so little power remaining, should need more Officers to
restrain them then they had before; that they should make a new rod for their
own poor backs, and add five Masters more to those eight and twenty, which
Lycurgus had imposed upon them. Which makes me wonder much at Tully, who does
acknowledge that the Ephori were ordained by Theopompus, (as both Aeristotle
Aristot. Polit. l. 5. c. 11.
and Plutarch do affirm) and yet will have them instituted for no other cause,
nisi ut oppositi sint Regibus, but to oppose and curb the Kings Cicero de
legibus l. 3.
: but more that Plato (who had so much advantage of him both in time and place)
should ascribe the institution to Lycurgus; and tell us that he did not only
ordain the Senate, (...) Plato Ep. 8. edit. gr. lat. To. 3.
, but that he did also constitute the Ephorate, for the strength and
preservation of the Regal power.

Plutarch Plut. in Lycurgo.
, confirmed by Scaliger Scalig. animadvers. in Eusebius. Chron.
, and may be gathered from some passages in Eusebius Chronicon, and the
authority of Aristotle, who refers the same to Theopompus, as before was
showed, that the first Institution was no less then 130 years after the death
of Lycurgus. Who was the first that bore this Office has been made a question,
but never till these later times, when men are grown, such Skeptics as to doubt
of every thing. Plutarch affirms for certain, Plutarch. in Lycurgo.
(...), that the first Ephorus (that is to say, the first (...), who had the
name of Ephorus by way of excellency, for otherwise there were five in all)
was called Elatus: and hereto Scaliger did once agree, as appears expressly,
page 67. of his Annotations on Eusebius, where he declares it in these words,
Primus Elatus renunciatur (...). But after having a desire to control
Eusebius, he takes occasion by some words in Diogenes Laertius to cry up Chilo
for the man: first positively, Primus (...) fuit Chilon, and next exclusively
of Elatus, Quibus animadversis non fuerit Elatus primus Ephorus sed Chilon. To
make this good, being a fancy of his own (and as his own most dearly
cherished) he produces first the testimony of Laertius, and afterward
confirms the same by a new emendatio temporum, a Calculation and account of his
own inventing. The words produced from Laertius are these verbatim; (...),
Diogen. Lae^t. l. 1. in Chilo.
Which is thus rendered in the Latin, and I think exactly. Fuit autem Ephorus
circa quinquagesimam and quintam Olympiada. Porro Pamphila circa sextam ait,
primumque Ephorum fuisse sub Euthydemo, autore Sosicrate: primumque instituisse
ut Regibus Ephori adjungerentur, Satyrus Lycurgum dixit. If it be granted in
the first place, that Chilo was not made Ephorus until the 55 Olympiad, as it is
plain he was not, and Scaliger affirms as much, it must needs follow upon true
account, that either Chilo was not the first Ephorus, or that the Ephori were
not instituted in more then twice an hundred and thirty years, after Lycurgus
had new molded the Commonwealth, contrary unto that which is said by Plutarch,
and out of him repeated by Joseph Scaliger. For from the time wherein Lycurgus
made his Laws, which was in the 25 year of Archelaus, the eighth King of the
elder house, unto the death of Alcamenes, which was the year before the first
Olympiad Eusebius. Chron. lib. post. p. 114. of Scaligers edit.
, were 112 years just, none under. From thence unto the last year of the 55.
220 years complete; which put together make no fewer then 332 years full, a
large misreckoning. Whereas the second year of the fifth Olympiad, in which
Eusebius puts the Institution of the Ephori, both in the Greek and Latin
Copies set out by Scaliger himself Page 115. of the Latin, and 35. of the
Greek Edition.
; that second year I say being added to the 112 before-remembred, in which King
Alcamenes died, makes up the full number of 130, which we find in Plutarch;
and agrees punctually with the time of Theopompus, who as it is confessed by
Scaliger, did first ordain them. Nor does Laertius say, if you mark him well,
either that Chilo was the first that was ever Ephorus, or the first that joined
the Ephori to the Kings of Sparta, both which absurdities are by Scaliger
imposed upon him. For unto any one who looks upon Laertius with a careful eye,
it may be easily discerned, that he speaks no otherwise of the Ephorate, then
of an Office instituted a long time before; with the condition of the which
Chilo was well acquainted, and therefore thought himself more fit to undergo it
then his Brother was, who very earnestly desired it Laertius in visa Chilon.
. All that Laertius says, is no more but this, that Chilo was made Ephorus
first, (not the first Ephorus which was made, as Scaliger would have it) under
Euthydemus; and that as Satyrus affirmed (who therein questionless was misled
by Plato) Lycurgus was the first who joined the Ephori to the Spartan Kings;
which words, viz. (...), he has left out of purpose to abuse his Author, and
make him speak the thing which he never meant. His other blunderings and
mistakes to make good this business, first laying the dissolution of the
Ephorate by Cleomenes, non multo ante vel post initium Philippi Page 67. of the
Animadvers.
, either not long before or shortly after the beginning of the reign of Philip
the last King of Macedon, but one (which indeed is true) and within nine lines,
no more, laying it in the 13. year of the self same King Philip, (most
extremely false) the changing of his Authors words from Fuit autem sub Regibus
Lacedaemon annis 350, as they occur in the Translation of S. Hierom, printed at
Basil, into Fuit sub Regibus Lacedaemoniorum Annis 350, against the Authors
mind and the rules of Grammar, only to bring about his device of Chilo, and
blind his Readers eyes with a new Chronology; and others I could point to if
my leisure served, I purpose to forbear at the present time. Nor had I been so
bold with Scaliger at all, or at least not now, but that the proud man is more
bold with the Ancient Fathers, whom he is pleased to look on with contempt, and
scorn, as often as they come before him: for which see page 255 of his
Annotations. And so I leave him with that censure which he gives Eusebius, as
learned and industrious an Antiquarie, as any Scaliger of them all, (no man
dispraised): Erratis hujus Autoris enumerandis charta non suffecerit
Animadvers. in Eusebius. p. 255.
; and so fare him well.

Ephori being thus ordained by Theopompus, became not presently of such
authority and power, as by degrees they did attain to: For being chosen by the
Kings as their proper Ministers as before was said, and many times (...), even
from their very nearest friends, as we read in Plutarch Plutarch. in Agis and
Cleomen.
; they were hard thrust at by the Senate, and forced to put up many an affront
from that mightier body. And this was it that Chilo aimed at, when he told his
Brother who at the same time desired the Office, and seemed offended that he
lost it, (...) Laertius in vita Chilon.
, that he was better skilled in bearing injuries and affronts, then his Brother
was. But this continued for no longer then whilst the Kings served their turns
upon them to oppose the Senate, and kept the nomination of them in their own
hands. For afterward the Kings relinquishing the election to the common
people, upon a forlorn hope, of gaining their affections by so great a benefit;
they began to set up for themselves, and in a very little time gained all the
custom of the City. And of this new election I am apt to think that Chilo, whom
before we spoke of, was the first (...). Which I propose not so much out of a
desire to comply with Scaliger, who for ought I can see, aimed at no such
matter; as on the credit of Eusebius, whom he so much slighteth. For in
Eusebius Chronicon of Joseph Scaligers own Edition, after he has put down the
institution of the Ephori in the second of the fifth Olympiad, as before I told
you; he gives this Item in the third of the five and fiftieth (which is the
very same that Laertius speaks of) Chilo qui de Septem Sapientibus fuit,
Lacedaemone Ephorus constituitur Eusebius. Chronic. lib. poster. p. 127.
, dispositione communus gentis, that Chilo one of the seven wise Masters was
ordained Ephorus at Sparta, by the general consent of all the people. But
whether this were so, or not, I am not able to determine absolutely. All I
observe from hence is this, that it is past all question, that from this time
they took upon them more then they had done formerly, and were intent on all
advantages to improve their power. For whereas at the first they were appointed
by the Kings to sit in judgment in their steeds, as before was said, by little
and little (...) Plutarch in Agis and Cleom.
, they drew that power unto themselves, and exercised it in their own name, by
their own authority: not as the Ministers of the Kings, they would none of
that, but as the Officers of the Commonwealth. And to that end they did erect
a Court of Judicature, which for power and greatness of authority was little
inferior to the Senate; drawing unto them all such businesses as were (...)
Pausan. l. 3. in Laconicis.
, most worthy of care and consideration. By means whereof, as they drew many of
the people to depend upon them, whose businesses and suits of law were brought
to be determined by them Aristot. Polit. lib. 3. cap. 1.
; so they increased that dependence, by husbanding such difference as did often
arise between the Senate and the Kings, to their own advantage. For it is well
observed by Aristotle, that as long as the Senate and the Kings did agree
together, they kept all the power in their own hands: (...) Id. ibid. l. 2. c.
9.
but when they jarred amongst themselves, they gave the people opportunity to
become their Masters. But that which raised them to the height, and made them
terrible at last both to King and Senate, was the mutual tie and correspondence
which was between them and the people: by whom they were not only chosen, and
therefore cherished by them as their own de^r creatures: but for the most part
chosen (...), out of the body of the people, and sometime (...) Aristot. Polit.
l. 2. cap. 7.
: out of the very meanest and the neediest of them; which made them on the
other side to court the people, and to apply themselves unto them upon all
occasions. And though it happened many times, that some of them being indigent
and needy men, were easily wrought upon by money, and apt to sell as well the
justice as the honor of the Commonwealth, to enrich themselves and raise their
families; whereof Aristotle much complains, and that deservedly Id. ibid. et c.
8*
: yet this corruption served to advance their power, and put them into a
condition to be the better able to oblige the people. So that the common sort
of people doing all they could to advance the power and reputation of the
Ephori, whom they accounted for their own, as indeed they were; and the Ephori
striving by all possible means to gratify the people, by obtaining new laws
and large immunities to be enacted for them, as they saw occasion: they altered
the whole frame of Government, and made it of an Aristocracie to become an
Oligarchie, and in conclusion a plain popular tyranny.

Kings and Senate, that nothing could be done without them. Were any laws to be
enacted, who but the Ephori must propound them? Or any Taxes to be levied for
the necessary uses of the Commonwealth, who but the Ephori must impose them?
Plutarch in Agis and Cleomen.
When Lysander had reduced the City of Athens unto such extremities, that they
were glad to yield unto such conditions as the Conquerors were pleased to
impose upon them: from whom must the Capitulations come, but from the Ephori?
It was the (...) Id. in. Lysandro.
, the final resolution of the Ephori, from which they were to expect either
bonds or liberty. Cynado is accused of Treason against Agesilaus and the State
of Sparta, the Ephori must take the information and proceed accordingly
Xenoph^n. in vita Agesilai.
: and if Pausanias be accused of holding correspondence with the King of
Persia, the Ephori send out their commands, Thucydides. l. 1.
(...), and commit him presently to Prison. When any Ambassadors were sent
forth on the public service, from whom must they receive their power, from
whom be furnished with instructions, but from the Eph^ri alone Plut. in Nicias.
? and who but they must appoint Commanders for the Wars, require account of
their employments, and either punish or reward them as they have deserved? When
Cleonymus was displeased because Areus was preferred before him in his
pretensions to the Kingdom: the Ephori did not only take upon them to sweeten
and demulce the man by great gifts and presents, (...) Pausan. l. 3. in Lacon.
but also to confer upon him the command of the Army, though of right belonging
to the Kings. When Mindarus the Admiral of their Navy was miserably beat by
the Athenians in the straight of Hellespont, an express is presently dispatched
to Sparta, to give unto the Ephori an account thereof Plutarch. in Alcibiades.
: Lysander had no sooner revenged this quarrel, and beat the Fleet of the
Athenians near the self same place, but he acquaints the Ephori with his good
success, with all speed that might be Idem in Lysandro.
And if the Wars prove fortunate, and the spoil so great, that part thereof be
sent to Sparta, to be laid up in the public Treasury; the Ephori, and none
but they must have the fingering of the money Id. ibid.
. Finally there was no Commander of the Armies, or other Officer employed by
the Commonwealth, whom they called not to an account as their stomachs served;
not staying till the Office was expired, and the Commander or the Officer
become a private man again, as in other States; but even in the midst of their
Command and Magistracy whatsoever it was: and whom they did not punish when
they came before them, either by imprisonment or death Xenophon de Repub.
Lacedaem.
, as to them seemed best. Thus have we brought them to their height, and seen
them absolutely possessed of the Supreme Power, in making peace or war as they
thought convenient; and in disposing of the goods, the liberties, yea and the
lives too of the Spartan subject. It had been a strange temper in them had they
tarried there, and not incroached as much (whilst the tide went with them)
upon the persons and the power of the Kings themselves.

Ministers of the Kings as before was told you, and accomptable to none but
them: yet after they were reckoned for the Officers of the Common wealth, they
cast off all relation to the Kings, their Masters, and thought themselves their
Equals at the best, and at last their betters. A point which Theopompus did but
little dream of, when first he set them up to oppose the Senate, although his
Queen a wise and understanding Lady, did evidently see, and tell him, what
would follow on it. Of which we find this story in the works of Aristotle,
and from him borrowed by Plutarch if I guess aright, that his wife seeing what
design he was bent upon, and how unluckily he was carried on to effect the
same, advised him to take heed that by erecting this new Magistracy, he did
not leave the Kingdom in a worse condition to his Heirs and Successors, then he
received the same from his Predecessors; and that he answered thereunto, (...)
Aristot. Polit. l. 5. c 11.
, that by this means he hoped to leave it stronger and more durable then it was
before. But the event declared unto all the world that the woman was the better
Prophet, and had the greater insight into things to come. The power of
Soveraigntie when once communicated to the common people, or otherwise usurped
by such popular Officers, as depend wholly on the people for their place and
being, is seldom times recovered into Regal hands. And though some Kings may be
persuaded by some subtle artifices (as it seems Theopompus was) that by this
means the Chair of State will stand the faster; yet the proceedings of the
Ephori in the State of Sparta will inform us otherwise, and easily lay open the
apparent danger of such weak surmises. For being made Officers of State, one of
the first points they obtained, was that the Kings made Oath unto them once in
every month, (...) Xenophon de Repub. Laced.
, that they would govern the Estate according to the laws established in the
Commonwealth, and that they would preserve the Kindom in the best condition
that they could: the Ephori making oath to them in the name of the City, whose
Officers they were, and by whom entrusted. Next they attempt to place such
Counselors about the Kings, as they might confide in, beginning with such
Kings as were under Age; and the first trial which they made was in appointing
one Cleandrides to be about King Plastonax, the 19. of the elder House, as his
chief Counselor and Director, without whose approbation nothing must be done
Plutarch in Pericles.
. Another of their usurpations and encroachments was to restrain their Kings in
the point of marriage, and to impose some fine or disgrace upon them, if they
presumed to marry against their liking. Anaxandrides the 15. of the elder
house, had married a Lady of brave parts, but it was her ill fortune to be
barren a long time together. The Ephori command him without more ado (...)
Pausan. lib* 3. in Lacon.
, to give her a Bill of divorce, and send her going. Archidamus the 17. of the
second House married a wife which brought him children. But fault was found she
was too little, and thereupon the Ephori condemned him in a sum of money;
saying (...), that she would not bring them Kings, but demi Kings Plutarch. in
Agesilao.
. And that you may perceive, how difficult a thing it was to please them in
this point, Leonidas had married one that was neither barren, nor too little;
and yet was quarrelled by the Ephori, and in fine condemned, for marrying with
a woman of another Nation Id. in Agis and Cleomenes.
. The fundamental laws of Sparta conferred upon the Kings the Supreme command
over the Military men in all wars abroad. The Ephori did not only dispose it
otherwise, and gave it unto such whom they desired to oblige unto them, as you
heard before: but kept the Kings at such a bay, that they neither could lead
forth the Armies without their consent, nor tarry longer in the camp then they
li^t to let them; and if the action did miscarrie, the Kings were either fined
or imprisoned for it. Agesilaus being a very stirring Prince, and desirous to
get honor in the wars, was not permitted to set forwards till he had bought the
Ephori with a sum of money Id. in Agesila^.
: and yet being in the height of his good success was called b^ck again, and
glad to be conformable to the said commands. And so it fared with Agis and
Cleomenes both, on the like occasions. And for the fining of their Kings,
besides what we have seen before in the former instances, Plisto^ax being
betrayed by Cleandrides, (whom the Eph^ri themselves had placed about him) and
his Army forced to disband and turn home again; is presently condemned in so
great a sum, that he was not able to discharge it Id. in Peri^les.
. By means whereof the Kings were brought at last unto that condition, (...),
as Aristotle truly notes Aristot. Polit. l. 2. cap. 7.
, that they were forced to court and bribe the Ephori upon all occasions, to
the great disservice of the State, and sometimes to the fatal overthrow of
their chief designs. So that it is no marvail, if considered rightly, either
that the Ephori kept their state and rose not up to reverence their King, when
he came before them, though all the residue of the people and the Senate did
it, as we read in Xenophon De Repub. Lacedaem.
; or that Agesilaus used to rise up to them, as often as they came unto him
about any business, as we find in Plutarch Plut. in Agesila^.
; or that the Kings esteemed it such a point of Soveraigntie, that when they
were commanded to attend the Ephori, (...), they did refuse to go upon the
first and second summons, and stirred not till the third command, as Cleomenes
bragged in the said Historian Id. in Agis and Cleomen.
. Which trust me was a point of no small importance.

Thucydides not without good reason, that they did not only punish with
imprisonment their great and principal Commanders; (...) Thucydid. hist. l. 1.
, but that it was lawful for the Ephori to do the like unto their Kings. Which
to avoid, Pausanias was enforced to retire himself, and live a voluntary exile
in another Country Plutarch in Lysander.
. Nothing remains but they take authority to depose, and in fine to murder
them; and if they gain not this, all the rest is nothing. And this they are
resolved to gain, or be folulie foiled; nor did they fail in the attempt when
they went about it. They quarrelled at Leonidas as before I told you, for
marrying with a woman of another Country, without so much as seeking for their
approbation. And that they may be sure to effect their business, Religion is
pretended, and a star must fall, only to warrant their proceedings. Which
preparations being past they cite him to appear before them, and on default of
his appearance they deposed him instantly, and conferred the Kingom on
Cleombrotus Id. in Agis and Cleomenes.
B^t these men being out of Office, he came out of Sanctuary, and was restored
again by the next years Ephori. Who to make proof that their anthoritie was as
great as their Predecessors, thought it not argument enough to restore one
King, except they did depose and destroy another. And thereupon laid hands on
Agis of the other House, and inhumanelie haled him to the common Prison, and
there most barbarously murdered him with his Mother and Grand mother. (...) Id.
ibid.
. And this says Plutarch was the first time, that ever the Ephori put a King
to death. And so perhaps it was the first, but the last it was not. For
Archidamus the Brother of Agis being recalled from banishment by Cleomenes, to
the end he might enjoy the Kingom which did by right belong unto him; was
preseutly seized on by the murderers, and dispatched in private, for fear he
should revenge the death of his slaughtered Brother Id. ibid.
. By which it is most evident without further proof, that the Spartan
Aristocratie was become a tyranny, and of all Tyrannies the most
insupportable, because meerlie popular. Or if more proof should be desired,
both Aristotle, and his his Master Plato will not stick to say it; though they
both died, before these two last Tragedies were acted on the stage of Sparta.
For Plato being to declare what he conceived of the Government of that
Commonwealth resolves that it did (...) Plato de legibus l. 4.
, approach more near to tyranny then to any other form what ever; the power
and empire of the Ephori being (...), plainly tyrannical, and no otherwise. And
Aristotle who had studied the condition of that State exactly, though at the
first he seemed to think that it was very well compounded of the three good
forms; yet upon full debate thereof, he concludes at last, (...) Aristot.
Poli^* l. 2. c. 4.
, that the dominion of the Ephori was an absolute Tyranny. Assuredly had they
lived to have seen that day, wherein the Ephori embrued their hands in the
blood of their Princes, under pretense of safety to the Commonwealth, they
would have voted it to have been a tyranny in the highest degree; and then the
most unsufferable Tyrants that ever wretched State groaned under. For though
the Kings of Sparta were so lessened by Lycurgus laws, that little more was
left unto them then the name and title; yet they were Kings, and held so sacred
by their neighbors, even their very Enemies, that none d^d ever offer to lay
hands upon them in the heat and fury of their fights, (...) Plutarch. in Agis
and Cleom.
, out of the reverence they did bear to those beams of Majesty, which most
apparently shined in them.

(10) The Ephori being grown to this height of Tyranny, were the more ready
for their fall; which followed not long after that most barbarous fact, upon
the persons of their Princes. The Kings had long since stomached them and their
high proceedings, bearing (...) Id. in Agesil.
a kind of heritable grudge betwixt them (as my Author calls it) ever since
they took upon them to control their Masters: but either wanted opportunity or
spirit, to attempt any thing to their prejudice; and therefore thought it safer
to procure their favors, then run themselves upon a hazardous experiment.
Pausanias, the 20. of the Elder House, was the first that ever did attempt
either by force or practice to subvert the Office: the insolences of the which
were then grown so great, that being a stout and active Prince, he was not able
to endure them. That he had entertained such thoughts is affirmed by Aristotle,
where he informs us that Lysander had a purpose to take away the Kingly
Government (or rather to acquire it to himself, as we find in Plutarch Id. in
Lysandro.
,) (...), and that Pausanias had the like to destroy the Ephorate Aristot.
Polit. lib. 5. c. 1.
. But what he failed to bring about, his Successors did at last accomplish. Of
which Cleombrotus and Agis, joining their hands and heads together did proceed
so far, that going into the Market place well attended by their friends and
followers, they plucked the Ephori from their seats, and substituted others in
their rooms Plutarch in Agis and Cleom.
, whom they conceived would be more pliant to their present enterprises: which
was the first actual attempt, that ever had been made against them by the Kings
of Sparta. But evulgato imperii Arcano, when so great a mystery of State was
once discovered, that the Ephori were but mortal men, and might as easily be
displaced and deposed as any of the other Magistrates; Leonidas immediately
upon his restitution to the Kingdom, made the like removal, and displaced those
who had took part against him with the former Kings Id. ibid.
. So that the ice being broken, and the way made open, Cleomenes son unto
Leonidas had the fairer way to abrogate the Office utterly, which at last he
did. For being a brave and gallant Prince, and seeing that the project he was
bent upon for the reduction of the Commonwealth to its primitive honor, could
not be brought about but by their destruction; he fell upon them with his
Soldiers as they sat sat at supper, and killed four of them in the place,
the fifth escaping shrewdly hurt to the nearest Sanctuary Id ibid.
. That done he went into the Market place, and overthrew all the Chairs of the
Ephori saving only one, which he reserved for himself as his Chair of State,
and sitting in the same in the sight of the people, gave them an account of his
proceedings, and the reasons which induced him to it: "Declaring how the Ephori
were at first appointed by the Kings themselves; that for long time they
governed only (...) as the Kings Ministers, and no otherwise; thatt many years
after this, Asteropus one of the Ephori, building upon a new foundation, and
being the first Author of that dangerous change, they took the Government unto
themselves, and exercised the same in their own names only; that though they
had usurped a power which belonged not to them, yet had they managed it
discreetly, they might perhaps have held it longer, and with better liking; but
that licentiously abusing the authority which they had usurped by suppressing
the lawful Governors ordained of old, by taking upon them to banish some of the
Citizens, and to put some to death without law and justice, and finally by
threatening those who were desirous to restore the Government to its ancient
form, they were no longer to be suffered: that for his part he should have
thought himself the happiest King that ever was, if possibly he could have
cured his Country of that foul affection without grief or sorrow; but being it
was not to be done that way, he thought it better that some few should be put
to death, then the whole Commonwealth run on to a swift destruction." This
said, he presently dissolved the Assembly, and seriously betook himself to the
Reformation which formerly he had projected, and in short time reduced the
people to the ancient Discipline, the state and reputation of the Commonwealth
to its ancient height.

Spartan Ephori, upon what grounds first instituted, and on what destroyed; by
what foul practices and unlawful means they gained the Soveraigntie of the
State, and by what they lost it: how, and by what degrees they came from low
and mean beginnings to so strange a tyranny, and with what suddenness they
lost their power and their lives together. But in all this there is not any
show or color for that which is affirmed by CALVIN, no ground for, nor verity
at all in that assertion, that the Ephori were at first ordained to oppose the
Kings, to regulate their proceedings, and restrain their power: but rather that
they were ordained (as indeed they were) to curb the Senate, to be the
Ministers of the Kings, and sub-servient to them; to sit in Judgment for them,
and discharge such Offices, as the Kings pleased to trust them with, in their
times of absence. If Calvin's popular Magistrates have no more authority, then
the Spartan Ephori, according to the rules of their Institution, they will have
little color to control their Princes, and less for putting a restraint on
the Regal power. The most they can pretend to must be usurpation, and that will
hold no longer, if it hold so long, then they have power to make it good by
blood and violence, which I hope Calvin did not aim at. And if they have no
other ground then an unjust title, prescription will not serve the turn, (for
nullum tempus occurrit Regi, as our Lawyers tell us) when a courageous Prince
is concerned in it, and oppressed by it. If any Popular spirits entertain such
hopes, if nothing else will satisfy their vast ambitions but to be equal with
their Kings and Supreme Governors, and at last above them: let them remember
what became of the Spartan Ephori, and that there was a Cleomenes which called
them to a sad account for all those insolences and affronts which they had put
upon himself and his Predecessors. And let all Kings and Supreme Governors take
heed by the example of these Spartan Princes, how they let loose the reins of
Government, and lay them on the necks of the common people: which if unbridled
once, and left at liberty, will not be easily induced to receive that Bit into
their mouths which before they champed on: and that they give no way to such
popular Magistrates as Calvin has presented to us, who whatsoever color and
pretense they make, aim at no other mark then the Royal power, though out of
too much modesty they disclaim the title, and must be either Kings or nothing.
Of which invasions and encroachments on the Supreme Power, our Author gives
another hint in the Roman Tribunes; the truth and fitness of which supposition
must be looked on next.

CHAP. III. Of the Encroachments of the Tribunes on the State of Rome; and that
they were not instituted for the ends supposed by Calvin.
(I) The Tribunes of the people why first Instituted in the State of Rome. (II)
And with what difficulty and conditions. (III) The Tribunes fortify
themselves with large immunities, before they went about to change the
Government. (IV) The Tribunes no sooner in their Office, but they set
themselves against the Nobility and the Senate, contrary to the Articles of
their Institution. (V) The many and dangerous Seditions occasioned by the
Tribunes in the City of Rome. (VI) The Tribunes and the people do agree
together to change the Government of the State. (VII) By what degrees the
people came to be possessed of all the Offices in the State, both of power and
dignity. (VIII) The Plots and Practices of the Gracchi to put the power of the
Judicature, and Supreme Majesty of the State, into the hands of the people.
(IX) The Tribunes take upon them to commit the Consuls, and bring all the
Officers of the State under their command. (X) The Office and authority of the
Tribunes reduced unto its ancient bounds by Corn. Sylla; and at last utterly
destroyed. (XI) An application of the former passages to the point in hand.
Rome to desire some Officers of their own, and the considerations which
induced the Senate to give way unto it, are obvious to the eyes of every
Reader, which has perused the Roman stories: yet I shall briefly lay it down,
the better to remove the intimation which we find in Calvin, that they were
purposely ordained to oppose the Consuls. The story then in brief is this. The
people having not long before expulsed their Kings, and got some reputation by
their prowess in those petit States which bordered nearest to the City, found
quickly that the liberty which they expected was nothing but a golden dream,
not able to protect them from the common Gaols, and that their reputation in
the wars would not pay their debts, or save them from the hands of their cruel
Creditors. For serving in the wars at their own proper charges, and having
little else to subsist upon but their trades or labor, they were fain sometimes
to take up money upon usurie. And though they did return from the wars with
victory, and showed those honorable scars which they had received, fighting in
defense of their Country and the Commonwealth; yet this did edify but little
with their hungry Creditors: Plutarch in M. Coriolano.
who did not sell their goods, if they were not solvent, but apprehended their
persons also, and either laid them up in the common prisons, or made them serve
in stead of Bondmen, and made them subject to the whip and other base
corrections fit for none but Slaves. And somewhat to this purpose the old man
complained, as we read in Livie, declaring to the people (who were apt to hear
it) how his Patrimony had been seized on by the merciless Usurers, his person
apprehended by them, and that he was not only made a Slave, but marked out for
slaughter: Inde ostentare tergum foedum recentibus vestigiis verberum Livie.
hist. l. 2.
, showing withal upon his back the miserable prints which the whip had left.
This made the people murmur, and at last to mutiny, and in tumultuous manner,
minaciter magis quam suppliciter, rather with threats then supplications to
require the Senate to take some course for their relief: resolving otherwise to
go no more unto the wars, serve the State who would. The Senate promised fair,
as there was good cause, (the Volsci pressing hard upon them to their very
gates); and by that promise won the people, and obtained a victory. But when
the wars were done, and performance looked for, in stead of finding a redress
of their former grievances, the rigor of the law took place, and creditoribus
tradibantur, and they were seized on by their Creditors as in former times: the
Senate thinking it unreasonable to make the law submit to the necessities of
particular men, and against law to defraud any man of the debts which were due
unto them. Dionys. Halicarnass. lib. 6.
But a new war approaching, a new promise made, and that neglected also when
the war was ended; the people seeing no relief was like to come from the hands
of the Senators, Long alia quam primo instituerant via grassabantur, began to
lend an ear to some desperate Counsels, and fell to entertain such hopes, as
formerly they durst never dream of. For drawing themselves into a body under
the conduct of Sicinius a troublesome and seditious person, they forsook the
City, and encamped upon an hill adjoining: resolving as they gave it out, to
seek new dwellings, and that there was no place in Italy but would afford them
air and water, (...), and ground in which they might be buried. There is no
question to be made, but if the Senate had beheld the action with neglect and
scorn, as Appius Dionys. Halicarn. l. 6.
, and C. Martius Plutarch in Coriolano.
, did advise they should; the people out of love to their wives and children,
would have returned to their houses: or if they had presented them in time with
any tolerable mitigations of the former laws, they might have taken off their
edge, and appeased the tumult. But giving way unto their fury till it grew too
high, and showing in their resolutions far more fear then courage; the people
got the better of them, and thought they stood upon the higher ground, as
indeed they did. Which pride and high conceit of theirs was the more increased,
by the authority and persuasions of one Junius Brutus, who came not to them
till they were too far engaged, to go off with safety. A man, as the Historian
notes, of a turbulent and seditious spirit, more apt to kindle a rebellion,
then to quench the flame; but otherwise (...) Dionys. Halicarnass. l. 6.
, of very great foresight into business, and one that had a ready tongue upon
all occasions. To him they gave the managing of the whole design, and he
improved the trust to their best advange. Insomuch that when Menenius Agrippa
was employed unto them to demand their grievances, and had brought the point to
such an issue, that there was nothing wanting to make up the breach, but some
security to be given on the part of the Senate, that the people should be no
more deluded with such empty promises; this Junius Brutus took upon him to
propose the terms: and no security would content him (as the plot was laid)
but that some popular Magistrates should be forthwith made, for the protection
of the people. Concedite nobis (inquit) Magistratus aliquot quotannis e nostro
corpore creare, etc. Id. ibid.
"Let us, says he, have certain Magistrates to be chosen yearly out of our own
body, on whom we shall not ask you to confer more power, then that they have
authority to assist the Commons, when they are either injured or oppressed by
violence, and to take order that they be not robbed of their rights and
liberties. Other security then this we will trust to none." Which when the
people heard (for few of them were made acquainted with the plot before) (...),
they made many a loud and joyful shout, praising the man unto the skies, and
absolutely resolving to admit of no other terms, then what their Spokesman had
proposed.

Senate, and there it met with very grreat heats and opposition before it
passed, and passed not at the last but upon conditions. The people had a
faction in the very Senate, and a strong one too, who labored what they could
to obtain the point. Of these Valerius was the chief, whose Brother had not
long before expulsed the Kings, and from his courting of the people was
surnamed Poplicola: a family that had been always favorable to the popular
party, and more endeavored their content, then the honor or profit of the
public. In which regard Appius charged him to his face, (...) Id. ibid.
, that the whole generation of them were so partial in behalf of the people,
that they had almost destroyed the Commonwealth. Others and those of greater
courage and Nobility, scorning that such an innovation should be made in the
public Government, opposed it with all might and main; not sparing to assure
the Senate that in the setting up of this new authority, they would in fine
put down their own. And of these Appius and Caius Martius, (who after had the
name of Coriolanus) were the leading men: who standing upon point of honor,
advised the Senate that having shaken off the tyranny of their Kings, they
should not prostitute themselves to the lusts of the people Id. ibid.
; that they should stand on their own ground, and not do any thing unworthy of
their place and dignity; that these were but the beginnings of sedition, and
that the purpose of the Commons was to abolish law, and set up a paritie
Plutarch in M. Coriolano.
: Appius foretelling, as inspired with the spirit of Prophecy, (...), how
great a Seminary of mischiefs it would prove to the Commonwealth, and calling
all the Gods to witness that he had done his best to prevent the same. But when
they found it like to pass, and that the major part of the house did incline
that way, it was advised that they should hold the people to the terms by
themselves proposed, and give their Officers no more power but to relieve the
people from unjust oppression, and that they should only interpose, if any
thing were passed in Senate to the peoples prejudice, but propose nothing of
themselves, nor appear in any thing, until the Senate had before considered of
it; that the election should be made in centuriatis Comitiis only, where the
Patricii and their followers bare the greatest stroke; and finally that in
their applications and addresses to the Lords of the Senate, in any business
whatsoever, they should all agree upon the point, so that if any one dissented,
the agreement and consent of all the rest should pass for nothing. For seeing
that Tribunes must be granted, they hoped that by their disagreement the honor
of the State might be kept upright, and that the Commonwealth was not quite
past help, (...) Dionys. Halicarn. l. 10.
, as long as any discord or dissension might be sown amongst them. Which last
condition (for all the rest were broken as soon as they were agreed on) was most
religiously observed till the very last, as we read in Plutarch, who gives it
for a rule amongst them, that if one Tribune did oppose (...) r; m Plutareh. in
Caio. and Tiber.
the agreement and command of all the rest did effect just nothing. Things
being brought unto this temper, and all points agreed on, the people went to
the election, and chose five new Officers, (according to the number of the
Spartan Ephori) which they called Tribunes of the people; of which Sicinius and
Junius Brutus must be two at least. We may be sure they took not all this pains
for nothing.

good behavior; and if they did not break those bonds, they were Prisoners
still. But first they must be fortified with some special privileges, to keep
their persons out of danger; that they might boldly venture upon any project
without fear of law; and put themselves into such condition, that whatsoever
wrongs they did, they would not be called to an account. To that end Brutus
taking his opportunity whilst the heats were up, and the Senate in a
disposition to deny them nothing, causes a law to be propounded and obtained
for the perpetual indemnitie of the Tribunes, (...), and for declaring of their
Office to be sacred and inviolable D^o^ys. Halicarn. l. 6.
. The substance of the law was to this effect; "That no man should compel the
Tribunes to do any thing against their wills, nor beat, or cause them to be
beaten, nor kill, or cause them to be killed; if any should presume to do the
contrary (...), he was to be pursued as an execrable person, and his goods
confiscate, and whosoever slew him should escape unpunished, and do a
meritorious service to the Commonwealth." A Privilege which they found good
use of in the times succeeding, and made it serve their turns upon all
occasions. Martius complained of them in the Senate for disobedience to the
Consuls, and an intent to bring an Anarchie upon the State: Plutarh. in
Coriolano.
they vote this for a breach of privilege, and nothing but his death or
banishment will give them satisfaction for it. Apptus being Consul sends his
Lictor to lay hands upon them for raising tumults in the City Livie hist. Romans
lib. 2.
; this is another breach of privilege, and he shall answer for it when his
year was out. Caeso Quintius like a noble Patriot, joins with the Consuls and
the Senate to oppress their insolences, when neither law nor reason would
prevail upon them; this also is a breach of privilege, and his life shall pay
for it Id. l. 3.
. But to proceed, having obtained this law for their own security, their next
work was to break or pass by those laws by which the State was governed in all
times before, and which themselves had yielded to at their first creation. It
was the practice of the City from the first fnundation (and a continual custom
has the force of law) to give such respect unto the Senate, that the people
did not vote nor determine any thing, (...) Dionys. Halicarnass. l. 7.
, which the Senate had not first debated and resolved upon. This though no
breach of privilege was a main impediment to the advancing of those projects
which they had in hand, and therefore fit to be removed, as removed it was: and
so a way made open unto that confusion, which did expose the State to so many
changes, that it was never constant to one form of government. Which being
obtained, the next thing to be brought about, was to bring the election of the
Tribunes into the hands of the people (who had before the least part in it)
that so depending mutually upon one another, they might cooperate together to
destroy the State, and bring it absolutely under the command of the common
people. For at the first, according to the Articles of the Institution, the
Tribunes were to be elected in Comitiis Centuriatis as before was said, where
none but men of years and substance (such as were of the Liverie, as we speak
in England) had the right of Suffrage; By means whereof the Patricians had a
very great stroke in the Elections, Et per Clientum suffragia creandi quos
vellent potestatem (...). hist.
, and by the voices of their Clients or dependents set up whom they listed.
They must no longer hold this power. The Tribunes were the creatures of the
Common people, and must be made by none but them. A law must therefore be
propounded to put the Election wholly into the hands of the people, and to
transact the same in Comitiis Tributis, where no Patrician was to vote, but all
things carried by the voices of the rascal Rabble. Which though it caused much
heat and no small ado, yet it was carried at the last; Appius complaining
openly as his custom was, Rempub. per metum prodi, that the Senate did destroy
the Commonwealth by their want of courage. And whereas at the first they had
so much modesty as not to come into the Senate Valor. Maxim. lib. 2. c. 2.
, Sed positis subselliis ante fores decreta Patrum examinare, but to sit
without upon some benches, whilst they examined the decrees which had passed
the house: they challenge now a place, though no vote in Senate t, and had free
ingress and egress when they would themselves.

Nobles, and make them of no more esteem then the common sort. And upon this
they set their strength, and made it the first hansel of their new authority.
Martius had spoke some words in Senate which displeased the Tribunes, and they
incense the people to revenge the injury: who promising to assist them in their
undertakings, an Officer is forthwith sent to apprehend him. This caused the
Patricians whom the cause concerned, to stand close together, and to oppose
this strange incroachment; and generally to affirm, as most true it was, that
when they yielded to the setting up of this new authority, there was no power
given them by the Senate (...) Dionys. Halicarn. l. 7.
, but only to preserve the Commons from unjust oppressions. The like did
Martius plead in his own behalf, as we find in Livie, auxilii non poenae jus
datum illi potestati, plebisque non patrum Tribunos esse Livie. hist. lib. 2.
, that they were trusted with a power to help the Commons, but with none to
punish, and were not Tribunes of the Lords, but of the people. And so much also
was affirmed in the open Senate, that the authority of the Tribunes was at
first ordained not to offend or grieve the Senate, but that the Commons might
not suffer any grievance by it; and that they did not use their power,
according to such limitations as were first agreed on, and as of right they
ought to use it, (...) Dionys. Halicarn. l. 7.
, but to the ruin and destruction of the Laws established. Enough of
conscience to have staved them from the prosecution, but that they had it in
design, and resolved to carry it. For Brutus had before given out and assured
the people, (...) Id. ibid.
, that he would humble the Nobility, and bring down their pride; and 'twas no
reason that such a man as he should be disappointed, and not be master of his
word. Martius being banished at the last, their next bout was with Appius
Claudius, a constant and professed enemy of the popular faction: one who had
openly took part against them in behalf of Martius, and after seeing them
apprehend some Gentlemen who opposed their insolences, had openly denied, jus
esse Tribuno in quenquam nisi in plebeium Livie. l. 2.
, that they could exercise their power on any but the Commons only. Him
therefore they accused of Treason, or at least sedition, in that he had
entrenched upon their authority, which was made sacred by the Laws: and
doubtless had condemned him to some shameful punishment, had he not died
before his trial. Which victory on Martius, and the death of Appius, did so
discourage the Nobility and puff up the Tribunes, that from this time forwards
(as the Historian does observe) the Tribunes cited whom they listed to answer
for themselves before the people, and to submit their lives to their final
sentence: which as it did increase the power of the popular faction in the
depressing of the Nobles, and weakening the authority of the Senate; so did it
open them a way to aim at and attain to all those dignities in the Common
wealth, (...) Dionys. Halicarn. l. 7.
, which were most honorable in themselves and had formerly belonged to the
Patricians, and to none but them. And yet the Senate and Nobility did not so
give over, but that sometimes they put them in remembrance of their first
conditions, and challenged them of breaking all those bonds and Covenants,
which were so solemnly agreed on and accepted by them, at the first erection of
their Office. For this did Fabius press upon them when they went about to make
some Law for the restraint and regulating of the power of the Consuls, viz.
that their authority was given them ad auxilium singulorum, for the relief of
such particulars as did want their help, not for the ruin of the public; and
that they should do well to bethink themselves, Livie. l. 3.
Tribunos plebis se creatos, non hosts Patribus, that they were chosen
Tribunes to protect the people, not enemies to oppress the Senate. And the
expostulation of the Senate was both just and necessary, when they demanded of
the Tribunes on the same occasion, (...) Dionys. Halicarn. l. 10.
, who gave them power to introduce new Laws and subvert the old; and told them
in plain terms they had broke their Covenants, and that they were not made upon
such conditions as to do all things that they listed, nor to do any thing at
all, but only to protect the poor, and preserve the Commons from oppression.
Which put together makes it a most evident truth, that in the creation of the
Tribunes there was nothing less intended then to curb the Senate, or to set up
a power to oppose the Consuls; as vainly and seditiously is supposed by CALVIN,
though true it is they did abuse their power with the Common people, and the
authority of their office to suppress them both.

Livie. If they held quiet for one year, as they seldom did (till they had
brought the City under their obedience) they broke out in the next that
followed with the greater violence: and when the course of the distemper was so
intermitted, that it held not always a Quotidian, it proved a Tertian Fever,
or at most a Quartan, and therefore like to tarry longer with the afflicted
Patient. How many seditions did they raise about the law Agaria, of which Livie
tells us that it was never moved H^st Romans l. 2.
sine maximis motibus without great tumults and dissensions? How many tumults
did they raise to oppose the Consuls, when they had any wars in hand, and were
to press the Soldier to pursue those wars? How often find we in that Author,
Tribunitium bellum domi territare patres Id. lib. 3.
, that when the Fathers had no wars abroad, they found a Tribunitian war at
home which did more affright them? how often find we them complaining, non
ultra ferri posse Tribunitios furores Id. lib. 4.
, that the insolences of the Tribunes were no longer sufferable; and that they
could not look to be without continual alarms, and renewed distractions,
whilst the seditions and the authors of them did succeed so prosperously? Nay
they were so accustomed to it, that having had some intermission (and that no
otherwise obtained, but by yielding all things to the people which they had a
mind to) Livie takes notice of it as a thing observable, permultos annos esse
Id. lib. 10.
, that many years had intervened since the Patricians and the Tribunes had
their last contention. And all this while they managed their seditions by the
tongues end only, seldom proceeding unto blows, and much less to blood. But
when the two Gracchi came in play and attained the Office, they fell from words
to blows, and from blows to murder: Tiberius one of the two Brothers, and
many of his friends and followers being tumultuously slain in the Common Forum,
as he was acting the part of a busy and seditious Tribune; whom Caius the
other of the two not long after followed both in life and death. And this,
says the Historian, initium in urbe Roma Civilis sanguinis gladiorumque
impunitatis fuit Velleius Patercul. hist.
, was the first time that the sword was suffered to range at liberty in the
streets of Rome, and to be discolored with the blood of the Citizens; their
differences before that day (though not often afterward) being determined by
parlies, but not by bloodshed. Which being put together and considered
seriously, it will appear to be no Paradox which we find in Florus, where he
affirms, Seditionum omnium causas Tribunitiam potestatem excitasse Florus
histor. Romans l. 3.
, that the Tribunitian power was the source and fountain of all those
seditions, wherewith the quiet of the State had been disturbed. Nor was it said
by Quintius without very good reason, that the authority of the Tribunes, in
seditione and ad seditiones nata, was born in a sedition and to raise
seditions; Cicero de Legibus l. 3.
that it was pestifera potestas, a pestilent pernicious office, and that Pompey
did exceeding ill to re-invest the Tribunes with that height of power, of which
they had been justly dispossessed by Sylla. Upon which grounds it had been
formerly averred by the Consuls and the rest of the Senate, that the Tribunes
were the cause of those distractions ((...), are the Authors words) which did
so miserably afflict the Commonwealth Dionys. Halicarn. l. 10.
. But this, to say the truth, is so clear a point, that it needs no proof. I
only shall observe and so pass it by, how justly the Nobility and Senate were
punished by their own example; and for how little time they enjoyed that
Sovereignty, which they had wrested from their Kings. From the expulsion of the
Kings to the creating of the Tribunes were but sixteen years; and from the
death of Tarquin to the reign of Brutus and Sicinius, but one year, no more,
and in that little span of time the people profited so well in the school of
rebellion, that they did not only beat the Senate at their own weapon of
disloialty, but choked them with their own objection. For when it was objected
against the Tribunes, that their authority was gotten and maintained by
seditious courses; the Tribunes handsomely replied, that that objection might
as well be made against the authority of the Consuls; which had been introduced
and established by no other means, Id. lib. 10.
(...), then the rebellion of the Nobles or Patricians against their Kings. A
very shrewd retortion, if you mark it well; and fit to be considered of in
these present times.

Tribunes to change the government of the State, and to put the Supreme Power
of all into the hands of the people; that is to say, to bring it under the
command of a few factious persons, on whom the body of the people had devolved
their power. And this is positively affirmed by Florus, where having told us
that the Tribunes were the cause of all the tumults and seditions which had
been raised within the City, he adds, that being at first ordained specie
quidem tuendae plebis, Florus hist. Romans l. 3.
under pretense of being Protectors of the Commons, and taking care for the
preserving of their rights and liberties; they sought in very deed to usurp the
Sovereignty, re autem dominationem sibi acquirere, and to get the Supreme power
into their own hands. To this end as the Tribunes strived to oblige the people
by causing new Laws to be made in their behalf, and for the increase of their
authority; so did the people readily obey the Tribunes, and gathered into an
head upon all occasions, as well for the protection of their persons, as the
confirmation of their power. When Martius had declamed against them in the open
Senate for their factious and seditious courses, the Tribunes presently made
complaint to the people of it, calling upon them to assist them, (...), and to
save their Tribunes Plutarch in Coriolano.
: at which the people were so madded, and ran on so furiously, that they were
like to have fallen desperately upon all the Senate. And Appius found unto his
cost, that in offering to attach a Tribune, (though he well deserved it) concio
omnis coorta pro Tribuno in Consulem Livie. l. 2.
, the whole assembly rose against him as one man, to defend their Tribune, the
rascal multitude gathering together out of all the City to do him right
against the Consul. And Plutarch tells us in the life of Tiberius Gracchus, that
the people were so sottishly affected to him, that many of the needy and
seditious rout waited upon him all night long up and down the Town; Plutarch in
Tiber. and C. Gracchis.
some of them buying tents and lying about his house to watch it, as a guard to
his person. And on the other side the houses of the Tribunes were kept
continually open as well nights as days, that they might serve as a Protection
or a Common Sanctuary for men of all sorts to repair unto, whom either debt or
misdemeanor, or some greater matter had made obnoxious to the Sergeants, or
other Ministers of justice, to the great prejudice of the honest and well
meaning Subjects in their suits and businesses. And besides this, the Tribunes
never failed to flatter and bewitch the people by some piece of courtship, or
by preferring some new Laws (as before was said) for their ease and benefit.
They had no sooner way then that to advance their power, or to obtain unto that
absoluteness of command and empire, which they projected to themselves. For
doubtless that of the Historian is exactly true, (...) Dionys. Halicarn. lib.
6.
, that he that means to be a Tyrant must be first a flatterer; there being no
readier way to advance a Tyranny then by being popular, a professed servant of
that people whom he would command. But this confederacy between the Tribunes
and the people and the mutual ties that were between them, I cannot better lay
before you then in Plutarchs words, Plutarch in Agis and Cleomen.
who speaking of the Gracchi does inform us thus, "That having received. many
favors from the peoples hands they were ashamed to be indebted to them, and
therefore earnestly endeavored to requi^e their courtesies, by making new
Decrees and Laws which they propounded and obtained for the peoples profit;
and on the other side, the people for their parts were not wanting to admire
and honor them the more, by how much they perceived them studious of their
good and benefit. So that with like strife on either side, the one to gratify
and oblige the other, their interesses were so mingled, and their intentions so
concorporated, that they must needs hold on as they had begun, and either stand
or fall together." By means whereof the people in conclusion became lords of
all, the majesty of the State and the power of judicature being absolutely
vested in them: which since they could not manage but by their Atturneys, nor
otherwise execute and discharge then by their Proxies, who but the Tribunes
their own creatures must be trusted with it? And this is that which Tacitus
observes to be the issue of those quarrels which were kept on foot between the
Nobility and the Commons, modo turbulenti Tribuni, Tacit. hist. lib. 2.
modo Consules praevalidi, sometimes some factious Tribunes carried it away,
and then again the Consuls had the better, and prevailed in power, according as
they did comply with the peoples humors; till Marius and Sylla first, and
Julius Caesar afterward by their example, by force of Arms subdued both
parties, and introduced an absolute Government.

first the discontented Nobles had expulsed their Kings, and found they could
not master all those difficulties which so great a business as that was did
present unto them, without being sure to have the people theirs without fear of
lapsing: Poplicola advised, and at last enacted it for Law, that no man should
presume upon pain of death to take upon him any Office, (...) Plutarch. in
Publicola.
, unless it come unto him by the gift of the people; and that if any were
condemned, and appealed to them, the execution should be respited, till the
people should give sentence in it. But then withal the Nobility kept all
Offices both of power and State in their own hands only, the people being
incapable of the meanest office which did relate unto the Government of the
Commonwealth; until they gained the Tribunes and the two Aediles (which were
under officers to the Tribunes) to be chosen out of their own body. Which once
obtained, there was no place, how high soever, which they did not aim at, and
which their Tribunes did not find some way to compass for them; the Nobles
and Patricians still in vain complaining how much they were dishonored in the
competition. First therefore having gained a Law (but with much ado) that the
Commons might be married into Noble Families, they presently propose another,
ut populo potestas esset, seu de Plebe, seu de Patribus vellet, Consules
faciendi, Livie. l. 4.
that the people might have liberty to choose the Consuls out of which rank of
men they listed: and at the first attempt did prevail so far, that in stead of
the two Consuls which they had before, six Military Tribunes should be chosen
by them, to be possessed of all the Consular authority, and they to be
promiscuously elected out of the Patricians and the People, as they saw
convenient Livie. l. 4.
; and having got this ground they went on a main. For not long after, P.
Licinius Calvus a mere Plebeian, is made one of these Military Tribunes; and
shortly after that the Magister Equitum, or the Commander of the horse. Thus
Silius and Aelius are made Questors, those of Patrician rank having had the
canvass; and next that followed a Decree, that the Docemviri Sacrorum, who had
the custody and charge of the Sibyls Books, partim ex Plebe, partim ex
Patriciis, Id. lib. 6.
should be indifferently chosen out of both Estates. In little time, the
Tribunes pressing hotly for it, L. Sextus obtains the Consulship Id. ibid.
, C. Martius Rutilius is first made Dictator, afterward one of the Censors
also Id. lib. 7.
; and P. Philo is advanced to the place and dignity of the Prator Id. lib. 8.
. Having thus took possession of all Civil Magistracy, which were of any power
and dignity in the Commonwealth; the Tribunes would not rest nor content
themselves, until the Commons were made capable of the Priesthood also: which
after some slight opposition made by Appius Claudius (a Family that never
yielded any thing to advance the people) was conferred upon them, five Augures,
and four Pontifi^es being added to the former number, all chosen, and for ever
to be chosen by and out of the Commons Id. lib. 10.
. There were only now two places of respect and credit, that of the Maximus
Curio and the Pontifex Maximus, both which the Nobles did pretend to belong to
them: but the Tribunes were resolved to have it otherwise. According to which
resolution, C. Manilius got the Office of the Maximus Curio Id. lib. 26.
: and in the close of all, but a good while after, Omnibus honoribus plebi
communicatis Rofin. Antiq. Romans l. 3. c. 22.
, after all other honors were conferred upon them, or rather communicated to
them, one T. Coruncanius was declared the Pontifex Maximus. All this and more
they had, but it would not satisfy.

power of Judicature, and the Supreme Majesty of the State to make all
complete; and to gain this the Tribunes must bestir themselves both with art
and violence; or else they could not hope to estate it on them. A business of
so high a nature, that it was never in a way to be brought about, till the two
Gracehi undertook the contrivance of it: who being men of excellent parts and
great abilities, did most unfortunately fall on the undertaking; and being
fallen upon it did devise all ways which either art or wit could present unto
them to effect the work. Of these Tiberius was the eldest, who stumbling in the
way on the Lex Agraria, as being a means to make the poor people more
confiderable, and the rich less powerful; and finding that Octavius one of his
Colleagues did oppose him in it, deposed him from his Office by force and
violence, only because he stood upon the right of his negative voice Plutarch
in Tib. and Caio.
. He had before inflamed the people by making a seditious speech to prefer
their business; and now he takes a course to inflame them more, for the
advancement of his own. For one of his friends being found dead upon a sudden,
not without some suspicion of poison, as he gave it out, he put on mourning
apparel, and brought his sons before the people, into the Common Forum,
beseeching them to have compassion on his Wife and Children, as one that
utterly despaired of his own safety, having for their sakes got the hatred of
the Noble men. And sometimes he would be the first man in the Marketplace,
apparelled all in black, his face swelled with tears, and looking heavily upon
the matter, would pray the people to stand to him, saying, he was afraid his
Enemies would come in the night, and overthrow his house to kill him. By means
of which devices he so wrought upon them, that many of them bought tents and
lay about his house continually, to keep him from the hands of his deadly
Enemies. So that being sure of their concurrence and assistance in any project
which he should set on foot to advance himself, under pretense of doing service
to the Commonwealth; he presently proposed a law, (...), that any man that
would might appeal from the Judges to the people in what cause soever. And that
he might be sure to embase the Senate, to the improvement and increase of the
peoples power, he had prepared another of an higher nature, which was to add
unto the Senate an equal number of the Equites, or the Roman Knights, who were
to be of equal power, and to have liberty of voting in all public businesses
with the ancient Senators. In passing which and other of his Popular laws he
got this trick, (and he was very constant to it) that if he found the sense of
the house to be against him, and was not like to carry with him the major part
of the voices, he would quarrel with his fellow Tribunes to spin out the time
till his party were all come together; and if that could not do it neither,
then he adjourned the Assembly to some other day. But yet for all these
artifices and unworthy practices, he could not compass the design, but left it
to be finished by his Brother Caius: Who taking the same course to engage the
people, which his Br^ther had pursued before, brought those designs about
which Tiberius failed in. Id. ibid.
For first whereas the Senate were the only Judges in matters which concerned
the affairs of the Commonwealth, which made them no less reverenced by the
Roman Knights, then by others of the common people: Caius prevailed so far that
he gained a law for adding three hundred of these Equites to as many Senators
(for the Senate did consist of three hundred anciently) (...), giving them
equal power of judging in all causes which were brought before them. So that
by gaining this and the former law of appealing to the people upon all
occasions, the people were estated in the power of Judicature, and the dernier
resort (as the Lawyers call it) was in them alone. The only point now left was
the Supreme Majesty, and that did Caius very handsomely confer upon them
without noise or trouble. For whereas all other Orators when when they made
their speeches, turned themselves toward the Palace where the Senate sat: he
on the contrary turned himself toward the Market place where the people were,
and taught all other Orators by his Example to do the like. And thus (says
Plutarch) by the only turning of his look he gained a point of infinite
consequence and importance; (...), changing the Commonwealth from an
Aristocratie, to a mere Democratie: which was the matter so aimed at by his
Predecessors.

Tribunes had been insolent enough in the former times, but the obtaining of
these laws made them more unsufferable. Before they used to quarrel all the
greatest Officers, as if the State could not consist but by their contentions:
there being no Magistrate so great, nor man so innocent, whom they exposed not
sometimes to contempt and scorn, and made not subject to their tyranni^. The
renowned Scipio himself, the very Atlas of the State when it was in danger, a
man in whom there was not any thing but brave and gallant, could not escape so
clear, but that he was accused by these factious Tribunes Livie. hist. lib. 28.
, and forced to live retired in his Countrey-house, far from the employments of
that State, which did not otherwise subsist but by his abilities. Nor could
they look on their Dictators but with eyes of malice, although they had as much
authority as that State could give them, or any of their Kings had enjoyed
before, whom they endeavor to make subject to their pride and tyranny by all
means imaginable. And to that end, sometimes denied him the honor of a Triumph,
though he had deserved it in all men's judgments but their own; and sometimes
making this Magister Equitum Id. lib. 22.
, to be of equal power and authority with him: and finally sometimes they
declaim against him Id. ibid.
, to make him of no reputation with the common people. And for their dealing
with the Consuls, it had been a complaint of old, even in the dawning of the
day of their new authority, Consulatum captum and oppressum a Tribunitiae
potestate Id. lib. 2.
, that the Consulship was suppressed and captivated by the power of the
Tribunes; and we can no where find that they improved their modesty, as they
did their power. Nor did they only quarrel with the Consuls, and proceed no
further, (though that had been an high affront to the Supreme Magistrate) but
threatened to commit them to the Prison also, and many times their threatenings
were not made in vain. For thus we read, that Caius Marius being Tribune
Plutarch in Mario.
, threatened to send Cotta the Consul unto Prison, but afterward was taken off
by fair persuasions: and Sulpitus, one as violent as he, though not so valiant,
assaulted both the Consuls as they sat in the Senate house Id. ibid.
, and killed one of their sons there, who was not so quick of foot as to escape
his hands. Which though they were but bare attempts were yet lewd enough,
sufficiently to the dishonor of such eminent Magistrates, and to the infamy and
disgrace of the public Government. And therefore to make sure work of it, and
that the world might see they could more then threaten, Quintius will tell you
in the Dialogue with his Brother Cicero, Brutum and P. Scipionem tales tantos
viros hominum omnium infimum and sordidissinum Trib. Pl. C. Curiatium in
vincula conjecisse Cicero de Legibus lib. 3.
, that C. Curiatius, a most base and unworthy person, had caused such gallant
men as Brutus and P. Scipio to be cast in Prison. And if we make a further
search we shall quickly find, that M. Drusus being Tribune caused Philip the
Consul to be cast headlong out of his seat, to the no small danger of his life,
only for interrupting him in the middle of a factious speech; which was an
insolency beyond imprisonment. To speak of their behavior toward the other
Magistrates were a thing impertinent. For if the Consuls and Dictators could
not escape their hands, there is no question to be made but that the Praetors,
Censors, Quaestors, yea the Pontifices themselves, were most abundantly debased
and insulted on by these popular Tyrants.

Tribunes to as great an height both for power and insolency, as were the
Ephori before; and thereby made them ready for the greater fall. A fall which
was not long a coming after they had made up the measure of their pride and
tyranny. For Lucius Sylla having brought the estate of Rome under his command,
and knowing full well how dangerous these men would be to him, if they were
suffered to continue in their former power, set forth a law by which they were
reduced to their ancient bounds; enabled only to relieve, not to wrong the
Subject. Sylla Tribunis Pl^bis lege sua injuriae faciendae potestatem ademit,
auxilii ferendi reliquit, as we read in Tullie Id. ibid.
. A thing that much displeased the people, and the Tribunes more. But Sylla was
no (...), no great applier of himself to the peoples humors, and therefore
cared but little how they took the matter. Pompey succeeding him in power and
in purpose too, took a course quite contrary; and reestablished them in that
authority whereof Sylla had of late deprived them. For finding that the common
people longed for nothing more then to see the Office of the Tribunes in the
height again, and being resolved to lay the foundation of his greatness on the
affections and dependence of the common people Plutarch. in Pompeio.
, (...), he gratified them in that point, and thought himself an happy man to
find so fair an opportunity to oblige them to him. On which deceitful grounds
(for they proved no other) he set them in their power again, as before was
said; for which he stands accused by Quintus, t Cicero de Leg^bu^. l 3.
and I think deservedly: Certain I am that Pompey bought the short affection
and applause of the common people at no less a price then his own destruction:
the Tribunes being the very men which pulled down his p^ide Plutarch in I.
Caesare.
, and set up Caesar to oppose him. Who going the same way to work that Sylla
did, and knowing that a Tribune and a Tribunitian spirit were no friends to
Monarchy, left them the name, but nothing else. The power and privilege of
the Office he kept unto himself for his own security Dion histor. Romans lib. 53.
; as one that understood, none better, how many notable advantanges he should
gain thereby, for the confirming of his Empire. Which course Augustus followed
also, taking the Tribunitian power into his own hands, posito Triumviri nomine
Tacitus Annal. lib. 1.
, as soon as the Triumvirate was expired by the death of his partners; and from
thence reckoned the years of his Government, as Tribunitiae potestatis tertium,
quartum, etc. which his Successors did after his example till the time of
Constantine, when the name of Tribune was laid by as a thing forgotten Rosin.
Antiq. Romans
. The Empire was then cast into another kind of mould then it had been
formerly; new Offices ordained, new forms of Government introduced, and a new
Rome built: and to what purpose should they keep the name, when the thing was
gone?

Calvin's word. He says the Tribunes were fet up to oppose the Consuls; but the
best Writers do affirm that they were instituted only to protect the people,
and to protect the people in such cases only when they did suffer any tort or
unjust oppression. He reckons them for instances of such popular Magistrates
as were ordained to moderate and restrain the vast power of Kings and other
Supreme Magistrates; but the best Writers do affirm that the Tribunes were not
instituted till the Kings were outed; nor instituted at the first to restrain
the Consular power, though by degrees they did restrain it as they pleased; and
finally that they were again abridged of their power and tyranny, as soon as
Monarchy was restored, and the State brought to be obedient to one Sovereign
Prince. He seems to intimate that the Consuls were not wronged by such
oppositions as the Tribunes daily made against them, and that the Tribunes did
no more in such oppositions then by their place and office they were bound to
do. But the best Writers do affirm that the Consuls made complaint from time to
time of those wrongs and insolences which those proud creatures of the people
did afflict them with; and they complained not without cause, as their stories
tell us. So that there is but little ground for the supposition, touching the
first creation of these mighty Tyrants, which Calvin trimly puts upon us; less
for the application of it to his end and purpose. What other power soever they
enjoyed or exercised more then the power of interceding, when any Bill or
Ordinance was to pass the Senate, by which the people might have suffered in
their goods and liberties, was an incroachment on the Consuls, and wrested from
them by strong hand, sometimes with blood, but never without dangerous tumults.
The best use can be made of such false surmises, especially when they are false
and factious too (and some good uses may be made of the strongest poisons) is
that an Item may be taken by all Kings, Princes* and Supreme Governors to have
a care of their Estates, and neither suffer any Tribunes, or men of Tribunitian
spirits, or such as challenge to themselves Tribunitian power, to grow up under
them, or live within the verge of their Dominions. The Tribune and the
Tribunitian spirit are no friend to Monarchy; and have so much of Pompey in
them (who restored the Office) that they will never be content to endure an
equal, much less to suffer a Superior. For further proof of which (if more
proof be requisite) and for discovering to the world with what arts and
practices those factious and seditious spirits did attain their height: it
would be a most excellent piece of service to all Sovereign Princes, if a just
Tribunitian history were composed by some man of judgment, for the recovery
of this Age from the present maladies, and a Memento to the future. But this I
leave to those who have time and leisure, and other fit abilities to go
through with it. I have another task in hand, and the Demarchi call upon me to
pass on to Athens, where we are like to find worse work then we met with
hitherto. Worse work I mean in this respect, that we are like to find less
ground for the supposition; for otherwise we are like to find no work at all,
as will appear more evidently by that which follows.

CHAP. IV. Of what authority the DEMARCHI were in the State of ATHENS; and of
the danger and unfitness of the instances produced by CALVIN.
(I) Athens first governed by Kings, and afterward by one Sovereign Prince
under other titles. (II) The Annual Magistrates of Athens what they were, and
of what authority. (III) By whom and what degrees the State of Athens was
reduced to a Democratie. (IV) Of the authority of the Senate, and the famous
Court of the Areopagites. (V) What the Demarchi were in the State of Athens,
and of what authority. (VI) The Demarchi never were of power to oppose the
Senate, nor were ordained to that end. (VII) Calvin's ill luck in making choice
of three such instances, which if true, would not serve his turn. (VIII) The
danger which lies hidden under the disguise of such popular Magistrates, as
are here instanced in by Calvin. (IX) What moved Calvin to lay these dangerous
stumbling blocks in the Subjects way. (X) The dangerous oppositions and
practices which have hence ensued in most parts of Europe. (XI) The sect of
CALVIN professed Enemies to Monarchy, and the power of Princes.
Athens, as were all others at the first, was under the Government of Kings,
all of them of the race of Cecrops, from whom his Successors were called
Cecropidae: and they, as other Kings in those ancient times, ut libitum
imperitabant Tacit. Annal. lib. 3.
, governed the people under them by no other rule then their own discretion.
Theseus the tenth from Cecrops, was the first King of Athens which let go his
hold, and parted with so many of the Regal rights, as made the Kings weak and
the Subjects wanton. For having a desire to incorporate all the Inhabitants of
Attica into the City of Athens, the better to unite them against foreign force,
and to assemble them together as occasion served, he was fain to win them to it
by large promises of giving them some share in the public Government: without
which bait, the wealthier sort, and such as had authority in their several
Buroughs, could not be drawn into the City Plutarch in Theseo.
. Yet still he kept unto himself and to his successors (...), as we find in
Plutarch, the chief Cnmmandery in the wars, and the preservation of the laws,
together with a superintendency in matters which concerned Religion; the main
points of Soveraigntie. And in this State things stood till the death of
Codrus, the seventh from Theseus, who giving up his own life to preserve his
Country, became so honored and admired amongst his people, that they resolved
for his sake to have no more Kings, for fear they should never meet with any
who might be worthy to succeed him: which was one of the prettiest wanton
quarrels that ever was picked against a Monarchy. The Princes which succeeded
after his decease, they called not Kings, but (...), or Governors; but the
change was only in the name, and in the manner of their getting the Supreme
authority. For being once invested with the Supreme power, they held it during
life without check or censure; as is affirmed by Africanus, an ancient writer:
who laying down the succession of the Kings of Athens, to the death of Codrus
African. apud Eusib. Chron. edit. Scaliger.
, adds this, (...), that after them succeeded the perpetual Archonte^, who
held the Government during life. The like Eusebius does affirm Eusebius. in Chro.
, and all Authors else, which treat of the affairs of Athens. The difference
was, that formerly the Kingdom was successive merely, entailed upon the Princes
of the line of Cecrops, now it began to be Elective, and to be given to them
who best pleased the people: Et loco libertatis erat, quod eligi coeperunt
Tacit. hist. l. 1.
, and it was some degree of liberty, (and a great one too) that they had power
to nominate and elect their Princes. But long they did not like of this,
although no doubt a great intrusion on the Regal dignity. The Princes were too
absolute when they held for life, not so observant of the people as it was
expected; because not liable to account, nor to be called unto a reckoning till
it was too late, till death had freed them from their faults, and the peoples
censure. And therefore having tried the Government of 13 of these perpetual
Archontes, of which Medon the son of Codrus was the first, and the last
Al^maeon; In december annos Magistratuum consuetudo conversa est Eusebius. in Chr.
, they introduced another custom, and every tenth year changed their Governors.
These they called (...), African. apud Eusebius. Chronic.
, or Decennial Archontes; of which they had but seven in all, and then gave
them over: and from that time were governed by nine Officers or Magistrates
chosen every year, who for that cause waa called (...), or the Annual
Magistrates. And yet it is to be observed that in both these changes, the
Archon whosoever he was, and whether he was for term of life or for ten years
only, had all the power which formerly was belonging to the Kings, save the
very name; in which regard Eusebius does not stick to call them by the name of
Kings: where speaking of the institution of these Annual Magistrates, he does
thus express it, Athenis Annui principes constituti sunt cessantibus Regibus
Eusebius. Chron.
, as St. Hierom renders it.

Annual Magistrates, they were these that follow, that is to say, (...) Iul.
Pollux in Onomast. l. 8. c. 9.
* which we may call the Provost (who (...) was called the Archon) the Bishop or
High Priest, the Marshal, and the six Chief Justices. Of these the Provost was
the chief, (...), of whom they did denominate the ensuing year, and by whose
name they dated all their private contracts, and Acts of State. Id. ibid. Sect.
2.
To him it appertained to have a care of celebrating the Orgies of Bacchus, and
the great festival which they termed Thargelia, consecrated to Apollo and
Diana; as also to take cognizance of misdemeanors, and in particular to punish
those who were common drunkards; and to determine in all cases which concerned
matter of inheritance: and furthermore to nominate Arbitrators for the ending
of fuits and private differences, to appoint Guardians unto Orphans, and
Overseers unto women left with child by their husbands. The (...) whom we call
the Bishop or high Priest, had the charge of all the sacred mysteries Id. ibid.
Sect. 3.
, (...), and the administration of the usual and accustomed sacrifices;
together with the cognizance of sacrilege, profaneness, and all other actions
which concerned Religion, as also power to inter^^ct litigious persons (or
Common Barretters as we call them) from being present at the celebrating of the
holy mysteries. And he retained the name of (...), because that anciently their
Kings, (as in all places else) had the chief hand in matters which related to
the public service of the Gods, and the solemn sacrifices. On the which reason
and no other, the Romans had their Regem Sacrificulum, (whom Plutarch calls
(...) Plutarch in Problemat.
, in imitation of the Latin, but Dionysius (...) Dionys. Halicarnens. hist. l.
5.,
in the true Greek phrase); of which Livie thus. Rerum deinde divinarum habita
cura: and quia quaedam publica sacra per ipsos Reges factitata erant, necubi
Regum desiderium esset, Regem Sacrificulum creant Livie hist. Rman. lib. 2.
. But to proceed, the Polemarchus whom we English by the name of Marshall, sat
judge in cases of sedition, and such whereby the grandour of the State might
suffer detriment; as also in all actions which concerned either Denizens, or
Merchant-strangers: and unto him it appertained to sacrifice to Diana and to
Mars, the two military Deities Jul. Pollux in Onomast. l. 8. c. 9. 3.
, (...), and to prescribe the funeral pomp for such as lost their lives in
their Countries service. Each of these had their two Assessors, of their own
election; but so that they were bound to choose them out of the Senate of five
hundred Id. ibid. Sect.
, from no lower rank. Finally for the (...), whom we call Chief Justices, they
were six in number, (...) Suidas in Lex.
, and had authority to give judgment absolutely in all civil pleas, to judge
of strangers which abused the privileges which they had in the City, of
briberie, conspiracies, false inscriptions, in cases of adultery and public
crimes; in points of trade, and actions which concerned the S^annaries Jul.
Poll^x in Onomall. l. 8 c. 9. sect. 1.
; as also to review the sentence of the Provost, and the decrees of the Senate
if occasion were; and to give notice to the people, (...), as Julius Pollux, if
any man preferred a law which was not profitable and expedient for the
Commonwealth. Such were the Officers, and such the duty of those Officers,
ordained at Athens, upon the last alteration of the Government which before we
spoke of: and amongst these we find not any popular Magistrate, who was to
have a care of the Common people, and to preserve them in their rights and
liberties from the oppression of the greater and more powerful Citizens; much
less set up of purpose to oppose the Senate. And to say truth, we must not look
for any such amongst the nine, nor in these times in which this alteration of
the Government was first established. They could not fall immediately from a
Regal State, to a Democratical, but they must take the Aristocratie in the way
unto it. They had been under Kings at first, or such as had the power of Kings,
although not the name. And when they chose these Annual Officers, they chose
them ex nobilibus urbis, out of the Nobles only, as Eusebius has it Eusebius.
Chron.
: which Scaliger is forced to grant to be so at first Scaliger in Animadvers.
, though out of a desire to confute his Author, he would very fain have had it
otherwise. Whether or no they had such Officers as Calvin dreams of, when they
had settled their Democratie, we shall see anon: having first shown by whom and
by what degrees the government of the State was cast on the peoples shoulders,
and the form thereof made merely popular or Democratical. For certainly it is
most true, that never any Democratical State showed it self at the first in its
proper colors, or came into the world by a lawful entrance; but crept into it
secretly at the back-dore either of faction or sedition.

Democratie, and made the people fall in love with a factious liberty, was
Theseus, a valiant but unfortunate King, who the better to induce the people of
Attica to desert their dwellings, and be incorporated into Athens, promised
them (as before was said) that all of them should have some share in the
public government, and after the form and manner of a Commonwealth. And so
far he performed his promise, as to divest himself of some parts of
Soveraigntie (...), and laid the first foundation of that popular State, which
was after built: but he paid deer for it Plutarch. in Th^seo.
. For the people who before had been so tractable, that they would do
whatsoever their Kings commanded, at the first words speaking; began to take
more state upon them, and became so stub born, that they would do nothing on
command, but looked to be flattered with and courted, upon all occasions
Id^ibid.
. Which being noted by Menestheus a popular man, but otherwise of the Royal
blood, he so sed that humor, and wrought so finely on them by his wit and
cunning, that Theseus was in fine deposed, and his sons disherited, and the
remainder of the Royalty conferred by them upon Menestheu^, as their deed of
gift. And though no doubt the people did improve their power, both when their
Kings became elective, and when their Governors were elected but for term of
years, and specially when the Magistrates were no more then Annual; yet they
could get no further then an Aristocratie, till the time of Solon; which were
about 170 years after the Annual Officers were first established: the Annual
Officers being established in the first year of the 5. Olympiad, and Solons
reformation happening in the second of the 47. But Solon being chosen Provost (or
the (...),) and finding the Republic much embroyled in dangerous factions
which had been long since bred between the Nobles and Commons, in the change of
Governments: took on him by the joint consent of both parties, the emendation
of the laws, and the reducing of the State of the Commonwealth to a more
peaceable and equal temper Id. in Solone.
. And he so ordered their affairs, that the chief Offices of the City remained
in the hands of the Nobility, as before they were; which for the time
contented them: but the election of those Officers, and the dernier resort, or
the admittance of Appeals upon Writs of error (as we call them); that he
confirmed unto the people; which did not only please the people for the present
time, but put them into a condition of drawing to themselves the supreme
authority. Insomuch that Aristotle though he seem to say, that Solon settled in
the City a mixed form of Government, the Court of Areopagites (which he also
instituted) pretending to an Oligarchie, the Annual Officers or Archontes to an
Aristocratie, and the power of judicature being vested in the common people,
unto a Democratie Aristot. Politic. l. 2. c. 10.
: yet he confesses at the last, that this power of judicature, and the
necessity which all men found of applying themselves unto the people, (...),
changed the Republic in conclusion to a mere Democratie, as it continued till
his time. But yet it was not brought about but with great ado, Pisistratus
first reducing the estate to an absolute Monarchy Plutarch. in So^one.
, (which because he got it from them by fraud and force, they called a Tyranny)
and after Clisthenes freeing his country from that yoke (by driving his
posterity out of Attica) restoring it unto an Aristocratie Id. in Aristide, in
Pericle, et Cim^nc.
, as before it was. At last it seemed good to Aristides, though for a time he
concurred with Clisthenes in his form of government, to cast a more indulgent
eye on the common people, who had behaved themselves exceeding gallantly in the
dreadful war against the Persians: and to cause a law to be enacted that all
authority and power of government should be communicated equally to all the
Citizens, Id. in Aristide.
(...), and that they should be capable of all the Offices and honors in the
Commonwealth. Which as it added much to the authority of the common people, so
that authority was increased much more by the Arts of Pericles; who bearing a
grudge unto the Court of the Areopagites, whereof he was never any Member, and
finding that the power thereof, and of the Senate of five hundred, did derogate
exceeding much from the power of the people, to whose faction he was wholly
wedded: by the help and setting on of Ephialtes (a busy and popular man) took
from them the hearing and determining of the weightiest causes Id. in Pericle
and ^imone.
, and put them over to the judgment and decision of the common people, who had
no more before but the last appeal: and thereby perfected and produced that
pure Democratie, which had so often been desired, but in vain attempted.

popular Officers as Calvin speaks of, ordained of purpose (as he thinks) to
oppose the Senate, and counter-ballance their authority. Nor were those Courts
at any time so inclined to tyranny, or likely in their constitution to oppress
the people, when their authority was greatest, and their power most eminent, as
that the people needed any special Officers to restrain their insolences, or
to confine them to the limits of their Jurisdiction. Now for the Senate, it
consisted at the first of 400 persons, an hundred out of every Tribe; and to
that number was restrained by Solon, whose device it was Id. in Solone.
: but Clisthenes, having increased the number of the Tribes to ten, added one
hundred more, which made five in all, (for each tribe fifty) and so continued
till the expiration of that Commonwealth. A chief part of their business was,
(...), etc. to deliberate and debate of all such matters as were to be
commended to the care of the common people, that when the whole body of the
people was assembled together, no point should be propounded to them but what
the Council of five hundred had fitted and prepared for their resolution Id.
ibid.
. It also appertained to them (...), etc. to consult about denouncing war and
raising moneys, to advise upon the making of new Laws, to judge of any
accident which at any time happened in the City, and of such matters which
concerned their Allies and neighbors; to impose tribute on the Subject, and to
take care both of the Navy and the Temples; and furthermore to inqure into the
carriage of the City Magistrates, to appoint keepers unto Prisoners taken in
the wars, to judge of suits concerning Orphans, and sometimes in such cases as
belonged more properly to a Court of war Xenophon de Repub. Athen.
. Other particulars there are which they were to deal in, but these the
principal: and these though points of great concernment, and arguments of the
power and trust committed to them, were little like to tempt them to abuse
their power in the oppressing of the people. For besides that they were chosen
but for one year only Xen^phon de Repub. Athen.
, and that too not without a previous inquisition into their former life and
conversation; which were sufficient to induce them to hold fair quarter with
the people by all means imaginable: they were bound by oath at their admission
to that honor, to consult the peoples good and benefit in most special manner,
and not to imprison any of them, how mean soever, unless he were found guilty
of some practice to betray the City, and diminish the authority and power of
the people; or that being one of the Farmers of the Tolls and Taxes, or a
Collector of the Tributes, he became non-solvent, and had not cleared his
account with the Commonwealth D^mosthen. in oratione com. N^ce^am.
. As for the Court or Council of the Areopagites, it consisted from the first
beginning, (...), of such and such alone who had formerly been of the number of
the nine chief Magistrates Plutarch in Solone, and Pericle.
; and they being once admitted held for term of life: which made them, being
men of eminence and reputation, to be more able to annoy the people, and to
int^ench upon them in their rights and liberties, had their mind been
answerable. For unto them belonged the general superintendency of all things in
the Commonwealth, and them did Solon trust with this special power, that they
should be (...) Id. in. Solen.
, and see the Laws to be maintained and to have their course: and in
particular to judge in the case of murder, and manslaughter, and briefly in
all Capital causes. And with these Courts or Counsels, call them which you
will, the prudent Legislator thought that he had settled and confirmed the
Commonwealth, (...), as with two strong Anchors, in such a firm and constant
manner, that neither the fabric of the State should be easily shaken, nor the
people apt to take offense, or run themselves upon unpeaceable and seditious
courses.

Demarchi take the peoples part, and save them from the wrongs and injuries
intended toward them? Calvin so intimates indeed, but he speaks without book,
being more guided to that error by the sound and etymology of the word, then
by the nature of the office. The best Greek Authors who have written the
affairs of Rome, do call the Tribunes of the people by this name Demarchi, and
their authority or Office by the name of (...) also. Nothing more common in
Polybius, Halicarnensis, Plutarch, and whosoever else have left us any thing of
the Roman stories in that language. But the Demarchi of Athens were of no such
power, and had but small authority (God wot) in affairs of State. Measure them
by the definition which is given by Suidas, and he will tell you that they were
certain Officers appointed in the Buroughs and free Towns of Attica, (being
twelve in number) Suidas in Lex.
(...). And for his power, he tells us that it did especially consist in making
a Terrier of the lands of every Township, and keeping of the public Registers
which concerned the Borough, in calling the people of the Town together when
their occasions did require it, and calculating of their voices by the poll, or
scrutinie, and sometimes in distraining on their goods and chattels, if any of
them were indebted to the State either in amerciaments or contributions. But
take his own words with you for the more assurance. (...) (says he) (...) Id.
ibid.
. The Author of the Etymologicon magnum says the same with Suidas, but in
sewer words; and he describes this mighty man of whom Calvin dreams, to be no
other then the Bailiff of some ancient Borough is with us in England, his
power being limited and confined within the perambulation of his own Parish, in
which he could do little more then take the valuation of his neighbors estate,
and tell how much he was to be assessed at in the Subsidy Book Etymologicon
Magnum in De^archo.
, (...). So he, which is in sum what we had before. It Is true, there was
another Officer of the same name in the City also, and for each tribe one; the
Alderman of the Ward we may fitliest call him; but not of much more power and
reputation then the Countrey-Bailiff. Of these says Harpocration an old
Grammarian, that they were called Naucrari at the first, and had authority to
arrest or destrain such persons as stood indebted to the Exchequer or the
Commonwealth. Harpocrat. in Demarcho.
(...), so Harpocration briefly in his wonted manner. But Julius Pollux in his
Onomasticon goes to work more plainly, and tells us of these Demarchi, that
they were (...) Jul. Pollux l. 8. c. 9. sect. 30.
, the governors or Aldermen of their several Wards, that formerly they were
called Naucrari; that anciently the twelfth part of a Tribe or Ward was called
Naucraria, and in the later times the whole Ward it self; that these Demarchi
had the ordering of the Taxes raised in every Ward, and looked unto the issuing
of them for the public use; and finally, that every Naucraria or Ward was to
find two horsemen and one ship for the service of the Commonwealth, (...),
from whence in probability they derived the word. Add unto this from Suidas, as
the close of all, (...) Suidas in Lex.
, that they had also the setting forth of the great festival called
Panathenaea; ordained by Theseus on the incorporating of all the people of
Attica into the City of Athens Plutarch in Theseo.
.

Demarchi (and more then this I cannot find which concerns that Office) and we
may easily perceive that they were men of no authority in affairs of State: so
far from being likely to protect the people from the power and pressures of the
Senate, that they were rather executioners, or Ministers of justice to afflict
the people when the occasions of the Senate did require it of them. That the
Demarchi were ordained to oppose the Senate, when it lay heavy on the necks of
the common people; or actually did make head against them in behalf of the
people if at any time they were oppressed and injured by it, cannot be found (I
dare with confidence affirm) in any Author of good credit, either Greek or
Latin. It Is true, there were some people-pleasers in the State of Athens, whom
they called (...), who by applying themselves to the peoples humor, and
seeming zealously affected to their power and profit, could lead them whither
they would, and to what they listed: and sometimes did oppose themselves for
the peoples sake, not only against the Senate, but all other Magistrates. Of
these it is that Aristotle does make frequent mention in his books of
Politics, and seems to prophecy, that if not looked into in time, (...)
Aristot. Politi c. l. 5 c 5.
, they would change the State into a Tyranny. But these were neither Officers
of State, nor justice, nor indeed any Officers at all, though many times they
did ill Offices to the Commonwealth, the better to advance the hopes of the
popular faction, and by it themselves. And it is true which Aristotle tells us
in another place, (...), that the people had not only power to elect their
Magistrates Id. ibid. l 2. c. 12.
, but to call them also to account, in case of mal-administration; and had
their proper Officers appointed to that end and purpose. But then it is true
withal, that amongst them we meet not these Demarchi of whom Calvin dreams; or
any others which stood up in behalf of the common people, but only in behalf of
the Commonwealth. Of this sort were the (...) superadded to the nine
Archontes, and of authority to call them to an after-reckoning, if they found
them guilty of extortion Jul. Pollux. l. 8. c. 9. Sect. 16.
: and of this sect were also those whom they called Logistae, some of the which
((...) Id. ibid. Sect. 13.
, says mine Author) were purposely appointed to observe and enquire into the
Acts of the Senate, and to proceed against them when their time was out,
according as they saw occasion: which kind of Overseers had an eye also on the
Areopagites. And this is that which is observed by Aeschines the famous Orator,
where speaking of the Fundamental constitutions of the Commonwealth, he tells
us, that it was ordained by the Legislators, (...) Aeschin. in Orat. contra
Dem^sto. and Ctesiphon.
, that even the Senate of five hundred should give up an account of their
ministration; and that the holy Council of the Areopagites should be obnoxious
to the censure of the Logistae, for by that very name he calls them. Of any
account they were to give to these Demarchi, or any thing they did de facto, or
might do de jure, with reference to the ease and benefit of the common people,
nothing but silence to be found in all Antiquity. And to say truth, it was not
necessary that any popular Magistrates should be made of purpose, to save the
people from the pride and tyranny of the higher Courts, which were accomptable
to the people upon all occasions, and were to be accomptable to them according
to the fundamental institution of the Commonwealth. The State of Athens being
one of the absolutest Democraties which was ever extant, and so accounted of by
all who write of Politics, had little need or use of such popular Magistrates
which Calvin fancieth in that place; which may be serviceable to the people in
an Aristocratie, but in a popular estate of no use at all. Which makes me
wonder by the way, why Plato should affirm against right and reason, that the
State of Athens in his time and the times before ((...)) was an Aristocratie
Plato in Meneximo.
: when by the current of all writers and the course of story, it app^ars most
evidently that it was not only a Democratie, but (...) Plutarch. in Cimone.
, the purest and most unmixt Democratie that was ever read of.

viz. that the Ephori, the Demarchi, and the Roman Tribunes were not ordained
at first for those ends and purposes which are supposed by the Author: but more
particularly, that neither the Ephori of Sparta were first instituted to oppose
the Kings, nor the Tribunes first ordained to oppose the Consuls, nor the
Demarchi of authority to oppose the Senate. And we have proved (which is
directly contrary unto Calvin's aim) that the Ephori were at first ordained to
ease the Kings, and to be aiding to them against the Senate, who began sensibly
to incroach on the Regal power: that the Tribunes were first instituted to no
other end but to preserve the people from unjust oppression, and that their
opposition to the Consuls was accounted always to be against the rules of
their institution, and a breach of Articles: And as for these Demarchi whom we
spoke of last, that neither by their institution nor by usurpation, they did
oppose against the Senate in behalf of the people, but executed their commands
upon the people, as their duty bound them. So that the great imagination which
the Author had of showing to the world a view of such popular Magistrates, as
might encourage men of place and eminence to think themselves ordained after
these examples to moderate their licentiousness of Kings and Princes; is fallen
directly to the ground without more ado, as being built upon a weak, nay a
false foundation, not able to support the building. And more then so, in case
the instances proposed had been rightly chosen, and that the Ephori in Sparta
had been first ordained to oppose the Kings, the Tribunes to oppose the
Consuls, and the Demarchi to keep under the Athenian Senate: yet these would
prove but sorry instances of such popular Officers as were ordained ad
moderandum Regum libidinem, to moderate the licentiousness of Kings and
sovereign Princes, for proof of which they were produced. The Ephori were not
instituted in the State of Sparta till the Kings were brought under the command
of the Senate, and the State become an Aristocratie, in which the Kings had
very little left them of the Royal dignity but the empty name, and were in
power no other then the Dukes of Venice; save that they were to have the
command of the Armies, which those Dukes have not. And for the Tribunes, it is
well known to every one who has perused the Roman story, that there were no
such creatures to be found in Rome, till the Romans had expu^sed their Kings,
and were under the command of Co^suls; the Monarchy being changed to an
Optimatie, and the people bound by solemn oaths never to admit of a King
amongst them. The like may be affirmed also of the Demarchi of Athens,
supposing that they were of as great authority, as either the Ephori or the
Tribunes; that they were instituted in a time when the affairs of State were
managed by nine Annual Magistrates, all of them chosen by the people and
accomptable to them. In all these cases, ^um non in regno populus esset sed in
liberate Livie his^. lib. 2.
, when the people had sued out their Wardship, and thought themselves to be at
liberty, freed from those bonds which nature and allegiance formerly had laid
upon them: they did no more then what a wise and understanding people had good
cause to do, in taking the best course they could for their future safety. And
in my mind the people pleaded most unanswerably in their own behalf, when they
alleged, se foris pro imperio and liberate dimicantes, domi a civibus captos
and oppressos Id. ibid.
, that fighting valiantly abroad both for their own liberty and their Countries
honor, against their Kings, they were oppressed and wronged at home by their
fellow Citizens; that their condition as things stood, was better in times of
war, then in times of peace; their liberty never more assured then when they
were amongst their Enemies: and therefore being no otherwise bound to submit
themselves to that change of Government, then as it had been introduced by
their own consent, they had all the reason in the world to get as good terms as
they could, and be no losers by the bargain. Which though it were the case and
plea particularly of the people of Rome, might be used also very fitly by the
Spartans and Athenians on the self same reasons. But this can no way be
pretended or alleged by those, who live in an established and successional
Monarchy, where there is one only to command in chief, and nothing left to the
Subject Tacit. Annal.
praeter obsequii gloriam, but the glory of obedience only, and the necessity
of submitting with a loyal heart to those commands and impositions which may be
said upon them with an unjust hand. So that admitting it for true (as indeed it
is not) that the Ephori, the Demarchi, and the Tribunes were ordained for the
ends supposed; yet it can follow by no rules of law or logic, that because
such popular Officers have been sometimes instituted to keep the scale upright
and the balance even, betwixt the Nobles and the People in an Aristocratie,
therefore the like are to be fancied in a settled Monarchy, for moderating the
licentiousness, that is to say, (for that no doubt must be his meaning) for
regulating the authority of the Sovereign Prince.

Calvin's purpose for setting up some popular Officers in every Kingdom to
regulate the authority and restrain the power of Sovereign Princes; and we may
see a secret and more subtle danger included in that short Parenthesis, then
what is obvious at first sight to the unwary Reader. For by the instances
proposed and presented to us, it seems to be his meaning, that these popular
Officers should not h^ve power only to restrain their Kings when they
transgress the bounds of law or equity, and either tyrannically oppress the
Subject, or wilfully dilapidate the patrimony of the Commonwealth: but that
they should set themselves against them and control their doings, in the same
way and after the same manner, as the Ephori did the Kings of Sparta, or the
Tribunes did the Roman Consuls. Now we have shown before out of several Authors
Vide chap. 2.
, that the Ephori did not only take upon them to appoint such Privy
Counselors about their Kings as to them seemed best, to limit and prescribe
them in the choice of their wives; to send them out unto the wars and recall
them home, as if they had been hirelings only and of no more reckoning; to put
them upon fine and ransom, if they did any thing which was not pleasing to
these humorous Gentlemen; to have them at command both to come and go as often
as they whistled for them, or held up a finger, and finally to look for lowly
reverence from them, whenever they vouchsafed to summon them to attend their
pleasures: but also to imprison; next to banish, and in fine to murder them.
And we have showed you of the Tribunes Vide chap. 3^
, that after they had fortified themselves with large privileges, and grew
predominant in the affections of the common people; they did not only quarrel
and oppose the Consuls under pretense of setting forth new laws for the peoples
benefit, nor were content to put the people into the possession of all the
offices and honors of the Commonwealth (which formerly belonged to the Nobles
only) whether the Consuls would or not: but sometimes clapped them up in prison,
and sometimes forced them to fly the Senate House for their lives and safety,
and sometimes threw them down headlong out of their Chairs of State, to the
great danger of their lives, and disgrace of their persons. Princes should be
in worse condition then their meanest subjects, if they were under the command
of such powerful masters, who being exalted from mean fortunes and ignoble
families, little acquainted with good manners, and less with any thing which is
brave and royal, would think themselves unworthy of so great an Office, should
they not Lord it to the purpose, and exercise all kind of tyranny on their
captived Kings, which insolence and malice could suggest unto them. If Jack be
once in office he must be a Gentleman; and gallop to the Devil if he get on
Horseback. Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum, as the Poet has it
Juvenal. S^i.
. If once the bramble come to have Dominion over the trees of the Forest, he
will not only rob the Olive of his fatness, the Vine of his rich Wines, and the
Fig Tree of his sweetness, but also will devour the Cedars Judge. c. 9.
, even the Cedars of Lebanon. No King or other Supreme Magistrate shall dare to
stand before them; or if he do, a fire shall come out of the Bramble, and
consume him utterly. Such popular Officers as those of whom Calvin speaks, are
of such credit and authority with the common people (whose Officers they are in
name, but in fact their masters) that if they do but blow the Trumpet, and say,
We have no part in David, nor no inheritance at all in the son of Jesse; 2 Samuel
^0.
every man will unto his tents, and forsake the King or Supreme Magistrate to
follow after them though men of Belial. And this I do believe the rather to be
Calvin's meaning, because G. Buchannan who built on his foundation, and pursued
^is Principles, does not only exceedingly commend the act of Theopompus, in
setting up the Ephori in the State of Sparta, and the Answer which he made his
wife when she murmured at it: but thinks it very meet and reasonable that a
free people (as all Subjects are in his opinion) should be armed with the like
authority in reprimenda tyrannidis acerbitate De jure regn^ apud Scotos.
, for the suppressing of tyrannical Government (in which themselves must be
Judges) which the Ephori enjoyed at Sparta, and the Tribunes in the City of
Rome. For though he durst not go so far in terminis, as to advise the
instituting of such popular Magistrates as Calvin speaks of in this place; yet
he comes very near it, to a tantamont. For that which Calvin does ascribe to
his popular Magistrates, Buchannan gives to the whole body of the people
generally, to whom he does allow as much authority over the persons of their
Kings, Quod illi in singulos e multitndine habent Id. ibid.
, as they have over any one of the common people: and thinks it both
unreasonable and absurd that they should not be called to account before the
ordinary Judges of their several Kingdoms (which must supply the place of
these popular Magistrates) as often as any of their subjects shall accuse them,
of murder, or adultery, or neglects in government, or whatsoever else they
shall charge them with; instancing in no fewer then twelve Kings of Scotland,
who either were condemned to perpetual prison, or else by voluntary death or
exile, Justas scelerum poenas ^ugerunt, escaped the punishment which was most
justly due unto them (as he most impudently says) for their wicked lives.

superstructure, as absolutely pulls up his own foundation: the answer is, that
the man was very much distracted between his reason and his passion, his
conscience and his private interess. Aliudque cupido, men's aliud suadet. His
reason and his conscience told him, that every subject was to yield obedience
to the authority and commands of the Sovereign Prince; and that if any other
doctrine should be plainly preached, it would conduce both to the scandal and
the hinderance of the Reformation. And his experience in the world could not
choose but tell him, that many of the chief Reformers by their heat and
violence had given too great advantage to the public Enemy; and made the
Protestant Religion to be much suspected, Nil aliud quaerere and captare quam
Seditionum opportunitatem Calvin in Epistola Dedic. ad Franciscum. l. 1536.
, for giving too much ground to seditious courses, and publishing some
doctrines which were inconsistent with the rules of Government. This made him
write so soundly of the Subjects duty even to wicked Princes, and the
unlawfulness of resisting in the way of Arms, though open force and violence
were offered to them by ungodly Tyrants: and this he does so well, that few do
it better. Utinam sic semper errasset CALVINUS, as once the learned Cardinal
said of him in another case. But then his interess in the cause and quarrel of
Geneva, who by the help of some such popular Officers as he speaks of here, had
not long before expelled their Bishop, who had also all the jurisdiction of a
temporal Prince within the City and the territory which belonged unto it,
inclined him to say somewhat which might serve to defend that action, and give
the like advantage unto other Cities to follow the example which was laid
before them. The case is briefly touched by Thuanus thus; Thuan. Hist. sui
temp. l.
Jus Supremi Dominii in Civitatem Genevae Episcopos semper penes se retinuisse,
donec mutata religione, Syndici qui sub Episcopali autoritate libertatem antea
tuebantur, illud proprium sibi fecere, and ejectis Episcopis sub imperii
patrocinio Rempub. administrabant. The Soveraigntie (says he) or Supreme
Dominion over the City of Geneva the Bishops still kept unto themselves, till
in the alteration of Religion the Syndi^ks, who before preserved the liberty
of the people under the government of the Bishops, assumed the same unto
themselves, and absolutely casting out the Bishops governed it like a
Common^wealth under the patronage or protection of the German Emperors. In
which it is first clear on the Bishops side, that they had jus Supremi Dominii,
the Soveraigntie or Supreme Dominion of the City. And so much is affirmed by
Calvin, in another place, Habebat jus gladii and alias civilis juridictionis
Calvin in Epistola ad Sadoletum.
parts He had, says he, the power of the Sword, and other parts of temporal
jurisdiction; but as he thinks (but foolishly and against all records)
Magistrat^i er^ptas, either by fraud or force extorted from the Civil
Magistrate. Next it is clear, that the Bishops did continue the possession of
this Supreme Power, till Viret and Farellus, two zealous Gospellers, came to
live amongst them; who finding that those of Berne in the year 1528. had made
an al^eration of Religion, practiced the like upon the City of Geneva. Which
not being likely to effect with the Bishops leave, and as little able to effect
against his liking, considering the great power and sway, which legally and
properly was inherent in him: they set the Syndicks (whom they had wrought upon
before) to make head against him; who by a popular tumult made him fl^e the
City, which presently they changed to a Commonwealth, after the manner of the
Free or Imperial Cities. In which respect Calvin bestows upon Farellus the
title of libertatis Patrem In Epistola ad Minist. Tigurin. 1553.
, the Father of that common liberty, which by his means the people of Geneva
at that time enjoyed. As for the Syndicks by whose power and countenance they
advanced the business, they were a kind of popular Officer, who had the care
of looking to the conservation of the peoples liberties, as Thuanus intimates;
and were much used in many parts of France and Italy, as Bodinus tells us Bodin
de Repub. lib. ^. c. ^.
. Their Office did consist of two special points: the one a Magistratibus
rationem reposcere, to call the ordinary Magistrates to an after reckoning, Id.
ibid.
if they did any thing unworthy of their place and dignity, or to the
hinderance and disservice of the Commonwealth; which had somewhat in it of the
Ephori in the State of Sparta: the other was, prospicere ne tenuiores and
infimae sortis homines a nobilibus, uti fit, ^premerentur, to have a care that
the poor people be not wronged or injured (as many times it happens) by the
power of the Nobles; which was the main reason for the institution of the Roman
Tribunes. In this regard the Civil laws interpret Syndicu^ to be the same with
defensor Civitatis Calvin in Le^ico Jurid. verbo Syndicus.
, the Conservator of the liberties of a Town or City, as full well they might:
the Office being made up (as it seems it was) of that of the Ephori and the
Tribunes mixed together. Now though this change was made before Calvin's coming
to Geneva, which was not till the year 1535, yet he affirms it of himself that
whatsoever had been done in the alteration, suffragio meo comprobavi Calvin in
Epistola ad Cardinal. Sadolet.
, he had confirmed and approved as a thing well done: and therefore thought
himself to be no less obliged to defend the action, then if it had been done at
first by his own command. For doubtless that of Tully is exceeding true, Nil
refert utrum voluerim fieri vel gaudeam factum Cicero in Philip. 2.
: between the doing of a foul and d^sloyal act, and the approbation of it when
it is done, is but little difference.

Geneva, thought himself bound not only to justify unto others what himself
approved; but also to lay down such grounds whereby the example might be
followed, and their dislo^altie and rebellion the less observed, because they
did not go alone without company. In which respect (and it is a thing to be
observed) although that Book of Institutions has been often printed, and
received many alterations and additions (as before was noted) yet this
particular passage still remains unal^ered, and has continued as it is from
the first Edition, which was in the year 1536. when the rebellion of Geneva was
yet fresh and talked of as an ill example. Nor was the man deceived in his
expectation; For as he grew into esteem and reputation in the world abroad, so
he attained at last to that power and empire over the souls and consciences of
his followers, that his errors were accounted Orthodox, his defects
perfections, and the revolt of the Genevians from rheir natural Prince must by
no means be called Rebellion, because projected and pursued by such popular
Officers, to whom it appertained of common course to regulate the authority of
Kings and Princes. And though he does not say expressly that there either are
or ought to be such popular Officers in every Realm or Commonwealth, but
brings it in upon the by with his ifs and ands: yet ifs and ands are not
allowed of in the laws to excuse rebellions Bacons history of King Henry the
seventh.
, and by the setting up of that dangerous Si quis ( si qui sint populares
Magistratus, as his words there are) he seems to make a Proclamation that where
there were such popular Officers, it was their bounden duty to correct their
Princes after the manner of Geneva; where there were none, the people were (God
help them) in an ill condition, unless some other means were thought of, for
their ease and remedy. Upon which Principles of his, his followers raised such
Positions, and pursued such practices as have distracted and embroyled the most
parts of Europe, and made it of a Garden to become a Wilderness. For finding
that they could not easily create such Popular Magistrates to lord it over
Kings and Princes who had not been accustomed to the like controlments; they
put that power of regulating the Supreme Authority either upon the body of the
people generally, whereof you were told before from Buchannan, or upon such to
whom they should communicate or transfer their power, as occasion served,
whereof you may hear further in that which follows. And that not only in the
case of civil liberty, for which the examples of the Ephori and the Roman
Tribunes were at first found out, and that of the Demarchi thrust upon the
Readers for the like foul end; but specially in such matters which concerned
Religion, wherein the extraordinary calling of some men in the holy Scriptures
must serve for Precedents and examples to confirm their practices. From hence
it was that Buchannan does not only subject his King unto the Ordinary Judges
and Courts of Justice as before was noted: but fearing that Kings would be too
potent to be so kept under, advises this, Eorum interfectoribus praemia
decerni Buchann. de jure Regni.
, that rewards should publicly be decreed for those who kill a Tyrant (and
Kings and Tyrants are the same as heretofore in the word and notion, so now in
the opinion of the Presbyterian or Calvinian faction) as usually are proposed
to those who kill Wolves, or Bears. From hence it was that the inferior or
Subordinate Magistrate is advanced so high, as to be entitled to a power,
adversus Superiorem Magistratum se, Rempub. and Ecclesiam etiam armis defendere
Paraeus in Epistola ad Romans cap. 13.
, of taking Arms against the King or superior Magistrate, in defense of
himself, his Country and true Religion: which though they are the words of
Paraeus only, yet they contain the mind and meaning of all the rest of that
faction, as his son Philip does demonstrate In Append. ad Cap. 13. Epist. ad
Romans
. Hence was it that John Knox, delivered for sound Orthodox doctrine, Procerum
esse propria autorit^te Idololatrian tollere, and Principes intra legum
rescripta per vim reducere Camden. Annal. Eliz. An. 1559.
, that it belonged unto the Peers of each several Kingdom to reform matters of
the Church by their own authority, and to confine their Kings and Princes
within the bounds prescribed by law, even by force of Arms. Hence that Geselius
one of the Lecturers of Roterdam preached unto his people, that if the
Magistrates and Clergy did neglect their duty in the reformation of Religion,
necesse est id facere pl^beios, that then it did belong to the Common people
Necessaria Respons.
, who were bound to have a care thereof and proceed accordingly. And as for
points of practice, should we look that way, what a confusion should we find
in most parts of Europe, occasioned by no other ground then the entertainment
of these principles and the scattering of these positions amongst the people?
Witness the Civil wars of France Jean de Serres inventaire de Fr.
, the revolt of Holland History of the Netherlands.
, the expulsion of the Earl of East-Friezland out the City of Embden Thuan
h^st. l. 114.
, the insurrections of the Scots Camden. Annal. An. 1559.
, the tumults of Bohemia Laurca Austriaca.
, the commotions of Brandenbourg Continuati. Thuan. hist l. 8.
, the translation of the Crown of Sweden from the King of Pole to Charles Duke
of Finland Thuan. hist. l. 8.
the change of Government in England: all acted by the Presbyterian or
Calvinian party in those several States, under pretense of Reformation and
redress of grievances.

Genius of the sect, that though they may admit an equal (as paritie is the
thing most aimed at by them both in Church and State) yet they will hardly be
persuaded to submit themselves to a Superior; to no Superiors more
unwillingly then to Kings and Princes: whose persons they disgrace, whose power
they ruinate, whose calling they endeavor to decry and blemish by all means
imaginable. First for their calling, they say it is no other then an humane
Ordinance, and that the King is but a creature of the peoples making; whom
having made, they may as easily destroy and unmake make again. Which as it is
the darling doctrine of this present time, so is it very eagerly pursued by
Buchannan, who affirms expressly, Quicquid juris populus alicui dederit, idem
justis de causis posse reposcere Buchann. de ^ure Regni.
, that whatsoever power the people give unto their King or Supreme Magistrate,
they may resume again upon just occasions. Their power they make so small and
inconsiderable, that they afford them very little even in matters temporal, and
no authority at all in things spiritual. CALVIN professes for himself, that
he was very much agrieved to hear that King Henry the eight, had took unto
himself the title of Supreme Head of the Church of England, accuses them of
inconsiderate zeal, nay blasphemy, who conferred it on him; and though he be
content at last to allow Kings a Ministerial power in matters which concern the
Reformation of Gods Public Worship, yet he condemns them as before of great
inconsiderateness, Qui facerent eos nimis spirituales Calvin in Amos cap. 7.
, who did ascribe unto them any great authority in spiritual matters. The
designation of all those who bear public office in the Church, the calling of
Councels or Assemblies, the Presidencie in those Councels, ordaining public
Fasts, and appointing Festivals, which anciently belonged unto Christian
Princes as the chief branches of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which is
vested in them; are utterly denied to Kings and Princes in their Books of
Discipline. In so much that when the Citizens of Embden did expel their Earl,
they did it chiefly for this reason, Quod se negotiis Ecclesiasticis and
Consistorialibus praeter jus and aequitatem immisceret Thuan. hist. l. 114.
, that he had intermedled more then they thought fit in Ecclesiastical causes,
and entrenched too much upon their Consistory. As for their power in temporal
or civil causes, by that time Knoxes Peers and Buchannans Judges, Paraeus his
inferior Magistrates, and CALVIN'S popular Officers have performed their parts,
in keeping them within the compass of the laws; arraigning them for their
offenses, if they should transgress; opposing them by force of arms, if any
thing be done unto the prejudice of the Church or State; and finally in
regulating their authority, after the manner of the Spartan Ephori, and the
Roman Tribunes: all that is left will be by much too little for a Roy d'
Ivitot, or for a King of Clouts, as we English phrase it. Last of all, for
their persons which God held so sacred, that he gave it for a law to his people
Israel, not to speak evil of their Princes, saying, Thou shall not speak evil
of the Ruler of thy people; Let us but look upon these men, and we shall find
the basest attributes too, good for the greatest Kings. Calvin calls Mary Queen
of England by the name of Proserpine Calvin in Amos cap. 7.
, and says that she did superare omnes Diabolos, that all the Devils of hell
were not half so mischeivous. Beza affords Queen Mary of Scotland no better
titles then those of Medea and Athaliah Beza in Epist. ad Jo.
; of which the last was most infamous in divine; the other no less scandalous
in humane stories; the one a Sorceress and a Witch, the other a Tyrant and
usurper. The Author of the Altar Damascenum, whosoever he was, can fin^e no
better a tribute for King James of most blessed memory, then infensissimus
Evangelii hostis Didoclavius in Epistola ad L^ctor.
, the greatest and deadly enemy of the Gospel of Christ. And Queen Elizabeth
her self did not escape so clear, but that the zealous Brethren were too bold
sometimes with her name and honor, though some of them paid dearly for it, and
were hanged for their labor. How that seditious Hugonot, the Author of the
lewd and unworthy Dialogue, entitled Eusebius Philadelphus, has dealt with
three great Princes of the House of France, and what reproachful names he gives
them, I had rather you should look for in the Author then expect from me; being
loath to wade too far in these dirtie pudoles; save that I shall be bold to
add this general Character which Didoclavius gives to all Kings in general;
viz. Natura insitum est in ^mnibus Regibus Christi odium, that all Kings
naturally hate Christ; which may serve for all. This is enough to let us see,
how irreconcilable an hatred* these of the Calvinian faction bear against
Kings and Princes; how well they play the part of the very Antichrist in
exalting themselves against whatsoever is called God; and that the special
reason why they affect so much to be called the Saints, is out of a strong
probable hope to see the day in which they shall bind Kings in chains, and all
the Princes of the earth in fetters of iron. Finally such is their disaffection
unto sacred Monarchy, which they have sucked out of the grounds and principles
here laid down by Calvin, that we may justly say of them what was most truly
said of the ancient Romans, quasi nefas esset Regem aliquem prope eorum
terminos esse Justin. hist. l. 29.
, they have bestirred themselves so bravely in defiance of the Regal
Government, as if they did account it an unpardonable sin to suffer any King,
though most good and gracious, to border near them. Which lest they should not
be of power to compass by their popular Magistrates, or by the Judges, or the
Peers, or the People severally; which make the main Battle for this combat: let
us next look on the Reserve, and see what hopes they have to effect the
business by the three Estates conjoined in Parliament, (or by what other name
soever we shall call their meeting) which CALVIN in the last place does reflect
upon, but cautiously with a qua forte, or a peradventure, as in that before.

CHAP. V. What are the three Estates in each several Kingdom, of which CALVIN
speaks, and what particularly in the Realm of ENGLAND.
(I) Of the division of a People into three Estates; and that the Priests or
Clergy have been always one. (II) The Priests employed in Civil matters and
affairs of State, by the Egyptians and the Persians, the Greeks, Gauls, and
Romans. (III) The Priests and Levites exercised in afaffairs of Civil
Government by Gods own appointment. (IV) The Prelates versed in Civil matters
and fairs of State, in the best and happiest times of Christianity. (V) The
Clergy make the third Estate in Germany, France, Spain, and the Northern
Kingdoms. (VI) That anciently in the Saxon times the Ecclesiastics of this
Realm were called to all public Councels. (VII) The Prelates an essential
fundamental part of the English Parliament. (VIII) Objections answered, and
that the word Clerus in the Legal notion, does not extend unto the Prelates.
(IX) That the inferior Clergy of the Realm of England had anciently their
votes in Parliament, to all intents and purposes as the Commons had. (X)
Objections answered; and that the calling of the Clergy to Parliaments and
Convocations, were after different manners, and by several writs. (XI) The
great disfranchisement and slavery obtruded on the English Clergy, by the
Idepriving of the Bishops of their Votes in Parliament. (XII) A brief
discussion of the question, whether any two of the three Estates conspiring or
agreeing together, can conclude any thing unto the prejudice of the third.
Calvin to the three Estates of every Kingdom, we must first see what kind of
men they are, and of what condition, who constitute the said Estates: which
being first settled and determined, we shall the better be enabled to proceed
accordingly in the inquiry after that authority which our Author gives them of
regulating the proceedings of the sovereign Prince, and putting a restraint on
the exorbitant power of Kings. In which we shall presume for granted what our
Author gives us, viz. tres Ordines in singulis Regnis, that in each several
Kingdom there are three Estates; and those three we shall prove to be (though
our Author is no otherwise to be understood) the Clergy, the Nobility, and the
Common people: which distribution of the Subject into three Estates as it is
very ancient, so was the distribution of them into three, neither more nor
less, founded on good prudential motives and grounds of Polity. For as
judicious Bodin very well observes, should there be only two Estates, and no
more then so, either upon such differences as might rise between them the one
side would be apt to compel the other by force of violence; or else, aequatis
Ordinum suffragiis Bodin de Repub. l. 3. cap. u^t.
, the balance being even between them, their meetings would be many times
dissolved without producing any notable effect to the benefit of the
Commonwealth. In which respect the counterpoise or addition of a third Esta^e
was exceeding necessary, ut alterutri sese adjungens utrumque conciliet, that
joining unto either of the other two, it might unite them both into one
opinion, and advance the service of the public. And on the other side were
there more then three, opinionum multitudo, the difference of opinions, and
pretense of interesses, would keep them at perpetual distance, and hinder them
from pitching upon any point, in which all their purposes and aims were to be
concentred. So that the casting of the body of a people into three Estates,
seems most convenient for the furtherance of the public service: and of those
three three Estates the Priests (or Clergy, as we call them since the times of
CHRIST) have generally been accounted one. For though Hippodamus (whom
Aristotle justly taxes for defects Aristot. Politic. l.
in Politic) ordained his three Estates to be the Soldiery, the
Handicraftsman, and the Husbandman: yet wiser Statists saw no reason that the
two last should pass for several estates or ranks of men, being that both
might be more fitly comprehended under the name and rank of the common people.
And therefore the Egyptians did divide the people into these three ranks, the
Priest, which is respondent to the Christian Clergy; the Soldier, who carries
most resemblance to the State of Nebles; and those which lived by trades and
labors, whom by one general name they called Operarii Diodor. Siculus.
, as we now the Commons: which cours^ we find to be observed also by the
ancient Gauls dividing their whole body into these three orders, Caesar. de
Bell ^o Gallico. l. 6.
the Druides, who had the charge of matters which concerned Religion; the
Equites who managed the affairs of war; and then the Plebs, or common people,
who were subordinate to the other two, and directed by them. How this division
has succeeded in the States of Christendom we shall see hereafter.

Priests of Egypt, the Druides of Gaul, and those who had the ordering of those
services which concerned the gods, by whatsoever name or title they were known
and called in other Countries, were not so tied unto the Altars, and other
ministerial Offices which concerned the gods, as not to have some special
influence in ordering the affairs of the Commonwealth. The Priests of Egypt,
as we read in Aelian (an Author of unquestioned credit) possessed the highest
seats of judicature, and were the only Judges which that people had: Judices
apud Egyptios iidem qu^ndam fuerunt qui and sacerdotes, Aelian in Varia histor.
l. 14. c. 34.
as that Author has it. And so much is assured us by Synesius also a Christian
Bishop of the East Syn^sius Ep. 57.
, where he resembles them in this particular to the Priests of Judah. The like
we find in Agathias of the Priests of Persia, men better known in ancient
Writers by the name of Magi: of whom he tells us, eorum consilio publica
omnia administrari, etc. Agathias in hist. Perfic. l. 2.
that by their counsel and advice the principal affairs of the State were
ordered, rewards proportioned and conferred upon well-deservers, and several
punishments inflicted on the Malefactors, according to the quality of the
misdemeanor; and finally that nothing was conceived to be rightly done, quod
Magorum sententia non sit confirmatum, which had not passed the approbation of
these Priests or Magi. If we draw nearer toward the West, and look into the
Government of the State of Athens, we shall find the chief authority thereof
to consist in the Senate of 500, and in the famous Court of the Areopagites, as
was no^ed in the ^ormer Chapter: in which the Priests, or at the least the
pri^cipal of that rank or order had both place and suffrage. For in that
honour^ry Edict which they made in favor of Hyrcanus, we may clearly see that
Dionysius the son of Asclepiades was one of the Priests, and also one of the
Prytanaei Joseph. Judaic. Antiqu. l. 14. c. 16.
, or Presidents of the Council, as we call them now; and that in calculating
of the voices, (...), Dorotheus the chief Priest had the greatest stroke, and
pronounced the Edict to be passed. And for the Court of Areopagites, it
consisted as before we told you of such and such alone as formerly had bore the
Office of the nine Annual Magistrates, whereof the (...), or Rex Sacrorum,
(whom we may English the chief Bishop) had the second place Suidas in verbo
(...).
. And this appears yet further by a passage in the life of Pericles, where we
are told of his design for the abasing of the power of the Areopagites, (...)
Plutarch in Pericle.
, of which Court he was not any Member, as the Author tells us, in that he had
never borne the Office either of the Provost, or the King, or the Polemarchus,
or any of the six chief Justices. So that the (...), the Rex Sacrorum, or chief
Bishop being of course to be admitted into the Court or Council of the
Areopagites when his year was ended, it cannot be, but that there must be many
of them in that famous Session; an equal number at the least, with those who
had been Polemarchi, or the yearly (...). Add here, that we are told by Julius
Pollux in his Onomasticon Lib 8. cap. 8. sect. 3.
, that it pertained to this (...), or Rex Sacrorum, besides the service of the
Gods, (...), to endite those before the Court who were guilty of murder; but
then withal, that having put in the enditement, and laid by his Crown, (...),
he sat upon the Bench with the other Judges and passed sentence on them. Thus
was it with the Druides or the Priests of Gallia, who did not only take the
charge of all sacred matters which did relate unto the service of the gods, but
de omnibus fere controversiis publicis privatisque Caesar de Bello Gallico l. 6.
, they did determine in almost all suits and controversies, as well public as
private; particularly in matters of inheritance, real actions, capital
crimes, as murder and the like offenses; and also had a power to decree both
rewards and punishments as they saw occasion. And for the better dispatch of
business both for their own ease and the peoples too, they chose some certain
times or Terms in which they met together not far from Chartres (being in the
middle of the Country) whither all sorts of people who had suits and
differences did repair unto them, eorumque judiciis and decretis parebant, and
to their Judgments and Decrees did submit themselves. And thus it also was
with the P^tifices or Priests of Rome who had not only a chief place in the
holy Mysteries, such as concerned the public worship of their gods; but also a
great power and sway, in the greatest and most important businesses which
concerned the State: which Tully makes one of those Constitutions or Arts of
Government, which seemed to have been devised by the gods themselves. Cicero in
Orat. pro Domo ^ua.
Cum multa divinitus a majoribus nostris inventa atque instituta sunt, tum
nihil praeclarius quam quod Pontifices cosdem and Religionibus Deorum
immortalium and summae reipub. prae^sse voluerunt. And as the principal Priests
in Athens had their place and Vote not only in the Court of Areopagites, but in
the Senate of five hundred as before was noted: so some of the more eminent
sort of Priests had the like pre-eminence, of sitting and voting in the Roman
Senate, which was as high an honor as that State could give them. For besides
that Rosinus has observed that some of the Pries^s were chosen out of the
number of the Senators Rosin. Antiqu. Romans
, who doubtless did not lose the right of suffrage which before they had; there
is a memorable case in Livie touching C. Flaccus: who was no sooner chosen the
Flamen Dialis, or P^iest of Jupiter, but pres^ntly he put in his title to a
place in Senate, which anciently belonged unto his predecessors in the right of
their Office, though of late years it seemed to have been for^eited by
discontinuance, The issue of which plea was this, that though Licinius the
Praetor did the best he could to cross the business, alleging, Non exoletis
vetustate Annalium exemplis stare jus Livie hist. Romans lib. 26.
, that they were not to be guided in the case by worm eaten Precedents, but by
the late practice of the Sta^e; yet it was otherwise determined by the Fathers
generally, and Flaccus settled in his place in the Roman* Senate, Magno assensu
Patrum Plebisque with the joint consent of all the people. But what need these
particulars have been brought to confirm this point, when as it affirmed in
generals by Synesius, a right godly Bishop of the Primitive times? (...) Synes.
Epist. 57.
, that in old times the same men were both Priests and Judges. Which said, he
instanceth in the particulars of the Jews and Egyptians who for long time
(...), had been chiefly governed by their Priests.

Priests in the land of Judah, who from the very first beginning of that State
and Nation to the final dissolution of it, were of great authority; not only
in composing of inferior dif^erences which casually did arise amongst the
people, but in the managerie of the chief affairs both of State and Government:
and that not gained by connivence of Princes, or by entrenching on the rights
of the secular powers, but by the institution and appointment of the Lord
himself. When Moses first complained that the sole Government of the people was
a burden too heavy for him to bear, it pleased God to appoint a standing
Consistory of Numb. 11. v. 16.
Seventie Elders, men of ability and wisdom, who were to have a share in the
public Government, and to decide amongst themselves such weighty businesses,
great matters Exodus 18. v. 22.
, as the Scripture calls them, which were reserved to Moses by a former
Ordinance. Of these, the Priests, as men who for the most part were at better
leisure then the rest to attend the service, and generally of more abilities to
go through with it, made always a considerable number, and many times the
major part. In which respect it was ordained by the Lord, when a matter did
arise to be scanned in judgment between blood and blood, between plea and
plea, and stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy within their gates,
the people should arise and go unto the place which the Lord should choose,
and come unto the Priests, the Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in
those days, and enquire and they shall show them the sentence of judgment
Deuteronomy. c. 17. v. 8, 9.
. The like is also ordered in the case of false wit^esses, where it is said,
that If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him that
which is wrong; then both the men between whom the controversy is shall stand
before the LORD, before the Priests and Judges which shall be in those days
Deuteronomy. 19. v. 17.
. Which passages are not understood of any particular Priests or Judges,
dispersed in their several dwellings up and down the Country; but of the
Priests and other Judges united and assembled in that famous Consistory of the
70 Elders, conveened together in that place which the Lord should choose;
called by the Jews the Sanhedrim, by the Greeks (...), and was the great
Council of estate for the Jewish Nation. To this Josephus does attest, where he
informs us (...) Joseph. adv. App^on. lib. 2.
, that the Priests of Jewrie had the cogn^zarce of all doubtful matters; more
plainly Philo, who knew well the customs of his native Country, where he
affirms expressly and in terminis; (...) Philo de vita Mesis.
, that the Priests had place and suffrage in this great (...), or Court of
Sanhedrim. And this is that which Casaubon does also tell us from the most
learned and expert of the Jewish Rabbis, Non nisi nobilissimos ^e
sacerdotibus, Levitis, caeteroque populo, and in lege peritissimos in Sanhedrim
eligi Casaub Exercit. in Baron. 1. Sect 3.
, that is to say, that none but the most eminent of the Priests, the Levites
and the rest of the people, and such as were most conversant in the Book of the
Law, were to be chosen into the Sanhedrim. But to return again to the Book of
God, the power and reputation of this Court and Consistory having been much
diminished in the times of the Kings of Judah, was again revived by Jehosophat.
Of whom we read, that he not only did appoint Judges in the la^d throughout all
the fenced Cities of IVDAH 2 Chronicles. 19. 5.
: but that he established at HIERVSALEM a standing Council, consisting of the
Levites and of the Priests, and of the chief of the Fathers of ISRAEL, for the
judgments of the Lord and for controversies Ibid. r. 8.
: according to the model formerly laid by God himself in the Book of
Deuteronomie. Which Court or Council thus revived continued in full force,
authority and power, during the time of the captivity of Babylon; as appears
plainly by that passage in the prophecy of Ezekiel, where it is said of the
Priests even by God himself, in controversy they shall stand in judgment
Ezeck* 44. v* ^24.
; compared with another place of the same Prophet, where he makes mention of
the Seventie, of the Ancients of the house of ISRAEL Id. c. 8. v. 11.
, and Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan standing in the midst, as Prince of the
Senate. And after their return from that house of bondage, they were confirmed
in this authority by the Edict and Decree of Artaxerxes, who gave Commission
unto EZRA to set Magistrates and Judges Ezra c. 7. ^. 25.
over the people; not after a new way of his own devising, but after the wisdom
of his God Ezra c. 7. ^. 25.
, declared in the foregoing Ages by his servant Moses. In which estate they
stood all the times succeeding, until the final dissolution of that State and
Nation: with this addition to the power of the holy Priesthood, that they had
not only all that while their place and suffrage in the Court of Sanhedrim, as
will appear to any one who has either read Josephus or the four Evangelists;
but for a great part of that time, till the reign of Herod, the Supreme
Government of the State was in the hands of the Priests. In which regard,
besides what was affirmed from Synesius formerly, it is said by Justin, Morem
esse apud Judaeos ut eosdem Reges and sacerdotes haberent, that it was the
custom of the Jews for the same men to be Kings and Priests Justin. hist. l. 36.
: and Tacitus gives this general note, Judaeis Sacerdotii honorem firmamentum
potentiae esse, that the honor given unto the Priesthood amongst the Jews, did
most especially conduce to the establishment of their power and Empire Tacit.
hist. l 3.
. And yet I cannot yield to Baronius neither, where he affirms (the better to
establish a Supremacy in the Popes of Rome) Summum Pont. arbitrio suo moderari
magnum illud Concili^m, etc. Baron. Annal. ^n. 57.
, that the high Priest was always President of the Council or Court of
Sanhedrim: it being generally declared in the Jewish Writers, that the High
Priest could challenge no place at all therein, in regard of his office and
descent, but merely in respect of such personal abilities as made himself to
undergo such a weighty burden; for which see Phagius in his notes on the 16.
of Deuteronomie.

Priests were formerly as well amongst the Jews as amongst the Gentiles; we
must next see whether they have not been employed in the like affairs, under
the Gospel of Christ, and that too in the best and happiest times of the
Christian Church. In search whereof it is not to be looked for by the ingenuous
Reader, that we should aim fo high as the first 300 years after Christ's
Nativitie. The Prelates of the Church were suspected then to have their
different aims and interesses, from those who had the government of the Civil
State, and therefore thought incapable of trust and employment in it. But after
that, according to that memorable maxim of Optatus, Ecclesia erat in Republica
Deschismat. Den^^^st. l 3.
, the Church became a part of the Common^wealth, and had their ends and aims
united; there followed these two things upon it: first that the Supreme
Government of the Church depended much upon the will and pleasure of the
Supreme Magistrate, insomuch as Socrates observes, (...) Socrat. Eccl. hist.
lib. 5. c. 1.
, that the greatest Councels have been called by their authority and
appointment; And 2ly, that the Governors and Rulers of the Church of God, came
to have place and power in disposing matters that appertained to the well
ordering of the Civil State. And this they did, not out of any busy or
pragmatical desire to draw the cognizance of secular causes into their own
hands, or to increase their power and reputation with the common people: but
merely for the ease and benefit of those who did repair unto them for their
help and counsel, and to comply with the command of the Apostle, who imposed it
on them. S. Austin tells us of S. Ambrose with how great difficulty he
obtained an opportunity of conversing with him privately, and at large, as his
case required: Secludentibus ^um ab ejus aure atque ore catervis negociosorum
hominum, the multitude of those who had business to him, August. Confess. l. 6.
c. 3.
and suits to be determined. by him, debarring him from all advantages of
access and conference. Which took up so much of his time, that he had little
leisure to refresh his body with necessary food, or his mind with the reading
of good Authors. And Posidonius tel^s us of S. Austin, causas audisse
diligenter and pie, that he diligently and religiously attended such businesses
as were brought before him, not only spending all the morning in that
troublesome exercise Posidon. in vita August. c. 19.
, but sometimes fasting all day long, the better to content the suitor, and
dispatch the business. The like S. Austin tells us of himself, and his fellow
Prelates, first that the Christians of those times pro secularibus causis suis
nos non raro quaererent August. in Psalm. 1: 8. sermon. 74 and Epist. 147.
, did ordinarily apply themselves unto them for the determing of secular
causes, and cheerfully submitted unto their decisions: next that the Prelates
did comply with their earnest solicitations and desires, therein Tu
multuosissimas causarum alienarum perplexitates patiendo Id. de ope^e Monach c.
29.
, by intermitting their own studies to engage themselves in the determining of
such secular causes as were brought before them, for the contentation of the
people, and the discharge of their own duty both to God and man. And this is
that which both S. Ambrose and S. Augustine tell us in their several writings,
viz. that they did undergo this trouble for no other reason then out of a
conformity and obedience to the words and intimation of S. Paul, 1 Cor. cap.
6. touching the ending of such suits and differences as did arise amongst the
Faithful: S. Austin saying, Constituisse Apostolum talibus causis
Ecclesiasticos cognitores Id. in Psalm. 118. sermon. 174.
, and iisdem molestiis eos affixisse Apostolos; Id. de opere Monach. 29.
S. Ambrose, that he had undertook the businesses which were brought before
him, Secundum sacrae formam praeceptionis qua eum Apostolus induebat Amb.
Epist. 24.
, which did impose such a necessity upon him, that he was not able to decline
it. Both of them do agree, in this, and Posidonius does agree with both in the
same particular Posidon. in vita August. c. 19.
, that they were not only warranted, but obliged by S. Paul's injunction, to
undertake the cognizance of such secular causes as were from time to time
committed to their care and trust; and that they had not done their duty, had
they made any scruple of the undertaking. But these being only private matters,
let us next see, whether their service was not used in affairs of State, and we
shall find that Constantine did always take some Bishops with him when he went
to war; not only for their ghostly counsel in spiritual matters, but for advise
in matters which concerned the occasion Eusebius. in vita Constant. l. 4. c. 54.
, the prosecution of the war which was then in hand: that Ambrose was twice
sent Ambassador from Valentinian the younger to the Tyrant Maximus, which he
performed to the great contentment of his Prince, and the preservation of the
Empire Amb. Epist. 27. lib. 5.
; whereof he gives us an account in an express unto the Emperor: that when
Firmus had rebelled in Africa, and saw himself too weak to resist the Forces
which were raised against him under Theodosius, Antistites ritus Christiani
pacem oraturos misit Ammian. Marcel. hist. l. 29.
, he sent the African Prelates his Ambassadors to treat of peace: that Marutha
Bishop of Mesopotamia was in like nature sent to the Court of Persia Socrat.
Eccles. hist. l. 7. c. 8.
, in the time of the Emperor Honorius. I. as after that Epiphanius Bishop of
Ticinum (which we now call Pavie) employed from the Ligurians to Athalaricus
King of the Goths in Italy, from him unto the Court of Burgundy, as
Cassiodorus and Ennodius do describe at large: that James the godly Bishop of
Nisibis, (a frontier Town against the Persians) was also (...), both Governor
of the place, and Captain of the Soldiers which were there in Garrison
Theodoret. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 30.
; and did most manfully defend it, against all the force and fury of the
Persian Armies, An. 338. or thereabouts: and finally (which was an argument of
great power and trust) that the Bishops in Justinians time were by him
appointed to oversee the Civil Magistrates, and to give notice to the Emperor
if they failed in any thing which did concern the Government o^ the Estate in
their several places; of which the very Edicts are still extant in the Book of
Novels Novel. 56. and in Append. ad Novel. 8.
.

Prelates being grown into this esteem for their integrity and wisdom, with
the Roman Emperors; it is no wonder if they were employed in the greatest
Offices of trust and counsel, after the Empire was dismembered and shared
betwixt such several Princes as grew up in the place of those mighty Monarchs:
And this they did on so good motives, and with such success, that in short time
the Prelates were not only used for advice and counsel, but the inferior
Clergy also were called unto employments of the highest nature, and in
conclusion with the Prelates made up the third Estate in most Christian
Kingdoms. For being that the study of Divinity is diffused and large, and
that the knowledge of Philosophy and the Arts and Histories, is but attendant
on the same and subservient to it; there was no question made at all in the
times we speak of, but that a Churchman so accomplished might be as useful in
the service of the Commonwealth, as those who wanted many opportunities to be
so versed in Books the best guides to business: especially when to those helps
in point of learning, were joined a suddenness of apprehension, a perspicacity
of judgment, and which swayed most of all integrity of life and conversation.
These when they met together (as they often did) in men admitted by the Church
unto holy Orders, it was not either thought or found (and indeed how could it?)
that their admittance into Orders did take off from any of those natural or
acquired indowments of which before they were possessed, or that it was a
disabling to them to make use thereof, in any matter of debate or action which
concerned the public. And that it has been so of old in all Christian
Kingdoms, besides that it is intimated by our Author here, we shall clearly
see by looking over such particulars as have most influence and power in the
affairs of Christendom.

And first beginning (as of right) with the German Empire, Thuanus gives this
note in general August. Thuan. hist. lib. 2.
, Imperium in tria omnino membra dividi, that that Empire is divided into three
Estates, over all which the Emperor is the head or the Supreme Prince. Of
these the first Estate is ex sacro Ordine, of the holy Hierarchy, composed of
the three spiritual Electors, together with the residue of the Archbishops and
Bishops, and many Abbots, Priors, and other Prelates. The second is of the
Nobility consisting of the three temporal Electors, the Dukes, Marquesses,
Lantgraves, Burgraves, Earls and Barons, of which there is no determinate
number; the Emperor having power to add daily to them, as he sees occasion.
The third Estate is of the free or Imperial Cities, in number 60. or
thereabouts, who represent themselves at the General Diets, by such
Commissioners or Deputies as are authorized to that purpose. Now for these
Diets, (for by that name they call their Conventus Ordinum, or Assembly of the
three Estates) they are summoned at the will and pleasure of the Emperor only,
and at such place and time as to him seems meetest Id. ibid.
. Where being met, (as all the three Estates must meet either in person or by
their Ambassadors) they use to treat of Peace, and War, of raising Subsidies
and Taxes to support the State, of leagues and con^ederacies, of raising and
decrying moneys, of making, abrogating, and expounding laws, and of such other
points and matters as do pertain unto the honor of the Empire and the public
sas^ti^. Nor is this any new authority which the Ecclesiastical Estate has
gained in the latter times; but such wherein they were entrusted from the first
beginning of that Empire: It being affi^med by Aventinus (a Writer of
unquestioned credit) that long before the institution of the seven Electors,
(which was in An. 996.) the Prelates, the Nobility, and the chief of the
people had the election of the Emperor Aventini Annal. Bo^o^um. l. 5.
. And if the Prelates were entrusted in so high a point, as the election of the
Emperor or the Sovereign Prince; no question but they were employed also in
his public Councels, in matters which concerned the managerie of the
Commonwealth.

Next pass we over into France, and there we find the Subjects marshalled into
three Estates, whereof the Clergy is the first. Rex coactis tribus Ordinibus,
Sacerdotio, Nobilitate, Plebe, subsidia rei pecuniariae petiit Paul. Aemilius
hist. Franc. l 9.
, that is to say, the King assembling or conveening the three Estates, viz. the
Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons, demanded subsidies for the support of
his Estate; So Paulus Aemilius does inform us: Out of these three are chosen
certain Delegates or Commissioners, some for each Estate, as often as the Kings
occasions do require their meeting, the time and place whereof is absolutely
left unto his disposing; and these thus met do make up the Conventus Ordinum,
or L' Assembly des Estats, as the French men call it, in form much like the
English Parliament, but in nothing else: the power and reputation of it being
much diminished in these latter times, especially since the great improvement
of the Court of Parliament, fixed and of long time fixed in Paris. Which Court
of Parliament, as it was instituted at the first by Charles Martell, Mayre of
the Pa^ace to the Merov^gnian line of France and Grandfather to Charle magne;
so it consisted at the first of the same ingredients, of which the great
Assembly des. Estats consists now, that is to say, the Prelates, and the
Peers, and certain of the principal Gentry which they call La nobless,
together with some few of the most consid^rable Officers of the Kings household
An^^e du Chos^e. 8.
. A Court of such esteem in the former times, that the Kings of Sicilie,
Cyprus, Bohomia, Portugal, Scotland, and Navarre, have thought it no
disparagement unto them to be members of it: and which is more, when Frederick
the second had spent much time and treasure in his quarrels with Pope Innocent
the fourth, he was content to submit the whole cause in difference unto the
judgment of this Court. But being at last become sedentaire and fixed at
Paris, as other ordinary Courts of Justice were, (which was in An. 1286. or
thereabouts) the Nobles first, and after them the Bishops withdrew themselves
from the troubles of it, and left it to the ordering of the Civil Lawyers:
though still the Peers do challenge and enjoy a place therein as often as any
point of moment is in agitation; the Bishop of Paris, and the Abbor of St.
Denis, continuing constant members of it to this very day. But for the
Assembly des Estats, or Conventus Ordinum, made up of the Clergy, the
Nobility and the Commons, as before I told I you: he that would see the manner
of it, the points there handled, and that remainder of authority which is left
unto them, let him repair unto Thuanne Thuan hist. sui temp. lib.
, and look upon the great Assembly held at Bloys, An. 1573. He shall find it
there.

Pass we next over the Pyrenees, to the Pealms of Spain, and we shall find in
each the same three Estates, whose meeting they call there by the name Bodin.
de Repub. lib. 3. c.
of Curia, the Court, (...), or by way of ominencie; consisting of the Clergy,
the Nobility, and the Commissioners of the Provinces and most ancient Cities.
But we must tell you by the way, that long before the institution of these
Courts, and long before the division of Spain into so many Kingdoms; the
Prelates of that Church were of such authority, that a chief stroke in the
election of their Kings did belong to them. For in the eighth Council of Toledo
summoned by Recesvinthus the 25. of the Gothish race of the Kings of Spain, An.
653. so long ago, in which were present 52 Bishops, 12 Abbots, and the
Delegates or Vicars of ten other Bishops, who could not personally attend the
service; it was ordered with the Kings consent, that from thenceforth the Kings
of Spain should be elected in the Regal City, or in what other place soever the
King should happen to decease, by the joint suffrages of the Prelates, and the
great Lords of the Court, Majores Palatii as the Canon calls them Council.
Tolet. VIII. Can. 10.
. But take the whole Canon with you for the more assurance, and you find it
thus. Abninc ergo and deinceps ita erunt in Regni gloria praeficiendi Rectores,
ut aut in urbe Regia, aut in loco ubi Princeps decesserit, cum Pontificum
Majorumque Palatii omnimodo eligantur assensu. But after Spain became divided
into several Kingdoms, and that each Kingdom had its Court, or Curia, as they
call their Parliament, the Clergy were esteemed in each for the third Estate
(the first indeed of all the three) and either in person or by their Proxies,
made up the most considerable part in those public meetings. For proof of
which we need but look into the General history of Spain, translated out of
French by Grimston, and we shall find a Court or Parliament for the Realm of
Aragon, consisting of the Bishops, Nobles, and Deputies of Towns and
Commonalties, having place in the said Estates conveened by King James at
Saragossa Anno 1325. for settling the Succession, and declaring the Heir Genesis
hist. of Spain. l. 14.
, another at Monson, where the Estates of Aragon and Catalogne did conveen
together 1236, to consult about the conquest of Valentia Id. lib. 11.
; and before that another Assembly of the Bishops and Noblemen called at
Saragossa by Alfonso the Great, touching the War against the Moors Id. lib. 9.
. And as for the Realm of Naples, and Sicily, being appends on this Crown,
there is little question to be made but that the Bishops and Clergy of both
enjoyed the place and privileges of the third Estate; both Kingdoms being
anciently holden of the Pope, and of his Erection and the Italian Bishops (as
lying directly under his nose) more amply privileged for the most part then in
other Countries. Thus for Castile, we find a Parliament of Lords, Prelates,
and Deputies of Towns summoned at Toledo by Alfonso the Noble, An. 1210. upon
occasion of an invasion made by the Moors; Id. lib. 10.
another before that at Burgos, under the same King, Anno 1179. for levying of
money on the people to maintain the Wars n; that great Convention of the States
held at Toledo by Ferdinand the Catholic 1479. for swearing to the succession
of his Son, Don John, in which the Prelates, the Nobility, and almost all the
Towns and Cities, which sent Commissioners to the Assembly, are expressly named
Id. lib.
. Thus finally do we find a meeting of the Deputies of the three Estates of
Navarre at the Town of Tasalla, Anno 1481. for preserving the Kingdom in
obedience to King Francis Phoebus, being then a minor, under age Id. lib. 22.
: and that the Deputies of the Clergy, Nobility, Provinces and good Towns of
Portugal, assembled at Tomara, An. 1581. to acknowledge Philip the second for
their King, and to settle the Government of that Kingdom for the times to come
Id. lib. 30.
.

Now let us take a view of the Northern Kingdoms, and still we find the
people ranked in the self same manner, and their great Councels to consist of
the Clergy, the N^bilitie, and certain Deputies, sent from the Provinces and
Cities, as in those before. In Hungar^e, before that Realm received the Gospel,
we read of none but Nobiles and Plebeii Bonfinius in hist. Hungar. Dec. l. 1.
, the Nobility and common people who did concur to the election of their
Kings; but no sooner was the Faith of Christ admitted, and a Clergy
instituted, but instantly we find a third Estate, Epis^opos and Sacerdotum
Collegia Id. ibid. De^. 2. l. 2.
, Bishops and others of the Clergy super-added to them, for the election of
the Kings, and the dispatch of other businesses which concerned the public Id.
Decad. 2. l. 3.
, as it continues to this day. In Danemark we shall find the same, if we mark
it well. For though Pontanus seem to count upon five Estates, making the Regal
Family to be the first, and subdividing the Commons into two, whereof the.
Yeomanry makes one, and the Tradesman or Citizen the other Pontan in Doriae
descript.
: yet in the body of the History we find only three, which are the Bishops,
the Nobility, and Civitatum delegati Id. in histor. Rerum Danic. l. 7.
, the Deputies or Commissioners of Towns and Cities: Take which of these
Accounts you will, and reckon either upon Five or on three Estates, yet still
the Ecclesiastic State, or Ordo Ecclesiasticus, as himself entituleth it, is
declared for one; and has been so declared, as their stories tell us, ever
since the first admittance of the Faith amongst them: the Bishops, together
with the Peers and Deputies, making up the Comitia or Conventus Ordinum. In
Poland the chief sway and power of government, next to the King, is in the
Council of Estate. Secundum Regem maxima and Augustuissima Senatus autoritas,
as Thuanus has it Thuan. hist. sui temp. l. 56.
. And that consists of nine Bishops, whereof the Archbishops of Guisna and
Leopolis make always two; of fifteen Palatines, for by that name they call the
greater sort of the Nobility, and of sixty five Chastellans, which are the
better sort of the Polish Gentry; who with the nine great Officers of the
Kingdom, (of which the Clergy are as capable as any other sort or degree of
subjects) do complete that Council. The Common people there are in no
authority, ( a procuratione Reipub. omnino summota) not having any Vote or
suffrage in the great Comitia Thuan. hist. sui. temp. l. 56.
, or general Assemblies of the Kingdom, as in other places. For Sweden, it
comes near the government and forms of Danemark, and has the same estates and
degrees of people as amongst the Danes, that is to say, Proceres and Nobiles,
the greater and the less Nobility, Episcopi and Ecclesiastici, the Bishops and
inferior Clergy, Civitates and universitates, the Cities and Towns Corporate
(for so I think he means by vniversitates) as Thuanus Id. lib. 131.
mustereth them. And in this Realm the Bishops and Clergy enjoy the place and
privileges of the third Estate (notwithstanding the alteration of Religion) to
this very day; the Bishops in their own persons, and a certain number of the
Clergy out of every Sochen (a division like our Rural Deanries) in the name of
the rest, having a necessary Vote in all their Parliaments. And as for
Scotland, their Parliament consisted anciently of three Estates, as learned
Camden does inform us, that is to say, the Lords spiritual, as Bishops,
Abbots, Priors; the Temporal Lords, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts,
Barons; and the Commissioners of the Cities and Buroughs Camden in descript.
Scotiae.
; To which were added by King James two Delegates or Commissioners out of every
County to make it more conform to the English Parliaments. And in some Acts
the Prelates are by name declared to be the third Estate, as in the Parliament,
Anno 1597. Anno 1606, etc. for which I do refer you to the Book at large.

England, where we shall find that from the first reception of the Christian
Faith amongst the Saxons, the Ecclesiastics have been called to all Public
Councels, and their advice required in the weightiest matters touching the
safety of the Kingdom. No sooner had King Ethelbert received the Gospel, but
presently we read that as well the Clergy as the Laity were called unto the
Common Council: which the Saxons sometimes called Mycell Synoth, the Great
Assembly, and sometimes Wittenagemots Coke on Li^l. 2. sect.
, the Council or Assembly of the Wise men of the Realm. Anno 605. Ethelbertus
Rex in fide roboratus Catholica etc. Cantuariae convocavit commune concilium
^am Cleri quam populi, etc. H. Spelman in Council. p. 126.
"King Ethelbert, as my Author has it, being confirmed in the Faith in the
year 605. (which was but nine years after his conversion) together with Bertha
his Queen, their Son Eadbald, the most Reverend Archbishop Augustine, and all
the rest of the Nobility, did solemnize the Feast of Christ's Nativity in the
City of Canterbury; and did there cause to be assembled on the ninth of January
the Common Council of his Kingdom, as well the Clergy as the Lay Subject, by
whose consent and approbation, he caused the Monastery by him built, to be
dedicated to the honor of Almighty God, by the hand of Augustine." And though
no question other examples of this kind may be found amongst the Saxon
Heptarchs, yet being the West Saxon Kingdom did in fine prevail, and united
all the rest into one Monarchy: we shall apply our selves unto that more
punctually. Where we shall find besides two Charters issued out by Athelstan,
Consilio Wlfelmi Archiepiscopi mei and aliorum Episcoporum meorum Ap. eund. p.
402, 403.
, by the advice of Wlfelm his Archbishop and his other Bishops: that Ina in the
year 702. caused the great Council of his Realm to be assembled, consisting ex
Episcopis, Principibus, proceribus, etc. of Bishops, Princes, Nobles, Earls,
and of all the Wise men, Elders, and People of the whole Kingdom, and there
enacted diverse laws for the Weal of his Realm Apud eund. p. 219.
. Thus do we read that Egbert, who first united the seven Kingdoms of the
Saxons under the name of England, did cause to be conveened at London his
Bishops and the Peers of the highest rank, pro consilio capiendo adversus
Danicos Piratas Charta Whitlafii Merciorum Regis ap. Ingulf.
, to advise upon some course against the Danish Pirates who infested the sea
coasts of England. Another Parliament or Council, call it which you will,
called at Kingsbury, Anno 855. in the time of Ethelwolph the Son of Egbert, pro
negotiis regni Chart. Bertulfi. Merc. Regis ap. Ingulf.
, to treat of the affairs of the Kingdom: the Acts whereof are ratified and
subscribed by the Bishops, Abbots, and other great men of the Realm. The same
King Ethelwolph in a Parliament or Assembly of his States at Winchester, Anno
855. Cum consilio Episcoporum and principum Ingulfi Croyland hist.
, by the advice and counsel of the Bishops and Nobility, confirmed unto the
Clergy the tenth part of all men's goods; and ordered that the Tithe so
confirmed unto them should be free ab omnibus secularibus servitutibus, for all
secular services and impositions. In the reign of Edred we find this, Anno
948. In Festo igitur nativitatis B. Mariae cum universi Magnates regni per
Regium edictum summoniti, tam Archiepiscopi and Episcopi ac Abbates, quam
caeteri totius regni proceres and optimates Londoniis convenissent ad
tractandum de negotiis publicis totius Regni Id ibid. p. 497 edit. Land.
: viz. That in the Feast of the Nativity of the blessed Virgin, the great men
of the Realm, that is to say, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Nobles, Peers,
were summoned by the Kings Writ to appear at London, to handle and conclude
about the public affairs of the Kingdom. Mention of this Assembly is made
again at the foundation and endowment of the Abbie of Crowland Id. p. 500.
: and afterward a confirmation of the same by Edgar, Anno 966. praesentibus
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus and Optimatibus Regni Id page 501. and 502.
, in the presence of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Peers of the
Kingdom. Like convention of Estates we find to have been called by Canutus
after the death of Edmund Ironside, for the settling of the Crown on his own
head, of which thus the Author Rog. Hoveden. Annal pars prior. p. 250.
. Cujus post mortem Rex Canutus omnes Episcopos and Duces, nec non and
principes cunctosque optimates gentis Angliae Londoniae congregari jussit.
Where still we find the Bishops to be called to Parliament as well as the
Dukes, Princes, and the rest of the Nobility; and to be ranked and marshalled
first (which clearly shows that they were always reckoned for the first
Estate) before the greatest and most eminent of the secular Peers. And so we
find it also in a Charter of King Edward the Confessor, the last King of the
Saxon race) by which he granted certain Lands and privileges to the Church of
Westminster, Anno 1066. Cum consilio and decreto Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum,
Comitum, aliorumque Optimatum Ap. H. Spelman in Council. p. 630.
, with the counsel and decree of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and others
of his Nobles. And all this while the Bishops and other Prelates of the Church
did hold their Lands by no other tenure, then in pura and perpetua eleemosyna
Camden in Brit.
, or Frank almoigne, as our Lawyers call it: and therefore sat in Parliament
in no other capacity then as spiritual persons merely, who by their
extraordinary knowledge in the word of God, and in such other parts of
learning, as the world then knew, were thought best able to direct and advise
their Princes in points of judgment. In which capacity and no other the Priors
of the Cathedral Churches of Canterbury, Ely, Winchester, Coventry, Bath,
Worcester, Norwich, and Durham, the Deans of Exceter, York, Wells, Salisbury,
and Lincoln, the Official of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Dean of the
Arches, the Guardian of the Spiritualties of any Bishopric when the Sea was
vacant, and the Vicars general of such Bishops as were absent beyond the Seas
Seldom Titles of hon. part. 2. c. 5.
, had sometimes place and suffrage in the house of Lords in the Ages following.

Norman Conqueror had possessed the State, then the case was altered. The
Prelates of the Church were no longer suffered to hold their Lands in
Frankalmoigne as before they did, or to be free from secular services and
commands, as before they were. Although they kept their lands, yet they changed
their tenure, and by the Conqueror, were ordained to hold their Lands sub
militari servitute Man. Paris in Will. 1. An. 1070.
, either in ^apite, or by Baronage, or some such military hold, and thereby
were compellable to aid the Kings in all times of war, with Men, Arms, and
Horses, as the Lay-subjects of the same tenures were required to do. Which
though it were conceived to be a great disfranchisement at the first, and an
heavy burden to the Prelacy* yet it conduced at last to their greater honor; in
giving them a further Title to their place in Parliament, than that which
formerly they could pretend to. Before, they claimed a place therein ratione
Officii, only by reason of their Offices or spiritual Dignities; but after
this, by reason also of those ancient Baronies which were annexed unto their
Dignities; en respect de lour possessions, L'antient Baronies annexes a lour
dignities Stamfords Pl^es, l. 3 c. 1.
, as our Lawyers have it. From this time forwards we must look upon them in the
House of Parliament, not as Bishops only, but as Peers and Barons of the Realm
also, and so themselves affirmed to the Temporal Lords in the Parliament holden
at Northampton under Henry 2. Non sedimus hic Episcopi, sed Barons; nos
Barons, ves Barons; Pares hic sumus Ap Seldom. titles of hon. p^. 2. c. 5.
. We fit not here say they, as Bisho^ps only, but as Barons; We are Barons, and
you are Barons; here we sit as Peers. Which last is also verified in terminis,
by the words of a Statute, or Act of Parliament, wherein the Bishops are
acknowledged to be Peers of the Land Stat. 25 Edw. 3. c. 5.
. Now that the Bishops are a fundamental and essential part of the Parliament
of England, I shall endeavor to make good by two manner of proofs; whereof the
one shall be de jure, and the other de facto. And first we shall begin with the
proofs de jure, and therein first with that which does occur in the Laws of King
Athelstan, amongst the which there is a Chapter (it is Cap. 11.) entitled De
officio Episcopi, and quid pertinet ad officium ejus; and therein it is thus
declared. Episcopo jure pertinet omnem rectitudinem promovere, dei scilicet and
seculi etc. Spelm. council. p. 402.
et convenit ut per consilium and testimonium ejus omne legis scitum, and Burgi
mensura, and omne pondus sit secundum dictionem ejus institutum, that is to
say, it belongs of right unto the Bishop to promote justice, in matters which
concern both the Church and State; and unto him it appertains that by his
counsel and award, all Laws and Weights, and Measures be ordained thorowout the
Kingdom. 2. Next we will have recourse to the old Record entitled Modus
tenendi Parliamentum. In which it is affirmed, ad Parliamentum summoniri and
venire debere Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Pricres, and alios majores
cleri, qui tenent per Comitatum aut Baroniam ratione hujusmodi tenurae, modus
tenendi Parliament.
that all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other Prelates of the
Church, who hold their lands either by an Earls fee or a Barons fee, were to be
summoned and to come to Parliament in regard of their tenure. 3. Next look we
on the chartularies of King Henry the first, recognized in full Parliament at
Clarendon under Henry the 2d. where they are called avitas consuetudines, which
declare it thus, Archipiscopi, Episcopi, and universae personae qui de
Regetenent in Capite, habeant possessiones suas de Rege ficut Baroniam, etc.
and sicut caeteri Barons debent interesse judiciis Curiae Regis cum Baronibus,
quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum vel ad mortem Matthew. Paris in
Hen. 2.
. The meaning is in brief, that Archbishops, Bishops, and all other
ecclesiastical persons which hold in Capite of the King, are to have and hold
their lands in Barony, and that they ought as Barons to be present in all
Judgments with the other Barons in the Court of Parliament, until the very
sentence of death or mutilation (which was very common in those times) was to
be pronounced. And then they commouly did use to withdraw themselves, not out
of any incapacity supposed to be in them by the Law of England, but out of a
restraint imposed upon them by the Canons of the Church of Rome. 4. In the
great Charter made by King John in the last of his reign, we have the form of
summoning a Parliament, and calling those together who have votes therein, thus
expressed at large. Ad habendum commune consilium Regni de auxilio assidendo,
etc. and de scutagiis assidendis, faciemus summoneri Archiepiscopos, Episcopos,
Abba^es, Comites, and Majores Barons Regni sigillatim per li^eras nostras: Et
praeterea summoneri faciemus in generali per Vice-Cemites and Ballivos nostros
omnes alios qui in Capite tenent ad certum diem, sc. ad terminum 40 dierum ad
minus, et ad certum locum, etc. Id. in Ioh.
In which we have not only a most evident proof, that the Bishops are of right
to be called to Parliament, for granting subsidies and Escuage, and treating of
the great affairs which concern the kingdom, but that they are to be summoned
by particular Letters, as well as the Earls and Barons or either of them; A
former Copy of which summons issued in the time of the said King John, is
extant on Record, and put in print of late in the Pt. 2. c. 5.
Titles of Honor. And we have here (I note this only by the way) a brief
intimation touching the form of summoning the Commons to attend in Parliament,
and the time of 40 days expressly specified to intervene between the summons
and the beginning of the Parliament; Which Commons being such as anciently did
hold in Capite, and either having a Knights fee or the degree of Knighthood,
did first promiscuously attend in these public meetings, and after were
reduced to four ( quatuor discretos milites de Comitatu tuo, as Id. ibid.
the writ ran unto the Sheriff) and at last to two, as they continue to this
day. 5. We have it thus in the Magna Charta of King Henry the 3d. the
birthright of the English Subject, according as it stands translated in the
book of Statutes. First we have granted to God, and by this our present Charter
have confirmed for us and our heirs for ever, that the Church of England shall
be free, and shall enjoy all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable Magna
Charta cap. 1.
. But it was a known Right and Liberty of the Church of England, that all the
Bishops, and many of the greater Clergy (and peradventure also the inferior
Clergy whereof more anon) had their Votes in Parliament; and therefore is to be
preserved inviolable by the Kings of England, their Heirs and Successors for
ever. Which Charter as it was confirmed by a solemn Curse denounced on all the
Infringers of it by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury Matthew. Patis in Henr. 3.
, and ratified in no fewer man 30 succeeding Parliaments: so was it enacted in
the reign of Edward the first, that it should be sent under the great Seal of
England, to all the Cathedral Churches of the Kingdom, to be read twice a year
before the people 25 Edw. 1. c. 2.
; that they should be read four times every year in a full County Court 28 Edw.
1. c. 1.
, and finally that all judgments given against it should be void 25 Edw. 1. c.
3.
. 6. We have the Protestation of John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury in
the time of King Edward the 3d. who being in disfavour with the King, and
denied entrance into the House of Peers, challenged his place and suffrage
there as the first Peer of the Realm, and one that ought to have the first
Voice in Parliament in right of his See. But hear him speak his own words,
which are these that follow. Amici (for he spoke to those who took witness of
it) Rexme ad hoc Parliamentum scripto suo vocavit, and ego tanquam major Par
Regni post regem, and primam vocem habere debens in Parliamento, jura Ecclesiae
meae Cantuariensis vendico, and ideo ingressum in Parliamentum peto Antiqu.
B^itan. in Joh. Stratford.
, which is full and plain. 7. And lastly, there is the Protestation on Record
of all the Bishops in the reign of King Richard the 2d. at what time William
Courtney was Archbishop of Canterbury: who being to withdraw themselves from
the House of Peers at the pronouncing of the sentence of death on some guilty
Lords, first made their Procurators to supply their rooms, and then put up
their Protestation to preserve their Rights; the sum whereof, for as much as
does concern this business, in their own words thus. De jure and consuetudine
regni Angliae ad Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem qui pro tempore fuerit, nec non
coeteros Suffraganeos confratres and compatres, Abbates and Priores aliosque
Praelatos quoscunque per Baroniam de domino Rege tenentes, pertinet in
Parliamentis Regis quibuscunque, ut Pares regni praedicti personaliter
interesse, ibidemque de regni negotiis ac aliis tractari consuetis cum caeteris
dicti regni Paribus and aliis ibidem jus interessendi habentibns consulere and
tractare, ordinare, statuere, and diffinire, ac c^etera facere quae Parliamento
ibidem imminent facienda. This put together makes enough abundantly for the
proofs de jure, (k) In vita Gul. Courtney.
and makes the Bishops right to have Vote in Parliament to be undeniable: Let
us next see whether this right of theirs be not confirmed and countenanced by
continual practice, and that they have not lost it by discontinuance; which is
my second kind of proofs, those I mean de facto. And first beginning with the
reign of the Norman Conqueror, we find a Parliament assembled in the fifth
year of that King, wherein are present Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, and Primates
totius Angliae Matthew. Paris in Willielmo 1.
, the Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and the rest of the Baronage of England. In the
9th. year of William Rufus an old Author tells us, de regni statu acturus,
Episcopos, Abbates, and quoscunque Regni proceres in unum praecepti sui
sanctione egit; that being to consult of the affairs of the Kingdom he called
together by his writ the Bishops, Abbots and all the Peers of the Realm Eadmer.
hist. Nov. l. 2.
. During the reign of Henry the 2d. (for we will take but one example out of
each King reign, though each Kings reign would yield us more) a Parliament was
called at London, wherein were many things dispatched as well of Ecclesiastical
as secular nature; the Bishops and Abbats being present with the other Lords.
Coacto apud Londoniam magno Episcoporum, and. Procerum, Abbatumque Concili^,
multa ecclefiasticarum and secularium rerum ordinata negotia, decisa litigia,
says the Monk of Malmes^ury Malmesb. hist. reg. Angl. l. 5.
. And of this Parliament it is, I take it, that Eadmer speaks, Hist. Novell.
l. 4. p. 91. Proceed we to King Henry the 2d. (for King Stephens reign was so
full of wars and tumults that there is very little to be found of Parliaments)
and there we find the Bishops with the other Peers convened in Parliament for
the determination of the points in controversy between Alfonso King of Castile
and Sancho King of Navarre, referred by compremise to that King of England, and
here determined by King Henry amongst other things, habito cum Episcopis
Comitibus et Baronebus cum deliberatione consilio, as in Roger Hoveden Hoveden
Annal. pars poster. in Hen. 2.
. Next him comes Rich. the first, his Son, during whose imprisonment by the D.
of Austria, his Brother John then Earl of Moriton endeavored by force and
cunning in Normandy to set the Crown on his own head: which caused Hubert the
Archbishop of Canterbury to call a Parliament ( Convocatis coram eo Episcopis,
Comitibus et Baronibus regni) Id. in Joh.
wherein the Bishops, Earls, and Barons did with one consent agree to seize on
his estate, and suppress his power, the better to preserve the Kingdom in
wealth, peace and safety. After succeeded John, and he calls a Parliament,
wherein were certain Laws made for the defense of his Kingdom, Communi assensu
Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum and omnium fidelium suo^um
Ang^iae, by the common counsel and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, and the rest of his Leiges. (Remember what was said before touching the
writ of Summons in the said Kings time) From this time till the last Parliament
of King Charles, there is no Kings reign, of which we have not many (though not
all) the Acts of Parliament still in print amongst us. Nor is there any Act of
Parliament in the printed Books, to the enacting of the which the Bishops
approbation and consent is not plainly specified, either in the general Proeme
set before the Acts, or in the body of the Act it themself; as by the books
themselves does at at large appear. And to this kind of proof may be further
added the form and manner of the writ by which the Prelates in all times have
been called to Parliament, being the very same verbatim with that which is
directed to the temporal Barons, save that the Spiritual Lords are commanded to
attend the service, in fide and dilectione, the temporal in fide and homagio,
and of late times in fide and ligeantia. A form or copy of which summons as
ancient as King John's time, is still preserved upon Record, directed nominatim
to the Archbishop of Canterbury V. Titles of hon. pt. 2. c. 5.
; and then a scriptum est similiter to the residue of the Bishops, Abbats,
Earls, and Barons. Then add the Privilege of Parliament for themselves and
their servants, during the time of the Sessions; the liberty to kill, and take
one or two of the Kings Deer as they pass by any of his Forests in coming to
the Parliament upon his commandment Charta de Foresta cap.
; their enjoying of the same immunities, which are and have been heretofore
enjoyed by the Temporal Barons Cambden in Britannia.
: and tell me if the Bishops did not sit in Parliament by as good a title, and
have not sat there longer by some hundreds of years in their Predecessors, as
or than any of the Temporal Lords do sit or have sat there in their
Progenitors; and therefore certainly essential, fundamental parts of the Court
of Parliament.

Acts have passed in Parliament, to which the Prelates did not vote, nor could
be present in the House when the Bill was passed; as in the sentencing to death
or mutilation of a guilty person: as does appear both by the laws and
constitutions recognized at Clarendon, and the following practice* This has
been touched on before, and we told you then, that this restraint was laid upon
them, not by the Common law of England, or any Act or Ordinance of the House of
Peers, by which they were disabled to attend that service. It was their own
voluntary Act, none compelled them to it, but only out of a conformity to some
former Canons ( ad sanctorum Canonum instituta Antiqu. Brit. in Gul. Courtney.
, as their own words are) by which it was not lawful for the Clergy men to be
either Judges or Assessors in causa Sanguinis Constitut. Othobon. fol. 45.
. And yet they took such care to preserve their Interests, that they did not
only give their Proxies for the representing of their persons, but did put up
their Protestation with a salvo jure for the preserving of their rights for the
time to come: jure Paritatis and interessendi in dicto Parliamento Antiqu.
Britan. in Gul. Courtney.
quoad omnia and singula ibi excercenda in omnibus semper salvo, as the manner
was. Examples of the which are as full and frequent, as their withdrawing
themselves on the said occasions. But then the main objection is, that as some
Acts have passed in Parliament absentibus Praelatis, when the Bishops did
absent themselves of their own accord; so many things have been transacted in
the Parliament excluso Clero, when the Clergy have been excluded or put out of
the House by some Act or Ordinance. A precedent for this has been found and
published by such as envied that poor remnant of the Churches honor: though
possibly they will find themselves deceived in their greatest hope, and that
the evidence will not serve to evince the cause. The Author of the Pamphlet
entitled, The Prerogative and practice of Parliaments, first laying down his
Tenet, that many good Acts of Parliament may be made though the Archbishops
and Bishops should not consent unto them Printed at London. 1628. p. 37.
(which is a point no man doubts of, considering how easily their negative may
be overruled by the far greater number in the House of Peers) adds, that at a
Parliament holden at S. Edmundsbury 1196 in the reign of Ed: 1. a Statute was
made by the King, the Barons, and the Commons, Excluso Clero, and for the proof
hereof refers us unto Bishop Jewel. Now Bishop Jewel says indeed, "that in a
Parliament solemnly holden at St. Edmunsbury by King Edward 1. Anno 1296. the
Archbishops and Bishops were quite shut forth, and yet the Parliament held on,
and good, and wholesome laws were there enacted, the departing or absence of the
Lords Spiritual notwithstanding Defense of the Apolog. pt. 6. c. 2.. 1.
. In the Records whereof it is written thus, Habito Rex cum Baronibus suis
Parliamento, and Clero excluso statutum est, etc. the King keeping the
Parliament with his Barons, the Clergy (that is to say, the Archbishops, and
Bishops) being shut forth, it was enacted, etc." Wherein who does not see, if
he has any eyes, that by this reason (if the proof be good) many good Acts of
Parllament may be made, though the Commons either out of absence or opposition
should not consent unto them? of whose consent unto that Statute (whatsoever it
was) there is as little to be found in that Record, as the concurrence of the
Bishops. But for Answer unto so much of this Record so often spoke of and
applauded as concerns the Bishops, we say, that this (if truly senced as I
think it be not) was the particular act of an angry and offended King against
his Clergy, not to be drawn into example as a proof or Argument against a most
clear, known, and undoubted right. The case stood thus, A Constitution had been
made by Boniface the 8th. Ne aliqua collecta ex ecclesiasticis proventibus Regi
aut cuivis alii Principi concedatur Matthew. Westminster. in Edw. 1.
, that Clergy men should not pay any tax or tallage unto Kings or Princes out
of their Spiritual preferments, without the leave of the Pope: under pretense
whereof the Clergy at this Parliament at S. Edmundsbury, refused to be
contributory to the Kings occasions, when the Lay-Members of the House had been
forwards in it. The King being herewith much offended, gives them a further day
to confider of it, adjourning the Parliament to London, there to begin on the
morrow after S. Hilaries day; and in the mean time commanded all their Barns to
be fast sealed up. The day being come, and the Clergy still persisting in their
former obstinacy, excluso e Parliamento Clero Consilium Rex cum solis Baronibus
and populo habuit, totumque statim Clerum protectione sua privavit Antiqu.
Brit. in R. Winchelsey.
; the King (says the Historian) excluding the Clergy out of the Parliament,
advised with his Barons and his people only, what was best to be done, by whose
advise he put the Clergy out of his protection, and thereby forced them to
conform to his will and pleasure. This is the summa totalis of the business,
and comes unto no more but this, that a particular course was advised in
Parliament on a particular displeasure taken by the King against the body of
his Clergy then convened together, for their particular refusal to contribute
to his wants and wars, the better to reduce them to their natural duty. Which
makes not any thing at all against the right of Bishops in the House of Peers,
or for excluding them that House, or for the validity of such Acts as are made
in Parliament during the time of such exclusion: especially considering that
the King shortly after called his States together, and did excuse himself for
many extravagant Acts which he had committed Walsing^, in Edw. 1. anno 1297.
against the liberties of the Subject (whereof this was one) laying the blame
thereof on his great occasions, and the necessities which the wars which he had
abroad, did impose upon him. And so much as in Answer unto that Record,
supposing that the words thereof be rightly senced, as I think they are not,
and that by Clerus there we are to understand Archbishops and Bishops, as I
think we be not, there being no Record (I dare boldly say it) either of History
or Law, in which the word Clerus serves to signify the Archbishops, and
Bishops, exclusive of the other Clergy; or any writing whatsoever, wherein it
does not either signify the whole Clergy generally, or the inferior Clergy
only exclusive of the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates. Therefore in
answer unto that so much applauded Cavil of Excluso Clero, from what Record
soever it either has been hitherto or shall hereafter be produced, I shall
propose it to the consideration of the sober Reader, whether by Clerus in that
place, or in any other of that kind and time, we must not understand the
in^eriour Clergy, as they stand distinguished in the Laws from my Lords the
Bishops. For howsoever it be true, that Clerus in the ecclesiastical notion of
the word does signify the whole Clergy generally, Archbishops, Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons: yet in the legal notion of it, it stands distinguished
from the Prelates, and signifies only the inferior Clergy. Thus do we find
the Ecclesiastics of this Realm divided into Prelates, men of Religion, and
other Clerks, 3. Edw. 1. c. 1. the Seculars either into Prelates and Clerks, 9
Edw. 2. c. 3. 1 Rich. 2. c. 3. or Prelates and Clerks beneficed, 18 Edw. 3. c.
2. or generally into the Prelates and the Clergy, 9 Edw. 2. c. 15. 14 Edw. 3.
c. 1, and 3. 18 Edw. 3. 2. 7. and 25 Edw. 3. 2. 4. and 8 Hen. 6. c. 1. and in
all acts and grants of Subsidies, made by the Clergy to the Kings or Queens of
England since the 32 of Henry 8. (when the Clergy subsidies first began to be
confirmed by act of Parliament) So also in the Latin ideom, which comes nearest
home, Nos Praelati and Clerus in the submission of the Clergy to King Henry 8.
Regist. Wa^ham.
, and in the sentence of divorce against Anne of Cleve Regist. Cranmer.
, and in the instrument of the grant of the Clergy subsidies presented to the
Kings of England ever since the 27 of Queen Elizabeth, and in the form of the
Certificates (per Statut. 8 Eliz. c. 17. and ever since.
Praelat^s and Clerum) returned by every Bishop to the Lord High Treasurer, and
finally, Nos Episcopi and Clerus Cantuariensis Provinciae in hac Synodo more
nostro solito dum Regni Parliamentum celebratur, congregati Stat. 1 Phil. and
Mar. c. 8.
, in the petition to K. K. Phillip and Mary, about the confirmation of the Abbey
lands to the Patentees. So that though many Statutes have been made in these
later times, excluso Clero, the Clergy (that is. to say the inferior Clergy)
being quite shut out, and utterly excluded from those public Counsails; yet
this proves nothing to the point that auy act of Parliament has been counted
good to which the Bishops were not called, or at the making of which Act they
either were shut out by force, or excluded by cunning. As for Kilbancies book
which that Author speaks of Prer^g. and pract. of Pa^l. p. 38.
, in which the Justices are made to say 7 H. 8. that our Sovereign Lord the
King may well hold his Parliament by him and his Temporal Lords, and by the
Commons also, without the Spiritual Lords, for that the Spiritual Lords have
not any place in the Parliament chamber by reason of their Spiritualties, but
by reason of their Temporal possessions: besides that it is only the opinion of
a private man, of no authority or credit in the Common wealth, and contrary to
the practice in the Saxon times in which the Bishops sat in Parliament as
Spiritual persons, not as Barons; the reason for ought I can see, will serve as
well to pretermit all or any of the Temporal Lords, as it can serve to
pretermit or exclude the Bishops, the Temporal Lords being called to Parliament
on no other ground, than for the Temporal possessions which they hold by Barony.

Excluso Clero supposes that the inferior ^lergy had some place in
Parliament, which being not to be supposed makes the Answer void: I shall crave
leave to offer some few observations unto the consideration of the sober and
impartial Reader, by which I hope to make that supposition probable, and
perhaps demonstrative. First then we have that famous Parliament (call it
Concilium magnum, or Concilium commune, or by what other name soever the old
writers called it) summoned by King Ethelbert, anno 605. which my Council. Hen.
Spelm.
Author calls Commune concilium tam Cleri quam Populi, where Clerus
comprehends the body of the Clergy generally, as well the Presbyters, as the
Bishops; as the word populus does the lay-subject generally, as well Lords as
Commons; or else the Lords and Commons one of the two must be needs left out.
And in this sense we are to understand these words in the latter times, as
where we read that Clerus Matthew. Paris* in Hen. 1.
Angliae and populus Vniversus were summoned to appear at Westminster, at the
Coronation of King Henry the first, where diverse Laws were made and declared,
subscribed by the Archbishops, Bishops, and others of the principal persons
that were there assembled: that Clero and populo convocato Rog. Hov. in Hen* 2.
, the Clergy and people of the Realm were called to Clarendon, anno 1163. by
King Henry the second, for the declaring and confirming of the Subjects
liberties: that in the year 1185 toward the later end of the said Kings reign,
Convocatus est Clerus and populus cum tota Nobilitate ad fontem Clericorum
Matthew. paris in Hen. 2.
, the Clergy, Commons, and Nobility were called unto the Parliament held at
Clerkenwell: and finally that a Parliament was called at London, in which the
Archbishop of Canterbury was present, cum toto Clero and tota secta Laicali
Quadrilog. ap. Seldom Tit. of Hon. pt. 2. c. 5.
, in the time of King John. Hitherto then the Clergy of both ranks and orders,
as well as Populus or tota secta Laicalis, the Subjects of the Laity, or the
Lords and Commons, had their place in Parliament. And in possession of this
right the Clergy stood when the Magna Charta was set out by King Henry the 3d,
wherein the freedoms, rights, and privileges of the Church of England (of which
this evidently was one) was confirmed unto her Magna Charta cap. 1.
: of the irrefragable and inviolable authority whereof we have spoke before.
The Cavil of Excluso Clero which has been used against the voting of the
Bishops in the house of Peers, comes in next for proof, that the inferior
Clergy had their place or vote with the house of Commons; (if in those times
the Lords and Commons made two houses, which I am not sure of) the Clergy could
not be excluded in an angry fit, or out of a particular design to deprive them
of the benefit of the Kings protection; if they had not formerly a place
amongst them: and if we will not understand by Clerus, the inferior Clergy,
which much about that time (as before we showed) began to be the leg^l English
of the word; we must needs understand the whole Clergy generally, the Clergy of
both ranks and orders. But our main proofs are yet to come, which are these
that follow. First it is evident that anciently the Clergy of each several
Diocese were chargeable by Law for the expenses of their Proctors in attending
the service of the Parliament; according as the Counties were by Common law
(since confirmed by Statute 23 H. 6. c. 11.) to bear the charges of their
Knights, the Buroughs and Cities of their Representees: which questionless the
Laws had not taken care for, but that the Clergy had their place in Parliament,
as the Commons had. And this appears by a Record Rotul. Parent. 26 Ed. 3. pt.
1. M. 22.
of 26 of King Edward the 3d. in which the Abbat of Leieester being then, but
never formerly commanded to attend in Parliament, amongst others of the Regular
Prelates; petitioned to be discharcharged from that attendance, in regard he
held in Frank-Almoigne only, by no other tenure. Which he obtained upon this
condition, ut semper in Procuratores ad hujusmodi Parliamenta mittendot
consentiat, and, ut moris est, eorundem expensis contribuat, that is to say,
that he and his Successors did give their voices in the choice of such
Procuratours, as the Clergy were to send to Parliament, and did contribute
toward their charges as the custom was. Next in the Modus tenendi
Parliamentum, which before we spoke of, there is amodus convocandi Clerum
Angliae ad Parl. Regis Modus tenendi Parl. M^.
, a form of calling the English Clergy (that is the Prelates and Clergy as John
Seldom ( e) renders it) to the Court of Parliament: said to be used in the time
of Edward the Son of Ethelred, ( s) V. Titles of hon. pt. 2.
presented to the Conqueror, and by him observed: which shows the Clergy in
those times had their place in Parliament. Which being but a general inference
shall be delivered more particularly from the Modus it self, which informs us
thus, Rex est caput, principum and finis Parliamenti, etc. Modus tenendi Parl.
Ms. c. 12.
"The King is the head, the beginning and end of the Parliament, and so he has
not any equal in the first degree; the second is of Archbishops, Bishops, and
Priors, and Abbats holding by Barony; the third is of Procurators of the
Clergy; the fourth of Earls, Barons, and other Nobles; the fifth is of Knights
of the Shire; the sixth of Citizens and Burgesses: and so the whole Parliament
is made up of these six degrees." But the said Modus tells us more, and goes
more particularly to work than so. For in the ninth chapter, speaking of the
course which was observed in canvassing hard and difficult matters, it tells
us that they used to choose 25 out of all degrees, (like a grand Committee) to
whose consideration they referred the point; that is to say, two Bishops, and
three Proctors for the Clergy, two Earls, three Barons, five Knights, five
Citizens, and as many Burgesses. And in the 12th. that on the fourth day of the
Parliament the Lord high Steward, the Lord Constable, and the Lord Marshal were
to call the house, every degree or rank of men in its several Order; and that
if any of the Proctors of the Clergy did not make appearance, the Bishop of the
Diocese was to be fined 100 l. And in the 23d. chapter it is said expressly,
that as the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in things which do concern the
Commons have more authority than all the Lords; so the Proctors for the Clergy,
in things which do concern the Clergy, have more authority than all the
Bishops. Which Modus if it be as ancient as the Norman Conqueror, as both Sir
Edward Coke conceives Preface to the 9th. part of Reports.
, and the title signieth, it shows the Clergies claim to a place in
Parliament to be more ancient than the Commons can pretend unto: but if no
older than the reign of King Edward third, as confidently is affirmed in the
Titles of Honor Titles of hon. pt 2. c. 5.
, if shows that in the usage of those later times the Procurators of the
Clergy had a right and place there as well as Citizens and Burgesses, or the
Knights of the Shires. And this is further proved by the writs of Summons
directed to the Archbishops and Bishops, for their own coming to the
Parliament; in the end whereof there is a clause for warning the Dean and
Chapter of their Cathedralls, and the Archdeacons with the whole Clergy to be
present at it, that is to say the Deans and Archdeacons personally, the
Chapter and Clergy in their Proctours, then and there to consent to such Acts
and Ordinances as shall be made by the Common counsel of the Kingdom. The
whole clause word for word is this Extant ibid. pt. 2. c. 5.
, Praemunientes Priorem and Capitulum (or Decanum and Capitulum as the case
might vary) Ecclesiae vestrae N. ac Archidiacanos totumque Clerum vestrae
Dioceseos, quod iidem Decanus and Archichidiaconi in propriis personis suis, ac
dictum Capitulum per unum, idemque Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos plenam
and sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo and Clero habentes, praedicto die
and loco personaliter intersint, ad consentiendum iis quae tunc ibidem de
communi consilio ipsius Regni nostri divina favente clementia contigerit
ordinari. Which clause being in the Writs of King Edward 1. and for the most
part of the reign of his next Successors^, till the middle of King Richard the
second, at which time it began to be fixed and formal; has still continued in
those writs ( without any difference almost between the Syllables) to this very
day Id. ibid.
. Now that this clause was more than Verbal, and that the Proctors of the
Clergy did attend in Parliament, is evident by the Acts and Statutes of King
Richard the second: the passages whereof I shall cite at large, the better to
conclude what I have in hand. The Duke of Gloucester and the Earl of Arundel
having got the mastery of the King, obtained a Commission directed to
themselves and others of their nomination, to have the rule of the King and his
Realm Statur 21 R. 2. c. 2.
: and having their Commission confirmed by Parliament, in the 11 year of his
reign, did execute diverse of his Friends and Ministers, and seized on their
Estates as forfeited. But having got the better of his headstrong and
rebellious Lords, in the one and twentieth of his reign he calls a Parliament,
in the Acts whereof it is declared, "That on the Petition of the Commons, of
the assent of all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Proctors of the
Clergy, he repealed the said Statute and Commission Ibid. c. 2.
, and with the assent of the said Lords and Commons did ordain and establish
that no such Commission nor the like be henceforth purchased, pursued or made.
This done, the heirs of such as had been condemned by virtue of the said
Commission, demanded restitution of their Lands and Honors. And thereupon the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Procuratours of the Clergy ( the Commons
having prayed to the King before as the Appellants prayed) severally examined
did assent expressly that the said Parliament and all the Statutes, etc. should
be void, etc. and restitution made as before is said. Ibid. c. 12.
And also the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Procuratours of the Clergy, and
the said Commons were severally examined of the Questions proposed at
Notingham, and of the Answer which the Judges made unto the same: which being
read as well before the King and the Lords, as before the Commons, it was
demanded of all the States of the Parliament, what they thought of the Answers,
and they said that they were lawfully and duly made, etc. And then it
follows, whereupon the King, by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Procuratours of the Clergy and the said Commons, and by the advice of the Justices and Sergeants, aforesaid (who had been asked their
opinion in point of Law) ordained and established that the said Parliament
should be annulled and held for none." Add unto this that passage in the 9 of
Edward 2. where it is said, that many Articles containing diverse grievances
committed against the Church of England, the Prelates and Clergy, were
propounded by the Prelates and Clerks of our Realm, in Parliament, and great
instance made that convenient remedy might be appointed therein Proem ad
articulos Cl^ri.
: that of the complaints made to the King in Parliament by the Prelates and
Clergy of this Realm, 50 Ed. 3. 5. and 8 Rich. 2. c. 13. and that of the
Petition delivered to the King in Parliament by the Clergy of England, 4 Hen.
4. c. 2. Seldom hist. of Tithes. c. 8. 33.
And finally that memorable passage in the Parliment, 51 Edw. 3. which in brief
was this. The Commons finding themselves agrieved as well with certain
Constitutions made by the Clergy in their Synods, as with some laws or
Ordinances which were lately passed, more to the advantage of the Clergy than
the Common people, put in a Bill to this effect, viz. "That no Act nor
Ordinance should from thenceforth be made or granted on the Petition of the
said Clergy, without the consent of Commons; and that the said Commons should
not be bound in times to come, by any constitutions made by the Clergy of this
Realm, for their own advantage, to which the Commons of this Realm had not
given consent." The reason of the which is this (and it is worth the marking) "
car eux ne veullent estre obligez a null de vos estatuz ne Ordinances faitz sanz
leur assent, because the said Clergy did not think themselves bound, (as indeed
they were not in those times) by any Statute, Act, or Ordinance, made without
their Assent in the Court of Parliament." Which clearly shows that in those
times the Clergy had their place in Parliament as the Commons had. Put all
which has been said together, and tell me if it be not clear and evident that
the inferior Clergy had their place in Parliament; whether the Clause
touching the calling of them thither, were not more than verbal in the Bishops
writs, and is true that in the writ of summons directed to their several and
respective Bishops they were called only ad consentiendum, to manifest their
consent to those Acts and ordinances, which by the Common counsel of the Realm
were to be ordained. But then it is as true withal, that sometimes their advice
was asked in the weighty matters, as in the 21 of K. Richard the 2. and
sometimes they petitioned and remonstrated for redress of grievances, as in the
instances and cases which were last produced. And it is as true that if they had
been present only ad consentiendum, to testify their assent to those Acts
which by the common Counsel of the Realm were proposed unto them: their
presence was as necessary, and their voice as requisite to all intents and
purposes (for ought I can see) as the voice and presence of the Commons in the
times we speak of. For in the writs of summons issued to the several Sheriffs
for the electing of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to attend the Parliament,
it is said expressly, first that the King resolves upon weighty motives
touching the weal and safety both of Church and State to hold his Parliament,
Fo^ma Brevis pro fammonit. Parliamenti.
et ibidem cum Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni nostri
colloquium habere et tractare, then and there to advise and treat with the
Prelates, Peers and Nobles of this Realm: Which words are also expressly used
in the writs of summons directed to the Bishops, and to every of them; who also
are required in a further clause consilium suum impendere Titles of hon. part
2. cap. 5.
, to give the King their best advice in his great affairs. So that the Prelates
and Nobility conveened in Parliament made the Kings great Counsel, and were
called thither to that end. What then belonged unto the Commons? 1. No more
than did belong to the Clergy also, that is to say, the giving of their consent
to such Laws and Statutes as should there be made. Which notwithstanding in
tract of time gave them such a sway, and stroke in the course of Parliaments,
that no law could be made, nor no tax imposed without their liking and
allowance. And this is that which is expressed in the last clause of the said
writ, by which the Knights and Burgesses are to come prepared Form a Brevis,
etc.
ad faciendum et consentiendum iis quae tune ibidem de consilio dicti Regni
nostri super negotiis antedictis contigerint ordinari. Which is the very same
which you had before in the writ directed to the Bishops, for summoning the
Clergy of their several Diocesses, and that here is a faciendum which the
other had not. A word which if you mark it well, has no operation in the
Construction of the text, except it be in paying subsidies, or doing such
things as are appointed to be done by that great Counsel of the Kingdom; Which
clause, though it be cunningly left out (that I may say no worse) in the
recital of the writ by the Author of the Book entitled, the Prerogative and
practice of Parliaments: is most ingenuously acknowledged in the Declaration of
the Lords and Commons assembled at Oxon, Declaration of the treaty P. 15.
where it is said, that the writs of summons, the foundation of all power in
Parliament, are directed to the Lords in express terms to treat and advise
with the King and the rest of the Peers of the Kingdom of England; and to the
Commons to do and consent to those things, which by that Common council of
England should be ordained. And thus it stands, as with the Common people
generally in most states of Christendom, so with the Commons anciently in most
states of Greece; of which Plutarch tells us Plutarch in Lyeurgo:
, that when the people were assembled in Counsel, "it was not lawful for any
of them to put forth matters to the Counsel to be determined, neither might any
of them deliver his opinion what he thought of any thing, but the people had
only authority (...), to give their assent unto such things as either the
Senators or their Kings do propound unto them."

Clergy lost their place and vote in Parliament, and therefore it may
reasonably be presumed that they had never any there: and 2ly. that if they had
been called ad consentiendum (though no more than so) we should have found more
frequent mention of their consent unto the Acts and Statutes in our printed
Books. For answer unto which it may first be said, that to suppose the Clergy
had no voice in Parliament, because it is not to be found when they lost that
Privilege, is such a kind of Argument (if it be an argument) as is made by
Bellarmine, Bellarm. de Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 5.
to prove that many of the controverted Tenets of the Church of Rome, are
neither terroneous nor new, because we cannot say expressly, quo tempore, quo
autore, when and by whose promoting they first crept in. And though we cannot
say expressly when the inferior Clergy lost their place in Parliament, in
regard it might be lost by discontinuance or non-usage; or that the clause was
pretermitted for some space of time the better to disuse them from it; or that
they might neglect the service in regard of their attendance in the
Convocation, which gave them power and reputation both with the Common people:
yet I have reason to believe, that this pretermission and disuse did chiefly
happen under the government of the Kings of the house of Lancaster, who being
the true heirs and successors of John of Gaunt, cast many a longing eye on the
Church revenues, and hardly were persuaded to abstain from that height of
sacrilege, which Henry the 8 did aftercome to. And this I am induced to believe
the rather, in regard that in the confirmation of the Churches rights so
solemnly confirmed and ratified in all former Parliaments; there was a clog put
to or added in these times, which shaked the Fabric: the confirmation being
first of such rights and liberties as were not repealed, 3. Hen. 5. cap. 1. and
4 Hen. 5. cap. 1. and afterward of such as by the Common law were not
repealeable, 2 Hen. 6. cap. 1. which might go very far indeed. And secondly I
find that in the 8 of Henry the 6. an Act of Parliament was passed, that all
the Clergy called to Convocation by the Kings writ, and their servants and
Family shall for ever hereafter fully use and enjoy such liberty and defense in
coming tarrying and returning, as the great men and Comminalty of the Realm of
England called to the Kings Parliament do enjoy, 8 Hen. 6. cap. 1.
etc. Which being an unnecessary care or caution when the Clergy had their
voice in Parliament, and very necessary to be taken formerly, if they had never
had such voice: makes me conceive, that it was much about this time that they
lost that privilege. But this I leave as a conjecture, and no more than so. For
answer to the second argument, that if they had been called of old ad
consentiendum, we should have found more frequent mention of their consent unto
the Acts and Statutes of the former times; besides that it is a negative proof,
and so non concludent, it strikes as much against the presence and consent of
the Knights and Burgesses in the elder Parliaments, as it can do against the
Clergy. For in the elder Parliaments under K. Henry 3. and K. Edward the first
there is no mention of the Commons made at all, either as present or
consenting; nor much almost in all the Parliaments till K. Henry 7. but that
they did petition for redress of greivances, and that upon their special
instance and request In the Proem to the several Sessions.
several laws were made for the behoof and benefit of the Commonwealth: which
part the Clergy also acted in some former Parliaments, as before was showed.
So that this negative Argument must conclude against both or neither. But
secondly I answer, that in these elder times in which the Proctors for the
Clergy had their place in Parliament, they are included generally in the name
of the Commons. And this I say on the authority of the old modus tenendi
Parliamentum, in which the Commons are divided in the Spiritualty and the
Temporalty; and where it is expressly said that the Proctors for the Clergy,
the Knights, the Citizens and the Burgesses did represent the whole Comminalty
of the Realm of England Cap. ult.
. And this holds good in law (for ought I find unto the contrary) to this very
day. Certain I am that Crompton in his book of the Jurisdiction of Courts,
where he fpeakes of Parliaments, does tell us that the Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque ports, Grompton Iurisd. des. Courts. ca^.
ove le Clergy qu' eux assemble au Pawles, represent le corpse de tout le
Comminalty Dengliterre, together with the Clergy which assembled at S. Paul's,
do represent the body of the whole Comminalty of England. So then, the Clergy
were not only called but were present also, according to that clause in the
writ of Summons (which before I spoke of) directed to their several and
respective Bishops, as the Kings spiritual Sheriffs, if I may so say, enabled
by the Laws to that end and purpose. Which some endeavoring to avoid, have at
last found out that the clause before recited out of the Writ to the Bishops,
is not a calling of the Clergy to attend in Parliament, but to command them to
attend in the Convocation: which I have heard much pressed by those who pretend
unto some knowledge in the course of things. Which though it be a gross
mistake, and inconsistent with the words and circumstances of the Writ it
self, which relates merely to the Parliament, and business of a Parllamentarie
nature: yet for the clearing of the point, and undeceiving such as have been
deceived, they may please to know, that besides this Writ by which the Clergy
are commanded to appear in Parliament, there is another writ and another form
of calling them unto the service of the Convocation, which is briefly this. The
King sends out his Writ or Mandat to the Archbishop of Canterbury, requiring
him super quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis, etc. Regist. Warham.
. for diverse great and weighty reasons concerning the Kings honor, the
Churches safety, and the public peace of his dominions, to summon all the
Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and the whole Clergy of his Province
to meet in Convocation at a day and place appointed. On the reception of which
Writ the Archbishop sends out his Monitory to the Bishop of London (who by
his place is Dean of the Episcopal College Antiqu. Britan. in initio.
, and to disperse the Mandates of the Metropolitan) requiring him to appear
himself in person, and to send out his warrant unto every Bishop of the
Province, to appear there also, and to take order that the Deans of the
Cathedrals, and Archdeacons personally, the Chapter by one Procurator, the
Clergy of the Diocese by two, (whom we usually call Clerks of the Convocation)
do attend that service ( p). Regist. Warham.
. Which coming to the hands of each several Bishop they do accordingly give
intimation to their Deans and Chapters, to their Archdeacons and the Clergy;
and they accordingly prepare themselves to obey the Monitory, and to return
Certificate of their doings in it. The like proceeding is observed also for the
Province of York. So that the calling of the Clergy to the Convocation being by
a different Writ and another form, which has no reference to nor dependence
on the writs directed by the K. to each several Bishop for their attendance in
the Parliament, it must needs be (as I conceive it) that by that clause
remaining in the Writs aforesaid, the Clergy have good right and title to a
voice in Parliament, though they have lost their jus in re, the benefit, the
use and possession of it.

Apostle said in another case, not by commandment but by permission. For I
persuade my self the Clergy do not aim so high at the recovery of a right so
long antiquated and disused, but would be well enough content with the
restitution of the Bishops to their vote in Parliament, of which they stood
possessed by so strong a Title, as the very constitution of the Parliament, and
the fundamental laws of the English government could confer upon them. For
though the Bishops sat in Parliament in their own personal capacities, and not
as the representative body of the Clergy; yet the poor Clergy found it some
respect unto them to be thus honored in their heads: and were the more obliged
to obey such Acts as were established in that Court, wherein these heads had
opportunity of interceding, if perhaps any thing were propounded which might be
grievous to the Clergy, and many times a power of hindering and diverting if
not by voice and numbers, yet by strength of reasons. They were not altogether
Slaves and Bondmen whilst the Church held that remnant of her ancient rights;
for whilst the heads retained that honor, the body could not choose but
rejoice in it and be cherished by it. But since they have been stripped of that
(by what unworthy Acts the world knows too well) they are become of such
condition, that the most despicable Tradesman in a Corporate Town is more
considerable in the eye of the State, and has a greater interesse in the
affairs thereof, than the greatest Prelate, and to say truth than all the
Clergy of the Realm. For being there are three Ingredients which make up a
Freeman (as S. Francis Bacon well observed in his speech concerning the
Post-nati) that is to say, 1. jus Civitatis, which did enable a man to buy and
sell, and to take Inheritances; 2. jus suffragii, a voice in the passing of
Laws and Election of Officers; and 3. jus honoris, a capability of such offices
and honors as the State could give him: the Clergy by this means are limited to
the first right only, and utterly excluded from the other two, and thereby put
into a worse condition, than the meanest Freeman in the Kingdom. Insomuch that
whereas every needy Artizan if he be free of any Corporate Town or City, every
Cottager that dwells in an ancient Borough, and every Clown which can lay
claim to sorty shillings per Annum of free hold, either for life or of
inheritance, has a voice in Parliament, either in person or by Proxy; and is
not bound by any law but what himself consents to in his Representatives: the
Clergy only of this Realm (as the case now stands) being one of the greatest
States of this Kingdom, as is acknowledged expressly in terminis by Act of
Parliament 8 Eliz. c. 1.
, are neither capable of place there in their personal capacities, nor suffered
to be there in their Procuratours, as of old they were; nor have so much as any
voice in choosing of the Knights and Burgesses which represent the body of the
people generally. I know it has been said in reply to this, that the Clergy
may give voices at the election of the Knights and Burgesses, and that it is
their own neglect if they do it not. But I know too, that this is only yielded
unto such of the Clergy, as are possessed os Lands and Houses in those several
places where such elections are to be made, and not then neither in most
places, except it be to make a party for particular ends, especially where some
good man or the main cause it self is concerned therein: which as it totally
excludes the greatest part of the Clergy from having any voice at all in these
Elections, (the greatest part of the Clegy (the more the pity) having neither
Lands nor Houses to such a value in fee simple) so it gives no more power unto
those that have, than what of necessity must serve (I am sure occasionally it
may) to their own undoing. For to say truth, those that give out that the
Clergy may give voice at such elections, use it but as a shift for the present
turn: intending nothing less indeed (as has often been seen) than that the
Clergy should be capable of so great a trust. The reason is, because there is
not any Freeman of a City or a Corporate town who has a voice in the election
of a Citizen to serve in Parliament, nor almost any Cottager or Freeholder who
has a voice in the election either of a Knight or Burgess, but is directly
eligible to the place himself. Of Citizens and Burgesses ^lected from the very
meanest of the people, we have many instances, and shall have more according as
they find their strength, and have received a taste of the sweets of Government.
And for the choosing of the Knights of the seveveral Shires, it is determined
by the Statutes that as 40 s. land of freehold per Annum 8 Hen. 6. c. 7.
, is enough to qualify a Clown for giving a voice at the election; so the same
Clown if he have 20l. land per Annum is capable of being chosen for a Knight of
the Shire, as appears plainly and expressly by the Statute law. For though the
writ directed to the several and respective Sheriffs prescribe a choice of
duos milites gladio cinctos; yet we know well that by the Statute of King Henry
6. which is explanatory in this case of the Common law, such notable Esquires
or Gentlemen, born of the same Counties, as shall be able to be Knights 23 Hen.
6. 15.
, are made as capable as a dubbed Knight to attend that service; and he that
has no more than 20 l. per Annum either in Capite or Socage is not only able
by the law to be made a Knight 1 Ed. 2. c. 1.
, but was compellable thereunto even by the Statute Law it self, until the Law
was lately altered in that point 17 Car^l. c. 1.
. And on the other side it is clear enough (for there have been of late some
experiments of it) that though a Clergyman be born an Esquire or Gentleman
(for they are not all born ex fece Plebis, as the late Lord Brook L. Brook
against Episcopacy.
forgetting his own poor extraction has been pleased to say) and though he be
possessed of a fair Estate descended to him from his Ancestors, or otherwise
possessed of some Lands or Houses in Town, Borough, or City, whereby he stands
as eligible in the eye of the Law, as any Lay-Gentleman of them all; yet either
he is held incapable, and so pretermitted; or if returned, rejected at the
House it self to his fowl reproach. It is a Fundamental constitution of the
Realm of England, that every Freeman has a voice in the Legislative power of
Parliament: and it is an old rule in Politic^s, ^uod omnes tangit ab omnibus
tractari debet And so acknowleged in a writ of Summons of K. Edw. 1.
. Which being now denied to the English Clergy, reduces to them to that
condition which St. Paul complains of; and make them no otherwise accounted of
by the Common people, than as, (...), the filth and off-scowring of the world
to this very day.

disfranchisement, the slavery obtruded lately on the English Clergy: that is
to say, whether that any two of the three Estates conspiring or agreeiug
together can conclude on any thing unto the prejudice of the third. Bodinus
that renowned Statesman does resolve it negatively; and states it thus, nihil
a duobus ordinibus discerni posse, quo uni ex tribus incommodum inferatur, si
res ad singulos ordines seorsum pertinet Bodin. de Rep. l. 3. c. 7.
, that nothing can be done by two of the Estates to the disprofit of the third,
in case the point proposed be such as concerns them severally. The point was
brought into debate upon this occasion. Henry the 3d. of France had summoned an
Assembly of the three Estates or Conventus Ordinum to be held at Bloys, Anno
1577. (The form and order of the which we have at large described by Thuanus
Lib. 63.) But finding that he could not bring his ends about so easily with
that numerous body, as if they were contracted to a narrower compass, he caused
it to be moved unto them that they should make choice of 36, twelve of each
Estate, quos^ Rex cum de postulatis decerneret in consilium adhibere dignaretur
Thuanus in hist. temp. l. 63.
, whom the King would deign call to counsel for the dispatch of such affairs
and motions as had been either moved or proposed unto him. Which being very
readily assented to by the Clergy and Nobility, who hoped thereby to find some
favor in the Court, and by degrees to be admitted to the Privy Counsel, was
very earnestly opposed by Bodinus, being then Delegate or Commissioner for the
Province of Veromandois, who saw full well that if businesses were so carried,
the Commons (which made the third Estate,) would find but little hopes to have
their grievances redressed, their petitions answered. Bodin. de Rep. l. 1. c. 7
And therefore labored the rest of the Commissioners not to yield unto it, as
being utterly destructive of the Rights and Liberties of the Common people:
which having done, he was by them entrusted to debate the business before the
other two Estates, and did it to so good effect, that at the last he took them
off from their resolution, and obtained the cause. What Arguments he used in
particular, neither himself nor Thuanus tells us. But sure I am that he
insisted both on the ancient customs of the Realm of France, as also of the
Realms of Spain and England, and the Roman Empire; in each of which it was
received for a ruled case, nihil a duobus ordinibus statui posse, quo uni ex
tribus prejudicium crearetur, that nothing could be done by any of the two
Estates unto the prejudice of the third. And if it were a ruled case, then in
the Parliament of England, there is no reason why it should be otherwise in the
present times, the equity and justice of it being still the same, and the same
reasons for it now as forcible, as they could be then. Had it been otherwise
resolved of in the former ages, wherein the Clergy were so prevalent in all
public Counsails, how easy a matter had it been for them either by joining
with the Nobility to exclude the Commons, or by joining with the Commonalty to
exclude the Nobles? Or having too much conscience to adventure on so great a
change, an alteration so incompatible and inconsistent with the Constitution of
a Parliament; how easily might they have suppressed the potency, and impaird
the Privileges of either of the other two, by working on the humors or
affections of the one to keep down the other? But these were Arts not known in
the former days, nor had been thought of in these last, but by men of ruin,
who were resolved to change the Government (as the event does show too clearly)
both of Church and State. Nor does it help the matter in the least degree, to
say that the exclusion of the Bishops from the House of Peers, was not done
merely by the practice of the two other Estates, but by the asse^t of the King,
of whom the Laws say he can do no wrong, and by an Act of Parliament whereof our
Laws yet say, quae ^ul doit imaginer chose dishonorable, Plowden in Commentar.
that no man is to think dishonourably. For we know well in what condition the
King was when he passed that Act, to what extremities he was reduced, on what
terms he stood, how he was forced to fly from his City of London, to part with
his dear Wife and Children, and in a word so overpowred by the prevailing party
in the two Houses of Parliament, that it was not safe for him (as his case then
was) to deny them any thing. And for the Act of Parliament so unduly gained,
besides that the Bill had been rejected when it was first brought unto the
Lords, and that the greater part of the Lords were frighted out of the House,
when contrary unto the course of Parliament it was brought again; it is a point
resolved both in Law and reason, that the Parliament can do nothing to the
destruction of it self, and that such Acts as are extorted from the King are
not good and valid, whereof we have a fair example in the Book of Statuers 15
Ed. 3.
. "For whereas the King had granted certain Articles pretended to be granted in
the form of a Statute, expressly contrary to the Laws of the Realm and his own
Prerogative and rights royal (mark it, for this is just the case) which he had
yielded to eschew the dangers, which by denying of the same were like to
follow:" in the same Parliament it was repealed in these following words; It
seemed good io the said Earls, Barons, and other wise men, that since the
Statute did not proceed of our free will, the same be void; and ought not to
have the name nor strength of a Statute, and therefore by their counsel and
assent we have decreed the said Statute to be void, etc. Or if it should not be
repealed in a formal manner, yet is this Act however gotten, void in effect
already by a former Statute, in which it was enacted in full Parliament, and at
the self same place where this Act was gained, that the Great Charter (by which
and many other Titles the Bishops held their place in Parliament) should be
kept in all points, and if any Statute be made to the contrary, it shall be
holden for none 42 Ed. 3. c. 1.
.

CHAP. VI. That the three Estates of every Kingdom whereof CALVIN speaks, have
no authority either to regulate the power, or control the Actions of the
Sovereign Prince.
(I.) The Bishops and Clergy of England, not the King, make the third Estate,
and of the dangerous consequences which may follow on the contrary Tenet. (II.)
The different influence of the three Estates upon conditional Princes, and an
absolute Monarch. (III.) The Sanhedrim of no authority over the persons, or the
actions of the Kings of Judah. (IV.) The three Estates in France of (...) small
authority over the actions of that King. (V.) The King of Spain not overruled,
or regulated by the three Estates. (VI.) Of what authority they have been
anciently in the Parliaments of Scotland. (VII.) The King of England always
accounted heretofore for an absolute Monarch. (VIII.) (...) part of Sovereignty
invested legally in the English Parliaments. (IX.) The three Estates assembled
in the Parliament of England, subordinate unto the King, not coordinate with
him. (X.) The Legislative power of Parliaments is properly and legally in the
King alone. (XI.) In what particulars the power of the English Parliament does
consist especially. (XII.) The Kings of England ordinarily overrule t^eir
Parliaments by themselves, their Counsel, and their Judges. (XIII.) Objections
answered touching the power and practice of some former Parliaments, and the
testimonies given unto them. (XIV.) No such Authority given by God in Holy
Scripture to any such Popular Magistrates, as CALVIN dreams of and pretends.
(XV.) The Application and Conclusion of the whole Discourse.
I Have been purposely more copious in the former Chapter, because I thought it
necessa^y to declare and manifest who made the three Estates in each several
Kingdom, which are pretended by our Author to have such power of regulating the
authority, and censuring the actions and the persons of their Sovereign
Princes. And this the rather in regard it is thought of late, and (more than
thought) presented to the world in some public writings, (especially as it
relates to the Realm of England) that the King, the Lords, and Commons, make
the three Estates: which brings the King into an equal rank with the other two
in reference to the business and affairs of Parliament. A fancy, by what
Accident soever it was broached and published, which has no consistence either
with truth, or ordinary observation, or with the practice of this Realm, or of
any other. For the proof of this my position, that the King is none of the
three Estates as is now pretended, if all proofs else should fail, I have one
from Calvin, whose judgment in this point amongst many of us, will be instar
omnium. For where he says in singulis Regnis tres esse Ordines, Calvin,
inst^t. 4. cap. ult.
that there are three Estates in each several Kingdom, and that these three
Estates convened in Parliament, (or by what other name soever they call their
meeting) are furnished with a power Regum libidinem moderandi, of moderating
the licentiousness of Kings and Princes; and that they become guilty of
perfidious dissimulation, si Regibus impotenter grassantibus, etc. If they
connive at Kings, when they play the Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the
Common People: I trow it cannot be conceived that the King is any one of the
three Estates, who are here trusted (or at least supposed to be entrusted) with
sufficient power, as well to regulate his authority, as to control his
actions. If Calvin be allowed to have common sense, and to have wit and words
enough to express his meaning, (as even his greatest Adversaries do confess
he had) it must be granted that he did not take the King of what Realm soever,
to be any of the three Estates: or if he did, he would have thought of other
means to restrain his insolences, than by leaving him in his own hands, to his
own correction. Either then Calvin is mistaken in the three Estates, (and if he
be mistaken in designing the men he aims at, may he not be mistaken in the
power he gives them?) or else the King is no^e, and indeed can be none of the
three Estates, qui primarios conventus peragunt, who usually convene in
Parliament for those ends and purposes before remembered. But not to trust to
him alone, though questionless he be ideoneus testis in the present case; Let
us behold the Assembly of the three Estates or Conventus Ordinum in France
(from whence it is conceived that all Assemblies of this kind had their first
Original) and we shall find a very full description of them in the Assembly
des Estats at Bloys under Henry 3. Anno 1577. of which thus Thuanus. Thuanus in
histor. sui temp. l. 63.
" Rex insublimi loco sub uranisco sedebat, etc. The King, says he, sat on an
high erected Throne under the Canopy of State, the Queen Mother, and the Queen
his wife, and all the Cardinals, Princes, Peers upon either hand. And then it
follows, Transtris infra dispositis ad dextram suam sacri Ordinis Delegati,
ad laevam Nobilitas, and infra plebetus ordo sedebat, that on some lower forms
there sat the Delegates of the Clergy toward the right hand of the King, the
Nobility toward the left, and the Commissioners for the Commons in the space
below." We may conjecture at the rest by the view of this: Of those in Spain,
by those Conventions of the States which before we spoke of, at Burgos, Monson,
Toledo, and in other places, in which the King is always mentioned as a
different person, who called them, and dissolved them as he saw occasion. For
Scotland, it is ordinary in the style of Parliaments, to say the King and the
Estates do ordain and constitute; Statutes of Scotland.
(for which I do refer you to the Book of Statutes) which clearly makes the K.
to be a different person from the Estates of that Kingdom. And as for England,
besides what may be gathered from the former Chapter, we read in the History of
Titus Livius, touching the Reign and Acts of K. Henry the 5th. that when his
Funerals were ended, the three Estates of the Realm of England did assemble
together and declared his Son K. Henry the 6. being an Infant of 8 months old
to be their Sovereign Lord, Tit. Live. M. S. in Bibl. Bodl.
as his Heir and Successor. "And in the Parliament Rolls of K. Richard the 3d.
there is mention of a Bill or Parchment presented to that Prince, being then
Duke of Gloucester, on the behalf and in the name of the three Estates of this
Realm of England, that is to wit, of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of
the Commons by name: which forasmuch as neither the said three Estates, nor the
persons which delivered it on their behalf were then assembled in form of
Parliament, was afterward in the first Parliament of that King by the same
three Estates assembled in this present Parliament (I speak the very words of
the Act it self) and by authority of the same, enrolled, recorded, and
approved: Ap Speed in K. Rich. 3^
And at the request, and by the assent of the three Estates of this Realm, that
is to say, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons of this Land
assembled in this present Parliament, and by authority of the same, it be
pronounced, decreed, and declared, that our said Sovereign Lord the King was,
and is the very and undoubted heir of this Realm of England, etc." And so it is
acknowledged in a 1 Eliz. cap. 3.
Statute of 1 Eliz. ca. 3. where the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in that Parliament assembled, being said expressly and in terminis to
represent the three Estates of the Realm of England, did recognize the Queens
Majesty to be their true, lawful, and undoubted Sovereign Liege Lady, and
Queen. This makes it evident, that the King was not accounted in the times
before for one of the three Estates of Parliament, nor can be so accounted in
the present times. For considering that the Lords and Commons do most
confessedly make two of the three Estates, and that the Clergy in an other Act
of Parliament of the said Queens time, are confessed to be one of the greatest
States of the Realm, Statut. 8 Eliz. cap. 1.
which Statute being still in force, does clearly make the Clergy to be the
third; either there must be more than three Estates in this Kingdom, which is
against the Doctrine of the present times, or else the King is none of the
Estates, as indeed he is not, which was the matter to be proved. But I spend
too much time in confuting that which has so little ground to stand on, more
than the dangerous consequences which are covered under it: For if the King be
granted once to be no more than one of the three Estates, how can it choose but
follow from so sad a Principle, that he is of no more power and consideration
in the time of Parliament, than the House of Peers, which sometimes has
consisted of three Lords, no more; or than the House of Commons only, which
has many times consisted of no more than 80 or an hundred Gentlemen: but of
far less consideration to all intents and purposes in the Law whatever, than
both the Houses joined together. What else can follow hereupon but that the
King must be coordinate with his two Houses of Parliament, and if coordinate,
then to be overruled by their Joint concurrence, bound to conform unto their
Acts, and confirm their Ordinances; or upon case of inconformity and
non-complyance to see them put in execution against his liking and consents, to
his foul reproach. And what at last will be the issue of this dangerous
consequence, but that the Lords content themselves to come down to the Commons,
and the King be no otherwise esteemed of than the chief of the Lords, the
Princeps Senatus if you will, or the Duke of Venice, at the best no more, which
if Sir Edward Dering may be credited, as I think he may in this particular,
seems to have been the main design of some of the most popular and powerful
Members then sitting with him, for which I do refer the Reader to his book of
Speeches. Which dangerous consequents whether they were observed at first by
these who first ventured on the expression, or were improvidently looked over,
I can hardly say. Certain I am, it gave too manifest an advantage to the
Antimonarchical party in this Kingdom, and hardened them in their proceeding
against their King, whom they were taught to look on and esteem no otherwise
than as a Joynt-tenant of the Sovereignty with the Lords and Commons. And if
Kings have partners in the Sovereignty, they are then no King; such being the
nature and law of Monarchy, that si divisionem capiat interitum capiat necesse
est, Lactant Institut. Div. l. 1. c.
if it be once divided, and the authorities thereof imparted, it is soon
destroyed. Such is the dangerous consequence of this new Expression, that it
seems utterly to deprive the Bishops, and in them the Clergy of this Land, of
all future hopes of being restored again to their place in Parliament. For
being the Parliament can consist but of three Estates, if the King fall so low
as to pass for one, either the Bishops or the Commons, or the Temporal Lords
must desert their claim, the better to make way for this new pretension: and in
all probability the Commons being grown so potent, and the Nobility so numerous
and united in blood and marriages, will not quit their interesse; and therefore
the poor Clergy must be no Estate, because less able, as the world now goes
with them, to maintain their title. I have often read that Constantine did use
to call himself (...) Eusebius. de vita Constant.
the Bishop or Superintendent of his Bishops; and I have often heard our Lawyers
say, that the King is the general Ordinary of the Kingdom: but never heard nor
read till within these few yearrs, that ever any King did possess himself of
the Bishops place or vote in Parliament, or sat there as the first of the
three Estates (as anciently the Bishops did) to supply their absence. By which
device, whether the Clergy or the King be the greater losers (though it be
partly seen already) future times will show.

three Estates: which we shall find on search and trial to be very different,
according to the constitution of the Kingdom in which they are. For where the
Kings are absolute Monarchs, as in England, Scotland, France, and Spain, Bodin
de Repub. l. 1. c.
the three Estates, have properly and legally little more authority, than to
advise their King, as they see occasion, to represent unto his view their
common grievances, and to propose such remedies, for redress thereof, as to
them seem meetest, to canvass and review such erroneous judgments as formerly
have passed in inferior Courts, and finally to consult about, and prepare such
laws as are expedient for the public. In other Countries where the Kings are
more conditional, and hold their Crowns by compact and agreement betweeen them
and their Subjects; the reputation and authority of the three Estates is more
high and eminent, as in Polonia, Danemark, and some others of the Northern
Kingdoms, where the Estates lay claim to more than a directive power, and
think it not enough to advise their King, unless they may dispose of the
Kingdom also, or at least make their King no better than a Royal Slave. Thus
and no otherwise it is with the German Emperors, who are obnoxious to the Laws,
Thuan. hist. sui temp. l. 2.
and for their Government accomptable to the Estates of the Empire: insomuch
that if the Princes of the Empire be persuaded in their consciences that he is
likely by his mal-administration to destroy the Empire, and that he will not
hearken to advice and counsel Anonym. Script. ap Philip. Paraeu in Append. ^d
Romans 13.
ab Electorum Collegio Caesaria potestate privari potest, he may be deprived by
the Electors, and a more fit and able man elected to supply the place. And to
this purpose in a Constitution made by the Emperor Jodocus, about the year
1410. there is a clause, that if he or any one of his Successors do any thing
unto the contrary thereof, the Electors and other States of the Empire sine
rebellionis vel infidelitatis crimine libertatem habeant, Goldast. Constit.
Imperial. Tom. 3. p. 424.
should be at liberty without incurring the crimes of Treason or Disloyalty,
not only to oppose, but resist them in it. The like to which occurs for the
Realm of Hungary, wherein K. Andrew gives authority to his Bishops, Lords, and
other Nobles sine nota alicujus infidelitatis; Bonfinius de Edict. publ. p. 37.
that without any imputation of disloyalty, they may contradict, oppose, and
resist their Kings, if they do any thing in violation of some Laws and
sanctions. In Poland the King takes a solemn oath at his Coronation, to confirm
all the Privileges, rights and liberties which have been granted to his
Subjects of all ranks and orders by any of his Predecessors: and then adds
this clause, quod si Sacramentum meum violavero, incolae Regni nullam nobis
obedientiam praestare tenebuntur; which if he violates, his Subjects shall no
longer be obliged to yield him obedience. Bodin de Rep. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Which oath as Bodine well observes, does savor rather of the condition of
the Prince of the Senate, than of the Majesty of a King. The like may be
affirmed of Frederick the first King of Danemark, who being called unto that
Crown on the ejection of K. Christian the 2d. An. 1523. "was so conditioned
with by the the Lords of the Kingdom, that at his coronation, or before, he
was fain to swear, that he would put none of the Nobility to death or
banishment, but by the judgment of the Senate, that the great men should have
power of life or death over their Tenants and Vassals, and that no Appeal
should lie from them to the Kings tribunal, nor the King be partaker of the
confiscations; nec item honores aut imperia privatis daturum, etc Id. ibid.
nor advance any private person to commands or honors, but by authority of his
great Counsel." Which oath being also taken by Frederick the second, made
Bodinus say, that the Kings of Danemark, non tam reipsa quam appellare Reges
sunt, were only titular Kings, but not Kings indeed: Which character he also
gives of the Kings of Bohemia. Id. ibid. p. 88.
But in an absolute Monarchy the case is otherwise, all the prerogatives and
rights of Sovereignty being so vested in the Kings person, ut nec singulis
civibus nec universis fac est, etc. that it is neither lawful to particular
men, nor to the whole body of the Subjects generally to call the Prince in
question for life, fame, or fortunes: Id. ibid. p. 210.
and amongst these he reckons the kingdoms of France, Spain, England,
Scotland, the Tartars, Muscovites, and omnium paene Africae and Asiae
imperiorum, and of almost all the Kingdoms of Africa, and Asia. But this we
shall the better see by looking over the particulars as they lie before us.

Jewish Sanhedrim; which being instituted and ordained by the Lord himself, may
serve to be a leading case in the present business. For being that the Jews
were the Lords own people, and their Kings honored with the title of the Lords
Anointed: it will be thought, that if the Sanhedrim, or the great Council of
the seventie had any authority and power over the Kings of Judah, (of whose jus
Regni such a large description is made by God himself in the first of Sam. cap.
8.) the three Estates may reasonably expect the like in these parts of
Christendom. Now for the authority of the Sanhedrim, it is said by Cardinal
Baronius, that they had power of judicature over the Law, the Prophets, and the
Kings themselves. Baron. Annal. Eccl. An. 31.. 10.
Erat horum summa autoritas ut qui de lege cognoscerent, and Prophetis, and
simul de Regnibus judicarent. Which false position he confirms by as false an
instance, affirming in the very next words, horum judicio Herodem Regem
postulatum esse, that King Herod was convented and convicted by them; for which
he cites Josephus with the like integrity. I should have wondered very much what
should occasion such a gross mistake in the learned Cardinal, had I not shown
before, that as he makes the Sanhedrim to rule the King, so he has made the
high Priest to rule the Sanhedrim: which to what purpose it was done every man
can tell, who knows the Cardinal endeavors nothing more in his large
Collections, than to advance the dignity and supremacy of the Popes of Rome.
Id. in Epist dedicator.
But for the power pretended to be in the Sanhedrim, and their proceedings
against Herod as their actual King; Josephus when he cite's is so far from
saying it, that he does expressly say the contrary. For, as Josephus tells the
story, Hyrcanus was then King, not Herod; and Herod of so little hopes to enjoy
the Kingdom, that he could not possibly pretend any Title to it. But having a
command in Galilee procured by Antipater his Father, of the good King Hyrcanus,
he had played the wanton Governor amongst them, and put some of them to death
against Law and Justice. For which the Mothers of the slain (...), did often
call upon the King and people in the open Temple, (...), Joseph. Ant^q Judic.
l. 14. cap. 17.
etc. that Herod might answer for the murder before the Sanhedrim, Which being
granted by the King, he was accordingly convented by them, and had been
questionless condemned, had not the King, who loved him dearly, given him
notice of it; on whose advertisement he went out of the Town, and so escaped
the danger. This is the substance of that story: and this gives no authority to
the Court of Sanhedrim, over the persons or the actions of the Kings of Judah.
Others there are, who make them equal to the Kings, though not superior, (
Magnam fuisse Senatus autoritatem and Regiae velut parem, Grotius in Matthew.
cap. 5. v. 22.
says the learned Grotius:) And for the proof thereof allege those words of
Sedechias in the Book of Jeremy: who when the Princes of his Realm required of
him to put the Prophet to death, returned this Answer, Jerem. 38. 5.
Behold he is in your h^nd, Rex enim contra vos nihil potest, for the King is
not he that can do any thing against you. Which words are also cited by Mr.
Prynne to prove that the King of England has no Negative voice; Prynne of
Parl. pt. 2. p. 73.
but by neither rightly. For Calvin (who, as one observes, composed his
expositions on the book of God according to the doctrine of his Institutions
Hookers preface.
) would not have lost so fair an evidence for the advancing of the power of his
three Estates: had he conceived he could have made it serviceable to his end
and purpose. But he upon the contrary finds fault with them, who do so expound
it, or think the King did speak so honorably of his Princes, ac si nihil iis
sit nequandum Calvin. in Jerem. c. 38. v. 5.
as if it were not to deny them any thing. Not so, says he, it rather is
amerulenta Regis querimonia, a sad and bitter complaint of the poor captivated
King against his Counselors; by whom he was so overruled, ut velit nolit
cedere iis cognitur, that he was forced to yield to them whether he would or
not: which he expressly calls inexcusabilem arrogantium, an intolerable piece
of sawciness in those Princes, and an exclusion of the King from his legal
rights.

France, the government whereof is merely Regal, if not despotical, such as
that of a Master over his Servants: which Aristotle defines to be a form of
Government, (...), Aristot. Politic. l. 3.
wherein the King may do whatsoever he list, according to the counsel of his
own mind. For in his Arbitrary Edicts which he sends abroad, he never
mentions the consent of the People, or the approbation of the Counsel, or the
advice of his Judges (which might be thought to derogate too much from his
absolute power) but concludes all of them in this Regal form, Car tell est
nostre plaisir, for such is our pleasure. And though the Court of Parliament in
Paris do use to take upon them to peruse his Edicts, before they pass abroad
for View of France by Dallington.
Laws, and sometime to demurr on his grants, and patents, and to petition him
to reverse the same, as they see occasion; yet their perusal is a matter but of
mere formality, and their demurs more dilatory than effectual. It is the Car
tell est nostre plaisir that concludes the business, and the Kings pleasure is
the Law which that Court is ruled by. As for the Assembly des Estats, or
Conventus Ordinum, it was reputed anciently the Supreme Court for government
and justice of all the Kingdom; and had the cognizance of the greatest and
most weighty affairs of State. But these meetings have been long since
discontinued, and almost forgotten: there being no such Assembly from the time
of K. Charles the eighth, to the beginning of the reign of K. Charles the
ninth, Thuanus hist. sui temp.
which was 70 years, and not many since. And to say truth, they could be but of
little use, as the world now goes, were the meetings oftener. For whereas there
are three Principal, if not sole occasions of calling this Assembly, or
Conventus Ordinum, that is to say, the disposing of the Regency, during the
nonage or sickness of the King, the granting aids and subsidies, and the
redress of the grievances: there is now another course taken to dispatch their
business. The Parliament of Paris, which speaks most commonly as it is prompted
by power and greatness, appoints the Regent; Contin. Thuani. An. 1610.
the Kings themselves together with their Treasurers and Underofficers
determine of the taxes, View of France.
and they that do complain of grievances may either have recourse to the Courts
of justice, or else petition to the King for redress thereof. And for the
making new Laws or repealing the old, the naturalization of the Alien, and the
regulating of his sales or grants of the Crown Lands, the public patrimony of
the Kingdom, which were wont to be the proper subject and debates of these
grand Assemblies: they also have been so disposed of, that the Conventus
Ordinum is neither troubled with them, nor called about them. The Chamber of
Accounts in Paris (which has some resemblance to our Court of Exchequer) does
absolutely dispose of Naturalizations, and superficially surveyeth the Kings
grants and sales, Andr. Du Mesn.
which they seldom cross. The Kings Car tell est nostre plaisir is the Subjects
law, and is as binding as any Act or Ordinance of the three Estates: and for
repealing of such Laws as upon long experience are conceived to be
unprofitable, the Kings sole Edict is as powerful as any Act of Parliament. Of
which Bodinus, does not only say in these general terms, Saepe vidimus sine
Ordinum convocatione and consensu leges a Principe abrogatas Bodin. de Rep.
lib. 1. cap. 8.
. that many times these Kings did abrogate some ancient laws without the
calling and consent of the three Estates: but says, that it was neither new
nor strange that they should so do, and gives us some particular instances, not
only of the later times but the former ages. Nay when the power of this
Assembly des Estats was most great and eminent, neither so curtailled nor
neglected as it has been lately; yet then they carried themselves with the
greatest reverence and respect before their King, that could be possibly
imagined. For in the Assembly held at Tours under Charles the 8. though the
King was then no more than 14 years of age, and the authority of that Court so
great and awful that it was never at so high an eminence for power and
reputation, quanta illis temporibus, as it was at that time: yet when they came
before the King, Monseiur de Rell being then Speaker for the Commons or the
third Estate, did in the name of all the rest, and with as much humility and
reverence as he could devise, promise such duty and obedience, such a
conformity of his will and pleasure, such readiness to supply his wants, and
such alacrity in hearking unto his Commandments, that as Bodinus well
observes, his* whole Oration was nothing else, quam perpetua voluntatis omnium
erga Regem testificatio Id. ibid.
, but a constant testimony and expression of the good affections of the subject
to their Lord and Sovereign. But whatsoever power they had in former times is
not now material, King Lewis the thirteenth, having (on good reason of State)
discharged those Conventions for the time ensuing, Instead whereof he
instituted an Assembly of another temper, and such as should be more obnoxious
to his will and pleasure, consisting of a certain number of persons out of each
Estate, but all of his own nomination and appointment, which joined with
certain of his Counsel and principal Officers, he caused to be called L'
Assembly des Notables, assigning to them all the power and privileges which the
later Conventions of the three Estates did pretend unto; right well assured
that men so nominated and entrusted would never use their powers to his
detriment, and disturbance of his Heirs and Successors.

Bodinus having shown what dutiful respects the Convention of Estates in
France showed unto their King, adds this note, nec aliter Hispanorum conventus
habentur, that the Assembly of the three Estates in the Realms of Spain carry
themselves with the like reverence and submission to their Lord the King: Nay
major etiam obedientia and majus obsequium Regi exhibetur, Id. ibid.
the King of Spain has more obedience and observance from his three Estates,
than that which is afforded to the Kings of France. Which being but general and
comparative, is yet enough to let us see that the Assembly of Estates in the
Realms of Spain, which they call the Curia, is very observant of their King and
obsequious to him, and have but little of that power which is supposed by our
Author to be inherent in the three Estates of all the Christian Kingdoms, But
this Bodinus proves more particularly, ascribing to the King, and to him
alone, the power of calling this Assembly when he sees occasion, and of
dissolving it again when his work is done; according as is used both in France
and England. And when they are assembled and met together, their Acts and
consultations are of no effect, further than as they are confirmed by the Kings
consent. Which he declares in the same form ( eadem formula qua apud nos) that
has accustomably been used by the Kings of France, which is authoritative
enough; that is to say Id. ibid. p. 90.
decernimus, statuimus, volumus, We will, and we appoint, and we have decreed.
The Kings of Spain, though not so despotical in their Government as the French
Kings are, are as absolute Monarchs, and have as great an influence on the
three Estates, to make them pliant to their will, and to work out their own
ends by them, as ever had the French Kings on their Courts of Parliament: a
touch whereof we had before in the former Chapter. And this we may yet further
see by their observance of the pleasure of King Philip the 2d. Who having
married the Lady Elizabeth Daughter of Henry the 2d. of France, Convocatos
Castellae and reliquarum Hispaniae Provinciarum Ordines, Thuan. ^ist. sui temp.
h 23. l.
calling together the Estates of Castile and his other Provinces of Spain, he
caused them to swear to the succession of his Son Prince Charles, whom he had
by the Lady Mary of Portugal, and after having on some jealousies of State put
that Prince to death, caused them to swear to the succession of another son by
the Lady of Austria. And for the power of his Edicts, which they call
Pragmaticas, they are as binding to the Subject as an Act of Parliament, or any
kind of Law whatever: examples of the which are very obvious and familiar in
the Spanish Histories. For though there be a body of Laws in use amongst them,
partly made up of some old Gothish Laws and Constitutions, and partly of some
parts of the Law imperial: yet for the explanation of the Laws in force, if any
doubt arise about them, or for supplying such defects which in the best
colllection of the Laws may occur sometimes, the Magistrates and Judges are to
have recourse to the King alone, and to conform to such instructions as he
gives them in it. And this is it which was ordained by Alfonso the tenth, qui
etiam magistratus ac judices Principem adire jussit, quoties patrio jure nihil
de proposita causa scriptum esset Bodin. de Rep. lib. 1. cap. 8.
, as Bodinus has it. It Is true that for the raising of supplies of money, and
the imposing of extraordinary taxes upon the subject, the Kings of Spain must
be beholden to the three Estates, without whose consent it cannot legally be
done. But then it is as true withal, that there are customary tributes called
Servitia Id. ibid. p. 90.
which the King raises of his own authority without such consent. And their
consenting to the extraordinary is a thing of course: the Spanish Nation being
so well affected naturally to the power and greatness of their Kings, whom they
desire to make considerable if not formidable in the opinion of their
Neighbors, that the Kings seldom fail of moneys if the Subjects have it.
Finally that we may perceive how absolute this Monarch is over all the Courts
or Curias of his whole dominions; take this along according as it stands
verbatim Spanish hist. 67. by Tyrannell.
in the Spanish History. "The King of Spain as he is a potent Prince and Lord
of many Countries, so has he many Counsels for the managing of their affairs
distinctly and apart without any confusion: every Counsel treating only of
those matters which concern their Jurisdiction and charges: with which Counsels
and with the Presidents thereof, being men of chief note, the King does usually
confer touching matters belonging to the good Government, preservation, and
increase of his Estates, and having heard every man's opinion, he commands that
to be executed which he holds most fit and convenient.."

Scotland, and we shall find it there no otherwise (I mean in reference to the
point which is now in question) than in France or Spain. For besides that
Bodinus makes it one of those absolute Monarchies, ubi Reges sine controversia
omnia jura Majestatis habent per sese, Bodin. de Repub. l. 2. c. 7.
in which the Kings have clearly all the rights of Majesty inherent in their
own persons only: it is declared in the Records of that very Kingdom, that the
King is directus totius dominus, Camden n Britan. deicript. ^
the Sovereign Lord of the whole State, and has all authority and jurisdiction
over all estates and degrees, as well Ecclesiastical as lay or temporal. And as
for those Estates and Degrees convened in Parliament, we may conjecture at
their power, by that which is delivered of the form or order which they held it
in; which is briefly this. Form of holding the Parl. in Scotl.
"As Soon as the Kings writ is issued out for summoning the Estates to meet in
Parliament, he makes choice of eight of the Spiritual Lords, such on whose
wisdom and integrity he may most rely; which eight do choose as many of the
Temporal Lords, and they together nominate eight more out of the Commissioners
for the Counties, and as many out of the Commissioners for the Towns or
Buroughs. These 32 thus chosen are called Domini pro Articulis, Lords of the
Articles: and they together with the Chancellor, Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy
Seal, and Principal Secretaries of state, and the Master of the Rolls (whom
they call Clerk Register) do admit or reject every bill; [but not before they
have been shown unto the King] if they pass there they are presented afterward
to the whole Assembly, where being thoroughly weighed, and examined, and put unto
the votes of the house; such of them as are carried by the major part of the
Voices (for the Lords and Commons sit together in the same house there) are on
the last day of the Sessions exhibited to the King: who by touching them with
his Scepter pronounces that he either ratifieth and approves them, or that he
does disable them and make them void. But if the business be disliked by the
Lords of the Articles it proceeds no further, and never comes unto the
consideration of the Parliament, or if the King dislikes of any thing in it
when they show it to him, it either is razed out or mended before it be
presented to the public view." King James of blessed memory, who very well
understood his own power and the forms of that Parliament, describes it much to
the same purpose, in his Speech made at Whitehall, March 31. Anno 1607. "About
twenty days (says he) before the Parliament, Proclamation is made throughout
the Kingdom to deliver unto the Kings Clerk of Register all Bills to be
exhibited that Session before a certain day. Then are they brought unto the
King, and perused and considered by him, and only such as he allows of are
put into the Chancellors hands to be propounded to the Parliament, and none
others. And if any other man in Parliament speak of any other matter than is in
this sort first allowed by the King, the Chancellor tells him that the King
has allowed of no such Bill. Besides, when they have passed them for Laws they
are presented to the King, and he with his Scepter put into his hands by the
Chancellor, must say, I ratify and approve all things done in this present
Parliament. And if there be any thing that he disliketh it is razed out
before." So the eldest Parliament Man as he said himself, at that time in
Scotland. This was the form of holding Parliaments in Scotland, which,
whosoever does consider with a serious eye may perceive most plainly, that it
is wholly in the Kings power to frame the Parliament to his own will, or at the
least to hinder it from doing any thing to the prejudice of his Royal Crown and
Dignity: in that the nominating of the Lords of the Articles did in a manner
totally depend on him. Which being observed by the Scots, they took the
opportunity when they were in Arms to pass an Act during the Presidency of the
Lord Burley, Anno 1640. Acts of Parliaments, 16 Carol.
for the abolition of this Order, and for reducing of that Parliament to the
forms of England; as being thought more advantageous to their purposes, than
the former was. So that the violent disloyalty of the Scottish Subjects, their
Insurrections against their Kings, and murdering them sometimes when their
heels were up, which makes that Nation so ill spoke of in the Stories of
Christendom, are not to be imputed to the three Estates convened in Parliament,
or to any power or Act of theirs, but only praefervido Scotorum ingenio Rivet
cont. tenuit.
as one pleads it for them, unto the natural disposition of that fierce and
headstrong people, yet easilier made subject unto rule and government. The
three Estates assembled in the Court of Parliament, (when in the judgment of
our Author they are most fit to undertake the business) have for the most part
had no hand in those desperate courses.

England, where, since we came no sooner, we will stay the longer: and here we
shall behold the King established in an absolute Monarchy, from whom the
meeting of the three Estates in Parliament detracteth nothing of his power and
authority Royal. Bodin as great a Politic as any of his time in the Realm of
France, has ranked our Kings amongst the absolute Monarch of these Western
parts Bodin de Rep. l. 1. c. 8.
. And Camden as renowned an Antiquary as any of the Age he lived in, has told
us of the King of England, supremam potestatem and merum imperium habere Camden
in Britan. descript.
, "that he has supreme power and absolute command in his dominions; and that
he neither holds his Crown in vassallage, nor receives his investisture of any
other, nor acknowledges any Superior, but God alone." To prove this last, he
cites these memorable words from Bracton an old English Lawyer, omnis quidem
sub Rege, and ipse sub nullo sed tantum sub deo, that every man is under the
King, but the King under none saving only God. But Bracton tells us more than
this, and affirms expressly, that the King has supreme power and jurisdiction
over all causes and persons in this his Majesty's Realm of England, that all
jurisdictions are vested in him and are issued from him, and that he has jus
gladii, or the right of the sword, for the better governance of his people.
This is the substance of his words, but the words are these, Bracton de leg.
A^gl. l. 2. c. 24.
Sciendum est (says he) quod ipse dominus Rex ordinariam habet jurisdictionem
and dignitatem and potestatem super omnes qui in regno suo sunt. Habet enim
omnia jura in manu sua quae ad coronam and laicalem pertinent potestatem, and
materialem gladium qui pertinet ad Regni gubernandum, etc. He adds yet
surther. Habet item in potestate sua leges and constitutiones Id. l. 2. c. 16.
, that the Laws and constitutions of the Realm, are in the power of the King:
by which words, whether he means that the Legislative power is in the King,
and whether the Legislative power be in him, and in him alone, we shall see
anon. But sure I am, that he ascribes unto the King the power of interpreting
the Law in all doubtful cases, in dubiis and obscuris domini Regis expectanda
interpretatio and voluntas, which is plain enough. For though he speaks only
de chartis Regiis and factis Regum, of the Kings deeds and charters only, as
the words seem to import; yet considering the times in which he lived (being
Chief Justice in the time of King Henry the 3d.) wherein there was but little
written Law more than what was comprehended in the Kings Grants and Charters,
he may be understood of all Laws whatever. And so much is collected out of
Bractons words by the L. Chancellor Egerton, of whom it may be said without
envy, that he was as grave and learned a Lawyer, as ever sat upon that Bench.
"Who gathers out of Bracton, that all cases not determined for want of
foresight are in the King, to whom belongs the right of interpretation, not in
plain and evident cases, but only in new questions and emergent doubts; and
that the King has as much right by the constitutions of this Kingdom, as the
Civil law gave the Roman Emperors, where it is said, Rex solus judicat de causa
a jure non definita Case of the Post-nati. p. 107, 108.
." And though the Kings make not any Laws without the counsel and consent of
his Lords and Commons, whereof we shall speak more in the following Section,
yet in such cases where the Laws do provide no remedy, and in such matters as
concern the politic administration of his Kingdoms, he may and does take order
by his Proclamations. He also has authority by his Prerogative Royal to
dispense with the rigor of the Laws, and sometimes to pass by a Statute with a
non obstante, as in the Statute 1 Henr. 4. cap. 6. touching the value to be
specified of such lands, offices, or annuities, etc, as by the King are granted
in his Letters patents. But these will better come within the compass of those
jura Majestatis or rights of Sovereignty, which our Lawyers call sacra and
individua Camden in B^it.
: sacred, by reason they are not to be pryed into with irreverent eyes; and
individual or inseparable, because they cannot be communicated unto any other.
Of which kind are the levying of Arms Case of our Assairs. p. 3.
, suppressing of tumults and rebellions, providing for the present safety of
his Kingdom against sudden dangers, convoking of Parliaments, and dissolving
them, making of Peers, granting liberty of sending Burgesses to Towns and
Cities, treating with foreign States, making war, leagues, and peace, granting
safe conduct and protection, indenizing, giving of honor, rewarding, pardoning,
coining, printing, and the like to these. But what need these particulars have
been looked into, to prove the absoluteness and sovereignty of the Kings of
England, when the whole body of the Realm has affirmed the same, and solemnly
declared it in their Acts of Parliament. In one of which is affirmed, 16 Rich.
2. c. 5.
that the Crown of England has been so free at all times, that it has been in
no earthly subjection, but immediately to God, in all things touching the
regality of the said Crown, and to none other. And in another Act, that the
Realm of England is an Empire governed by one supreme head and King, having the
Dignity and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same, unto whom a Body
politic compact of all sorts and degrees of people, divided in terms and by
names of Spiritualty and Temporalty been bounden and ought to bear next to God
a natural and humble obedience 24 Henr. 8. c. 12.
. And more than so, that the King being the supreme head of this Body Politic
is instituted and furnished by the goodness and sufferance of Almighty God with
plenary whole and entire power, pre-eminence, authority, prerogative, and
jurisdiction to render and yield justice and final determination to all manner
of Subjects within this Realm, and in all causes whatsoever. Nor was this any
new Opinion invented only to comply with the Princes humor, but such as is
declared to have been fortified by sundry Laws and Ordinances made in former
Parliaments Ibid.
: and such as has been since confirmed by a solemn Oath, taken and to be taken
by most of the Subjects of this Kingdom, Which Oath consisting of two parts,
the one Declaratory, and the other Promissory; in the Declaratory part the man
thus takes it does declare and testify in his conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm and of all other his
Dominions, and Countries, as well in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things or
causes as temporal, etc. (l) 1 Eliz. c. 1.
And in the Promissooy part, they make Oath and swear, that to their power they
will assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and
Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and
Succcesseors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. Put
all which has been said together, and it will appear, that if to have merum
imperium, a full and absolute command, and all the jura majestatis which belong
to Sovereignty, if to be so supreme as to hold immediately of God, to have all
persons under him, none but God above him; if to have all authority and
jurisdiction to be vested in him, and proceeding from him, and the material
sword at his sole disposal for the correcting of offenders and the well
ordering of his people; if to have whole and entire power of rendering justice
and final determination of all causes to all manner of Subjects, us also to
interpret and dispense with Laws; and all this ratified and confirmed unto him
by the solemn Oath of his Subjects in the Court of Parliament, be enough to
make an absolute Monarch: the Kings of England are more absolute Monarchs than
either of their Neighbors of France or Spain.

Sovereignty, or some part thereof, in the two Houses of Parliament: concerning
which Mr. Prynne published a discourse entitled The supreme power of
Parliaments and Kingdoms; and others in their Pamphlets upon that Argument have
made the Parliament so absolute, and the King so limited, that of the two the
Members of the Houses are the greater Monarchs. But this is but a new devise,
not heard of in our former Monuments and Records of Law: nor proved, or to be
proved indeed by any other Medium, than the Rebellions of Cade, Tiler, Straw,
Kett, Mackerell, and the rest of that rascal rabble Prynnes book of Parl. etc.
p^. 3.
; or the seditious Parliaments in the time of K. Henry the 3d. King Edward the
2d. and King Richard the 2d. when civil war and faction carried all before it.
For neither have the Houses or either of them enjoyed such Sovereignty de facto
in times well settled, and Parliaments lawfully assembled, nor ever could
pretend to the same de jure. Or if they did, as many have been apt enough to
raise false pretenses, it would much trouble them to determine whether this
Sovereignty be conferred upon them by the King or the people, whether it be in
either of the Houses severally, or in both united. If they can challenge this
pretended Sovereignty in neither of these capacities, nor by none of these
Titles, it may be warrantably concluded that there is no such Sovereignty as
they do pretend to. And first there is no part nor branch of Sovereignty
conferred upon them by the King. The writs of Summons which the Declaration of
the Lords and Commons assembled at Oxon. 1643. does most truly call the
foundation of all power in Parliament Declaration of the Treaty. p. 15.
, tell us no such matter. The writ directed to the Lords does enable them only
to confer and treat with one another, and consilium vestrum impendere, and to
advise the King in such weighty matters as concern the safety of the Kingdom.
But they are only to advise, not compel the King, to counsel him, but not
control him; and to advise and counsel are no marks of Sovereignty, but rather
works of service and subordination. Nor can they come to give this Counsel
without he invite them, and being invited by his writ cannot choose but come,
except he excuse them: which are sure notes of duty and subjection, but very
sorry signs of power and sovereignty. It Is true, that being come together they
may and sometimes do, on a writ of Error, examine, and reverse or affirm such
judgments as have been given in the Kings Bench: and from their sentence in
the case there is no appeal, but only to the whole body of that Court, the King
and both the Houses, the Head and Members Case of our Affairs. p. 7, 8.
. But this they do, not as the upper house of Parliament, but as the distinct
court of the Kings Barons of Parliament of a particular and ministerial
jurisdiction, to some intents and purposes, and to some alone: which though it
does invest them with a power of judicature, confers not any thing upon them
which belongs to Sovereignty. Then for the Commons, all which the writ does
call them to is facere and consentire, to do and consent unto such things which
are ordained by the Lords and Common Counsel of the Kingdom of England, and
sure conformity and consent, which is all the writ requires from them) are no
marks of Sovereignty, nor can an Argument be drawn from thence by the
subtillest Sophister, to show that they are called to be partakers of the
Sovereign power, or that the King intends to denude himself of any branch or
leaf thereof to hide their nakedness. And being met together in a body
collective, they are so far from having any share in Sovereignty, that they
cannot properly be called a Court of Judicature, as neither having any power to
minister an Oath Id. p. 9.
, or to imprison any body (except it be some of their own Members if they see
occasion) which are things incident to all Courts of Justice, and to every
Steward of a Leet, insomuch that the House of Commons is compared by some (^and
not incongruosly) unto the Grand Inquest at a general Sessions Review of the
Observat. p. 22.
, whose principal work it is to receive bills, and prepare businesses, and make
them fit and ready for my Lords the Judges. Nay so far were they heretofore
from the thoughts of Sovereignty, that they were liable to suits and
punishments for things done in Parliament, though only to the prejudice of a
private Subject, until King Henry 8. most graciously passed a Law for their
indemnity. For whereas Richard Strode one of the company of Tinners in the
County of Cornwall, being a Member of the Commons House, had spoken somewhat to
the prejudice of that Society, and contrary to the Ordinances of the
Stanneries; at his return into the Country, ^e was arested, fined, imprisoned.
Complaint whereof being made in Parliament, the King passed a Law to this
effect, viz. 4 H^n. 8. c. 8.
That ull suits, condemnations, executions, charges and impositions put or
hereafter to be put upon Richard Strode, and every of his Accomplices that be of
this Parliament, or a^y other hereafter, for any Bill, speaking, or reasoning
of any thing concerning the Parliament to be communed and treated of, shall be
void and null: but neither any reparation was allowed to Strode, nor any
punishment inflicted upon those that sued him, for ought appears upon Record.
And for the Houses joined together (which is the last capacity they can claim
it in) they are so far from having the supreme authority, that (as it is
observed by a learned Gentleman) "they cannot so unite or conjoyn as to be an
entire Court either of Sovereign or Ministerial jurisdiction; no otherwise
cooperating than by concurrence of Votes in their several Houses, for
preparing matters in order to an Act of Parliament Case of our Affairs. p. 9.
: Which when they have done, they are so far from having any legal authority in
the State, as that in Law there is no style nor form of their joint Acts; nor
does the Law so much as take notice of them until they have the Royal Assent.
So that considering that the two Houses alone do no way make an entire Body or
Court, and that there is no known style nor form of any Law or Edict, by the
Votes of the two Houses only, nor any notice taken of them by the Law; it is
apparent that there is no Sovereignty in their two Votes alone." How far the
practice of the Lords and Commons which remaind at Westminster, after so many
of both Houses had tepaired to the King, etc. may create Precedents unto
posterity, I am not able to determine: but sure I am, they have no Precedent to
show from the former Ages. But let us go a little further and suppose for
granted, that the Houses either joint or separate be capable of the
Sovereignty, were it given unto them: I would fain know whether they claim it
from the King, or the people only. Not from the King, for he confers upon them
no further power than to debate and treat of his great Affairs, to have access
unto his person, freedom of Speech (as long as they contein themselves within
the bounds of Loyalty) authority over their own Members: which being
custumarily desired Hakewell of passing bills in Parliament
, and of course obtained (as it relates into the Commons) shows plainly, that
these vulgar privileges are nothing more the rights of Parliament, than the
favors of Princes, but yet such favors as impart not the least power of
Sovereignty. Nor does the calling of a Parliament ex opere operato as you know
who phrase it, either denude the King of the poorest robe of all his Royalty,
or confer the same upon the Houses, or on either of them; whether the King
intend so by his call, or otherwise. For Bodin (whom Mr. Prynne has honored
with the title of a grand Politician Pryn of Parliam. par. 2. p. 45.
) does affirm expressly, Principis majestatem nec Comitorum convocatione, nec
Senatus populique praesentia minui Bodin. de Repub.
, that the majesty or Sovereignty of the King is not a jot diminished either by
the calling of a Parliament or Conventus Ordinum, or by the frequency and
presence of his Lords and Commons. Nay to say truth, the Majesty of Sovereign
Princes is never so transcendent and conspicuous as when they sit in
Parliament, with their States about them, the King then standing in his highest
Estate, as was once said by Henry 8. who knew (as well as any of the Kings of
England) how to keep up the majesty of the Crown Imperial. Nor can they claim
it from the people, who have none to give; for nemo dat quod non habet, as the
saying is. The King (as has been proved before) does hold his Royal Crown
immediately from God himself, not from the contract of the people. He writes
not populi clementia, but Dei gratia, not by the favor of the people, but by
the grace of God. The consent and approbation of the people (used and not used
before the day of coronation) is reckoned only as a part of the solemn pomps
which are then accustomably used. The King is actually King to all intents and
purposes in the Law whatever, immediately on the death of his Predecessor. Nor
ever was it otherwise objected in the Realm of England, till Clark and Watson
pleaded it at their arraignment in the first year of King James Speeds History
in K. James.
. Or grant we that the Majesty of this Kingdom was first originally in the
people, and by them devolved upon the King by their joint consent: yet having
given away that power by their said consent, and settled it upon the King by an
Act of State, confirmed by Oaths and all solemnities which that Act requires;
they cannot so retract that grant, or make void that gift, as to pass a new
conveyance of it, and settle it upon their Representees in the House of
Commons. Or if they could, yet this would utterly exclude all the Lords from
having the least share or portion in this new found Sovereignty; in that they
represent not the common people, but sit there only in their own personal
capacities, and therefore must submit at last to these new made Sovereigns, who
carry both the Purse and Sword at their own girdles. So then the people cannot
give the Sovereignty, and if they have no power to give it, the Lords and
Commons have no claim thereunto de jure. See we next therefore how much of this
Sovereignty they or their Predecessors rather have enjoyed de facto, in
peaceable and regular times, fit to be drawn into example in the Ages
following. The chief particulars in which the Sovereignty consists we have seen
before; and will now see whether that any of them been exercised and enjoyed in
peaceable and regular times by both or either of the two Houses of Parliament.
And first for calling and dissolving Parliaments, making of Peers, granting of
liberty to Towns and Cities, to make choice of Burgesses, which anciently had
no such liberty, treating with foreign States, denouncing war, or making Leagues
or Peace after war commenced, granting safe conduct and protection, indenizing
of Aliens, giving of honors unto eminent and deserving persons, rewarding,
pardoning, coining, printing, making of corporations, and dispensing with the
Laws in force; they are such points which never Parliament did pretend to till
these later times, wherein every thing almost is lawful (I am sure more
law^ull) than to fear God and honor the King. Nor do I find that Mr. Prynne
has labored to entitle them to these particulars. For levying of Arms and the
command of the Militia, besides that the Kings of England have ever been in
possession of it, and that possession never disturbed or interrupted by any
claim of right made in the behalf of the two Houses, (which is as sure a title
as the Law can make): the Houses have declared by a Act of Parliament S^at. 7
Ed. 1. cap. 1.
, that of right it belongs unto the King straightly to defend (that is
prohibit) all force of Arms, and that the Parliament is bound to aid him in
that prohibition. Touching the Royal navy and the ports and forts, the Kings
prescription to them is so strong and binding, that in the 3d. of Edward 3.
Edw. 3.
the House of Commons; did disclaim the having cognizance of such matters as
the guarding of the Seas, and marches of the Kingdom: which certainly they had
not done had they pretended any title to the ports and navy. As for suppressing
tumults, and providing for the safety of the Kingdom against sudden danger, the
Law commits it solely to the care of the King: obliging every Subject by the
duty of his allegiance to aid and assist him at all seasons when need shall
require 11 Henr. 7. c. 18.
. And for their power of declaring law in the House of Peers, wherein they
deliver their opinion in the point before them, in true propriety of speech
they have none at all Case of our Affairs, p. 4.
. And this is that which was affirmed by his Majesty at the end of the
Parliament, Anno 1628. saying, that it belonged only to the Judges under him to
interpret laws, and that none of the Houses of Parliament joint or separate
(what new Doctrine soever might be raised) had any power either to make or
declare law without his consent 3 Car.
. And if it be done with his consent, it is not so properly the declaring and
interpreting of an old law, as the making rather of a new, says a learned
Gentleman Case of our affairs, P. 5.
.

Sovereignty, not as superior to the King, but coordinate with him: and this
say they appears sufficiently in that the two Houses of Parliament have not
only a power of consulting but of consenting, and that too in the highest
office of the Monarchy, (whereof they are a Coordinative part) the making of
Laws Fuller Answer to D. F. p. 2.
. Which dangerous doctrine as it was built at first on that former error which
makes the King to be one of the three Estates in Parliament, so it is
super-structed with some necessary consequents; whether more treasonable or
ridiculous, it is hard to say. For on these grounds the Author of the Fuller
Answers has presented us with these trim devises Id. page 1.
, viz. that England is not a simple subordinate and absolute, but a
coordinative and mixed Monarchy; that this mixed Monarchy is compounded of three
coordinate Estates, a King and two Houses of Parliament; that these three make
but one supreme, but that one is a mixed one, or else the Monarchy were not
mizt; and finally, which needs must follow from the premises, that although
every Member of the Houses s^orsim, taken severally, may be called a Subject,
yet all collective in their houses are no Subjects. Auditum admissi risum
teneatis? Can any man hear these serious follies and abstain from laughter? or
think a fellow who pretends both to wit and learning should talk thus of a
Monarchy (which every one that knows any thing in Greek, know to imply the
supreme government of one) compounded of three coordinate Estates, and those
coordinate Estates consisting of no fewer than 600 persons? Or that a man who
can pretend but to so much use of reason as to distinguish him from a beast,
could fall on such a senselest Dotage, as to make the same man at the same time
to be a Subject and no Subject; a Subject in the Streets and in his private
House, no Subject when he sits in Haberdashers Hall for advance of moneys, or
in either of the two Houses of Parliament? And yet this senseless Doctrine is
become so dangerous, because so universally admired and hearkened to, that the
beginning and continuance of our long Disturbances may chiefly be ascribed unto
this opinion, to which they have seduced the poor ignorant people. The rather
in regard that some who have undertook the confutation of these brainless
solies, have most improvidently granted not only As in the book called
Conscience satisfied.
that the two Houses of Parliament are in a sort coordinate with the King ad
aliquid, to some Act or exercising of the supreme power, that is to the making
of Laws; but that this coordination of the three Estates (of which the King is
yielded every where for one) is fundamental, and held by the two Houses on no
worse a title than a fundamental Constitution; which is as much as any
reasonable Parliamentarian need desire to have. Therefore in Answer to the
Fuller, (not taking notice of his foolish and seditious inferences) we will
clear those points. 1. That the two Houses of Parliament are not coordinate
with the King, but subordinate to him; And 2. that the power of making laws is
properly and legally in the King alone. As for the first we had before a
Recognition made by Act of Parliament, by which the Kingdom of England is
acknowledged to be an Empire governed by one supreme head and King, to whom all
sorts and degrees of people ought to bear next to God a natural and humble
obedience 24 H. 8. c. 12.
: which certainly the Lords and Commons had not made to the dethroning of
themselves, their heirs and successors from this coordinative part of
Sovereignty, if any such coordination had been then believed. Or if it be
supposed, to excuse the matter, that K. Henry the 8th. being a severe and
terrible Prince did wrest this Recognition from them (which yet will hardly
serve for a good defense:) what shall we say to the like recognition made in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign 1 Eliz. c. 1.
, when she was green in State, and her power unsettled, and so less apt to work
upon her people by threats and terrors? Assuredly had the Houses dreamed in
those broken times of that coordinative Sovereignty, which is now pretended,
they might have easily regained it, and made up that breach which by the
violent assaults of King Henry the 8th. had been made upon them: which was a
point they never aimed at. Besides, if this coordinative majesty might be once
admitted, it musts needs follow, that though the King has no Superior, he
has many Equals; and where there is Equality there is no Subjection. But
Bracton tells us in plain terms, not only that the King has no Superior in
his Realm, except God almighty, but no Equal neither: and the reason which he
gives is exceeding strong, Quia sic amitteret praeceptum, cum par in Parem non
habeat potestatem Bracton de leg. A^gl. l. 1. c. 8*
, because he could not have an Equal, but with the loss of his Authority and
Regal Dignity, considering that one Equal has no power to command an other.
Now lest the Fuller should object (as perhaps he may) that this is spoken of
the King out of times of Parliament, and of the Members of the Houses seorsim,
taken severally as particular persons; but when they are convened in
Parliament, then they are Sovereigns and no Subjects: first he must know, that
by the Statute of Queen Elizabeth all of the House of Commons are to take the
oath before remembered for the defending of all preheminences, and authorities
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and for bearing faith
and true allegiance to the King, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and that
if any of them do refuse this Oath, he is to have no voice in Parliament Stat.
5 E^iz. 1.
. 2. He cannot choose but know, that even sedente Parliamento, both the Lords
and Commons use to address themselves to his sacred Majesty in the way of
supplication and petition, (and certainly it is not the course for men of equal
rank to send Petitions unto one another); and that in those Petitions they do
style themselves his Majesty's most humble and obedient Subjects. Which is not
only used as the common Complement which the hypocrisy of these times has
taken up, (though possibly it might be no otherwise meant in some late
addresses) but is the very phrase in some Acts of Parliament ^25 Hen. 8. c. 22.
etc.
, as in the Acts at large does at full appear. 3. They may be pleased to know,
how happy a thing it was for the Realm of England that this Fuller did not live
in former times: For had he broached this Doctrine some Ages since, he would
have made an end of Parliaments. Princes are very jealous of the smallest
points of Sovereignty, and love to reign alone without any Rivals: their Souls
being equally made up of Pompeys and Caesar's, and can as little broke an Equul,
as endure a Superior. And lastly, I must let him know what Bodinus says, who
tells us this, Legum ac edictorum probatio aut publicatio quae in Curia vel
Senatu fieri solet, non arguit imperii majestatem in Senatu vel Curia inesse
Bodin de Rep. l. 1. c. 8.
, viz. That the publishing and approbation of Laws and Edicts which is made
ordinarily in the Court or Parliament, proves not the Majesty of the State to
be in the said Court or Parliament. And therefore if the power of confirmation
or rejecting be of a greater trust and more high concernment, than that of
consulting and consenting, as no doubt it is, the power of consulting and
consenting, which the Fuller does ascribe to the two Houses of Parliament, will
give them but a sorry Title to Co-ordinative sovereignty.

making Laws, which as before I said, is properly and legally in the King
alone, tanquam in proprio Subjecto, as in the true and adequate subject of that
power. And for the proof thereof, I shall thus proceed. When the Norman
Conqueror first came in, as he won the Kingdom by the sword, so did he govern
it by his power: His Sword was then the Scepter, and his will the Law. There
was no need on his part, of an Act of Parliament; much less of calling all the
Estates together, to know of them after what form, and by what Laws they would
be governed. It might as well be said of him, as in the flourish and best times
of the Roman Emperors Justin. Institut. l. 1. c.
, Quod Principi placuerit legis habet vigorem, that whatsoever the King willed
it did pass for* Law. This King and some of his Successors being then (...),
and having a despotical power on the lives and fortunes of their Subjects,
which they disposed of for the benefit of their friends and followers, Normans,
French, and Flemangs, as to them seemed best. But as the Subjects found the
yoke to be too heavy and insupportable; so they addressed themselves in their
Petitions to the Kings their Sovereigns, to have that yoke made easier, and the
burden lighter, especially in such particulars, of which they were most
sensible at the present time. By this means they obtained first to have the
Laws of Edward the Confessor, contained for the most part in the great Charter
afterward: and by this means, that is to say, by pouring out their prayers and
desires unto them, did they obtain most of the Laws and Statutes, which are now
remaining of the time of King Henry the 3d. and King Edward the first. Many of
which as they were issued at the first either in form of Charters under the
Great Seal, or else as Proclamations of Grace and favor; so do they carry
still this mark of their first procuring, the King wills, the King
commands, the King ordains, the King provideth, the King grants, etc. And
when the Kings were pleased to call their Estates together, it was not out of
an opinion that they could not give away their power, or dispense their
favors, or abate any thing of the severity of their former government, without
the approbation and consent of their people: but out of just fear lest any one
of the three Estates (I mean the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons) should
insist on any thing, which might be prejudicial to the other two. The Commons
being always on the craving part, and suffering as much perhaps from their
immediate Lords, as from their King, might possibly have asked some things
which were as much derogatory to the Lords (under whom they held) as of their
Sovereign Liege the King, the chief Lord of all. In this respect, the Counsel
and consent as well of the Prelates as the Temporal Lords, was accounted
necessary, in passing of all Acts of Grace and Favor to the people: because
that having many Royalties and large immunities of their own, a more near
relation to the person, and a greater interesse in the honor of their Lord the
King; nothing should pass unto the prejudice and diminution of their own
Estates, or the disabling of the King to support his Sovereignty. And this for
long time was the Style of the following Parliaments, viz. Preface, an. 1 Ed. 3.
"To the honor of God and of holy Church, and to the redress of the
oppressions of the people, our Sovereign Lord the King, etc. at the request of
the Commonalty of his Realm, by their Petition made before him and his Counsel
in the Parliament, by the Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other
great men assembled in the said Parliament, has granted for him and his Heirs.
etc." To this effect, but with some little (and but a very little) variation of
the words, was the usual Style in all the Prefaces or Preambles of the Acts of
Parliament, from the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the third, till the
beginning of the reign of King Henry the 7th. save that sometimes we find the
Lords complaining 10 Ed. 3. etc.
, or petitioning 21 Ed. 3. etc.
, and the Commons assenting 28 Ed. 3. etc.
, as their occasions did require: and sometime also no other motive
represented, but the Kings great desire to provide for the ease and safety of
his people, upon deliberation had with the Prelates and Nobles, and learned men
assisting with their mutual Counsel 23 Ed. 3.
. And all this while there is no question to be made, but that the power of
making Laws was conceived to be the chiefest flower of the Royal Diadem, to
which the Lords and Commons neither joint nor separate, did not pretend the
smallest Title more than petitioning for them, or assenting to them: it being
wholly left to the Kings grace and goodness, whether he would give ear or not
unto their petitions, or hearken unto such advise as the Lords or other great
men gave him in behalf of his people. And this is that which was declared in
the Parliament by the Lords and Commons (and still holds good as well in point
of Law as Reason) that it belonged unto the regality of the King to grant or
deny what Petitions 2 Her. 5.
in Parliament he pleases. But as the Kings came in upon doubtful Titles, or
otherwise were necessitated to comply with the peoples humors, (as sometimes
they were) so did the Parliaments make use of the opportunities for the
increase of their authority, at least in the formalities of Law, and other
advantages of expression. So that in the minority of King Henry the sixth, unto
those usual words by the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and at the special instance and request of the Commons (which were inserted
ordinarily into the body of the Acts from the beginning of the reign of King
Henry the 6th.) was added this, By the authority of the said Parliament 3 Hen.
6. c. 2. and 8 H. 6. 3. etc.
. But still it is to be observed, that though those words were added to the
former clause, yet the power of granting or ordaining was acknowledged to
belong to the King alone; as in the places in the Margin, where it is said, Our
Lord the King considering the premises, by the advice and assent, and at the
request aforesaid, has ordained and granted by the authority of the said
Parliament, 3 H. 6. 2. and our Lord the King considering, etc. has ordained
and established by authority of this Parliament, 8 H. 6. 3. And thus it
generally stood, (but every general rule may have some exceptions) till the
beginning of the reign of King Henry the 7th. about which time that usual
clause, the special instance or request of the Commons, began by little and
little to be laid aside, and that of their advise or assent to be inserted in
the place thereof: for which I do refer you to the book at large. Which though
it were some alteration of the former style, and that those words By the
authority of this present Parliament, may make men think that the Lords and
Commons did then pretend some title unto the power of making laws: yet neither
advising or assenting are so operative in the present case as to transfer the
power of making laws to such as do advise about them, or assent unto them; not
can the al^eration of the forms and styles used in ancient times, import an
alteration of the form of Government, unless it can be showed, (as I think it
cannot) that any of our Kings did renounce that power, which properly and
solely did belong unto them, or did by any solemn Act of Communication, confer
the same upon the Lords and Commons convened in Parliament. And this is that
which is resolved and declared in our Common law, where it is said Cited in the
unlawfulness of resist. p* 107.
, Le Roy fait les loix avec le consent du Seigneurs et communs, et non pas les
Seigneurs et communs avec le consent du Roy, that is to say, that the King
makes Laws in Parliament by the assent of the Lords and Commoni, and not the
Lords and Commons by the assent of the King. And for a further proof of this,
and for the clearing of this point that the Lords and Commons pretend to no
more power in the making of laws, than opportunity to propound and advise about
them, and on mature advise to give their several Assents unto them, we need but
look into the first Act of the Parliament in the third year of King Charles,
being a Recognition of some ancient Rights belonging to the English subject. An
Act conceived according to the primitive form, in way of a Petition to the
Kings most excellent Majesty Statut. 3 Carol.
, in which the Lords and Commons do most humbly pray as their Rights and
Liberties, that no such things as they complained of, might be done hereafter;
that his Majesty would vouchsafe to declare that the Awards, doings, and
proceedings to the prejudice of his people in any of the premises, shall not be
drawn hereafter into consequence or example, and that he would be pleased to
declare his Royal pleasure, that in the point aforesaid all his Officers and
Ministers should serve him according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. To
which although the King returned a fair general Answer, assuring them that his
Subjects should have no cause for the time to come to complain of any wrong or
oppressions contrary to their just Righ^s and Liberties; yet this gave little
satisfaction till he came in person, and causing the Petition to be distinctly
read by the Clerk of the Crown Ibid.
, returned his Answer in these words, Soit droit fait come est desire, that is
to say, let right be done as is desired. Which being the very formal words by
which the said Petition and every clause and Article therein contained, became
to be a law and to have the force of an Act of Parliament, and being there is
nothing spoken of the concurrent authority of the Lords and Commons for the
enacting of the same, may serve instead of many Arguments for the proof of
this, that the Legislative power as we phrase it now, is wholly and solely in
the King; although restrained in the exercise and use thereof by constant
custom, unto the counsel and consent of the Lords and Commons. Le Roy veult
Smith de Rep. Angl.
, or the King will have it so, is the imperative phrase by which the
Propositions of the Lords and Commons are made Acts of Parliament. And let the
Lords and Commons agitate and propound what Laws they please for their ease and
benefit (as generally all Laws and Statutes are more for the ease and benefit
of the Subject, than the advantage of the King): yet as well now, as formerly in
the times of the Roman Emperors, Quod Principi placuerit legis habet vigorem,
nothing but that which the King pleases to allow of, is to pass for Law: the
laws not taking their coercive force (as judicious Hooker well observes) from
the quality of such as devise them, but from the power which gives them the
strength of laws Hooker Ecclesiast. Pol*
. I shut up this Discourse with this expression and comparison of a late
leatned Gentleman, viz. "That as in a Copyhold Estate, the Copybolder of a mere
Tenant at will comes by custom to gain an Inheritance, and so to limit and
restrain the will and power of the Lord, that he cannot make any determination
of the Copyholders Estate otherwise than according to the custom of the
Manor; and yet does not deprive the Lord of his Lordship in the Copyhold, nor
participate with him in it, neither yet divest the Fee and Franktenement out of
the Lord, but that they still remain in him, and are ever parcel of his Demesne
Case of our Affairs. p. 6.
: so in the restraining of the Kings Legislative power to the concurrence of
the Peers and Commons, though the custom of the Kingdom has so fixed and
settled the restraint, as that the King cannot in that point use his Sovereign
power without the concurrence of the Peers and Commons according to the custom
of the Kingdom; yet still the Sovereignty (and with it the inseparable
Legislative power) does reside soly in the King."

serve Parliaments, and what benefit can redound to the Subject by them; I say
in the Apostles words, much every way Romans 3. 2.
. Many vexations often times do befall the Subjects without the knowledge of
the King, and against his will; to which his ears are open in a time of
Parliament. The King at other times uses the eyes and ears of such as have
place about him, who may perhaps be guilty of the wrongs which are done the
people: but in a Parliament he sees with his own eyes, and hears with his
own ears, and so is in a better way to redress the mischief than he could be
otherwise. Nor do the people by the opportunity of these Parliamentary
meetings, obtain upon their Prayers and petitions a redress of grievances only,
but many times the King is overcome by their importunity to abate so much of
his power, to grant such points, and pass such Laws and Statutes for their ease
and benefit, as otherwise he would not yield to. For certainly it is as true in
making our approaches and petitions to our Lord the King, as in the pouring out
of our prayers and supplications to the Lord our God: the more multitudinous
and united the Petitioners are, the more like to speed. And therefore said
Bodinus truly, Principem plaeraque universis concedere quae singulis
denegarentur Bodin. de Rep. l. 1. c. 8.
, that Kings do many times grant those favors to the whole body of their
people, which would be absolutely denied or not so readily yielded to
particular persons. There are moreover many things of greater concernment,
(besides the abrogating of old Laws and making new) which having been formerly
recommended by the Kings of England, to the care and counsel of their people
convened in Parliament, are not now regularly dispatched but in such
conventions: as are altering the tenure of Lands, confirming the rights,
titles, and possessions of private men, naturalizing Aliens, legitimating
Bastards, adding sometimes the secular authority to such points of Doctrine and
forms of worship as the Clergy have agreed upon in their Comvocations, if it be
required, changing the public weights and measures thorowout the Kingdom,
defining of such doubtful cases as are not easily resolved in the Courts of
Law, raising of Subsidies and Taxes, attainting such as either are too potent
to be caught, or too hard to be found, and so not tryable in the ordinary
Courts of Justice; restoring to their blood and honors such, or the Heirs of
such, as have been formerly attainted; granting of free and general pardons Sir
Tho. Smith, de Rep. Angl. Camden in Brit. Crompt. of Courts, etc.
, with diverse others of this nature. In all and each of these the Lords and
Commons do cooperate to the public good, in the way of means and preparation,
but their cooperation would be lost and fruitless, did not the King by his
concomitant or subsequent grace produce their good intentions into perfect
Acts, and being Acts either of special grace and favor, or else of ordinary
right and justice, no way derogatory to the Prerogative Royal^, are usually
confirmed by the Royal assent, without stop or hesitancy. But then, some other
things there are of great importance and advantage to the Common wealth, in
which the Houses usually do proceed even to final sentence (the Commons in the
way of imquisition or impeachment, the Lords in that of judicature and
determination) with the consent and approbation of the King, though many times
without his personal assent and presence. The King may be abused in his Grants
and Patents, to the oppression of the people, or the dilapidation and
destruction of the Royal Patrimony; Judges, and other the great Officers of Law
and Equity are subject to corruptions, and may smell of gifts, whereby the
passages of Justice do become obstructed; The Ministers of inferior Courts as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil, either exhaust the miserable subject by
extortions, or else consume him by delays; Erroneous judgments may be given
through fear or favor to the undoing of a man and his whole posterity, in
which his Majesty's Justices of either Bench can afford no remedy; The great
ones of the State may become too insolent, and the poor too miserable; and many
other ways there are by which the Fabric of the State may be out of Order:
for the removing of which mischiefs, the rectifying of which abuses, the Lords
and Commons in their several ways before remembered, are of special use; yet
so, that if the Kings Grants do come in question, or any of his Officers are
called to a reckoning, they used heretofore to signify unto his Majesty what
they found therein, and he accordingly either revoked his Grants, or displaced
his Servants, or by some other means gave way unto their contentment: the Kings
consent being always necessary, and received as a part of the final sentence,
if they went so far. So that we may conclude this point with these words of
Bodin, who being well acquainted with the Government of this State and Nation,
partly by way of conference with Dr. Dale the Queens Ambassador in France, and
partly in the way of observation when he was in England, does give this
resolution of the point in controversy Bodin. de Repub. l. 1. c. 8.
, Habere quidem Ordines Anglorum authoritatem quandam, jura vero majestatis,
and imperii summam in unius Principis arbitrio versari. The States says he of
England have a kind of authority, but all the rights of Sovereignty and command
in chief, are at the will and pleasure of the Prince alone.

Lords and Commons met in Parliament are of great authority, especially as they
have improved it in these later times; yet were they never of such power, but
that the Kings have for the most part overruled them, and made them pliant and
conformable to their own desires: and this not only by themselves, but
sometimes also by their Judges, by their counsel often. For such was the great
care and wisdom of our former Kings, as not to venture single on that numerous
body of the two Houses of Parliament, whereby the Sovereignty might be so
easily overmatched; but to take with them for Assistants as well the Lords of
their Privy Counsel with whom they might advise in matters which concerned them
in their Sovereign rights, as their learned Counsel (as they call them)
consisting of the Judges and most eminent Lawyers, from whom they might receive
instruction as the case required, and neither do, nor suffer wrong in point of
Law: and by both these, as well as by the power and awe of their personal
presence, have they not only regulated but restrained their Parliaments. And
this is easily demonstrable by continual practice. For in the Statute of
Bigamie made in the fourth 4 Ed. 1.
year of King Edward 1. it is said expre^ly, "that in the presence of certain
reverend Fathers, Bishops of England, and others of the Kings Counsel, the
Constitutions underwritten were recited, and after published before the King
his Couusel, forasmuch as all the Kings Counsel, as well Justices as others did
agree, that they should be put in writing and observed." In the Articuli super
Chartas, when the Great Charter was confirmed at the request of the Prelates,
Earls, and Barons, 28 Ed. 1. c. 2.
we find these two clauses: the one in the beginning thus, Nevertheless the
King and his Counsel do not intend, by reason of this Stat^te, to diminish the
Kings right Ibid. c. 20.
, etc. The other in the close of all in these following words, And
notwithstanding all these things mentioned, or any part of them, both the King
and his Counsel, and all they which were present at the making of this
Ordinance, do will and intend that the right and prerogative of his Crown shall
be saved in all things. In the 27th. of King Edward the 3d. 27 Ed. 3.
The Commons presenting a Petition to the King, which the Kings Counsel did
mislike, were content thereupon to mend and explain their Petition, the form of
which Petition is in these words following. "To their most redoubted Sovereign
Lord the King, praying the Commons, that whereas they have prayed him to be
discharged of all manner of Articles of the Lyre, etc. which Petition seems
to his Counsel to be prejudicial unto him, and in disherison of his Crown* if
it were so generally granted: his said Commons not willing nor desiring to
demand things of him, which should fall in disherison of him or of his Crown
perpetually, as of Escheats, etc. but of trespasses, misprisions, negligences,
and ignorances, etc." In the 13 of the reign of King Richard the 2d. when the
Commons did pray that upon pain of forfeiture, the Chancellor, or Counsel of
the King should not after the end of the Parliament make any Ordinance against
the Common law 13 Rich. 2.
, the King (by the advice of his Counsel) answered, Let it be used as it has
been used before this time, so as the Regality of the King be saved, for the
King will save his Regalities, as his Predecessors have done. In the 4th. year
of King Henry 4. 4 Hen. 4.
when the Commons complained against Sub-poenae's and other writs grounded upon
false suggestions, the King (upon the same advise) returned this answer, that
he would give in charge to his Officers, that they should abstain more than
before time they had to send for his Subjects in that manner. But yet (says
he) it is not our intention that our Officers shall so abstain, that they may
not send for our Subjects in matters and causes necessary, as it has been used
in the time of our good Progenitors. Finally, not to bring forth more
particulars in a case so clear, it was the constant custom in all Parliaments,
till the Reign of King Henry 5. Henr. 5*
that when any Bill had passed both houses, and was presented to the King for
his Royal Assent, the King by the advice of his Privy Counsel, or his Counsel
learned in the Laws, or sometimes of both, did use to cross ou^ and obliterate
as much or as little of it as he pleased, to leave out what he liked not, and
confirmed the rest; that only which the King confirmed being held for Law. And
though in the succeeding times the Kings did graciously vouchsafe to pass the
whole Bill in that form which the Houses gave it, or to reject it wholly as
they saw occasion: yet still the Privy Counsel, and the Judges, and the Counsel
learned in the Laws, have and enjoy their place in the House of Peers, as well
for preservation of the Kings rights and Royalties, as for direction to the
Lords in a point of Law, if any case of difficulty be brought before them; on
which occasions the Lords are to demand the opinion of the Judges, and upon
their opinions to ground their Judgment. As for example, In the Parliament 28
of Hen. 6. The Commons made sure that William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk,
should be committed to Prison for many treasons and other crimes 28 Hen. 6*
, and thereupon the Lords demanded the opinion of the Judges, whether he should
be committed to Prison or not; whose Answer was, that he ought not to be
committed in regard the Commons had not charged him with any particular
offense, but with generals only; which opinion was allowed and followed. In
another Parliament of the said King, held by Prorogation, one Thomas Thorpe the
Speaker of the House of Commons, was in the Prorogation-time condemned in 1000
l. damages, upon an Action of Trespass at the suit of Richard Duke of York,
and was committed to Prison for execution of the same. The parliament being
reassembled, the Commons made su^e to the King and Lords to have their Speaker
delivered to them, according to the privilege of Parliaments The privilege of
the Barons, p. 15.
: the Lords demanded the opinion of the Judges in it, and upon their Answer,
did conclude, that the Speaker should still remain in Prison according to Law,
notwithstanding the privilege of Parliament; and according to this resolution
the Commons were commanded in the Kings name to choose one Tho* Carleton for
their Speaker, which was done accordingly. Other examples of this kind are
exceeding obvious, and for numbers infinite; yet neither more in number, nor
more obvious than those of our Kings serving their turns by and upon their
Parliaments, as their occasions did require. For not to look on higher and more
Regal times, we find that Richard the 2d. a Prince not very acceptable to the
Common people, could get an Act of Parliament 21 Ric. 2.
, to confirm the extrajudicial opinion of the Judges, given before at
Notingham; that King Henry 4th. could by an other Act reverse all that
Parliament, 1 Hen* 4.
entayl the Crown to his posterity, and keep his Duchy of Lancaster and all
the Lands and Seigneuries of it, from being united to the Crown; that King
Edward the 4th. could have a Parliament to declare all the Kings of the House
of Lancaster, to be Kings in fact but not in right 1 Ed. c. 1.
, and for uniting of that Duchy to the Crown Imperial, notwithstanding the
former Act of separation; that King Richard the 3d. could have a Parliament to
bastardize all his Brothers Children, to set the Crown on his own head, though
a most bloody Tyrant, and a plain Usurper Speeds hist. in K. Richard. 3.
; that King Henry 7. could have the Crown entayled by an Act of Parliament, to
the issue of his own body Verulam. hist. of K. Hen 7.
without relation to his Queen of the house of York, which was conceived by
many at that time to have the better Title to it; another, for paying a
Benevolence which he had required of the subject 11 Hen. 7. c. 10.
, though all Benevolences had been damned by a former Statute made in the
short, but bloody reign of King Richard the 3d. that King Henry 8. 65 Hen. 8.
c. 22, and 28. c. 7. and 35 H. 8. c. 1.
could have one Act of Parliament to bastardry his Daughter Mary, in favor of
the Lady Elizabeth; another to declare the Lady Elizabeth to be illegitimate,
in expectation of the issue by Queen Jane Seymour; a third for settling the
succession by his Will and Testament, and what else he pleased; that Queen Mary
could not only obtain several Acts in favor of her self and the S^e of Rome 1
Mar. s^s. 2. c. 1, 2. and 1. and 2 Ph. and M. c. 8. 10.
, but for the settling of the Regency on the King of Spain, in case the Children
of that Bed should be left in nonage. And finally that Queen Elizabeth did not
only gain many several Acts for the security of her own Person, which were
determinable with her life, but could procure an Act to be passed in Parliament
for making it high treason to affirm and say, That the Queen could not by Act
of Parliament, bind and dispose the Rights and Titles which any person
whatsoever might have to the Crown. 13 Eliz. c. 1.
And as for raising moneys, and amassing treasures by help of Parliaments, he
that desires to know how well our Kings have served themselves that way by the
help of Parliaments, let him peruse a book entitled, the Privilege of
Parliaments, writ in the manner of Dialogue between a Privy Counselor, and a
Justice of Peace, and he shall be satisfied to the full. Put all that has been
said together, and sure the kingdom of England must not be the place, in which
the three Estates convened in Parliament have power to regulate the King, or
restain his actions, or moderate his extravagances, or where they can be taxed
for per^idious treachery, if they connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants,
or wantonly insult on the Common People, or otherwise abuse that power which
the Lord has given them. Calvin was much mistaken if he thought the contrary;
or if he dreamt that he should be believed on his ipse dixit, without a
punctual enquiry into the grounds and probability of such a dangerous
intimation as he lays before us.

Militia of the Kingdom, of the Forts, Castles, Ports, and the Navy Royal, not
only without the Kings leave, but against his liking: that they have deposed
some Kings, and advanced others to the top of the Regal Throne: And for the
proof of this they produce examples out of the reign of K. Henry 3. K. Edw. 2.
and K. Richard the 2. Prynnes Book of Parl. part. 2.
Examples, which if rightly pondered, do not so much prove the power, as the
weakness of Parliaments, in being carried up and down by the private conduct of
every popular pretender. For it is well known that the Parliaments did not take
upon them to rule, or rather to overlook K. Henry 3. but as they were directed
by Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, who having raised a potent faction in the
State, by the assistance of the Earls of Gloucester, Hereford, Derby, Man.
Paris, Henr. 3.
and some others of the great Lords of the kingdom, compelled the King to yield
unto what terms he pleased, and made the Parliaments no other than a means and
instrument to put a popular gloss on his wretched purposes. And it is well known
that the ensuing Parliaments which they instance in, moved not of their own
accord to the deposing of King Edward the 2. or King Richard the 2. but sailed
as they were steered by those powerful Counsels, which Queen Isabel in the
one, and Henry Duke of Lancaster in the other, did propose unto them.
Walsingham in Hist. Angl. and Hypodig. Neustriae.
It was no safe resisting those (as their cold wisdoms and forgotten loyalties
did suggest unto them) qui tot legionibus imperarent, who had so manany
thousand men in arms to make good their project, and they might think as the
poor-spirited Citizens of Samaria did in another case (but a case very like the
present) Behold two Kings stood not before him, how then can we stand 2 Kings
10. 4.
? For had it been an argument of the power of Parliaments, that they deposed
one King to set up another, dethroned King Richard to advance the Duke of
Lancaster to the Regal diadem, they would have kept the house of Lancaster in
possession of it, (for the full demonstration of a power indeed) and not have
cast them off, at the first attempt of a new plausible pretender, declared them
to be kings in fact, but not in right, whose lawful right they had before
preferred above all other titles, and set the Crown upon the heads of their
deadly Enemies. In the next place it is objected that Parliaments are a great
restraint of the Sovereign power (according to the Doctrine here laid down by
Calvin) in that the King can make no laws, nor levy any money upon the Subject,
but by the counsel and assent of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
But this objection hurts as little as the former did. For Kings, to say the
truth, need no laws at all. In all such points wherein they have not bound
themselves by some former laws made for the common use and benefit of the
Subject, they are left at liberty, and may proceed in governing the people,
given by God unto them, according to their own discretion, and the advice of
their Counsel. New Laws are chiefly made for the Subjects benefit, at their
desire, on their importunate requests, for their special profit; not one in
twenty, nay, I dare boldly say not one in an hundred, made for the advantage of
the King, either in the improvement of his power, or the increase of his
Revenue. Look over all the Acts of Parliament, from the beginning of the reign
of King Henry 3. to the present time, and tell me he that can, if he finds it
otherwise: Kings would have little use of Parliaments, and less mind to call
them, if nothing but the making of new Laws were the matter aimed at. And as
for raising moneys and imposing taxes, it either must suppose the Kings to be
always unthrifts, that they be always indigent and necessitous, and behind-hand
with the world (which are the ordinary effects of ill husbandry) or else this
argument is lost, and of little use: For if our Kings should husband their
estates to the best advantage, and make the best benefit of such escheats and
forfeitures and con^iscations as day by day do fall unto them; If they should
follow the example of K. Henry 7. and execute the penal Laws according to the
power which those Laws have given them, and the trust reposed in them by their
People; if they should please to examine their revenue, and proportion their
expense to their comings in, there would be little need of subsidies and
supplies of money, more than the ordinary aids and impositions upon
Merchandise, which the Law allows of, and the known rights of Sovereignty
backed by prescription, and long custom have asserted to them: So that it is by
Accident, not by right and nature, that the Parliament has any power or
opportunity to restrain their King in this particular; for where there is no
need of asking, there is no occasion of denying; by consequence no restraint
upon, no baffle or affronting offered to the Regal power. And yet the Sovereign
need not fear (if he be tollerably careful of his own estate) that any
reasonable demand of his in these money matters, will meet with opposition or
denial in his Houses of Parliament. For whilst there are so many Acts of Grace
and favor to be done in Parliament (as what almost in every Parliament but an
enlargement of the Kings favors to his people) and that none can be done in
Parliament but with the Kings fiat and consent: there is no question to be
made, but that the two Houses of Parliament will far sooner choose to supply
the King (as allwise Parliaments have done) than rob the Subject of the benefit
of his grace and favors, which is the best fruit they reap from Parliaments.
Finally, whereas it is objected (but I think it in sport) that the old Lord
Burleigh used to say, that he knew not what a Parliament in England could not
do; and that King James once said in a Parliament, that then there were 500
Kings, which words were took for a Concession that all were Kings as well as he
in a time of Parliament; they who have given us these Objections do either
mis-understand their Authors, or abuse themselves. For what the Lord Burleigh
said of Parliaments (though it be more than the wisest man alive can justify)
he spoke of Parliaments, according as the word is used in its proper sense; not
for the two Houses, or for either of them exclusive of the Kings presence and
consent; but for the supreme Court, for the highest Judicatory, consisting of
the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Representees of the Commons; and then it will not serve for the turn intended.
And what King James said once in jest (though I have often heard it used in
earnest upon this occasion) was spoke only in derision of some daring Spirits,
who laying by the modesty of their Predecessors, would needs be looking into
the Prerogative, or finding errors and mistakes in the present Government, or
meddling with those Arcana imperii which former Parliaments beheld at distance,
with the eye of reverence. But certainly King James intended nothing less than
to acknowledge a co-ordinative Sovereignty in the two Houses of Parliament, or
to make them his Copartners in the Regal power. His carriage and behavior
toward them in the whole course of his Government, clearly shows the contrary:
there never being prince more jealous in the points of Sovereignty, nor more
incapable of a Rival in those points than he.

paramount) does remain unanswered. For if the three Estates convened in
Parliament, or any other popular Magistrate, whom Calvin dreams of, be ordaned
by the Word of God, as Guardians of the peoples Liberties; and therefore
authorized to moderate and restrain the power of Kings as often as they shall
invade or infringe those liberties, as Calvin plainly says they were; or that
they know themselves to be ordained by Gods word to that end and purpose (
cujus se lege Dei Tutores positos esse norunt) as he says they do: then
neither any discontinuance or non-usage on their parts, nor any prescription to
the contrary alleged by Kings and supreme Princes, can hinder them from
resuming and exercising that Authority which God has given them, whenever
they shall find a fit time for it. But first I would fain learn of Calvin in
what part of the Word of God we shall find any such Authority given to those
popular Magistrates (by what name soever they are called in their several
Countries) as he tells us of. Not in the old Testament I am sure, though in the
institution of the seventy Elders there be some hopes of it. For when Moses
first ordained those Elders, it was not to diminish any part of that power
which was vosted in him, but to ease himself of some part of the burden which
did lie upon him. And this appears plainly by the 18. Chapter of the Book of
Exodus. For when it was observed by Jethro his Father in Law, that he attended
the businesses of the people from morning till night, he told him plainly ultra
v^res s^as negotium esse, that the burden was too heavy for him, verse. 18. and
therefore that he should choose some Underofficers, and place them over
Thousands, over Hundreds, and ever Fifties, and over Tens, Verse. 21. Leviusque
sit tibi partito in alios onere: that so it might be the easier for him, those
officers bearing some part of the burden with him. Yet so that these inferior
Officers should only judge in matters of inferior nature, the greater matters
being still reserved to his own Tribunal. Which counsel, as it was very well
approved by Moses, so was it given by Jethro and approved by Moses, with
reference to the will and pleasure of All-mighty God, verse. 23. And what the
Lord God did in it we shall find in the Book of Numbers chap. 11. For when
Moses made complaint to God, that the Burden of all the people was laid on
him, verse. 11. (where note it is the burden still which he makes complaint of)
and that he was not able to hear all the people alone, because it was too
heavy for him, verse. 14. God willed him to make choice of seventy of those
Officers, which before he had placed over the people, and to present them to
him in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, where he would give unto them the
Spirit of Government, ut sustentent tecum o^us populi, to the end that they
might bear the burden of the people with him, verse. 17. Nothing in all this,
but the easing of the Supreme Magistrate of some part of the Burden, which was
before too heavy for him, without any diminution of his power in the least
respect. Nor does it make for Calvin's purpose, that God said to Moses, that he
would take of the Spirit which was upon him, and put it on the seventy Elders,
verse. 17. the Spirit resting upon Moses in as full a measure as at first it
did, not lessened by the communication of it to those Underofficers. And so
the point is stated by two learned writers, though otherwise of different
persuasions in the things of God. By Estius for the Pontificians it is so
determined, Estius in (...) sacrae scripturae loca. Number. 11. v. 17.
Non significatur per hoc, quod minus haberet Moses de spiritu quam antea, sed
significatur, quod ex eodem spiritu gratiae, quo repletus Moses populum illum
regebat, etiam alii adjutorium essent habituri, ad eundem populum regendum.
Deodat. Annot. in Number. 11.
The very same with that of Deodatus for the Protestant or reformed writers.
Not that the gift of the Spirit (says he) should be in any manner truly (or
really) diminished in Moses, but because that infallible conduct of the Spirit
of God, which until then had been peculiar to Moses, should be made common to
all the seventy in the public government. And much less did it derogate from
the spirit and power of Moses, that the seventy were endued by God with the
gift of prophecy, verse. 25. that being but a personal grace, and perhaps but
temporary to those persons neither, to gain them at the first the greater
estimation amongst the people, whom they were to govern; never pretended to by
any of their Successors in that Magistracy for the times ensuing. And therefore
when Moses was told of it, he made light of the matter, and was so far from
envying at it, that he seemed to wish that all Gods people might be able to
prophecy to one another, Estius in Number. 11. v. 29.
verse. 29. conceiving rightly nihil abesse dignitati suae personae, as my
Author has it, that it did nothing derogate from his power and dignity; though
J^shua out of an honest zeal to his Masters greatness might fear it tended, or
might tend unto the diminution of his Masters dignity and credit, as is
observed by Deodate. What power these seventy Elders had in succeeding times,
when they were drawn into a body, and made up that great Court which was called
the Sanhedrim; and how far they were then from curbing and restraining the
power of those several Kings under which they lived, has been shown already.

Now if the old Testament do give so little countenance to that great Authority
which Calvin has assigned so peremptorily to his three Estates, or any other
popular Magistates in their several Countries, I am sure the New Testament does
afford them less; in which obedience to the Supreme Magistrate, is punctually
and frequently required of all sorts of persons. Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers, says the Apostle of the Gentiles, Romans 13. 1. If every
soul, then neither any Papal, Presbyterian or popular pretender can challenge
any exemption from that obedience and subjection to the higher powers, which is
required of them in this Text; and much less exercise any jurisdiction or
Authority over them, whereby they may be brought in subjection to him.
Hieronym. in Romans 13.
"St. Jerome tells us that this rule is given by the Apostle, for fear lest some
presuming on that Christian Liberty unto which they were called, might possibly
refuse to yield obedience and pay their just Tributes to those higher powers to
which the Lord had made them subject." And therefore he desires to humble them
and bring them unto a better understanding of their Christian duty, ne forte
propter superbiam, magis quam propter Deum contumeliam patiantur. Lest the
reproach or punishment which they suffered for it, should be imputed rather to
their pride and arrogance, then their zeal to God. Now what St. Jerome tells us
in the general only, is by St. Chrysostom pressed particularly, with reference
almost to all degrees and estates of men: Here the Apostle shows (says he)
that these things are commanded to all men, Chrysostom. in Romans Hom. 23.
both Priests and Monks, and not to temporal men only, which he declares in
the beginning, when he said, Let every soul be subject to the highest powers:
although thou be an Apostle, although thou be an Evangelist, although thou be a
Prophet, although thou be whatsoever thou art. Which said he gives this reason
for it, that Religion is not overthrown by this subjection. If no Apostle could
pretend to an exemption from those common duties which Subjects owe unto their
Princes; then certainly the Pope who pretends to sit in Peter's Chair, and to
challenge all the privileges which belonged unto him, must needs be in as
great subjection to a Christian Emperor, as the Apostles were (in their times)
to any Heathen King. If those things were required of Priests and Monks, as he
says they were, then must the Papal Clergy, (whether they be Monasticks or
secular Priests) perform those duties, and yield that due obedience unto those
Kings and Princes under whom they live, which are here required. But so it is,
that partly by strong hand, and partly by taking their opportunities in the
darker Ages of the Church, the Pope has not only freed his Clergy from the
power of Princes, in matters even of Civil nature and concernment; but
challenges for himself a power above them, and exercised it for a long time
with great pride and Tyranny, contrary to the Apostles Rule and the Fathers
Commentary. If no Evangelist or Prophet could challenge any such exemption as
the Father plainly says they could not; then much less can the Presbyterian
Minister pretend unto it, though he be both a Prophet and an Evangelist also in
his own conceit. Which notwithstanding, the Scottish Presbyterians had got unto
so great a head in the minority of King James, in all matters, which related to
Ecclesiastical cognizance (and to that cognizance they reduced all matters)
they commonly declined the Kings judgment, and his Courts of Judicature as
altogether incompetent; appealing from them either to their own Presbyteries,
or to the next general Assembly of their own appointing: and standing so
wilfully to those Appeals, that some of them had like to have paid dear for it,
(after that Kings coming into England) if the King had not been more merciful
to them, then they deserved at his hands. If no man whatsoever he be, can
lawfully acquit himself from this subjection as is said by Chrysostom; what
will become of Calvin's popular Magistrates, and of the great authority which he
gives them over Kings and Princes; those popular Officers being included
equally with the rest of the people, in St. Paul's injunction? It Is true that
Calvin's popular Officers may seem to have some color for it, both from our
English Translation and the vulgar Latin; by which obedience is required
sublimioribus potestatibus, to the higher powers; and all such popular
Officers, whatsoever they be, may warrantably be looked upon as higher powers,
in respect of the residue of the people. But first the words in the original,
viz. (...), do not so properly signify, the higher, as the supreme powers: and
so the word is rendered in the first of St. Peter cap. 2. verse. 13. in which
submission is required to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it
be unto the King, (...), as to the Supreme, or unto such as are sent by him,
etc. (...), says St. Peter in the singular, (...), says St. Paul in the
plural number; both words proceeding from (...), in the Nominative Case, and
consequently being of the same sense and signification. But secondly permitting
them the benefit of these translations, yet will they find but little color
for that coercive power, that sovereign Authority and Jurisdiction, which
Calvin has assigned to the three Estates or any other popular Officers over
Kings and Princes. For though such popular Officers may warrantably be looked
upon as higher powers in respect of the residue of the people, as before was
said, yet are they lower powers in respect of the King, from whom as they
receive all the Authority which they have, whatsoever it be, so unto him they
are to render an account of their actings in it, whenever he pleases. So
that these popular Officers may be compared not unfitly unto the Genera
subalterna in the Schools of Logic; each of them being subordinate to one
another (the Constable to the Mayor or Bailiff in a corporate Town, or to the
Justices of the Peace in the County at large, the Majors and Justices to the
Judges in their several Circuits, the Judges in their several Circuits and
their Courts of Judicature to the Lord Chancellor for the time being, and he
unto the three Estates when convened in Parliament) till they end all in genus
summum, in that supreme power which is subordinate to none, and unto which the
rest are Species subalternae (as the Logicians phrase it) in their several
orders, till they end all in Specie infima, even in the lowest of the People.

Less comfort can I give them from the Apostle of the Jews from the words of
St. Peter, in which submission is required (as before was said) to every
ordinance of man, whether it be unto the King as unto the Supreme, or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well. Now those which are thus authorized,
and sent by Kings to the ends and purposes before mentioned, may very properly
be resembled unto Jehosophats Commissioners in the Kingdom of Judah, 2 Chronicles.
17. 7.
or the itinerary Judges in the Realm of England; and can neither claim nor
exercise any other Authority, then what in their Commissions and instructions
is assigned unto them. And certainly no King did or will ever grant any such
Commission whereby his Under-officers and inferior Magistrates, may challenge
any power above him, or exercise any jurisdiction or Authority over him. If any
thing in this Text may be thought to favor Calvin in this strange opinion, it
is that Kings are said to be (...), humana creatura, says the vulgar Latin, an
ordinance of man, as the English reads it; and being but a Creature of the
peoples making, the rest may think themselves as good men as he. "The Rhemists
will have Kings to be called humane creatures, because elected by the people,
or holding their Sovereignty by birth and carnal propagation, ordained for the
wealth, peace and prosperity of the Subjects; to put a difference betwixt that
humane Superiority, and the spiritual Rulers and Regiment, guiding and
governing the people to an higher end, and instituted by God himself
immediately, Christ having expressly constituted the form of Regiment, used ever
since in the Church." Whereunto Dr. Fulk for want of a better does return this
Answer, viz. That though there be great difference between the government of
Princes, and Ecclesiastical Governors, yet the Apostle calls not Princes an
humane creation, as though they were not also of Gods Creation (for there is no
power but of God) but that the form of their Creation is in man's appointment.
All the Genevians generally do so expound it, and it concerns them so to do in
point of interesse. The Bishop of that City was their Sovereign Prince, and had
jus utriusque gladini, as Calvin signified in a Letter to Cardinal Sadolet,
till he and all his Clergy were expelled the City in a popular Tumult, Anno
1528. and a new form of Government established both in Church and State. So
that having laid the foundation of their Commonwealth in the expulsion of
their Prince, and the new model of their Discipline in refusing to have any
more Bishop; they found it best for justifying their proceedings at home, and
increasing their Partisans abroad, to maintain a parity of Ministers in the
Church of Christ, and to invest the people and their popular Officers with a
chief power in the concernments and affairs of State, even to the deposing of
Kings, and disposing of Kingdoms.

But for this last they find no warrant in the Text which we have before us,
For first admitting the Translation to be true and genuine (as indeed it is
not) the Roman Emperor, and consequently other Kings and Princes, may be said
to be an humane Ordinance, because their power is most visibly conversant,
circa humanas Actiones, about ordering of humane Actions, and other civil
affairs of men, as they were subjects of the Empire, and Members of that Body
politic, whereof that Emperor was head. Secondly, to make sovereign Princes by
what name and Title soever called, to be no other then an humane Ordinance,
because they are ordained by the people and of their appointment; must needs
create an irreconcilable difference between St. Peter and St. Paul, by which
last the Supreme Powers, whatsoever they be, are called the Ordinance of God.
The Powers (says that Apostle) are ordained of God, and therefore he that
resists the Powers resists the Ordinance of God. Upon which words Deodate
gives this Gloss or Comment. "That the supreme Powers are called the Ordinance
of God, because God is the Author of this Order in the world: and all those who
attain to these Dignities, do so, either by his manifest will and approbation,
when the means are lawful: or by his secret Providence by mere permission or
toleration, when they are unlawful. Now it is fitting that man should approve
and tolerate that which God approves and tolerates." But thirdly, I conceive
that those words in the Greek Text of St. Peter, viz. (...), are not so
properly translated as they might have been; and as the same words, (...), are
rendered by the same Translators (somewhat more near to the Original) in another
place. For in the 8. chapt. to the Romans verse. 22. we find them rendering
(...), by the whole Creation (and why not rather every Creature, as both our
old Translation and the Rhemists read it, conform to omnis Creatura in the
vulgar Latin?) which had they done and kept themselves more near to the Greek
Original in St. Peter's Text, they either would have rendered it by every humane
Creature, as the Rhemists do; or rather by all Men, or by all Mankind, as the
words import. And then the meaning will be this, that the Jews living
scattered and dispersed in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, and other Provinces of
the Empire, were to have their conversation so meek and lowly (for fear of
giving scandal to the Gentiles amongst whom they lived) as to submit themselves
to all Mankind, or rather to every Man (unto every humane Creature, as the
Rhemists read it) that was in Authority above, whether it were unto the Emperor
himself, as their supreme Lord, or to such Legates, Prefects, and Procurators,
as were appointed by him for the government of those several Provinces, to the
end that they may punish the evildoers, and encourage such as did well, living
comformably to the Laws by which they were governed. Small comfort in this
Text, as in any of the rest before, for those popular Officers which Calvin
makes the Overseers of the sovereign Prince, and Guardians of the Liberties of
the common people.

If then there be no Text of Scripture, no warrant from the word of God by
which the popular Officers, which Calvin dreams of, are made the Keepers of the
Liberties of the Common people, or vested with the power of opposing Kings and
sovereign Princes as often as they wantonly insult upon the people, or wilfully
infringe their Privileges: I would fain learn how they should come to know
that they are vested with such power, or trusted with the defense of the
Subjects Liberties ( cujus se Dei ordinatione Tutores positos esse norunt) as
Calvin plainly says they do. If they pretend to know it by inspiration, such
inspiration cannot be known to any but themselves alone; neither the Prince or
people, whom it most concerns, can take notice of it. Nor can they well
assure themselves whether such inspirations come from God or the Devil; the
Devil many times insnaring proud ambitious and vainglorious Men by such
strange Delusions. If they pretend to know it by the Dictate of their private
Spirit (the great Diana of Calvin and his followers in expounding Scripture) we
are but in the same uncertainties, as we were before. And who can tell whether
the private Spirit they pretend unto, and do so much brag of, 1 King. 22. 22.
may not be such a lying Spirit as was put into the mouths of the Prophets,
when Ahab was to be seduced to his own destruction? Adeo Argumenta ex absurdo
petita ineptos habent exitus, as Lactantius notes it.

All I have now to add, is to show the difference between Calvin and his
followers, in the propounding of this Doctrine; delivered by Calvin in few
words, but Magisterially enough, and with no other Authority then his ipse
dixit; enlarged by David Paraeus in his Comment on the 13. chapter to the
Romans into diverse branches, and many endeavors used by him (as by the rest of
Calvin's followers,) to find out Arguments and instances out of several Authors
to make good the cause. For which though Calvin escaped the fire, yet Paraeus
could not. Ille Crucem pretium sceleris tulit, hic Diadema. For so it happened,
that one Mr. Knight of Brodegates (now Pembroke College) in Oxford, had
preached up the Authority of these popular officers in a Sermon before the
University, about the beginning of the year 1622. for which being presently
transmitted to the King and Council, he there ingenuously confessed, that he
had borrowed both his Doctrine, and his proofs and instances from the Book of
Paraeus above mentioned. Notice whereof being given to the University, the
whole Doctrine of Paraeus as to that particular, was drawn into several
Propositions; which in a full and frequent Convocation held on the 25. of June,
1622. were severally condemned to be erroneous, scandalous, and destructive of
Monarchical Government. Upon which Sentence or determination, the King gave
order that as many of those books as could be gotten, should solemnly and
publicly be burnt in each of the Universities, and St. Paul's Churchyard,
which was done accordingly. An accident much complained of by the Puritan party
for a long time after, who looked upon it as the funeral pile of their Hopes
and Projects; till by degrees they got fresh courage, carrying on their designs
more secretly, by consequence more dangerously then before they did. The
terrible effects whereof we have seen and felt in our late Civil Wars and
present confusions. But it is time to close this point, and come to a
conclusion of the whole Discourse; there be no other Objections that I know of,
but what are easily reduced unto those before, or not worth the Answering.

15. Thus have we took a brief Survey of those insinuations, grounds or
Principles (call them what you will) which CALVIN has laid down in his Book of
Institutions, for the encouragement of the Subjects to rebellious courses, and
putting them in Arms against their Sovereign, either in case of Tyranny,
Licentiousness, or Mal-administration, of what sort soever; by which the
Subjects may pretend that they are oppressed either in point of liberty, or in
point of property. And we have shown upon what false and weak foundations he
has raised his building; how much he has mistook or abused his Authors; but
how much more he has betrayed and abused his Readers. For we have clearly
proved, and directly manifested, out of the best Records and Monuments of the
former times, that the Ephori were not instituted in the State of Sparta to
oppose the Kings; nor the Tribunes in the State of Rome to oppose the Consuls;
nor the Demarchi in the Commonwealth of Athens to oppose the Senate: or if
they were, that this could no way serve to advance his purpose of setting up
such popular Officers in the Kingdoms of Christendom; those Officers being only
found in Aristocraties, or Democraties, but never heard or dreampt of in a
Monarchical Government. And we have shown both who they are which constitute
the three Estates in all Christian Kingdoms; and that there is no Christian
Kingdom in which the three Estates convened in Parliament (or by what other
name soever they do call them) have any authority either to regulate the person
of the Sovereign Prince, or restrain his power, in case he be a Sovereign
Prince, and not merely titular and conditional; and that it is not to be found
in Holy Scripture, that they are or were ordained by God to be the Patrons and
Protectors of the Common people, and therefore chargeable with no less a crime
than a most perfidious Dissimulation, should they connive at Kings when they
play the Tyrants, or want only abuse that power which the Lord has given them,
to the oppression of their Subjects. In which last points, touching the
designation of the three Estates, and the authority pretended to be vested in
them, I have carried a more particular eye on this Kingdom of England where
those pernicious Principles and insinuations which our Author gives us, have
been too readily embraced, and too eagerly pursued by those of his party and
opinion. If herein I have done any service to Supreme Authority, my Country
and some misguided Zelots of it, I shall have reason to rejoice in my
undertaking. If not, posterity shall not say that Calvin's memory was so sacred
with me, and his name so venerable, as rather to suffer such a Stumbling Block
to be laid in the Subjects way without being censured and removed, than either
his authority should be brought in question, or any of his Dictates to a legal
trial. Having been purchased by the Lord at so dear a price, we are to be no
longer the Servants of men, or to have the truth of God with respect of
persons. I have God to be my Father, and the Church my Mother, and therefore
have not only pleaded the Cause of Kings and Supreme Magistrates who are the
Deputies of God, but added somewhat in behalf of the Church of England, whose
Rights and privileges I have pleaded to my best abilities. The issue and
success I refer to him by whom Kings do reign, and who appointed Kings, and
other Supreme Magistrates to be nursing Fathers to his Church; that as they do
receive authority and power from the hands of God, so they may use the same in
the protection and defense of the Church of God: and God, even their own God
will give them his Blessing, and save them from the striving of unruly people,
whose mouth speaks proud words, and their right hand is a right hand of
iniquity.

FINIS.

