The holy Sisters Conspiracy against their Husbands, and the City of London,
designed at their last Farewell of their Meeting Houses in Coleman-street;
Together with their Psalm of Mercy.
Sarah an old Scismatick hold's forth. DEarly beloved sister! shere met
together in fear, I beseech you let us hold forth our gifts (for the mutual
Information and Edification of one another) in a spiritual and holy discourse,
as not knowing otherwise, but that this may be the last time, that ever we
shall meet together in this place in peace.


Joanna. Why! Sister, what cause have you to suspect that we shall not meet
together here at another time, as we have been wonted to do for many years?


Deborah. The wicked and Reprobate about the City say, that the Man in Power at
White Hall, whom they call their King, has put forth a Proclamation the other
day, to put down and put by all our Meetinghouses and Meetings for the future;
because some of our Brethren being lately moved by the spirit, obeyed the holy
Call, and contended for our Christian Liberty in the streets, as loyal subjects
of our King Jesus; In whose name they cut off some wicked members, that opposed
them in the names of God and Kings Charles, as they wickedly said.


Ruth. Truly sisters! As I was selling of Lace in Cheap Side the other day,
there came a great Company together on Horseback, and read a Paper to that
effect; whereupon I told my sister Abigaile of the sad news; who went with me
to our sister Prudence at the Bull-head; where we sweetened our sorrow with a
pint of burnt Claret, and remembered the Saints in prison (our Father Know --,
and the rest of our Brethren and Sisters,) whom that man of Sin (that they call
their Lord Mayor Brown) has wickedly committed.


Abigaile. Yea! It is very true; but you forgot one thing, sister Ruth; that
is, the great fervency and love, that our sister Prudence showed to us, who
brought us in an halfpenny Roll to sop in the wine upon her own charge; which
you promised to communicate at our next meeting, that the thanks of the
Congregation might be returned to her for her Christian and sisterly bounty.


Prudence. It was not so much worth indeed, good Sisters! that I deserve any
thanks for it. But verily, I have been much cast down in my spirit, ever since
I heard, that our harmless and innocent meetings should be stopped and
prevented, and that we should be debarred of the sweet fellowship and communion
of our dearly beloved brethren; of whose sufferings we ought to be
fellow-feelers now in the time of their captivity, as they have added much to
our consolation in the time of their Liberty.


Bathsheba. In truth, Sisters, I have much felt the sweetness of our Brethrens
love, and been comforted by their gifts and abilities many a time. Oh! what a
holy man is our Brother Iv --! the Cheese monger; who was always so meekly and
lowly minded, that for the supply of the inward wants of any of us, would not
disdain to fall on his face, and zealously embrace us in the arms of his
servent affection; which has been the cause by constant usage, that his Nose
stand's awry, after the similitude of our old Father Cans.


Agatha. And I can say by good experience, that if we be obstructed hence
forward in our zealous way, I shall loose the precious and balmy salutations of
our brother H -- the Printer; whose breathings and pantings have been always
very cordial and comfortable to me, and made such deep Impressions upon my
sanctified heart, that they have made me very fruitful, and zealous of his
good works; but if I now be deprived of his holy Seed, I fear, I shall decline
in the spiritual way of our fructification, and bring forth only fruits meet
for penance and grief.


Hester. Verily for my part I say unto you, that the man (according to the
flesh,) whom I fondly and idly took to be my Husband in the days of my
youthful vanities, has proved a mere Jew unto me, and will not give me that
due benevolence, which we are taught in our holy Scriptures, is owing from the
Male to the Female; And therefore since he is one of the Reprobates, and also
one that loves the superstitious shirt, better than my hallowed and purified
Smock, I am resolved (in despite of all opposition) to follow the godly
Exhortations and Motives of that holy man of God Mr. Feake; and if I cannot
have my liberty of Conscience with a Brother in our public Meeting Place, I
will seek after his Fellowship and Membership in a Corner, like the persecuted
Saints of old; who lived in Dens and Caverns of the earth, rather then they
would not enjoy their liberty of Conscience.


Patience. What! shall not our Brethren in the fear of the Lord hold forth unto
us, and make us partakers of those good gifts, that they have received, and can
fully and freely administer unto us for the relief of our needs and
necessities? Shall all our Potato pies, our Calves-foot pies, our Jellies, and
cordial Brothes (besides those little Drachms and Scruples of Spirits) be all
suspended and laid aside; which inflamed our zeales, and provoked us to
conjunction and union one with another in an holy fear? No, no, I Will turn my
Patience into fury, and rather than be kept from the sweet and delightful
enjoyments of those felicities, I will break the Commandments of ten thousand
Proclamations, let them exclaim as loud as they will! What! are not the
Creatures common for us Saints, and shall we (like drowsy and cowardly fools)
be scared and terrified out of our Comforts, by a little paper-stuff? No, no,
my Husbands Silks and Sattins shall fly for it, but I Will keep up our
Prerogatives; which have been so piously contended for by all our Brethren
beyond the Seas for many years, and for which the Saints of late lost their
lives, and more will follow er're it be long, if the Reprobates should prevail
against us; which I hope they never shall be able, till we have utterly
destroyed them upon the face of the earth.


Charity. In good sooth, sister Patience, I concur with you in opinion; And I
further add somewhat of mine own, That I hold it both unnatural and
unreasonable, that if we were no more then rational creatures, (as we are not)
we should have less freedom and liberty in congregating together with holy
men, than is permitted in the order of Nature to mere bruit Beasts and Fowl
(which have no understanding) to gather themselves into sociable herds and
flocks, and do those things in common one with another, as their appetites
incite them; Much more therefore since that we are Saints, and pure and holy
Sisters of the Brethren, (who are perfect and righteous men) should we have in
charity our free and absolute permission and toleration to do what we will; for
as much as the Brethren go the right way to work with us, and do not tempt us
to folly and filthiness, as the carnal and sinful men of the world use to do
with the rest of our unsanctified Sex; but what they do to us, they do it with
sobriety and discretion, and in pure love and affection, that they may raise up
an holy Generation of young Saints; who may only know their Fathers after the
spirit and not after the flesh; (as the children of the world do,) though there
were twenty of the Brethren contributing to the begetting of one little Saint;
For Charity is the bond of all perfection, and love is the fulfilling of the
law; And therefore if a Brother and Sister be spiritually moved, and inclined
in an holy love and charitable respect to propagate and increase the number of
the faithful, no time or place or persons ought to restrain or bar them from
doing so good a work. Wherefore my opinion is, that the Proclamation is not
binding of us in Charity, Religion and Conscience; nor is there any carnal
power above the privileges of us Saints: And therefore I will never submit to
it, as long as I breath.


Faith. Good sister, I believe you to be in the right; and as our sister
Rebecca has often expounded to us the word, I am confirmed, that we are above
all principalities and Powers in the world (except the powers of darkness,)
and shall bring them all into subjection under our feet. And therefore we will
meet with our beloved Brethren, though it be at the Gallows, rather then we
will loose their brotherly communion; and if any of those wicked men, (which
call themselves our Husbands,) will not give us way to do as we list, but shall
seek to control and require us to go along with them to their Steeple Houses,
and conform our selves to their Baal's Priests, we will forsake and leave their
wicked company, and betake us to our Brethrens Copulation and Conjunction with
us, where and when and how, the spirit shall move us to it.


Temperance. This is very fine indeed! What must we meet no more together
forsooth? But we will by my consent, in despite of all the Train Bands of the
City! A Proclamation! Out upon it! It Is but one of the Bulls of the Whore of
Babylon, and shall we be frighted and disheartened by a little Paper-Bull, that
fear not, nor stand in aw of the great Bulls of Bashan, our husbands! Come,
come, Sisters, let us make a collection, and provide a stock for our religious
brethren, who now suffer persecution for their Conscience sake, that their
bonds may be made easy to them, and the rigor of their Keepers taken off;
that since we cannot enjoy them with us here in freedom, they may freely enjoy
us with them in their restraints and confinements. For which purpose, the
Foreman of our shop has already progged for me (unknown to his wicked Master)
this bag of money; And rather than our Brethren shall want, my servants shall
course it, and course it over and over with me, so as they will but proll from
their Master secretly, that which his Nabal like and churlish worldly
mindedness will not freely let me have for the relief of our poor brethren.


Rebecca. Ah good sister Temperance, you are piously disposed! Hold close to
that good resolution, and never fall back from it with any persuasion of that
evil minded man, your carnal and ungodly Husband. All that he has is yours,
and for our common good; And therefore it is no iniquity for you to do what you
will, so as thereby you promote the welfare of our brethren, though it tend to
the breaking and bringing down the rebellious and stubborn heart of your
unsanctified Husband; for whom you must not reserve in the least corner of your
soul any affection or love; since he is a reprobate to our Faith, and an enemy
to the Saints; and its no matter at all what becomes of him.


Constance. Though, sisters, you can ruzzle up and down in your silks and rich
attire, and I am but a poor footer of stockings, yet my bolt may be as soon
shot, as yours, and to as good a purpose! I say this; That it is best for us
all to be as wary as we can. For my own part, I am now grown old, and cannot
do, as I was wont, the mark being quite out of my mouth, as they profanely
say: But if my blood was as quick and active (as some of yours is, and it has
been in my younger days) I would adventure to do more than now I can, or can
be expected from me. I tell you, sisters, that I conceive it will be best for
us to follow the advice and exhortation of our brother Venner, and to cut the
throats of such of our Husbands, as are Kinglings for the Man in Power, and
Enemies to the Brethren. As for my part, I have an old rigid Presbyterian to my
Husband, who night and day calls me Scismatick and Fanatic, and Whore, and
Jade, and Bawd to the sanctified Whores (meaning all you my dear sisters,) but
for my self, I value not his words, if there was any great matter of truth in
them; only I will be avenged upon him for your sakes, whose holy names and
persons, he does so wickedly slander; And therefore it shall not belong ere I
do him a courtesy, and send him to his long home: And if you will ever be
free, you must all do the like, that are under the Curse of such ungracious
Reprobates.


Innocence. I am fully convinced, that my Sister Constance has moved to the
purpose, and it will be best for us all to take her Counsel, and put it in
present and speedy execution, that we may set up our Monarchy with all
expedition.


All of them in a ribble-rabble, Agreed, agreed! We Will fire the City too,
rather then we will not have our wills. And therefore let us take our Farewell
of this our Meeting Place at this time; only let us sing a Psalm of mercy to
the praise of our King, composed by our Father Feake for our Edification and
Instruction, before we depart.

A Psalm of Mercy.
Usula, (who cry's ^nds of Gold and Silver) read's, and all the Sisters sing.
To the Tune of, Now thanks to the Powers below!

Sing it in the Nose. WHat a Reprobate Crew is here,
Who will not have Jesus Reign?
But send all our Saints
To Bonds and Restraints,
And kill'um again and again?
Let Us rise in an holy fear,
And fight for our heavenly King;
We will ha'no power
But Vane in the Tower
To Rule us in any thing!
Come Sisters, and sing
An Hymn to our King,
Who sits on high Degree;
The Men at White Hall,
And the wicked shall fall,
And hey, then up go We.
A Match, quoth my sister Joyce;
Contented, quoth Rachel too;
Quoth, Abigaile, yea, and Faith, verily,
And Charity, let 't be so.
Our Monarchy is the Fifth,
Shall last for a Thousand years;
Of The wicked on earth
There shall be a dearth,
When Jesus himself appears!
And we are the Babes of Grace,
The fruits of an holy Seed;
For old Father Cann
(That Reverend man,)
Begat us in Word and Deed.
The earth is our own,
For Title there is none,
But in the right Heirs of Sion;
Then let us be free,
For verily we
No King have but Judah's Lion.
It Is verity, quoth old Joane,
And Sooth, quoth my sister Pru,
It Is manifest truth, quoth mortified Ruth,
And the Gospel is so, says Su.
The Bishops and Bells shall down,
For we have an holy Call;
The Saints are beyond
All Order and Bond
Of duty to Priests of Baal.
Their Pipes and Organs too,
Their superstitious Shirt,
Their Canons and Bulls,
(To cozen poor Gulls,)
We Will trample 'um in the Dirt.
No Ordinance shall
Command us at all,
For we are above their thrall.
We care not a Straw
For Reason or Law;
For Conscience is all in all.
Ay marry, quoth Agatha,
And Temperance, eke also,
Quoth Hanna, it is just, and Mary it must
And shall be, quoth Grace, I trow.
The Steeple-house Lands are ours,
Kings, Queens, Delinquents too,
And James'es and all
The Court at White Hall,
And Somerset House also.
For The'balds it is our right,
And Marrow-bone-Park to boot,
And Eltham's our own,
At Endfield there is none,
But our selves that shall grub a root.
And Greenwich shall be
For Tenements, free
For Saints to possess Pell-well.
And where all the Sport
Is at Hampton Court,
Shall be for our selves to dwell.
It Is blessed, quoth Bathsheba,
And Clemence, w' ar'all agreed;
It Is right, quoth Gartrude, and fit says sweet Jude.
And Thomasine, yea, indeed.
For Husbands we will have none,
But Brothers in purity;
We will not be Wives
And tie up our Lives
To Villainous slaverie;
But couple in love and fear;
When moved by the spirit to 't;
For there is no sin
To let a Saint in,
When he has the grace to do 't,
And thus are we taught,
No folly is wrought,
When Brothers will exercise.
Both Kiffin and Hills
(No Printer of Bills)
Have proved it in ample wise.
It Is true quoth Elizabeth,
And it is very good, quoth Pris,
And Aquila too will have it be so,
And so will my sister Sis.
What though the King Proclaim's
Our Meetings no more shall be;
In private we may
Hold forth the right way,
And be, as we should be, free;
Our Husbands we will make believe;
We go but to take the air,
Or visit a Nurse,
And lighten their Purse
With a little dissembling Prayer.
Or if they be cross,
(Let 'um stand to the loss)
We Will tempt our Apprentices,
(By writing a Dash,
To cozen the Cash,)
And make 'um mere novices.
Oh very well said, quoth Con,
And so will I do, says Franck.
And Mercy cry's I, and Mat, really,
And I Am of that mind, quoth Thank.
We Will cut off the wicked Rout,
And bath us all in their Bloods;
Their Houses and Land
We Will have at Command.
And common upon their Goods;
No mortal King nor Priest,
No Lord, nor Duke we will have,
We Will grind 'um to Grist,
And live as we list,
And we will do wonders brave;
Come Dorcos and Cloe,
With Lois and Zoe,
Young Letice and Beterice and Jane,
Phill, Dorothy, Mawd,
Come troup it abroad,
For now is our time to reign.
Sa, sa, quoth my sister Bab,
And Kill 'um, quoth Margerie;
Spare none, cry's old Tib, no quarter says Sib
And hey! for our Monarchy.
Let Us all take the Sacrament,
That we to each other be true,
And kill without pity
In Country and City,
The wicked ungodly Crew.
We Will favor no Sex, nor Age,
No quality, nor degree;
But all shall to Pot,
Both English and Scot,
That hinder our Liberty.
The Mayor of the Town,
(That terrible Brown,)
And Cox and the Captains all,
We Will torture and slay
In a merciless way,
And mince 'um, like herbs, as small.
Ay, That is the way quoth Emm,
Quoth Phoebe, we conquer shall;
Says Lucy, it is well; quoth Jylian and Nell,
Twill make us amends for all.
A Loyal Wish.
What Faith, Hope, and Charity,
Fanatics in Truth profess,
By Germanie's Woe,
And our Rebels or, Sisters, utrum, horum, harum
here too,
Well may we do more, than guess;
The ar' just like the Gadarens Swine,
Which the Devils did drive and bewitch!
An herd, set on evil,
Will run to the Devil,
And's Dam, when their Brains
^a^les do itch:
Then let 'um run on!
Says Ned, Tom, and John:
Ay! let 'um be hanged quoth Mun!
Th'ar' mine! quoth old Nick,
And take 'um says Dick,
And well-come! quoth worshipful Dun.
And God bless King Charles, quoth George,
And save him, says Simon and Sill,
I, I, quoth old Cole, and each loyal Soul,
And Amen, and Amen, cry's Will.
The honest men's Resolution.
But what, shall we do with our Wives,
That fisk up and down the Town?
And one is for Bowls,
And the other for Knowles,
But all against Cox and Brown?
They cheat us all with their looks,
And snivell and snot by wrote!
And nothing but squeak,
For Venner and Feake,
And for a Laced Morning-Coate.
For such a Bell-dam
Says Sylas and Sam,
Let Us have an Italian Lock!
No, no! It Is far better,
Quoth Robin and Peter,
To take 'um all down in the Dock!
But that will not do, says Nump,
Then nothing, says Roger and Raph!
Let Us lay 'um, says Not, and splay 'um, say 's Wat,
And then we shall make 'um safe.
But, Faith, y' ar'all out oth' way!
The Sisters have such a Trick!
No Instrument will.
Seclude 'um from ill,
But still against P -- 's, they will Kick.
What shall we do then? quoth Hal,
Let Us cope up their Lechery!
Says Rowland, we may,
Be Masters, that way.
But 'twill not last long, quoth, Theophilus
The.
What shall we do then,
Quoth Cutbert and Ben.
Let Us do 'um like men, quoth Dan,
Let Us fill up their Chincks.
Says Mystical Sphinx,
Quoth Taffie, then I Am your man!
And I am as cut, quoth Cad,
And Shenkin, Me vat-a-whe.
Ap Howel, It Is true, and Morgan and Hugh
Y'Cambrie, Dieu, Dalth-a-whe.
Printed by T. M. 1661.


