THE GROWTH and SPREADING OF HAERESIE.

Set forth In a SERMON preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, on the
10th. day of March, being the day of their public Fast and Humiliation for the
growth of Haeresie.

By THOMAS HODGES, Minister of Gods Word, at KENSINGTON.

(...).

Themist. orat. 3. Melius aditum obstruxisse, quam aenam exegisse peccati.

Simpl. epist. 14. ad Zeno. imper. Published by Order of the House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Abel Roper, at the sign of the Sun
against Dunstans church in Fleetstreet. 1647.

Die Jovis, 11. Martii, 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Rows and Mr. Gewen do
from this House give thanks unto Mr. Vines and Mr. Hodges for the great pains
they took in their Sermons preached on the 10. of March 1646. at Margarets
Westminster, before the House of Commons, being a day of public Humiliation
for the growth of Errors, Haeresies, etc. And they are to desire them to print
their Sermons, wherein they are to have the like privilege in printing of
them, as others in the like kind usually have had.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Abel Roper to print my Sermon.

THO. HODGES.



TO THE Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe GOD of heaven and earth, who is in himself an infinite ocean of Perfection
without either bank or bottom, has been pleased by the overflowings of his
power and goodness to create this orderly glorious frame of Heaven and Earth
out of nothing; the Earth he has furnished not only with great variety of
excellent Beings, but also has Genesis 1.28. Psalm. 4.5, 6.
set over them a visible Governor to be his Vicegerent, giving him dominion
over all things beneath; Who although he be a little less then the Angels, yet
is he answerable for this trust to God alone. This glorious God has furnished
him with Job 38.11. 32 8.
Reason and understa^ding, more then the beasts: and that he might be more
happy than the world can make him, he has not only given him vast desires, and
such a capacity as cannot be satisfied by Creature-fulnesse, but has designed
him to a higher end, a Heaven, which principally consists in the Rev. 22.4. 1
Cor. 13.12. Psalm. 16.11.
enjoyment of himself. But because his reason is not 1 Cor. 2.14.
sufficient to discover this to him, or bring him thither; therefore he has
sent forth his Psalm. 43.3.
Light and Truth, the blessed 2 Pet. 1.3.
shinings of Religion, to lead us to his dwelling, and to the place of his
abode: which is not Ephesians. 1.9.3, 9, etc.
man's design, but Gods discovery of his will and mind, pointing out the way to
bliss. Yet has he not appointed that man should reach this end without
opposition, and that not only from corruptions and 1 Pet. 2.11.
lusts within which fight against the soul, but also poor man is encountered by
the Ephesians. 6.12.
prince of darkness, and spiritual wickednesses in high places: which makes
his passage to his end so difficult, that did not that Almighty power that has
decreed him to the end, work 1 Pet. 1 4, 5
effectually to the preserving of him in the way, he must needs come short of
happiness. The truth is, amongst all encounters he meets with, there is scarce
any monster that more endangers him then that Hydra Haeresie; which if it once
gets place in the Head by assent, has a general influence upon his affections
and actions, and is a fruitful mother, producing quickly like some fertile
weeds a numerous progeny. This ensuing discourse will in some measure discover
that unto you: Which you will not find polite, but very plain, in an unaffected
dress. But I beseech you remember, I did but bring up the Rear to my reverend
Brother, in Application of that, which with great variety of Learning he
doctrinally laid before you; and it was intended not to tickle the ears, or
please the fancy of any, but to affect our hearts with a deep sense of that sad
evil of Haeresie; to mourn for which, pray against it, and beg mercy for Church
and State, we were assembled together. 'Twas your command that I should publish
it: In obedience to which, I have sent it abroad under your protection, to be a
remembrancer to you, of your engagements to God, prayers, and resolutions taken
up that day, wherein for this cause you afflicted your souls before God, and
supplicated the destruction of it.

Causin. l. 9. c. 42.
It is reported, That during the time the Olympian games lasted, there was not
a Fly seen on Mount Olympus; the like is Paul. Fagius praefat. ad Thargum.
affirmed of Onkelos his Chalde Paraphrase. I cannot say much for the truth of
either: But this I am sure of, That it is not so with us; for the Baal-zebub i.
e. muscarum princeps.

Shindleri pentaglot, vervo (...)


Prince of Flies, during your sitting, has raised such swarms of flies an
every corner of our Land, that many of our Congregations and Families are
miserably Fly-blowne with Haeresies and corrupt Tenets. The truth is, the World
is now grown old, near its ruin, and it is no marvel if it dote and be full of
fancies. But when they are grown to such a height of madness, that they
produce destructions, (as our Apostle styles Haeresies in the Text) is it not
time to cry to you for help? He was a Monster of men, that could please himself
with fidling, when Rome was on fire; or could make a sport to see poor wretches
swim for their lives and drowned in Tiber, being thrown thither by his command.
We know you are Christian Magistrates, who resembling the God of heaven in his
care for souls, will not endure that the Devil his enemy should triumph here,
or be worshipped in his image Haeresie amongst the inhabitants of this Island,
seeing it is so opposite to the first Truth, and dangerous to peoples immortal
spirits.

If it shall be thought, that I have not sufficiently pointed out what I mean
by Haeresie; I answer, My reverend Brother did prevent me; and as I did not in
Preaching, so I will not in Printing, actum agere, but refer my self to his
description of it. Only give me leave to say, That if the Opinion overthrows
any Fundamental Truth, I intend that, by the name Haeresie: if it shake or
loosen the foundation-stones, it is not to be past by; Little serpents grow
great ones by degrees, if they be let alone; the Egg may quickly become a
Cockatrice, nay a Flying-serpent. But as for more petty differences in opinion,
concerning things not much material, either not determined in Gods word at all,
or after such a manner as is dubious, not only to particular persons, but also
to many Churches of Christ, as some particulars perhaps in Discipline, and the
like; so the peace of Church and State may stand with it; if the persons
professing it be of an humble and conforming spirit to Authority, not stubborn
or refractory, but willing to open their eyes to further light, not plotting
nor contriving the overthrow of others, nor seeking to undermine what tends to
order and safety, nor have their mouths open to censure, condemn, and rail
against others; Such persons I have Multa donanda ingeniis puto, sed donanda
vitia, no^ portenta sunt. Senec. praefat. l. 1. contr.
not the least aim at in any part of this ensuing discourse, only wish them the
spirit of judgment and of a sounder mind. But as for foul-mouthed Haeresie, I
wish the same Joh. 2.15, 16, 17.
zeal that was in Christ, may act strongly in you, to whip them out of the
Temple. God has dealt by you, as Ephesians. 6.11.
Ahashuerus by Mordecai, clothed you with his own robe and title, called you
Psalm. 82 1, 6.
Gods, and put Romans 13.1, etc.
power into your hand: I hope it shall ever be your Motto with the blessed
Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.8
We can do nothing against, but for the Truth. If for the Truth, then certainly
against Error, Truths chief opposite. I look at you as Cant. 3.7, 8.
the spiritual Solomon's guard of valiant men about his bed: Error is got into
Christ's bedchamber, men's souls, and there attempts to assault Him that is the
Truth, in the hearts of his people. We are confident you are too well-affected
to this King of Kings, to suffer it: Yet give me leave to tell you, That many
of these unworthy people have not a little boasted of encouragement from Above,
as they call it; but we believe it not, knowing that their tongues are much
their own, and that they are great masters of untruths: We rather think it is
here, as it was in the speech of Henry the VI. who when a man that
counterfeited a recovering his sight at his dead Uncle the D. of Glocesters
tomb, was brought unto him, the man hoping by magnifying the holiness and
virtue of his Uncle to have gained some reward from him; He having found out by
enquiry that he was a man of a wicked life, in stead of giving credit to him,
told him, That he knew his Uncles goodness so well, that he was sure, if he
had seen, he would rather have plucked out both his eyes, then have restored
either of them to him. The like we may say of you. Yet give me leave in all
humility to represent unto you no small affliction to good men, which is, The
fruitfulness of the Press in producing monstrous misshapen births: It Is
believed by wise men, Sueton. vit. Tiberii.
that Tiberias as much was Non sunt commiseratione digni, qui tanti putant
caput potius quam dictum perdere. Sen. l. 2. contr.
mistaken in that connivence of his at such kind of trash as this, which might
tend like a spark to some terrible flame, as almost in any act of his
government.

To conclude; I beseech you do not delay this business, There is nothing more
excellent then Gods truth, nor more of concernment then Man's soul; both lie a
bleeding. It is observed that the Spartans, too much contemning the weakness
and pusillanimity of the Thebans, made but petty inroads upon them by small
parties: had they put forth the utmost of their power, the Thebans were a
people at that time so sluggish and unapt to resist, they might easily have
subdued them; but by these small parties they so awakened them, that they made
them warriors, and after a grievous slaughter found their own error and
mistake too late.

The GOD of heaven direct and guide your Counsels. Which is, and shall ever be
the Prayer of him that is

Your most humble and affectionate servant in Christ Jesus, THO: HODGES.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS at Margarets
Westminster, on the tenth of March 1646. being a day of public Humiliation
for the growth of Errors, Haeresies, etc.
2 PETER 2.2. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.


MY Learned and Reverend Brother has set before you the 2 Timothy 3.8
Jannes and Jambres that delude and pervert souls. It is my task, to show you
the havoc they make of Gods inheritance. He has discoursed of the Pandoraes
box, and I shall show you the mischief that comes by the opening thereof. You
have seen by this discourse the black face of damnable error; and one would
think that such stuff should scarce be owned in the world: Yet here in the
words of my Text behold the peoples madness, many shall follow their
pernicious ways, etc. In which words observe.

1 The thriving and growth of Heresy; many shall follow their pernicious ways.

2 The sad sequel or fruit of this; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be
evil spoken of.

First, In the growth of these damnable errors, observe, 1 Their Nature and
Character, styled here in the Text (...) Destructions. 2 Their attraction or
rather infection and fascination; And in that take notice of, 1 Their efficacy,
they shall so prevail, and overcome the wills of some, that they shall follow
their pernicious ways. 2 Their spreading; Not a few, but Many shall be
perverted by them.



Secondly, in the sad sequel of this perversion, observe 1 An Epithet given by
the Apostle to Christian Religion, It Is the way of truth. 2 The foul carriage
of many wicked men toward it, or the course usage it finds at the hands of
some in the world, (...) i. e. It shall be blasphemed or evil spoken of. 3 The
reason, or root of this, By reason of whom, i. e. of those that are by these
damnable errors seduced and led astray by these false teachers.


But first I shall speak of the first part, viz.

Observe, 1. The Character and Nature of Heretical courses, rightly here in
this Text styled by our Apostle Destructions. Hence compared to a
life-destroying, sense-devouring 2 Timothy 2.17.
Gangrene, to a terrible 1 Timothy 1.19.
shipwreck, to a horrible Rev. 12.15.
flood, by which Med. in Apocal. in cap 12 and verse. 15. cum al is.
some learned expositors understand especially the Arrian heresy, not excluding
others also. O who is able to reckon up the ruins they bring, the sad
destructions they produce to Societies or particular persons!

First, look into the Church, there is no man that is moderately ver'st in
Church-story, but must needs take notice, that these damnable errors have been
almost in every Century notoriously destructive there; robbing, and dispoyling
her of not only her Cant. 2.15
tender grapes, but many choice ornaments, learned instruments, who might have
been more useful to her, alienating them from her, nay many times engaging them
as sorest opposites against her peace and verity: Witness of old 2 Timothy 4.10.
Demas, 2 Timothy 2.17.
Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 1.15.
Phygellus and Hermogenes, Nicholas, Ebion and Cerinthus, Menander, Saturninus,
with many others. And in later time Muncer, Swenkfeild, Servetus, David George,
Socinus, and diverse others.

What horrid exacerbations of mind have they raised, which have grown to
provoking language, and have not rested there, but proceeded to blows, yea
blood; witness that hot contest at Alexandria between the Arrians and the
Orthodox; where (to use Eusebius. in vita Constant. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Eusebius his words) they fought together, and killed each other like swarms of
gnats in the air. How have they defiled her purity with loathsome pollutions in
Doctrine and manners? witness those filthy dreamers in St. Jude 8.
Judes time who defiled the flesh, despised dominion, and speak evil of
dignities. Those abominable beastly men, whom no less title then Some called
them Bort orites, from their beastly life.
Gnostici would content, as if they had been the only inhabitants of Goshen,
and all the world beside had been benighted in Egyptian darkness. And I
beseech you, how much in later times have our Germane Anabaptists, or English
Libertines in their assertions, or lives fallen short of their monstrous
predecessors? How have they like fumes out of the bottomless pit clouded her
verity? In the Church of Gal. 3.1. and 5.7. etc.
Galatia, was not the soule-saving Doctrine of Justification almost totally
eclipsed? and in the Church of Corinth 1 Cor. 15.
the article of the resurrection shrewdly shaken by these? did not the wretched
doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicholaitans pass with many for current in Rev.
2.14.20.
Pergamus? And was not the bright shining of truth offuscated by those in
Thyatirus? How did truth seem to have forsaken the Church in the days of
Athanasius, when the world (to use Jeroms expression) groaned to see it self
become an Arrian, when a whole Socrates. sch. Eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 25.
Synod of Arrians at Tire condemn poor Athanasius for maintaining the eternal
Diety of Christ? How have these damnable errors when once they have got footing
in the spirits of men turned them into beasts of prey, cruel Phil 3.2.
dogs, ravenous Act. 20 29.
wolves, devouring lions; not resting satisfied where their power could reach
and prevail, without the inflicting of the saddest cruelties, and forest
destructions they could invent, upon the most Orthodox professors of truth? We
need to seek for proof of this no further than the Socrat. hist. Eccles. lib.
2. cap. 22. Athanas. Apolog. Victor. de persecut. Vandal. lib. 3.
Arrian haeresy; how cruel and bloody were they to the servants of Christ;
exciting the Magistrate to exturpate them, loading them with slanders,
banishing them from their Countries, scourging, and imprisoning them, cutting
out their tongues, nay not satisfied without their precious lives. Thus we see
that whether we look at these damnable errors in their own nature, or in their
subject in whom they reside, they are truly by the Apostle in the Text styled
Destructions.

Secondly, but fares the Commonwealth any better where these take place? Have
not these damnable errors destroyed its peace by tumultuous insurrections, and
horrid outrages? what a terrible tempest was raised by Aug. Epist. 50. ad
Bonif. and Epist. 68. ad Januar. and lib. 3. cont. crescon.
Donatists, and Circumcelliones, men of the same humor with them, and what
outrages were committed by them; who pretended to more piety than others, but
expressed the contrary, by their rapines, robberies, and mischeivous courses? Nor
could they be taken off, till Honorius the Paul. diac. lib. 14.
Emperor was fain to send Dulcius with an army to suppress them. How have
these errors many times subverted the very foundations of States, while some of
them in their own nature have been so directly opposite to the being, or
binding of Laws, to the authority of Magistrates (as the Moniches of old, the
Munster faction of late) that where they have taken place, the ligaments of
States have been (so far as these have prevailed) so miserably broken, and left
in so sad a confusion under a pretense of Quidam ut imperium subvertant,
libertatem si subverterint ipsam aggredientur. Corn. Tacit.
liberty, that had not their extirpation been the more speedy they had
certainly buried those people where they reigned in utter confusion and
desolation. Not only making them accessory to their own destruction, whilst
with their own hands they should effect their ruin; but also engaging him who
is the God of order and truth to become their enemy, and pour out the
testimonies of his vengeance from heaven upon them: Sometimes by a more
immediate hand, as Paul. Diac. lib. 15.
Antioch, a nurcery of heresies was first sore shaken, and after with fire from
heaven consumed; Nichomedia a place where the Arrians were appointed to meet,
swallowed up of an earthquake. And frequently by the mediate hand of men, who
are his ax, rod, and staff of his indignation; whose spirits he stirs up to
take vengeance on his behalf; such in former times were Constantine the great,
who banished Arrius; Socr. schol. hist. eccl. l. 5. c. 10. Evagr. hist. eccl. l.
4. c. 11.
Theodosius expeld all heretics that were against the faith of one substance;
Justinian published sharp edicts, and sorely punished heretics, with diverse
others. And in later times Charles the fifth against the Westphalian crew; also
the Magistrates of Geneva burning Servetus for his Antitrinitarian heresy,
with many other examples of this. Thus you have seen, how destructive these
damnable heresies are in societies.

Secondly, but are they less pernicious to particular persons, whether
ringleaders, or such as are perverted by them? Certainly no; but I may truly
take up the words of the Prophet Esaias. 59.5.
, They hatch Cockatrice eggs, and weave the spiders web: he that eats of
their eggs dies, and that which is crushed, breaks forth into a viper. In
which place Hieron. in Epist. ad Cypri.
Jerome thinks the Prophet Esaias does lively set forth the nature of heresies,
and the work of heretics. How is it often the destruction of their bodies,
whilst their erroneous mind puts them upon the asserting or practicing that
which either by too much excess and riotous courses ruins nature, as the 2
Pet. 2.10, 12, 13, etc.
Libertines of former and later time; Or else on the contrary, by too much
Coloss. 2.21, 22.
austerity and self-elected rigidity, sink in time the Body, and bring it to
the dust of death?

But if none of these take place, how often is the God of heaven so far
provoked, especially against the founders, or principal abetters and
maintainers of them; that vengeance marks them with some eminent and notorious
badge of Gods displeasure, by some sad and dismal ruin? Theodoret eccles.
hist. l. 3. c. 14.
When Arrius was in the midst of his pomp and pride, the hand of Heaven allots
him a deathbed, and death loathsome like his Opinion. Evagr. hist. eccl. l. 1.
c. 7.
Nestorius his tongue was eaten with worms; Anastasius a great defender of the
Eutychian heresy, was smitten with a thunderbolt; Palmerieteron.
Olympius who publicly detested the Trinity, was struck with three lightnings
whereby his body was burnt.

Yet however their bodies speed, most certainly they are always destructive to
their better part the soul; 1 Timothy 5.6.
benighting their minds, turning their light into darkness, and leaving them
to innumerable by ways of 2 Timothy 3.8.
ruin and destruction. Many times spoiling their 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. 2 Timothy
4.2.
Consciences of peace, by overthrowing the very grounds and roots thereof, as
Christ's satisfaction; the comfortable doctrine of Justification, by the Papists
and Socinians; which being taken away, what is left to a poor distressed soul
afflicted with the sight and sense of sin, a knife or halter, the too too
ordinary refuges of dark distracted minds?

But however an Erring mind may enjoy a seeming peace, (which for the most part
is rather to be styled sottish stupidity, or carnal security, then Christian
tranquillity) Yet always, answerable to the degree of falsehood in the haeresie
asserted, there is a pollution and stain thereby derived to the person
maintaining Lev. 13.29, 30, 42, 43, 44.
it. Leprosy in the head as truly made a Leper, as on any other part; neither
does it rest in the head, but as defluxions from the brain overthrow the
stomach, so haeresies corrupt the other faculties of the soul, and frequently
discover themselves in the filthy ungodly practices of those that entertain
them; Some haeresies directly militating against all piety in life and
conversation; as that of the Libertines of old, who conceived that the
distinction of Works into good and bad, was but an invention of men; and that
no works were really bad in their own nature, but were to be reckoned evil only
so far forth as he that wrought them thought them so to be. And in our days,
the Libertine assertions that so much prevail upon unstable spirits; as, That
there is no resurrection of the flesh; That the works which are wrought by the
body shall never be accounted for; That God is the author of evil works, as
well as of good; That men are freed that believe, from obedience to the Moral
Law and the like.

Thus haeresies 1 Timothy 6.5.
corrupt men's minds, destroy good Conscience, pollute their Lives, rob them of
beauty, peace, piety, indeed all real spiritual worth. As rottenness in an
apple, or a flaw or cloud in a precious stone, so far as these prevail, all
real value ceases; so we may justly assert, that look how far haeresie
prevails, so far forth the spirit of such a one is little, yea nothing worth; 2 Timothy 2.20.
making them vessels of wood, stone, dishonor: Cypr. l. 3. ep. 3. l. 4. ep. 2.
Aug. l. 3. de bap. cont. Donatist. c. 18, 19, etc.
(so Cyprian, Austin, and diverse others understand that place in Timothy
concerning such kind of persons as these.) But that which is worst of all, the
height of misery, and dregs of vengeance; Gal. 5.20, 21.
The nature, and necessary consequent of Haeresie unrepented of, is to deprive
the soul of happiness. And most certainly, though it may bring a man into an
imaginary sensual heaven, like that of Demaes here; yet will it bring them, if
obstinately persisted in, into a 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.
hell hereafter. And however they may blaze and shine in the opinion of their
own Faction, or others here; St. Peter tells you, like shooting gliding
meteors, there is an eternal 2 Pet. 2.17 Jude 13.
night of darkness abides them in the other world for ever.

security; Have no bowels of pity to poor souls; Are void of Publikenesse of
spirit; Not regarding to see Jerusalem in prosperity, nor peace upon Israel.
But as an Antidote against their oratory, I beseech you consider, the
greatness of your trust for the Peoples safety; the strictness of your
Covenant-engagement; the frequencie of your Declarations and Remonstrances
against them; your Replies to reproaches that have been cast upon you, as if
you favored them; And lastly, I beseech you consider the ruining and
destroying nature of Heresy, to Church, Commonwealth, Souls, Bodies. Cant.
2.14.
Therefore take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the Vines.

2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.
given up to believe a lie; to be so far deserted by God, as that Heresies
should prevail over them: 2 Timothy 2.26.
It Is as the Devil would have it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.
A trophie of his victory, a sign of Indignation, a Prognostic of Ruin, 2 Timothy 2.17.
a deadly disease, a mark of Rev. 13.8.
Reprobation; a terrible shipwreck, a certain ingulf of them in the Rev. 14.9,
10.
participation of the saddest plagues and vengeance. O how can we weep enough
this day for the daughter of our people; The Lords people are led captive; the
Church is ecclipsed, and looks like a Jer. 12.9.
speckled bird amongst the nations; The Commonwealth rotters; Souls are
defiled; And hell is, I fear, too much filled with these Erring creatures.

We Ministers have need to weep, for want of courage, watchfulness, zeal.
Christ may complain of us as Eusebius. eccl. hist. l. 3 c. 20.
St. John did of that Bishop, I have made a sweet keeper of my brothers soul.

You Magistrates had need to weep for want of Vt laudanda patientia, sic
timendum ne culpetur in nimium tolerandis negligentia. Aug. sermon. 14. de verb.
Apost.
Warmth, Heedfulnesse, Expedition, and for your cruel mercy toward Seducers.
Are not you styled Psalm. 47.9.
Sheilds, Nch. 9.27
Saviors, Isa. 44.18.
Shepherds, Isa. 49 23.
Nursing Fathers to Church and State? And God forbid you should be Psalm. 115.6.
like David's Idol, have eyes, and not take notice of these; ears, and not
hear the sad cries of a distracted afflicted people against them; hands, and
should not smite and cut off such wicked workers Psalm. 101.8.
from the city of our God. Parents and Masters had need to weep, for their
heedlesnesse, and perfunctorinesse; that they have no more watched over their
tender spring, nor made it their business to Ephesians. 6.4, 9.
ground them in the Principles of religion, for want of which they have easily
been Ephesians. 5.14.
seduced and cheated by these heretical Impostors who lie in wait to deceive.
And have they not abundantly obtained their purpose? Did ever the former ages
produce more hideous Monsters than we have risen up amongst us in this poor
Island? Are there not many Arrians, who hold that damnable error against the
eternal Deity of Jesus Christ? Some Valentinians, who oppose the reality of
his taking flesh of the Virgin Mary? Marcionites, who deny the verity of his
sufferings? Gnostics, who pretend to new lights and revelations, but are too
much like them in the wildness of their Opinions, and profaneness of their
Lives? And very many, of whom we may say as Multiferme monstrum. Epiphan.
Epiphanius of Ebion, that he was a Monster of many shapes, holding all errors
together; The Samaritans abomination, the Jews name, the Nazareans opinion,
the Cerinthians form, the Corpocratians improbity, and the Christians
profession, and is not here cause to weep?

Luke 19.41
Christ wept over Jerusalem, out of a contemplation of those sad confusions and
ruins that were at hand; and have not we just cause to mourn for our selves
and for our children, when we may justly in a very true sense take up the Psalm.
80.13, 14.
Psalmists sad complaint: Thou have broken down their hedges, so that they that
pass by devour it; the Bore out of the wood does waste it, and the wild beast
of the field does devour it. Is not here cause to weep?

Not to us O Lord, not to us; or with the 1 Cor. 15.10. Non est devotionis
dedisse prope totum, sed fraudis detinuisse minimum. Prosp.
Apostle, Not I but the grace of God that was with me. With praise and
thanksgiving, for this mercy to our selves; with prayer and supplication for
poor souls, that either are in danger to be ensnared by them, or are already
captivated, that they may escape out of this snare of the devil; With pity and
commiseration toward them, taking notice that we our selves are but men, and
may be Quid de me talis ^^^^atio fecisset, etc. Aug. Gal. 6 1.
tempted; With help and adjuvation, Jude 22, 23
yet putting a difference, some pulling with fear, as it were out of the fire.

Exhortation to People. You see there is no dallying with Haeresies, for they
are Destructions: Therefore 1 John 4.1.
try before you trust, whether the spirits be of God or no. Thus did the
religious Act. 17.11.
Bereans, they searched the Scriptures, whether the things St. Paul preached
were so or no. Poison is not a thing to be dallied with, seeing it destroys
nature, and causes death: what is matter though it be tendered in a golden cup?
Beware, I beseech you, of that fool-hardinesse which is found in too many in
our days, who venture to complement with pernicious errors and erroneous
persons, resolving either to keep their minds free from engagement to them; or
if they go so far as to sip, and out of curiosity take a taste of them, yet
they determine to maintain in themselves a mind free to fall off at pleasure.
But Sed enim febrem ut malum and de causa and de potentia sua, ut notum est,
abominamus potius quam miramur, and quantum in nobis est praecavemus, non
habentes abolitionem ejus in nostra potestate. Haereses vero mortem aeternam
and majoris ignis ardorem inferentes, malunt quidam mirari quod possint hoc,
quam devitare ne possint, etc. Tertul. de praescript. haeret.
I beseech you consider, they are of too Rev. 17.4.
intoxicating a nature, filling the soul with a spiritual vertigo, destroying
by degrees the light of the mind, Gal. 3.1.
fascinating and bewitching the spirits of those that swallow them. Neither is
it a thing unusual, but common with God in his dispensation, to 2 Thessalonians. 2,
10, 11.
deliver up such to strong delusion that believe a lie, that receive not the
truth in the love thereof. Oh then, how is it possible they should ever escape,
Libera voluntas sine gratia, tota vitiosa cupiditae est, Aug.
when grace is withheld, whereby they should escape out of these snares of the
devil, and they left to his depths and wiles, under the conduct of an erring
mind. If therefore thou throwest thy self off from the pinnacle of the temple,
never think thou can stop where thou please: But as Solomon cautions his
drunkard against that vice, Prove. 23, 31.
Look not upon the wine when it is red; when it gives his color in the
glass, when it moves it self aright. So say I to thee, take heed of being
flattered into a liking of untruths, either from the glorious colors and
pretenses of more sanctity, New light, clearer discoveries of Truth, Christian
liberty, or the like: for if Haeresies had not some plausible varnish to set
them off, they would be contemned and detested by all, being in themselves of
horrid hue, of an ugly visage and hag-like countenance; but it is their paint
that makes them passable. Haereses ornatu, non viscuribus pulchrae sunt; foris
extrinsecus ni^^^ nomine justitiae se dea^^ant, etc Aug. sermon. 50. in Job.
Their clothing is fair, but their inward frame is monstrous; they outwardly
shine with the gilt of truth and righteousness, but inwardly there is nothing
but darkness and impiety in them, being conceived in the womb of 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.
a dark elated mind, cherished by vain imaginations, self-estimation and ends;
produced, most frequently, to 2 Pet. 2, 3.
gain reputation and the like advantages; but always terminating (if persisted
in) in sad 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. 2 Pet. 2.3.1^.
ruins and destructions. Yet see the madness of the people; Not a few, but
many, says our Apostle, shall follow their pernicious ways. Which is the
second thing in my Text.

many are conquered and led captive by them. This [shall] in my Text, is far
from a precept; for it is prohibited to follow the false Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, etc.
Prophet of old, or the false Jude 19.20, 21, etc. Ephesians. 4.14.
Apostles and erring Teachers in the New Testament. Nor is there in it the
least show of a Toleration from heaven, which God abhors, threatening sad
judgments and breathing flames against the Rev. 2.15.
Church of Pergamus, for the Nicolaitans; and against the Church of Thiatyra,
for suffering Jesabel to seduce his servants. But it is an infallible
Prediction: for God was (as it were) the active understanding to this blessed
Apostle, by whose revelation he foresaw this sad prevailing Apostasy
destroying not a few, but many. Baron. Annal.
This Epistle was written about the year of Christ 65. not long before his
death, as himself hints in his first chap. of this Epist. and 14. verse.
Knowing (says he) that shortly I must put off this earthly tabernacle, even as
our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me. Which fell out about the year 67. And how
soon after, according to this Prophetical prediction, did arise Cerinthus,
Basilides, Carpocrates, Saturninus, Marcion, Valentinus who drew no small
numbers, but multitudes in those Eastern parts became followers of their
blasphemos monstrous Tenets. Epiphanius within the compass of about 400 years,
wri^es of the rise of almost fourscore sects and sorts of Haereticks; some
more, some less differing from each other, but all of them enemies to the
truth. By these, alas, how soon was the Lords field, his Church over run with
tares and weeds? How swiftly did Haeresie run from East to West, like fire in
stubble?

But this [Many shall follow] in my Text, is not to be co^fined within the
narrow compass of some few Centuries of years after the Apostles death, but is
extensive to the end of the world, as may appear by a due consideration of the
last chap. of this 2. epistle. It Is true, the East first bred haeresies, as
having the riper and more nimble wits, the Devil also bending his power betimes
to make them adulterate Truth, and strangle it in its infancy: And oh happy
had it been for thousands of souls, if Haeresies birth and funeral had been at
the same place and time together: but the old Serpent used all his skill to
make it long-lived; endeavoring by his hucksters to convey it from place to
place; that thus it living in many soiles, and souls, there might be the less
danger of its utter extirpation. He quickly found choice Agents for his
purpose: Some out of ambition, as Act. ^.
Simon Magus, Joh. 3.9. Eusebius. hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 3.
Diotrophes, Eusebius. hist. eccl. l. 7. c. 29. l. 6. c. 42.
Paulus Samosatenus, etc. Others out of covetousness, as Ibid. l. 5. c. 25.
Natalius, and those in the Tit. 1.11. Romans 16.18.
Apostles times: And not a few out of discontent and revenge, as Socr. schol.
hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 36.
Apollinaris, Donatus, Marcion: Some of little learning, but more then
sufficient boldness, as Aetius, and very many doting dreamers; and others
whose brains he had garrisoned and magabined for his own use, full fraughting
them with Philosophy, and unsubmitted principles to higher truths, as
Valentinus, Photinus, with diverse others. And by these hucksters he drove so
great a trade, that no few customers were gained by them: so that Haeresie in
many places might well boast against truth, as Theodata in Aelian against the
Philosopher, That her followers far exceeded the number of his.

Mat. 14.^, 11.
Christ, before his death, predicted it should be so, That many false Christ's
and false Prophets should after his departure arise, and deceive many. 2 Timothy 3
6.
St. Paul in his time saw them like some terrible tempest or horrid Harocan, 2 Timothy 2.18
subverting whole houses, overthrowing the faith of many. Eusebius. hist. eccl. l.
3. c. 11.
S. John who lived the longest, sees Cerinthus, Menander, and Ebion, against
whose haeresie he writes his gospel; and foresees in Prophetic vision the Romans
13.3
Beast who pretends to be Christ's Vicar, the succeeding dragon of Rome, and all
the earth wandering after him. And in later times, was ever that Countess more
fruitful in her prodigious birth of three hundred sixty and four children at
one time (if the Holland-story abuse us nor) then these pernicious Errors have
been in sundry places? witness Poland, and the neighboring Territories,
abounding with Socinians, and other haeresies of all sorts and sizes; Germany,
famous for fruitfulness in misshapen monstrous Opinions; The Low Countries
have not been much behind the forementioned places for fertility in these
noisome weeds; And now at last poor England has too large a share in the sad
infection and spreading of this desperate Malady: witness the increase of
Familisme, Antinomianisme, Socinianisme, and many other desperate Tenets, so
far prevailing amongst the People, that except some speedy course be taken to
prevent their further spreading, they threaten a terrible inundation, to the
loss of Truth, and utter ruin of the Nation.

many are infected with them?

Reasons of the spreading of Haeresies.
Either they are persons of parts and learning, as Valentinus, Socinus,
Simachus, and diverse others: Or such as are of reputed Piety; they have a 2 Timothy 3.5.
form of godliness, and in their words and deportments are transformed into 2
Cor. 11, ^4.
Angels of light; as Montanus, Novatus, Arrius, the Munster-Anabaptists, who in
the beginning exceedingly prevailed by their discourses, which were at the
first of nothing but Bulling (...). Anabap. l. 2. c ^7.
Mortification, Fasting, and other Religious exercises; and their pretense in
their deportments was to more then ordinary piety: This made them to be
indulged in some petty differences in Opinion, by those that were in Authority;
pitied by the chief reforming Ministers; adhered to by many single-hearted, but
inadvertent pious people, who so much listened to and believed their words, and
were so gulled by their specious shows, that they little dreamt of the mischief
that some of their ringleaders aimed at, or the progress they intended to
make, till many of them had brought themselves into such a trap, that there was
scarce any hope or means left to them to evade a most desperate and utter
ruin: Thus, they having the repute of fair and conscientious Dealers, could
not want Customers, who with too greedy a mind would receive and take upon
trust their Errors. But to close this; There are many likewise, who have not
only ventured, but suffered for Religion, whereby they have grown in
estimation with well-meaning pious people: I might give many instances in the
Primitive times hereof, but I omit them; take only an example of latter days.
Hist. David. George.
David George, at first a citizen of Delph, was cast into prison, bored through
the tongue for speaking against and withstanding Popish idolatry, by which he
came to be in high esteem with the godly; yet afterward became one of the
worst, and most blasphemous Haereticks in any age of the Church I have read of,
asserting the Scriptures, yea those of the Apostles, were lame, childish, and
ineffectuall for the understanding of the things of God; that he was greater
then Christ in the flesh, etc. But by reason of his sufferings for truth in
former times, he was in so great repute, that he easily seduced many unstable
souls to become of his Opinions.

Ephesians. 4.14.
They want not their guiles and arts to ensnare poor souls; They study the
persons, and wait their opportunity to deceive; Romans 16.18
They use fair speeches to beguile the hearts of the simple; professions of
love and charity, To be eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, guides to the
erring. Brother, say they, Mat. 7.4.
let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye. The wolf lays the sheep, when
he seizes on him, upon his back gently, as if he meant but only to ease him;
whereas indeed his purpose is to take his opportunity that he may devour him.
So for all the sheeps clothing, yet are seducers inwardly but Mat. 7.15.
ravening wolves. And because they conceive, to lay open and rebuke the faults
of others, is no small means to conceal their own, and render themselves
unsuspected to those they deal with; Therefore how do they curiously pry into
the faults of others, and like flesh flies passing over what is sound and right,
light only on what is sore and putrid in them? Flavian. epist. ad Leon. Pap.
Eutyches confutes Nestorius, that he might gain repute to himself, and false
opinion. Neither want they vehemence and ejulation, confidence, boldness, and
resolution, being men of a 1 Timothy 4.1.
seared conscience, and brazen forehead, that cannot blush. To set their Errors
home, and to commend them the better to those they intend to make their
disciples, they practice the old trick of one of the prime persons of their
order, I mean Simon Magus, who to gain the greater repute of himself, and
credit to his blasphemies, persuaded the poor Samaritans Act. 8.9, 10.
that he was somebody, no less then the mighty power of God; which testimony
of his being too easily believed by those poor creatures, gaind the attention
and respect of small and great in that place to him. After him Jactabat sacram
Scripturam se solum and primum intelligece. Vinc. Lyr. c. 42
Nestorius trod in his steps of pride, boasting, That he alone knew the meaning
of the Scriptures, and was the first that rightly understood them. And this
has been from time to time the strain of these Seducers, to cast out 2 Pet.
1.18. Jude 26.
swelling words of vanity, whereby they gained on weak minds sufficiently, who
use to judge of doctrines, rather by the conceit they have of the person that
vents them, then by their conformity to the Word of truth. So Eunomius likewise
boasted, That he knew God with the same knowledge wherewithal God knew
himself. They pretend to high Col. 2.18.
mysteries and depths, being vainly puffed up in their carnal minds, intruding
themselves into things they understand not; and have answerably their canting
language, which may rather amaze their auditors, and lead them into mists of
darkness and giddiness, then into the least true notion of heavenly truth.
They leave not here, but that their Authority may be beyond all questioning,
Eusebius. hist. eccl. l. 5. c. 25.
They boast of the prescriptions of Apostles, and the prime Pillars of
Christianity: So did the Haereticks of old, and the Papists still to this day
with great impudency; but scarce so much as any color of truth, except it be
fetched out of spurious writings and legends falsely attributed to those holy
men, and nothing agreeing with their genuine writings. But, because Divine
testimony is of highest authority, and most infallible, therefore they will
rather father blasphemously their Errors on the Spirit of truth, then not gain
belief; 2 Pet. 3.16.
either wracking or wresting his Word to their purpose, abusing the Scriptures;
or else they will boast (if no warrant, so much as seemingly probable, can be
found in His book for their unworthy assertions and practices) that they have
their direction from immediate Revelation and Inspiration; as the Montanists of
old; and not long since, John of Leyden and his followers at Munster, for their
abominable doctrine and loathsome courses.

3. The matter they broach, is no small cause and reason of their so much
prevailing with multitudes. For perhaps it is something New, such with which
they have not had the least acquaintance before: now naturally men have 2 Timothy
4.5.
itching ears, are true Act. 17.21.
Athenians greedy of new things; They are quickly weary of old Truths, because
they never saw their beauty, nor tasted their sweetness by an intuitive
knowledge; for if they had, they would have found such pleasure and profit in
them, as not to have been at all weary of them; Truths beauty always lasting
as fresh as at her first appearance to us, and always springing gloriously in
greenesse and pleasant fruits, not capable of being slighted by the soul that
knows her. But what if (as it falls out too often) these new Truths prove but
old Errors new varnisht over? As in these giddy times wherein we live, who
would not almost give credit to that old Pythagorean fable, of men's souls
passing when they die, into other bodies? There are some do so much resemble
Arrius, Donatus, the Gnostics, and other ancient Haereticks; that were we not
assured the same Power of darkness that acted the former, still living, is
vigorous in these also to the same ends and purposes, or else we might suppose
the souls of the former haereticks had taken up the bodies of the latter for
their dwellings.

And many times, I must needs confess, it is not so much new matter, as a new
dress in newfound language and unintelligible words, when they most boast of
new Lights and Doctrines, which Paul (...). 1 Timothy 6.20
counsels Timothy to shun and avoid. So that we may truly say concerning many
of their Ringleaders in our days, as an Historian speaks of the Ligurians of
old, who dwelt amongst bogs and bushy places, Major erat aliquanto labor
invenire quam vincere.
That it was a greater labor to find them out, then to conquer them; So these
men, they have such gypsy, fustian Language, in which they endeavor to lie
hid, and conceal their sense and meaning, for fear that if they should come to
the light, it would quickly appear what adulterate stuff they endeavor to
obtrude for Gospel upon poor souls; therefore it is their pretense, That what
they speak is Desiderant ut iniquitas eorum sit mysticae, religionis nomine
palliata. Anselm.
mystical, rather to be received by an implicit faith, and adored with
admiration, then pryed into by reason, or examined by comparing it with the Law
and Testimony, to which Esaias 8.20.
God sends his people. Yet I must needs acknowledge also, that many times there
are some of this seduceing crew, who run as much wild on the other hand,
endeavoring to bring down Religion in the highest mysteries thereof to the
scanning and judgment of humane reason; Credere aliquid esse verum, quod ratio
non potest apprehendere, nec intellectus intelligere, levitatis signum esse
dicimus.

Averroes, qui subinde christian is ogganiebat. sic Socinus, and multi
haeretici, etc.


and what falls not within the approbation of this, they reject as spurious.
Hence came the Antitrinitarian error; the opinion of the death of souls; the
denial of the bodies resurrection, and the like. Patriarchas haereticorum.
Tertull. lib. cont. Hermog.
Hence Tertullian rightly styles the Philosophers, the patriarchs or heads of
haereticks. And because they will not fail to overcome, and prevail with the
people; it is not the least part of their care, and cunning, to proportion
their doctrine, and shape their tenets to the peoples humor; they prophecy
Esaias 30.10
smooth things, and 2 Pet. 2.19
promise them liberty, as Eusebius. lib. 4 cap. 6. hist. Eccl.
Barchochebas did the inslaved Jews, or life and such immunity from death and
evils Just. Mart. Apol. 2. pro Christ.
as Menander the haereticall sorcerer did to his disciples; hereby they take
with the people, who cry them up for sweet Gospel Preachers, their new light
best agreeing with the carnal affections, and earthly designs and resolutions
of their fleshly auditors: Lies, like candlelight, best serving to set off the
masks and mummeries of the world, whereas the Ephesians. 5.23.
bright daylight of heavenly truth would mar all. Yet because if they should
discover themselves in a constant divulging of new and strange opinions, it
might startle the people they deal with, and make them more cautious how they
give up their spirits to be leveaned by them; therefore they have got this
trick and slight, to hold forth some known truths, which managing to their own
advantage, they make the means to attract the belief of the people the easier
to what they shall afterward hold forth of their own unto them. Somewhat
Strabo. lib. 15.
like the description of Ape-catching in the Indies. The person that watches to
take that creature, first brings a basin or vessel of pure water; which when
the ape perceives (the man being retired out of sight) down comes he, and
having gazed on himself, and beheld his face in the water a while, he begins
to dab, and wash himself therein; which when he has done sufficiently, he
gets up into the tree again; which when the man perceives, he takes away the
basin or vessel of water, instead thereof conveying a vessel of bird-lime;
the poor ape suspecting nothing, the heat prevailing over the waters refreshing
coldness, comes down from the tree again, and falls to patting of himself
about the face and head as before; by which his eyes being closed with the
bird-lime, he becomes a prey to his wily catcher. So has it been, nay is at
this present day with many seducers amongst us, etc. They know that their
doctrine like adulterate coin could not pass unless there were some mixture
of the gold or silver of truth with their baser metal of error; therefore they
gild over their more horrible opinions with Orthodox truths, or at the least
with such expressions as seem to ordinary capacities to be very innocent, and
little or nothing different from the mind of the Church of Christ, when in
truth they mean nothing less: But Gesner. hist. ^is^. lib. (...). Plin. lib.
9. cap. 29.
as the fish called Calamarie, or by some the Sea-clerk, when he is in danger
to be taken, casts forth an inky black substance, in which concealing himself
from the sight of the fisher, in that night of darkness he passes away
undiscovered and evades the danger. Even so do these Seducers escape the being
discovered what they are, by their dark expressions and ambiguous words, which
either are not understood, or else in them they seem to many, that they speak
but the same things with us (as Irenaeus says) when indeed they mean nothing
less then truth: (...). Iraen.
whereby it comes to pass, that even as poison given in honey enters the
veins quickly, and piercing the deeper, kills the speedier, and more surely;
so their desperate Errors being covered in the Romans 16.18
pleasing words of seeming and approved Verity, are entertained into the
Peoples mind with approbation, and there received as the truth of God with
greatest liking, and held fast with so much obstinacy, that (as we see by sad
experience) Gal. 4.6.
they reckon them their sorest enemies that tell them the truth, nay will
rather perish than suffer these cords of death to be taken from them.

4. The fault many times is much in the Mat. 13 25
servants whom Christ has employed about his vineyard, to take care that the
seed of wholesome Truth be sown, and every plant that is contrary thereunto of
the envious man's planting, according to the power wherewith he has betrusted
them, eradicated and plucked up. The Minister in his sphere, by 2 Timothy 4.2, etc.
frequent Preaching, holding forth the whole truth of God clearly, Tit. 1.9.
confuting gainsayers solidly, if after two or three admonitions they refuse to
be gained, 2 Timothy 2.16, 17.
avoiding and shunning their perverse disputes, and company, warning others to
beware of them; 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26.
using all gentleness and patience to them that are seduced, proving if God at
any time will give them repentance, that they may escape out of this snare of
the devil. And if all will not do, but still this gangrene spreads, and
threatens ruin to the whole; 1 Timothy 1.20.
Then ought they to exercise that dreadful Censure of the Church; that neither
this 1 Cor. 5.6, 7.
leaven for want of casting out may sour the lump, nor Heb 12.15
this root of bitterness so spread, by being amongst the professors of verity,
as that many should be perverted thereby; nor they be partakers of Seducers
sins, by an unrighteous silence, of unjust withholding that Ordinance of GOD,
which possibly may tend to the making even the seducer sensible of his crime,
by Gods blessing and concurrence; but however, it is like to put a stand to
their madness, make others 1 Timothy 5.20.
fear, and be very cautious, how either they receive their doctrine whom the
Church of Christ declares deceivers, or run their course which may bring them
into the same condemnation with these their seducing guides. But however, the
Ministers of Christ have discharged their duty, and may have much peace and
comfort therein, whatever the event and issue thereof prove to be.

There is another servant whom Christ has entrusted in this great business,
and that is the Magistrate; Although there be Stapleton, in Relect. controv. 2.
quest. 5. art. 1. p. 253. Bellarm. l. 1. de R. P. cap. 7. Tannerus, Becanus,
cum multis aliis.
some that would limit and restrain his power to secular affairs: yet is this
doctrine so little answerable either to the practice of most pious 1 Chronicles. 23.
1 Chr. 31. 2 King 23. Vos estis episcopi in ecclesia; ego extra ecclesiam seu
templure episcopus a Deo sum constitutus. Eusebius.
Governors, to the opinion of Aug. epist. 50. ad Bonif. ep. 48 ad Vincent. l.
3. cont. Cresc. gram. c. 51.

Leo epist. 9. ad Theodos. etc.


Antiquity, or to Deuteronomy. 17.18. cu^ 2 King. 11.12. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Romans 13.1,
etc. Esa. 49.23.
Scripture verity; that were not these men abundantly ignorant, or exceedingly
impudent, they would never maintain an opinion so plainly opposite to truth as
this is. But alas, here is the sad root of this misery: That either the
Ministers are Isa. 56.10.
ignorant, and unable to maintain the truth, confute and stop the mouths of
gainsayers; or they are wicked and scandalous, like 1 Samuel 2.13, etc.
Elies so^^, whose profane and ungodly courses lose all repute to the Truth,
making the things of God (by those who measure truth by the lives and carriages
of them that maintain it) to be abandoned and abhorred. If neither of these,
yet perhaps they are Rev. 2.20.
careless, negligent, and inadvertent, nothing heeding how Truth thrives, or
how Error spreads, as if to them it were of very small or no concernment: In
point of benefit they are greedy dogs, zealous enough for their profit, Isa.
56.11.
looking after that from every quarter; but in point of duty they want heat,
Rev. 3.15.
the fire of zeal for Gods glory is not in them, therefore they love their
ease, to sleep, slumber, and take their rest; whereby they give not only an
opportunity to the Evil one to sow his tares, but to those tares to take root
and prosper.

Or lastly; They are magisteriall and proud, testy and froward, whereas they
ought to be Gal. 6.1.
lowly and meek, 2 Timothy 2^ 24, 25.
gentle toward all, apt to teach, waiting with patience: but this their course
and carriage is no small means to alienate poor seduced souls from the truth,
making them believe that truth has but small strength of reason and wisdom to
support it, and therefore stands in need of the weak and loathsome props of
Pride and passion. Thus verity is disgraced. But, many times the Minister may
do his duty, and yet by reason of the Magistrates miscarriage these Haeresies
may flourish; because, perhaps, they have conquered himself: Now Psalm 11.3.
if the foundations be removed, what then can the righteous do? O how sad was
the Churches condition, when Emperors, Kings and Governors were infected with
the Arrian haeresie; when Arrianisme Vincent. Lyr. cont. haeres.
like a hellish fury, laid hold on the Throne it self; the People imitating and
conforming to their Princes judgment and manners, were quickly and easily
infected with it. Or suppose they be not tainted themselves, yet if they be
irreligious and profane, who make as slight of differences in Religion, as Act.
25.19, 20.
Festus did in the business of Paul; Or timorous to displease, of a low and
inferior spirit, slothful to erract, or execute according to the demerit of
the Error, or the Haeretick; how can it from such be expected, either that
Truth should be righted, or a stop put to the madness of people by them?

5. This is too often occasioned through the various differences in Judgment
about things not much material, that are amongst different Ministers and
Professors of Piety and Religion, whereby they are so divided in affection and
exasperated against each other, that their bitter words and carriages too often
discover that fire of hell which burns within, though at the same time they
agree in fundamentals, and things that are absolutely necessary to eternal
happiness. There are no few examples of this might be given in Primitive
times; Eusebius. hist eccl. l. 5 c. 21, etc
as about the time of Easter, maintained with no small heat, and such like
petty differences breaking forth by degrees into horrid flames. The like has
too much happened in the Church of Christ in latter times: The Ministers and
Professors of Religion not long since in this Island, were like a goodly
Mirror, all of one piece, glorious in truth and piety, by reason of the bright
beams of the Sun of Righteousness, that Fountain of true light and
holiness, shining on them: But oh how are they broken all to shivers, and who
can express the sad consequents of their dissentions! The Profane are detetred
from looking toward Religion, because they conceive it to be a thing of so
great uncertainty, that it will be impossible for them to attain to any
assurance of what is truth, seeing such persons of parts and piety cannot agree
about it. The weak, contrary to the Apostles Romans 14.1.
canon, being received to doubtful disputations, or hearing so much of
differences amongst those that are reckoned more then ordinary in Religion, lie
down in despondencie of spirit, and are subjected to sad temptations of
misbelief and error: That which Heb. 12.13.
halts, in stead of being healed is clean turned out of the way of truth: The
strong are grieved; and the Devil laughs to see his work go forward, his
kingdom increase, his tares so readily entertained, by the means of those whom
he looked upon as his most mortal enemies.

6. All the former causes of the growth of haeresie would not be effectually
operative, were it not that Peoples hearts are like a prepared soil, ready to
entertain these damnable errors. Look into their minds, they are filled with
darkness; how then should they be able to understand, or judge of the things
of God? they cannot, 1 Cor. 2.14.
for they are spiritually discerned, in heavenly light, only manifest to an
enlightened mind; all colors in the dark are alike. Neither is this only
Natural, but adventitious; frequently from a cold frozen heart void of Truths
love, which like cold weather thickens the clouds, causing darkness; and
darkness prevailing by the clouds being thickened, increases the cold: so is it
here: A cold frozen spirit clouds and darkens the mind; and the mind being
darkened, heighthens and increases the coldness and benummednesse of the heart,
in respect of that affection which it owes to the truth. But yet in many,
(blessed be God) there are beginning of Knowledge; which in most of these being
but very beginnings and embrioes of Truth, they hang too Act 26 28.
equally balanced between it and error, being full of doubtfulnesse, and are
not freed from jealousies and suspicions, Mar. 13.21
which are apt to take fire, break forth and show themselves, when Seducers
question the truths they pretend to hold, but in truth are far from any firm
and determinate assent upon any right ground; which makes them so easily let
them slip, and barter them for such counterfeit ware as these soul-destroying
Errors be. They are very credulous, like Prove. 14.25.
Solomon's fool, perhaps many times out of Taedio investigandae penitus
veritatis, cuilibet opinioni potius succumbere maliit quam in explorando
pertinaci diligentia perseverare. Minut. in Octav. Malunt credere quam
judicare. Sen.
slothful sluggishnesse, being rather willing to take what they hear on trust,
then to trouble themselves and take pains about it, to try what conformity and
proportion it holds with the unerring, undeceiving Word of truth, the
Scriptures.

Many have corrupt Consciences, that must be Ezekiel. 13.18, 20
boulstered 2 Timothy 4 3.
corrupt Affections, that must be humoured; corrupt Practices, that must be
like blemishes concealed and hid. This will make them, like the Elephant, to
mud the pure water of the doctrine of truth, that they may not see and be
convinced of their ugliness; as the Mat. 5.21, etc.
Pharisees did the Law by their foolish glosses.

Corrupt and pervert the Truth, that they may avoid torture of Conscience. When
the Athenians had lost Salmis, they made a law against the naming of it: So,
whatever may torment them before their time, they rather flatly deny it, or
some false way or other they take to avoid the force and conviction thereof.
Witness those people in the Church of Corinth, that began to say, There is 1
Cor. 15.12.
no Resurrection. 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.
Himinaeus and Philetus, that affirmed it was already past. Indeed they could
wish it were so, because of its consequent, The last Judgment; which doctrine,
if they should rightly consider, would make them Act 24.25.
tremble: therefore they choose that doctrine to maintain, which may best suit
with their credit and reputation, peace and quietness, Joh. 3.19.
They love darkness more then light, because their works are evil. 1 King.
22.8.
Michaiah is too plain and tart, He speaks no good concerning me, says wicked
Ahab. Mat. 5.13.
The salt of truth, though it has wholsomnesse, yet has it tartness in it,
which they will not endure. Strabo l 17. number. 565.
The Aethiopians curse the Sun when it rises, because it scorches them. Rev.
11.10
The Earth cannot bear the two Witnesses, because they vex the inhabitants
thereof: So does Truth the ungodly spirits of these people, 2 Pet. 2.18.
therefore they are very willing to entertain that which may better agree with
their frame and temper of spirit, with their carnal tranquillity of mind and
Mich. 2.11
ways which they are resolved to walk in; and making their lusts their law, 2
Pet. 2.18
lie open to be seduced by such who bait their hook with what is proportionable
to those lusts in them. Yet perhaps they may pretend, that they seek for, and
love the Truth; which certainly if they did, they would make it more their
business to be acquainted with it, and would not let it lie so carelessly and
superficially on the surface of their souls without any watch or guard upon it,
Luke 8.5.
like the seed on the highway (...) There are too too many who are so greedy
of New lights, that old truths will not down: They are like the old Sceptici
philosophi quasi quaesitores and consideratores, qui omnia in suspenso
relinquentes, nihil definiunt. Gell. l. 15. c. 5.
Scepticks, accounting it no small bondage to fix a belief of any truth
almost, but delight in a vagrancie of mind without law or limit. And to make
their misery complete, they are so unhappy as to fall in love with their own
understanding so far, as to make it the sovereign Judge of controversies, and
Rule of truth, contrary to the advice of Prove. 3, 5.28, 26. 1 Cor. 3.18. 2 Cor.
10.5.
Scriptures: by which means, because their mind is full of Ephesians. 5.3. 2 Pet.
2.18. Jude 16, 18, 19. 2 Pet. 3.3.
darkness, and erroneous principles, naturally being biased by perverse and
carnal affection, which mould and modelize their apprehensions; therefore they
cannot choose but err, and mistake in their choice, and decisions of truth and
error. Many times like the Abissines, who because they are black, when they
picture Angels they draw them in the same color with themselves: Even so do
these; whatever is tendered to them, if it agree with their humor and fancy,
they embrace and cry it up for truth. Now therefore these things being duly
considered, it is no great wonder, though not a few, but Many are perverted by
Seducers.

7. We may add to the former reasons, very often, the concurrence of the time
and season, which very much conduces to help forward this evil. Perhaps it is a
time of Liberty, such a season wherein the reins of Government are laid too
loosely upon the Peoples neck; Nay, perhaps the garb and fashion that is most
in request, is Haeresie: which finding patronage from persons of no mean rank,
and encouragement, no marvel though it spread apace and flourish. Flies,
Swallows, and such like creatures, remain as dead in the Winter; and Weeds
appear not, till the Summers sun revive and draw them forth: so Errors, if
they received not some gleams of countenance, or at least connivence from some
of a superior Orb, would (in all probability) soon dwinder, and quickly vanish.

8. It Is Gods just judgment on them who 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
receive not his Truth in the love thereof, to give them up to the Psalm. 81.11
writhings of their own hearts to walk in their own counsels; to send them
strong delusion to believe a lie; to deliver them up to Satan, who has power
to seduce and captivate those whom God deserts and leaves. But we must rightly
conceive of this; that God is not the cause efficiently, for he is not the
author of what he is the revenger; But as a righteous Judge, he gives liberty
to that Arch-enemy of mankind to tempt; withholds or denies that grace,
through the presence of which they might be secured against his fiery darts;
nay many times withdrawes the grace they have, which did back-biasse Natures
inclination to such or such an Error; which rub being once removed, the
temptations of these haeresies here mentioned, too easily prevail. And thus you
see how Haeresies come to captivate, not a few, but many, as in this Text.

Mat. 13.38
to see how fast these Tares thrive, this Mat. 16.11 1 Cor. 5.8.
Leven spreads, this 2 Timothy 2.17.
Gangrene frets! The Kingdom looks like a Lazar-house, or field fought in many
places, by reason of this: How many are there of all ages ensnared by them? The
hoary head that is ready to descend to the grave; and your hopeful Spring,
that seemed to promise life and happiness to Church and State; Almost all
ranks and degrees have felt the poisonous blasts of damnable Error; which like
that hail in the Rev. 8.7. Gerhard. in Apoc. 8.7, etc.
Revelation, has smitten tall trees, as well as low grass; by trees some
understanding persons of power and place, by grass inferior people. Nay, this
mischief has lighted not only upon the Profane, to be rid of whom the Church
and State might be glad, as wennes, sores, and putrid members, except they
would mend; but also upon Professors of godliness, that have looked ore-night
like an early ripe apple, yelow and red above the rest, yet in the morning have
been Gal. 5.7, etc 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
found under the tree; this accursed Haeresie has thrown them out of their
place: truth is, there is cause to fear that some worm, some bosome-sin or
other has devoured their moisture within, whereby they are visibly the sooner
ripe, but indeed rotten. So that you have cause to complain of diverse, as
Eusebius. vita Constable.
Constantine did of many in his time, That those by whom he hoped to have cured
others, were brainsick themselves, and needed cure. Nor are there amongst these
Many only an ignorant rout, but men of excellent natural endowments, and
tolerable acquired abilities: Alas, the temple of the Church is full of smoke,
the ship of the Commonwealth is full of water, All is on fire. Oh the sad cries
from many parts of the Kingdom to you! If there be any help in your hand, (say
they) deliver us.

But why (may some say) all this ado? It Is no new thing, but usual in time of
Reformation, to be troubled with Errors; was it not so, not only in the
Primitive time, but also when Luther and others were stirred up to purge Gods
floor? What shoals of Haereticks were raised up by hell to blast their work,
and render it odious to the world, as if it were a seed producing monsters and
enormities, rather then reducing things to Primitive purity and regularity?

Mark. 9.26.
Devil most roars and rends when he is casting out, and expresses most rage
when he Rev. 12.12
feels his passion drawing on, because he knows his time is short.

2. But yet, I hope our Reformation is not in Fundamentals: we have long
enjoyed as clear light, and as full discoveries of fundamental truths, as any
Church that I know under the cope of heaven; Others have gladly lighted their
tapers more at our flame, then we at theirs. And oh, what sober religious
spirit bleeds not to see, that after the enjoyment of this blessed Sunshine
for more then fourscore years, not a few, but many should be seduced to run so
willingly, swiftly, furiously, obstinately, into such desperate Errors?

2 King. 6.26, 27.
Whence shall I help thee? for God has furnished you with power, are you not
the Supreme Court? And has strengthened your hand with deliverance, subduing
your enemies under you. Does not the Church and State repose in you as
Physicians of skill, and will? Oh deceive not their trust, frustrate not their
expectation; Spend not their Coin and Blood, and yet leave them in a more
dangerous Labyrinth then where you found them, in point of Haeresie. Before
they were afflicted by Men in the shape of beasts, Persons of Learning, parts,
and birth; But now by Beasts in the shape of men, Mushromes, the birth of one
night and darkness; Of whom many could wish, that the course which Socrat.
schol. hist. eccles. l. 3. c. 11.
Julian took with the Christians, might be yours, To shut up the Schools of
Learning, that all might be reduced to the same degree of Barbarism with
themselves. Oh how can you endure to see such Troops ingulf themselves in
ruin? Has not Salus populi, the Peoples safety, been your profession? What,
is it only of the Sheaf, and not the Soul? and that of no strangers neither,
but of those that breath in the same Climate with you, live on the same soil,
are governed by the same Law, have the same Name, profess the same Religion,
pretend to the same GOD. Nor can you certainly forget, and so be cruel to yout
own bowels. Fincel. l. 1. de miraculis. Lovic. Theat. hist. in praecept. quart.
Manlii loc. com. cum multis al^^.
There be many reverend Authors tell a strange story that fell out at Hammel in
Saxony, viz. That there came one in the shape of a Piper in a patcht pide coat,
who when he first piped made all the Rats and Mice leave their holes and follow
him out of the Town; but when he came again and piped, troops of the Citizens
Children followed him dancing, till coming to a mountain not far from the
city, the mountain opened, and neither he nor they were ever seen after. Has
not this pyde piper Haeresie, perhaps led those that are near and dear unto
you, you know not whither? Is it not dangerous to suffer Rats-bane to lie in
sight, or Conduit-heads to be poisoned? May it not be just that thy wife or
children should be the next that are poisoned by it? Is it not just, that such
as make it not their business to maintain Truth in Gods house, should have no
peace in their own? What a sad sight will it be, to see thy posterity in hell
through thy negligence?

Honored Senators, give me leave to say, That if Posterities care be an
intangling argument when death comes, making men desire life for their sakes;
certainly it never was more prevalent with wise and affectionate Parents, then
at this time; wherein, if death takes us away, we are like to leave them
(without Heavens protection) to be a prey to the worst of mischiefs, these
damnable Errors. What profit, I beseech you, is it, if now you have foiled our
Enemies, the worst of enemies foil ours, and lead them captive into a worse
captivity, then that of the body is or can be? In Plague-time you are careful
to keep the sound and sick asunder, you have appointed distinguishing marks and
badges: And in this worst of plagues, will you suffer them to herd together?

Have pity, I beseech you, on the Church of God abroad, whose affliction it
will be to see, and danger to feel the sad effects of Haeresie, if like that
woman in the Zach. 5.11.
Prophet, it be suffered to build for it self a house in England.

Have pity, I beseech you, on the Church of God at home; Once the greatest
eyesore to Haereticks, envy of Papists, refuge to the Orthodox, glorious for
Doctrine, a praise in the Earth, the mother of many Stars of the first
magnitude, famous Martyrs, faithful Confessors, and innumerable souls in
Heaven.

Have compassion on your selves, your honor and reputation. Your outward and
inward peace and tranquillity, your truth and fidelity under the profession of
so many Declarations, Remonstrances and Ordinances, which I forbear to
specify, are all deeply concerned in this.

And lastly, have pity upon, and I beseech you show mercy to lovely Truth, that
beam of glory, daughter of heaven, Psalm. 43.3.
that Clue of mercy let down into this dark erring World, to lead us through
the many Labyrinths of a benighted Mind, erring Thoughts, misleading Examples,
dark Temptations, to bliss and happiness. For she suffers, and is here like
to perish from us, and be utterly lost, or at least shrewdly ecclipsed, if you
relieve her not: For, Through these the way of Truth is evil spoken of, or
blasphemed. And that is the Last part of the Text.

By reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of -- You have,

1. An epithete given to Christian religion; it is styled The way of truth.

2. The foul carriage of many wicked men toward it; It shall be blasphemed, or
evil spoken of.

3. The cause and root of this mischief; By reason of whom. Which words some
refer to the Seducers; but I rather, as agreeing best with the words and
scope of the Apostle, with the most and learned Expositors refer it to the
Seduced.

But of each of these in their order; And first, very briefly of the first.

1. An epithete given Religion, It Is the way of Truth. So styled likewise by the
Psalm. 119.30. Psalm. 60.4.
Psalmist, I have chosen (says he) the way of Truth. The Isa. 26.2. Jer. 9 3.
Dan. 8.12.
Prophets very frequently give Religion this epithete; So likewise do the
blessed 2 Cor. 13.8. Gal. 3.1. James 5.19. 1 Pet. 1.22. Joh. 3.12.
Apostles, yea Joh. 18.37.
Christ himself. It may well challenge this glorious title,

First, from its parentage and original, who is the Psalm 31.5. Romans 3.4.
God of truth, the Joh. 14.6. Summa veritas nulli quicquam debet, sed omnia
debent ci, and ipsa est causa omniu^ aliarum veritatum, etc. Ansel. de verit.
Jam. 1.17.
first, infallible, immutable, eternal Truth, the fountain of all kinds and
degrees of truth, whether in this world, or that which is to come.

Secondly, it is styled the way of truth, by way of opposition to Psalm. 119.104.
lying falsehood and deceit. What ever other ways and courses pretend in
reference to the making of us holy or happy, they are but lying ways, not able
to effect really in the least degree what they hold forth to us.

Thirdly, in respect of efficiencie, It not only requires truth of us, but is
Gods instrument whereby through the concurrence of his Spirit he works it in
us, Joh. 8.32. Psalm. 119.
freeing our minds from sad deluding Errors, and our affections from every
false deceiving way; thus working Ps. 51.6.
truth in the inward part, which he requires and delights in.

Fourthly, in point of Termination; it brings those that sincerely embrace and
practice it, to the enjoyment of Truths fountain, the God of truth: being his
way to us in point of communication and impartment; for he conveyes himself in
his emanations in beams of Truth to us, Psalm. 36 9.
In his light we see light, as the Psalmist speaks: And it is our way to him;
for 1 John 1 7.
if we walk in the light as he is light, we have communion one with another,
says St. John. And thus briefly you see some few, of the many Reasons that
might be given, why Christian Religion is styled The way of Truth.

(...).
blasphemed or evil spoken of, says our Apostle; be used like him that is
Truth it self, in the days of his flesh, Luke 2.34.
who was a sign that was spoken against, as S. Luke expresses it. If I should
rake in the dunghill of the writing of Heathens, or repeat those horrid words
which they have uttered against the truth of God; or if I should look into
latter times, and mention those base aspersions, foolish scorns, scurrilous
speeches, that have been made use of by Atheistical spirits, dark-minded
Pagans, or erring Papists, I might sooner offend your ears, then want matter
to insist on.

1. How have profane spirits detracted from it, by decrying its birth and
original to be so high and honorable as indeed it is? while they have
asserted, Act. 17.32.
That it is not of God, nor came down from heaven, but is the product of Man's
brain, and that an ill one too; despoiling and devesting it of all real value,
as if there were (if their blasphemous speeches might be believed) neither
wisdom, beauty, holiness, comfort, or happiness to be found in conforming to
it. And the like.

2. There are many, who being acted by hell, have yet gone further; attributing
to Religion such things as are inconsistent with it, nay egregiously false, and
directly opposite to the glory, nature, and being of it: as, That it came from
hell; Takes with none but Joh. 7.47, 48, 49.
base, shallow, fantastic people; That it makes those that entertain it,
proud, peevish, morose, Act. 21 28, etc.
rebellious, Libertines, unjust, and the like; That it will bring them to
beggary, misery, distraction, some violent death, and everlasting ruin. Thus
do they set their months against the God of heaven, while they blaspheme his
truth.

3. There are others that yet go a step further then the former, who do not
only speak evil of the Truth, but when they have robbed Religion of her glory,
they deck and adorn their doting, destroying Errors with Truths Act 19 27,
etc. 35.
ornaments; attributing to them, as Numa and other deceivers to their Laws,
the title of Divine oracles, Eusebius. eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 6.
Depths of wisdom, Rules of piety, Saving truths, High and mystical
excellencies. Thus did Saturninus and diverse others. He that would satisfy
himself farther concerning these particulars, may take a view of Porphyrie's
railing books against the Christians; or later horrid Pamphlets exceeding his
in blasphemy, as that De tribus Impostoribus mundi; Popish railing libels;
Haeretical writings, as that of Paul Best, The Mad-mans Divinity, and such like
stuff.

And thus briefly you see the truth of this second particular, viz. The course
usage Religion meets with at the hands of some in the world, It is evil-spoken
of or blasphemed. But how comes this to pass? Indeed it is men's baseness and
profaneness so to do; but yet there is seeming cause for it, which the Text
holds forth in those words, By reason of whom, i.e. of such as are seduced.
Which is the third and last Particular of this second general Part.



Thus was in the Primitive times the people who bare the name of Christians,
yet being seduced, professed such doctrine as could no way agree with the
Christian verity, and walked in an answerable practice to their erroneous
tenets, raised Eusebius l. 4. hist. eccl. c. 7.
no small persecutions against the Church. For when the profane atheistical
spirits of the world took notice in those people either of their monstrous and
absurd opinions, as that of Epophan. haeres. 37. Aug. de haeres.
the Ophites, who worshipped the Serpent that seduced Eve, believing it was
Christ: and the Epiph. haer. 38. Aug. de haer.
Cainites, who honored Cain as their father, Eusebius. hist. eccl. l. 3. c. 26.
Epiph. haeres. 21 and 25.
highly esteeming Esau, Chore, Dathan, Abiran, and Judas, etc. Their beastly
tenets, as that of the Nicholaitans concerning community of wives: or of the
Simonians, concerning liberty to all licentiousness. Which when they take
notice how contrary and opposite to Justice, Order, Modesty, such assertions
are; this makes them tax Religion as the Devils product, carrying souls
headlong to eternal ruin. Or else they look upon their inconstancy and
levity, frequently shifting opinions, and changing Sects, Mat. 11.7.
like reeds shaken to and fro, or empty Jude 12.
clouds carried hither and thither by every wind: As Socr. schol. hist. eccl.
l. 3 c. 11.
Eccebolius the Sophist, who in Constantines time was a Christian, in Julians a
Pagan, after his death a Professor of Christianity again; and has this blurre
left on him, That he was constant in his unconstancie to his death. How many
such weather-cocks are there in the world who turn with every wind, conforming
themselves to the time, not truth: Well, hereby worldly men charge Truth with
fallibility and uncertainty. Or else they take notice of their egregious Pride
and Censoriousnesse, Hermogenes erat natura turbulentus, etc. Tertul. Jam. 3.17.
morosity and selfishnesse; stiling their own Conventicles the Elect of God,
the Spouse of Christ, the only pure and undefiled one, rejecting all others as
polluted creatures, Reprobates, fuel for hell, and the like; as the Eusebius.
hist. eccl. l. 6. c. 42.
Novatians of old, (...)
who styled themselves the Pure ones, and diverse other Haereticks both in
former and later times, I might instance in. This makes them tax Religion with
pride and unmannerlinesse, with self-seeking and uncharitableness, etc.

And lastly, Their divisions and differences that were amongst them; which made
Pagans take notice, that Amb. in 2 Timothy 2.20.
there were many Sects and Factions amongst the Christians; and hence conclude
against the Religion it self, as a thing breeding and nourishing divisions and
distempers.

But give me leave to tell you, their mistake may be taken notice of to arise
from these two things:

Either, first, their not distinguishing between Truth and Haeresie, as if they
were one and the same seed, producing the same fruit in all whom they possessed.
Thus they speak evil of the things they 2 Pet. 2.12.
understand not, as the Apostle speaks.

Or secondly, Their not putting a difference between the Orthodox and Heterodox
professors of Religion. Which error in the Eusebius hist. eccl. l. 4. c 7.
Primitive time was no small occasion of slanders cast upon the Christians, and
of sad persecutions raised against them. And hence it was that those Primitive
fathers were so much put upon it, to pen Pemonstrances, Confessions of faith,
Apologies, and Confutations of Haeretical tenets; that they might vindicate
Religion, and clear the Church of Christ from those calumnies and false
aspersions that were occasioned by their words and courses, who were seduced by
heterodox opinions.

Esa^. 37 3.
blasphemy; And that too frequently procured by them who pretend to more light,
piety and religion then others do. So that Christ may well take up those words
in the Zach. 13.6.
Prophet, I am wounded in the house of my friend; for such they are in
pretense, though in reality enemies. What pious spirit can choose but grieve to
see the Daughter of heaven reproached; the Jewel betrusted with the Saints,
abused; the general and only true Medicine of souls contemned; the Mirror
of Heaven spet upon; the Image of Gods mind most despitefully used: To hear
Innocence charged with guilt; Simplicity, with deceit; Sincerity, with
falsehood; Antiquity, with novelty; Light called darkness, Divine called
humane, nay diabolical; Who can abstain from tears? What have we (I beseech
you) to leave Posterity, so precious as this Way of Truth? If that be gone, the
1 Samuel 3.
glory is departed from Israel, and farewell all. Have we received it from our
ancestors in luster and purity, and is it not grievous to us, that in our time
it should be so mangled and defaced, that our children after us (except it be
timely prevented) will scarce be able to distinguish 'twixt it and Error? Why
did the valiant Martyrs shed their precious blood, but to maintain this way of
truth? and shall we lose and let it go at so cheap a rate, and not mourn for
it? Esa. 36, 22, 37, 1.
The Jews of old, when they heard blasphemy, used to rend their clothes, to
testify the inward rending of their hearts: Can ours be whole when the foolish
people so much defame Gods truth, and blaspheme his Psalm. 74.18.
name?

Well, this I am sure of, That by this morris-dance of Haereticks, Gods truth
is rendered in the opinion of carnal men, as a thing of so much uncertainty,
vanity and deformity, that those who otherwise would embrace it, are kept back
(like that Indian King from baptism, by beholding the Spaniards ungodly
oppressing courses); The weak are scandalized and laid open to temptations,
Mat. 18.6. Mark 9.42. Luke 17.2.
but woe to them that offend those little ones that believe in Christ; it were
better for them that a millstone were hanged about their necks, and they were
cast into the bottom of the sea: The strong, 2 Samuel 2.23.
like the army, stand at a gaze, as when Hasael lay dead before them, and are
retarded in stead of making progres to cleanse these Pausan. l. 5.
Augean stables, and purge out this leven, which else would leven the lump;
their righteous souls are vexed, to see Religion made a coat for the Moon, or
a Shipmans hose to serve all turns and purposes: The profane are heartned
against this way of truth, and their mouths wide-opened in scorns, scoms and
reproaches of it. These things moved the blessed Apostle to that severe desire,
Gal. 5.12.
I would, says he, they were cut off that trouble you. And lastly, God himself
is provoked to wrath and indignation: For if Cedr^^. p. 168.
Theodosius the Emperor was so much offended with the people of Antioch, for
abusing the Statue of his Empress Placilla, that he devoted the place to
ruin, and themselves to slavery; what think you will become of those that
abuse Religion, then which there is not a more excellent Image of Himself in
heaven or earth. And is not here cause to mourn?

England become an Amsterdam of Mixtures, an Island of Monsters? Has God done
so much for you, and will you so ill requite him, in exposing his Truth to
scorn? Do you not know the charge of Papists against the Protestant truth,
because of Divisions and Errors? we formerly have been able to retort this, by
bidding them look at home; and must we now be silent?

Beloved, were it some new, and not an ordinary trial, that where (...). Macar.
hom. 17.
Truth is, the devil seeks to extinguish, or at least eclipse its glory, by
setting up Error to cloud it, or at least to conflict with it and disturb
Truths quiet possession: were this, I say, some strange and uncouth thing, it
were the more tolerable to be ensnared by it. But when it is a thing so
ordinary, that less or more, the Devils malice in every age of the Church has
been sufficiently discovered against the Truth; nay, God has permitted such
blasts and storms to arise, for to put his people upon a stricter enquiry after
truths confines; and that the light chafe, and weighty wheat, the chaste
soul, and unchaste fickle spirit, may be Deuteronomy. 13.3.
distinguished, discovered, and difference put between them. And now, when it
is a thing so common; to be conquered by it, what will it argue at the best,
but great inadvertencie and heedlesnes of spirit in you, and render you
unexcusable before Gods tribunal.

Therefore I beseech you, Ephesians. 6.10.
be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might; 1 Cor. 16.13.
Quit your selves like men; Jude 3.
Contend earnestly for the faith: always remembering that speech of Fraus and
malitia haereticorum vel dolenda est tanquam hominu^, vel cavenda est quam
haereticarum; vel irridenda tanqua^ imperitorum and superborum. Aug. cont.
Adric.
Augustine, The fraud and malice of haereticks is either to be bewailed,
because they are men; or taken heed of and avoided, because they are
Haereticks; or to be laughed at, because they are either unskilful and foolish,
or else proud and lofty; but always to be shunned and avoided, as the means
and way of everlasting ruin.

Q. What (may some say) should we do, that we may escape their Seducements?

A. 1. Get your minds furnished with saving, wholesome fundamental principles of
Religion, out of Truths record, the Word of God: for unballased ships are soon
oreset, empty clouds whist to and fro by every blast; chafe carried hither and
thither with every breath of wind; and unfurnished, unprincipled souls with
heavenly truth, are easily like children for want of knowledge seduced and
plunged in error: Humana caecitas ad deum non dirigit viam, nisi ipse lucernam
legis ostendat, etc. Cyp. ser. 5. de laps. Col. 3.16.
Therefore let the Word of Christ dwell plentifully in you in all knowledge and
spiritual understanding. What is a Goldsmith without his Touchstone, or a
Carpenter without his Rule? or a Christian without the Word?

2. Rest not in a bare literal knowledge, without the sealing light of Gods
spirit, affecting your souls with a proportionable love and liking to what is
discovered in his Word unto you: for what we find not pleasure, profit, or some
real worth and benefit in, we are easily enticed and prevailed with to let it
go: but if once heavenly truths unload their treasures of glory into our souls,
so that we find and feel their virtue and influence in our spirits; beams of
light enlightening, Psalm. 15.7.
delighting, and making glorious our minds; 1 Cor. 10.5.
Subduing power, throwing down Satan's forts in our hearts; 2 Cor. 3. ult.
transforming grace, changing the whole man into the Lords image; Conscience
comforted, rectified, sanctified; in a word, the soul Ephesians. 3.19.
filled with Gods fullness; It begets so great an assurance in the spirit of
Religious verity, and so great an affection toward it because of its
goodness, that Seducers lose their labor and are fruitless in their
endeavors to rob such souls of Truth, because they know its real worth, and
that there is nothing so good to them, in exchange for which they should barter
and let it go. Only take care to grow and increase in this sweet Col. 1.2.2.
Experimental knowledge, and most inward acquaintance with the way of truth,
for Nemo putet bonos posse de ecclesia discedere: Triticum non rapit ventus,
nec arborem solida radice fundatam procella subvertit. Inanes paleae tempestate
jactantur, invalidae arbores turbinis incursione evertuntur. Cyp. tract. 3. de
simpl. praelat.
thereby you shall find your selves established and strongly rooted in the
same, so that when others shall discover their levity, and in time of
temptation shall fall away, you shall stand like mount Sion that cannot be
moved.

3. Romans 16.18. 2 Timothy 3.5.
Mark them that cause divisions, and avoid them, says St. Paul, for they serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies. Whether they seek to divide
you from the Christian verity by pernicious haeresies; or from the unity of
Christ's church and people, by peace disturbing schisms and seperations; Mark
them with a note of infamy, as notoriously 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.
proud, basely self-seeking, foolishly erring, Truths enemies, adversaries to
Peace, destroyers of Souls. And do not only mark, but also 1 Timothy 6.5.
avoid them after two or three admonitions: shun and avoid their discourses and
disputes, which serve to no good purpose, but as foiles to their pride, rises
to their slanders, and (when they are more public) as baits to deceive and
delude poor souls; being like Fencers challenges, inventions to give the better
advantages to Cut-purses to act their prizes. And as for their persons, avoid
them too: O how zealously affected against Seducers were the Primitive 2 John
10, 11.
Christians! John the Evangelist would not endure Iraen. l 3. c. 3.
in the Bath at Ephesus with the haeretick Cerinthus; nor Polycarpus would
entertain communion with Marcion, but defied him as the first begotten son of
Satan. So zealous were the Apostles and their disciples, says Irenaeus, that
they would not communicate with haereticks in word, but were answerable to Tit.
3.10, 11.
St. Paul's admonition, Eschew him that is a Haeretick, after the first and
second admonition, knowing that such a one is perverse and sins, being
condemned of his own conscience.

4. Forsake not your faithful Pastors, Heb. 3.17.
but obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls. The fable is well known, of the Wolves that offered to
make a league with the Sheep, conditionally that they would put away their
dogs; I need not make the application: but this I am sure of, That the Devil,
and Seducers who are his instruments, make it one of their first and chiefest
designs, to alienate the hearts of people from their faithful Guides; which
if they can once effect, on the ruins of their reputation they use to lay the
foundation of their own esteem. Thus dealt the false Apostles with the
Corinthians in the case of Paul, 2 Cor. 10.10.
His bodily presence say they is weak and contemptible; 2 Cor. 11.6, 11, 12, 13.
That he was rude in speech; did not love and esteem them as themselves professed
they did; and such like stuff to foment and increase jealousies in their
hearts, as do our Seducers now adays, that they may make way for themselves in
the peoples estimation.

5. Despise not the 1 Cor. 11.16.
Churches of Christ, especially in the Doctrine which they unanimously hold
forth: For is not the 1 Timothy 3.15.
Church the ground and 1 Timothy 3.15.
pillar of truth, whereon God hangs forth to view that sound direction to the
world, which may guide their feet in the way of peace, to the reaching of
everlasting bliss?

6. Forsake not the Heb. 10.25
assembling of your selves together; be not a stranger to the public
Congregations, as the custom of some is, who think Christ is not to be found
except in a wilderness or in a chamber: Mat. 24, 26.
but go not after them, says he.

7. Endeavor after a greater measure of mortification of corrupt passions and
affections, which Si vis lumine claro cernere verum, gaudia pelle, pelle
timorem, spentque sugato, nec dolor adsit: nubila men's est vinctaque fraenis
haec ubi regna^t. Boet. l. 1. de consol. philos. metro 7.
so cloud the mind, that Truth cannot in its luster appear unto it; and makes
the heart, like those that are Ecclus. c 27.
Lunaticks, full of changes from 2 Timothy 3.13
bad to worser, but never right; never settled, but full of motion, Camerar.
Hor. Succis. par. 1. c. 36.
like a horse stung with wasps that runs, capers and curvets, to little
purpose. Corrupt passions and affections prevailing, the soul is like to an
Prove. 25.28.
unfenced city, open to rapine and ruin by every enemy. They are, in a word,
such a complying party with whatever is evil, that if Seducers can but find a
way to parley with them, and proffer them what is proportionable to their
nature; if they have but the art to suit their bait to those 2 Pet. 2.18, 19.
Jude 16, 17, etc
lusts or passions that have domination and rule within, be it 3 John 9.
ambition, Tit. 1.11.
covetousnes, fear, or whatever it be; That soul is easily made a prey of by
these Haereticks. Therefore, if ever you would be safe, be not content without
the death of these.

8. Grow in grace, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 11.
Add virtue to virtue, as St. Peter presses, that an abundant entrance may be
administered to you into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. If you would not be led away with the error of the wicked (says the
same Apostle) 2 Pet. 3.17 18.
grow in grace, for it is that is only able to Heb. 13.9.
establish the heart against temptations and seducements. 1 Cor. 14, 20.
A silly child is easily cozened with copper instead of gold; but as Heb. 5.14.
knowledge and discerning increases in him, he is free from that delusion. A
Ephesians. 4.14.
weak body reels to and fro, and every blast of wind is ready to throw him
down, but as strength grows he becomes more able daily to endure its strongest
blasts: so is it with the soul, according to the measure of grace it is
endowed with, it is able to resist and stand out against seducements.

Above all, endeavor to increase Humility, which is the Jam. 4.6.
womb of virtue; 1 Pet. 5 5.
a sweet adornment and an excellent fence against this monster Haeresie: which
had some cherisht, the Church had not been pestered with this evil, nor had
this plague of Error found such footing in this our Israel.

If any spark of this hellish fire at any time light on your souls, dally not
with it, but be sure to call in help betimes to quench it: there is many a house
has been consumed to ashes, by the inhabitants Et neglecta solent incendia
sumere viris. Horat. 1. ep. 19. Facilius est excludere perniciosa quam regere,
and non admittere quam admissa moderari. Sea. l. 1. de ira, c. 7.
inadvertencie, not heeding the first kindling of this mischief in their souls;
and others by an overweening opinion of their own ability to extinguish it at
pleasure; and perhaps some few out of an over-tendernesse of their own repute,
as being loath that others should take notice what foolish, dark, heterodox
reasonings they have had within, (for as such, at their first encounter, there
are many have looked upon them, though afterward they have changed their
opinion.) Whatever the pretense and color be, deal in this business as you
usually do in your own dwellings: If you spy within your doors a strange face
walking up and down at pleasure, you fall to questioning what he is, whence he
comes, what he would have? Which not being able to satisfy you in, if you be
not able your self, help is called in, Scintillae statim ut apparet extinguenda
est and fermentum a massae vicinio removendum, secandae putridae carnes, and
scabiosum animal a caulis ovium repellendum; ne tota domus, massa, corpus, and
pecora, ardeat, corrumpatur, putrescat, intereant, etc. Hier. in Gal. 5.
and you thrust him out of doors; Or if you find his intention be theft, or
murder, he is delivered up to the Magistrate to receive condign punishment to
his demerit. So I beseech you, if strange Opinions look into your souls, and
in your thoughts walk up and down, let them be 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Isa. 8.20.
examined and brought to the test of Law and Testimony; thereby you will find
they are mischievous both in their nature, and in their intent and purpose,
they come not but to devour; therefore harbor them not in your spirits, but
call in aid from your faithful Shepherds, and able Christians; also cry for
help from Heaven to deliver you from them, to destroy and root them out, that
they may no more take place in men's hearts to their ruin and destruction.

And lastly, worthy Senators, give me leave in all humility to make my address
to you in the behalf of Truth. Are not you Truths guardians, foster-fathers to
whose protection God has committed Truth? Does he not style you Psalm. 47.9.
Shields, in his Word? and I hope He shall never have cause to complain of you,
as that Warrior did of his, Clypeus meus me sefellie Cause.
My shield has deceived me. Oh what shall we do, if Truth be blasted and
blasphemed! if that once fail! Prove. 29.18.
Where there is no vision, the people perish. And can you be safe? will the God
of truth protect you? No; from the Ezekiel. 9.3, 5. Rev. 8.5.
Altar comes revenging fire. Or will those that destroy Truth, spare you?
Certainly no; Haeretici, quos non possu^t sermon decipere, eos putant gladie
esse feriendos. Hier. in orat. in Auxen. de non trad. Basil.
There are none so keen as these, to ruin whatever opposes them. I beseech
you, without offense give me leave to tell you, We have just cause to fear, if
Truth be not supported and inthroniz'd, having enjoyed so clear and long
discoveries thereof as we have done; that God will send a darker Night on this
poor Island, then ever was the Marian Persecution.

Q. But perhaps you may ask me, what is the way whereby Error may be suppressed,
and Truth established?

A. 1. Command and hasten, I beseech you, the business of Catechizing, whereby
poor souls may be taught the principles of Religion in the plainest way and
manner, that there may be milk for babes.

2. Plant a good piece of Battery in every eminent place, especially there
where Errors already begin to thrive and prosper: I mean such Ministry, as may
be able to manifest the folly, falsehood, and danger of such Errors as do arise,
and discover the madness of Seducers, that their 2 Timothy 3.9.
foolishness may appear to all, and their Tit. 1.11.
mouths be stopped, or at least their danger prevented, that they destroy not the
precious souls of people. And here give me leave to suggest unto you, That
there are many learned men in this Kingdom, whom God has not gifted with
Elocution and other the like abilities for Pulpit-work, yet would be very fit
to maintain the Truth by their Pen, against destroying Errors, might they but
have encouragement, and by convenient maintenance be enabled thereunto.

3. Settle with all convenient speed your Confession of Faith, wherein people
may take notice what is allowed for Truth, upon mature debate: whereby you
shall not only settle that good opinion the Churches of Christ have always had
since the Reformation, of this poor Island; but also put such a help into the
hands of people, that they shall with little pains discern what is right or
wrong; And as a common Standard being set up, and strengthened by your
Sanction, there is hope our Differences may vanish.

4. Permit not Prove. 22.28 Blandimenta vagae fugies novitdtis. Great.
old Landmarks to be removed without absolute necessity: for, besides the muse
it breeds in peoples mindse, and great advantage it gives to incredulity in
point of Truth, there is also another evil in it, which is, That changes are
very dangerous in point of Eventus varios res nova semper habet.
event and issue.

5. Suffer not Fundamental truths, as, Christ's deity, The reality of his
incarnation, passion, or satisfaction, The blessed Trinity, Scriptures
authority, verity, and the like; to be questioned by every juggling Sophister,
or vagrant itinerant Huckster, nor tossed on the tongue of every profane
debauched person, nor much less to be libel'd and pamphleted against by every
unsavory, ignorant, blasphemous wretch. All these kinds of people are like
the Causin. l. 12 c. 58.
glass that was in the temple of Smirna, which presented those things that
were exceeding lovely in themselves, in most horrid misshapen forms: therefore
they are fitter to be broken in shivers then maintained and countenanced.

6. Take heed how you tolerate Schism; for in a little time, without great
care, it will open the door to Haeresie; as little thieves creeping in at the
window, unlock the gate for greater to enter in. And be confident, that loose
Government is frequently the mother of loose Tenets in higher matters. Gaudet
rotus orbis de unitate catholica praeter partem Affricae, in qua incendium de
scintilla con ^^tum est, (de Donato loquitur) Op^at. Mile^.
Donatus was first a Schismatic, and afterward somewhat worse: He that
expects to find a Church in this world void of blemish, had best (as Eusebius.
hist. eccl. l. 1. c. 7.
Constantine tells Acesius the Novatian Bishop) get a ladder and climb alone
into heaven.

7. Take special care of our fountains, the Universities; that Learning may be
encouraged, and Doctrines contrary to soundness of faith, or holiness of life
and manners, be wholly there suppressed. For want of this, because there have
been Errors in the first concoction, they could never in many be mended to this
present day; but many Congregations have been poisoned with Arminianisme,
Socinianisme, yea downright Popery: it was the milk they sucked at the
University from ill Tutors, and their people must either take that or none, for
they have no better to give them. It were not a little to be wished, that what
Eusebius hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 17.
Eusebius writes concerning the Primitive Christians in Egypt, were practiced
there; I mean, that reading the Scriptures, and pious exercises, might be more
in use amongst them. Eusebius. hist. eccl. l 6. c. 16. Nullis tutius infirma at as
co^mittitur, qua^ his qui and pie docti, and docte piisunt. Hyper. opusc. c. 4.
What a flourishing School was Alexandria, by reason of Clement, Ammonius,
Panthenus, Origin, Heracles, Didymus, and diverse others; who being men of
extraordinary piety and learning, were Instruments to breed not a few, that
were famous men for Learning and Religion in the Church of God.

8. Suffer not the Church, for relation or by-respects, to be pestered with
unsound or illiterate persons, who have not the Isa. ^0 4.
tongue of the learned, are not well Mat. 13 52.
taught to the Kingdom of heaven, Mich. 3.8.
want judgment, 2 Timothy 2.15
and are not able to divide the Word of God aright, 1 Timothy 4.16 (...). 2 Timothy
3.13.
Take no heed to their doctrine, but are deceivers, being deceived.

9. 1 Cor. 9.14 1 Timothy 5.17, 18
Take heed of scandalous Maintenance, it is the way to breed a base and
scandalous Ministry in time; like 1 King. 12.31.
Jeroboams Priests, or Judge. 17.5, 10.
Micha's tens^ekels Levite.

10. Encourage Orthodoxnesse, but discountenance Erroneous persons and
opinions: And that not only in verbal, but also in real encouragements, as, by
your Provision and Maintenance. Theodore. l. 1. c. 11.
(y) So Constantine did, and diverse pious Emperors, who cherished Truths
champions, but discouraged Errors hucksters. By your Laws and Ordinances, stop
Seducers mouths, but command that Truth be taught: It Is a Princely work to make
it your employment, that people may know the sacred truth of God. By your
Censures and Punishments, let all the World take notice you are sensible of
Gods dishonor, and that there is nothing more you affect, then to do him
service in this great business: If nothing else will do it, Deuteronomy. 13.5.10.
the Seducing Prophet must die the death, for offering to thrust Gods people
from him; Eliah slayes 1 King. 18.40.
Baals prophets, the like does 2 King. 10.24.
Jehu, 2 King. 11.18.
The people of the land slay Mattan. If any offer sacrifice to Idols on altars,
let him be Gladio ultore sterneretur.
cut off with the sword, says Constantine; Valentinian, Theodosius, Martian,
were alike disposed against such persons. I confess, such executions should be
after other means made use of, all endeavor frustrated; desperate Doctrines
broached, with Haeresie, Blasphemy, or Sedition mingled. Fulmina paucorum
periculo cadunt, omnium metu.
The thunderbolt smites few, but frights many.

Obj. But some may object and say, What would you have us do, there are many of
them are holy and pious men?

Ans. You hear what the Apostle says, that many may have 2 Timothy 3.5.
a form, and yet deny the power of godliness. The wolf in the fable, that he
might not be suspected, but the more easily make his prey of the silly sheep,
put on a skin of theirs: The shepherd discovers the guile, and hangs him up in
his disguise; his fellow-shepherds blame him for hanging the silly sheep; To
clear himself from cruelty, he wishes them to open his skin, which having done
they easily discover that he was not mistaken as they conceived. I need not
trouble you with making application, it is obvious to your view.

2. Why should you think, to say, He is an honest or a pious man, should be a
foolish plea in case of abusing Coin, Theft, Treason, or the like; and yet
should be of weight and force in this far greater business, and more horrid
mischief?

Well, I shall say no more: but to conclude; Blessed be God who has put it
into your hearts to humble your souls this day before him, and command the
Nation so to do: In the sense of that Oath of God that lies upon you, to
extirpate Popery, Superstition, Haeresie, Schism, Profanesse, and whatsoever
is contrary to found doctrine, and the power of godliness: In the apprehension
of Gods protection of You, but misery that lies on the Land, by abominable
Blasphemies and damnable Haeresies, tending to the subversion of the Faith;
whereby reproach and contempt has been cast upon Gods name, and saving truths,
the immortal souls of people in danger of swift destruction, and the Kingdom
brought into a perilous condition. Blessed be the God of heaven who has caused
you to take notice, That not to use your power to suppress this mischief, is
to make your selves partakers of these men's sins and punishments. And now
(worthy Senators) what remains, but that according to your profession you
employ and improve the utmost of your power, That nothing be said or done
against, but for the Truth.

I beseech the Rock of Eternity to act and enable you by his grace, to put
under his everlasting arms and bear you up in the putting into Execution this
your Ordinance and resolution; Make you like those Rev. 4.6.8.
glorious creatures full of eyes, that you may set about this business; Hoc
pietatis genus est, coercere infantia^ criminis, ne juvenescat augmentis.
Cassiod. l. 5. ep. 39.
Timously, before it be too late; Conscientiously, as a duty; Affectionately,
as a thing of glory to God, concernment to your selves and this poor Kingdom;
Unanimously, as a way of strength; Fully, with due respect to every Truth,
without respect to any Person; Courageously, not fearing opposition. Consider,
you have a good God to support you; It Is the way to have a good Conscience in
the sense of duty to cheer you; Good men will bless God for you; And if you
strive 2 Timothy 2.5^
lawfully, you may expect confidently that Heaven will crown you.

Vid. Cause. l. 1. c. 71.
Clemens Alexandrinus tells us a story, That amongst the Magi in Persia, there
were three hills; when people came to the first, they heard a clashing of arms;
when they came to the second, they heard a confused noise; but when they
reached the third, they heard nothing but songs of triumph. The terrible noise
of Arms you have heard already; God grant, if it be his will, our cares in this
poor Island may never more be acquainted with those dreadful sounds: You are
now come to the second hill, the confused noise of Error, the language of
Babel: Be now but valiant, go on with resolution, and I doubt not but ere long
you shall hear the voice of Victorious songs of triumph, Halelujahs to our GOD.

FINIS.

