A grave and learned SPEECH Or an APOLOGY delivered by Denzill Hollis Esquire In a
full Answer to the Charge against him, from His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX
and the Army:

For the clearing of himself in every particular Crime charged against him in
the Papers.

Printed in the year. 1647.

A grave and learned Speech, or an Apology delivered by Denzill Holles Esquire etc.
Mr. Speaker:
IT is my unhappiness to stand accused by a Charge against me, in which I
doubt not (and so the rest of the Gentlemen under this misfortune with me) to
give a satisfactory account of innocence therein: And for that which concerns
my self, I shall give this Answer to it:

I cannot undertake to charge my memory (at this time) to give particular and
positive answers to those passages at Oxford, which received a full debate in
the House of Commons two years since; I do not find any new matter in this
Charge, save what I have (together with Mr. (...) who was a Commissioner with
me there) then gave account of, when we were accused by the Lord Savill; And
this House was so fully satisfied (after a full debate held several days
thereon, that it was Resolved upon the Question, July 21. 1645. (by this House)
That the matter of the report should be totally and finally laid aside. And for
the truth hereof, to manifest my innocence, and discover the malice of the Lord
Savill, who was then my Accuser, I shall refer my self to the Papers which
concern my then Examinations, and the resolutions of the House thereon.

And thus much I am informed since concerning his Lordship, that he has been
much troubled at what he then did; and (to testify his remorse for the injury
he then did unto Master (...) and my self) his Lordship sent a person of
Honor, not long since, to me, to give me assurance thereof, further declaring
from him, That when his Composition was made with the Parliament, and was
passed by both Houses, he would then discover unto me how that whole business
was laid against me, and who they were that laid it; which when I knew, I
should see I had no cause to be so angry with him, and therefore I was desired
by a Peer of the Re^lme, (who came from him not to be against him in setting
the fine for his composition; telling me that his Lordship durst not discover
it before, but when his Composition was passed, he would let me know the
particulars, the le^st inckling whereof (to come from him to their knowledge,
in whom he was in danger) might prove his ruin.

Yet I can assure you (to speak it without vanity) I (knowing my own innocence)
passed by it, never so much as sending to the Lord Savill about it, nor doing
his Lordship any dis-service for his former malice against me.

And as for the Letter sent from the Earl of Lindsey to me, containing (as I am
charged) some secret design. It is true, I received a Paper from him, after
which it was my unhappiness to fall sick, which made me to forget it for some
time; yet so soon as it came to my mind, I did acquaint the House with it;
the contents of it was (in a line or two, very short) a recommendation of the
bearer, the Lord Savill: I had then the words fresh in my mind, and did then
repeat them in the House, at which time the House was so far satisfied
therein, that this House Resolved upon the Question, July 19. 1645. That the
receiving of that note, in the manner as I did, was no holding of intelligence
with the Enemy.

And for the Paper it self, I do not know what became of it, or whether I burnt
it, as perhaps I might.

Now for that part of the Charge which charge me that the Earl of Lindsey
moved for a pass to go to Oxford, and that the King should say, That I did him
better service in the Parliament, then I could do there; That was reported to
this House from the Examinations of what the Lord Savill informed against me;
and, as I said then, so now, I know nothing of it, I am confident it is false;
the Earl of Lindsey, nor any body else, had never motion to any such desire
from me, nor had I ever any such thoughts.

As for what I am charged in the second Article, with sending several Messages
to the Earl of Dorset and the Lord Digby, or to join with any in drawing up
Propositions, and sending them privately to His Majesty; It is all false and
untrue, in all and in every part of it.

To that in the third Article: I must acknowledge that (by the Lady Carlisles
favor) I have often waited upon her, both at her lodgings in Whitehall, and
elsewhere, but never with any disaffested persons, to hold correspondency with
the Queen, to put Conditions upon the Parliament, to bring in the King upon
any terms, by our plotting against the Parliament, or to do any other thing in
prosecution of such evil designs; but only to show that respect which is due
to a Lady of such Honor.

And I conceive it is well known to this House, that I have been always so
far from having a great power upon the Treasure of this Kingdom, to
maintain the Queens Party, assure her Pention, or undertake to do more for
the King then the Army would do, That I have had as little to do with money
businesses as any; I have not grown great by the ruins of others by these sad
times, nor preferred my self nor friends to higher fortunes then otherwise we
could have aspired unto.

And that I should send unto the Queen, to advise her to send the Prince into
Scotland, to come into this Kingdom in the head of an Army, or invite the
Scots, or join with any other for inviting the Scots, or any other foreign
forces to enter this Kingdom, it is utterly false, and a mere invention of
malice against me; nor do I know of any means used to cause or encourage any
Officers or Soldiers to gather together tumultuously at Westminster, to
affright and assault the Members of Parliament; for my part I am clear of any
such thing.

And for obstructing of Petitions (as I am charged in the first Article) when
Petitioners came to the Parliament for redress of public grievances; I have
only delivered my opinion in this House, when seditious Petitions have been
read; and for Major Tuleday, and Nicholas Tew, they affronted the Committee,
and Tew endeavored to raise a Tumult in the Court of Requests, to the danger
and disturbance of the Committee, who committed them both until the next
morning, which was approved by this House, yet (upon my motion in his behalf)
this House was pleased to bail Major Tuleday, and shortly after Mr. Tew was
discharged.

As for that which is laid upon me in the eight Article, concerning the drawing
up of the Declaration, it was done in this House, the House allowing it, and it
passed both Houses, and therefore it seems strange to me that any should
question that which was made an Act of both Houses of Parliament; I drew it up
indeed (though very unwilling to take that tax upon me) as near as I could
according to the sense of the House, in obedience to a general Call upon me
for it, being exceedingly pressed and urged to do it, as you well know. And for
the relief of Ireland, it was always my endeavor to promote it, desiring
that an entire Body might have gone out of the Army.

It is true, some forces for Ireland were commanded back from Bromsgrove in
Worcestershire to Reading, which was ordered by the Committee that they might
receive their pay safe. The Officers then representing to the Committee the
great necessities of the Soldiers, and that they did not know how to convey it
into Worcestershire in safety, in regard that it must pass through the
quarters of the Army, who had expressed great displeasure to those forces which
were drawn off for Ireland; and the Committee was the rather induced to do
it, because they knew the moneys which was sent to Oxford for disbanding a
Regiment there quartered, was seized on, which fear caused the calling back of
those to Reading, and not upon any design whatsoever.

And whereas by the 14. Article I am charged with those Gentlemen, to obstruct
Articles against the Lord Inchiquen, and for calling back the Lord Lisle, that
his command might be committed to the Lord Inchiquen, I was (always so far
from keeping off proceedings upon those Articles, that I furthered it all I
could, and several times moved it in the House, being very desirous to have
all cleared concerning the Lord Inchiquen, whom I believe to be a man of honor
and fidelity.

And for that the Lord Lisles time of government in Ireland was expired (which
was but to continue one year in that Command;) the Parliament being pleased to
dispose of the Affairs of Ireland in an other way; I went in the several
debates thereon (in the House) according to my judgment and conscience, not
respecting any particular Person, but the common good; and for the writing of a
Letter to put out all those who favored Independants, I never knew of any such
thing done.

And whereas I am charged by my power and countenance to obstruct Justice in
the cause between Alderman Langham and Captain Limery, it is very untrue. I
confess, that my self, and Sir Philip Stapleton (who is accused with me)
being one afternoon in the Court of Requests, we heard that the House of Lords
were then to sit, we went to ask the occasion thereof, and meeting with the
Earl of Rutland in the Lobby, his Lordship told us, That it was about a great
Cause depending between Langham and Limery, and we had some discourse about it,
but I did not understand that the merit of the Cause was at all in question,
only the entertaining of it upon an Appeal, concerning which I said, That it
was my Opinion, that it was the common Justice of the Kingdom, and not to be
denied to any: This was all that passed between us, as some of Master Limeries
Counsel then present (who heard it spoken) can testify.

And for the whole Charge delivered into this House against me from the Army, I
have had a strict scruteny over my conscience, and have made enquiry upon every
branch thereof into my past actions and intentions, and cannot find that I
have deserved such a return from any who pretend to be friends to the
Parliament, and peace of the Church and Kingdom.

FINIS.

