A DECLARATION MADE TO THE KINGDOM, BY HENRY EARL OF HOLLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke.

Anno Dom. 1643.

A DECLARATION made to the Kingdom, by Henry Earl of Holland.
I Have not forborne either out of forgetfulness, or guiltiness, to send
forth these Expressions thus publicly, though I confess, they are of a
nature, in the which I have so little dexterity, as, I may rather give
advantage, to such as would be ready to seek it; then satisfaction, to those,
that would be pleased to take it.

I was willing to take this National Covenant, that binds up these Kingdoms
in such an unity, and in so happy an agreement. And likewise to pass through
any trial, that so may Actions might be laid open, before this discourse, That
thereby it might find the more credit. And I do passionatly wish, that the
thoughts and intentions I carried to Oxford could likewise be so; Which since
they cannot, nor pass by any other Conveyance, to the knowledge of such, as I
desire to satisfy, I shall here freely, and faithfully express them.

Though I have ever, both in my pious duties, and my natural reason, wished,
and endeavored, to see this Kingdom restored to the comforts, and rest of
Peace, yet, was I never such a seeker of it, as to desire to find it, without
those blessings, we have endeavored to procure with it, of Truth, and true
liberty, agreeable to the Condition of free, and undejected Subjects; Yet, such
were my hopes, I confess, (made so, by many public relations, and discourses
from Oxford, as they were even, formed into an opinion) That upon a free, and
faithful representation to his Majesty, of the sad, and deplorable condition
of his Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, he might have been persuaded, to
have Offered, even those things, from his own reason, or Wisdom, that we for
our necessity, and Conservation have often, and humbly petitioned him for. And
when this was made, not only possible, but probable, unto me; I did conceive
my self not to be the unproperest person to represent these things unto His
Majesty, from a long and near relation not only to His Person, but His
Counsels: Where I may truly say, I have endeavored to oppose all advises,
that, I believed, could raise any misunderstanding or division betwixt His
Parliament and people. And this, I am persuaded, has been apparent in all my
actions, and that, very clearly, (I will not say dangerously) when His Majesty
advised with his Counsel, concerning the breaking off the last Parliament, I
having ever looked upon those resolutions, as unhappie, and dangeous ways of
Government in this Kingdom.

But I shall say no more in this way, since, as it leads toward my self,
even Truths, thus looking homeward, may, abroad, be looked upon as vanities;
Otherwise, there are many particulars, that would show my Counsels to His
Majesty, and my employments from him, to have been ever expressed, and
governed, with great Fidelity to this Kingdom.

These faithful, and free Counsels, made me hope, His Majesty, with some
reason, and justice, might have reflected, and looked back upon my usual
advises unto him, and from thence have given me encouragement, to have pursued
both my Fidelity to Him, and to His Kingdoms, brought to this condition by
contrary Counsels. Which finding His Majesty not persuaded to do, And at that
time, such a Cessation concluded in Ireland, as made me see the streams of
Council dyed in the blood of many thousand Protestants, massacred in their
Martyrdom there: And not only so, But a danger likewise by too many visible
circumstances, threatened to our Religion, in this Kingdom. These reasons
prevailed straight, both upon my Conscience, and my Judgment, speedily to
return unto the Parliament; Streams, though by accident, or by breaches, they
may hastily run, even out of their own Bosom, yet naturally are they
inclined to revert, and to look back to their Channells, and long-kept course
again, so was it with me, to return unto this Great Channel of the Kingdoms
safety, the Parliament; the Life-streame, that does encompasse, and has depth
only, to bear the weight, and to buoye up the honor of this endangered, and
distracted Kingdom: Where, I faithfully imbarque my self, to take those
Fortunes, that God shall send me, either with them, or from them. And no
Tempest shall have power to make me repent my Adventure, both of Life, and
Fortune with them; Where, though I may be justly esteemed but as a grain in a
balance, yet the smallest dus;t, adds something to the Scales; And since I
have made an uneven step, from the unclearenes of my information, more then
from the unfaithfulness of my affections, or intentions, I hope, it may be
looked upon, and considered, as the Proverb, that says, Whosoever stumbles,
and falls not, gets rather then looses, ground.

And, this ground I profess faithfully to stand, or fall upon, That, I shall
choose rather to perish with the Parliament, in their intentions, to maintain
our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, then to prosper in the abandoning of the
least of them. And this I bind up by the vows of a Christian, and a Gentleman.

This is Printed according to Order.


