Practical Divinity: OR A HELP THROVGH the blessing of God to lead men more
to look within themselves, and to unite experienced Christians in the bond and
fellowship of the Spirit.

Delivered in sundry exercises lately spoken by Cap. PAUL HOBSON, Upon these
Texts.

Prove. 28.1. The righteous are as bold as a Lion.

Cant. 6.9. My Dove, my undefiled is but one.

Phil. 4.11. I have learned in whatsoever estate I am therewith to be content.

Published by an hearty Wellwillerto Peace and unity among the dissenting Godly
and to the promotion of spiritual and experimental truths, without
affectation or opinions, or prejudice against persons. Tending as to the
edification of the reader chiefly: so also, somewhat in vindication of the
Author.

Licensed and Published according to Order. And sold by R. HARFORD at the
Bible in Queenes-head-alley in Paternoster Row. 1646.

The Publisher to the Reader.
READER,
THese Sermons allthough not intended by the Author to to be made thus public,
he being absent when they were taken in hand; But being very much desired by
many and pressed hereunto, conceiving truth herein held forth so clear, that
the spiritual and experienced Christian will relish and seal thereto; Being
desirous to own truth wheresoever found, not daring to oppose it, truth
carrying such a light, power and demonstration in it self, James 2.1.
we durst not have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory in
respect of persons.

It could be wished the Author would publish his own labors; but they
appearing to many, worthy the communicating, they are here presented to thy
view; And although they may not be so full and emphaticall as they were
delivered, being taken by writing them from his mouth, yet love will make thee
not curious to spy faults, which is too common a fault in our times, but to
take in good part what is here held forth to thee, by him who aims at thy
spiritual good, and somewhat also in vindication of the Author of these
Sermons, (whose I believe they are, not only in regard of expression, but also
in experience in a good measure) an imputation of errors being laid on him as
on others, more then true.

And indeed we believe as it was lately said before a solemn Assembly, there
is (it may be) abroad a greater cry of errors then really there is, allthough
with grief be it spoken, there be many foul errors broached, and some very
blasphemous which deserve as severe punishments as the word of God requires:
yet let not real and glorious truths suffer under the name of error; Our Lord
Christ himself was counted among the transgressors, and St. Paul confesses
after the way that yon call heresy, so worship I the Lord God of my Fathers;
and let us not judge all that error, which we by reason of darkness, or not
being come to the same experiences, cannot see to be truth; but let us try all
things and hold fast that which is good. 2 Cor. 10.12.


Neither as the Apostle says ought we to boast of things without our measure,
as the manner of some is, that is of other men's labors and experiences; in
another man's line, of things made ready to our hand; for we are very ready to
think higher of our selves then is meet, or we have cause, Gal. 6.3 2 Cor.
10.17.
having built up our selves in our own conceits, to be something when we are
nothing. That because the Apostle Paul, Luther, and others, through affliction
and high experiences of Gods assistance, and thriving by the Cross, were
transcendently hold in God and for God, therefore they are ready to appropriate
and boast of their labors and experiences as if they were their own, and were
come to such an high pitch and had the same enjoyments.

But it were far better and safer for us this something were brought to
nothing, and we convinced of our own weakness ingrace and how carnal we are
and how far below the life of Christ and true boldness; This man should go
home justified rather then the other. But he that glories let him glory in the
Lord, that Christ may be all in all; Gal. 5 22.23.25.
for not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the lord commends;
for self being set up and gotten into the chairt, it will swell, boasting
itself above what is meet, or what it has received, and then others better
then themselves must be their footstool, that by the degrading of others they
may advance themselves: but says the Apostle, they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts; the fruit of the spirit is
joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance; against such there is no law; if we live in the spirit let us walk
in the spirit, and let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one
another, envying one another.

But read I pray thee these Sermons seriously and with a single eye, (if so it
be given thee) and weigh the subject of them and whereto they tend, and apply
them to experience: and thou shall see how much or how little thou have of the
life of Chirst. And if thou beeft enabled to aim at thine own good in
perusing them, I doubt not but thou will accept, and not quarrel at them. So I
commend both them and thee to the blessing of him, who only is able to make us
grow up into him in all things who is our head, Ephe. 4.15.
that speaking the truth in love, Phil. 2.1.
and having fellowship in the spirit; we henceforth be no more children, Ephe.
4.14.
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive;
But holding forth the word of life, till we all come in the unity of the faith
and knowledge of the son of God, unto a parfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of fulness of Christ,

In whom he desires to serve thee, Fare well.

DEarest friends, that which I purpose to speak this morning very briefly,
that I may give way to our Brother that is to speak also, shall be out of the
28. Prove. part of the 1 ver. But the righteous are as bold as a Lion. It will
be necessary that we read the foregoing words in regard of this word But,
having some reference to some what said before the wicked flee when none
pursues, but the righteous are as bold as a Lion; most of the sentences in
this book of the Prove. are without any dependence, but are entire speeches,
having their full sense in themselves; but here we have 2 sentences in one
verse, one explaining and setting out the other, two affirmative Propositions
in opposition one to another; whatsoever can be spoken of a wicked man and one
that lives from God, without God, the contrary in opposition may truly and
properly be said of a godly man, here called a righteous man, because he lives
in God, lives with God, he acts by the power of God, he lives in another
Region, has a contrary life, he is elemented in Divine loves, partakes of the
Divine nature, 2 Peter 1.4.
and lives in the divine glory.

These words we have now read, they are an affirmation of a saints privilege,
and of a Saints property; All souls which are brought home to God, that live
with God, this is their privilege, they are made righteous by God; made
righteous by Justification, a righteousness held out to them: and also made
righteous by the glory and righteousness of God in them; and such a man cannot
choose but be bold for such a God; And not only bold in opposition to wicked
men, because they flee when none pursues, Psalm. 53.5.
and fear where no fear is; but the highest resemblance of the highest
creature, is too low to set out what such a man's boldness is in God and for
God, and therefore you see the Holy Ghost makes use of the choyfest of all the
creatures for courage and boldness, to set out the temper of a saint, when he
lives in God and God in him; nay the highest and most raised sublimity in the
creature is too low to set out the lowest acts of a saints spirit.

I may draw one point from the former words, of wicked men's fear, because it
leads to unfold the other points concerning a righteous man's boldness. The
wicked flees when none pursues.

That man that lives without God, although made by God, he is so far a man of
fear and not of faith. But I shall let that go, and come to the words
intended; There is not only a difference in the spirits of wicked and
righteous men, but a direct opposition; the one acts all together downe-ward to
the earth, to self, to carnal, low, and base ends; the other acts all-together
upward to God, to heaven, to self denial, to high and pure ends.

That the people of God are a righteous people. They are righteous, not only in
regard of Justification, that is a righteousness held forth and made out to
us: but also in regard of that you call sanctification, that is, a
righteousness revealed in us; and this is peculiarly a saints privilege; He
not only lives under life, but he lives in life, is life it self: I confess
it is a great and precious privilege to live under life, to have and use
Ordinances; but to have them and not live by them, nay, to have them and not to
have lives above them, this is below a saints privilege; the world has thus
much privilege; But the saints they use not only the Ordinances, but they are
a means to put them into life; to make them one with life, they know what the
Anoninting is, what the unction of the Father is. But now if you ask me what
is me^ant by a righteous man? Ans. Some take it to be meant of Christ himself.
The righteous are as bold as a Lion, that is, (say they) Christ, for he only
is righteous, and not any man, therefore he is called the Lion of the tribe of
Judah. Revel. 5.5.
But my light says, this a description of a saints spirit, for there is
nothing can be said of Christ, but may all so be said of Saints, as saints; for
he lives in the same life with Christ, in the same region, in the same glory;
nay he lives in the same Sovereignty and authority; is Christ a son and heir
of his fathers glory? So are all Saints, they partake of the same sonship, the
same inheritance; is Christ a King? so are the Saints, partakers of the same
Kingship. Has he put down all rule and all authority and subjected all his
enemies under his feer? so have the Saints, so far as they live with and in
Christ; they set their foot upon all their lusts, upon all the world: they are
conquerers over Death and Hell, they have set their foot upon the very neck of
Satan. I know beloved there be degrees to this life, there is a dying before
we come to this life; but this is certain, as a Saint comes up to this life,
so he puts down Principalities, and Powers, when he lives as a saint he puts
down all rule and all authority that before he was subjected to and captivated
under. And the very matter of Christ's glory, the same for nature and kind,
though not for degrees in this life, is a Saints portion.

the righteous are bold. Doct. That the people of God are a bold people, full
of courage.

Men and women must of necessity be made righteous by Christ, before they can
be bold and conragious for Christ. All other boldness is a false deceiving
boldness, except it proceed from hence; in that we are freed, set at liberty,
made righteous by Christ, many are bold it is true; but it is no true boldness,
it is a presumptuous boldness: there is a natural boldness, and there is a
legal boldness, and there is a pharisaicall boldness, boldness of diverse
kinds; but this true real, unconquerable, undeceaveable boldness, is only to
be had and enjoyed in the life of Christ, being made righteous by him, not only
by a righteousness made out to us, but by a righteousness revealed in us.

The next Observation is from the resemblance here used. The righteous are as
bold as a Lion. It Is a comparison taken from the highest, and choysest of all
Creatures for undaunted boldness and courage, in that he fears no creature,
nothing can turn him out of his way; the holy Ghost upon every occasion when
he would set out the property and privileges of Saints, he still chooses the
choysest of all the creatures to set it out by; to set out of what a high,
choice and raised spirit a Saint is off, as he is a Saint: the high frame of a
Saints spirit that lives with Christ, is not to be set out by the choicest of
all the creatures, and that may be next the point.

That the highest of creatures is too low to declare the glory of a Saints
spirit. It Is impossible by the choicest of all creatures, and by the perfection
of all creatures, to make it out to men in the full glory, beawty and
excellency thereof; He that injoyes it knows it best, but he is not able to
comprehend it; for he is comprehended by it. And therefore he himself is not
able to make it out to the full, but is swallowed up by it.

These points the words hold forth to us; but I shall not handle them
severally, but we will rather choose to gather the full sense of them all in one
conclusion, viz.

That Souls made righteous by God are in the enjoyment of God transcen dently
bold. Here are 3 conclusions in one. 1. Here is Saints are made righteous. 2.
Saints thus made righteous they are bold. 3. They are transcendently bold. For
the opening this point, we must open all the words.

1. To be made righteous what it is. We shall not now speak how we are made
righteous by justification, as righteousness is purchased for us, and held out
to us. Because I conceive the words intend a man in the other sense; a man made
righteous, by revealing of righteousness in us, in that we are made one with
the life and glory of Christ: we speak now of a righteous spirit, a freed
spirit, a spirit made one with Christ, a spirit overcome in the enjoyment of
Christ's spirit, a spirit wrapped up, overwhelmed by the sweet inflowings and
comings in of the glory of Christ: a spirit wherein Christ sits in glory and
displayes his loves to the soul, so that by the very coming in and enjoyment
of Christ, they are made one with Christ, transformed into the very nature and
glory of Christ. So that all self and the very form of the old creature is
annihilated, and all turned into Christ; He is removed from his former center,
his own bottom; there is a new ingrafting and being carried up into Christ, so
that he is transformed into the hidden, divine, superexcellent glory and riches
and life of Christ: so as he is (as I may say) christed with Christ, made glory
with the very glory of God and Christ, so that this they not only know in
their understandings, but have, feel, and enjoy it, and it works in them a
life, and fruit suitable to this glory and transformation.

Those that lie in the heart of Christ, that have found themselves transplanted
from themselves, transformed into Christ, by Christ, they find their heart
transformd with loves and ravishments toward him, to him, and none else, but
as they see them, and enjoy them in him, and him in them; there are
intercourses and returns of love to each other. This is not the righteousness
of Justification, when Christ holds out a righteousness purchased for thee,
and thou by faith laying hold on it for the acceptance of thy person; but this
is Christ himself; his hand taking hold of thee, bringing thee over from thy
self into himself, and transacting thee into himself, and this is that that
causes interchanges of loves, so that Christ in loving thee, he loves himself;
and thou in loving him love thy self, in one and the same act; and in all
your acts Christ acts, and in all Christ acts within you, you act; so soon as
ever you are brought over into these enjoyments, you are swallowed up in
Christ, and in your lowest acts Christ acts as well as in your highest; in the
very lowest estate, you may have the highest enjoyments: that when you are
trampled on by the world, when your enemies think they have got the day and
have their will of you, then may you have such sweet enjoyments of Christ, Mat.
5.11.12.
that in this regard you may rejoice and be exceeding glad when you enter into
diverse temptations; Jeames 1.2.
when the world and persecutors think they have taken from you all your
comfort, and bereft you of all your life, then may you be more then conquerers,
enjoying a life hidden from them; that when they think you are captived, they
themselves are captived, and you the conquerers, as deceivers, 2 Cor. 6.8.9.10.
and yet true (says the Apostle) as unknown; yet well known; as sorrowful;
Col. 3.3.
yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich: as having nothing and yet
possessing all things: you are dead to the world, but your life is hid with
Christ in God; by this you may take a sight and small taste of what is meant by
a righteous man in this place, the righteous are as bold as a Lion.

Secondly, what is meant by this word bold; truly friends I must confess I
have been along time mistaken what this bold spirit in a saint was; I took it
to be this, and that, and mistaken in all; time was when I had a natural
boldness which many men have, which is borne with them, being of a resolute
bold hardy temper of spirit; yet this was discovered to me to be but nature;
and many a wicked man is possessed thereof: then afterward I came to be a
civil man; then in that I paid every man his own, and lived uprightly to
menward, so that no man could tax me of doing any man wrong; herein I grew
bold; But this also was discovered to be but civil boldness, and upon false
grounds. Then I came to Legal boldness, attaining to such a degree of
obedience to the Law, that I thought my self all most blameless, and herein I
grew bold indeed, and I thought it was true boldness: but it was discovered
this was not the true boldness neither, and there is many other kinds of
boldness; there is a sinful boldness, men being ignorant of themselves, and
what sin is, and what God is; they are bold to sin, and sin with a high
hand daringly, with brazen faces. So also there is a pharisaicall boldness,
when men are bold because of their external conformity to the Law, and
external submitting to Ordinances, because they are in a right Gospel way,
because they are of a fellowship where they enjoy pure Ordinances; And am not I
(say they) as good as you, what do you more then I? I do not speak this that
you should neglect Ordinances, and forsake fellowship, for I know the High God
may be enjoyed in a low Ordinance; And you ought also to hold forth God in
Ordinances to others, to men of the World, and Saints below you; though you
enjoy that which is far above all Ordinances, even the real and lovely
presence of the Lord Christ in himself.

Many men because they enjoy Ordinances in purity, and hold forth a great
Profession, they gather hence a great boldness, and look bigg upon
themselves, and think who may walk more bigg, bold, and confident then they
(what, they not Saints? who is a saint then?) I that have gone thus sarre, and
tied my self constant to duty, what not I of thus long standing? But beloved,
none of all these is the true boldness; a Saints boldness is from other
principles, of a more noble and higher frame; His boldnesle is, because he
lives with, and injoyes the highest God: In that they are gotten above all the
world. Things below are too base for their spirits; they count it gain to lose
themselves: the other count it gain to gain themselves; And hence it is,
because they see themselves gotten above all things, they live undaunted noble
lives; They live in the upper Regions where Christ lives, above all things
inferior to himself.

They are so much drawn into Christ, that they cannot much mind these things
below, they are not much troubled how they ebb or flow, because they are aloft;
They are not tumbled to and fro, as they in their Tides tumble too and again;
They are filled with noble blood, divine blood; the Spirit and Glory of Christ
and God, rests upon them, and runs in all their veins.

Beloved, what can that man fear, that is thus transacted, transplanted,
united to God, drawn up into God, in whom all self, and flesh, and carnal
ends, 2 Cor. 12.9.
is perished, dead and buried, and he made a new man in Christ, rissen in, and
with Christ? Here is the man is here spoken of; Here is the boldness of a
Saint: No marvel all the world, nor all the fluctuation of and in the world,
cannot disturb this man's Spirit; for he is above all, aloft, he is in the
bosom of Christ; Oh dearest friends, this life is a hidden thing, and you that
enjoy it know it, and none else; I know your experiences of this life, far
exceed what ever my tongue can express; when men have imprisoned you, and
think they have overcome you, then are you most at liberty; When they have
brought you to poverty, then have they most in richt you; when ye die, ye live;
when you have all things, then have you nothing; 2 Cor. 6.10.
when you have nothing, then have you all things; Phil. 3.8.
you are so taken up with Christ, that all below Christ, is as dross, and
dung, Gal. 6.14.
and you say with Paul God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, save in
the Cross of Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world.

While you are with Christ, what can hurt you? all the troubles in the world
sease no more on you then water on a Ducks back.; While the world is reviling,
you are singing; while the world is imprisoning, you are embracing; While the
world is hating and persecuting, you are loving; While the world is casting you
off for sects and scismaticks, you are in your injoyings; While the world
smites, Christ is kissing: such a mysterious hidden secret, is the life of a
saint, that it befooles all the world. When the world thinks they deserve their
hatred, they love and pittye them; while you think they look upon you, they
look above you; their eye is not upon their opposers, but what they enjoy from
Christ; they are of more noble, higher spirits, then to fasten their eyes so
low as upon their opposers; I profess when God brought me of from one
condition of boldness to another; but especially when he fetched me off from
legal and pharisaicall boldness; in so much that I saw, that all boldness
which had its rise and birth, in self, from self, and to self, it must be
confounded; and I came to see that all true boldness must run out from the
very heart and loves of Christ; it must be from a spirit filled with such
royal, noble, divine blood, as none but the sons of God partake of; and then
I saw the world was of a blood so low and base, that it cannot be sensible
what this life is.

The second thing we would come to show, is, wherein this boldness
dothco^sist. A soul thus made one with God, made righteous by God in the
enjoyment of God, and by the righteousness of God revealed in us, he is bold
in these three regards.

First, He is bold with God. Secondly, He is bold in declaring for God.
Thirdly, He is bold in undergoing any thing laid upon him by God.

First, He is bold with God, he is free and familiar with God; There is such
intimate communion between Christ and him, that he can freely, and with a
sonlike spirit and affection, ask any thing of God, his enjoyments embolden
him; For he sees God so unbosome himself to him, that his very heart is not too
much for him. He asks not as a servant with slavish fear, but as a son, as
seeing all his inheritance is in God. He knows what ever is in God, in Christ,
is as freely his as they are Christ's; he has as true right to them as Christ;
He lays claim to all the beawties and glories of Christ, to all the riches,
life, and treasures in Christ, as his own proper portion. He does not ask
with a daunted fearful spirit, he approaches into his very Bosom, to his very
Heart: and what ever is there, he knows is his own to ask and enjoy; and
this he does freely, fully; he lays claim to all Divine loves.

And by this enjoyment, he makes returns of loves; all the loves his heart can
hold, shall all run out to God again; by this very imbracement, he comes to
act in God and God in him.

And I pray you observe this, and think of it when you do not see me; The very
enjoyment of God carries over your spirits, and all you are to God, to give up
your selves to him; you will not stand upon such needless questions. Whether
saints are bount to duty; they by that very act of enjoying God, make
themselves over to God, to be acted, and ruled by God: their own will ceases,
and Gods will is become one with theirs, and theirs with his; you cannot choose
but love and act for God, for you are with God, in God:

Friends, I hope some of your spirits do echo to these truths, and find
them true, by your enjoyments in some degree. Do not think that this is the
life you must look for only hereafter, when you are come to Heaven after this
life; I tell you this life is now, and I verily believe the time is coming,
that saints shall come to see this life made good to them, and in them more and
more.



Answ. In three regards the Saints have experience of these things. First, In
regard they know they have a propriety in him. Secondly, In regard they have
knowledge in experience of recourse to him. Thirdly, of a constant familiarity
with him.

First, They have a knowledge of propriety in him, they know that God has made
himself their Father, and they his sons, this makes them bold; who can be more
bold with a Father then his sons? Though Abraham be ignorant of us, yet thou
art our Father, Isal. 63.16.
behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. They know God does
not cast them off because of their sins; this does not make them no sons, but
they look upon God as an infinite gracious loving Father; They have experience,
that coming to their Father is a means to purify their hearts, and if they
stand off till they have cleansed themselves, this has been a means to throw
them more into sin; and though they have sinned, yet they throw themselves into
his arms, they have experience that he dos not upbraid them for coming to him,
in asking themselves, how durst they aproach to him, being so defild with sin;
But they find, that bringing their hearts to him, is the only way to cleanse
themselves; they find such loves in the bosom of the Father, such bowels to
pardon, such embracements, that they know no way in all the world comparable to
this, to break their hearts, and to make them throw sin far away. Time was
when they said, true it is, Christ calls, and invites me to come, but I am so
defiled, so sinful, I dare not come: I will reform my life, and get more
power against sin, and then I may go with boldness.

But this soul who has enjoyed the loves of God, so sweetly, so intimately,
he finds this is the way to remain foul still; And though he might refrain
sin, yet he was not purged from sin; This end, and that end wrought with him;
something from self, and to self: but sin as sin was as strong as ever. But he
found this way the only way to heal sin, and get a new heart, a new nature,
viz. to throw himself upon his Father, into his Fathers arms: Though Abraham
be ignorant of us, Isai. 63.16.
yet thou art our Father; And this going to God frees us from our sins, and
nothing else. To say I am legal, and I am full of corruption, I am weak and I
can do nothing: all this while, we stand at a distance, and weaken our selves
more; We are not free, we are locked up in our selves, and strive by our own
strength. But if you would be holy, throw your selves into the loves of God;
this very enjoyment will give you an enlarged, a free, and broken heart; then
sin will be hated from a new nature. God dos not say I love you, if you be
holy; but, I love you to make you holy. Beloved, this is the new covenant that
the Gospel holds out to us; and herein lies the power of the Gospel, to make
of unrighteous, righteous, to work by love, not by constraint.

Men that never had experience of this life, they lay Laws, and Constraints
upon men to duty, and know not the power of love. When the Prodigal had but a
resolution to throw himself upon his fathers loves, you see how he was
received; No sooner dos God open his heart to a poor sinner, but he sees the
everlasting roling bowels of a Father, toward him, and then they interchange
loves and bowels; Hos. 11.8.
That their repentings are kindled together; Ier. 31.22.
I do earnestly remember him still: my bowels are troubled for him: Jer. 3.22.
Bowels role toward one another, and then the poor sinners come to see their
own names writ in their own hearts, that before was writ in the heart of God;
And see his dearest loves have ever been toward them for good; He sees now he
was not excluded from God, because he had departed away from him, and
blacksliden, but was the rather called to come to him, because he had
blackslided, and defiled himself; Jer. 3.22
As Jer. 3.22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your
backslidings; Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. He has
experience that he had lain long striving against sin, but found no power from
a right ground, from a right principle; But when he (it may be) after many
years striving with his lusts to subdue them, and bring them under, he resolved
at last to go to God and said: Lord here is my heart, as bad as can be, the
more I strive with it, the worse it is; I have striven long and cannot conquer
one sin; but Lord do thou now take it, do with it what thou will; all this
while I was ashamed to come to thee, my heart was so bad; now I commit it to
thee; and then he found a subdued heart, and never before.

So long as I look upon my obedience and my conformity, and when I see a want,
I hold off from God; this breeds obstructions between the soul and God. Your
praying, and your duties, and your obedience, do declare that you live in God,
and not that they may bring you to God.

Brethren, this is the way: have you finned and falen from God? stay not but
return to God, then he will heal your backsliding; Stay not, as men usually
do, till your selves have healed your own backslidings, and then you will
believe. This way does never rightly overcome the heart; but be ye weak
Christian, or be ye strong, try this way, and you shall find a wonderful
change in your spirits; you may draw nigh to God, with boldness, the way
stands open; God never chid a soul that throws it self upon him.

Again, this often recourse to, and familiarity with God, it makes a man
rightly to understand God, to know his very nature; men that live out of God,
mistake God; they judge otherwise of his nature then it is; Saints by enjoying
God, they know God; what a God of sweetness and loves he is; how free in
communicating of himself; what an unchangable God he is; how ready to receive
a sinner; what loves run from him into them, when once they are come in to him;
though God frown, they know his nature is nothing but unchangeable loves;
however he deals with them in his Providence, they know all his ways are
ways of love to them; He cannot hate them, nor do any thing as a fruit of
hatred; They understand God, they know his ways with his Saints; though he
kill them, yet will they trust in him; Isai. 55.
Though in external Providence he seems to frown, yet they know what is in
his heart; they take all in good part their Father does unto them.

This is that which raises up their hearts to a holy boldness of spirit; What
ever men intends they know God smiles; what ever his providence are, they know
his loves are constant, unchangable; This makes their hearts rejoice, and
triumph, to live above; though the body be under sufferings, yet their spirit
is free; walks up and down in loves, is compassed about with joys, swallowed
up in GOD, and lives amongst Divine Crowns.

If a man have no experience of these things, he lives darkly, mournfully, he
measures God by himself; if men be angry, he thinks God is angry; if providence
change, they think God changes; and this raises not, but overwhelmes the spirit
of a man; this sinks his spirit; for he judges God like himself; but what
says God? are my ways as your ways, and my thoughts, as your thoughts? Isai.
55.
As high as the Heavens are above the Earth: so high are my thoughts above your
thoughts, and my ways above your ways.

Secondly they are bold for God; ye never see any principle, but it works
suitable to itself; so the Saints have a principle from God, which qualifies
them so, that they can stand for God: 1. In suffering for him; if it be his
will, they shall suffer losses, ignominy, derision, yea Death it self, they
have a principle from God will bear them out; Look upon Paul, what a spirit
had he when they told him of bonds? Acts. 21.13.
what mean ye to weep and break my heart? for I am ready (says he) not only
to be bound, but to die for the name of the Lord Jesus.

And so the three Children, what resolutions had they to suffer? We know our
God whom we serve, Dan. 3.17.18.
is able to deliver us, but howsoever be it known unto thee, we will not
worship this Image; Frowns, nor scorns from men, will not turn them out of
their way.

And the reasons of this are, First, the real conviction of security in God,
before they engage themselves for God; as 2 Timothy 1.12. For which cause I also
suffer these things; nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I know in whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed to
him, against that day.

The soul seeing God such a buckler, and seeing himself so secure; this makes
him not stand at any thing, but to engage himself and all he is for God.



I answer no, it is not self love, but love to God. But here lies a great
mystery, in a Saints thus engaging for God.

It arises from being partaker of the very nature of God; and his will is so
swallowed up and resigned into Gods that he acts Gods will, not his own; So
that his security is not in any outward protection, but in what the will of God
is? and if his spirit live in, and with God, what ever fall to him, this he
accounts his security.

as none; they are not much troubled at them, for their spirits live among
divine thrones and Crowns.

The 3. reason of a Saints thus boldly engaging for God, is, Though they suffer
externally, yet there is within a supply of contrary love; and smiles;

Men indeavorto throw scorns, and derisions upon the Saints; and invent such
deriding names, that they would make them odious: even as the very offscouring
of the World, and that they may render them as the vilest men upon earth.

It matters not, God visits them with his loves; He communicates that to their
spirits, which abundantly makes up their suffering, and makes amends a thousand
thousand times.

One comes and he calls you Sectaries, another Independents, another
Scismaticks, another Anabaptists, another Antinomians, another comes and tells
you, they are this day going to petition the Parliament against all your
Independents; now what of all this? were you but carried above, and did you
live in God? these would be like so many small puffes of wind that would scarce
blow away a straw; For a man never fears a man, when he knows himself above
a man; when he knows himself free from him, and out of his reach to hurt him.

All the men in the World cannot hurt a Saint; nor all the Devils in Hell; a
man will never fear his Enemy, especially when he knows he is killed before
he comes near him.

Christ has overcome sin, Death, Hell, the Devil, the World; and therefore,
what need the saints fear any of these? 2 Cor. 4.17.
The afflictions of this life are but light and momentary: but there is an
exceeding weight of glory to be revealed. Will a man regard a small cross,
when he has a weight and an exceeding weight of Divine loves, of Divine Crowns?

This is enough to make a man, not only to be content to bear afflictions and
frowns from the World; but also to love the cross, to love the frowns.

When thou have a loss in thy Estate, in thy name, or any way, Christ comes
with his loves, and makes an over abundant supply; I do not say; he gives thee
the same things; but, he gives thee that which is a thousand times more worth.

If thou losest farthings, and gainest pounds; if thou losest strawes and
gainest pearls, what loss have thou?

Thus Christ does to a Saint at the very instant of his suffering, if he live
with and in Christ; for Christ's way is, not to send the affliction and let it
lie heavy, and press a man down, and then he afterward lets men reason
themselves into content; for a Saints content, as a Saints, is not from reason,
but from a present enjoyment of Christ, which is communicated at that very
instant, immediately from the very bosom and heart of Christ.

Intercourses of loves runs out from Christ; which alone is their
satisfaction, without reasons help.

The fourth Reason, why the Saints are so bold in declaring, and engaging for
God is; because, in all their sufferings, they engage not at their own cost and
charges; they live not by their own life, they live not by their own strength;
but they engage at Christ's charges, and they live by Christ's life, they spend
upon his strength.

It Is a Phrase we have often up, especially in the Country; they may spend
freely that spend upon other men's Purses.

So the Saints, they go on in their way, and walk like Saints, because they
live not by and of themselves; their life, and their strength, and their
comforts, are all Christ's; they spend upon his Stock.

This makes them so free and so bold, spend while they will, they have a vast
Treasure, never to be exhausted; Still Christ supplies them with new strength,
and new life.

Let men go on to revile and abuse the Saints, and study names of Factions,
and Independents and the like, to make them odious; No matter, Christ assists
them; Christ has names full of Love and sweetness for them.

And if they should proceed to persecution as they may, and imprisonment, no
matter; There comes a new suppy from Christ answerable to their sufferings.

But the Saints being weak and not knowing this, they many times needleslly
trouble themselves with forethinking what they shall do, if Suffering, and
Afflictions, and Troubles increase; And the reason is, because they apply, and
compare Future Troubles to present strength.

But those that live in Christ, and with Christ, they know they cannot engage
upon any new affliction, But there is a new supply of Strength, and Courage,
and life from Christ; and therefore they reason thus.

If Bonds, Reproaches, and imprisonment, or Death it self do attend me;
There is Fresh Joy, New Life, and more Srength attends.

The more opposers, the more Strength, the more Joy, the more Glory, the more
Loves, the more Embraces, The more overcomings of Loves.

And therefore this is that which makes them Bold in Declaring for God.

Who more bold for God in declaring truth then the Apostles, in Acts the
fourth? though they knew troubles and persecution attended them, Acts: 4.10.
and bonds in every place, be it known says Peter unto you and to all
Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth was this man made whole,
whom ye crucified, but God has raised him up, and this is the stone set at
naught by you Builders and is now become the head of the corner, neither is
there Salvation in any other; Now when they saw the boldness of the Apostles,
and saw that they were ignorant men, they took knowledge that they had been,
with Jesus, and could say nothing against the Miracle they had wrought in the
name of Jesus; Then they took counsel and straightly charged them they should
speak no more in that name, and they answered boldly, whether is it right in
sight of God to hearken unto you more then unto God, Judge ye? for we can not
but speak the things we have seen and heard: and so the whole Chapter, and
diverse other places do declare, with what wonderful boldness they declare
Christ; because Christ lived withthem, lived in them, they had experience of
his strength and love in supporting. And their love could not but return in
declaring the things they had seen and heard.

And the Reasons of this are, because the enjoyment of these things beget a
love to the things declared, and gives power to declare them with all courage
and boldness; the Saints are made one with Christ, sucked and drawn up into
Christ, they live by loving and love by living, they declare through loving,
and love through declaring. And suitable to their love they cannot choose but
declare, love in them has the pre-eminence, it predominates, it overrules all
other things in them, they must needs, they are constrained to declare the life
they live in.

If a Parliament should command, that men should not declare what experience
they have of Christ, as I hope this Parliament never will, they could not
contain, it would be as fire in their bosoms, it would burst out, loves would
so constrain them; could they sit and see and not speak? I tell you there is
such mighty constraines in the power of love, they could not keep in.

It boots not the World to act against the power of love to raise persecution,
the more they act against it the more it works, the more it constraines.

Again another reason is, why they are so constrained to declare what they see
and know, because the matter declared is the very power declaring. They are so
lapt up in the loves of Christ and so made one in him, that the things they
declare is not another thing from them, but they are the very things.

And therefore if they are so bold in declaring, never blame them, for they and
those things are the same; no nor never admire them, for there is such a
constraining power in them they cannot do otherwise. And that he has he
receives not from others as their experiences, but they are his own, they are
himself. Paul (you see) when once Christ had appeared to him, there was such a
Light, such a Glory, such a Power, such a Demonstration of Truth to his Soul,
that he immediately went and preached Christ; he went not to the Brethren to be
confirmed in what he saw and felt, but the power love was such, that come life
come death he must declare it.

And a third Reason may be, because he enjoyes what he declares; what he
enjoyes he acts, and what he acts he enjoyes; while he says he sees he feels;
while he speaks of love, he acts in love.

Here now you see the quality of a Saints spirit. And indeed this acting and
enjoying he esteems his protion, his everlasting inheritance, his Heaven; his
very work is his reward, esteeming (says the Apostle) the reproach with
Christ, Heb. 11.26
greater riches then the Treasures of Egypt, Phil 4.8.
this life was the recompense of reward Moses had an eye too, and Paul he
counted all things loss and dung, to gain and enjoy it; and David herejoyceth
in the word as one that finds great spoils, Ps. 16.5.6.^.
for in keeping thereof, there is a full reward.

Beloved friends this is your Heaven, and if you cannot count this a sufficient
Heaven and reward, you will hardly think Heaven hereafter a reward, especially
in the condition you are in; but did you act in love and lived in Christ here,
you would say were this life but perfected, I have enough, enough; I desire no
other Heaven, this portion is enough; as David says in 16 Psalm. Ps. 16.5.6.
The Lord is the portion of mine Inheritance, the Lines are fallen to me in
very pleasant places, yea I have a Goodly Heritage.

Now we come to the Third thing wherein the Saints are bold: They are bold in
undergoing any thing from God; must I be poor, must I be sick, must I be in
prison, must I be in Death, he is bold to undergo it; he sees the loves of God
in all that comes to him: Let all the world conjoyn together against this man,
and look never so black and terrible upon him, he sees his God smileing, his
God speaking nothing but loves.

As sin and the law, though they are in conjunction to terrify him, yet he
is bold, for he sees God reconciled. And as they (the greater) can not daunt
his boldness, so neither can men, nor can the Word, all they can do cannot make
him think his Father is angry.

Though God himself try the Saints; they liveing in him, and enjoying his
love; Though he seem in his Providence to be angry; yet they find loves in his
very bosom, in his very heart, when men enjoy not this, every frown from men,
and every frown from God, casts them down; they forsake their boldness,
because they have no exprience of the sweet and unchangeable nature of God. as
Ezekiel. 22.14. Exek. 22.14.
Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the days that I shall
deal with thee: They being backsliden and departed from God they were not able
to look on God as a father, when he aflicted them, as the Saints can do; Does
God chide? yet they know it is in love. Does God wound? all are fruits of his
love.

So now you see how bold a Saint is with God; How bold in standing for God; How
bold in declaring God, How bold in undergoing any thing from God; and all this
by liveing with God, by liveing in God, and enjoying God. This man must needs
be a bold man that has such inflowings of loves from God; what shall such a
man account dear for such a God? How bold was Jer. in the Prison? though put
in the Dungeon, where he sanke in the mire and was ready to starve? when he was
taken out again and remained in prison, he could not hold his peace; the power
of loves constrained him to speak what he had seen and felt.

And so Job though he was aflicted in his Estate, in his children, in his own
person, Job. 13.15.
what (says he) though he kill me he deferves to be trusted in; I cannot
forsake him for all this.

And old Ely when there was such bitter things spoken against him by God, says
he it is the Lord let him do with me what seems him good. I Sam. 3.18.
And that is the highest Act that is expressed of him. And the reason is,
because that man that lives in God understands God in himself, what his heart
is. If we look on God as he acts out of himself and not as he acts in
himself, there is nothing but changes, to day sick, tomorrow well; to day in
prison, tomorrow not; this year rich, next year poor; Now if we shall judge
that God changes as our condition changes, I^^^. 17.
what comfort? But God in his nature is one and the same, no changes nor shadow
of turning, always alike. Again a saint in God lives in the will of God, Gods
will is all in all to him. And this is that which brings him up to that
raisednesse and height of spirit; he sees God in what ever he does to act his
own blessed will on him, and so he see but that accomplished, therein he rests
and rejoices, because he lives above aloft, he lives in the Center, in the
Fountain of loves. If we live in the streams, if we live below among the
Creatures, there is nothing but trouble and rumbling this way and that way,
ebbing and flowing; but the Center, the Fountain, the upper Regions are quiet,
still, composed, sattisfied. Again, because if God do take all from the
Creature and take him up to live in himself he has not lost all but found all
a thousand fold. Yet in the most roughest acting out of God. he finds loves in
God; else his spirit would be down to day and up to morrow, according to those
actings; but this life with God, in the bosom and bowels of transcendent
loves, there all disputs are at an ends, he lives in providence above
providence, he lives above reasons Region and Element, and therefore when
Reason would make disputes and arguments from Gods external dealings; as if
God were as rough as his providence; this life silences all, and lays the
soul to rest in the sweet embraces of the loves of an unchaingable Father;
though he kill me yet will I trust in him.

And again the Saints have such experience of the loves of God, flowing warm
from the heart of God that they cannot be beaten out of good thoughts of God:
as we say by a friend whom we know and love and have intimate acquaintance
with; if this man or that should bring tales of evil intended by him toward
you; you would say I will not believe him, for I know him so well that the thing
is impossible to be true; So do the Saints find God such a true friend such an
intimate close friend, that has so much expressed his love to them that though
sin, the Law, Hell, Death, the Devil, the World, Providence, or whoever should
bring them ill tidings from their father: ob (say they) it cannot be, I know
him so well, I have such sweet such frequent enjoyments with him, that I cannot
think a hard thought of him, this draws up the Soul to a high, yea a higher
and higher enjoyment of God.

This enjoyment transcends yea sleights all other enjoyments below it, it
transcends Nature, it transcends Reason, it transcends external providence,
and all the roughest actings thereof. Let never so high accusations be laid on
the Saints, they value them not, their life with God makes up all; As some have
laid diverse accusations on me and on the Saints, some are Truths, and we are
ready to maintain them, we hope to the death; others are false and charging
upon us that we never said nor held, and all to make us odious to the World; As
for instance that I should say, there was no other use of Christ but to declare
love to the World, and for this end he came and for no other. Who ever holds it
for my part I count it an error, my Judgment is otherwise, I hold no such
thing, I disclaim it; Christ came to sattisfie and answer a law, as well as to
make out love; and though these and the like, and such other things may be
fathered upon us, partly through darkness, not seeing and enjoying Truth, and
partly through malice, to lay to our charge, the things we never knew nor held;
yet we hope God will vindicate his Truth and vindicate his saints, and Truth
shall burn and flame out so gloriously, that he will make all opposers and
slanderers ashamed, therefore let not the saints much trouble themselves at
these things, let the Creature be still and silent, and let God alone, he is
but working a way for his own praise, in confounding his enemies, and
vindicating the simplicity of the saints, who live with him and in him to their
everlasting comfort and Joy.

BEloved friends, that I intend to speak unto you at this present, shall be
from the word of God, in the 6 of Cant. 9 verse.

My Dove my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her mother, she is the
choice one of her that bare her.

That which I shall speak to you at this time, shall be only from the first
words, My Dove my undefiled is but one.

There is not much dependence of these words on the foregoing words, but so
much dependence there is, that as you may see in the former words, that the
Daughters of Jerusalem enquire of the Spouse of Christ where her beloved is,
she had so set him out and expressed her ardent affection to him, that they
begin to wonder and desire to see what a one her beloved was, because she was
so ravished with him, say they in the first verse, whether is thy beloved gone,
oh thou fairest among women, whether is thy beloved turned aside that we may
seek him with thee? she answers them in the next verses, My beloved is gone
down into his Garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the Gardens and gather
Lillyes. And I am my beloveds and my beloved is mine, he feeds among the
Lillies. And then Christ in the next words begins to discribe and set out what
his Spouse is, and anotomizes her in all her portracture and beauties, not only
how beutifull she is to him and amiable through his beuty put upon her, but
also how fruitful his Spouse is in the enjoying her beloved that there is not
one barren among them, so amiable every way that Christ was ravished with her
beuty, therefore (says he) turn away thine eyes from me for they have
overcome me.

But then this description might breed this objection, are all so beutifull and
comely? are all so fruitful that there it not on barren amongst them; they are
several and of several tempers and judgments, nether do they all appear so
fruitful as he describes? he answers all in this ninth verse My Dove my
undefiled is but one, All Saints in Christ are but one; men of the world, and
poor Saints, weak Saints, that see not their privileges by Christ, they are
ready to say how can this be, that the Spouse of Christ is so beutifull so
fruitful, they see it otherwise, they can see no beuty in them, they bring
forth but little weak and poor fruit, here is some of this way and some of
that fellowship, some of this Judgment and some of that, some are in a Church
way and some are not, some are Congregated and some are uncongregated, I but
for all that, though among themselves they be diverse, yet in Christ they are
but one; You, it is true, make a difference but that should not be, This is but
the folly and weakness of men, but see and look upon them as they are in
Christ, and you shall see they are one to him, as they are in him and live with
him and in him, they are fruitful, though not as they are in themselves. The
points that I apprehend these words hold forth are these.

1 Doct. That Christ's Church is Christ's Dove, 2 D. Christ's Church is Christ's
undefiled Dove, 3 Doct. That Christ's Church or Christ's Dove is not divided but
is one and united.
Now for the first of these, if you ask why Christ's Church is called Christ's
Dove: I conceive for present it is in two regards, first in regard of their
Privileges, how much they are tendered by him: and secondly in regard they are
made glorious and amiable by him. 1. Considering how precious they are to him,
what affections he has let out to them, the dearest loves and the very heart
of Christ runs out to them, singly, solely, nothing that is in the very
bowels and heart of Christ, is too good, too dear for them; there is nothing
in Christ but is there laid up, kept and preserved for a Saints treasure; all
the choice loves of God, the choicest life of God is treasured up in Christ for
his Saints; and when once they have forsaken themselves, then to be enjoyed by
them, and delighted in for ever; he thinks nothing too good for his Spouse: he
has not only filled himself for them, but emptyed himself for them, poured
out his own blood, his own life, his own glory to save them, to enrich them.

Christ shows how precious they are to him, first in regard of the place where
he lays a saint, that is, in his very bosom, in his very heart; not only in
his common providence, but in his very heart, he never leaves a saint, till he
bring it from step to step by degrees into himself; that the soul is so lapt
up in him, that he has made it one with himself. And that soul that is
acquainted with this life knows this, and none else; others know not what it
means, I was (says he) a slave under the Law, and it tyrannized over me; many
a hard lesson, and many a hard task I had set me, and many a bitter stripe; and
he in bowels of loves came and freed me, he redeemed me from that tyranny; I
was under the killing letter which threatened nothing but death and hell, and
now I have found his loves in setting me at liberty; and now I can read his
loves in every line, in all his proceedings, and these are, I say, such loves
that none can prize, but those that have them, read, seen, and felt them in
them. This is a Saints portion peculiarly to live with Christ, to live of
Christ, to live in him. It Is the worlds portion to live under life, and not
enjoy life, but a saint lives in life; life and he are one; they are brought by
Christ into the very overflowings of loves, they live in the very streams of
loves, compassed about with loves; Christ comes to them continually, sups with
them, wraps them up in admiration of himself, and fills them with divine loves.

Secondly, Christ declares how precious saints are to him, by taking all
advantages to do them good, by sin, by sorrows, by sufferings, by afflictions,
by life, by death, every way; none of all these but Christ makes them
advantages and helps to them. When they wrestle with sin, it would be too hard
for a saint if Christ did not help them, and sin would get the advantage over
them; should Christ but leave us in a temptation, we were undone, but Christ
comes with a conquering unresistable power, and rescues us from sin, and brings
us over to the loves of himself.

So also in affliction, the saints they moyle and toil, and are even worn out
in it, that they know not what to do, that they are ready to give out, and lay
down all, then Christ he comes in and supports, and puts under his hand to
stay the soul from sinking; when our own strength is done, then Christ comes
in; nay, we many times wrestle our selves into great straits; Christ comes now
and releases us; that when we lose our selves, he gains us, and wrastles us
into his own loves and glory; he ravishes us with his loves, and then also is
he ravished with our loves as you see in this chapter.

Secondly, they are made glorious by him, and with him, as David says, Ps.
68.13.
They are like the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers like
yellow gold, it is a metaphor, you must conceive taken from very pleasant and
glorious colored Doves, to set out how Christ beautifies, and makes his saint
glorious and amiable. The very same glory that is on Christ, is on a saint;
Christ and a saint have not two different lives, two different glories; but
both one and the same, says the Apostle, 1 Ioh 4.17.
As he is, so are we in this world. Brethren, the life of a saint is a
mystery, Christ and they live in the enjoyments each of other, the life of a
saint is internal.

Surely friends, let me tell you, it is not known by partaking of fellowships
and ordinances, although we ought to partake of them, and hold them forth to
the world, but the beauty of the life of Christ's consists in the enjoyment of
Christ's loves; so that the soul, is therein centred and satisfied, as it is
expressed 17. Ioh. 17.23.
Ioh. Thou in me, and I in them, and they in me, that they may be made perfect
in one. All saints they are beloved with the same loves that the Father loves
the Son, the same riches, the same life, the same love, the same glory is
bestowed on them. Ephesians. 11.3.
We are now in this life, set in heavenly places in Christ, many think they
shall have this life hereafter, when they shall come to heaven: but those that
live this life, they are in heaven here, and sit now in heavenly places; and
herein is the great mistake among Professors, they do not live in and with
Christ here; they use ordinances, and hold forth a profession and here rest;
but for this heavenly life, this intimate uniting life, they look not after
it, they expect it not, they know it not, they live it not. Oh brethren! did
you but know this life in experience, you would never rest till you were in it,
and were comprehended by it, (for I pray mark) that this life must comprehend
you, and not you it; you do not know, beloved, what manner of men you should
be, were you in it, it does not yet appear, says the Apostle, what we shall
be, but when he shall appear in us, we shall see him as he is, we shall be
made like him. Christ's life shall be in us and we in him.

We may talk of this life, but when we live this life, then we shall know it,
then we shall be swallowed up of it; I my self knew it not what it meant,
though I often spoke to you of it, till of late; and alas that we see and have
of it, is but little small glimerings of this life. In truth I now perceive
there is but little enjoyment of Christ in the world, this life is a hidden
life, men talk of it, Christians talk of it but alas how coldly, without
affection, withoutlove, without overwhelmings, which shows they live without
it, did you know this life, and did you live in the heart and loves of Christ,
in the embraces of Christ, it would make us live otherguesse lives then we do.
Oh beloved, how full of loves and sweetness should we be? how full of
self-denial? how much seeking the good of others as your own? it does not
make men of that harsh censuring, judging spirit, that is now so rife in the
world, it does not make men so sweld and fly-blown with their own parts and
with, the good opinions of others, if you had it, it would make you live far
above all these things. And so far as any man's life and comfort runs not
parallel with these things, truly let him be never so great in profession; in
good earnest he lives yet in the flesh, and is not gotten into the life of
Christ, Christ and they are not of one, but of two contrary spirits and lives.
But oh the sweet transcendent loves, joys, overcommings that Saints enjoy, who
live with Christ, and in Christ, they live in loving, and love in living,
Christ and they are of one spirit, 16. Eze. 6.
as 16 Ezekiel. 6. When I passed by thee, I saw thee polluted in thine own blood,
I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blond, live, and I caused thee to
multiply, etc. and then thy time was a time of loves, etc. then wast thou comely
through my comlinese, that I had put upon thee. Christ makes his Spouse
beautiful with his own beauty; but we for the most part think highly of our
selves, and of our own beauty, and are comely to themselves, through their own
comeliness, and therein they glory; and most in the world run this way in
practice, though in judgment they deny it; but he who is come up to Christ, to
have his beauty put on him; his life and his enjoyments; he has put off
himself, he has put of his own life, his own beauty, his own comeliness, and
what ever enjoyments come from self, all these he is crucified too.

But this is a life none come too, nor none knows what it is in the enjoyment
of it, but he that has it. So much for that Head. We come to a second thing to
be considered, that is, why they are called Doves, and that is in regard of the
Saints property. The property of Doves is to be full of innocence, and
secondly full of love, and thirdly full of delight.

First, full of innocence, a Dove is the harmlessest creature in the world, so
are the saints; the meekest, the harmlessest of all men; if they be reviled,
they revile not again; they esteem not of the praisings or revilings of the
world, because they have no life in the world, nor of the world, as saints. If
they have, they live below themselves, they live apart from Christ; they are of
so mortified a temper in any worldly respect, if they live with Christ, and in
Christ, that they cannot think any thing a gain in the world, nor any thing a
Loss: if they lose any thing, houses, lands, wives, children, honors, these
they account no loss, because to them they were no gain; if they gain any
thing, they count it not gain, except they gain their life in it; and that is
God himself, christ himself; to have God in all they have, or else they account
they have nothing, and if they have nothing, if they live as I before showed
you, in the very bosom and heart of Christ, and in the mutual embraces of
each other, that they can say experimentally and feelingly, and enjoyingly, my
beloved is mine, and I am his. This is their gain, this is their all, and they
have no thoughts of gaining in the world. For if they gain these things and
not God in them, they think themselves loosers. It Is true, they love wife,
children, friends, honors, so Christ be in them, with the discovery of his
sweetness and loves, then they are well and at rest.

They think it no hard thing to be reviled in the world, if God speak love;
let blind selfe-seeking, selfe-advancing, men of the world say what they will.
And therefore beloved friends observe your spirits; do you find your selves
moved and disturbed by others revilings? so far you live in your selves; so far
you are unmortified, uncrucified, you live not as Christians, according to the
life you hold forth; if you did, you would see where their life is, and how far
below Christ, and how much in themselves, that live in reviling and defaming
others; and in stead of being angry or to your selves and in your selves,
returning like for like, you would pity them, and pray earnestly for them,
that God would open their eyes, that they also may see upon what low and base
principles they live and move.

Again, Doves are single-hearted and full of love, so are the saints, as
saints; they love, and delight in loving; It is observed by some, of some
Doves, and so of Hindes, that if their Mates had died, they were so affected
with it, they would die also; such a resemblance is in the saints, they are
full of love to each other, are sensible of each others sufferings; they do
not seek to undo, vex, and defame one another, but pity and help one
another, they do as they would be done by; they will not requite evil with
evil, as do the men of the world, and all those that are not come up to the
life of Christ to live as Saints, for they delight in loving; they live by
loving, and love by living, for it is said of the Hindes and Doves, they have
these three properties, first, they live by loving; secondly, they grow
fruitful by loving; and thirdly, they die without loving. The saints do thus;
they delight in love, they grow fruitful by loving, and dye if they do not
love. 1. They live by loving, they are carried out in the first place in love
to Christ, as the cause of their love; for Christ's love to them, causes their
love to return to him; and they love Christ also in the Saints, these loves
are the saints feast; they live by Christ's kissing and embracing them, and by
their kissing and embracing Christ, and also in kissing and embracing one
another spirits; by communicating to each other their experiences and
enjoyments of Christ; there is no greater joy, nor higher act in them then to act
love, these are the dainties they feast on, then are they transcendent in their
spirits, and then are they most full of Christ. Secondly, Doves are made
fruitful by loving, so are the saints; when thrive they more then when they
have the sweetest communion and are most open to one another, to each others
enjoyments, and so kiss and embrace each others spirits?

No sooner has a saint kissed the heart of Christ, but it is made fruitful by
that very kiss, by that embracement, and by that enjoyment; The very enjoyment
of Christ makes them fruitful. And they cannot be otherwise. They being once
come to this, to enjoy Christ they cannot be unfruitful. Here is a saint then;
his very love, his very nature provokes to fruitfulness; if he be not
fruitful, what ever he may be taken for, as a great Christian, because a great
professor; he never yet enjoyed Christ, never yet knew what the loves, the
overcomming transcendent loves of Christ were.

Fruitfulness is made over to the soul at that very instant; it is like the
opening of the pores of the body, then the blood interchanges and have free
course and mingles it self through the whole body; this love of Christ (I tell
you friends) it opens the pores of the soul, love and fruitfulness runs from
Christ into the saints interchangeably; as Christ's heart is open to you, so is
yours to him; there is a secret convayance to each other in the acts of loves.

And thirdly they die without it, saints as saints, except they love they die;
I pray observe, saints as saints cannot die, but their life dies, their joy
dies, they live uncomfortably and as dying, as if they had no life. I speak now
in regard of actings; a saint when he acts not love, he dies; he may have
ordinances, and use external intercourses to Christ and with the saints, and
yet he as good as dead, no more life in act and comfort then the men of the
world, if the warm heart-bloud of Christ do not run, and have free course into
his soul; the saint acts not as a saint; but yet he may act in religion and
worship; but, it is but to him self, and to his own credit and honor, and
esteem among men, or for some other selfe-end, and yet have no life as a
saint. The new man and Christ is as dead, and acts not, and therefore it is,
sometime a saint has overflowings of spirit, mightily enlarged, his spirit has
no bounds, another time he is bound up, straightened, the pores of his soul are
locked up; he has no intercourse of loves from Christ, and therefore has no
breathings, no declarations of Christ's loves to him, no experiences, he is
wrapped up in himself, and to himself: and therefore this makes him, (the soul
being as sensible of this as of death (for it is a death to him) this makes him
to go to Christ, and complain heavily, oh! how he groans in spirit till he be
revived, till his spirit, till his loves come into him again, and cause him to
act and live. Oh! says he, let my Christ come into me or I die, I cannot live;
it is true (says he) here is ordinances, and here is a fellowship externally;
but what is all this, if my soul be frozen, if my heart be bound up; if I live
within my self; if. I have not intercourses and returns of loves, from my
beloved, I die, I die.

Now beloved, would you have me make some use of this point from the
particulars thereof; I hope you have done that your selves as I went along, but
I will a little make out some uses. I cannot be large because of the time and
my own weakness; and I would make it out to you of what I have found in my
own experience; though I must confess it is but lately, and no great light
neither; there are depths, there are glorious transcendent truths, in these
experiences; but oh! how dark, at how small a crevice do we see? How short
do we come? I tell you, though I have many times spoken of these things, yet
how coldly, no ravishings, no inlargings, no overcommings of spirit, how bound
up? truth is, I had the Theorie in my understanding, and I thought I had
practiced them, because I knew them; but it is but new, it is but small the
experience of them; but God will reveal and lead on his saints from step to
step; that they shall go from strength to strength, digging up fountains till
they appear before the Lord in Zion; Professors talk much of heaven, but I
profess they never were in heaven, nay never will be, if they come not to this
life; you hope it may be this life will be hereafter. But I tell you, your
heaven is here as well as hereafter in a degree: be not deceived to pers wade
your selves you are saints, and you are Christians, and have not this life, we
have described; so far you are in your sins, you are yet below Christ, you
are yet in your selves, you are not come up to the life of a Christian, to the
life of a Saint.

Uses, from the particulars; first, are the saints so happy in their priviled
ges, that they are Christ's Doves, and so precious to him? is it the privilege
and portion of the saints to be so precious to Christ? then take this as the
first consectory, this will follow, if it be so.

Then they will not long to be precious to the world; you will not be troubled
though the world, though men, though friends, though enemies regard you not; so
you be precious to Christ, this is enough for you; what though such a friend
speak evil of you? what thongh such a Professor loves you not; and there
another professor suspects you, and you are troubled; Why saints, where is
your life, in the world or in Christ? if in the world, no marvel you are
troubled; no marvel you are offended; if your life be in Christ, (you will
say) what matter; so Christ thinks preciously of you; if you have the sweet
and mutual embraces of Christ; and your spirits run into each other, and kiss
and embrace each other, here would be your rest.

Secondly, observe from the next particulars, is nothing in the heart of
Christ, too good for saints? does Christ embrace, salute, kiss, ravish, the
saints in his transcendent loves? Does he endow them with the same glory he
himself has with the Father? for I must put things together, strength will
not hold out to take them all severally as the things deserve. Have any of you
felt these things in your own experience? I do not ask you, if you have had
the knowledge thereof in your understandings, but have you enjoyed them, and
found the loves of Christ, so large, so overcomming to your souls? do you see
and feel, that Christ thinks nothing in his very heart too good for you? The
Scripture indeed is very full to prove this, I need not cite them, but have you
made proof thereof? are these things so to you? are they proved by your
enjoyments? then I will tell you what it will work.

First, nothing that you have will be too precious for Christ, Christ's very
heart, his life, his riches, his loves, his glory, is not too precious for you.
And your very heart, your life, you will not think too precious for him, much
less your honor, your riches, your credit; I tell you friends, nothing will
be too dear to part with, so you may be taken up to these enjoyments; you will
tread upon all as dirt, as dung, so you may gain the loves, and embraces of
Christ. Will friends, will honors, will parts, will ordinances, stand you in
such stead as the loves of Christ? will they lay you in the very heart and
bosom of Christ? will they redeem you from the law and set you free? will
they take you from under the power of the killing letter, which threatened
nothing but death and hell? will they take all advantages to do you good, by
sin, by afflictions? will they come in and help you, when you are quite worn
out? will they help you out in straits? No, no, they will not, they cannot:
but all they can do, is but to lay you in their own bosoms, they cannot
help against the terrors of the Law; they take all advantages to do you
hurt, they cannot help you out of straits, but rather help you into straits,
etc. The saints, as saints, they look on all outward comforts thus, and how
then can they be in love with them; they look on them as chafe, as stubble,
as nothing; their life, their loves, their treasure is in the loves of Christ,
and having Christ's heart, running out to them and theirs to his; Ioh. 17.23.
Thou in me, and I in them, and they in me: Thus much you hold forth by your
profession of Christ, and if it be so, then I wonder why something of yours is
too good for him; if you loose your honor, your good name, your estates for
him, you think much, you think Christ deals hardly with you; and well you
may, if he bestow not himself upon you; but had you as good a thing in the
room of that you lose, you would never repine; if Christ be such happiness,
such riches, such ravishings, so that he is better then all things else; what is
the reason you stick so much upon the creature? what is the reason you come not
off to this life? what is the reason that ye come no sooner, make no more have,
have no more longings to it? But friends, were you in the arms, in the
embraces of Christ, you would repent you came no sooner into these joys and
loves; that you were no sooner crucified to the flesh, and to your selves. Oh!
beloved, I tell you, you would slight all things as they stood in opposition
to Christ. But as I told you before, they do love wife, friends, children, but
it is in Christ, as Christ appears to them, in them. But friends, where is your
great boasting of your profession and Christianity, and living to Christ, if
these things be so? If Christ take away strawes and give Diamonds and Pearls,
what cause have thou to complain? If thou do complain for the losing of
these strawes, it is sign for all thy boasting thou have no Pearls; but these
strawes, these nothings were thy Pearls and thy Diamonds.

Again, is a saint made glorious by Christ, and is Christ and his glory all
one? then were you made glorious by Christ, you would be swallowed up in the
loves of Christ; you could not live apart from Christ, but you should live in
Christ. You have heard this is your privilege, as saints; you shall not live
in one region, and Christ in another, but you shall enjoy the same life, the
same joys, the same loves with Christ.

Again, is the presence of Christ in himself? then it is not to be enjoyd
elsewhere; it is not in fellowships; it is not in ordinances, simply considered;
yet these ye are to use to hold forth the discipline of Christ to the world,
yet not to rest in these; these distinguish you externally from the men of the
world; but you will be as of the world still for all them, if you enjoy no more
but bare ordinances. This I speak, because many satisfy themselves in this,
in receiving outwardly the ordinances, and that they are accounted Professors,
and sequestered from the men of the world, and because they are found in such
and such fellowships, being well thought on by others; alas these will do you
no good; for all these you may have no more life then the men of the world. You
see no man can live in the bosom of Christ, and in the glory of Christ, but
he is made one with Christ; Saints, they are not only made perfect hereafter;
as most Professors run away with that; but they are admitted and have some
entrance into heaven here; they live as Saints, they walk as saints, they
trade as saints, they live with Christ; they walk up and down in loves, love
compasses them round about, they are swallowed up of loves; they live in
loving, and love in living; ordinances are but shells; but saints while they are
cracking the shell to others, they are eating the kernel themselves, and live
thereby. Alas friends, you may be partakers of all external ordinances, you
may submit to Baptism, you may come into a right order of a Church way, you
may frequently break Bread together, but what is all this friends? this is but
the shell of the business, the husk, the bone; but is Christ glorified in
your spirit, (here is the life) and you in his Spirit, here is the kernel, the
marrow; do you live as he lives? are you made one in spirit? truly friends,
examine, and look well to your selves, for mine own part, often have I spoken
to you, and taught to you, that which I found not in experience; yet I thought
I had; but truly I find now I comprehended them, yet I was not comprehended of
them; I knew not what eating the kernel was, nor tasting the marrow, the
sweetness till of late.

Again, are saints well and fitly called Doves, in regard of liveing in loves,
and by being made fruitful by loving, and in regard they cannot live except
they love? then observe that the people of God, are an innocent people; they
are innocent to the Law; Christ has fulfilled it for them, and freed them from
the Law, and brought them to peace and liberty from under the power of the
killing letter.

Again, are the saints no selfe-seekers but selfe-deniers? then I wonder what
means that rough and rugged carriage in those that say they live with Christ,
and in Christ, and enjoy Christ; and yet their life is much in seeking to
defame others, and to set up themselves: This is not to live as saints, this is
far from the carriage of saints, this is not to live in loves, and to grow
fruitful by loveing; the carriage of a saint is (you have heard) to seek
another good as their own: These then live not in Christ; but they live in
the world, Christ and they live in two contrary Regions; these declare they yet
live in the Creature, in self, in flesh: these seek for honor of men, and not
of Christ; so they may but set up themselves, it matters not what becomes of
their brethren. As those that love Honor or Riches or what else in the World,
so they can but get them for themselves, they care not how many suffer for it,
so they have it: are these (beloved brethren) such as live as Christ lives?
those that revile because they are reviled, nay revile when not reviled; how
far is this below the practice of saints? such men proclaim and hold it
forth they are no saints in practice, what ever they would have the World or
Gods people think of them.

The saints, (you see) they undervalue all man's reviling, it is to far below
them to revile again, to return evil for evil; you see they are passive in
suffering, but active in loving: the other are proud, selfe-seeking, self
boasting, and they yet live in the flesh, and are not come to live in and with
Jesus Christ.

Again, observe from the second thing that the saints grow fruitful by
loveing and delight in loving, then they are not constrained by the law to
duty, but they love it of themselves, it is no forced thing in them; they do
not task and force them selves to obey Christ but it is their nature, and they
work freely, their lives are in loving, and in loving they have their life.
Till men come to live this life, these things, to all men else are a hidden
mystery; and if a mystery no marvel then men so much mistake in setting out
this life, and what a Christian is, for no man knows it, nor hits it right but
he that lives it, for all else, live and grope in the dark and few attain to
it.

Some men say this is the Christian, and some that is the Christian, and it may
be mistaken in both, for they make Christians according to their own fancy; if
he do but jump with them in opinion, this is enough to hold him up a Christian,
oh! he must needs be the godly man, and and yet see not that rule the word
holds forth in the life, marrow, and mystery of it: but beloved it will be so,
every man judges by what light he has; and if his light be false or dark, so
needs must his judgment be. Yet in my experience I see but (as it were) a dram
of that weight of glory that is to be revealed upon the soons of truth.

And I will tell you what my thoughts are; I am persuaded, ere long, God will
pick out himself a choice people; now here is some what to do about Churches
and selected Congregations, but you will see (if I mistake not) ere long,
Congregations picked out of Congregations; of Men that have experience of this
life of living with God. And the ordinances shall be yet more and more
purified; and yet they not rest in ordinances, but shall have the marrow of
ordinances: I say the time will come, that there will be a people who kiss and
embrace one another in spirit, and shall live in loving and in joying one
another, far more then ever, yet our eyes have seen.

We should now have further proceeded to the next points, namely these, from
the words, My Dove, my undefiled is one. Doct. 2. That Christ's Dove is not a
defiled, but an undefiled company. Thirdly, that Christ's undefiled Dove is but
one; though they be scattered and divided here to men, yet to Christ they are
but one, where we should have showed the folly of many in these days, that
they ty their loves only to that congregated body of which they are in
fellowship with; and if they differ in judgment from them, they have no love
to them; neither do they account them of the number of Christ's one, undefiled
Dove; this is gross ignorance, and proceeds from weakness, pride, and folly;
and is indeed mere Antichrist, and the fopperies of men: congregated, or
uncongregated, so they be Christ's Doves, we ought to love them. But my
strength fails me, and so I commit you, and what has been delivered, to the
blessing of God.

PHIL. 4.11. I have learned in what ever estate I am therewith to be content.


THe first point from these words is this. Doct. That contentation, is a Saints
lesson; first, let us see what a Saints contentation is? Secondly, the benefits
that flow from a Saints contentation.

First what a Saints contentation is, it is this; to be content with God, and
in God in all conditions; herein is only a true rest; if it be in any thing
else but God, it is no true rest; If honor, or pleasure, or profit, or credit,
or applause, or riches, or any thing besides God does give thee rest; thy rest
and content is in the creature, and not in God: for then, as these things ebb
and flow, so does thy content. But he whose content is in God, his content is,
as God ebbes and flows to him; so that if he have God and enjoy him, he cares
not how the creature comes or goes. If he have riches, and not God in them, he
has no true rest.

And on the contrary, if he have poverty, disgrace, bannishment, or
imprisonment, and enjoy God, he has his rest still. Because his content is
not in, and with the creature, but it is in and with God; Gods will is his
rest. He that lives in the will of God, he sees Gods will is best for him;
and his will is so swallowed up in the will of God, and made one with it, that
he has no peace but in this.

And this life he has and enjoyes not by reasoning himself into this
condition; as, for a man to say thus; this is Gods will, and I must be content;
it is but a folly to resist his will; it must be so, and I cannot help it;
therefore I were better be content, then to fight and strive against it; for I
cannot remove it, till God please.

Now this is not the content of Saints, but that which reason dictates to a
man, which a man without grace may reach; and in this content most are
satisfied, and take it to be a Saints submission, and contentation when it is
not.

But a Saints rest, content, and satisfaction, is not from reason; but from a
sweet enjoyment of God in every condition; so that in every condition, he
finds God so sweet, so ravishing, that he concludes; these conditions are
best for him, better then any other. And this man he sees really; that God
chooses his conditions better for him, then he can choose for himself; so
that this man finds really, and experimentally, such enjoyments of God, such
sparklings of love, such precious experiences of grace scattered up and down
in those conditions, that he cannot wish them otherwise, except the will of
God be to change them, and to put him into any other condition better for him.

For if he desire health, or honor, or riches, or parts, or any other
conditions, and therein find not God and his glorious outgoings in his soul,
and experiences of his loves; he has no rest: but poverty and the contrary
he desires rather, so he may have the enjoyment of his God in them.

For I told you, it was God alone, and God in all things, and with all things,
was the true rest of Saints. His rest is not in this and that, but God in this
and that; so that whether he have this thing, or that thing, if he have not
God in this, and that thing, he has no rest, not as a Saint; I pray observe
that. I do not deny, but many men may have a rest, but it is not a Saints
rest, as a saint; and that which flows from grace, and from the loves and
embraces of God himself.

Whether it flow from reason (as I told you before) or whether it be from
enjoying the creature. As many men that live below reason, that live by sense;
they have a content and satisfaction; because they have the creature; riches,
or honor, or credit, or beauty, or parts, and they are herewith content: truly
friends, this is no better then a sensual content; and this is far short of
that content that comes from reason; and therefore, much more of that which
flows from God and grace; for he that has it from God, and by enjoying that
sweetness of loves that is in the will of God; he lives with God, lives in
God, is in the very bosom of God, in the very heart of Christ.

And he that lives there; no marvel though he regard not the motion and
alteration of the creature; but as God alters to his enjoyments.

When he enjoyes most of God, then has he the greatest content, though he
have the least of the creature; and when he enjoyes less of God, then has he
the less content, though never so much of the creature; and the reason is,
because nothing without God, nothing below God can be his rest.

Secondly, for the good, and for those benefits that flow from this enjoyment,
of God and from a Saints content.

1 He that lives this life, he is free from the combustion of opposition; for
when God does one thing; and the will of man would have another, here now Gods
will and man's, fight; and rush one against another, like two contrary streams
or seas, which will not mingle. Where these two wills meet, there must needs
be much trouble, and great combustion in their opposition; the man cannot be
at rest; Iea 1.6.7.8
but as the Apostle James says, He is in a very unsettled, wavering
condition, like a wave of the Sea carried and tossed every way, and cannot
receive any thing of the Lord, being double minded, and unstable in all his
ways.

He would have a rest composed of God and the creature. And such a man cannot
receive any thing of God, in a saint-like way; till he come to enjoy God
singly and nakedly; he can have no lasting, no true rest.

But did we rest in God and not in the creature, we should be free from this
combustion, and this alterity in our spirits. And so far as we want it, so
far we are short of a saint-like satisfaction and rest.

And where this content is not, there is that combustion In opposition, and
resisting Gods will, (as I said) like two mighty Seas that dash one against
another; and where that is, there is a foame, froth, and filth cast up which
annoyes the man; A discontented heart, that cast up mire and dirt; Much sin,
froth, and defilement. And as the Apostle, says; this man is unstable in all
his ways, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine. Every wind of
Doctrine changes his opinion; and certainly there is no man rightly
established, and groundedly firm in his opinion, till he come into this life,
to live with God, and in God.

But he whose will is emptied into the will of God, he lives with God, and in
God; he sits above all the Alterity of the creature; change this man from one
condition to another, he changes not, as his condition changes; throw him into
any condition, which way you will, he still falls on his legs.

This is the man that David speaks of, that he makes to lie down in green
pastures and leads him beside the still waters, Ps. 37.4.
he restores his soul and leads him in the path of righteousness for his Name
sake, and though he walk in the valley of the shadow of death he will not
fear; thy rod and thy staff is with me. and they comfort me, they see loves,
and gains, and proffits, and sweet experiences more precious then pearls in
the very rods of God, and are fully satisfied with the goodness of God. God
spreads them a fair Table in presence of their enemies, and their head is
sweetly anointed with oil, and their cup runs over, like the oil on Aarons
head; which perfumeth al Gods dealings, to them and runs down to the very
skirts of their garments, Ps. 133.
and like the dew of hermon and as the dew on the mountains of Zion, for there
he commands the blessing even for evermore, and this is that David speaks
off in the 37. Ps. 4. Delight thy self in the Lord and he shall give thee the
desires of thine heart. Ps 23.
What Is that think you? that you shall have riches, and plenty, and credit, and
ease, and full tables and great earthly possessions? No no, but that in the
want or fulness of these things, you shall have God to be your rest and
content; that your will and Gods being united, you shall have no defires but
what is agreeable to the will of God.

This is that dwelling in the Land and being fed of God, as David speaks in
the 37. Ps.

For so long as we live on the creature, we cannot have this spiritual life,
and these divine promises made good to us; but of necessity, we liveing on the
creature, we must be subject to the troubles distraction and changes of the
creature.

As those that live in any element must needs be subject to the motions,
Alterations and troubles of that element in which they live. As birds, or
fishes: birds live in the air, if the air change and be infected, so needs
must they: or fish, if the element of water wherein they live, be poisoned or
disturbed so are they; and so it is in this; those that live in the creature
and with the creature: must needs simpathize, and be sutably qualified to the
creature.

But he that sits above with God is above all change in the creatures element;
he is selfe-denied to the world, and all in the world.

Again, this is the way to persection; so far as we are satisfied with God,
and satisfied with truth; so far we live in perfection; I do not say that
person is perfect, or without sin; no, but so far as we live this life, so
far we come toward perfection, and live in perfection, and live with God; The
new man carries us to God and perfection; it assends and carries us upward, to
God and Christ: but so far as we come not up to this life; so far we live
below God, and are drawn downward to the Creature, to the World, to Hell-ward,
to Divell-ward: as one when he saw a Bird tied with a stone to her Leg, as she
mounted to flee upward, still the stone drew her down to the Earth, and
thereupon he fell a weeping; because it did so fully represent to him his own
condition, he could not but weep. Grace carries and draws a man on to
perfection; but the old man draws down to the Earth, to defilement, to
destruction.

3. Again this conditon of a Saints rest is a gathering condition; it puts him
in a gathering way. I pray you observe it, this man is the thriving man, he
only is in a thriving way; this man is like to grow a rich man indeed. All our
ways are scattering ways; if we live on the creature we gain not, but
scatter and lose all; he that lives this life of a Saint, that God has taught
him this lesson, flowing from his own self, from the very heart of God, and
the bosom of Christ; he gathers such precious flowers of experience, and gains
such precious Jewels and Pearls, that he counts himself rich in them, and in
nothing else; If he live beside God, he looks on himself as a man that
scatters all; as a growing to be a banckrupt; one that has no experience of the
rich gainings of grace; 1 Timothy 6.6.
Godliness with content (says the Apostle) is great gain. There Is no true
content but in gains by grace, and the rich experriences of Gods workings in
the soul; to see which way corruption comes to be crusified, and he killed to
the world and the world to him; to see how his power and life comes in, and to
observe the glorious outgoings of God, and the manner of his glorious and
Godlike proceedings with his soul; this satisfies and composes his heart; to
see how sweetly God has conquered his soul, and brought his will into
subjection, that was so raging, so rebellious. Then he counts it all joy to
fall into diverse temptations; knowing, and finding by experience, that the
trying of faith works patience, Isai. 13.9.10.
to be entire wanting nothing; and so far as he comes into this life of
perfection? to rejoice in that he is made low; and he that is of low degree in
the creature, to rejoice in that he is made rich in God, and high in God; To.
5.4.
and he sees how patience brings forth experience, and experience hope, and
hope makes not a shamed.

We will now come to some short uses and consectories from this point, and from
the benefits thereof.

Use the first; Is contentation a saints lesson? is a saints spirit a satisfied
spirit? then so far as any one of us have not a satisfied spirit, so far we
have not a Saints spirit, so far we are not saints; So far as we are not
satisfied, contented, at rest and composed, so far we are short of God, and
have not the life of God; so far as we live not with God and in God; For this
is held out to us in the very nature of God; God is in himself at rest,
serene, composed; no distraction in the Creature touches him, he sits above;
that is, hs is free from all changes and all alterations in the world; so is
that man so far as he is a Saint, being united and made one with God; though
he live among the creatures, as God has his being in and through all the
creatures, yet he is not altered by the creatures; So has this man as he is a
saint, not his joy, his life, his riches, his treasure in the creature, but in
and with God, above all creatures.

Again, is a saint as he is a saint, of composed satisfied spirit, composed of
one spirit; for that is promised in Jer. I will give them one heart, Ier. 32.39
and one spirit? then he is not of a divided discontented spirit; he is not
troubled with those wishings and wouldings as men below are. Oh that I had this
condition or that condition: but (says he) let any condition come, so I have
God in it: God is my rest and not the condition; be it riches, or health, or
the best condition wherein the men of the world, and so far as we are
unregenerate, to think therein is rest; oh says one, had I but such a ones
conditition, such Lands, such Honors, I could be contented and satisfied; oh
says another, had I not such enemies, were they but cut offandoverthro wne, I
should have rest; this is not the temper of a Saint as a saint; But he says I
have found that promise fullfild? I have the desire if my heart, Psalm. 37.4.
my rest is in God, and I cannot tell what to wish other then I have, what I
have I would have; and what I would have I have: if thou art not come to this,
thou have a divided heart.

Some men they are ready to say, and bless themselves in their condition and
say, I thank God I am contented; but wherein is thy content? thou have a good
estate, and thou have the desire of thy heart in the creature, thou have rare
parts, or thou art honored among men, and herein thou art satisfied; and thou
thinks this is a gracious content; thou do not murmur, but blessest God for
thy condition; alas, this is but sensual, this is but nature; if thy content
were right, it would not be in the creature but in God; Should God wheel thee
into another condition, and wheel away these outward contents, then where will
be thy comfort? And some who are gone a little higher, they can boast and say,
I bless God I am content; I am in poverty, in disgrace, in prison, etc. I am
persuaded to submit to the^, because it is so and it cannot be no other ways;
it is therefore better to be content, then to fight against the condition,
except I could help it; this is but reasoning a man's self into content, this
content is not a Saints content; that is, to be content as seeing an excellency
in this condition; as seeing beawty, and loves, Psalm. 68.24.
and the glorious outgoings of Gods proceedings; They have seen thy goings O
God who art in the Sanctuary, therefore the Virgins love thee; oh the sparkling
pearls and diamonds this soul discovers; experiences worth all the world; he
sells all that he has to purchase this field where these jewels are. Matthew.
13.46.
But he that reasons himself to rest, he is not satisfied nor content, though
he says, he is; for he sees no loves, no joys no gatherings, no riches in
these conditions, he longs to have the conditions changed, if he could; he
longs not for the experiences of the condition; But the other says, let me
have those sweet experiences, and then any condition; for those experiences are
my riches, my life; I am now in a gathering way; now I see my riches come in;
instead of envying and wishing for others conditions, thou would say: no
conditions like mine, no riches like these riches, no credit like this credit;
what to lie in the very bosom and heart of of Christ; That whether he continue
poverty or remoove it, honor or remove it, so that I may have my joys, my
experiences, the enjoyment of my God, for therein is my rest.

For this man, a Saint, is contented with God, and not with something done by
God; but with God in all conditions; As we may look upon the Spouse in the
Cant. let her be buffeted so she may but have her beloved she cares not; Cant.
5.7.
she will through all for him; and the reason is, tell him, I am sick of love;
if she have not her beloved, give her what you will, riches, honor, parts,
ordinances; oh she cries out, what means all these things, you mistake my
disease, I am sick of love.

If you be content, what means this wishing and woulding; what means this
picking and choosing your conditions? what means so much envy of others
conditions, if you see them but before you? Does a man that has a thousand
pounds, that has pearls and diamonds, envy him that has but a penny or pibble
stones* it is never seen. Therefore we may conclude thou have no Pearls, no
treasure; thou have not found the field wherein is the pearls; thou have not
found God in health, and God in sickness, God in riches, and God in poverty,
and God in parts, and God in want of parts, and God in all.

I pray observe this; nothing contents the soul, but that which answers the
soul in all conditions, in all its wants; riches, honor, beawty, etc. do not
answer the souls wants, without God be in them; it must be something suitable
to the souls nature; that must be Godlike and spiritual, else it will not
feed the soul; these terrene things feed but sense not saints; A child
delights not to play, but with children, not with old men; so the soul
delights not to play with creatures which are all below God; but it loves God,
and delights in God, in the loves and embraces of God, and God delights in the
embraces of saints, their embraces are mutual.

Take this as another consectory from this Doct. Is a saints rest and
satisfaction in the enjoying of God? then it is not not a sessation of any
outward accommodation, can cease a saints content and satisfaction; for his
joy, his rest lives, when all outward comforts dies. As Habac. 3.17. Allthough
the figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vine: the labor
of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock cut off
from the fold, and their should be no heard in the stalles. Yet I will rejoice
in the Lord: and joy in the God of my salvation. The Lord God is my strength.

Again, If so far as a spirit is content and at rest, its so far like God;
then those that profess themselves sons and daughters of God and are not
content; they are not like God; they are not sons and daughters of God; they
are not the Image and offspring of God; for those that are Gods sons, and
borne of God, they are like God, hold forth Gods Image; and so far as we come
short of this we hold forth the Devils image; and we are no farther to
account our selves the sons of God, then as we are begotten of God, and so
far as we are content with God, and God in all things; Else we are begotten of
the will of man, and of the will of flesh, and not of the will of God.

Again, dos this contentation of a Saint give him ability to be in a
gathering way in all conditions; then those that thrive not by all conditions
so far they are no Saints, but they are in a scattering, undoing way; they
are scatterers and losers in all condititions, because they enjoy not God.

Contentation with God is our greatest gain, and the reason is; because this
fixes a man's heart to his own portion, which is God alone; and so far as we
run out from God to the creature for content, so far we run out to strange
women, to commit adultery, and play the harlots, as Jer. 3. shows, Thou have
played the harlot with many lovers, Jer. 3.1.
yet retutne again unto me says the Lord. Surely as a wife treacherously
departs from her hushand, so have you dealt treacherously mith me, oh house
of Israel. All things but God is strange women.

Again, is he that is content with God free from the combustion of opposition;
then we gather further; that no condition is cross to this spirit; we commonly
cry out of crosses; from men, from friends, from enemies; crosses by Kings, and
crosses by Parliaments, and why is all this? crosses in a Presbiterian way, and
crosses in an Independent way, and why? the reason is, because our spirits are
not laid level to all conditions; to see all conditions equal to him, that
lives with and in God. truly friends think of this seriously; our crosses are
not without, but all our crosses are from within; we have wills of our own,
which crosses; and dashes against Gods will in our conditions; and hence is the
cross: for were my will and the conditions suitable and laid level, here would
be no cross; And hence it is we are so unquiet: the working of our wills and
conditions being so thwart and contrary, that they cast up foam, mire, and
dirt; and hence it is that we are so unstable, we are not fixed, but carried up
and down with every wind of doctrine; hence it is, that so far as we are
content with any thing below God, we are liable to the change and confusion of
the nature of all things.

See then friends wherein a saints content and rest lies; it is God in friends,
God in relations, God in all outward accommodations? you see also how great a
good and benefit arises from this life; When they fail God stands; we are free
from the combustion of opposition; that man has no cross, no co^ditio^ is
rough to him; ye are in a gathering way, ye shall grow rich; your heart shall
be fixed and not carried away with every wind of doctrine and opinion; Lastly,
this fixes your heart fast to your own portion, which is God himself. And those
rich enjoyments of his glorious outgo-ings; Psalm. 68.24.
they have seen thy goings o God, even the goings of my God, and my King even
in the Sanctuary.

FINIS

