A GLIMPSE OF GODS GLORY: AS IT WAS PRESENTED In a SERMON preached in St.
MARGARETS Westminster, Before the Honorable House of COMMONS At the late
Solemn Fast, September 28. 1642.

By THO: HODGES Rector of the Church at Kensington near LONDON.

Published by Order of that House.

LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet and are to be sold at the Gilt Cup in PAUL'S
Churchyard near S. Austins Gate. 1642.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS Now assembled in Parliament.
THe great God of Heaven and earth, who made what ever he made for his own
praise, has stamped more excellent characters of his glory on man, then on all
the rest of his sublunary creatures besides: not only making him Lord of all
his works, but giving him understanding more then the beasts; whereby, he might
not only be able like a earthly Monarch to rule over these earthly beings, but
also might see in all his God, and thereby have his will inclined, and
affections moved after him, to know, and enjoy him, who is his eternal life.
To this, man has not only an obliegement by commands, benefits, and the like;
but also by creation, an ability, and aptitude so to do: But alas, how has he
lost what he then received! and now like Sampson, his spiritual eyes being
gone, he is a stranger to the light of heaven, and all true liberty.

And what is our ministry set up by this God in the world for? Is it not to
turn poor undone men from darkness to light, and from this spiritual
bondage to the living God? But how shall we perform this task, unless by
endeavoring so to bring this glorious God to light before them, that they may
discern what a glory they have slighted; and mourn, what a goodness they
have turned their back on, and change their mind; making for the future this
God their end, and aim in all their actions, and so make to their souls
straight steps toward the enjoyment of him?

We shall find in Gods book, that when Nations have overflowne with sin,
Hos. 4.1.6.
and consequently with ruin as a just recompense and wages of it; it is
attributed to the lack of this knowledge; Esaias 11.9.
so on the other side, when the iniquity of Kingdoms is destroyed, the
knowledge of the Lord is laid down as a means whereby it was brought to pass.

This made me the rather pitch upon this subject, that this glimpse of God
might so affect our spirits, as not only to fit us for that days duty wherein
it was preached, but also for the future it might attract our minds unto him.

The subject is high indeed, far sitter for an Angels tongue, then for a
mortal man's, especially incompast with such darkness and infirmity as my
self; which not being senseless of, had not your command engaged the
publication of these thoughts, they had never seen the light. But seeing your
Wisdoms have judged this meet; I shall sit down well pleased to have
testified my obedience. Therefore I beseech you, though the gift be far beneath
your worth and eminency, yet let the givers mind be accepted in it, which is
not inferior to any that prays for your happiness, and desires always to be
found,

Your most humble servant in Christ Jesus, THO: HODGES.

Die Mercurii 28. September. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that Mr. Hollis,
and Sir Rob: Harley are appointed to return thanks from this House, to Mr.
Hodges, and Mr. Wilson, for the great pains they have taken in the Sermons
they preached this day at S. Margarets Westminster, at the entreaty of this
House. And that they desire them to print their Sermons; And that no man
presume to print them, but such as they shall appoint, until the House shall
take farther Order.

H. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint John Bartlet to print my Sermon.

Tho: Hodges.



The Preface.
THe sad darkness that covers Ireland, and many distractions of our own
Kingdom, Esaias 12.12.
are God Almighties calls from heaven to the performance of this solemn duty.
We are here therefore before the Lord this day, to lay our selves low before
him; and Hos. 12.4.
like Jacobs to wrestle by prayers, and tears, with the great God, for the
stopping these floods of wrath, which have made such sad breaches amongst us;
and to procure the healing of the one, and prevention of the like miseries in
the other Kingdom.

The duty is extraordinary; But alas, we usually bring such ordinary hearts,
that except the God of mercy be pleased to pity us, and raise us above our
selves, the duty is like to perish in our hands, and we, to lose that fruit
which our souls desire. Can we think that such heedlesse spirits are like to
procure the salvation of Kingdoms? Is not regardlesnesse a thing in ordinary
duties forbidden? nay, which the soul of God so much abhors, that he accounts the
best works not to Revel. 3.2.
fill up, where that is? Does he not Mal. 1.14.
curse the deceiver, that offers not the best, in the Old Law; and shall we
think he will accept of less now? Therefore I beseech you, let us not deceive
our selves, but remember; As we mete out to God, in the due performance of the
duty of this Luke 6.^8.
day, so we may expect his meting to us again in the requests of our souls.

Alas, we are Esaias 22.13.
very unapt to be drawn to the performance of duties of this nature, but if we
take them in hand, we are usually so cold, so perfunctory, we care not which
end goes forward, thinking a body Esaias 58.5.
without a soul sufficient, to discharge us of it; which doubtless is amongst
diverse other reasons; because, either we consider not Mal. 1.14.
how great a God we have to deal with in it, or expect not any great matter
from the due performance of it; for, were we thoroughly convinced of the former,
his glory would put us upon more diligent advertency; we would think Revel. 4.8.
like the four Beasts, we had need to have eyes both within and without, and
all too little; and but for the latter, the poor cripples expectation of an
alms, or the Canaanitish woman's of her daughters recovery, did not make the
one more wishly Acts 3.5.
to cast an eye on the Apostle, Mat. 15.22.
or the other cry more fervently after our Savior, then we would be, both to
look, and cry, with attention, and fervor after the Lord this day, for that
which is so affected by us.

That therefore we may not be like the Dogs of Aelian lib. 6. de Animal. cap.
53.
Nilus, who running lap its waters; or like those the Prophet Esaias complains
of, Esaias 54.7.
that stir not themselves up to take hold of the Lord. Give me leave to present
you this day with a glimpse of what a God in this duty you have to deal with;
How glorious, how able, how willing; That thereby your souls may be raised up
to reverence, and attention, to hope, and confidence, to admiration, and
elevation; Out of that portion of Scripture, contained in the hundredth and
thirteenth Psalm, the fifth and sixth verses.

A GLIMPSE OF GODS GLORY: As it was presented in a SERMON.
PSALM 113. VERSE 5. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high?

VERSE 6. Who humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in
the earth?


THe Author of this Psalm was David; the time, when he came newly to the
Crown; Iun. et Tremel. Annotat. in loc.
The matter, praise; 1. To God. 2. Of God.


Both joined in this Text.

In which observe Gods 1. Majesty. 2. Mercy. 3. The impression this makes on
the Psalmist.


1. Gods Majesty, expressed by, 1. His eminency, he is on high; and that is
farther discovered by the Original and fountain of it, (...), He exalts
himself on high, so the word signifies. 2. By the immutability, and eternity
of it; He R. Maim. More Nevochim. l. 1. c. 11.
fits, or dwells on high.
2. Gods mercy, which appears, in His 1. Providence. 2. Relation. 3.
Condescension.
1. His providence: In that observe, The Act, he beholds. Object, and that is
double; 1. Things in Heaven. 2. Things on earth.

2. In his exhibiting himself by way of Relation, He is our God. 3. In his
great condescension; though he be so high, yet for the preservation, and
gubernation of his poor creatures, he abaseth himself; i. e. rather then
they shall want governing and sustaining, he will take charge of them
himself, and so far veil his glory, as to employ his wisdom, power, and
other attributes for their advantage.
3. The impression that this apprehension makes on the mind of the Psalmist,
and that is Admiration: O who is like unto him!
1. Gods eminency; He is on high: Therefore styled by the Esaias 57.15.
Prophet, the High and lofty one; and so he is indeed:

1. In respect of place and dwelling; He is in Heaven, says Eccles. 5.2.
Solomon; and our Savior in our prayers instructs us to look up Mat. 6.
thither. It is true, he is in the aereall, and Starry heaven by his essence
and power; But the Heaven of the blessed is his Esaias 66.1.
Throne, that is the place where he chiefly testifies his residence; not as if
he were determined so to that place, as to be excluded from others; 1 Kings
8.27.
The heaven of heavens is not able to contain him, for Ier. 23.24.
he fills both heaven and earth; but in respect of manifestation he is said to
be there, because in that place he chiefly manifests Esaias 63.15.
his glory and goodness.

2. In respect of essence, he is high indeed, unexpressibly high in excellency
above all beings, not Genesis 14.22.
only in Abraham's phrase, The high God, but in Psalm. 7.17.
David's, The Lord most High. Alas, what are all created beings with all their
excellencies in respect of him, but even as Esaias 40.17.
nothing and vanity, as the Prophet speaks? He is the perfectest of all
Beings. For first, there is no perfection in any created being (if it be not a
help of its necessity, or a remedy against the evil that is incident to it)
but we may find it all in God. Is it Jer. 10.10.
life, 1 Samuel 2.3.
knowledge, Job 9.4.
strength, Lev. 11.44.
holiness, or what ever else is simply excellent? he is the Original and
cause of all: therefore much more possesses these excellencies then the
creatures. Psalm. 94.9.


Secondly, they are all in God after a (...). Dionys. de divi. nominibus c. 1.
Sic Aquin. part 1. q. 3. art. 1 and 3.
super-eminent manner.

For, 1. they are diverse things in the creatures, but one in God.

2. They are accidents in the creatures, but essence in God.

3. They are in the creature with some allay or other, they are like the moon,
when they shine brightest, yet there are creature spots of imperfection to be
found in them: Job 4.18.
the Angels the excellentest of created Beings, are charged with folly. But God
is so light That in him there 1 John 1.5.
is no darkness at all.

Then thirdly, in respect of measure, he is infinitely above them all. Alas,
they possess but some small drops in respect of the fountain, some poor
glimmering rays in respect of this glorious sun; in a word, He is an
infinite Ocean of perfection, without either brinke, or bottom.

3. He is high in respect of Rab. Maymon. in more Nevochim lib. 1. cap. 20.
State, and dominion. Look amongst all those that he is pleased to grace with
the Title of gods, whether Angels in heaven, or men upon earth, and you will
find, Psalm. 86.8.
That amongst the gods, there is none like unto him, neither are there any
works like unto his works.

First, look upon all the gods; who amongst them has the Esaias 66.1.
whole heaven for his throne, and the whole earth for his footestoole, as he
has? Psalm. 95.3, 4, 5.
who has such vaste territories and dominions? Esaias 33.22. Jam. 4.12. Romans
9.21. etc.
who such supreme power and absolute authority? Revel. 19.16.
he is the God of gods, and King of kings; there is never a resembling or
deputed God amongst them, but they are beholding to him for 1 Cor. 4.7.
their glory; it is their height and honor to be the Psalm. 82.6.
Sons of the Highest: if they be higher then others in place, or parts, it is
from his coining, they pass with others at such a rate. And as the putting
forth of his creating power made them such, so his excellency is the measure
of theirs: the nigher they come to him in point of likeness or employment,
Psalm. 16.3. Prove. 12.26. Dan. 4.36.
the higher they are in point of eminency.

Look upon his works, and he is high in them too; there is none amongst the
gods, whose works are Psalm. 86.8.
like to his, Psalm. 40.5.
they out-passe expression. View this, 1. In the works of Creation: Esaias 40.12.
Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven
with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed
the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? Are not these high
works indeed, thus to form and proportion out such vaste creatures, and that
with so much facility, and ease (as the Prophet expresses) with such
unexpressible surpassing power, as if he were but spanning; measuring,
weighing; can any less then a high Almighty Deity do it? Princes declare
their highness, by high extraordinary works; Dan. 4.30.
Nebuchadnezzar builds a glorious palace, to discover his Majesty, and great
glory; but alas, what is this poor pile to Psalm. 33.6. Psalm. 102.25.
the laying of the foundations of the earth, and the creating the glorious
fabric of the vast heavens? which are also the work of his hands. If we
contemplate all these creatures, first, in God, before they had a Being in
themselves; Psalm. 139.16. Plato styles God, (...).
as the Idea, or shape of the work in the Artificers mind, before he puts his
hand to frame it; so all creatures were in the divine understanding: and here
for the farther extolling his height, we may well cry out with the Esaias
40.13.14.
Prophet, Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord? or being his counselor
taught him? with whom took he counsel? But all this while he was like Ante
omnia Deus erat solus ipse sibi and mundus, and locus, and omnia, Tertul. coat.
Prox.
a claspt book, gloriously shining only to himself.

Then secondly, look also upon him in his creating emanations; this glorious
book is unclaspt, and now what was hidden before in God becomes manifest; so
that thereby Romans 1.20. Psa. 104.30, 31
the invisible things of God from the Creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead; Esth. 1.4.
like Ahasuerosh his great feast, whereby he showed the greatness of his
riches and excellency: And indeed what are the creatures, but the Quid est
excellentia creaturae, nisi Dei exundatio, qua inferiora etiam replevit? Bern.
Over-flowings of Gods power, and eminency; whereby not contenting himself
with discoveries of his highness, and glory in the creation of the heavens,
and their glorious furniture of Angels, Sun, Moon, Stars, and such like,
he has likewise replenisht the earth, Psalm. 33.5, 6. Esaias 6.3.
which also is full of his goodness, and glory?

Then secondly, as all things flow from him, so they depend upon him; which
likewise declares his Highness. The greatest excellencies of Being, or
indowments which we so much admire, as wisdom, strength, life, holiness,
etc. as much depend upon him, as the effigies in the glass upon the presence
of the face that causes it: Psalm. 104.29.
If he turn away his face i. e. restrain his influence, of sustaining,
maintaining grace, and power, they vanish. Heb. 1.3.
He sustaines, and bears up all, both in respect of Act. 17.28.
being, excellencies, and operations. Psalm. 104.27.
He maintains, and spreads a table for all, therefore hither they look with a
craving, imploring eye: Psalm. 107.
especially in dangers, they that despise his majesty before, now acknowledge
his highness above all others; for, forsaking their fellow creatures, which
are refuges of lies, Non ad capitolium, sed ad coelum, etc. Tertul
they look now to the heavens, not to the Capitol: And those that would not
own him before, cry now, Lord help, Lord save, lowdly thereby proclaiming his
glory.

Thirdly, he to whom all tend must needs be on high; but as all came from him,
and live upon him, so they Romans 11.36.
tend to him, as Eccles. 1.7.
rivers which come from the Sea and return again unto it. When he framed all,
first the end he aimed at Deus in exteriora quidem tendit, sed tamen in totum
undique in se redit. Senec. lib. de beata vita, cap. 8.
was himself, his own Prove. 16.4.
glory, for which he accordingly Stamped them with such several adaptations, as
might without fail, dispose them for, and carry them to this end. Some tend to
him, and so praise him passively, as the excellency of the work extolls the
workman: Psalm. 19.1.
Thus the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows forth his
handy work. Likewise the Acts of his providence, both of Justice and Mercy,
when by an outstretched arm he reduces those creatures, and things into order
in relation to this end, which otherwise in themselves would prove irregular:
Psalm. 76.10.
Thus he makes the wrath of man to praise him: as Pharaohs, when not only
thereby he took occasion to show how much he was Exodus 18.11.
above him, and higher then he, by blasting his Counsels, enervating his
courage, destroying his power; But also, when he had permitted that beast to
rage enough, to bring about his own design, The remainder of his wrath (as
the Psalmist speaks) God did subdue, by making the sea his grave. The like we
may see in Socrat. Schol. Eccles. Hist. li. 3. cap. 18.
Julian, if we consider his bloody resolutions, fierce prosecution, but
sudden and miraculous destruction: the like is evident in the King of Esaias 10.
Assyria, and many others.

Others tend to him Actively by way of intention; Psalm. 24.6.
propounding this high God to themselves as there ultimat end, and aim.

They look up to him as the only One, in enjoyment of whom they can be
perfected: Therefore move toward him as their Domine secisti nos ad te, and
inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te, Aug. conf. l. 1. cap. 1.
(...). Sy^e^. hymno 2. Psa. 73.25. etc. Psalm. 63.8.
Center, and cannot find quietness in themselves, until, and no farther then
they rest in him. Their wish is, Vt currat vita mea in amplexus tuos, nec
avertetur donec abscondit me in abscondito vultus tui. Aug.
that they may by every act and duty they perform, be thereby carried into his
embraces, and never leave off, till at last they be swallowed up of his
unspeakeable glory.

Thus whether we consider Gods Essence, Dwelling, Dominion, or works, we see
in all he is High.

Quest. But how high is he?

Answ. 1. So high, that all creatures bow before him, and do homage to him
according to their several aptitudes and abilities. Saint John brings them all
in, attributing to him, and so putting from themselves, but setting on his
head, as a royalty due only to him, the crown of glory: Revel. 5.13.
And every creature (says he) which is in heaven, and on earth and under the
earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying,
Blessing, honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the throne. 1.
Some by way of subjection, stooping to him, Dan. 7 10. Rev. 5.11, 12.
Angels, and Saints they worship him, acknowledging his highness, by denying
their own, Esaias 6.
but setting up his will as their supreme law and excellency, cast down their
crowns, and vayling their glory, they cover their face, and make his glory the
object of their admiration. 2. Others acknowledge his eminency by their
Consternation upon the least shining forth of his glory, when he discovers but
the emblems of his greatness, James 2.19.
Devils tremble, Esaias 33.14.
Men quake; and as the worms when it thunders wriggle into the corners of the
earth; so, for all men's lofty looks, though when all is quiet, they may puff
up themselves with conceit they are something more then ordinary, like Sueton.
in Calig.
Caligula, who fancied himself a God imitating Jove's thunder: But when the
true God gave forth this voice of his Majesty from heaven, he that before was
so high, was now as low, and poor in his Spirit, covering his eyes with his
cap, running under the bed, or into any bench-hole for preservation; so let but
the Lord arise to shake the earth terribly, and the tallest Cedar, the highest
tower, the loftiest spirit of godless men, can dare it no longer, but will
think the Esaias 2.19.
holes of the rocks, and caves of the earth to be their best fence and shelter.

Thirdly, even inanimate creatures by Hab. 3.9, 10, 11. Esaias 48.13. Dan. 4.3.5.
compliance with, and ready subjection to, the impressions of his power: Job.
38 35.
the lightnings fly, the right aiming thunderbolt makes speed at his
direction, the best impression of his power; if he do Psalm. 144 5.
but touch the mountains they smoke, and the hills tremble: Nahum 1.4, 5, 6.
But if he be angry he rebukes the sea, and rivers they dry up; Bashan, Carmel,
Lebanus, languish, the mountains quake at him, the hills melt, and the earth
is burnt up at his presence yea the world and all that dwell therein; Who may
endure in his indignation? alas, none may behold him, his wrath is so high,
ore-topping the creatures weakness, that it is all one whether it be against a
man or against a Job 34.29.
Nation. 2. He is so high that he surmounts all created capacity to comprehend
him. Can thou (says Job 11.7, 8, 9
Zophar the Naamathite to Job) by searching find out God? can thou find out
the Almighty to perfection? It is as high as heaven, what can thou do?
deeper than hell, what can thou know? the measure thereof is longer then the
earth, and broader then the sea. So that indeed in David's phrase, his
greatness and eminency is Psalm. 145.3.
unsearchable. This that heathen Philosopher Mau^i. Loc. com.
Simonides well expressed when being enjoined by Hiero the Tyrant to tell him,
what was God, he required for solution, first one days respite, but at the end
of that two, when they were expired four, still doubling his time for
inquiry; till at the last being by the demander asked the reason of his
delays, he told him plainly; that by how much the more he thought of God, by
so much the more he apprehended the impossibility of declaring what he was. In
a word; he is so high, 1. That no bodily eye has ever, 1 John 4.12.
or can possibly see him. Therefore if we read of Abraham, Moses, Esaias,
Ezekiel, or others, of whom the contrary seems to be asserted, we must
understand it thus: that indeed they did see R. Maymon. more Nev^chim. lib. 3.
cap. 7.
Mercavah ve lo Harocheh, i. e. the Chariot in which God road, but not the
rider in it; they saw some created image, glory, whereby he was pleased for the
present to testify his more immediate presence, but not himself. 2. Neither
can the eye of the Understanding perfectly reach. He dwells in such inaccessible
light, that no mortal eye can attain to; nay, (but through vailes, and
clouding, yet proportionating mediums) get the least glimpse of; and that not
by direct view of God in himself, but rather (as Nazianzen expresses it well)
as weak eyes gaze not on the sun in its Orb, Nazianz. 1. Theol.
that is to bright, but on its resemblance in the water; so we on God in his
Word, and works, in, and upon which he has left sufficient manifestations of
his eminency, to attract our spirits, lay low our lofty minds, and make us
live by the apprehension of them: yet must we not think, that because by his
mercy we reach some little glimmering beam of his infinite unexpressible
highness thus (as it were) at the second hand, that therefore we either do,
or can by any means ever be able perfectly to measure his highness; which no
created line, or understanding can ever do, no not angelical, there being so
vast a distance between an infinite glory, and a finite capacity. We see
indeed, the eye of our body may be filled with the sun brightness, but it is
impossible that so narrow a receptacle should perfectly contain such a large
glory: So, although the Angels understandings now are, and the Saints,
hereafter shall be filled brimfull with the clear manifestations of Gods
eminency and glory, yet that they can fully reach, or perfectly contain the
exact, and precise knowledge of it, is an error so gross, that it much more
deserves pity then confutation.

If he be so high, that no created line can measure him, either of Angels now,
or Saints hereafter: alas, how much less can we dream of doing it here?
Considering likewise (which farther discovers his eminency) he is so high,
that, 1. He surmounts all creatures, he has no parallel. 2. Ista de Deo di
cimus, quia non invenimus melius quod dicamus, etc. Aug. Sermon. 40. de Tempore.
Surpasses all notion. 3. Vide Nazia. Orat. 36. Afri vocant Deum ignotum Amon,
i. e. Heus tu quis es? Plu. lib. de I side and O sir.
Is above all name. When Manoah inquires after his name, the answer is, It Is
Wonderful, i e. I am called as I am called; but such is thy weakness, that it
surpasses thy conception: so Bid, Victorinus, and others on Exodus interpret
it. 4. He must needs therefore be beyond the tongues expression, if he be
above the minds apprehension; and so indeed he is incomprehensible by the
mind, unexpressible by the tongue, as (...), Synes.
Synesius speaks.

To close this Doctrine; he is indeed like the poole Aristot. de mirabil.
auscult.
Polycritus writes of, cited by Aristotle, which in compass at the first
scarce seemed to exceed the breadth of a shield, but if any went into it to
wash, it extended it self still more and more: so is it with Gods glorious
excellency, which though at the first to a carnal eye it appears but small,
yet the more the mind is exercised about it, the larger it shows, till at the
last it proves Tantum recedit quantum capitur, Nazia. Oratione prima.
incomprehensible, and the understanding be swallowed up by it.

Now let us come to the application of this truth, wherein I shall only speak
of what I conceive may be most apposite to further us in the present duty of
this day, and of most concernment to our selves here present.

And here first, we may justly take up a sad complaint, M^l. 1. We have brought
God low.
Where is my honor? Where is it indeed? unless it consists in giving him, 1.
Only Esaias 29.
a body without a soul: as if he were not the God of both, or would be
satisfied with the one without the other, or did not deserve both. 2. Or if the
best part, yet in that the worst, and lowest place, Qui totum hominem condidit,
habere cum communem cum adversario non dignatur, Greg. Magn.
as if some empty piece of vanity did better deserve the throne, then the God
of glory. See it in those two strong passions only of love, and fear. Alas,
first in our love, and estimation, does not the covetous person set up his gold
above his God? the ambitious his honor? the unclean person his harlots, those
unhappie sacrifices of public lust, as Infaelicissimas publicarum lihidinum
victimas, Tertul.
Tertullian styles them? and in truth, every one without Gods grace, his will,
with a little inverting the Prophets phrase, we may truly say, that Jer. 11.13.
according to the number of their lusts and humors so are their gods. (...).
Hesiod.
Hesiod says there are thirty thousand. And the spirit of the Egyptians was
so low, that the meanest creature was good enough to make a god of; the truth
is, there is nothing so mean that a carnal heart will not Idolize, and
advance in affection above the Highest; if it bear a proportion to it self, it
will make a god of it. Not by external adoration, that is too gross, but by
internal affection, and bestowing the heart upon it, which is as real a
setting up a false God, though not so palpable, as the former. But perhaps
because like Isreal's Elders in Ezekiel. 8.
Ezekiel, men act this privately, they will deny it, and plead not guilty:
Therefore, that we may no longer shift this off, but receive conviction of it,
consider for discovery these three things. First, which way runs the current
of our thoughts? spend we not more? dwells not our hearts longer, and that too
with greater content on other objects, then on God? Remember our Saviors rule:
Mat. 6.21.
Where the treasure is, there will the heart be also. Secondly, have not other
things a stronger influence into our actions then God, we will do more for
them then him; for did not riches entice, honors provoke, pleasures allure, it
is much to be feared that most would (command God what he please) prove
useless, inactive, burdens to the earth that bears them. Nay do we not see
the prevalencie of these? for what is it most men will not do to gain them?
forgo faith, and truth, Religion and piety, as 2 Timothy 4.10.
Demas who forsook his ministry, because he saw it was no thriving way, and
went to Thessalonica, Doroth in Synops.
there turning Idolatrous Priest: Judas will sell his master, and what not?
Thirdly, they are most hard to part with: for if a separation be endeavored to
be made but only in point of affection; away with Amos, imprison Michaiah,
pursue Eliah, behead John; they doglike, snarle at the chain that restraines
them, and like some lascivious novice, 2 Timothy 4.3.
will not endure sound words. But if once it comes to an actual separation,
they are as dear, and they will as easily part with their Chaldaei appellant
nummum (...) sangui nem.
blood as them: the breaking of a debtor, the budding of disgrace, (as in
Hamans) you may read in their face, you need not ask what ails them; nay
many times their burden is so great, as they apprehend, that (to use Jobs
phrase) it makes some Job 7.15.
choose strangling rather then life. But no such ado for this high God; there
is none says, Job 35.10.
Where is my maker? he may be where he will for them, so they have the world at
will: and indeed, if at any time they look up to him, it is not to honor, but
make Multi uti Deo volunt ut fruantur mundo; Aug.
use of him for their own carnal ends. In a time of dearth, or other misery
they will Hosea 7.12.
howl upon their beds, not for their God, but for their corn, oil and wine,
for such things as they stand in need of, but care not, were it not for these
things, what becomes of this great God, or Esaias 43.24. Amos 2.13.
how much they sin against him. Secondly, is it any better in our fears?
Indeed we talk much of fearing God, but where is the man that lifts up God on
high in his heart, by making him his Esaias 8.13.
dread? That acknowledges so his eminency with reverence, as to stand in awe
of him above all creatures? Alas, first, how heedelesse are we to provoke him,
Job 15.16.
drinking in sin, as the fish does water, without any dread at all, Prove.
10.23.
making a sport of sin, whereas true Prove. 13.13. Ezra 10 3.
fear would make us reverence his Commandments to do them, it would make us
to Prove. 8.13.
hate sin, and abstain from it, where Genesis 42.18.
no eye sees; and give up our selves to do what he enjoynes with 2 Chronicles. 19.9.
strife and constancy. Secondly, how regardlesse of making up our breaches? we
can eat and sleep, and be merry, when our provocations lie upon us; like Mat.
24 38.
Joseph's brethren, or the Genesis 37.25. Psalm. 119.
old world, and never heed them. Thirdly, how incredulous and sleighting of
his judgments? whereas, if we feared him, we would fear his blows: either
because we Psalm. 10.4, 5.
see them not; or Gods Romans 2.4.
patience suspends the execution of them, to draw us to repentance, we say they
shall not come. Though they hang in the threatening which cannot lie, we say,
Jer. 15.3.
the words of the Prophet shall become as wind. Though they be evident in the
causes procuring, as vapors ascending, clouds gathering, yet we say they shall
not be. Though they be manifest in the 1 Cor. 10.
parallels of our condition, which are left upon record in Gods book, and
evident elsewhere, yet we dread them not; as if either he that cannot lie, had
mistaken; or Justice it self for our sakes, and in our particulars would
become partial; or omnipotency could be withstood, or stood under in
executing wrath by our weakness. It Is a sad case my brethren, that nothing but
blows will make us fear; when God falls a plaguing, then usually men a
fearing. The Egyptians were gallant enough till Gods blows made them stoop,
and the Philistims high more then enough, when the victory fell on their side,
and the Arc to boot, they thought they had met with another Dagon, such a god
as their own, with whom they might be bold; but when he puts forth his power,
as a man that wakes out of sleep, and smites his enemies (as the Psalm. 78.653
66.
Psalmist speaks) in the hinder parts with Emrods, then they fear. But O how
deplorable a thing is it, that even this fear usually lasts not long; when
plague, sword, famine, or the like judgments, come first amongst us! They are
like the block that Jupiter in the Euripid.
fable threw down amongst the croaking frogs, which at first was so terrible,
that happy was he that could soonest fly and get farthest off into the
secretst hole; but when they were a little better acquainted with it, they put
away their dread, and now being fearelesse, hopt, and leapt upon it: so as the
judgment continues, our fear grows less, as if either God had stirred up all
his wrath, and so in time it would come to nothing: or because others were
swept away by the Esaias 28.15.
overflowing scourge and we respited, that therefore for the future it shall
not come nigh us. So that by what has been spoken it is sufficiently plain,
that both in our love, and fear, we have brought this high God exceeding low.

3. Mat. 12.34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: O how in many places of
this Land are men's glory ( Psalm. 57.8.
So the Psalmist styles our tongues) become their shame! speaking of his
glorious and reverent name, at which Angels are full of holy tremblings, with
such lightness, and vanity; not lifting it up as their badge, glory, banner,
as the Exodus 20.8. (...) quod signif. elevavit tanquam vexillum.
third Commandment injoynes. Nay with such impiety and profaneness tossing
it to and fro, as if their speech could have no grace, but in Gods disgrace,
nor they honor, but in his dishonor; as if Augustus Caesar were a dealing
with some god Neptune, or the Lonic. Thect. Histor.
three sons trying their archery at their fathers heart, to see who can
shoot nighest. Remember God will not hold such guiltless, he has professed it:
Zach. 5.3.
there is a roll of curses gone out to execute Gods vengeance on such. And if
the pettiest Prince will not endure to have his name abused and slighted; near
think the highest will permit it: no, he has threatened that for it the Hos.
4.2, 3.
Land shall mourn, and the inhabitants beshrew the time that ere they did so.
And thus you see the indignities we have put upon him, and how low we have
brought him in himself.

Secondly, have we not used him, as ill in his Ordinances; Ah alas! here we
have brought him exceeding low indeed: though his Word, and Sacraments be, 2
Cor. 3.18.
Glasses manifesting his goodness and glory, Thrones of his Majesty, Psalm.
119.9. James 1.18.
Channels of grace, the souls 2 Pet. 1.19
light, 1 Pet. 2.2.
food, Jer. 8.22.
physic, Esaias 12.3.
wells of Salvation; Yet how have we Ezekiel. 22.8.
despised Gods holy things? Hos. 8.12.
the great things of his seem to us but small. Our fathers would have been
glad to have had their eyes blessed with seeing what we have seen, and ears,
with hearing what we have heard: But alas, with those in Mal. 1.13.
Malachi, What a weariness is it to us? we are quickly out of breath, soon
tired with duty, Gods Word is Jer. 23.33.34 Quanto melius esset nonnullis
omnino non audire verbum Dei, quam audire cum malitia, vel aud^re cum
hypocrisi, etc. Hilar in Psalm. 118.
a burden to us. There are too many amongst us that think, there is no such
great need of these, they can do as well without them. And o how sad a sight
is it to any Godly mind to see, with how much irreverence, and disrespect we
use Gods Ordinances, Levit. 26 2. Eccles 5.1. Psalm. 95.6.
though he command the contrary! were it but the letter, or token of some great
Prince, our reverence, and respect would far exceed, what we show to these.
This is a too too common, but most grievous fault. Nay, how have some
endeavored to suppress them if not in being, (...). Eurip.
yet in respect of purity, and power: as if, so we had the things, and did the
outside of the work for fashions sake, 'twere no great matter after what sort
we did it; or whether we were advantaged by it or no.

3. We have used him as ill, Genesis 39.2, 3.
brought him as low in his servants. 1. In his common train; his Saints,
though they be his, Colos. 3.10.
Image, Exodus 19. (...)
chief treasure, Mal. 3.17.
Jewels, favorites of heavens, Mal. 3.17.
Blessings to the place where they be, Genesis 19.22.
pillars to keep off ill, prevailing Jacobs to precure good, Zach. 2.7.
dear to God as the apple of his eye, Act 9.4. Mat. 25.40.45.
1 Cor. 4 13.
such whose grace or disgrace he ownes as done to himself, yet how have they
been 2 Timothy 3.3.
despised, and slighted in their thoughts by this generation, accounted as the
off-scowring of the earth, the fools of the age? The better Saint the worse
esteem; they have been accounted as Psalm. 31.22.
broken vessels, good for nothing but the dunghill; Esaias 8.18.
signs and wonders in Israel; the Psalm. 69.12.
Song of drunkards; the Psalm. 35.15.16.
mirth of feasts: What names have been invented to brand and disgrace them
with? what slanders and calumnies have not been raised on them? that they are
the Act. 24.5. (...).
pests of kingdoms; 1 King. 18.17.
troublers of Israel; Esth. 38. Christiam ad ignem; Christiani ad lcones, etc.
Rebellious against all laws; not for the profit of the Common wealth, that
they should be permitted to draw in the common breath? how Jer. 20.10.
watching for their haltings; how Psalm. 35.15, 25, 16.
glad of their falls? How joyful of catching at, and take up any ill rumor of
them? how insulting over their weaknesses? how witty to revive the Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. l. 9. c. 5.
old Primitive slanders? and in a word, how cruel and merciless to them,
Psalm. 41.8.
if they fall under their power? The Plin. hist. not.
Naturalist says, the Tigers rage is stirred up, and exasperated by smelling
the fragrant sent of spices: I am sure it is thus with them, for doubtless,
because Esaias 59.15.
they abstain from evil (there is the cause) they make themselves a prey; 1
Pet. 4.4.
they run not with them to the same excess of riot, but Wisd. 2.15.
their ways are of another fashion: there is cause enough; they shine as
lights Phil. 2.15. Fonus homi, sod Christianus, etc.
in the midst of a froward and perverse generation, there is the true ground of
the quarrel, what ere they pretend to the contrary. Well hereby the Saints
have their Psalm. 123.3, 4.
hearts, as well as their hands full: out of the bitterness of their souls
they cry; Let me tell you in our Saviors phrase, Luke 18.7.8.
God will avenge his Saints and that speedily. If their prayers ascend, and
cries enter into the ears of the Lord of Hosts; the earth shall know their
folly, and the next news we hear is, Revel. 8.4. etc.
thunders, lightnings, earthquakes, and terrible judgments upon the world, to
testify Gods indignation for his peoples unworthy usage.

2. In his more special servants, his Ministers. Are not they Jer. 15.19.
Gods mouth? 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors to his people? are not they the 2 Cor. 3.3.
Pen, and the holy Ghost the Ink, wherewith the grace and mind of the ever
glorious God is written, on the fleshly tables of his peoples hearts? Does he
not so far own them, as to say, Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me, etc. Yet how in diverse places of this Kingdom,
have many of these been slighted, snib'd, discouraged, threatened, robbed of
their livelihood, their mouths stopped, and al manner of indignities and
affronts offered to them; and what is the cause? Alas, if they would but have
Esaias 30.10.
modified, and brought down their light to the allay of the times, that their
words might have been as the 1 King. 22.13.
rest of the Prophets: Amos 7.12.13.
if they would but have quenched their zeal, abated of their diligence, and
widened their conscience in a way of blind obedience, to have swallowed Camels,
they might have done well enough. But if Christ himself sit Mal. 3 2, 3.
as the refiners fire, and fullers soape to purify, and cleanse the sons of
Levy, they will never endure his coming. Strabo l. 17. Sic in fabula Ranae
Solis nuptias execrantur, Aesop. fab. Revel. 16.8, 9, 10.
There are a people I have read of, that curse the sun when it rises; but
it is because it scorches them: Joh. 5.53. etc.
John is too burning and shining a light, to be long endured; and was it not
plain dealing brought that glorious Prophet Esaias to be sawne in pieces?
Hieron. in Esai c. 1. ex Rabin's.
Saint Ierom tells us, it was first because he said he had seen the Lord; and
secondly, because he called the great ones of Judah Esaias 1.10.
Princes of Sodom, and rulers of Gomorrah, who were indeed their truest
paralells. It Is a sad thing my brethren, and worth our laying to heart this day,
to call to mind, what nets have been spread, Esaias 6.1.
what snares laid, what traps set, what superfluous, if not superstitious
ceremonies revived for the suppression of faithful painful Ministers; Hos.
5.1.
whereas, give me leave to tell you my thoughts freely, I conceive 'twere
better that Caesar should break all Sueton. in August.
Vedius Pollioes curious glasses, then that they should break the bond of
charity, or the breach of them be the occasion of so much inhumanity as
heretofore.

4. To name no more particulars; we have brought God as low in his Day, as in
any of the former: though it be a Day of commemoration of one of the greatest
mercies; Nundinae animae.
a Day of special communion with God in his Ordinances; Ezekiel. 20 20.
a sign between God and his people; a type of our eternal rest in heaven; a
Day of Gods own institution; yet how in many places of this kingdom has it
been profaned? We have been so far from calling it Honorable, that we
have made it Ordinary; a Day Sabbatum vituli aurci. Exodus 32.6.
of sports, pastimes and recreations; we have Esaias 58.13.
done our own works, and spoke our own words; Nay, alas! in many places,
there is no day in the week, wherein the devil has been more served in
revellings, drunkenness, and all manner of ungodliness, then on that Day. We
have been so far from esteeming it a delight, that no day has been a greater
burden to us, accounting the work of that day most irksome, and the Amos 8.5.
time most tedious.

And thus you see a sad sight, how both in Himself, his Ordinances, Servants,
Day, we have offered indignity to the Highest, and brought him low amongst us
in this Kingdom.

O, how has God thundered against these abasings of him in his word! 1 Samuel
2.30.
Do we despise him? there is contempt for us; Do we slight his Ordinances?
Levit. 26.15.26.
there is diseases to consume us; Do we trample upon his Saints? Luke 18.8.
there is destruction to overtake us; Do we profane his Sabbaths? Levit.
26.34, 35.
there is desolation to reward us; Nay, has not God executed his fierce
displeasure for these indignities upon transgressing Nations? What brought
ruin on Isreal's Kingdom? Ezekiel. 22.24. etc.
were not these the cause? What desolation on Judah? Zach. 7.13. etc. 2 Chronicles.
36.15, 16.
were not these the sins? We need not go to Shiloh; alas, nigher hand we may
behold, in Germany, Ireland, sad spectacles of Gods revenging Justice. Nay,
even at home, how fast do the clouds gather threatening tempest? Our heaven is
darkened, our Sun and Moon withhold their light, our Stars have lost their
luster, our Land trembles, the foundations shake; and may we not fear that
these iniquities in us make our condition like sinful Judahs; as a Esaias 30.13,
14.
breach in a high wall (as the Prophet elegantly expresses it) whose ruin
comes in an instant when least expected? Or (as it follows) as the breaking
of a Potters vessel all to pieces without hope of reparation? What shall we
do? Shall we cry the Ier. 7.4.
Temple of the Lord? Dum sancte vivimus Domini sumus, etc. Hieron.
that will not serve; or plead Mat. 3.
we are Abraham's seed? Non quaeritur successio carnis, sed fidei haercditas.
Aug.
it will not excuse: If we were Ier. 22.24.
Coniahs, as the signet on Gods right hand, these things would pluck us thence.
Shall we carowse away our fears like Dan. 5.1. and verse 30. Tranquillitas
illa tempestas est, Bern.
Belshazzar, besieged by the Medes and Persians? Or like the Cyclops, immure
our selves in our caves of carnal confidence without all dread? Or like the
Thracians when it thunders, shoot up our arrows of defiance against the
Highest? Alas, hereby we may make our ruin more swift, more certain, but not
evade it. If now the Hos. 7.9.
symptoms of our misery begin to show themselves, we would not palliat, but
thoroughly cure Englands malady; we must take away the cause, and the effect
will follow: first quit our selves of these indignities we have offered God,
Ier. 18.7, 8.
and then we may assure our selves the quarrel is ended. And that we may do
so; give me leave to show you, 1. First their rise, the roots of bitterness
from whence they spring. 2. And then their Remedy.

1. As I conceive, these are the roots of bitterness, from whence debasing of
God in this kingdom arise.

1. The lewd lives and wicked actions of some that profess Religion, and
pretend relation to the Highest. De fide cujusque magis oculis quam auribus
creden li. Ruffin.
They have Jacobs voice, but Esaus hands; either they are 2 These. 3.10.12.
idle busybodies, not working at all, but only prating of Religion; or if
they do work, they are 1 Pet. 2.13.15.
full of deceit, and all manner of injustice in their dealings, like the
Harpies, Virgins faces, but Vultures tallons: for, look into their trading;
what Mic. 6.11.
unfaithfulness, overreaching, cousenage? weigh their words; Ier. 9.3.
Crimina qui cernunt aliorum nec s^a cernunt; Hi sapu^t aliis, desipiuntque
sibi. Owen Ep. Mat. 7.5.
what lying, slaundering, backbiting, censoriousnesse? Look into their
actions; what griping, oppression, cruelty shall you find? Alas, these are so
far from Tit. 2.10.
gracing the doctrine of the Highest, or causing others by their example to
Mat. 5.16.
give him glory, that by their carriage the mouths of ungodly men are opened
wide to speak evil of Religion, and Romans 2.24.
blaspheme Gods name. They are stumbling blocks in the way of others; but I
wish they would take to heart those dreadful words of Christ, Mar. 18.6, 7.
Errorum causae sunt. 1 (...), 1 Timothy 6.4. 2 (...), 2 Pet. 3.16. 3 Philosophiae
abusus, Colos. 2.8. ut Aerius, Arrius, etc.
Offenses must come, but woe to those by whom they come; it were better a
millstone were tied about their necks, and they cast into the bottom of the
sea, etc.

2. Multitudes of errors that daily spring up amongst us, Men dream their
Midianitish dream, and tell it for Gospel to their neighbors. O! how is our
Kingdom pestered with Pelagianisme, Socinianisme, Arminianisme, Anabaptisme,
Brownisme, Popery, Libertinisme, and what Sect finds not abetters in our Land?
How do these spread like a Tim. 2.7.
gangren? and get ground every day? how do they like the Locusts of Egypt
corrupt and destroy our Spring, our hopeful youth before they come to
maturity? Alas, how is the peace both of Church and Commonwealth, by these
disturbed, and the unity rent in pieces? How are families disjoynted, and the
Kingdom divided within it self? what heats are struck amongst nearest friends
for these? what malice, heart-burnings, and engagements against each other? so
that we may well revive that expression used by Nullae infestae hominibus
bestie, ut sunt sibi ferales plerique Christiani Ammian. Marcell. lib. 2. ca. 2.
Ammianus Marcellinus (a sad thing that a Heathen should see such hellish
miscarriages of Christians toward each other) There are no beasts to men
(says he) so cruel and deadly, as Christians are. Well; hereby there are many
corrupted, and drawn away; and very many turn Scepticks, concluding nothing
in matter of Religion, nor much regarding piety, truth, Saints, Sabbath, or
ought else that is spiritual, debase God in all; for they conceive, that
either in these there is no reality, or if there be, that it is far above their
ability ere to reach it; and under these discouragements they sit them down,
resolving to give themselves the raines in carnal liberty, and never to
trouble their heads or hearts about such inquiries, or the practice of things
so controverted as these are.

3. Heaps of base and unworthy Ministers, they bring God low; when they are
such, either in respect of,

First, Gifts and abilities. Esaias 42.19.
Lanthornes without light, breasts without milk, Jude 12.
clouds without water, eyes without sight, Zach. 11.16, 17. Mat. 15.14.
guides without eyes; they are so far from the Apostles humble exclamation, 2
Cor. 2.16.
Who is sufficient for these things, that in their opinion, he that is good for
nothing else, is able enough for this: If we have a child we know not what to
do with, O, make a Minister of him! When all trades fail, are there not too
too many make this their last refuge? Thus, the 2 Chro. 13.9.
basest of the people are thrust on God, who (to use Rehoboams phrase) are good
enough to serve dunghill-gods, or those that are no gods, but not the Highest.
It is Gods custom, first to gift, and then to employ, as he Bezaleel; and as
for the measure, we shall find that God appointed, Vide Aynsworth on Genesis c.
20. ver. 16. 1 King 7.15. compared with 2 Chronicles. 3.15. Allow for the basis one
cubit and it doubles the number.
both the weights, and measures of the Sanctuary to be twice as large as those
of the Commonwealth; to show, that he expects much more in those that serve
him there, then he does in others.

Secondly, base in judgment, and opinion. Esaias 3 12.
O my people, thy teachers have made thee to err, and perverted the steps of
thy way! A sad complaint; the people cry for bread, and they give them a stone;
for meat, and they reach them a Serpent; for drink, and there is none proceeds
from these fountains, Rev. 8.9, 11.
but deadly streams; for vision, and they hold out to them Ier. 23.16.
the thoughts of their own hearts, dreams of theit own fancy. They are far
from being what God requires they should be; clean Mirrors, to receive the
beams of Gods truth into themselves, and then by reflection to cast forth
those beams upon the people: what they speak, they should receive Ezekiel. 33.7.
from Gods mouth, not the forge of Heretics. It ought to be their care, Ier.
23.28.
to separate between the precious and the vile; but this some cannot, others
do not, and hence come such creature advancing, but God-debasing errors daily
to spring amongst us.

Thirdly, base in life and practice: Whereas they ought to be 1 Pet. 5.3.
examples to their flocks, and to go before believers by way of practice, in 1 Timothy 4.12. Esaias 52.11. Quod sumus professione, action potius quam nomine
demonstremus. Et nomen congruat actioni, actio respondeat nomini, ne sit nomen
inane and cimen immane, etc. Amb. l. De dignitate Sacerdotali. c. 3.
conversation, charity, spirit, faith, purity, as the Apostle speaks; they are
so far from this, that although perhaps, like highway hands, they point out
the way to others, yet walk not therein themselves; just like the Mat. 23.3.
Pharisees, they say, i. e. they can teach others what to do, but do not, i.
e. they practice not what they preach; Romans 2.21.
nay, they do the things they forbid to others; They preach a man should not
steal, commit adultery, etc. Periit pietas a Sacerdot. etc. Bern. in Cant.
Hos. 4.9. Non arbitror inter Sacerdotes multos esse qui salvi siant, etc.
Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Act.
yet they do. By their example they infect more then their pains cure. God
required in the Old Law Levit. 21.22.
they should be without blemish, by way of qualification; the same is required
in the 1 Timothy 3.2.
New; for if they be like old Elies sons in their lives and doings, 1 Samuel 2.12.
they will not only bring judgment on their own souls and bodies, but bring
God low in the eyes, and make (as they did) his service stink in the nostrils
of the people.

Fourthly, or else they are base in pains, and discharge of their duty. Esaias
56.11.
They will take the fleece, but the flock may fare as it will for them; It may
be (except to gather their in-come) they will scarce vouchsafe it a visit: they
little regard the 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. (...).
Apostolical injunction of being instant, and preaching in season, out of
season; or the 1 Cor. 9.16.
woe threatened in case of nonperformance; Esaias 56.19.
they love to slumber, sleep, lie down, their carnal ease; the Pastorum
absentia lupo invadendi ocasionem praebet. Athanas. Apolog. ad Constant.
Imperat.
wolf may worry, the enemy Mat. 13.25.
sow what tares he please in their field; Thus careless are they of Gods
dishonor, and regardlesse how low men bring him.

4. The remissness, and coldness of many Magistrates in drawing the sword of
Justice against bringers of God low. They are not affected with Gods dishonor
as they ought to be; they can well enough endure ( Levit. 24.11. etc. (...)
perforare.
contrary to Moses president) to hear Gods name struck through, torn in
pieces, and trampled on by bloody oaths; his day profaned, his Ordinances
neglected, or slightly used; his people wronged, and abused; yet here Psalm.
115.5.
like David's Idol, they have eyes, and see not, ears, and hear not, etc. but
if by complaint made to them, they are forced to hear, they think as
slightly, and accordingly proceed, as sometimes Act. 25.19.
Festus did of Paul, and his cause, as if these things were not worth their
heeding; which sleighting and regardlesnesse of theirs, strengthens the hands
of God-debasing people in their profaneness.

5. The ill example and discountenance of Superiors. If the great ones be
chief in the fault, Ezra 9.2.
in Ezraes time, it is no marvel if the people be infected with it; Aethiopes
eorum Principil insirmitates imitant, etc. Diod. Sicul.
we see a man of quality can no sooner take up a fashion in habit, but
thousands follow him; the truth is, there is nothing has greater influence
upon the multitude, nor swayes more with them, then the example of their
betters; 2 Chro. 12.1. 2 Chronicles. 36.12.14.
if they contemn and slight all piety, the people will do so too.

6. The crosses and meannesse (for the most part) of Gods people. Zeph 3.12.
A poor people, and afflicted, that is their character. Eusch. hist. Eccles.
l. 3. c. 16.
Christ's kinsmen were not more contemptible to the Emperor Domitian, for their
mean condition, then these to the Ioh. 7.48.
great and wise ones of the world; and for their sakes, Religion.

7. The Ioh. 3.2.
cowardice and faint-heartednesse of those that are religious. If they come
into the company of godless men, they dissemble what they are, for fear of
John 7.13.
displeasing men, or being affronted by them, Ier. 9.3.
they are not valiant for their God; their tongue is tied, their light of a
godly conversation is restrained; their carnal policy makes them forget Mat.
5.16.
Christ's precept.

8. The vayling of providence. When God seems to Psalm. 44.23.
sleep; Psalm. 10.1.
hide himself; Ezekiel. 8.12.
forsake the earth, by the suspension of the manifest working of his power;
then (because the world lives in sense, and not in faith) God is exceeding low
both in himself and all that pertaines to him in their esteem; they say with
that Psalm. 14 1. (...) stultus a radice (...) efslornit.
saplesse fellow in their hearts, There is no God; or with proud Pharaoh, Exodus
5.2.
Who is the Lord? If they grant there is one Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse
Jovi. Job 22.14.
, they confine him to the heavens; or if they will allow him the earth for a
part of his territories, they fancy him such a God as will Zeph. 1.12.
neither do good nor evil. Now on the contrary, Ezekiel. 38.23. Psalm. 9.16.
when God puts forth his power in working any great unexpected change in the
world, the notion of God that nature has planted in men's minds revives, and
God recovers his glory. Ezekiel. 36.23.
When he pulls down Babylon, whereas Gods name was profaned before in the eyes
of the Heathen, i. e. they thought as meanly of the true God, nay more meanly
then of some of their own dead stocks they worshipped; they took him for a
very common, ordinary God: But by this manifestation of his might, and
discovery of his Justice, in the ruin of a place so strong, so opposite to
himself, and service, his name is now sanctified in the sight of the Heathen,
i. e. lifted up above all their Idol-gods, and he is taken notice of to be the
Lord. So likewise, when he raises Sion out of her desolate condition, Psalm.
102.16.
He then appears so in his glory, that the Saints admire, and Ps. 126.2, 3.
the very Heathens themselves are astonished at it; but Ps. 74 11.
when Sion falls by the enemies hand, then the foolish people blaspheme and
despise Gods name.

Lastly, (which indeed is the root of all, and without which all the rest were
nothing) a dark sensual heart, either 1. 1 Cor. 2.14.
not discerning the things of God, The natural man does not, neither can he,
for they are spiritually discerned; They may have indeed a Cognitio 1.
Disciplinaris. 2
disciplinary knowledge, i. e. a knowledge by hearesay, as a blind man has of
colors; but an Intuitiva i. e. per speciem propriam, etc.
intuitive knowledge, that he wants; he sees neither the glory of the Highest,
nor the sweetness of Ordinances, the benefit of his Day, or the beauty of
holiness in his servants; he looks upon Exodus 26.7.14.
the outside of the Tabernacle, and there are only mean despicable coverings;
but as for the costly furniture, and admirable beauty within, that he sees not,
much less has he the least apprehension of the glory of God that dwells in the
Holy of Holies between the Cherubims. It is no marvel therefore, though the
carnal mind so much despise that, which to it self appears Esaias 5. 1 Cor.
2.6, 7, 8. 1 John 3.2. Colos. 3.3.
so contemptible, and of whose hidden glory it knows just nothing at all.

2. Nor can it more relish the Highest, or the things of God: there is no
proportion betwixt a carnal heart and them, they are contrary to its humor
and temper, ways and courses, thoughts and projects, ends and aims; Romans 8.7.
therefore the Apostle says, the carnal mind is enmity against God, it is
not, neither can it be subject to the Law of God; It sleights his Day, and
contemnes his Ordinances, despises his Saints, and rejects himself as
unprofitable, useless and disadvantagious to it self. And thus you see the
roots from whence this debasing of God amongst us comes.

Quest. But now perhaps you will say to me, The disease is plain enough, and
the causes manifest, but where is the cure? O what may we do in these times
of public misery to help all?

Answ. Doubtless my beloved, if you would stanch the bloody issue that already
afflicts the Kingdom; if you would settle the peace of Church and State; if
you desire the preservation of your selves and yours, here is the way,

Let us first repair God in point of honor, against 1. Our selves. 2. Others.


First, against our selves; alas, there is not any of us, but less or more, by
one means or other, we have had our hands in bringing him low; therefore I
beseech you, let us not be like the Lamiae, clear sighted abroad, but without
eyes at home; rather look into our own hearts and ways, where we shall see
there is cause enough why we should use our utmost endeavors to free our
selves from the guilt of the frequent, and horrid indignities we have put upon
him, and to repair him in point of honor.

Quest. But you will ask me, What are the means whereby we may repair his
glory in respect of our selves?

Answ. 1. Let us take to our selves our own shame, acknowledge our
God-dishonouring courses, and in the sense of them lie low before him; For is
not this the business of the day, to feed our souls with the sad spectacle of
our ill carriages toward our God, and thereby to make our heart to bow? If we
put off our ornaments, and not our pride; if the head hang down, and the heart
be lifted up, are we in better state, or can we expect better success of our
fast, then the Prophet Esaias 58.
Esayes hypocrites found by theirs? But, if we seriously in the sense of our
own vildnesse humble our selves this day before our God, Ier. 3.12, 13.
Do our sins trouble us? he will discharge them; 2 Chro. 7.14.
Is he departed? this will cause him to return, and heal our Land. Would we
gain audience this day? the Psalm. 9.12. Et cum talis fueris memento mei. Bern.
prayer of the humble self-abhorring soul cannot miscarry: or would we get a
glimpse of the Highest? he that would see stars in the day, must descend into
some pit, from thence he may discern them: See Pro. 30.2, etc.
Solomon, when he falls lowest in the sense of his own vildnesse, he rises then
highest in the apprehension of Gods glory. Would we have Gods direction in
these distracting erring times, what to do in our private Christian practice?
He Psalm. 25.9.
will teach the humble his ways, Psalm. 138.6.
he gives grace to them, but beholds the proud afar off: or what course to
steer in Church or State, according to our several places? If we would but
put on this temper and frame of spirit, Ezekiel. 43.11.
we shall not want that neither.

Seeing therefore, this self-humbling, self-debasing, is both the work of the
day, and a thing so requisite; give me leave to further you in it; and to the
same end, to lay before you certain considerations, wherein we may all of us
see enough to make us vilde in our own eyes. Consider we therefore:

1. What Ier. 8 6. 1 King. 8.47.
have we done? How many Sabbaths have we profaned? How many opportunities of
exalting God have we let slip? How many Sermons have we slighted? How many
Lords Suppers by unpreparednesse and irreverence polluted? How in our love and
fear, has every vanity been set up, and God debased? How low, and seldom is
God in our thoughts? How little is God extold by our tongues? How far are our
actions from advancing his name in the world? There is no number can count our
rebellions, or reckon up our disthronizations of the Highest.

2. What are we that have done these things? for Genesis 18.27.
matter, dust and ashes; for weakness, Esaias 40.6, 17
grass, easily withering, flowers, quickly fading; for emptiness, vanity,
lighter then vanity, nothing, nay less then nothing; Ezekiel. 15.2. etc.
like Ezekiels Vinestick, good for nothing: A sweet contemptible subject, to
lift up our selves against this God of glory.

3. Against whom have we exalted our selves? Is it not against the Highest? A
trespass against an ordinary man, being committed against the King, proves
treason. Do not our hearts tremble? Were it against a King, it were too much,
Prove. 16.14.
His wrath is as the messenger of death; But what is it then against the Kings
King? against that God that infinitely surpasses all Princes of the earth in
glory?

1. Were it against a man, 1 Samuel 2.25.
the Judge might judge our cause, but being against this high God, O! who shall
entreat for us?

2. What recompensation can we make for these indignities we have offered him?
It is Mic. 6.6.7.
not thousands of Rams, not ten thousands of rivers of Oil, that he regards;
to give the fruit of our body, for the sin of our soul, he respects not. If we
should weep out our eyes, grieve our selves into our grave, give our bodies to
the fire; alas, it is an infinite Glory by our sins we have wronged, and how
can the finite sufferings of such worthless creatures make amends for the
injury, and dishonor that we have done him? And this is one reason of the
everlastingnesse Mat. 5.26. Propter satisfactionis defectum, etc.
of hels torments on the damned, because being worthless they cannot satisfy
Gods justice in any time, therefore they undergo his wrath for their demerits
to all eternity.

3. Where may we hide us from his pursuit, and vengeance? Psalm. 139.8.
Darkness cannot cover us; Amos 9.2, 3.
Carmel, nor the bottom of the sea conceal us; going up to Heaven, or down
to hell secure us; all places are alike to him, for he is the place of places,
they subsist in him; Ier. 23.24.
He fills them all, therefore to hide us is impossible.

4. By what power can we defend our selves against his revenging justice? How
easily are Esaias 27.4. and cap. 5.24. and cap. 9.18, 19, 20.
thorns, and stubble ore-mastred by the fire? Psalm. 1.4.
chafe whift away by the wind? If we were as well intrencht as Belshazzar in
Babylon; or fortified Cedren.
as Nicephorus Phocas the Greek Emperor, who out of his guilty conscience
fearing heavens justice made his Palace at Constantinople, as it was thought
impregnable; whereby, he now secured, cast off his fears; But when he least
expected, a voice was heard, none knew from whom, or whence, taxing his foolish
confidence, and telling him, that though he raised the walls as high as heaven,
yet as long as wickedness dwelt within, there was no safety to be expected.
It Is Esaias 2.12. etc. Zeph. 1.14. etc. Esaias 43.13. Amos 2.14, 15, 16.
not the strength of towers, walls, or any creature, is able to secure us
against his consuming indignation.

5. What excuse can we make for our selves? shall we say we did not know such
things to be indignities to the Highest? 'Twil not excuse, we have his word,
and may know it if we will. Or is it an abasement to our conceited excellency
to serve the Highest? Alas, the service of the greatest Emperor or noblest
master, which men so seek, what is it to this? the Revel. 19.10.
Angels and excellentest Psalm. 116.16.
Saints account this their glory. Or is it no thriving service? Mal. 1.10.
None lights a fire or opens a door for naught. The end he aims at in his
Commands, is the good of his servants, that Deuteronomy. 5.33.
they may live, etc. There is no service so gainful here as this; there is
Psa. 119.165.
peace, Psalm. 4.7.
joy, prosperity, Psalm. 3.8.
blessing, riches, honor, all that is good; and as for the future, no master
makes such provision for servants as God for his; Joh. 12.26. Revel. 22.3.
immortality, heaven, life, glory, and that for ever; so that we are wholly
left without excuse.

6. Whither may we appeal from his tribunal? there is none higher then
himself, he is the sole Judge, that James 4.12.
has power of eternal life and death; he is both Esaias 33.22.
Lawgiver, Judge, and King; there is no appeal.

7. How shall we be able to stand under his wrath? If this high God do but
lift up his voice, Psalm. 18.13. etc.
abroad fly hailestones and coals of fire; The sea roares, the earth
trembles, the whole creation is troubled; who is able Psalm. 76.7.
to stand before his indignation? We talk much of lightning, what a terrible
creature it is; how powerful in executing Gods Commands; what strange things
it will do; consume houses, nay Cities; rend and tear mighty trees, massy
buildings in pieces; kill the child in the mothers womb, with many other
strange and astonishing effects: we cannot say how great the power of that one
creature is; how much less do we know what is of his wrath; it is like
himself, Nah. 1.6.
high and glorious, sharp and piercing even to the soul, bereaving that of
peace, joy, courage: alas, our hearts Ezekiel. 22.14.
cannot be strong when this possesses them; nor endure, when this like a fierce
Lion Deuteronomy. 29.20.
couches and lies upon them. (...) Homer.
All the creatures combined cannot resist it, nor any mere created means Jer.
4.4.
extinguish it: being powered out, it makes the Esaias 24 17.18. etc. Jer. 4.19.
etc.
earth a desolation; the nations past escaping; the high ones come to nothing;
the mighty strengthlesse, heartlesse. What shall we do now considering all
these things? shall we still go on in a way of debasing God? Who did ever
contend with him and prosper? I remember Herod. l. 2.
Herodotus tells us a story of the Psilli a foolish people, who being
displeased with the South wind, for drying up their waters, would needs take
up arms against it; but while they marched on the sands to meet their enemy,
it blew so strongly, that it raised such a drift of sand as overwhelmed them;
whereby, in stead of a victory, they met with a grave, as the just reward of
their folly. The like, if we steer this course, we may expect, as in the Job
22.15. etc.
old world, the Exodus 14.27. etc.
Egyptians, and many others plainly appears. In brief, if we would actively
do him honor, and our selves good; there is no way but to fly to him; and no
posture more meet, and acceptable then this 2 Chronicles. 33.12.
Self abhorrencie, and lying low before him. Prove. 30.2. etc.
I am more brutish then any man, and have not the understanding of a man in me,
etc. should (as they were Agurs) be every one of our thoughts. The Luk 15.21.
prodigal, or Luk 18.13.
Publicans confession well fits our mouths: their posture may show us what
behavior best becomes us: were it to put on 1 King 21.27.
sackcloth, sit in ashes, cover our heads with dust, with Ahab to walk the
pace of saddest, dejectedst mourners, it is not low enough, it cannot be too
low, the God we have debased is so high, whom could we but get a sight of, it
would lay us low indeed, as sometimes Job 42.56. c. 7.20.
Job, and Esaias 6.5.
Esaias; Phil. 3.
and drive us out of our selves to take Sanctuary in Christ's merit. And thus
you see the first means whereby we should repair God in point of glory, in
respect of our selves, viz. by taking to our selves our shame, and so lying low
before him.

2, We Ezra 10.1.
should be deeply affected with, and mourn for, the indignities have been
offered to him. Schickard. in Bechin. Happer.
If the book of the Law did but fall to the ground amongst the Jews, they
called a fast, and it was matter of mourning to them; but o how has Gods law
not only fallen to the ground amongst us by omission of practice, but been
Psalm. 2.3.119 126. Esaias 24.5.
trampled upon by opposition and contempt. Diodor. Sicul. l. 17.
When one of Darius King of Persia's Eunuchs saw Alexander the great setting
his feet upon a low table that had been highly esteemed by his master, he
wept; being asked the reason by Alexander, he gave this, he mourned to see that
thing which his master so highly once esteemed, to be now contemned and made
his footestoole: so in truth my beloved, what pious heart does not bleed to
hear, and see in these degenerate times, the despising, and trampling upon
those things which God so highly prizes? His name is in every corner torn in
pieces by bloody oaths, as if men were resolved, if they could, to swear, and
curse God out of Heaven. What irreverence is used toward his Ordinances? what
contempt, and reproach cast upon his servants? what a low opinion of God, of
the power and purity of Religion, is there in the hearts of people? These, and
many such like miscarriages, may well make Ps. 119.136.
our eyes run down with rivers of tears, because, neither by our selves,
nor others, the high God is no more advanced, but so much debased amongst us.
To see earthly greatness descend in state, or esteem, has sometimes moved
ingenuous minds to express their sense by tears; Sabel. l. 6. Enn 4.
Alexander for Darius treacherously murdered; Diod. Sicul. l. 31.
the people, for Perses King of Macedonia, although he were their enemy, yet
seeing him brought from a Palace, to a prison, wept. 1. Sam. 15.35
So Samuel for Saul, when he had lost his esteem with God, and stability in
his Kingdom, both together. But, if they that be brought low have any relation
to us, we are much more moved: So Sabellic. l. 7. Enn. 2.
Psammenitus King of Egypt, seeing his familiar friend brought down from a
high to a very mean condition, testified his sorrow by weeping. Job 2.12.
Jobs friends did the like when they came to visit him. And if our hands be in
it, we are usually much more sensible, and affected with it: Erasm. in Adag.
So Bassianus, when ever he saw but the picture of his brother Geta, whom he
had bereaved both of Crown and life together. But, if our own condition be
engaged and involved in theirs, then most of all. 2 Chronicles. 35.24.
Thus Judah for Josiah; and no marvel, for he was the Lam. 4 20.
breath of their nostrils, which being gone they perished. And are there not
all these, and many more considerations, to fill our souls with sorrow, our
eyes with tears? Psalm. 78.56.
How high is this God who is brought thus low amongst us? Ezekiel. 16 8. etc.
Then, is he not our God by Covenant, to whom we have offered these
indignities? Have not we a hand in his dishonours? And is not our condition 2 Samuel 2.30.
involved in this? Is he not our ornament, to adorn us? our Tower, shield,
wall of fire to keep us safe? Glory, crown, to deck us? Is he dishonored, and
can we be safe? 2 Chronicles. 22.11.
When Josiah heard the words of the Law, he rents his clothes, as a testimony
of his inward consternation and sorrow: Why, what is the matter? Alas, God is
dishonored, and the people in general engaged under Gods displeasure for it;
2 Chronicles. 22.19, 20.
But see how kindly God takes at his hand this manifestation of his sense of
his dishonor, and displeasure; he gives the people a respiration, and him an
exemption from the common ruin. Ezekiel. 9.4.
Ezekiels mourners for the abominations of the time they lived in, are sealed
for safety. In a word, Joel 2.12.
the day calls for it; it is a day of mourning, of rending the heart with
sorrow, 1 Samuel 7.6.
of drawing water, and pouring it out before the Lord: the sins of our selves,
and others require it, we may every where find matter enough for sorrow; the
discovery of our affection to our God engage us in it; the examples of the
Saints invite us to it; the safety of ourselves, and Kingdom cry loudly for
it. Plutarch. in Alexand.
Alexanders Macedonians being sensible of his displeasure, laid by their arms,
put on their mourning attire, came running in troops to his tent, where for
almost three days space they remained with loud cries, and abundance of
tears, testifying their remorse for offending him, beseeching his pardon,
which at last they gained. And Guicciard. l. 7
Guicciardine tells us, That Lewis the twelfth of France, when he entered into
Genoa, in his triumphant Chariot, with his sword naked, resolving to make a
prey of their riches, and an example of many of the chief amongst them, and to
leave the rest to his soldiers mercies; But being met, first, by the chief;
afterward, by the multitude, with great lamentation for their folly, and
abundance of tears, and cries, as testimonies of their inward sorrow, his
wrath was appeased toward them. Is there such mercy in men, and not more in
God? O yes; he is the 2 Cor. 1.3.
original and Ephesians. 2.4.
ocean of it; it is his nature. The mother does not with more earnestness
desire to be rid of her milk that fills her breasts, nor give it forth with
more delight to her Mic. 7.18.
babe, then God his mercy. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32.
He wooes men to accept it; he Esaias 30.18.
waits that he may show it; he takes any opportunity to extend it. 1 John 1.^.
Do they confess their sins? then he forgives and covers. Ier. 31.18, 19, 20.
Do they bewail their folly? then he remits. Hos. 14.4.
Do they afflict their souls with the thought of what they have done? he will
speak peace. Do they in earnest mourn for those indignities that have been
offered him? He will take the mourning garment from them, and give them for
ashes, beauty; for sorrow, Esaias 61.3.
joy. And thus we see the second means, whereby we may repair Gods honor,
and set him on high, in respect of our selves. But if you would have these
former means to prove effectual, you must add to these a third, and that is

3. Reformation. An inward and outward change. Esaias 55.7. Tutius recurrere quam
male cu rere, crat Symbolum Philippi tertii Imperatoris. Reusn. Symb.
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the ungodly man his thoughts; that God
requires. For a man to put on a form of sorrow, and self dejection; to cry to
God for mercy on such a day as this, and yet to hold fast his God-dishonouring
ways, what is this but to mock the Highest? Like Philip. de Comm. Similiter
fere and Halverstadenses olim, etc. Sabel l 7. Enn. 8.
Lewis the eleventh of France, who carried a leaden crucifixe in his hat, and
when he had done any act his conscience checked him for, he plucked off his hat
and bowed to his Crucifixe, asking forgiveness for it; hereby accounting
himself sufficiently quitted from the guilt of his sin, without any more
ado. Just thus deal the most part of men with God; They sin, and they ask
forgiveness; whereby they think themselves sufficiently discharged of the old,
and in case to begin on a new score with him. Let us not deceive our selves,
for Gal. 6.7.
God is not mocked; he regards not shows, but substance; not the face, but
the heart; Hos. 11.12. (...). Theogn. Sic and dicit Deus.
nor cares he for wording of it, it is deeds that he respects: Esaias 1.16, 17,
18.
Cease to do evil, learn to do well, else there is no treating with him.
He may be angry with a people that Psalm. 80.4.
prays; Esaias 50.8.
with a fasting, a weeping people; but when a people once cordially reformes,
the Ier. 18.8. Jonah 3.10.
quarrel is at an end. It is not the creature, but the sin God hates: the
holding of it fast, is the creatures ruin. Job 11.13, 14, 15.22.22. etc. 1
John 1.6.
But if this accursed God-debasing thing be once discarded, God takes
possession of his throne, man's soul, and all is Esaias 32.17.
peace, and quietness for ever. But now, because in our selves we are not able
to contribute so much as a 2 Cor. 3.5.
good thought toward this reformation, and advancing of God in our hearts, or
actions, but our sufficiency is of God, Who Philip. 2.13. Non est devotionis
dedisse prope totum, sed fraudis detin^issen inimum. Prosp.
works both the will and the deed of his own good pleasure; therefore, we
have need, not only by prayer to seek from his free mercy the pardon of those
indignities we have offered him heretofore, Da quod jubes, and jube quod vis.
Aug.
but for the future, strength to enable us in this business, that we may
advance, and set up his glory in the world. Therefore let us earnestly beseech
him; 1. That 2. Cor. 4.6.
he, who in the beginning caused light to shine out of darkness, would
vouchsafe to shine into our dark souls, to give the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Christ: for doubtless, my brethren, this is a great cause,
2 Pet. 1.3. Claritas in intellectu parit ardorem in affectu.
why he is so low in our thoughts, fears, loves, services in his Ordinances,
Saints, Day, because we are no more acquainted with him. For, did we but see
what a glorious God he were, we would doubtless more advance him in all. Psalm.
68.1. etc.
If God did but arise in our souls, then even as the sun drives away the
darkness, and fogges that benight the earth, so would this light abolish the
dark lusts of our ignorance, fears, 1 Pet. 1.14.
and profaneness of our spirits, which being rectified, would rightly order
our outward man, and make us shine as lights in the midst of a froward and
perverse generation; that others seeing the beams shining forth of this light
within, may glorify our Father which is in heaven. 2. 2 These. 3.5.
That God would likewise vouchsafe us a son like Spirit and affection to him;
by shedding abroad his love in our hearts; whereby, as a son is affected to
honor his father, we may have our souls enlarged to glorify him. If this
were in us, 'twould make us like (...), etc. Horodot. Neh. 13.11.17.25.
Croesus dumb son to find a tongue in his behalf. Psalm. 34.3.139.21.22.
Amantium mos est ut amorem suum silentiotegere nequeant. Chrysostom.
There is nothing would more afflict us then his dishonours, nor affect us then
to see him advanced in the world. In truth this is a maine reason why men are
no more sensible how it fares with his glory, or how much they dishonor him,
because they look at him as a God that is a stranger to them. I beseech you
therefore let us more and more seek after the knowledge of our relation to
him, and the getting our hearts possessed by this filial disposition, then we
shall make it our business, nay, 'twill be our meat and drink to do his
will, to advance his glory, and lift up his name; Psalm. 48.10.
that as his name is, so may be his esteem and praise amongst the sons of
men. And thus you see as briefly as I could, the task that lies upon us all
in general, and the means whereby we may repair our God in point of glory
and honor in respect of our selves.

2. We should not think we have done our duties when we repair Gods glory in
respect of our selves; it is not here to be confined, but we must endeavor to
spread his fame, and every one in our several spheres and places, to cause
others to do the same. Fathers, Masters, Mat. 25.27.
who are entrusted with the least power, must put it forth for God; but
especially those that are entrusted with greater ability and larger power,
must not be wanting in it. And here give me leave I beseech you, to use the
liberty of Gods Ambassador, and in his behalf to address my speech to you,
whom the Providence of God has singled and called together, out of the many
thousands of this Kingdom, to do his work, and advance his glory. Let me in a
few words excite, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and bespeake you in his behalf, to be zealous in this work. Were it an
employment too low, I would hold my tongue; but is it not the work of the
eminentest Saints, the glorious Angels, nay of Joh. 8.50.
Christ himself? Prove. 16.4.
Is it not the end for which God does all he does? Or were the issue of it
shame, I might be silent; but when God says it is honor, (as sometimes
amongst the Romans the way to Honors Temple was through that of Virtue) it is
argument sufficient to persuade brave minds. Psalm. 22.30.31.
Do you not profess your selves to be the sons, the servants of this high
God? whereby can you do service more then this, or testify the truth of your
relation you pretend? I Magna facinora, magnis periculis emuntur. Dion.
Halicarn. l. 9. Zach. 4.7.
confess there are mountains of opposition in your way, but is not this God
of power sufficient to make them plain? Put case you suffer the loss of what
you esteem of in it; is it not a Refert Pericles, non picturam, non aurum and
lapides, sed scutum divulsam, fractam galeam, hebetem glad^um, faciem
vulner^tam cedere militibus ad ornatum. Pet. Bless.
scare of honor? and he sufficient whose work you do, to make you amends?
Suppose you undergo as many reproaches, and wounds in your names as that Noble
old Plin. de^ V^r. illust.
Roman, Marcus Manlius, did in his body in defense of the Capitol; So many
wounds, so many mouths to proclaim your honor, and cry for heavens blessing
on you and yours: and be sure, in Gods due time, Psalm. 37.6.
he will clear your names, and make them like noone day, full of glory, and
luster. Is it in your estates? What lost Joseph, Daniel, Nehemian, Amisit
propter Christum militis ordinem and obtinuit dignitatem Imperatoriam, etc.
Valentinian, and many others by this employment? But yet put case you suffer;
you can never by Gods Service be real losers; Mat. 19.29.
for if you part with wife, children, house, or land, you shall gain by the
bargain; in peace of conscience, joy of the holy Ghost, light of Gods
countenance, etc. here a hundred fold, and that is not all, the best is behind,
in the end everlasting life. Suppose it should yet rise higher, and might
possibly cost you your lives; you can never bring them to a better market, nor
part with them in a more comfortable Luke 17.33.
gainefull way then the advancement of Gods name, and endeavoring that he may
be esteemed, and served like himself. It is for your God, and can you do too
much, or be too zealous for such a God as yours? There are four sorts of men,
whose names are more illustrious, memory dearer, and themselves more highly
esteemed, as persons of greater desert, and eminency amongst the sons of men
then others be: Bacon. Essay 55.
Founders of States and Commonwealths, as Romulus, Cyrus, Caesar, Ottoman,
etc. or Lawgivers, as Lycurgus, Solon, Justinian, etc. Saviors or deliverers
from intestine wars, foreign servitude, etc. so Augustus Caesar, Vespasian,
Aurelianus, etc. or lastly, such as enlarge their territories, or make noble
resistance against invaders.

Are these such things as justly advance men in the opinion of the world? and
is there not in these, and many more respects sufficient in God, to excite the
putting forth of your utmost abilities to set him on high? Were not our
predecessors in former times like Ezekiel. 16.
Ezekiels miserable infant, polluted with the filth of heathenish Paganism,
and disorderly Barbarism? Who Act. 17.26.
allotted them this good Land to dwell in? Who shaped, and framed them into
goodly order, and comeliness, instead of a lawless rout of Pagans, making us
a Christian Commonwealth; was it not He? Who decked us with such comely
ornaments and jewels of Laws, and national Statutes, especially with such
heavenly Ordinances, to be a light to our path, and a Lantern to our feet, to
guide our souls in the way of life and peace? Psalm. 147.19, 20.
doubtless it was he. Who has (in a word) kept hitherto our Land like Gideous
fleece, dry, when the earth round about us in neighbor Countries has been
wet with the blood of the slain? who has Psalm. 147.13. etc.
strengthened the bars of our gates, preserving us both from foreign
invasions, and domestic treacheries; but He? We may truly say with Psalm.
124.2, 3.
Israel, If the Lord had not been on our side when men rose up against us,
they had swallowed us up quick, etc. And can you now do too much for such a
God as this, to repair his glory, and make his name high in this Land, where
he so well deserves it? If therefore you are resolved (as I doubt not but you
are) to set both shoulders to the work, then I beseech you manifest it more
and more,

1. By discountenancing, and punishing those that daily bring him low, as
soule-mouthed swearers, abominable blasphemers, profane Sabbath Breakers, lewd
and wicked professors, broachers of errors; ignorant, heretical, idle and
scandalous Ministers; remiss or corrupt Magistrates; pleaders for Baal;
persecuters of Gods servants; and, who ever they are that your Wisdoms,
regulated by Gods Word, shall discover to be enemies to the Crown and dignity
of this King of glory. Remember I beseech you, 1. Romans 13.4.
You are Trusties in the behalf of God; His providence has called you
together, and trusted you with power; part with your own honor, so far as you
may without destruction of the public interest, (I shall be far from
persuading you to write yours, like Dracoes Laws, in blood) but not with Gods.
I may say to you, as sometimes Caesar to his Ship-man in a tempest, Why fear
thou? thou carriest Caesar and his fortune; So, 1 Samuel 15.24 Fiat justitia, aut
pereat micadus. Erat Symbolum Ferdinandi primi Imperatoris. Reas. Symb.
why in the least measure should your Spirits resiliate? is not the glory of
the great God imbarqued in your managing of the affairs of Church and State? I
beseech you therefore be excited more and more to discharge this trust. Psalm.
101.8.
See how David sets about the ridding the City of God from evil workers. Josh.
7.11, 12
Ioshuahs crying will not serve, nor fasting, till this be done. 1 King. 18.40
How zealous is Eliah for the Lord of Hoasts in this respect? And Exodus 32.26,
27.
Moses the meekest man alive, in recovering Gods glory by this means, is the
hottest; like a flame of fire walking in the midst of stubble. Nature teaches
us in point of injury to be too sensible for our own glory; I beseech you be
not less for Gods, lest by remissness you incur the guilt of other sins, and
draw thereby upon your selves 1 King 20.12
a sad account. 2. Are you not Trusties likewise in the behalf of King and
Kingdom? not only entrusted with the Prerogative of the one, and the
Liberties of the other, but Safety of them both? which how can that be firm so
long as Josh. 7.
Achan is in the Camp; Iona. 1.
Jonah in the ship; Judge. 20.
and the men of Gibeah not discountenanced for their profaneness? but when
Psalm. 106.30.
Phineas reale puts him upon this task, the plague is staid; and when the
Zach. 6.8.
Medes and Persians do God right on the Chaldeans, Gods wrath is appeased.

Then 2. for the future; I beseech you be careful to fence Gods glory from
being trampled on, and advance him in this Kingdom by wholesome Laws; Blessed
be God for those we already enjoy; but give me leave to beseech your most
serious thoughts in this. For, do you not each day find in things that
concern our worldly welfare, wherein your predecessors might have done
something more, either in matter of expression, or addition, then ere they did?
I conceive in this I speak of, you may find the like: O, be a blessed means,
that it may be mended. Dan. 3.24.
Your Laws for blaspheming Gods name, let them be more severe; that this
Land-destroying vice may be rooted out from amongst us. Endeavor, that God may
rule in his own house, and be served according as himself requires, with a
pure worship. That Ordinances may be like those Revel. 22.1.
Crystal streams without mud or mixture. That every Candlestick in this Land
may be furnished with a burning, and shining light. That the waters of the
Ezekiel. 47.8, 9:
Sanctuary may flow thence plentifully, to make the fish live. That none may be
chosen to serve in the Temple, but such, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. 2 Timothy 4.2.
who like the Arc, have Aarons Rod, the two Tables, and the pot of Manna in
them. Mal. 3.10.
That there may be meat in Gods house, 1 Cor 9.9.
and the mouth of the Ox be not muzled that treads out the corn. Neh.
13.17, etc.
That the Lords Day may be observed with that devotion, and piety which he
commands. That the name of Baal, and all false worship, may be rooted out from
amongst us. In a word; that whatsoever provokes the eyes of Gods glory may be
extirpated. This is the way to set God on high, and to make us happy. But this
cannot be, except God be pleased to shine on your counsels, Exodus 18.21. 2 Samuel
23.3.
and bless your endeavors, that by your means we may enjoy yet one mercy
more, and that is; 3. That the sword of justice, and power to see the execution
of these Laws be committed into the hands of men fearing God: Such, who may
resemble in holiness that God whose place they supply, whose name they bear,
and whose 2 Chro. 19.6.
judgment they execute: for, if they want piety, we cannot expect, but that
they should either be senseless of Gods dishonours Amos 6.12.
, or perhaps, which is worse, pervert Gods Ordinance, Mic. 3.2, 3.
prove taskmasters to Gods people, and discourage virtue.

Thus I have made bold, according to my meandness, to present you with the
way, whereby you may advance God in respect of others. And now to wind up this
point: Are not the eyes of Christendom upon you, to see what you will do for
your God? Is not one Kingdom in a very sad plight, and do not the foundations
and pillars of this shake? Do not the people of the Land cast from all places,
a pitifull-imploring eye upon you, to repair their breaches, to settle their
peace, and increase their happiness? Does not the Mic. 6.9.
rod of God which he shakes over the Land in pestilence, and intestine
dissentions, cry loudly to you for reparation on this behalf? and whereby may
that be done, but by this means of a Zeph. 2.1, 2.
timely, Ier. 4.14.
cordial, Ezekiel. 18.30.
universal reformation? This is the way to avert wrath; like Manlii loc. com.
p. 142.
John sometimes Bishop of Magdenburge, against whom the Duke of Saxony raised
an army; one coming from thence, the Duke asked him, what preparation the
Bishop made? he told him, that he saw none; Why, but (says the Duke) what does
he then? The other replied, That he reformed his Church, his house his City;
Which when the Duke heard, he disbanded his army, saying, He would never
venture upon him that engaged by such a course God to assist him. Thus this
course will make you Esaias 58.8. etc. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
too hard for your enemies: it will hold up the hands and hearts of your
friends, be a continual feast to your consciences; Esaias 38.3.
comfort your hearts on your deathbeds; and cause: you with unspeakeable joy
one day to hear that Mat. 25.21.
consolation, Well done good and faithful servants, enter you into your
Masters glory.

And thus at the last I have finished the first particular of my Text, Gods
eminency; He is on high. In which, because of my desire to suit my discourse to
the day, I have been the longer; therefore, I shall endeavor to make amends
in the brevity of my discourse upon the two branches of this first particular
which remain: wherein I shall rather point out, then prosecute; and with 1 Samuel 14.27
Jonathan, rather give you a taste, then a meal of the soule-quickning,
minde-inlightning honey in this Text.

This eminency of God (as you heard in the dividing of the text) is discovered,
By 1. The rise and fountain of it. 2. The eternity, and stability of it.


1. The Original and fountain of it, it is of, and from himself: (...) he
exalts himself, says the text. This is manifest in all the former respects.

1. Look upon his essential eminency, and perfection, of holiness, life,
power, etc. All receive from his infinite fullness, but how can he receive from
any who is the Revel. 1.8. Esaias 44.6. Psalm. 90.2.
first, in time eternally before them all; Job 22.2, 3. etc.
and so perfect that no accession or addition can be made to him by any
creature in point of essential glory?

2. As for his throne, and glorious habitation, Psalm. 102.25, 26.
his hands did frame, his fingers fashioned it; not out of pre-existent matter,
but from nothing.

2. His glorious state and dignity, he comes not by it as other Monarchs do,
by descent, choice, conquest, or the like; But well may he be Lord of that he
Genesis 1.1.
made; Colos. 1.16.
His territories, subjects, whether in heaven, or earth, he gave a being to;
and, by his all-powerfull wisdom has so contrived these things, that they
subsist in him; nor can they, if they would, shake Ps. 103.19. (...). Orph.
off his government, they are so framed by him to be subservient to it, and by
his power so infinitely surpassing theirs, so led, infallibly Psalm. 66.7.
subdued, and ordered by it.

Object. But does not he Esaias 43.20 21. Ps. 148. per tot.
use the creatures in this great work to exalt himself, and command them so to
do?

Answ. 1. As Job 35.6. etc. Eminentiam Dei, praedicatur in scriptura. 1. (...).
2. (...). 3. (...)

for his essential glory, they cannot detract from, neither add to that at
all, it is above the sphere of their activity.

2. It is true, in point of employment he is pleased to set the creatures on
work to advance the manifestation of his glory, and eminency, in the execution
of many of his great works in the world: His Angels he imployes in Dan.
4.13.10.20, 21.
governing Kingdoms, Revel. 7.2.8.6. etc.
executing his decrees of judgment or mercy; His Ministers are 2 Cor. 6.1.
co-workers with him, in the conversion and salvation of souls, etc.

But first, that he is pleased at all to use his creatures in such affairs as
may advance the manifestation of his eminency, is a work of Psalm. 16.2. Zach.
4.6. Esth. 4.14.
dignation, and not of indigencie; in it he is pleased to put honor upon his
creature, but is not necessitated in the least measure to employ it; for he is
able to do the same thing without it if he please: He can give Revel. 21.22.
light without the sun, sustain without food, as in the kingdom of glory.
Secondary causes indeed can do nothing without him, but he does in heaven and
earth, whatsoever he please, without them.

Secondly, it is his power whereby the creature works: they first from him
received it, as Mat. 25.14. vide Bradward. de causa Dei mihi. p. 165.
a stock to trade with for his glory; (...), etc. Pythag. citat. Just. Mart.
it is maintained by his continual influence, and acted by him, whether it be
in 1 Chronicles. 29.12.
nature, or in Phil. 2. Conatus nostri nulli sunt si non excitantur, and
incassi si non adjuvantur, Bern.
grace; so that although in some of his great works he is pleased to cover his
arm with the creatures shadow, yet still, what ere is done, by Psa.. 62.11.
Multa facit in homine Deus quae non facit homo; nulla vero facit homo, quae non
facit Deus ut faciat homo, Aug. l. 2. cont. 2 Epist. I clag. c. 8.
power in this great business, it is indeed Gods Work.

Therefore, seeing he exalts himself, we should learn in every thing whereby
the declarative highness of this great God is advanced, to set the crown of
glory upon his head; by acknowledging his hand in all, and giving him the
praise. Alas, we are too apt (when either our selves are used, or else our
fellow creatures made Gods instruments, in a way of manifestation to advance
his highness) so much to gaze on them, Deuteronomy. 8.17. etc. Hab. 1.16.
as here to terminate our fight, and go no farther to behold that God whose
instruments they were and by whose power what is done was brought to pass: And
hence it is, that what is due to God, we give to them. The Romans had a
custom, that when they had received any great victory ore their enemy,
Laurumque superbam Jn grem o Jovis abscissis deponere Poenis, etc. Et taurum
album Jovi mactabant, etc. Live. l. 6. Dec. 3.
the conqueror in his triumphant Chariot rode to the Capitol, where in all
humility he did present a Palm to Jupiter; therein acknowledging it was his
power whereby this conquest was achieved: You see that natures light did
point, and prompt them to this duty, though they mistook the object where it
was due. I would that we who do pretend more light, did not express more
darkness in this thing. It is reported, that Manla Loc. com. p. 178.
Adrian the fifth being made Pope, the solemnity at Lovain, where once he was
head, being likewise kept, amongst other papers hung up in the Hall, in one was
written; Trajectum planted him, Lovain watered, Caesar gave the increase: one
wittily subscribes, Hic Deus nihil fecit. And may we not under-write the same,
if we speak the conceptions of most men's inward thoughts? If God exalt his
mercy in deliverances from common ruin, and calamities, etc. we talk of the
Soldiers valor, the States man's Policy, but scarce one word of God. If he
exalt his Justice in afflicting, suppose in war pestilence, or the like; we
speak of the enemies in justice, cruelty, power; or the airs corruption,
earths infection, peoples distempers; thus, still we are so locked up in second
causes, as not to see the first; the covering does so terminate our minds, we
cannot see the Arm that works all this.

O let us be more wise, and learn to see our God in all his works; it will
make us live more comfortably in all changes; Psalm. 90.2.
not idolize our Psalm. 115.1. 1 Chronicles. 29.114. etc.
selves, or fellow creatures, but give him his due. Could we but with that
blessed Saint behold the rise of all from him, and how his power moves and acts
in all, to carry them to the fountain whence they issued, it would make us use
his Romans 11.36.
doxologie, and give him the praise.

And thus I have rather touched then handled this first branch, whereby his
eminency is discovered, viz. The original and fountain of it. He exalts
himself.

Secondly, Gods eminency is further discovered by (...): Sic Psalm. 102.12. R.
Maymon. Morch. Nevoc. l. 1. c. 11.
his eternity and immutabilitie, He sits or dwells on high says the text, and
so Rabbi Maymony and other expositors understand the phrase.

1. In respect of Eternitas, a part ante, and a part post ei attribuitur, etc
eternity; Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the
world were formed, even from everlasting to everlasting he is God. Esaias 43.10.
Sine initio and fine, vere and semper idem, codem modo se habens solus est
Deus, Iren. l. 2. c. 64.
There was none before him, neither shall any be after him, as the Prophet
speaks.

2. In respect of Immutability, he is a high God, and dwells on high indeed, for
he Mal. 3.6. Qua est simplex, Independent, perfectissimus, Actus purus, etc.
vide Aquin. p. 1.
changes not: Nay, he is so far from changing in point of Essential
eminency, that there is not in him James 1.17.
the least show, or shadow of it. Ps. 102.26.27
Though both heaven and earth wax old as a garment, and as a vesture he does
change them, yet he indures for ever, his years have no end, there is his
eternity; and for all these changes he remains the same, as the Psalmist
speaks, there is his immutability. Indeed there is nothing but change in all
things else: the Prophet Ezekiel. 1.16.
Ezekiel sees God on his throne, there he sits, but under the throne are
wheels, Dicimus immutabile bonum non esse nisi unum verum Deum beatum; ea vero
quae fecit, bona quidem esse, quod ab illo; veruntamen mutabilia, quod non de
illo, sed de nihilo facta sunt, Aug. l. 12 de Civ. Dei c. 1.
and they are full of motion and revolution; there is, 1. the wheel of times
and seasons, Genesis 8.22. Temporalia rapit tempus, etc. Aug.
seed time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night.
Every thing under the sun has its Eccles. 3.1.
time and season. Then 2. there is the wheel of Eccles. 1.4.
generation. One generation passes away and another comes, some dye, and
others are borne, Hieron. in verba Eccles. 1 4. Tonsura generis humani. Senec.
even as in a wheel turning about, the part thou now see, by and by is out
of thy sight; so says Jerome, those men, plants and other things which thou
did even now see, are straightway vanished, and others fill up their places
which before appeared not. 3. There is the wheel of state and condition. Look
upon bodies Politic, what is become of those four Zach. 6.1.
Monarchies that issued from between the brazen mountains of Gods providence,
are they not vanished? And may we not say the like of others too? Either their
own overgrown greatness; or else some hand of violence has destroyed them;
so that except in history we know not where to find them.

Secondly, to name no more; let us but cast an eye upon our selves, and is not
Jobs expression [children of change] a title well befits us? How do we change
in all we are and have? From childhood to youth, from youth to man's estate,
from thence to age, Job 14.2.
we never stand at a stay till dust returns to dust. The face of heaven admits
not of more changes then our minds. As for our outward state, how In hoc vitae
salo, circumdantibus agitamur procellis Roet. Job 1.
does it change, and put on several shapes? to day in wealth, to morrow as
poor as Job: now on the throne, the next day on the pile like Herodot. l. 1.
Croesus: to day in honor and reputation, to morrow like Bellisarius begging
an alms of passengers: whether it be from good to bad, or contrary, it matters
not, for still it is change. These changes are the wheels of this High Gods
Rabbini apelant creaturas Dei Mercavah. i. e. currum. Sic R. Maimon. Morch.
Nevecb. l. ^. c. ^. and Alii.
Chariot in which he rides, and though he makes them all, yet he is the same.
Though heaven and earth threaten to come together, though the waves roar, and
waters lift up their voice; though the thunder rattles and lightnings fly
abroad; though men perish and creatures be cut off as in the flood; yet as the
sun, being above the place of storms and tempests, goes on its course, and
is not checked by these; so is it far above the sphere of change, to make the
least Psalm. 29.
mutation in this God. 1. Gods repenting is not changing.
And therefore if you read that he repents, do not mistake the phrase: it is
true; Genesis 6.6. 1 Samuel 15.29. Numb. 23.19.
it is over man; but not as man, he does it. In man it intimates a turbation of
mind, a displicencie of the fact, a mutation of counsel, but in God it is not
a change of counsel, but of fact; of things which are made by him, not of his
prescience; nor is it an alteration of his nature, but a suspension of his
wrath, power, or some other attribute: he is a free agent, and whether he
works or no, it alters not himself. 2. Passions attibuted to God do not
prove him mutable.
So if you read that he is Non secundum turbationis affectum; secundum
ultionis effectum, etc.
angry, jealous, or the like, then know, the Scripture being ordained for men,
speaks in their dialect; and as the nurse in talking with her young one brings
down her language to the child's conception, so God does his; hence comes such
low expressions in holy writ, because in spiritual things we are very dull,
but yet we must not think that passions, or such things are Non in Deo est
aliud quam justa aversatio peccati, and voluntas majestiatis suae vindicandae,
etc. Scalig.
really in God; but it is because his works are such as men's when passions do
possess their minds; as to destroy, consume, confound, the work he has
wrought, yet perturbations have no place in him.

3. So if Coming or going, approaching and departing, do not prove God
mutable in place.
you read he comes, or goes, is absent, and returns, etc. it is not by chance
of place; that cannot be, for he is Justin Mart. dial. cum Triphon.
the place of all that has a being; but it is Non venit qui aberat, sed
apparet qui latebat. Bern.
because he that before to us was hid is now made manifest; the change is not
in him, but in our sight; our eyes are cured which before were blind, our minds
unvaild. This Divina frequenter videntur occurrere atque praecurrere; etc.
Procl. l. de Anim.
adaptation in us makes the change, there is none in him at all.

4. So if you read he is sometimes high, then low; do not mis understand: it
is not in himself, he is still the same, but in the minds of men, and
estimation: now though blind eyes do not behold the sun, and so its
brightness wants esteem from such, it is nothing to the sun, they fare the
worse for it, and not that glorious lamp; so though all men should dis-esteeme
the Highest, nay, if they should rise up and fight against him, they may Being
High or Low in the world do not prove God mutable in point of Essential
eminency.
deprive themselves of happiness by this course, but he is above their power,
they Job 35.8. etc.
cannot reach him at all. And thus you see the stability of his glory.

And now for the close of all; you have had Gods eminency discovered to you,
both in it self, as also in respect of, 1. The Original and fountain of it,
2. The Eternity and Immutability of it: and why all this? Is it to fill our
heads with notions; or to find us matter for discourse? No doubtless, but
that thereby deep impressions may be made upon our spirits, and we by it
improved in point of practice. O that these notions might dwell upon our hearts
and stick close to our souls, and then I make no doubt, but we should find a
changing, trans-forming power in them to effect these things.

1. This would take off our spirits from our too too fierce, and eager pursuit
of earthly things. Alas, is it not a sad sight to see, that man one of Gods
excellentest pieces, whom he has created with an immortal soul, full of
vaste desires, Avaritia non suo, non alieno, non ipso orb contenta, totum
possidet, and de inopia queritur semper, Zen. Ser. ^e Avarit.
never to be satisfied but with himself, should through the mis-guidance of 1
Pet. 1.4.
dark lusts, so far mistake his happiness, as Jter sine termino. Pelagus
sine portu, etc. Si Tarram amas, terra es; si Deum ^mas, quid vis ut dicam?
Deus es. Aug.
to seek it, in poor, empty, transient things? One runs to riches as his
Prove. 10.15.
strong tower, which take the Prove. 23.5.
wings of the Eagle and fly away: another seeks it in honors, and
preferment, then which there is nothing more inconstant, depending on men's
esteems, who quickly change, either their Esth. 7.7, 8.
minds, or Psa. 146.23.
lives, and so they come to be as first they were, nay perchance in far worse
condition; for now their hearts being glew'd to these, when they depart, it
tears their souls in pieces, and farewell all content: thus they pay interest
in their Cum gravi dolor amittuntur quae cum magno amore habentur, Isiod. de
sum. bono.
griefs they have, for all the pleasures which they found in these. Nay which
is worst of all, they do not only part with these (which in themselves being
so full of change, had they but Si bona mundi hujus peritura credimus, cur
peritura tanto amore cupimus? Isiod. ut sup.
wisdom to discern it, they could expect no other) Nitidi sunt fores fulgore
potentiae, interius tamen vacui sunt elatione superbiae. Isiod. l. 3 c. 63.
but with their peace of conscience, God, and all, whom they forsaking, lose
the Psalm. 73.27. Phil. 3.19.
stablest good, and by it ingulfe themselves in misery. Whereas did but their
minds retain the glory of this God we have spoken of, it would Gustavite and
esurio, tetigistime and exarsi in concupiscentiam tuam. Aug. conf.
attract their spirits to himself; it would make them cleave to him both in
affection and Psalm. 9.10.
dependencie; Heb. 11.27.
it would make us fear to offend his Majesty; considering if he turn enemy
Jer. 17.4. Esaias 33.14.
there is not a worse then he, who is not simply high, but lasts for aye to
prosecute his foes.

2. It would stir up our souls to sacrifice our Psalm. 71.15.16.
strength and best endeavors in his service, we would never think we Psalm.
104.31.33.34.
could too much serve a God, whose glory is so permanent, nor care what pains
we took, or what we lost for gain of him.

3. It would be a Well of life and comfort to us, to see that God is the same
that ever he was. How have the Saints refresht themselves from this, when they
have thought of former times Da mihi te Domine. Aug. Omnis mihi copia quae Deus
meus non est, egestas est, Aug. conf.
in their distress? how has it Psalm. 74.14.
fed their spirits, and revived their souls, considering he is the same that
did those things? Therefore when they have seen what God has done, their
hearts Psalm. 44.1.4. Psalm. 77.11.12. etc.
are raised to expect the like again; and so would ours, did we but take their
course.

4. As the Herodot. l. 2.
Egyptians who live in the fens, being vexed with gnats, they use to sleep in
high towers, whereby those creatures being not able to soar so high, they are
delivered from the biting of them; so would it be with us, being bitten with
earthly cares and fears; it would make us fly to God, and rest in him, did we
but Psalm. 89.15. etc. Psalm. 31.19. etc. Psalm. 91.9. etc.
know him as we ought to do. We all complain enough of cares and fears; Let
us behold this God, and dwell in him, then they will vanish, and what ever come
to pass, it will not much trouble us, if we find All in One, whose glory is
so great, and changes not.

FINIS.

