ON THE UNTIMELY AND MUCH LAMENTED DEATH OF Mrs Anne Gray, the Daughter of the
Learnedly accomplished Doctor Nicholas Gray of Tunbridge in Kent, Who dyed of
the Small Pox.
AN ELEGY.
SCarce have I dried my Cheeks, but Griefs invite
Again my Eyes to weep, my Hand to write,
Which still return with greater force, being more
In weight and number then they were before.
Mechanic Griefs are eloquent, their sound
Beats through the streets, and in that spacious Round
Salutes each strangers ear: Nor can so high
And wide a Ruin in one Family
Contracted keep; but seeking farther bounds,
Fills every breast with its afflicting sounds.
Youth met with Beauty weeps; then who forbears
To Griefe's Exchequer to bring in his tears?
Het that such tributes does not now return,
Knows neither Virtue, nor for whom we mourn,
SHE, whose unequalled, and whose rich desert
Did take possession in each knowing heart;
Whose life was such, it may be well denied,
That she did ever ill, but that she died.
SHE, like another Nature, but whose Name
Gave life to Beauty, and a voice to Fame;
SHE, whose pure worth was such, whom gone, that even
Heaven would lament with many a tear, if Heaven
Had not assumed her, who in all she did,
Both Grace in it and Innocence were hid,
Is hence ascended, while our Griefs infer
Their moist Complaints, and envy Heaven, not Her.
Death, who did boast his high Prerogative,
And hourly Conquests over all alive,
Did here begin to startle, and did seem
To fear her Beauties would now conquer him:
Therefore a danger to prevent so nigh,
Drew forth at once all his Artillery,
And so direct the Battery was laid,
So full the Charge, so fast the Case-shot played,
That the poor Body fell upon the place,
A thousand wounds being printed on her face:
Yet spite of Death, and Fate, we must imply,
That she her self was well content to dye;
For in this sad and tedious vale of Tears,
Ere she had hardly numbered eighteen years,
She had done all her business, and made even
With Earth, and drawn up her accounts for Heaven.
Rich in her Sexes value, good men's praise,
And full of all could be desired, but days;
Where after her we sigh our souls, the while
She counts our tears, and with a pitying smile
Beholds our following Love; and now no Drums,
Nor voice of Cannons, nor of Trumpets comes
To vex her quiet ear; nor any noise
Dares once approach to interrupt her joys;
But Health and Strength do court her, and the treasure
Of endless light, and unrepented pleasure,
And all the Blessings which fair Peace does bring
Sent for so often by my late Lord the King
Her Epitaph.
Would thou know who lies here, under
This cold Marble? read, and wonder:
For body, beauty, feature, sense,
This was the Maid of Excellence,
Whose early Soul soon understood
And practiced all that men call Good:
And wondering threescore years should stay
For what so soon she bore away,
She sudden unto Heaven did fly,
Ashamed of dull Mortality.
SAMUEL HOLLAND.


