THE READING IN LINCOLNES-INNE, FEB. 28. 1641. Upon the STAT. of 25. E. 3. cap.
2. Being the Statute of TREASONS.

By ROBERT HOLBORNE, Esquire.

Indici conjurationis praemia constituta. Salust. in Conjur. Caril.

OXFORD: Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. Anno Dom.
1642.

The Reading of ROBERT HOLBORNE in Lincolnes-Inne, Esquire. Feb. the 28. 1641. Upon
the Stat. of 25. E. 3. c. 2. being the Stat. of TREASONS.
BEfore the Statute, Trespasses were made Felonies, and Felonies were made
Treasons; and we could not judge which were Felonies, and which were Treasons,
The parts of the Statute, are first, Declarative. High treason. Petty treason.
And secondly, Directive High treason.
but it did rest in the breast of the Judges that were in those days: for the
preventing of which mischief, this Statute which I now read upon was made
which has two parts: A Declarative part; and that does declare what hereafter
shall be judged Treason: and treason also is commonly divided into two parts:
that is,

First, high Treason that is against the person of the King, and that will fall
out for this days work. Secondly, petty treason, which is in the latter part
of the Statute, as will appear hereafter.

The second part of this Statute is the Directive part; and directs the Judges
how far to proceed upon a Fact that is not within the Statute.

High treason is against the person of the King, or against his government,
viz. as against his Judges, Seals and Coins: these are the Divisions that I
shall make of this Law.

The Definition of Treason.
The Definition of treason.
It is Laesa Majest. which comprehends the person of the King, and his Officers
of Justice. For the person of the King and the treasons that are committed more
immediately against his person, and they are acts and persons.

Persons, they are of two sorts; persons against whom, and the persons by whom
these treason are committed: the acts, and they are diverse:

As first compassing the death of the King: and for explanation of this word
compassing; it is an old word, signifying not a bringing to pass only; but a
going about as you shall find it in Britain and the Mirror of Justice; but
it is since called in Latin Macinatio, or a going about, 1. Mar. Bro. tit.
trea. 24.
and compassing is treason though no effect do follow; as a compassing to kill
the King though he be not killed so a compassing without any other act is
treason: but there may be an act done that does effect the death of the King
and yet no treason, if there be no compassing: as in the case of Sir Walter
Turrell, who shooting at a Dear, his arrow glanced against a tree, Hollinshead.
and struck King William Rusus upon the breast that he died; and this was not
treason, because the^e was no compassing: And so it is in the case of a
Physician as if the King takes paysick and dies of the physic working, yet if
it be not notoriously gross, and it does not appear that he did any way
compass the death of the King, this is not treason within this Law; for in the
case of a common person, if a Phys^^ian give one physic whereof he dies, this
is not Felony in him, although the Phyhtian had no license to practice
Physic; for it is his fault that he will take physic of him; and volenti
nosit injuria. If the Prince in person assaults a man, and drives him so hard
against the wall that if he does not defend himself he will kill him and he
cannot do it without danger to the Prince; in that case he ought not to defend
himself, but ought rather to dye then hazard the person of the Prince, because
he is caput and salus Repub. and yet nature does teach a man to defend himself
against all danger. And thus much for acts without compassing: and yet some of
these acts that are without compassing are left to the Jurie to judge of and
some others are left to the Judges to judge of, as by presumption of Law; as in
Murder there ought to be malice forethought and yet if an Officer, in executing
of his office be slain, this is Murder by the Law, and yet in this case there
do not appear any malice forethought, and so in this case the Law makes an
evidence for the Jurie, and so in deeds of the like cases.

The second Act is violating; and this word is derived of vi perdendo, but yet
it may be done without any force at all.

The third act is levying war against the King; and what shall be said of
levying war, See Saint John's argument in Sherly of Sheffields case.
that may be diverse ways: as if the Inhabitants of a Town will gather
themselves together to pull down the fences of a Common, in which they have no
interest, or Common nor ever had, this is treason within this Law; but if they
had an interest or Common there, then it is no treason, but if they shall do
it by force of Arms in a warlike manner, qu: but in the first case it is a
levyings of war against this government.

Another levying of war may be against the King, as if it be to the displacing
of his Officers, Nota.
as in the Earl of Essex case in his coming to the City of London for to
remove Officers that were about the Queen this was treason; and so it is also
to the same purpose in 1. 1. Mar. Dyer 14. Brook tit. Treason 14.8. Hen. 8.
Mar. Dyer. 24. and so it appears a man may levy war against the King,
although he has no intent to meddle with the person of the King or any way to
hurt him, and so you shall find it also in Bro. title treason 14. And if any
levy war without the King, this is a levying of war within the Law. 8. H. 8.
If two conspire to levy war and one alone does it, this is treason in both.

The fourth part is to adhere to the Kings Enemies, and first who shall be
saidenemies within this Law; Nota. See Irish statute. p.
secondly, what shall be said adhering to them that are enemies within this
Law; this word Enemy cannot extend to subjects, for they are Rebels and no
enemies, and so it is expressed in the Irish statutes, and this statute cannot be
taken according to equity, for it is a penal Law, and of the greatest
pepenalty that is, and therefore the aiding of Rebels cannot be meant any way
the aiding of the Kings enemies within this Law; aiding the enemies within or
without is an aiding of those that come into the Land, or of those that are
without; a Subject is of two sorts, ratione originis and a Subject ratione
loci. Subjects 2. sorts. 1. Ratione Origenis. 2. Ra. Loci.


A Subject rationi originis, cannot be an enemy, although he does levy war
(inrespect of his obedience) but a rebel he shall be.

A Subject rationi loci, during his residence here, he can be no enemy neither,
but if he goes over Sea, and then levy war against this Kingdom or any other
of his majesty's Kingdoms, he is then an enemy within this Law and no Rebel.

There is also Dominum rectum, et Dominum utile, Dominum duplex.
for if a man be born within the dominum rectum, as that of Scotland in ancient
time, and there he levy war, he is an enemy and no rebel; but if he be borne
within the dominum utile, and levy war, he is a rebel and not an enemy.

Aiding, is by sending of them aid, as of victuals, or of weapons, and the
like, by giving of them counsel, or by any other way, whereby they may receive
strength or comfort from him.

Now for the persons by whom this levying of war may be, and as to that all
levies are within this Law, as well women as men for women are comprehended
under this word man.

Secondly, persons of all nations, that are within this Land, are within this
Law, for as they shall have protection by the Laws of the Land, and they ought
at their peril to take notice of the Law, so soon as they come into the Land,
for they ought to have notice given them and cannot allege ignorance if it be
not given them; especially in such Laws as this that are so beneficial both
to the King and Kingdom.

Thirdly, persons of all degrees, as a Queen that is married to the King
attempting the death of the King, is within this Law: A foreign Ambassador
is also within this Law, but if a foreign King should come into this Land by
license and here compass the death of the King, the question will be how he
shall be tried, for, he is a King here, and therefore ought to be tried per
Pares, which he cannot be, for other honors are not allowed here.

Fourthly, all ages are within this Law, as in faults which have knowledge or
men of non sanae memoriae, and a mad man is also within this Law, as to that
part of the statute which concerns more immediately the person of the King,
for if any of them before mentioned in this division, shall compass his death,
it is treason within the first clause, but not in the clause of levying war,
as I shall show you afterward; but a man that is surdus, caecus et mutus, is
not within this Law, for it is impossible for him to have understanding.
Northumberlands case.


Now for the persons against whom a King before his Coronation is within this
law, as it is in the Duke of Northumberlands case, for he is presently a King,
as soon as the other King deceaseth, and there is no interregnum for the King;
Quatenus a King, never dies, but he is said to demise, when he departs this
life, and the King is crowned, because he is a King, and not a King because he
is Crowned a King, See 4. E. 4.1.9. F. 4.12.
de facto and not de jure, is a King within this Law, as it is in 4. E. 4.1.
and 9. E. 4.12. A King conjugall or maritall, that takes to wife the Queen of
England is within this Law, a Queen that is married, although the marriage be
void, yet that Queen is within this Law, so is a Queen married by proxy, a
Queen, a Queen within age is also within this Law.

The first Case.
I. S. First Case.
after the divorce of the wife of the Grandchild, and Heire-apparent to the
Queen, do violate her, and imagine the death of the husband, and declares this
to I. D. and after kills the husband of the Queen, and conspire to levy war
against the Queen, and delivers to I. D. money to buy arms and after becomes
mad, and aids the enemies of the Queen within the Realm, and then kill the
Queen.

The conclusion is, first I. S. is a traitor within this Law, for killing the
husband of the Queen and for conspiring to levy war, and for killing of the
Queen, and in every one of these.

The second conclusion, that I. S. is not a traitor within this Law, for
imagining the death of the Grandchild, and yet he is within the case of the
Law, not for violating of his wife, nor for aiding of the enemies.

I. S. is a traitor within this Law for killing the husband of the Queen, but
not within these words, that whosoever shall conspire or compass the death of
the King; for as to that clause he is not King, for the Queen is regent and
not he, and so not within that clause, nor the meaning of it, but he is within
this word Companion, for he is as good a companion to the Queen, as the Queen
is to the King, and so within the same reason of Law; for the husband of the
Queen in such a case is in a better condition and plight then a Queen to a
King and so upon a stronger reason; but this you must take as a rule that I
have said before, viz. that this Statute is not to be taken by equity; and this
you shall find as another rule, as well for the expounding this Statute as any
other; Bro. tree. sol. 12.12. ass. pl. 30.19. H. 6.47. Com. 87.6. Fitz. Cor.
7.118. Brooks tuareas. 8.
that those cases that stands upon the same reason shall be within the same
Law, although not taken by equity; for where there is the same identity,
paritie, or majority of reason in any cases there ought to be the same Law, as
it is in the statute of Glooester concerning waste, and in this our statute,
the misterics are not named, yet there is within this Law, for if the servant
kills the wife of his Master, knowing her to be his Masters wife, this is
adjudged petty treason by the judgment of all the Judges of both Benches 19. H.
6.47. Com. 87.6. Fitz. Cor. 7.118. Bro. Tit. treason 8. For as well the Mistress
as the Master has assiance in him, and he ought to give reverence to his
Mistress, as well as his Master, and yet the Master is only named in this
statute; but in our case, the express words are, that if any man shall
compass the death of the Kings Companion it shall be treason, and so there is
an express proviso for him, being the Companion, for he is a Companion to the
Queen: a second difference between our case, and the case of the Mistress is,
that she is his Mistress but gratia, and under the power of her husband; but in
our case the King maritall has a superiority over his wife, as he is her
husband, and so our case is a far stronger case.

If a child kills his Father or Mother, this is petty treason, 21. E. 3.17. Bro.
tit. Sanctuarii^. Bro. tit. treas. 6.
and so it was also at the Common Law, before the making of this statute, 21.
E. 3.17. Bro. tit. Santuarii the 2. and Bro. tit. treason the 6. because there
is a majority of reason then that of a servant, the reason of the submission
and duty that is to the Father and Mother from the child, and where there is a
majority of reason, or a paritie of reason for the one case as there is for the
other, there is always the same Law.

But you will object, there is a Satute made 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. Cap. 9. 1
and 2. Ph. and Mar. ca. 9.
that if any shall imagine the death of the King, that it shall be treason, and
therefore he was not provided for before this statute, and therefore this
stature was made; if it were treason before this statute, then this statute was
made in vain and to no purpose.



The next point is the declaring, of this his imagination to I. D. 1. Mar. Bro.
tit. treas. 24. The second point.
which is an overt act, for an overt act is the declaring of his mind and
intentions to others, by such words as imply an act to follow, as by bidding a
man to do what he has intended, or to do any act that may tend to his
purpose, or by writing to declare his mind; but if a man have a thought of
killing the King, this is only primus motus and although he afterward tells
another that he had such a thought, this is no overt act, but if he does
cherish this thought then it becomes his own, and then he tells it to another,
that he has such an intention, this is an overt act, for the words that he
does speak, are words executory, and imply that he will do such an act, or if
A. conspire with B. to kill the King this is an overt act; but to imagine with
himself, is not, because it cannot come to be known; words of encouragement
to others, is an obvert act also.

For conspiring to levy war is the next, and this is treason within this Law,
although it be not within the words of the sttatute, but yet it is within the
meaning and reason of the statute, Nota.
for how is it possible for any to levy war, but he must conspire the death
of the King, or his deposing at least; and the conspiring to do either of
these, is treason within this law as aforesaid, and that within this word
compassing, which as I said before, is of a very large extent, but I must
confess the intention, is not so bad an actual levying of war, and yet it
is as bad in him that does intend it; and this levying of war, does
immediately look at the person of the King though not immediately, and so in
that respect it is treason, and so it is of deposing, and so is the statute of
1. E. 6. Cap. 12. and so you shall find it in Doctor Stories case, 1. Ed.
6.12. Dyer, Storys Case. 13. Elizab. Dyer 298.
13. Eliz. Dier 298. B. who did conspire with a foreign Prince to invade this
Land, and showed him a means how to conquer this Kingdom, and yet there was
no act done by that Prince against the Queen, yet this is adjudged treason,
and the reason there yielded, was, because this invasion could not possible be
without great hazard and perrill to the person of the Queen, which is a very
full case in proving of this point; 19. II. 6.47.
but a conspiring to coin money, is not treason within this Law, because it is
not against the person of the King, but yet if two shall conspire to coin
money, and one does it alone without the other, yet this is treason in both.

The third point.
The third point is that I. S. after he became mad, kills the Queen, this is
treason within this Law, first, because a man may counterfeit himself to be
mad, and he may do it so cunningly as it cannot be discerned whether he be mad
or no.

The second reason, is in respect of the great esteem that the Law gives to
the person of the King, for he is the fountain of justice, and for the proof
of this point that it may be understood, we ought to see what the Common Law
was before the making of this statute, as to this point; and then we ought to
inquire and see how the Law is altered since the making of the statute: and by
this means, we shall find out the Law and the reason thereof; it is true that
the Law without special words, will not bind an Infant or a mad man, as to
the punishment of their bodies, but yet it will extend to their lands and
estates; but this our law is no new law, but only a declarative law, and in
that case general words will bind an infant or a mad man, without any
special words; that it was treason at the Common law is apparent in Britame,
and the Mirror of Justice, and this statute does not declare who shall be
traitors, but what shall be treason, and therefore this act is treason in a mad
man, See Beverleys cas^ com. 124. Daltons Just. 206.
or whomsoever shall commit it, for a mad man, is not excepted out of this law;
and to make this appear more fully, you may be pleased to read the case of
Beverley, in Com. 124. that a man that is non compus mentis may commit high
treason, although he cannot commit petty treason nor felony, and so it is also
in Daltons Justice of Peace 206. that if a man that is non compos mentis, shall
kill the King, this is high treason: nay Beverleys case goes furthur and says;
that if he shall offer only to kill the King, this is high treason, Nota.
because the King is caput et salus Reipub. and acapite bona valetudo transit
in omnes, and for this case his person is so sacred, that none must offer the
least violence to him, but he is reus criminis lesae Majestatis, et pereat
unus, ne pereant omnes.

The second conclusion is, that I. S. is not a traitor within this Law, for
imagining the death of the Grandchild, yet he is within the care and protection
of the Law, for he is not within the words of the Law, but without the
intention and reason of the Law; for the words are, that if any man shall
compass the death of the eldest son, that this is treason; but in the French
language, in which this Law was first written, it is le regne fills et heir,
and yet if the eldest son dies, the second son is within the Law, because
he is then the eldest son, and so it is of the third son, for then he is
also Heir apparent, and he is within the intention and meaning of this Law;
Princes case 8. separ.
and so to this purpose is the Princes case in 8. Separt. where it is that the
second son shall be Duke of Cornwall after the death of the eldest, and yet
it is only limited to the eldest son; a collatrall Heir is also within
this statute, because as he conceives this statute intend's to provide that
the next Heir to the Crown shall be secured from danger; and the case that
may be likened to this, is that, where a writ of Aid may be brought by the
next heir, for the writ says, Cujus haeres apse est. F. N. B. 221. F. N. B.
221.
so that it appears that it lies only for the heir lineall or collateral,
male or female.

The eldest daughter is also within our Law, heirs Fous is also a grand heir
within this Law, but this imagining or compassing the death of the Grandchild,
or of any other heir is not treason, unless there be a sufficient declaration
of it to another, for no man can judge of the thoughts; for the imagination
only, can be no overt act, and this declaration of his imagination or
compassing to I. D. is not a sufficient overt act to make him a traitor within
this Law; for he told him only that he had such an imagination, which is but
primus motus, for he does not say that he will do it in the Future tence, for
that may be treason, for that it does imply an act to be done afterward; but
the other is only also against that is past; then for violating the wife after
that she is divorced, this is not treason within this Law. And yet the divorce
is but a mensa and thoro but it is such a divorce as deprives her of his
company, and so she is not his companion within this Law, but yet she is his
wife, and a wife divorc't a mensa et thoro shall have her divorce, because that
divorce does not dissolve the marriage, but she remains his wife still; but
yet if she has any children during that divorce they are all bastards,
because she is not to keep her husband company; a Queen Dowager is not
within this Law, because she is not companion to the King, that then is and is
not provided for by this Law; for the words of the statute are if any shall
violate the Kings companion.

The second lecture, The second Lecture.
according to my first devision is concerning the government; and that is first
in the seal, which is clavis regnt; the second in his money and coin, the
third in his offices: for the first which are the seals and they are first,
the Great-Seale secondly the Privy-Seale and thirdly the Seal of the
Exchequer, and of all these Seals, the Common Law takes special notice, as
that the King may grant to one power, to make Attorney under the Privy-Seale;
37. II. 6.27.6. Co. 2.17. Lams case.
and so is 37. H. 3.27. 6. Co. 2.17. Lams case, and so of the other Seals, but
our Law takes notice of the Seal only, as for point of treason, for the words
are exclusive to all other Seals, for that being the greatest excludes all
other inferior Seals that are the least: now what shall be said at
counterseiting of this great Seal and that must be, by making of another Seal
like to this, and for to seal pattents with it for to make a seal like the
great Seal, to put this to a piece of wax only is no counterfiting of the
great Seal, but there ought to be a writing annexed unto it, and then it is a
counterfitting within this Law: but if the Lord Keeper does seal a pattent,
Nota.
without special authority from the King, yet this is no counterfeiting within
this Law, or if any one do find this great Seal or otherwise obtain it, and
seals pattents therewith, this is not counterfeiting neither within this Law,
for if the Seal be cruely and in due manner put to a pattent, and afterward
the pattentee does rate or add to the pattent in any place, Lakes ease 4. Jac.
this is no counterfeiting, as it is in Lakes case, 4. Jac. and yet the rasing
of a deed is the forging of a deed.

Secondly, concerning counterfeiting the Kings coin, and this ought to be
intended only of the Kings own money, for that only is meant by this Law and
not any foreign money, but foreign money is provided for by another Law,;
the coining of copper if it be made current is also within this Law, for it is
only in the power of the King to imbase coin, as it is apparent in the case
of money in Davies sererts for the King is Master of the coin, Case of money in
Davies seperts.
but in the mirror of Justice, it is said, the King cannot alter his coin,
for things are not in this Law because they are not current within this Realm;
foreign money is not within this Law, because at the time when this Law was
made, all foreign money that was brought into this Realm, was but bullon,
because it was a great deal worser then that of this Nation: and forraigners
afterward did make their coin finer, and then it was made current here by a
statute, and so within this Law.

If any that have authority and power to mint or coin, and he coin pieces
that are lest in weight then they ought to have been, by the authority by him
given, this is a counterfiting, because he has not pursued his authority, and
so is as if he had no authority to make it of that weight, which he has made
it; and so is the 3. H. 7 c. 10. to counterfeit a foreign money, 3. H. 7. c.
10.
and to bring it over is not a counterfeiting within this Law; 6. H. 7.13.1. R.
3.1. Bro. Tit. treason 27. Stam. pl. 3. D.
but if one counterfeit the covne of this Kingdom beyond the Sea, and brings
it over and Marchandizes with it, and thereby deceave our Merchants, this is
account fitting as in the book aforesaid; and if one counterfeits the coin of
this Kingdom, although he does not put it to others, yet this is a
counterfiting within this Law 6. H. 7.13.1. H. 31. Bro. Tet. treas. 27. Stam.
ples. 3. D.

What shall we say the bringing in of money, what not? the bringing in of
foreign money, ought to be intended of money that is counterfeited in another
Realm, and like unto ours, for the words are so, money and not of forraigners
money; if two conspire to coin and counterfeit, 19. H. 6.43. Stam. pl. 3.
and one of them does it, it is treason in both. 19. H. 6.43. Stam. pleas. 3.
a, but an intention to counterfeit, is not treason within this Law.

The Barrons of the Exchequer are within this Law, and it is agreed in
Tanfields case (who was one of the Barrons of the Exchequer) that he was within
the words of the statute and the words of Oyer and Determiner are within this
Law, but all other Judges are not, as the Ecclesiastical Judges are not within
this Law, for they hold with the Court of Rome and did derive their authority
from him in ancient time; neither is a Constable within this Law.

The second case.
I. S. slits the great Seal and closes it to a Commission, and coins money
in the form of shillings invertendo the arms, The second case.
kills the Lord Keeper of the great Seal in Chancery, and brings in false money
like English, to Merchandise, knowing it to be false, but does not offer it,
and I. S. knowing this does succor him.

The conclusion is, that I. S. is a traitor in omnibus, and I. D. also within
this Law; the first act is, slighting of the Seal, and putting of it to the
Commission and that is treason; first, because that is slit, whereby it is
become now no Seal at all; it cannot be said that this half is the broad
Seal, or that the other halse is the broad Seal, fer they both together make
but one broad Seal, and when he has closed them together again, and joined
them to a Commission, he has made the Seala new, for it was no Seal when it
was slit, but now it is.

The second reason is, in respect of the mischief that does come by this
translating of an old Seal to a new Commission, for both the King and his
Subjects are as much abused, as if it had been counterfeited; and the reason
of Laws and not authority, 40. Ass. 33. and Broait. treas. 17. Britta.ca. 4.
fo. 10.
ought to be our rule to go by; for indicandum est legibus non exemples, and
so he conceives the case in Bro. Tit. treason 3. to be no grand Law this was
treason also at Common Law, as you shall find it expressed in Bruam ca. 4. fol.
10. and in the mirror of Justice ca. 1. sex. 6. and since the statute in the
same Kings time that this statute was made in and they who knew best the
reasons and grounds of this statute, and the meaning thereof, and were at the
making thereof, by all likelihood, did adjudge it treason, to take an old Seal
from an old pattent, and to put it to a new one, as in 40. Ass. pl. 33. and 2.
(...). 4.33. and Stamf. says, 40. Ass.p. 33. and 2 H. 4.33
that it was so adjudged in his time.

In all treasons that do concern the person of the King, the judgment ought
to be, that he shall be hanged, drawn, and quartered; but for other treasons
that do not imediately concern the person of the King, 1. H. 6.5. 19. H.
6.47. 6. H. 7.13.
the judgment ought to be, that he shall be drawn and hanged only, and not
that he shall be quartered, as it is in 1. H. 6. 5. 19. H. 6. 47.

The second act, is the counterfeiting of the Kings money, and the inverting of
the arms of the King whereby the Kings Liege people and others may be
deceived, for that is a sufficient alteration to make it treason although it be
such a one as cannot be discerned without special notice taken of it; and this
does appear by the judgment given in the Star Chamber for the counterfeiting
of far things, and it is treason for any man to bear the Kings arms, as it
appears in the Earl of Surreys case.

The third act, is the killing of the Officers of the King as of the Lord
Keeper. and that is treason within this Law, for the Lord Keeper is now
Chancelour, although at that time when this statute was made, the Lord
Chancelours Office, and the Lord Keepers Office, were two several and distinct
Offices, yet they are made now both one Office, 5. Eliz. c. 18.25. E. 3. c. 2.
and that is by the statute of 5. Eliz. ca. 18. and this statute of 15. E. 3.
ca. 2. may and does extend to that statute of 5. Eliz. which comes after as is
very fully expressed to the purpose, though not to this case in Co. 4. fo. 4.
Vernons case, the statute of Marlebrige, which was made 4.52. H. 3. gave the
word of the tennant that held by Knight service, notwithstanding he had made a
feoffment by colusion: from which time and for 200. years and more, till the
statute of the 4. of H. 7. ca. 17. which gave the Ward of the heir of
Costigase, the heir of Costigase, was not in Ward, and yet it is held in the
27. of H. 8.9. fol. that if Costigase after the statute of 4. H. 7. makes a
feoffment in Fee by colution, to defraud the Lord of his Ward, that this is
taken within the equity of the statute of Marlebridge, and so of diverse other
cases that you may see there cited in Vernons case above mentioned.

The fourth Act is the bringing in of false money like unto our English money,
for to Merchandise withal: and this is treason: for here is not only an
intent, but there is also an act joined with this intent; for he brings over
this money, which is the act, with an intent to Merchandise. The second
conclusion is, that I. D. is a traitor within this law, and his treason does
go or extend to all the other four treasons that were committed by I. S. for
this succouring of him after the fact committed, makes him a traitor within
this law: and at the Common Law, before the making of this Statute, if a man
had succored one that had committed treason, knowing him to have committed it
he had bin a traitor: and so if one does now succor a fellon, it is felony in
the succorour; and why should it not be so in our case? for the reason of law
in our case is far stronger that the succorour of a traitor, should be a
traitor, then the succouring of a fellon should be a fellon, because the
offense is greater, and therefore it is an aggravation of his punishment, to
make him that no man shall receive or succor him; for we see the law inflicts
a greater punishment upon a traitor then upon a fellon; and that is to deter
men from such acts as those are: and so it apperes that there is reason why he
should be a traitor, although he be not within the words of the Statute. And
therefore it is in the reason of the Statute. Another reason is because the
Statute does not say who shall be traitors, but what shall be treason, and this
word treason shall be taken with all its concomitants and accidents as it was
at Common Law; and then that was a concomitant to treason that the succoror
should be a traitor.



eam ^roditionem predictam perpetrasse felonice hospitalis fuit: and this was
not grand, because he was in that case indicted as an accessory and was not
indicted as a traitor; for there can be no accessaries in treasons, Fit. tit.
Cor. 55. Bro. tit. Cor. 135.
as there is in felonies, and he is Enz. titl. Coron. 55. Bro. tit. Coron. 135.
and for express authority it is in 1. H. 6.5. for if this Statute had made
felony treason and one does commit that treason, and A. succors him, knowing
of it, it had binabsurd for to have said that the succorour should have bin
only a felon; but our case is stronger, for this Law does not make any one
treason, but only declares what shall be adjudged treason, but if this statute
had expressed that all abettors should have been traitors, that then the
receivers or succourers should not have been traitors within this Law, for
then the intent of the makers would plainly appear, that it was not intended
that the receivers or succourers after the fact should not have been within
this Law, but only the Abettors before and at the fact.

The third Lecture.
This Lecture is of petty treason, and petty treason do very little differ from
felonies, for by the pardon of all felonies, all petty treasons are pardoned.
Stam. as it is fol. 2.6. Stam. fo. 2.6.
But it has some correspondency with other treasors; and that is in respect of
the duty and obedience that is dueeach to other; as it is from the Subjects to
the King, so from the servant to the Master. All servants although they receive
no wages, but only meat and drink are within this Law, a servant that is not
compellable to serve by this Statute; yet if he does serve he is within this
Law, and so is a Bailiffe of a Manor, for if he kill that Lord of the Manor,
it is p^tty treason within this Law; Steward of a Court Leet or Court Barron,
is not within this law: a wife divorced for adultery, is within this law,
although a Queen divorst for adultery be not within this law, as ye have heard
before.

Ordinaties are of two sorts: Ordinarius loci, ordinarius Dioces.
Ordinarius loci, Ordinarius Dioces. and the superior Ordinares they are all
within this law Ordinarius loci, as that of the Deane of Westminster;
Ordinarius Dioces. is the Bishop of the Diocese, and the superior Ordinary is
the Archbishop; they are all within this law in respect of the obedience that
is due to them. A child killing his Father or his Mother, he is within this
law, as you heard before, although he he not named in it, yet there is a
majority of treason in it more then that of a servant, and therefore is within
that intent and reason of the law, and so it is in Dalton: If one command
another to kill his Master, who does it, yet it is not treason within this
law, unless he be there present when the fact is done, 40. Ass. 25.
40. Ass. 25. If a wife command a servant to kill her husband, and he does it;
it is treason in both within this law: and so it appears that Abettors and
Partners are within the last part of this Statute concerning petty treasons,
although they are not named. If a servant goes from his Master, and then kills
him; this is petty treason within this law; for it shall be intended that he
had such an intention to kill him before he departed out of his service, Bro.
Titl. treason 15.33. Ass. 7.
33. Ass. 7. And so is a quarrel in Westminster Hall the Courts sitting, and
then go out of the Hall into the Pallace-Yard, and then one strikes the other,
this is punishable with the same punishment, as if he had struck him in the
Hal, for the punishment shall be to the loss of his hand, and the forfeiture of
his goods, and perpetual imprisonment, as it is in Dacies case, 1. and 2.
Eliz. Diar. 188.21. E. 3.17.21. Ass. 30.
in the 1. and 2. of Eliz. Diar 188. but some of these offenses were treason at
the Common Law, as the son killing of the father, 21. E. 3.17. and of a
maidservant killing her Mistress. 21. Ass. 30. if a servant kill his Mistress,
this is petty treason within this Law, and yet she is not named, but is to be
intended upon the same reason with his Master, 19. H. 6.47.
and the obedience is due to the one as well as to the other 19. H. 6.37.

Treason ought to be fully proved as it appears by the words of the statute
and that is to be by two witnesses, the proving of every treason, 1. E. 6.
and the statute of 1. E. 6. is not repealed as to this point by the statute of
Ph. and Mary, but only the trial in the Counties, and not concerning
witnesles, as by that statute more at large appears; and in the 14. of Eliz.
in the Lord Lumlyer case; 14. Eliz. Lumlies case 13. H. 8. 11. 12. Bro. tit.
tree, 29.33.
it was agreed that the statute 1. E. 6. was not reversed by the old statute.
The trial of Lords of Parliament ought to be per pares; but in some cases he
shall not have his trial per pares, as in an appeal, but in an indictment he
shall, and the indictment shall be received into Parliament, because an
Indictment is the Kings suit, and the statute of Magna Charta is nec super cun
ibimus, nec super eum mittimus, and this is to be intended in the Kings suit
the 10. Ed. 4.6. 10. E. 4.6.


But a Lord may refuse his trial per paces, if he will; as it was adjudged 1.
of Phil. and Mar. Br. in the Lord Grayes case, 1, Phi. Ma. Bro. Lo.Gr. case Pa.
13. Jac.
but in the Lord of Castlehavens case, it was held the contrary, if a man be
killed in rebellion he shall forfeit his lands and is a traitor; but there ought
to be an inquisition taken of him, and that shall be a sufficient trial. As
the case in Pa. 13. Jac. Br. if a man do cast himself into the water and
never is found after; yet if it be presented by the Justice of Peace, this is
sufficient to make him forfeit his goods.

As for those treasons which are not here declared, the Judges authority take
indictments of them; but they ought not to be proceeded to judgment, for
nothing is to be done in point of judgment in such a case, till it be adjudged
and declared in Parliament, and all other treasons that are not here declared,
ought to be felonies at the least, because felonies were made treasons before
the statute; and because the words of the statute are, that it ought to be
treason or felony; but if it be but once declared in Parliament, unless there
be a Proviso that the Judges shall not proceed upon the like cases, they may
afterward proceed by force of this statute.

They are treasons at Common Law, notwithstanding the statute 1. Q. Mary; for
that did take away those treasons, and Declarations of treasons, that were made
in Parliaments from the time of our statute to the 1. of Q. Mary, but does not
take away the declarative power in our statute mentioned, nor the Common Law,
but they do remains still as before.

FINIS.

