Sions Halelujah: Set forth in a SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable
House of Peers, in the Abbie Church of Westminster, on Thursday June 28. Being
the day of Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God for his Majesty's safe Return.

By Tho. Hodges, Rector Ecclesiae de Kensington.

Dulcem matris affectionem miserorum casibus tribuit Deus; nec dies, nec quies
ulla ac ne momentum quidem tenue ejus transcurrit beneficiis otiosum.

Apul. Met. lib. 11. Psalm. 69.7. Give unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the
earth, give unto the Lord glory and strength.

LONDON, Printed by J. Best, for Andrew Crook, at the Green-Dragon in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

Die Veneris 29 Junii. 1660.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That Mr. Hodges
who preached before the Lords in Parliament on Thursday 28. of this instant in
the Abbey Church Westminster is hereby thanked for his Sermon preached then
before their Lordships. And it is the Lords desire that he print and publish
his said Sermon.

JOHN BROWN Cler. Paliamentorum.

TO THE Right Honorable the Peers assembled in Parliament.
My Lords.
YOur command put me on the task of Preaching, and now Printing this Sermon;
which presents it self to your view and protection; it was a day of mercies
occasioned it, and had the Preachers ability been answerable either to the
vastness of the good by God exhibited, or the greatness of desire to express
his resentment thereof, it might have proved an excellent monument to posterity
of the wonders God wrought for our King and Nation. ^u^l i^ Sy^. Caes. Clas.
Heraclius the Greek Emperor being delivered from Chosroes the Persian, as a
memorial thereof, stamped his coin with Glory be to God in the highest etc. May
the like impression for ever remain on your hearts; that it may be your
greatest aim to glorify him who has exalted you. With sad hearts you have
seen the Emblem verified, swarms of gnats destroying the royal Lion, whose
orders and actings like Tiberius and Caligula's laws might rather be styled
outrageous madnesses, Tacit. Hist.
then sober and just decrees and actions. But now blessed be God the Scene is
changed, and a more pleasant fight presents it self to you view; somewhat like
that in the Revelation of St. John, Chap. 11. 11. The two great ordinances of
God restored, of Magistracy and Ministry to an undeserving Nation. And that too
so suddenly, sweetly, unanimously, in point of National consent, as those who
had the largest hope could rationally scarce have dreamt of. May the greatness
of this mercy work a greater miracle then all the pretensions of twenty years;
even an happy moderation, and regular reformation both in Church and State,
that misguided spirits may nevermore gain opportunity to shape coats for the
Mooon, according to their several interests in point of Religion, nor act the
part of Empiricks on the civil Government. Joseph, de bello judaico l. 6. c. 1.
Jerusalem might have stood much longer then it did, had not the treble faction
forgot the golden rule of charity and moderation, by intestine conflicts and
dissentions gratifying there enemies design (though not intentionally) rather
then consulting their own safety and welfare.

Haughty and petulant spirits never bless their owners with permanent peace,
nor their country with tranquillity. That God who has blessed both King and
people with such great mercyes, grant unto both so deep a sense thereof, as may
produce a vigorous retribution of praise for all his goodness. And give unto
your Lordships such wisdom, moderation, and zeal for his glory, that you may be
happy instruments in advancing the same, and settling upon firm foundations
this Church and State. Always remembering that positive, 1 Samuel 2.30.
peremptory, and in alterable conclusion, Those that honor me, I will honor;
but those that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. And may your actings be
always at such a rate, that when the Lord of Lords shall appear and require an
account of your Stewardship, you may give it with joy, and not with heaviness,
which is the hearty prayer of

My Lords, Your most humble and faithful Servant. THOMAS HODGES.

Sions Halelujah, SET FORTH In a Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable
House of Peers in the Abby-Church of Westminster, on Thursday, June 28. being
the day of Public Thanksgiving unto Almighty God, for his Majesty's safe
return.
PSALM. 126.3. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice.


THis book of Psalms is a little Bible, Psalmorum liber quaecunque sunt utilia
ex omnibus continet, etc. Aug. Prol. in Psalm.
replenished with all sorts of Heavenly matter. A great part whereof is
Eucharistical, tuned to heavens melodious Harmony. Amongst all the Subjects
treated of therein, none outnumbers the Subject of this Psalm: Which what that
is, the first words tell you; it is the reducing of a captivity, and a sad one
too. In which they were as dead dry bones, in their own esteem, and out of
which they had no hope, nor help to escape. But when God brought it to pass,
above, yea against all humane expectation, they were tanquam Somniantes, as men
neither perfectly asleep nor awake, verse. 1. and could not believe what they
heard, felt, or saw at the first. But being at the last put out of all doubt,
they became Ridentes and exultantes, laughing and triumphing, verse. 2. And the
Heathens Admirantes and Agnocscentes, admiring and acknowledging this
miraculous dispensation; Of which this Text is the product and effect.

And its no other then the Churches Echo and Halelujah to the Heathens
confession. Indeed, strange had it been if spectators only should have said so
much, and the Jews who were so deeply concernd in the advantage of this
deliverance should have been silent; but that they are not: He that conferred
this blessing, gave both sense and gratitude; they are both expressed in this
Text, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice. Which being
thus read according to our translation, we may observe in these words, 1. An
Acknowledgment of Gods bounty. 2. An Impression, and retribution suitable
thereunto.


1. In the acknowledgment, we have

1. A pointing out the mercy, under that expression, Magna, great things.

2. A confession of the Author, Jehovah, the Lord.

3. An assertion of the actual possession; it is not faciet, he will do great
things, but fecit, he has done them, they be not suspended mercies, but
conferred.

4. A Declaration of the object, in which there is a comfortable appropriation
by the Jews, to themselves; and indeed, what were it to them, had it not been
for them? Therefore they put in their claim and own it; it is for us say they,
the Lord has done great things for us. And these be the particulars of the
first part, their acknowledgment of Gods bounty.

2. In the impression and retribution, you have

1. The passion excited, joy.

2. The Subject, which is extensive; the mercy was national, and so was the
joy. Us, in the preeedent part, was the object: And We, is in the Impression,
the Subject of this joy.

3. The time; it is suitable too, and concomitant with the mercy; not vanishing,
but continuing; fuimus laetantes, we have rejoiced, when this fecit Magna was
extended to us, and are still rejoicing in the memory thereof. And thus you see
the several parts of this Text. I Will begin with the first.

1. The Mercies, expressed by that term, Magna, great things, whereby the
Psalmist intends, not to diminish the dignity of any other work of God, as if
it were simply little, but comparatively it may be so called; As lights in the
heaven, exceed one another in magnitude and splendor, yet is the least in it
self both great and glorious. There is a day of small things, says the Prophet
Zachary, Zach. 4.10.
And there is a day of great things, says the Prophet Jeremiah; Ier. 30.7, 8.
such are these in this Text. The first are as certain beginnings, and the
latter as completions of some great business. In the lesser there is a luster,
as at the Sun rising: But in the greater a brightness as at Noon day; so here,
When God built up Sion, Psalm. 102.
he appeared in his glory. But we may not count this a small mercy; it is not
some great thing, but things: Behold a Troop. A blessed constellation of
mercies, whose happiness, he multiplied to do great things; So the Chaldee,
Syriack and Arabic versions render it; And the history of this deliverance
makes it good.

The power that detaind them is broken, by the Medes and Persians. They though
Pagans, and so no friends to their Religion, become their deliverers.
Impregnable Babylon their strong Prison is opened to set them free. Isa. 45.23.
2 Chronicles. 36.22, 23.
They are freely discharged by Proclamation, and encouraged, yea enabled to
return to their own soil, Government, and exercise of Religious worship. And
all this, when things were at the worst with them, no power in their hands to
help, no hope in their hearts rationally to expect it; how then could they say
less if they would say any thing, but acknowledge that these were Magna, great
things, as here they do!

And such indeed they are; whether measured

1. By utility and profit that thereby redounded to them. Things, certainly
they were of great moment to these Jews; and of the greatest relative goodness,
in reference to their advantage; what could be more welcome to them, then
liberty to the captive; Return to the debarred from their native soil;
Restoration of the Plundered to their own possessions; dignity to the debased?
It Was talked of far and near, and every mouth was full of, Who is like to
Jerusalem! happy art thou O people, saved by the Lords own hand.

2. Great things they were in respect of their power, or possibility. To them
they were impossible, in respect of their own ability to effect them. Their
wisdom was too shallow: Their strength too weak, their Prison too strong,
their Enemies too severe, potent, and watchful, Lam. 1.2.
their condition too low; Sion had no son to comfort her, her breach was great
like the Sea, so that none could heal her.

3. Needs must these things be of more then an ordinary size, because the
greatness of Gods strength was put forth to effect them. He has magnified to
work, says the Original, he greatned himself to effect them, called up great
power, and clothed himself therewith, to bring them to pass. Psalm 93.1.
Now did the arm of the Lord put on strength, Isa. 51, 9, 10.
and awaken, as of old, when he brought them out of Egypt, and dried up the
Sea before them. He wrought magnificently like an Almighty God. Magnifice egit;
So Vatablus renders Magna fecit. Magnifificentia est magnarum rerum et
excelsarum, cum animi amp^a quadam etsplendida propositione cogitatio, atque
administratio, Cic. in Rhet. Est virtus factiva magnorum. Aq. 2^. q. 134. art.
As in the Thracian Hieroglyphick of Gods power, set forth by the Sun sending
forth three beams; whereof the first broke a rock in pieces; the second
dissolved a mighty Mountain of Ice; the third raisd a dead man; so was it here,
he brake in pieces the rocky-hearted Caldeans, melted into charity toward his
people the frozen-spirited Medes, and Persians, Ezekiel. 37.
raised this dead and buried Nation, the Jews out of their Caldean Sepulchers,
Ezekiel, 37.11.
and in all this discovered his extraordinary power and might.

4. We style that great, which is extraordinary and strange, not falling out
every day, especially if such things come to pass, unexpectedly if they be
things that we look not for; Isa. 64.3.
and such were these, such a deliverance as Ezra styles it: Ezra 9.15.
after seaventy years, suddenly dismissed, solely and no other captives, though
Pagans. Who has heard who hah seen such things? Isa. 66.8.
says the Prophet Isaiah; they filld the very spectators with admiration: and
whereas the Heathens were dim-sighted, and apt enough to detract from, and
abate in Sions mercies and deliverances, they are here so extraordinary, of so
great a grandeur, and have on them such eminent Characters of their Authors
Omnipotency, being blessings of the first magnitude, that the heathens cannot
choose but acknowledge them. Then said they amongst the Heathens, The Lord has
done great things for them. And the Jews with thankfulness admire it; The Lord
has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice. Which brings us to the
Second particular

Viz. 2. The season in which they were made partakers of these great things;
fecit, he has done them, and they have these mercies in their own possession;
it is not faciet, he will do this for them; that is true too, so often as his
peoples need requires it; I will, says God, bring again from Bashan, Psalm.
68.22.
from the depth of the Sea; but here it is fecit, the work is finished. To have
had them decreed in heaven, might they but know Quam diu expectanda, How long
before they might look for them, would have been a mercy; Wherein God gratified
them, assigning the period of their bondage to be seventy years, by his holy
Prophet; Ier. 25.11, 12.
but in that thraldom many of them dyed beleiving, as yet not having received
the impletion of that promise; at the last providence concurs to the
accomplishment of that prediction, Ezra 1.2, 3, 4
and the ruler of the Nations sets them free. The Countryman when he sees the
clouds, those bottles of heaven thicken by ascending vapors, is glad; but when
they let fall their drops in showers, impregnated with natures crimson salt,
the fields laugh, and the husbandman grearly rejoices; so was it with this
people; Then was our mouths filled with laughter, and our tongues with singing.
Well, but who may they thank for this? the Lord has done it, say they.

3. They acknowledge the Author is God. He, Diod. Sic. lib. 1 (...). Arist.
Ethic. l^b. 5. cap. 4. (...) etc.
who as the chief Egyptian Priest in their Divine Worship, used to style their
King by way of commendation, that truly is he, a bountiful imparter of his good
things. And as the Philosopher speaks of the habit of virtue, that by actions
it may be known and judged, so is his truth, wisdom, goodness and power, who
is the Author of his deliverance; by such products as this, him they see and
own in these great things; not any of the heathens Gods, but Jehovah the God of
Israel they acknowledge to be the Author of them, who is the first and fountain
of all beings. And indeed, Omne bonum nihil est nisi Dei exun datio, qua
inferiora etiam replevit: Bern.
what ever we admire in sublunary things, what else is it but the overflowing
of his wisdom, goodness, and power, whereby he has replenisht even things
beneath? He may fitly be resembled to the Egyptians Isis, all breast, whereby
he suckles, and satisfies with good terrestial creatures, Macr^b.
imparting to them, being, Life, deliverances, and all that is good, who being
love, and so of a communicative nature, invites poor creatures to himself (as
Vespatian did the Egyptians) from his infinite fullness to draw forth to
themselves what ever may really turn to their advantage. Haurite a me tanquam
ex Nilo. Philost. l. 5. c. ^0. in vit. Ap^ll.


He is a God of truth, who gives being to all his promises, and makes good his
predictions by his servants the Prophets. Isa. 44.26.
So here, after the accomplishment of seventy years, and 43.6.
he says to the North give up my sons and my daughters, and the work is done.
His will is the tyring house, wherein his Emanations and actings receive their
dress, Psalm 115.3.
he has done whatsoever pleased him, says the Psalmist.

(...). Synes. Him. 2. Hebr. 1.
All second causes depend on him whom Sinesias rightly styles the root of the
World, and the Center of beings, who bears up all things Manutenentia Divina,
by the Almighty word of his power; and directs by his unerring wisdom to their
intended ends.

Mercanab R. Mayn. More Nevoch. lib. 3. cap. 7.
The whole creation is his Chariot, in which he rides abroad, and manifests
himself in the world; making such use of every part thereof, as seems good to
his wisdom; N^us Dei est opus perfectum.
and over all he has so absolute a command, that less then Pompyes stamp with
his foot, his beck, suffices to raise an army of deliverers, for his inthralled
people. Yet needs he none of these to do his work by; and that he is pleased to
make use of any, it is a dignation in him to honor the creature, not of
indigence as if he could not effect what he pleased without it. As here, in
reducing this captivity, he makes use of Cyrus, Opus dignotionis, non
indigentiae. Aq.
but could have accomplished it without him; and now he is his instrument, what
is he without this agent? Isa. 45.
It Was the Lord (as the Prophet expresses it) that loosened the loins of Kings,
and opened the doors before him; He went before him, and made crooked places
straight, he broke op^ the brazen doors, and burst asunder the iron bars. Ezra
1.2.
This Cyrus himself acknowledges; The Lord God of heaven has given me all the
Kingdoms of the earth. It Was he that stirred him up to attempt it, and gave him
power, wisdom and courage to atcheive it, enabling him to conquer Babylon it
self, Ier. ^0 21. D^od. Sic. rer. antiq lib. 3. c. 4.
that hammer that broke in pieces the Nations: Although it was immured with
mighty Walls, fortified with strong Towers, and rampires, strengthened with
massy gates, replenished with multitudes of Soldiers; furnished abundantly with
all necessaryes, fenced with the impassible river Euphrates: by all which both
King and people were so secure, and regardless, that Belshazzer and his
Courtiers feast, Invedunt u^be^ somno vi^oque sepultam.
and carouse it in the Temples sacred vessels, while Cyrus dividing the River
into several Channels, he and his army enter the City being buried in sleep and
drunkenness, and so by force carry it.

But what is all this to Sions deliverance? perhaps they have but changed one
Enemy for another, and peradventure a worse; no, no such matter; come therefore
and behold the doings of the Lord; Zach. 4.6.
he conquers their conqueror by his spirit, making him captivate their
conquerours, and release the conquered, Isa. 14.28. 2 Chronicles. 36.23 Ezra 1.
and that too in relation to a prediction of him, and precept imposed by God
upon him above an hundred years before he was born. Thus the Lord was
favorable to his Land; Psalm. 85.5.
and whence came the sore, thence came the salve. Salvation belongs to the
Lord, Psalm. 3.
and his blessing is upon his people, which is the fourth particular.

4. The object of these great things, for whom they were wrought; It Is Nobiscum,
with us, says the Original; not that we should imagine they had any hand in it,
or contributed the least help thereunto; Psalm, 115.1.
No; not to us, but to thy name, say they, we give the glory. Nor was it by
chance, but propter nos, it was for us, says the Psalmist, both in Gods
intention and exhibition. It might have been against, and not for them; they
well deserved it by theit transgressions, Neh. 8.34, 35, 36.
not only before, but also in the time of their Captivity. But it was with and
for them; all went well with them, and was as they would have it. Proportion
was a foil, and propriety makes the mercy complete; he has holppen his servant
Israel. Luke 1.54.


Had these bin the mercies of others, good nature would have made them sensible
on their behalf; but being their own, how can they choose but deeply resent
them, with hearts full of joy, and mouths full of praise, as the Plalmist
predicted, When the Lord brings back the Captivity of his people, Jacob shall
rejoice and Israel shall be glad. So here do they fulfill it, Whereof we
rejoice, and that is the second part.

2. The impression these great things received make upon them; or, the passion
excited hereby, expressed in the Term Laetantes, rejoicing. It Is a branch of
delight, wherein the heart is dilated, as by sorrow it is coarctated; a
Metaphorical expression taken from the bodies positure, when it is not pent up
in a narrow room, but is at ease and pleasure; so is the mind, when it enjoyes
such good things, wherewith it is pleased and delighted; Martin. Lexic.
he rejoices that enjoyes what ever he desires; Etymologists derive Laetitia
joy, Psalm 4.2.119.31. Isa. 60.5. 2 Chro. 6.11.
a mentis latitudine, and so it is styled the hearts enlargment, whereby it makes
more way for the object delighted in, to enter into it: As the Sun-flower opens
and dilates it self toward the sun, to receive his beams and influence more
abundantly.

It Is rightly placed in the Concupiscible faculty, and is wrought by presence
of, and Union with the object desired. Now there is no doubt, but as this
Nation above all others was Impatient of bondage; so, nothing could be alike
pleasing to them, as freedom and liberty from their thraldom. And as of old,
when God brought Israel out of Egypt, and preserved them from their Enemies at
the red Sea, There, say they, did we rejoice in him; Psalm, 66.6.
So was it here upon this deliverance from their Caldean servitude, whereof we
rejoice.

Gaudio cogendi vis inest. Plin. 2 Samuel 6.14. Laetu^ illum vocabant qui cum
corona public vitulabat. Seal. ad Va^r.
Joy of all passions can least be dissembled. David dances; And indeed of old
they used to style him Laetus, joyful, that skipt and leapt amongst the people
with a garland on his head: In a word, the heart conceives it, and then quickly
sends it forth throughout all the province of nature, that every part may have
a share in the common comfort.

And he is truly joyful, says Perottus, who manifests in his countenance the
mirth he has within; Est proprie laetus qui hilaritatem quam intus habet etiam
vultu ostenditu Perot. Psalm. 16.9.
And very frequently in the tongue, where it turns to a Laudabo, praise, and
thankful acknowledgment thereof; witness the Psalmist; my heart, says he, is
glad, and my glory, that is, my tongue rejoices; so fares it with these
Captives, verse. 2. Then were our mouths filled with laughter, and our tongues
with singing.

Cant. 8.7. Isa. 24.5.
The people of God, like the Star-fish will burn and shine in the water of
distress, praise God in the very fire of afflictions: But when his dealing with
his people is as it was here, the turning their captivity, thereby he takes
from them their mourning weed, and makes them full of joy by his work of
goodness, as the Jews in this Text. I, and observe.

2. The rejoicing is as extensive as the deliverance. The one was National, so
also was the other; thus was it with their fathers when God brought them with
an outstretched arm out of Egypt, Exodus 15.1, 2.
all Israel rejoiced and sang that song of Triumph. 2 Chronicles. 20.26.27,
So did Iehoshaphat and all the men of Judah upon that great victory and
deliverance, They returned to Jerusalem with joy, and verse. 28. They went to
the house of God with Psalteries, harps, and Trumpets. Such is the Thundering
Haleluiah of Gods Redeemed, Rev. 19. And such in point of unamimity and
concurrence was theirs here in this Text.

3. Well but when were they thus joyful? fuimus say they; there is no doubt but
this joy was at the highth when the mercy was fresh; then sang they his praise,
Psalm. 106.12, 13
they deferd not their sacrifice of praise to their deliverer. Truly,
accommodation to their advantage, propriety in, and possession of this
deliverance, must needs make them happy, and its apprehension joyful. The more
they desired it before it came, the greater relish found they in it being now
obtaind. Darius his muddy water was precious when his drought was so excessive,
that it threatened ruin; the Heathens admiration, and extorted confession by
clear conviction, do not a little heighthen it; indeed it was to them a blessed
change, an unexpected mercy, of great concernment.

But does not Fuimus speak of this rejoicing as of a thing past and gone, as
the deliverance was? no, by no means; Ibidem.
It was indeed too ordinary with this people, One day to sing his praise, the
next to forget his goodness, and rebel against him: But here the Psalmist has
no design to put in an indictment against them, as if they were faulty in this
respect, but rather he sets before them an exemplar, that whenever
forgetfulness or dullness does surprise their minds, by this they may be excited
to remember whence they are fallen, and do their first work: but let this
suffice concerning the Jews.

Q. What Is all this to us?

A. Exceeding much; for if we consider the mercy we commemorate this day, at
least it parallels theirs, if not outstrips it; what tongue can express the
misery we were reduced to by the late intestine War? How was peace destroyed,
plenty vanished, trading decayed, order confounded, laws subverted, truth
vanished, Orthodox Ministry contemned, Iocus est in militia et ludus domos
deripere, fana spoliare.
lawful Magistracy extirpated! Servants rid on horseback, and Princes went on
foot. What rapines and plunderings were in every corner of the Land! what traps
and snares were laid for the Liberty, Estates, yea lives of those who refused
to Sacrifice conscience and loyalty to the lusts and interests of Usurping
persons! The Land was become an Aceldama. Caldean like, they neither spare
Princes nor Priests. Lam. 5.
In the War they slay in battle those whom they find in arms, and many unarmed
in cold blood. Not the lives of the living, nor the bones of the dead (if
contrary to their corrupt interest) were secure; thousands of our strong men
fell by the sword; 2 Chronicles. 36.17
our King was horridly murdered at his own door, Lam. 5.16.
and so fell the Crown from our head; our real friends were few; many
treacherous; designs failed, our hearts fainted, our miseries were of twenty
years continuance; we had no Prophets to predict, Psalm 74 9.
we wanted our signs, nor knew any man Quamdiu, how long our dismal night of
misery would continue on us; And our eyes even failed with looking for the
salvation of our God. Thus, when we were most hopeless, Psalm. 69.3.
helpless, our enemies highest, and we lowest; Cedren. ad anim. 13. Heracl.
they armd with power, treasure, like the picture of Chosroes in the midst of
his heaven, full of might and dignity, warring and prevailing by their silver
spears, when they seemed fixed like eternal Mountains, and everlasting hills;
yet then, H^b. 3.9.
even then was the Lord seen in the Mount, and our necessity was his
opportunity; the wicked were snared in the works of their own hands. Psalm. 9.16.
Higgaion Selath.

The people grevv impatient of their pressures: God put it into their hearts to
affect, strongly to desire, and petition for the restoration of their ancient
government, and fundamental constitutions, stird up the worthy General to be
his instrument in a happy chang, united the generality of the people, (though
of several opinions about Ecclesiastical things) in a blessed concurrence,
whence came the loud shout of the Nation, like that in the Revelation, saying
to their exiled King, Ascend. And that to, after such high indignityes, and
affronts, horrid slanders, Rev. 11.1^.
Pamphleters and railing Rabshakies, like Smirnaes glass presenting what was
most amiable in his sacred Majesty, most ugly and deformed to the Nation; yea,
after such sad oppressions, great temptations, desperate rejections and
assaults; That God should turn our captivity so suddenly, so sweetly, without
effusion of blood: And should set our King upon his Throne with such high
testimonies of National affection and subjection to him; are not these Magna,
great things! yes certainly, Mirabilia, they are wonderful in our eyes.

Especially that these great mercies should be for us; A people laden with
profaneness, and Hypocrisy, who rather might expect extirpation then Salvation;
yet wrought he all this for us, miserable creatures, when we were in the deeps;
Psalm, 136.23.
He remembered us in our low estate; for us, weak Wights, when our strength was
gone; for us, unworthy wretches, when we were ripe for ruin; therefore we
should not content our selves to contemplate this, and rejoice alone, and 66.5,
6,
but invite others, as the Psalmist does, Come and behold the doings of the
Lord, what Salvation he has wrought for the children of men! And therefore
come let us exalt and praise his name together. Psalm. 34.3.


Thus Laetantes, this rejoicing in the Text is a necessary duty, requisite to
our festivity, as it was to Isreal's. Deuteronomy: 16.14, 15.


But rightly to determine it in respect of the object, Herodot. lib. 1.
must be our care. Agasicles was banished by the Halicarnasseans, because he
consecrated not to the Gods the prize he gained at the Olympic games, but
carried it to his own house: let us rather conform to the Psalmists invitation
and advice, Psalm. 35.1, 2.
Come let us sing unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the rock of our
salvation; let us come into his presence with thanksgiving, and show our selves
glad in him with Psalms. What could this holy Prophet have taken care for more
then here he does! First, that there be a right fountain; the heart must not be
absent: it must be heartily. Secondly, that the streams be pleasant and
suitable to the present dispensation, songs of gratitude, Psalms of
acknowledgement: But thirdly, he contents not himself with this, but designs a
place; and where should that be, but the place or his present Hissan? and the
place of public worship is fittest for the expression of public joy: A perite
portas justiciae, Psalm. 118.19.
the Temples Halelujahs best suit with public deliverances: and what is more
noble, No^ esse candidatos Angelorum dicit. Te^t. de orat. cap. 3.
then there to join in the employment of Angels, whose age is not measured by
time, but praise? What more honorable then there not only to pay our tribute,
by giving to him the honor due to his Name; but also to put the Crown of praise
on his head, who with mercy and loving kindness crowns us! Psalm 103.
I am sure the advantage is our own, Gods gracious emanations being like
Solinus his Well, which if sung to, rises, else ebbs. When I sing praises unto
God, Psalm 56.9.
then shall mine Enemies be driven back, says David; so was it with
Jehoshaphat, ^ Chron. 20, 2^
when they began to sing and praise the Lord, their Enemies were smiten; and so
will it be with us, our great things will be teeming mercies, and bring forth
more; they will be but pawns, ^ontinalia fest^s erat dies Romae, quo in^ntes
coronas pro^icebanit, ut a quibus aqua^ acciper^t, iisdem gratiam refer
hocritu viderentur. Vide Var. l. 5. de ling. lat.
and first fruits of future good; only we must take heed, that we put not a bar
in the way thereof, by our ingratitude. What can be more equal then if we draw
good out of this Ocean of goodness! Roman like we should crown the Fountain
that imparts it.

The danger of mutability is a great allay in all sublunary good, the stability
whereof depends on Gods will and actual emanation, as beams on the Sun.
Therefore the Psalmist prays, Psalm. 90, 17.
Estahlish that which thou have wrought for us, or else it will quickly vanish
and come to nothing: And our best way to make it durable, Luke ^, ^4.
is, to answer Gods design, in conferring it upon us; what is that? but ut
serviamus, says holy Zacharias, That we being delivered from the fear of our
Enemies, and out of the hands of those that hate us, should serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness hefore him all the days of our lives: That
is indeed the real gratitude, Psalm. 56.13.
when not only verbally but vitally we endeavor to express it, as holy David,
in our conversation, I will walk before God in the Land of the living.

But that's not all, we must take care that both our internal, external, Joy and
gratitude, bear some proportion to our mercyes. 2 Chro. 32.25.
This was Hezekiahs fault; he was not thankful according to the mercyes
received; Diis and paren tibus non possumus retribuere aequalia. Arist.
let it be our warning. To God, and our Parents, we can never sufficiently
retribute for the benefits we receive from them; says the Philosopher; the
example of his disciple Alexander the great is worthy our imitation, Plin. l.
^. c. 14.
who when he had conquered Arabia, sent home a ship laden with franckinsence,
entreating Leonides to offer it liberally unto the Gods.

My Lords, God in this happy change greatned himself, that he might greaten
you; What now is your task, but to make your business to greaten him in the
sight of the people; as to his essential glory you cannot. But in point of
manifestation to the world, by your words and Actions, you may, and ought. I
will deliver says God; there is his benificene, and thou shall glorify me,
there is our duty. He has done the one for your Lordships, Psalm. 50.
and now expects the other from you. And I make no doubt but the Psalmists Quid
retribuam is in your hearts, resolving to perform it; And your inquiry whereby
you may give Testimony to the world, of the deep sense you have of Gods
deliverance. Wherefore in all humility give me leave to present to you certain
great things God respects by way of gratitude for those great things of his
bestowed on you. As 1. Magna pietatis, that you take care for the great things
of Religion. Who ever denies to the Civil Authority that power, has not
considertd as he ought; the commands given them by God, and so their
obligement, the commendations he gives to such, and therein their
encouragement, the blessing conferred on them that faithfully did it, nor the
punishments inflicted upon neglecters of this duty; neither their titles,
office, or account they must give to the King of Kings, are understood by such;
and indeed they rob the Magistrate who assert it, of their greatest dignity.

Therefore I beseech you let it be your care to build God an house, and you may
be confident he will do the like for you, let Isreal's resolution in the sense
of their deliverance be yours, He is my God, Exodus 15.2.
and I will prepare him a habitation; my Fathers God, and I will exalt him.
This will be the Nations honor, when as the new Jerusalem, England may be
styled Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there; I and the Nations safety, The Lord
is in the midst of her, Ezekiel. 48.35.
she shall not be moved; he will help her and that right soon. Psalm. 46.^.
It Is fit those places that are consecrated to the public worship of God, which
by the iniquity of the late sad times have been either neglected or defaced,
should be taken care off; but especially I beseech you bestow your best
endeavors upon the advancement of Knowledge and piety, whereby God may have a
house of living stones; 1 Pet: 2.5.
and the Nation may grow up more and more, to be a habitation and Temple for
the Lord to dwell in; Ephesians. 2.21, 22
To this end, promote not loyterers, but laborers to this work, that have both
skill and will to promote it: That bear both Urim and Thummim in their hearts
and lives, Ioh. 5.33.
and are like John Baptist shining in ability, burning in zeal, and sanctity.
To be salt not having lost it savor, 1 Pet. 4: 11. John. 13.15.
but fit to season the sacrifice, and make the people a savory offering to the
Lord, Loqui debent ut oracula, vivere ut numina. Causia. l. 4. c. 25 Exodus:
21.17. Isa. 52.11. Lev: 10.1, ^, ^ It Is the Jews opinion that they were then
drunk, whereby they occasioned that law, v. ^. Paal halturim. cum aliis. 1 Timothy:
3.2, 3 Exodus: 37.23 1 Timothy: 4.12 The holy shekle weighed 320 barley corns, the
common but 16^. 3. Maym. Psalm. 132.9.
is their duty. They must speak as the Oracles of God, and live after their
Lords example. The Athenians would not permit foul-mouthed Democharis to blow
Vestaes fire. And a blemished Priest was not amongst the Jews permited to serve
at Gods Altar. Those that bear the Vessels of the Lord must be holy. The two
sons of Aaron smart for their drunken mistake, and from their error God takes
occasion to forbid strong drink to their fellows, when they are employed in
his public service. St. Paul's winebibber is unfit for this sacred employment.
Gold is fittest for Lamps and Snuffers in Gods Sanctuary and exemplary Holiness
for his Priests. The Shekle of the Temple is twice, the weight of the
Commonwealth; it is no ordinary measure of sanctity is enough in Churchmen. Thus
let it be your endeavor, That Gods Priests may be clothed with righteousness,
and the people will shout for joy.

2. Mag na Justitiae, the great things of distributive Justice; Let your
Tribunal be like that noble Romans, Reorum Scopulus, justorum refugium. Tacit.
2 Chronicles. 1^.8, 9.
Lucus Cassiu^, A rock to split in pieces the guilty, but a refuge to the
innocent. I hope you remember God trusts you with his power, for which you are
accountable, and your judgment is the Lords, who is no respecter of persons,
nor takes rewards; therefore let judgment run down as water, and righteousness
like a mighty stream. Amos 5.24. Plin. l. 2. c. 17.
Democritus allowed only two gods, Punishment and Reward. There is nothing so
forcible to preserve humane society, as the due distribution of them.

3. Lastly, Give me leave to commend to you Magna Misericordiae, The bowels of
compassion, My Lords; We find some coin of Antoninus Pius, and Nerva's also,
Causin. l. 1. c. 18.
in which an Eagle sits on a Thunderbolt, to which is added an Olive Branch;
which took so much with Charles the fifth, and Max. the 2d. that they took this
in amongst the rest of their Symbols and devices; which intimates, that though
the Emperors power to avenge and punish be very great, yet is it moderated and
restrained by clemency; And Caesar got not less glory by mercy, then by
victories. Caesar dando, sublevando, ignoscendo, gloriam adeptus est. Sal^st.
Is^. 8.6, 7, 8.
Therefore give me leave to close this in the words of the Prophet Isaiah: If
you break the bands of wickedness, and undo the heavy burdens, and let the
oppressed go free, and break every yoke; If you feed the hungry, and cloathe
the naked, and hide not your eyes from your own flesh: Then shall your light
break forth as the morning, and your health shall spring forth speedily, and
your righteousness shall go before you, and the glory of the Lord shall be your
reward. Then shall you keep a feast of rejoicing indeed to the Lord, when not
only you take care for your selves, Deuteronomy. 16.1^.
Vt absit maestitia, and adsit laetitia, which was commanded as a necessary
adjunct in all festivities: but also in respect of others who are relieved
through your goodness, so that they also will be cheerfully ready with your
selves to join in the Halelujah of this Text, and to acknowledge heartily,
thankfully, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice.

Osor. lib. 4.
Amongst the Ethiopians they had a custom, that once a year the fires in all
habitations were extinguished, and then by the King restored to the Nobles, and
by them to the common people. I am sure the King has not been wanting to make
the Nation to feel the warmth of royal clemency; and I am confident through
your management they shall be put into the full possession thereof in due
season.

My Lords, I shall only add a few Arguments to remain with you as incitements
to real gratitude. First, Consider our mercies are not meritoria, deserved by
us; No, It Is his mercy we are not confounded; but they are exploratoria, God
proves us whether we will improve them for his glory and the public good.
Secondly, He that has done for us great good things in mercy, can do to us
terrible things in justice: Rev. 12.1. Psalm. 30. ^.
The world is fitly emblematized by the moon, it is full of changes. Nones mount
stands so strong that it cannot be moved. Cedren.
Phocas Tower though never so high immured, so strongly guarded, is no Fence
against Heavens revenge for sins transgression, as an unknown voice declared.
If you desire honor, the way to it is through Virtues Temple: the shadow is not
more inseparable from the body, then honor and praise from excellent actions of
piety, justice, mercy: The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.
Psalm. 112.^,
This is the way to erect monuments more honorable to your selves, and
posterities then of brick or stone. Thus God shall have the glory of his mercy;
Your Country the benefit; and your selves the honor here, Comfort when you
leave this World, and everlasting happiness in a better.

FINIS.

