Mr. HOLLIS HIS SPEECH TO The Lords in Parliament concerning PEACE. WITH A
motion for some course to be taken for repairing of trade, that so poor
tradesmen may be preserved to hold out during these troublesome Times.

Whereunto is added a Relation of a Vision of Blood in the Sky, that appeared
about Redding on Tuesday night last.

LONDON, Printed for T. Wright. 1643.

Mr. Hollis HIS. Speech to the Lords, upon the delivery of a Message from the
House of Commons.
My Lords,
I Am commanded by the Knights. Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House, to
present your Lordships with a Petition now delivered into their House, by
diverse poor Tradesmen in and about the City of London, contaning in the same
the great want and necessity they and their families are fallen into, through
the decay of treading. The means and causes that have produced this decay, and
the remedies to prevant further misery, and revive trading: My Lords, it is a
common observation, and the experience of former Ages has made it manifest,
that when the sword of war is unsheathed, famine that follows, the greatest
destruction of all Commonwealths and Kingdoms, witness the miserable
calamities and troubles that have of late years befallen upon Italy and
Germany. If we call to mind ancient Histories mentioning the fatal
destruction of the Eastern Empires, we shall find that the first step to
their desolation, has been domestic dissension, and homebred mutinies, upon
which has followed National wars, and the effects of all has been famine
and pestilence, which has given a full period to the utter confusion of those
Kingdoms. If we pry and search into the ancient Histories of Italy and Rome,
we shall find the only destruction both of that Kingdom and City; has
happened only by these occasions, the pride and ambition of the Popes and
Bishops of that See, usurping authority to themselves over the Churches in the
East, produced the wars between the East Vandals and the Romans, beeween the
East and West Goths, and the Italians, which was the utter desolation of the
City of Rome.

First, by Allarick Captain of the West Goths. Secondly by Adolph their
Captain. Thirdly, by Athila King of the Hunns. Fourthly, by Genserick King of
the Vandalls. Fifthly Odasar a German. Sixthly Theodericke an East Goth. And
lastly, Totela Baldivel.

These Princes by the sword and fire, executed the just judgments of God upon
proud and wicked Rome; the original whereof was occasioned by the impurity and
uncleanes of the Clergy: and what terrible Famines and grievous pestilencies
followed these wars, is likewise too manifest by History; whereas in the
beginning whom Rome first began to lift up her head against Gods true Religion
and his anointed Servants, Kings and Emperors, she had been dashed and
suppressed, all those bloody and long wars procured by the Bishops thereof in
all parts of the Christian world had bin prevented and avoided.

My Lords, I have spoken this only to remember your Lordships of the miseries
and calamities that have happened unto those Nations that have entertained
amongst themselves dissension about the diversity of worship of God in
Religion, which always has proved the root and principal means of future
destruction, that now in time while opportunity does serve such occasions of
difference as do threaten the the same desolations to the state wherein we
live, and whereof we be a part, may by the wisdom of this high Court of
Parliment be prevented and avoided.

My Lords, if Dearth and Famine be in a Nation, there can be nothing expected
but confusion as well of the rich, as of the poor, It is the Common Proverb,
necessity has no law. There is no delaying of present necessity. It is not to
be thought that Millions of men, women and childrdn will starve and perish, so
long as there is Corn in the Land of Goshen, or in the custody of Joseph, It is
therefore the desire, my Lords, of the Commons, that as they have
compassionately considered among themselves this necessiated Petition of
distressed Tradesmen, and have limited a day certain for answering the same,
so your Lordships would be pleased to take the same Petition into your
consideration with them, that the petitioners may at the time appointed,
receive from both Houses of Parliament, such answer from their demands, as may
give them full satisfaction.

My Lords, under favor, I am to speak a word or two of the means that have
occasioned the decay in trading, and the remedies to prevent the same for
future time, and again renew Trading, the means they conceive is principally
want of due execution of Justice upon those persons that have bin the causers,
and Authors thereof, and then the remedies, due execution of Justice, without
any further protraction of time and the Enacting of such wholesome and good
laws, for the restriction of vice, and maintaining of virtue, both in
government of the Church and State, as shall be congruent to the word of God,
and the peace and prosperity of his Sacred Majesty, and all his Kingdoms, as
shall be thought meet by the wisdom and policy of this great and high Court
of Parliament, which I further humbly leave to the grave consideration of this
Honorable House.

A Relation of a Vision of Blood in the Sky, which appeared at Redding on
Tuesday night last.
UPon Tuesday night last there appeared a sky red as blood about Redding,
half a mile long, or more, which was seen so clear and visible about six of
the clock at night, that not only many people thereabouts did run to see it,
but it being apparent so far that it might be seen to London; there were
thousands that went to London Bridge, and many other places, where they could
attain the prospect, to see it; insomuch that there was a great crowd upon the
Bridge, some went into the fields, others to the tops of houses to behold this
wonderful vision, which was in this manner, viz. In length half a mile or
more, as it was judged, sharp at the North end, and broad at the South end: for
the length of it was North and South, red as blood, and very clear, almost in
color like the Moon when she is in an Eclipse; which though it seemed clear,
yet caused rather a darkness then a light; the length continued much alike,
but it grew sometimes broader, and sometimes again it was narrower; there was
neither Sun, Moon, nor any Star visible in the sky, which was very black and
dark, only this bloody vision which appeared in this manner. What can we
otherwise judge of, then to be a token of Gods displeasure against the cruel
Cavaliers thereabouts, who kill, murder, and slaw the people of God, whose
blood cries to heaven in the ears of God for vengeance against them.

FINIS.
(...)

(...) handle the Ecclesiastical affairs. And those which shall be chosen to
go to the Colloques and Synods with the Ministers, shall not fail to come
thither at the day assigned.

CHAP. VII. Of Deacons.
Article I. THe Deacons shall be ordained in the Church to gather the alms of
the people, and to distribute them according to the necessity of the poor, by
the advice of the Consistory.

Art. 2. They shall gather together the alms after the Sermon, and shall
procure and keep faithfully, the goods of the poor: And if necessity so
require, they shall go from house to house of those that are willing, to
gather that which it shall please them to give.

Art. 3. They shall distribute nothing without the advice of the Consistory, if
there be not urgent necessity.

Art. 4. The alms shall be distributed principally to those which are of the
household of faith, and if there be any overplus, it may serve to help the
strangers.

Art. 5. To meet with all suspicion the Deacons shall keep the Book, as well
of the receipts as also of the distribution of the alms, the which they shall
count in presence of the Minister and of one of the Elders.

Art. 6. The Deacons shall render their accounts every Communion day after the
latter Sermon, in the presence of the Ministers, the Ancients, and the people,
if there be any that will assist them: And therefore they shall be exhorted to
be present there.

Art. 7. They shall endeavor that the poor shall be nourished without going
about a begging. And they shall make suite to the Governors, that the youth
fit for labor, may be set to occupations: And shall advertise the Masters, the
Justices, to the end they may give order that none go from house to house to
beg.

Art. 8. They shall visit the poor, sick, and impotent, and the prisoners,
to comfort and assist them in their necessity.

Art. 9. They shall be assistant to the Consistory with the Ministers and
Ancients, and there shall propose the necessity of the poor, and tell their
advice: but in the choice of other Deacons, they shall have definitive voice.

Art. 10. There shall be two Deacons in every Parish, or else the Elders shall
have this charge of gathering and distributing the alms of the people.

The Ecclesiastical Liturgy, wherein is contained the Preaching of the Word,
the Administration of the Sacraments, Marriage, the visitation of the Sick,
wherein also is spoken of Burial.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Preaching of the Word.
Article I. THe people shall assemble themselves twice every Sunday within the
Church to hear the Gospel preached, and shall be assistant to the public
prayers: And also they shall assemble themselves once or twice every week upon
the days, which shall be commodious for the Parishes: And every house-holder
shall cause to be present his family.

Art. 2. The people being assembled before the Sermon, one shall read a
Chapter out of the Canonical Scripture only, and not out of the Apocrypha
Books: and that it be done by one that has charge in the Church, or of one of
good conversation at the least.

Art. 3. During the time of prayers, every one shall kneel, having the head
bare. Item during the time of singing of Psalms, and the administration of the
Sacraments, and whiles the Minister shall read his Text, every one shall be
uncovered, and be attentive to that which is said and done of him.

Art. 4. At the public Catechismes which the Minister shall make on the Sunday
after dinner, he shall choose a Text out of the Word of God, which is agreeable
unto the section he is to treat of, and shall read in the beginning of the
said Text, and shall have it for a foundation of the doctrine which shall be
spoken of in the said section.

Art. 5. The doors of the Church shall be shut after the Sermon and public
prayers, to wipe away all superstition. And the sears shall be set in good
order, that every one may commodiously understand the voice of the Minister
preaching.

Art. 6. The Churches which are dedicated to the special service of God, shall
not be employed to any profane uses: And the Magistrate shall be desired that
he would not hold there any civil jurisdiction.

CHAP. IX. Of Baptism.
Article I. THe holy Baptism shall be administered in the Church after the
preaching of the Word of God, before the blessing.

Art. 2. The Fathers of the children (if they be not upon a voyage) shall with
the witnesses stand near to the child, to present it to God, and make promise
for the instruction of it, as they are bound there to do.

Art. 3. None shall be received to present a child at the Baptism, unless he
have received the Lords Supper, or else if he be not fit to receive it, and
that he make promise to do it at the next Communion, whereof (if he be a
stranger) he shall bring testimony.

Art. 4. He which would present a child to be Baptized, shall advertise the
Minister in good time.

Art. 5. The Minister shall not receive the names of Heathen, of Idols, names
attributed to God in the Scripture, neither the names of Office, as Angels,
Baptist, Apostle.

Art. 6. Every Parish shall register all their Baptismes, of the Fathers,
Mothers, and Witnesses of children, and of the day wherein they were baptized;
and likewise of the Marriages and of the days; all which shall be carefully
kept.

CHAP. X. Of the Lords Supper.
Article I. THe holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall be celebrated four
times in the year; at Easter, or the first Sunday of April: the first Sunday
of July: the first Sunday of October; and the first Sunday of Januarie: And
this shall be done after the Sermon, the which shall be made expressly of this
matter, or at the least shall be touched at the latter end of the Sermon.

Art. 2. They shall follow this order; The Table shall be set in some
commodious place by the Pulpit, where they shall communicate in order, being
set, which is most conformable to the first institution, or standing, as it is
the custom of some Churches, the men first, and the women after, and none
shall go away till after the thankesgiving and blessing of the people.

Art. 3. Those which would communicate at the holy Supper, shall be catechized
first of all by the Minister, to render a reason of their faith. They ought to
know the Lords Prayer, the Articles of their faith, and the ten Commandments,
at the least the substance of them; and renounce the Pope, the Mass, and all
Idolatry and Superstition.

Art. 4. None shall be received to the holy Supper, which is not of age and
discretion, and which has not good testimony of his life and conversation, and
which does not promise to subject himself to the discipline.

Art. 5. If there be any which is accused in justice to have committed some
crime, he shall be exhorted to abstain from the Communion, till such time as
he shall be justified.

Art. 6. There shall not be received to the Lords Supper any of other Parishes
without good testimony from his Pastor, or of two of the Elders where there is
no Minister.

Art. 7. Those that will not be reconciled, shall be deprived of the Lords
Supper.

Art. 8. They shall advertise the people at the least fifteen days before the
Lords Supper, to the end they may be prepared for it.

Art. 9. Besides the former examination, which is made of the doctrine before
they communicate unto the holy Supper, every one ought again to be catechized
once a year at the least, according to the commodity of the Ministers and
Parishioners.

CHAP. XI. Of the Fast.
Article I. THe public fast shall be celebrated in the Church, what time the
Colloque or Synod shall think it meet, as a day of rest, in which there
shall be Sermons in the forenoone and afternoon, with prayers, the reading of
the word of God, and singing of Psalms, all most meet for the occasions and
causes of the Fast, and all by the authority of the Magistrate.

Of Thankesgiving.
Art. 2. The solemn thankesgiving must be celebrated in like manner, as the
Fast: all the exercises being fitted to the occasions and causes of it.

CHAP. XII. Of Marriage.
Article I. THe promises of Marriages shall be made in the presence of the
Parents friends, Governors, or Masters or Mistresses of the parties, and with
consent of them, and in the presence of the Minister, or of one Elder or
Deacon, who shall receive the promises pure and simple, with invocation of the
name of God, otherwise they shall not be received. And as for those that are at
their own liberty, the presence of the Minister or one of the Elders or
Deacons is also necessary for the policy.

Art. 2. The children and those which are under Government, cannot make any
promise of Marriage without the consent of their Fathers and Mothers, or of
their Tutors, or of their Gardians, in whose power they are.

Art. 3. If the Fathers and Mothers are so unreasonable that they will not
accord to so holy a thing, the Consistory shall give them such advice as shall
be expedient, to the which if the Fathers and Mothers will not agree, they
shall have recourse to the Magistrate.

Art. 4. Even those which have been married, owe this honor to their parents,
not to marry themselves without the advice of their parents, for want whereof
they shall be censured.

Art. 5. Those which shall be betrothed, shall promise with their parents that
they shall be married within three months after their promises are made, or
within six months, in case they be in a voyage. And if they will not obey,
they shall be pursued by the Ecclesiastical Censures.

Art. 6. No stranger shall be betrothed, unless he have leave of the Right
Worshipful the Governors, or their Leiftenants.

Art. 7. In marriages the degrees of consanguinitie and affinity shall be
diligently observed according to the law of God.

Art. 8. The publication of Matrimony shall be declared three Sundays, one
after another immediately in the Church where the parties dwells, or if they
marry in some other Parish, they shall bring good testimony from the Minister
that shall have published them, otherwise they cannot be married.

Art. 9. To avoyde the abuse and profanation of the day of Rest, and the
manifest contempt of the Word of God, which is made in the marriage-dayes, it
is thought good that marriage be no more celebrated upon Sunday, but on the
week days only when there is a Sermon.

Art. 10. If any will oppose himself against the publication of Matrimony,
they must address themselves to the Minister first, or to two of the Elders,
which shall signify it to the next Consistory, to come and give the reasons of
his opposition: Of which the Consistory shall judge: And if there be any
appeal, it shall be referred to the Colloque.

Art. 11. Those which have companied together before they are married, shall
not be married before they have made confession of their fault; and if the
fault be openly known, they shall do it before all the Church: And if it be
less known, the Consistory shall give order for it.

Art. 12. The promises of Widows that would remarry themselves, shall not be
received but six months after the death of their deceased husband, that both
for the honesty and well seemlinesse, and to meet with many inconveniences. As
for the men, they shall be exhorted to stay a certain time also, without
constraining them thereunto.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Visitation of the sick.
Article I. THose which have sick folk, shall advertise those which have
charge in the Church in commodious time to this end, that they may be visited
and comforted.

Art. 2. Those which are sick shall be advertised to make their will in good
time, and whilst they are in their good sense, which shall be done in the
presence of the Minister or Elder, or some other able men, and worthy of faith,
which shall seal the said Testament, to this end they may be approved.

CHAP. XIV. Of Burial.
Article I. THe dead bodies shall not be brought nor made enter into the
Churches: but into the Churchyard ordained for the faithful.

Art. 2. The kinsfolk, friends, and neighbors of the dead, and as many as the
kinsfolks will pray, even the Ministers, if they be at leisure, as members of
the Church and brethren, not in regard of their charge, no more than the Elders
and Deacons, and shall go to conduct the dead corpse, for the comeliness of
the burial: At the which there shall be neither Sermon, nor prayer, nor
ringing of Bells, neither any kind of other ceremony.

Art. 3. The dead shall not be buried without advertising of the Minister
before.

Art. 4. The dead corpse of those which are excommunicated shall not be buried
among the faithful without ordinance of the Magistrate.

CHAPTER XV. Of Ecclesiastical Censures.
Article I. ALL those which are of the Church shall be subject to the censures,
as well those which have charge in the Church, as those which have no charge.

Art. 2. The suspention from the holy Supper of the Lord, shall be published only
in matter of heresy, schism, or other notable fault, of which the Consistory
shall judge.

Art. 3. Those which shall not receive the advertisements and reprehensions of
faults made by the Word of God, and which continue hardened, without hope of
being brought into the right way after many exhortations, if they cannot be
brought again they shall be excommunicated: whereunto shall be proceeded by
three Sundays, according to the order as follows.

Art. 4. The first Sunday every one shall be exhorted to pray for the sinner,
without naming or declaring the sin, or the sinner.

Art. 5. The second Sunday the sinner shall be named and not the sin: the
third Sunday the sinner shall be named and the sin declared, and he
excommunicated, which shall so continue as long as he remains rebellious.

Art. 6. Those which are excommunicated, are rejected of the Church, that they
ought not to be admitted either to public prayers, or unto the preaching of
the Word.

Art. 7. If any having public charge in the Church, shall commit any fault
which in a private person meriteth public suspention from the Lords Supper,
they shall be suspended from their charge, and if they commit any fault the
which in a private person meriteth excommunication they shall be deposed.

Art. 8. And likewise those which have committed any such fault, by the which
they are made incapable of exercising their charge to the edification of the
Church, shall be deposed.

Art. 9. If the sinner comes to repentance, desiring of the Consistory to be
received to the peace of the Church, diligent information must be had of his
conversation, and shall advise the people thereof the Sunday before he be
received, and make confession to have peace of the Church.

Art. 10. The second Sunday he shall present himself before the Pulpit, and
shall confess his fault, asking pardon of God and of the Church by his own
mouth, in ratifying only that which the Minister shall have said of his
repentance.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Ecclesiastical Assemblies for the guiding and governing of
the Church.
Article I. IN all Ecclesiastical Assemblies the Ministers shall be
Moderators, to gather the voices, to impose silence, and to give sentence
according to the plurality, and to give the Censures; to the which they shall
be subject as well as others.

Art. 2. All Censures shall be done in meekness of spirit and doctrine.

Art. 3. All Assemblies shall be begun and ended by prayers and thankesgiving;
and it shall be done by him that is then Moderator.

Art. 4. All those which there shall be assistant, shall speak by order,
without interrupting one of the other.

Art. 5. None shall depart from the Assembly without leave.

Art. 6. All Ecclesiastical matters there shall be entreated of, and decided
by the Word of God, without taking upon them any civil Jurisdiction.

Art. 7. If there come any matter of importance, which cannot be decided in the
lesser Assemblies, they shall be sent to the greater. And likewise if any man
do feel himself grieved with the judgment of the lesser, he may appeal to
the greater: And there shall be nothing in the greater handled, which has not
been handled before in the lesser, unless it be in a matter which is remitted.

Art. 8. For all the things that are memorable in all the Assemblies, there
shall be a Register made, which shall be done by a Scribe appointed in every
one of the Assemblies.

Art. 9. The Ecclesiastical Assemblies shall not be daysmen in causes and
matters civil, yet the particular members of it as private persons may, but
yet very rarely, when it is for making an end of debate, and the same of great
consequence.

Art. 10. He which has been deprived of the Communion, or suspended from his
Charge by an assembly, shall be reestablished by the same.

These Assemblies are either simple, or compound; simple, as the Consistories.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Consistories.
Article I. THe Consistory is the assembly of the Ministers and Elders of every
Church, for the Government of it, and to watch over the manners and doctrine,
and to correct the vices, and encourage the well-doers, where the Deacons,
together with the proposants, may be assistant to the Ministers, to the end to
fashion them in the discipline and guiding of the Church.

Art. 2. The Consistories are to be assembled every Sunday, or other days and
hours ordained, according to the commodity of the Consistories, to consult of
the affairs of the Church.

Art. 3. None shall be called to the Consistory without the advice of the
Minister and of two Elders, in case of necessity at the least: and every Elder
or he that gives sommance, shall call them of his quarter, as shall be
ordained.

Art. 4. The Elders shall not report the secret faults, not having observed the
order commanded by Jesus Christ, Matthew. 18. Reprehending in secret the faults
that are secret.

Art. 5. The Minister or Elders shall not name to the Consistory, those whose
faults they shall bring to the Consistory, without the advice of the said
Consistory.

Art. 6. The censures of the Consistory shall be given before every Communion
in the most commodious day; wherein the Schoolmasters also shall be censured.

Art. 7. The Consistory shall choose those which ought to go to the Colloques.

Art. 8. The correction of faults and offenses, appertains to the
Consistories, excommunication excepted.

Art. 9. In Ecclesiastical Assemblies the Consistories shall make inquisition
of the faults which shall come before them; and shall adjure the parties in the
name of God to speak the truth.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the composed Assemblies, which are the Colloques and the
Synods.
Article I. AT the beginning of the Assembly there shall be called the Minister
and the Elders, which ought to be assistants there.

Art. 2. The persons who are named to be assistants shall not miss to be
present there, upon pain to be censured at the next assembly, unto the which
they shall be called.

Art. 3. The Articles of the former assemblies shall be read before they enter
the affairs, to the end to know if they have been executed: And at the end of
every assembly the Elders shall take a copy of that which has been determined
there: to the end that all may walk after the same rule.

Art. 4. In every Assembly there shall be a Scribe to write that which shall be
resolved of by the Company.

Art. 5. At the end of every assembly they shall give a brotherly censure of
the Consistories, in general of the Ministers and Elders, which shall be
assistant there, and principally of that which has been done in the assembly
during the action.

Art. 6. The excommunication shall be only concluded in these assemblies.

Art. 7. The Masters the Justices shall be prayed to cease the exercise of
Courts, ordinary and extraordinary in the days of the Colloques and Synods,
to this end that they which ought to be there assistant may not be hindered.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Colloques.
Article I. THe Colloque in the Assembly of the Ministers and Ancients deputed
of every Church, in every one of the Governments of those Isles, for the
government and entertainment of the Discipline.

Art. 2. The Colloques shall be assembled four times in the year; ten days
before every Communion: In which day there shall be the proposition of the Word
of God, following the form which is before established in the Chapter of
Ministers.

Art. 3. The Ministers of Alderney and Spark, shall meet once a year at the
least, at the Colloque at Gernsey, and they shall choose the most fit time to
come in.

Art. 4. The Colloque shall choose those which ought to go to the Synod, and
shall give them Letters testimonial of their sending.

CHAP. XX. Of the Synods.
Article I. THe Synod is the Assembly of Ministers and Elders, deputed by the
Colloques of these Isles.

Art. 2. The Synod shall be assembled from two years to two years, in Gersey
and Garnsey by course, unless necessity do constrain to assemble it sooner*
In which case those of the I Will where the Synod is to be holden, may hasten* it
by the advice of both the Colloques.

Art. 3. In every Synod there shall be chosen a Minister to govern the
action, and a Scribe to register the actions.

Art. 4. The Minister of the place where the assembly is made, shall make a
prayer in the beginning of the first sitting.

Art. 5. The Colloques shall mutually advertise one another of the general
things they have to propose to the Synod in commodious time, to this end that
every one may have time to think of it more ripely. And they shall give some
advertisement thereof before the Colloque, which goes next before the Synod,
so far as they may: And as for things of smaller importance, they shall be
communicated of in the day of the first sitting.

These Articles touching the Discipline, are so set down that so much and so
far as they are grounded upon the Word of God, they are immovable: And as
for the points that are merely Ecclesiastical, that is to say, framed and set
down for the commodity of the Church, according to the circumstance of
persons, time, and place, they may be changed by the same authority they have
been instituted.

Here follows the manner of Installing the Officers of the Church.
The Promise in general.
YOu promise before God, his elect Angels, and his Church, that you will serve
him faithfully in this Office, taking heed to your self, to this end, that in
this vocation of God, you may walk worthily, so as it becomes a good servant
of God, without abusing it to serve your own affections, or to be pleasing
unto men, but that you use it with a good consciente, carrying all that you do
in this office to the glory of God, and to the edification of the Church,
principally of that over which you are set: giving in all things good example
unto all, namely, in keeping and taking good heed to the policy as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, procuring the good and honor of the Kingdom of
England and of the I Will: taking pains that the people may live in good order,
peace and union one with another, and in subjection and obedience to the
Government of his Majesty, the right Worshipful the Governors, his
Lieftenant, the Bailiefe, and the Justices, not consenting to any thing which
is repugnant to the Laws Civil, Policy of the Country and Kingdom, and the
Ecclesiastical Censures. All which you shall do so far as your office does
require, that is to say, without being prejudicial to the liberty of a good
conscience.

Furthermore, You shall not abandon or leave off your Charge for any
coffeehouse, or tediousness, or any thing whatsoever: unless it be by the
consent of the Consistory, or other to whom it appertains: At which
Consistory you shall attend (if there be no hinderance) the Sunday, after the
Catechism to handle the Ecclesiastical affairs: And you shall take heed of
not disclosing any thing that has been handled, to the parties or any other
persons (unless it be that they ought to know it) in pain of being rejected
from the Company: Remembering always that you must render an account of the
charge which has been committed unto you; to the end that you may hear his
most amiable voice, It is well done good servant, enter into the joy of thy
Lord. Finally, that which touches you most nearly in regard of the particular
charge you are called unto.

Promises Common to Ministers of the Word of God, and to the Elders.
YOu do promise that you will feed and govern the flock of Christ, which is
committed unto you, which is his house, according to the policy that our Lord
Jesus Christ has established in his Church, in having a care not by
constraint, but willingly and with a ready courage, not for gain or unseemely
honor, but only having regard to the glory of God, and to the salvation of
the people: Not reigning over the Church, but in humility and fear, following
the Word of God.

You promise also to have an eye and watch upon the flock, to admonish and
comfort in particular, according as need requires: Also to reprehend the
private faults, and to bring to the Consistory the public faults; to the end
the scandalls of the Church may be hindered.

You shall attend the Colloques and Synodes at all times, when you shall be
deputed thereunto, revealing nothing of that which has been handled to the
parties, or any of the persons, unless they ought to know it, upon pain to be
rejected from the company.

You promise to take careful heed of the accounts of the Deacons at the
Communion day, or at least at the Communion days of September and Easter, and
that after the second Sermon of the Sabbath; in which day ordinarily there is
no Consistory kept, or else the Sunday following, according to the
opportunity of the Church.

A Promise particular to the Minister of the Word.
YOu promise that you will deliver the most holy Word, and Sacraments of God,
in all faithfulness, pureness, and reverence, that you will take pains in
teaching the people which are capable, in convincing those which contradict, in
casting down the proud, in erecting and lifting up the humble, in bringing
again those that are strayed out of the way, in cutting rightly the word of
truth, as a good workman, which needs not be ashamed, and as a good and wise
Steward of the House of the Lord, distributing the spiritual meat as well to
every one apart, according to his ability, as in common to all the family. You
shall do this in all diligence, being earnest in time and out of time: And for
this cause you promise to follow with all care and diligence, all means and
helps of study, things proper to execute and honor your said Ministry,
which notwithstanding shall be done in all simplicity and easiness, as well
in words as in sentences, to this end, that the rudest and most unlearned, and
the Church may be edified by it. Above all, you shall employ your self in
studying the holy Scriptures, to this end, that being well instructed touching
the Kingdom of Heaven, you may be like a good Father of a Family, who is able
to draw out of his treasure both old and new things.

A Promise particular to the Elders.
YOu promise to be assistant unto the Ministers of the Word, for the Government
of the Church, over the which you are appointed, and shall take heed to the
Ministry of the Word; First, that the Church be not unprovided, and that being
established it may be reverenced, and therefore you shall have an eye to them
as well for the holy doctrine, as for their holiness of life, and afterward
upon the rest of the Church, especially upon those which are committed more
nearly to your charge. And therefore if there shall come any discord between
any of your quarter, you shall endeavor to accord them by good and brotherly
advisement, and if they will not obey, you shall summon them to come to the
Consistory to have some convenient remedy thereof, which you shall do
principally in the Visitation before the Communion: Also you shall go at every
Communion throughout all the Families of your quarter, as well to your
neighbors, as those that are of your own household, to know whether they live
in the fear of God, whether they frequent preaching, if they do pray in their
houses, their particular prayers evening and morning, before and after meat.

Furthermore, You do promise to visit the sick of your quarter, and when
there shall be need, you shall call with you the Ministers of the Word to
comfort them; finally, you shall procure that all things in the assemblies may
be done in good order and seemlinesse.

A Promise particular to Deacons.
YOu promise to receive, dispense, and keep faithfully, and without deceit or
acceptance of persons, the goods which are given to the poor; you shall
gather the alms of the poor given by the people at the going out of the
Church after the Sermons, and especially on the Sabbath day: And if that
necessity so require (because of some extraordinary need) you shall go by the
houses of those which are willing, to gather some come or other alms,
according to the good will or discretion of well disposed people. And to wipe
away all evil suspicion, you shall count out of hand the alms received (which
shall be set down in writing) in the presence of the Ministers, and one or two
of the Elders: And for this cause you shall have a Book, wherein to Register
as well the things that are received as those that are laid out.

You do promise that you will not give any alms without communicating it unto
the Ministers and the Elders, that you distribute the alms, first of all unto
those that are of the household of faith; and if there be any overplus, you may
let it run down unto strangers from the Church.

You do promise to visit the poor, sick, and to cause them to be tended and
looked unto, and to inquire of the necessity of other poor, principally of
your quarter, and to the end that they may be nourished by the alms of the
Church, without letting them wander and range about the streets, or other
Parishes. And you shall procure that those which are meet to be put to
occupation, that they may be employed, of the which, you shall advertise the
Constables, or those which have the charge of Justice, to the end that they may
not be suffered to beg.

A Prayer Common for all the Officers of the Church.
OH Lord God, Father of light, from whom comes every good and perfect gift,
we do pray thee most humbly in the name and favor of Jesus Christ, thy only
Son our Savior, who being ascended into heaven in glory, does not cease to
enlarge toward as thy gracious liberality of Officers, for the work of the
Ministry, and building of thy mystical body, we most humbly pray thee, that
seeing it has pleased thee to call this our brother to the service of the
Church, that thou would so fashion and fit him to so holy a charge, that he
may quit himself in all diligence, employing himself faithfully and with a
fervent zeal to all that which belongs unto his charge. Give him prudency to
govern himself well in it, and force to execute all things that appertain to
him in regard of his office. Above all things, fill him with the spirit of thy
fear, to the end that he may be preserved from all scandal, confusion, and
the allurements of this present world, of the snares and ambushments of Satan,
giving him patience and constancy, that he may acquit faithfully his duty as
much as humane frailty may suffer: Bless thou his labor, to the end that
nothing hinder the holy work which is in his hands; Show also this grace to
every one of us, to acknowledge him as set and ordained of thy hand in this
most holy vocation, that we may be led by him, without withstanding the order
thou have established in thy Charge: And that by this means remaining in thy
obedience, thou may be glorified in us, and thy Church may receive continual
growth, to the good and salvation of thy children:

Proper to the Minister of the Word.
And in regard of his particular Charge, we most humbly pray thee, that this
our brother which thou have called to the Ministry of thy holy Word, to the
which even the holy Angels are insufficient, thou would enlarge him with
the true keowledge of the wonderful secrets thereof, and with a singular
wisdom, by the which he may know how to dispense and apply to every one,
according to the circumstance of time, of places, and principally of persons,
that he may have his mouth opened to declare in all liberty and boldness,
truly spiritual, the mystery of the Gospel; As also all that which is meet
for him to declare; And also to administer the holy Sacraments in all purity
and reverence: Give to every one of us this grace, that we may receive as well
the one as the other, in all humility and trembling of heart, not as coming
from men, but (as the truth is) coming from thee the living God, thereby to be
quickened eternally to

Proper to the Elders.
be an Elder and watchman, grant thou that he being given for help to the
Ministers of the Word in the government, and as the ears of the body of the
Church, he may apply himself with such diligence to know the estate as well of
the faith as of the manners of the flock, principally of those over the which
he has more particular charge, that by this means he may as well admonish,
reprehend, comfort, and encourage every one, according as there is need; as
also to certify the Ministers of the Word of it, that the Ministers by help
thereof may with more profit address their doctrine to the Church of God. Give
also this grace to every one of us, that we may obey and reverence him as well
in private admonitions, as the rest of the guiding of the Church, as a father
whom God has set to watch over our souls, to this end he may do it with
cheerfulness and not with grief to

Proper to Deacons.
be a Deacon, that thou would grant him thy Spirit, first of simplicity,
to distribute the treasure of the church without acceptance of persons; and
then the spirit of discretion, to discern of the estate of every one of the
poor, and especially of those which are of his quarter. Finally, and above
all, the spirit of compassion, to execute his duty toward the poor
(principally toward the sick and weak) in all joy and readninesse, to the
end they be not put to further sorrow: Touch also the hearts and entrayles of
every one of us, that following thy liberality toward us, we may willingly
and frankly distribute of our goods to sustain the necessity of the afflicted,
as members of the same body, and entertaining the communion, which ought to be
between the faithful, we may show by effect that we are true members of the
Church.

Laying on of hands.
I lay upon him the hands in the name of the Consistory, by which imposition of
hands, you are advertised that you are set apart from the affairs of this
world, whether they be your own or any others (in so much as they may hinder
the charge you are called unto) to be dedicated and consecrated to the holy
service of God. Moreover, that in doing your duty faithfully, roundly, and in
all simplicity (as before God) you shall be assured of the assistance of the
hand of God, helpful unto you in all your necessity: And therefore that you
be not discouraged for the afflictions that may come upon you in executing your
charge, rather that you may sustain constantly and in all patience, contempt,
shame, and reproach of men given in this world, both which things being
signified by this ceremony, God by his mercy and faithfulness accomplish and
perfect in you, in the name of his Son Jesus Christ our Savior.

A general Admonition to the people for all the Officers of the Church.
ANd as for you Brethren and Sisters know, that the duty of the Church toward
the Brother present, is to receive him willingly, as sent of God, bearing him
honor and reverence, in regard of his Charge, the which he executes toward
you: Take heed that you murmur not against him, or against his Ministry in any
sort whatsoever, for the Lord will not leave unpunished the contempt of his
servants, and much less the murmuring and rash rebellion against their
persons: As the horrible examples that may be seen in the Scriptures do
plainly testify. It is also required of you that you pray unto God for him, to
this end that he may execute the office God has called him unto in all wisdom
and faithfulness, referring all to Gods glory, and the edification of his
Church, whereof he has charge.

Special for the Minister of the Word.
Which you shall do so much more carefully for him in regard that his charge
is of so great importance, as well for the glory of God, as for the salvation
of us all, as you have partly understood by the duty which has been already
recited. To the end that speech may be given him and a mouth opened in all
boldness to make known the secret of the Gospel, and to speak frankly as it
behooves him to speak. Secondly, it is meet you know that the office of the
Church toward the Ministers is to entertain them honestly, according to their
power and ability: for it is good reason that seeing they sow spiritual
things, they should reap the corporal things: And that the Ox that treads
out the grain, should not want feeding, as St Paul teaches: Therefore also
you shall have this our Brother for recommended as touching his entertainment.

FINIS.

