DAEMONOLOGIE, AND THEOLOGY. The first, The Malady, Demonstrating the
Diabolical Arts, and Devilish hearts of MEN.

The Second, The Remedy: Demonstrating, God a rich Supply of all Good.

By Doctor Nathanael Homes,

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, and are to be sold by Jo: Martin, and Jo:
Ridley, at the Castle in Fleet Street, near Ram-Alley, 1650.

DAEMONOLOGIE, OR THE CHARACTER Of the Crying Evils of the Present Times: In
which, Beside the transcendent wicked practices of Men that never sipt of
Religion; and the unparalled impious Principles of Hypocrites degenerated
from their Profession of Religion, whether SEEKERS, SHAKERS, FAMILISTS,
RANTERS, ADAMITES, etc.

Are handled THE DOCTRINES of DEVILS, as 1. DIABOLICAL ARTS in general, Viz.
the Causes, means, etc. 2. DIABOLICAL ARTS in special Viz. Operation of
strange things, as Charming, and Juggling. And Declaration of hidden things, As
1. DIVINATION immediate by a Familiar Spirit.


Divination mediate, namely, by Auspicie, Augurie, Pullarie, Aruspicie,
Sortilegie, Necromancie, Oneiromancie, Astrology.


All which are here handled not only Pneumatologically by the strength of
Reason, History, and Experience of Men's confessions; but Theologically,
according to the depths of Scripture, And Prophetically, as foretold to be the
idioms and proper marks of the LAST DAYS (before Christ's appearance) by the
Word of God, according to the Hebrew, Chalde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabian and
Greek.

A Table of the several Chapters and Sections, contained in this ensuing
TREATISE: Viz.
CHAP. I. OF the general and main Position. Fol. 1 CHAP. II. Showing in
General that these present times in which we now live, are those evil times
that precede next before that first appearance of Christ, which is yet to come.
fol. 11 CHAP. III. A particular Parallel of our times, with that in the 1.
Tim. 4.1. That men shall give heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of
Devils. fol. 16 CHAP. IV. A particular Parallel of our Times, to Enchantment,
Witchcraft, etc. seducing Spirits. fol. 22. CHAP. V. Of Divination by immediate
help of the Devil. fol. 47 CHAP. VI. Of Diabolical Divination by Auspicie,
the flying of Birds, Augurie, the noise of Birds. Pullarie, Chickings eating
their meat; and by other Occurrences of Beasts, and Things, either conducing
to, or concurring with, the said Arts; or are Appendices of this kind of
Divination in general. fol. 53 CHAP. VII. Of Divination called Aruspicie, and
Sortilegie. fol. 67. CAAP. VIII. Of Necromancie, or the Black Art. fol. 83
CHAP. IX. Of Oneirologie, Oneiromancie, Somnispicine, or Divination by Dreams.
fol. 88 CHAP. X. Of Astrology, or Divination by the Stars; commonly called
Judicial Astrology, as whereby men undertake to Predict, Divine and foretell,
the good and bad success of Humane affairs, concerning Nations, or Persons.
fol. 106 SECT. 1. Of the Nature of Astrology in some Distinctions,
Descriptions and Observations. fol. 108 SECT. 2. Of the opinion of the Learned,
touching Astrology. fol. 111 SECT. 3. The condemnation of Astrology by the
Word of God, in several places of Scripture. fol. 121 SECT. 4. Containing
Reasons, or Arguments against Astrology. fol. 140 SECT. 5. Confuting the
Objections that are brought in the behalf of Astrology. fol. 159
CHAP. XI. A Parallel of other particular sins of the present Times; with
the Prophesies of those Texts before named, of the last days; Demonstrating
that these are the Times forerunning Christ's next appearance, according to the
Prophesies of the Scriptures. fol. 191
God a rich Supply of all Good: In which you have,

I. The Believers Interest in it. II. The Riches of it in quantity. III. The
gloriousness of it in quality. IV. The means sealing up all; Namely, Christ.
TO The Right worshipful, and his much honored Friend, FRANCIS ROVS, a Member
of the Parliament of ENGLAND, and Master of Eaton College.
SIR,
YOur Piety, your Learning, your Patronage to both, have encouraged me to
bequeath this Piece to you. Though I cannot merit you a Maecaenas to me, the
truth may to it.

Paul seeing the Idolatry of the Athenians, his spirit, (...), Act. 17.16.
(...) He was much greived in his spirit. Arab. Stirred with anger.
was bitterly provoked. And the dumb Daughter of Crassus spoke, when she saw
her Fathers life in danger. I could not hold my peace, nor can you withhold
your approbation, to cry down that diabolical Astrology which is practiced
by some, in these all-evill times (in sorts of sins) to the great prejudice of
truth and godliness. Myriads of men, of late, have degenerated by many
Miscreant degrees of declension. This last of turning to Daemonologie, as to a
Divinity, leaving God, for the Devil, is worst of all. Atheism (too
frequent) is worst regatively, this positively; and therefore in that, worse
then that worst. How justly I speak all this, will appear, when this Treatise
has made report. And had I made known to the Parliament, all I know of some
Astrologers late practices, possibly they might make a Law against Astrologers,
as the Roman Senate did. Vlpian, l. 7. De officio Proconsulis.
I will interrupt you no longer, but still remain,

Yours to serve you in Christ Jesus: Nath. Homes.
From my Study at Mary Staynings, London, October. 28. 1650.
CHAP. I.
Of the General and maine Position.

IT is Prophesied in the New Testament, that next before Christ's appearance to
call the Jews, of whom, with the fullness of the Gentiles, to set up his
glorious Kingdom on Earth, there should be just such times, as these present
evil times now are, 1 Timothy 4.1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
later times, some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits,
and doctrines of Devils, etc. 2 Timothy 3.1. This know, that in the last days
perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous,
boasters. 2 Pet. 2.1. But there shall be false teachers among you, who privily
shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, etc.
2 Pet. 3.3. There shall come in the last days, scoffers, walking after their
own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming, etc. Jude v. 14.
And Enoch the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these; that is, of these and
such as these. What are they? Verse. 4. etc. Such as creep in unawares, ungodly
men, turning the grace of our God into wantonness, or laciviousnesse, etc.
Jude v. 17, 18. Remember the words which were spoken BEFORE of the Apostles, of
our Lord Jesus Christ, how that they told you, that there should be mockers in
the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be they,
who separate themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit.

If one Apostle had once said these things, all the World might not, without
great sin, either contradict, or not believe. But in the mouths of two or three
witnesses, every word is established, in the judgments of all rational men. We
have here three Apostles testifying of the truth in hand, and each of them
twice apeece: Some testifying it to the Gentiles, others to the Jews, another
to both, and all. And from them all, we have both the Position and the
Exposition; yea, and as Chronologers do Astronomically, by Eclipses,
Plenilunes, Novilunes, Epacts, etc. so these The logically several ways, set
marks upon times, whereby they may be known to be the last times, in the sense
before expressed. So that we cannot but be compelled in our understandings, to
acknowledge that when the evils we speak of are extant, the said last times are
existent.

When Paul had said, in that 1 Timothy 4.1. (...), in the later times, such and
such evils should be; yea, and not content with that expression, speaks more
punctually, in 2 Timothy 3.1. (...), in the LAST DAYS shall be such and such
evils, as pride, self-love, etc. about twenty in all, to Verse. 10. he
presently exhorts Timothy to stand sound, while seducers grow worse and worse;
Verse. 11. to the end of the Chapter; charging him, Chap. 4. v. 1. before the
Lord Jesus Christ, and by his appearance and Kingdom, to Preach the Word, and
to be instant in season and out of season; Namely, to the end that he may
Preach and establish men whiles they will hear. For, says he, in v. 3. The
time will come that men will not endure sound Doctrine, etc. And shall be
turned unto fables: So that Saint Paul sets a mark upon these times of evil,
that he says shall come in the last days; that they do precede next before
the appearance of Christ to set up his Kingdom. So that the entyre Systeme of
this whole point of the evils that shall be in the last days, mentioned both
before and after the mention of the appearance of Christ, to set up his
Kingdom, can intend nothing more, then that these last evil days the Apostle
speaks of, do forerunn next before the appearance of Christ, for the erecting
of that Kingdom. As if Paul should say, in the last days shall be these and
these evils, just before Christ's appearance; and upon that, I charge thee, etc.
Where an emphasis is put upon his having a Kingdom at his appearance (if we
read but as in the English.) For the Apostle does, as it were, adjure Timothy
upon this Book, charge him upon this, as a singular interest, that Christ at
his appearance shall have a Kingdom: Not only that spiritual Kingly power
which he has always had with his Church, but he shall have a Kingdom at his
appearance, in which he shall exercise a judicature over the bodies of men, as
it is also express in this Verse. How, we shall touch by and by. But the Greek
has a far louder emphasis. For it is (...), that is, THAT SAME appearance of
him, and THAT SAME Kingdom of him, or of his. As that his appearance at this
time, this Text speaks of, is not merely spiritual, but visible; so
proportionably, that his Kingdom at that time is not only spiritual but
visible. And further the Greek tells us that Christ has that Kingdom, (...),
AFTER, or ACCORDING to his appearance: Yea, the copulative AND puts it into
that order; namely, first his appearance, and THEN his Kingdom. His
appearance, at least, is first in order of nature, before his Kingdom, if not
in time. Til the Jews be called, none of this Kingdom is set up, as is the
general vote of all the Bible (cleared largly in another Treatise.) And how
they shall be for the generality called at once, as (to use the Prophets words,
Isa. 66.8.) a Nation borne at once, without the visible appearance of Christ to
them (which they daily expect, often throwing open their windows to behold) let
them devise that are contrary to us in opinion, for I cannot. The Scriptures
tell me twice, Zech. 12. 10, 11. Revel. 1.7. (which places cannot be meant of
Christ's coming in the flesh, or to the ultimate day of the general Judgment,
as has been largely demonstrated else where) I say, they tell me that the Jews
shall be called by the visible appearance of Christ. Zecharie speaks of the
Jews Families mourning a part, and of pouring out of the spirit upon them,
which cannot be imagined at the ultimate day of Judgment. And John in the
Revelations quotes the same place, carrying it on as a Prophecy of a future
time, when Christ long since had been incarnate, and ascended. And beyond all
contradiction with meditational men, this Text of Paul to Timothy is clear for
the appearance of Christ to be the preparation and Primitie of his Kingdom: At
the beginning of which Kingdom, it is said here, He shall judge the quick and
the dead (as our English has it.) It can be no danger to keep close to the
Original. I charge thee, says Paul to Timothy, before the Lord Jesus Christ,
(...), etc. Who will in future judge quick and dead after his appearance. His
appearance must precede (as to make himself known to Jews and Gentiles to be
King, etc.) then after that he sets up his Kingdom at the beginning whereof he
shall judge (it is not said (...), THE quick, and THE dead, as comprising all
mankind that ever was, but) quick and dead indefinitely, meaning indeed,
according to the Analogy of other Scriptures, that at the beginning of the
said Kingdom he shall judge SOME of the quick and dead: that is, He shall
destroy the quick obstinate wicked, especially that relate to the Antichristian
party, Revel. 19. two last. And he shall raise all the dead Saints, Revel.
11.15, 16, 17, 18. (weigh the place) And Revel. 20.4, 5. etc. In the former is
mentioned Christ's Kingdom, at that resurrection; and the anger of Nations; and
rescuing the Earth from the destroyers thereof: and the opening of the Temple,
and the Arc seen; which I cannot by any safe interpretation make to suit with
the ultimate day of the general Judgment. In the later, namely, Revel. 20.4,
5. etc. to the end of the Chapter, the six times mention of a thousand years,
the mention of loosing of Satan after that; the following of the resurrection
of the wicked after that; the mention of the Saints reigning mean while with
Christ a thousand years (who reigns not after the general Judgment, but lays
down all, 1 Cor. 15.24.) with infinite more that has been discussed on this
place, and the other of Revel. 11.15. make me confident, that nothing but the
Corporal resurrection, and glorious reigning of the Saints on earth for a long
time, can rationally be understood in those places. Thus you see how Paul
having Prophesied what evils shall be in the last days, shows us clearly what is
that which is the period of them, and the beginning of better times: Namely,
Christ's appearance and his Kingdom: So that the evils that we are to speak
of, according to these Texts of Saint Paul, do precede, and go next before
Christ's next appearance.

So likewise Saint Peter, having foretold the evils of the last days, does
likewise set a conspicuous mark upon the times, to signify he means the
same times as Paul did; Namely, those that foregoe next before Christ's
appearance and Kingdom, 2 Pet. 3.2, 3, 4. That ye may be mindful of the
words which were spoken before by the HOLY PROPHETS (that is, says Marlorat,
the words which the Prophets spoke concerning false Prophets, which Peter had
repeated, 2, Epist. Chap. 2. Verse. 1. and of the last times) Knowing this,
FIRST, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, saying, Where is the
promise of his COMING? For since the Fathers fell asleep all things continue
as they were from the creation: As if they should say, We see nothing of
Christ's appearances, but outward providence, or spiritual Ordinances, But of
Christ's visible appearance at his COMING, we see no sign or symptom: But
says Peter, Verse 8. to the Saints, Be ye not ignorant of this one thing,
that one day with the Lord is a thousand years: and a thousand years as one
day: As if he should say (in that he makes this repetition, according to the
judgment, not only of all the most learned Hebrews, but also of most learned
Mede) that Christ's coming will be sudden to these Scoffers, as if it were but a
day or two hence; every thousand years, and parts of a thousand years shall be
but in proportion to a day, and so much of a day: The seven thousand years of
the World, is but as the seventh day of its age, when at farthest (if our
account of years from the creation be so short as we make it, of which we have
cause to doubt) shall be the Sabbatisme of rest on Earth, as Paul must needs
mean, Heb. 4. (demonstrated largely in our Treatise of the thousand years) And
that day a thousand years of refreshment to the people of God: And it must be,
says Peter, Verse 12, 13. at his coming, that for their refreshment they must
have, enjoy, and be in, New Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein (though not
before) shall dwell all righteousness: And these new Heavens and new EARTH must
be such as he has promised; which promise is, Isa, 65.17. to the end of the
Chapter; wherein this state of the new Heavens and new Earth is so explained,
as cannot (not only in my judgment, but the judgment of most learned Mede)
be understood of supernatural glory in the highest Heavens. Thus also we see
Peter marks out unto us, that the evil times, and the evils of the times he
speaks of, do in his sense antecede, and usher in, the next appearance, or
COMING of Christ to set up his Kingdom on Earth.

One word of Judes marks upon the times of evil, he speaks of, and then we shall
lanch forth into the deep, and Sea of the evils of those times: One mark is,
Verse. 14. Enoch the SEVENTH from Adam, prophesied of these (or, such as these)
saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints: Enoch
evidently, according to the computation of Moses, Genesis 5. and of Luke, Chap. 3.
was the seventh from Adam, thus; Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahaleel, Jared,
Enoch: that is, Exclusively, making Adam only the beginning of the All, of
mankind, Enoch was the seventh Father that came out of Adams loins; which is
according to the mind of the Text: The seventh FROM Adam; that is, The seventh
of the Fathers that were FROM Adam.

Between Adam and Enoch were but six Fathers. So between Adam and the Age of
which Enoch Prophesied, that the Lord should come with ten thousands of his
Saints to judge, are at most but six Ages, six thousand years; and then the
state of things in the seventh, Eodem recidit, the second Adam Christ, restores
the World to the perfection of the first Adam, but with more stability.

The emphasis of the seventh from Adam must of necessity signify some such
thing, and not merely signify the antiquity of the quotation. For if that had
been all, the Apostle mentioning the story of Sodom, and as an example of
judgment by fire, might also have quoted Lot, but does not; of a certainty
therefore the seventh from Adam has some notable thing in it; as all sevenths
in the Old Testament have. And the constant tenor of the Jews in all ages, is;
and has been, that toward the end of the six thousandth year of the World,
great will the change be: And our Text tells us that according as Enoch was a
seventh, so in a proportion to that, the Lord should come to judge, now after
the Apostles times, in the last days of the World. Immediately before which,
shall be mockers, walking after their own ungodly lusts; spoken long before, by
the Apostles of Jesus Christ, as our Apostle Jude tells us, Verse. 17, 18. which
is a second mark of those evil times he speaks of, to be the forerunners of
the very last times before Christ's appearance. For if the Apostles foretell
these things long before, then they are the last times, when these things shall
come to pass.

CHAP. II.
Showing in GENERAL, That these present times in which we now live, are those
evil times that precede next before that first appearance of Christ, which is
yet to come.

THIS will appear by an exact weighing the agreement that is between our times,
and the general expressions of our three Apostles, of the last days. Jude
says, Verse. 18. Men should walk after their own lusts. Peter says, 2 Epist.
Chap. 3. Verse. 3. the self same words. And in Epist. 2. Chap. 2. Verse. 1.
There shall be false Teachers, that shall bring in damnable heresies. Paul
says, 2 Timothy 3.1. They shall be perilous times: And in 1 Epist. Chap. 4. Verse.
1. Men shall depart from the faith. The sum of all, is, That men shall depart
from their Principles; they shall depart in opinion and practice, from their
once received Principles of truth, and mor all enlightened consciences. Just as
it is said of the foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25. they had no Oil in their Vessels,
to maintain their Lamps of former profession. Principia essendi, Principles of
the being of Godliness, they never had; namely, True sanctifying grace: for
that could never have gone out, or been utterly lost. But Principia
cognoscendi, Principles of knowledge, what as Christians they ought to think
and do, namely, The knowledge of the Word, to some conviction on the
conscience, that they had. Now from these Principles, immediately before Christ's
coming, they were departed: And so it is now, in these our days. Men once
called Professors, are turned topsy turve (as we Proverbially say) from what
they were, both in opinion and practice. They are most perilous times, above
all times before them, for wicked opinions and practices. The wickedest times
before, as the Jews in the worst of times, held the Old Testament; and the
Papists, both Old and New, though with many false glosses; but these times with
open mouth cast away all the Scriptures, the ground of all divine truth: And
what do they walk after or according to then? Even after their own lusts:
both corporal lusts, namely those Principles that please the flesh; and also
intellectual lusts, and mental wantonnesses, fantasies of their own spirits.
What ever pleasant dreams they dream, or new devises they imagine to sooth up
themselves, and put away all true fear of God, and the thoughts of judgment
to come, of local Hell and Heaven, and the immortality of the soul; such
dreams and imaginations, I say, as these that put away all fundamental truths,
and the thoughts of them, are their Principles of truth: And like Principles,
like conclusions. Upon such premises must needs follow damnable heresies. That
the Creature cannot sin, because God acts in him: That the Creature has done
nothing that he should torment himself by denying himself any contentment:
That all things are common, and to be enjoyed in common. And thus they depart
from the Faith: As in that 1 Timothy 4.1. of the evil times the Apostle speaks of,
he says, Some shall depart from the Faith. Est fides quam, and fides qua:
There is either the Faith which we believe, that is, the object and ground of
Faith, namely, the Doctrine of Faith, the holy Scriptures; or the Faith with
which we believe, namely, the quality of Faith. The parallel of our times to
this, is, that there is in this Nation, such an apostasy of Men and Women,
called formerly Professors, from the Faith as I never heard or read of in any
Ecclesiastical Story, of any Nation. We have them that deny the Scriptures, and
with those blasphemous reproaches cast upon them, and with such audacious
equalizing, yea preferring of their own dreams above them; as it will be safer
to be silent touching the particulars, then to carry the sound of them to your
ears: And if they depart from the object of Faith, the Doctrine of the Word of
God; they must necessitatedly depart from the quality of so much Faith as may
be in an Apostate before his faling away: As, from a fundament all Faith, to
wit, That there is a God; and from an historical Faith, whereby he once did
believe that the Scriptures were the truth of God, and so becomes worse then
the Devil, James 2. And worse then the generality of Heathens. * For the
Devil cannot be an Atheist, but his sin is properly the sin against the holy
Ghost, maliciously to hate and persecute that truth of which he is fully
convinced. And the generality of Heathens could not be Atheists, because of the
Common Law of nature, Romans 2.15. whoever of them (as generally they all did)
set up any thing to be their God, did withal acknowledge some Oracle, secret
conference, or tradition, etc. whereby they knew the mind of that God. And
lastly, these Apostates are worse then the Jews or Papists whom they pretend
to detest; for they both in all their Heresies and Errors in opinion and
practice, still in the maine keep to those Scriptures they first embraced. Nor
is it a sufficient excuse for them to pretend they have all things dictated to
them by the spirit, because we are commanded to try the spirits by the Doctrine
of the Scriptures, 1 John 4.1. And if this place of Scripture is not of weight
with these Anti-scripturians, let them hear reason. How were they two both
ledd by the good Spirit, when at the same time the one of them preteuded to
Preach by the Spirit strange high Hyperphysicall transcendencies, and the other
in the auditory at the same time breaks out into loud expressions of sublime
spiritual raptures, pretended to be upon the parties spirit, to the
occasioning of the Preacher to hold his peace a while, til by and by he cries
out to the other, Be silent O flesh. Sure the spirit of God is not contrary to
it self, nor the author of confusion: And if there be a lying spirit, as well
as a spirit of truth, how shall we know to distinguish the good from the liar,
but by the old good way ever since there was a written Word on Earth; namely,
by the written Word, Isa. 20.8.

CHAP. III.
A particular parallel of our times with that in the 1 Timothy 4.1. that men
shall give heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils.

SSould seem that in the last times there shall be seducing Spirits, and their
Doctrines, as well as the Spirit of truth and his Doctrines: And as Satan is
called a lying spirit, so he is said to be a lying spirit in the mouth of
Ahabs four hundred false Prophets, for one Michaia that spoke by the spirit of
truth; so that men's spirits are also said to be lying spirits; or spirits or
error, 1 John 4.1. prompted, no doubt; also by Satan. The Parallel of these
times to our times in this suits thus: Men, yea nominal Professors: First, are
Levellers, which was the Devils Doctrine to Adam. Secondly, Familists, saying
that men are Deified, and God is the Creature, which also was in effect the
Devils Doctrine. Thirdly, are much given to heed and believe Diabolical Magic
and Divinations (under the notion of lawful Mathematics, and laudable Art) to
tell, and foretell things which God does not, and nature cannot declare, or
Predict. I speak not against proper lawful Art, which I am engaged to honor;
but against such practices as are above Art, and belong to Diabolical
assistances; whereby, many in these days are at last decoyed into the Circle
of the Devils power of prevailing suggestions, and bewitched Obsession, if not
also most probably, by what I could tell you, unto possession. In Revel. 12.
Verse. 10, 11, 12. in the type of the last times before Christ's appearance, it is
said, Now is the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; and the
Saints overcome by the blood of the Lamb. But immediately before shall be a Woe
to the Inhabitants of the Earth, for the Devil is come down unto you: I say,
immediately BEFORE; because it is said, first, That the Devil and Satan were cast
out: And then it follows, Now is salvation and the Kingdom of our God, and
his Christ. Secondly, it is said, The Devil is come down, having great wrath,
because he knows he has but a short time. * And Master Perkins shows in
his Book of Witchcraft, that a man that does confidently believe, that upon
such Figures, Circles, and the like Diabolical traditions, he shall be told such
and such things, not knowing any divine, or natural reason WHEREFORE it should
be so, may be in an implicit Covenant with the Devil.. It is not enough for a
right knowledge by Art, to know, That it shall be so; but to know justly why,
and wherefore it shall be so. The knowledge of wherefore promises Art. But the
knowledge of only THAT it shall be so, may be suspected of far worse. And
doubtless some good men in these times, whose return to the truth, witness
their goodness (of which we have but rare examples) have been really
bewitched; being forced with an irresistible strange power, to say and do
those absurd, yea and wicked words and things, as I am loath to mention, though
I am certain of them. By their own confession we may apparently gather the
Devil was in it, because of their blasphemies, and withal strong temptations to
uncleanness, though the Lord graciously kept them from yielding to them. These
things we have partly from their Books, and partly from their confessions. To
confirm this of the Devils bewitching in a sort, with strange delusions, some
good people by parling with Satan at first (as Eve did) when he begins to
present his cozening phantasmes, hear a true and strange Story of Luther; who
being at prayer, on that the Papists call Good Friday, the Devil represents on
the Wall, over against the fixing of his eyes in his devotion, a most exact
pourtracture of a Crucifix, limbing forth to the life, Christ hanging naked on
the Cross, with his five passion wounds, and drops of blood pendent, and as
distilling from their Orifices: Luther at first astonished hereat, quickly
recovering his spirits, did not (as now it would by many, as I perceive by
their narrative of what sights they have seen) take it for a revelation, but
zealously like a prudent sound Saint, burst out into words to this effect,
Avaunt, I defy thee, thou cursed Devil; I know no picture of Christ but his
Word and Sacraments. At which words Satan having lost his design, withdrew his
painted Cloth, I mean his represented phantasie-fopperies. Upon this, a good
Woman a while after in Germany, having a strange Vision (as She imagined) and
therein as She conceived, a revelation, diverse godly Ministers, and among them
Luther, were sent for; when they came, the Woman endeavored to show them a
strange representation upon the Wall, which She (as She said) saw, but they
could not. Luther importunes the Woman to bid defiance to it, and to spit upon
the place, in token of her abhorrence; which at last, after much importunity,
She did: Whereupon She cried out, O now it is turned into a Serpent, or great
Snake; O now says She, it creeps up upon my arm to my shoulder; O now, says
She, it bites me by the ear and some drops of blood fell; but whether Luther
saw the blood, Luthers Story does not expressly tell me. After which the Woman
was quieted. I leave the Reader to make application; whom I could tell other
certain relations of apparitions, as was imagined of fire on the Wall, whiles a
most godly Minister was praying, to comfort another Minister, that at that time
conceived something did stroke down the Bedd-clothes upon him as he was in his
Bed. All which artifices the Devil will use in these last times, to see if he
can draw away people from the sure Word of God, to other fantastical
revelations. Which Word, Peter says in Epist. 2. Chap. 1. Verse. 19. is more
sure to us, then a voice from Heaven. Compare Gal. I. v. 8. The Devil in the
last times will use extreme diligence with all his devices, 2 Cor. 2.11.
Transforming himself into an Angel of light, and making HIS MINISTERS so to
do, 2 Cor. 11. that he himself, and they may BEWITCH men from the truth, Gal.
3.1.

So that as there are seducing spirits of Devils, so of Men, 1 John 4.1. of
which next, that we may take in all that this expression of 1 Timothy 4. 1. may
comprehend. Men-seducing-spirits are such as pretend much of the spirit, either
of Prophecy, or of holy illumination in knowledge (both of them in that 1 John
4.1. and 3.) but by their lips and lives it appears, they are carried to their
opinions, or practices with a lying spirit: So in that 1 John 4. And that
parallel place of our other Apostle under consideration, Viz. Jude, Verse. 19.
Sensual, not having the spirit: that is, They make boasts of having the
spirit, but indeed are quite contrary to having the spirit, for they are
sensual: They are so in their notions, and so in their actions; they are not
spiritualized, but are carnal. So most sadly in these days: The Seekers
pretend the spirit, but lay aside those Ordinances that are appointed by the
spirit, and wherein is heard the voice of the spirit, both from God to us, and
in us to God. The Shakers pretend the spirit, but act in a fleshly manner of
quivering, interrupting one another, whiles both pretend to be moved by the
spirit. The Familists pretend the spirit, yet refuse a Christ come in the
flesh, who was most full of the spirit, and is the communicator of the spirit.
The Ranters pretend the spirit, yet curse, and swear, and Whore, most
fleshlily.

CHAP. IV.
A particular Parallel of our times, to Enchantment, Witchcraft, etc. seducing
Spirits.

THat I may a little warn this present Age of having to do with the Devil,
and his Agents in ways of Divinations, Enchantments, and other Diabolical
operations, before they are aware; let me take this opportunity of our matter
and method, leading me hereunto from this Text of 1 Timothy 4.1. Seducing spirits,
and Doctrines of Devils,

First, To observe from Acts 19.19. that those that act by the Devils
assistance, do pretend Art, yea, and Book-Art too, as well as laudable
Mathematicians do for their commendable Arts.

Secondly, That the Devil, being a spirit of exceeding knowledge (for he lost
only his goodness) He understanding better then men the Prophesies of the Old
Testament, the secrets of nature, what nature may be heightened unto in being,
or operation, and the dependence of actions, both naturally and morally, often
times does hitt right in Predictions. As he by his Oracle foretold Great
Alexander of things, as of Victories, etc. change of Empires, etc. by knowledge
he had stolen out of the Prophecy of Daniel 11.3. And so by his skill in men's
natural complexions, and passions, and to varnish incentive objects; observing
what causes natural or moral do usually produce such effects, He, and by his
help, his Wizards, or Diviners foretell sometimes very right, what will befall
such and such men.

Then again, by his exceeding power and agility, he can either change the
visive humor of the eye, or the condition of the air; or he can trouble the
inward fancy, making it to take notice of the phantasmes he presents, or
stir up melancholy, or the like humors, or patch up a body of the Elements,
he acting in it as the soul thereof, or can act in the mouth of a Beast, by
all which he has made miserable men think and say, they are Prophets, Christ,
God (even as Nebuchadnezzar by a deep melancholy, and Satan let loose upon him
by Gods permission, thought himself, and so acted for many years, as a
Beast.) And made an appearance of Samuel, and spoke in the Serpent. Much more
can he do in man by suggestion, obsession, and possession.

Thirdly, the Devil being most malicious against God, does in every thing he
can, oppose God: And therefore he also being a King or Prince, namely, of
darkness, and God of the World, will have his Oracle, invent his words and
laws of the Art of Divination, etc. which he communicates to his Subjects,
especially to his trusty tried ones, to put them in execution, to draw others
to sin. And therefore the Apostle calls all superstitious worship, Observations,
actings, and communion with them, Diabolical, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. The Gentiles
sacrifices are sacrificed to the Devil: And I would not (says the Apostle to
the Corinthians there) that ye should have fellowship with Devils; ye cannot
drink of the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils: ye cannot be partakers of
the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils.

Fourthly, In the last times, a little before the coming of Christ, 2 These.
2.1, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. The principal wicked Agents of Satan shall come with the
WORKINGS OF SATAN, with all power, and SIGNS, and LYING WONDERS; and with all
DECEIVE ABLENESS of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they
received not the love of the truth. And for this cause God shall send them
strong DE LUSIONS that they shall believe a LIE; that they all might be damned,
who believe not the truth, but had PLEASURE in unrighteousness.

Fifthly, The ground of Divination, or Sorcery, Enchantment, Witchcraft, etc.
is a COVENANT. As God makes a Covenant with his people, sealing it with
Sacramental seals; by faith wherein, they can do gracious acts, above, and
contrary to flesh and blood; as to defy Satan, conquer sin, repel a
temptation, and suffer great things patiently for the Name of Christ: Many
Heroic instances whereof, and of other things, we have in the eleventh Chapter
of the Epistle to the Hebrews; and the ten Persecutions, and the Marian days;
so the Devil, in derision of godliness, and malice to God, and to draw away
souls from entering into Covenant with God, makes a Covenant with wicked men,
and seals it with many visible signs, figures, etc. by confidence wherein,
they are helped by him (God permitting) to do strange things. For which the
Scripture is evident, Deuteronomy. 18.10. Moses having named Diviners, Observers of
times (or as some render it, Astrologers) Enchanters, and Witches, in the 11.
Verse he names Charmers as the ground work of all before, and the aid of them
that follow, Viz. To consult with a familiar Spirit, and Wizardly to know, and
Necromantically to enquire of the dead. And with such dependence to that which
follows does the Syriack render it: And he names Charmers with this Notation
(...) Jungens junctionem, as Arias Montanus translates it word for word: that
is, Joining into conjunction or agreement; yea, and of society. For all that
know but a little Hebrew can tei that (...) signifies to be sociated,
associated, conjoined; used of Ephraims joining with Idols, Hos. 4.17. That is,
Reverencing, and trusting in Idols; as Inchanters, Diviners, Charmers, etc. do
in the Devil, as a part or appendix of their Covenant: yea, it signifies to be
coupled, or to agree, or make an agreement with one. And Schindler says, (...)
signifies an Inchanter, or one, Qui consortium habet cum Daemonibus, that has
a share with Devils, or a partnership with Devils. Indeed these Diviners, etc.
are they of whom that Isa. 28.15. is most properly, and in a special manner
true, They have made a Covenant with Hell and Death. Other evil men do
metaphorically, by way of presumption, and security in sinning: But these
properly, and by a kind of paction. So much is intimated in Psalm. 58.5 They
are like the deaf Adder, that stops her ear, which will not hear the
voice of Charmers, the voice of a learned conjoyner of societies, or skilful
maker of Compacts: So the Hebrew exactly word for word ((...)) It Is true, this
is but a Simile or Comparison; but in such is supposed as granted, an evident
truth in the particulars whence the similitude is formed; else it had not been
a familiar and plain way of Preaching, so much used by Christ. So here it is
taken for granted, that there are Charmers, and that Charmers are skilled in
making Compacts. Not with Beasts that were a ridiculous imagination; but with
those that can help them in their Art, who only are the Devils; and so they
come to have power to Charm, Inchant, and do strange things, beyond the
strength or sphere of mere Art, or natural virtue. Which Covenant-making with
the Devil, does something more appear by the Devils offer, fully on his part,
which he made to Christ, Matthew. 4. That he would give Christ all the
Kingdoms, if he would fall down and worship him: and for that end, formed
somehow, before Christ's senses, a kind of representation of all the glory of
the World: Which is sufficient to show how ready the Devil is to make a
Covenant with men, and upon what terms, and what by permission he can do;
and what opportunities he takes to make such offers; namely, when men are in
the greatest distress (as Christ now had fasted forty days and forty nights)
in which he hopes, men having no help from God, and growing into desperate
discontent, his offers may be accepted. For surely if he would offer this to
Christ, who fully would and did refuse them, how much more to wicked men whose
lives show that their hearts are badd enough to close with his offers. And we
have experience to rivet this fast and firm, from the confessions of
Sorcerers, Diviners, Witches, etc. of very many Ages, who have acknowledged
that by virtue of a Covenant with the Devil, they effected what they did.
Which to be truly spoken by them, common reason must needs evince, seeing the
Witch of Endor, and the like poor, ignorant, weak, and silly, and sinful men,
and women, have no true and right skill, nor divine gift, nor power over
nature, etc. above other men, to act their feats; which other men out of
Covenant with the Devil cannot act, of what indowments soever. Which is the
more confirmed, because this I am most sure of, that whiles some of these
Diabolical Artists have been at their feats, some worthy godly man in the
company, secretly groaning earnest prayer to God, that those delusions of the
people might not be permitted, they have swet with endeavors to act their
wonders, but in vain, being unable to bring to pass; crying out, that some
body in the company did hinder them, Certain it is, that some wicked men have
a special intimacy, interest, etc. with the Devil: Else why should the Apostle
intimate Idolaters have; that sacrificing to the Devil, they have special
Communion, fellowship, and partnership with the Devil. Weigh that 1 Cor. 10.20,
21. well; and they that can, the Greek also (for I cannot stand to dilate on all
things intending all brevity) and consider all the circumstances of that Text,
and you will find that Idolaters are in a great agreement with the Devil; and
if they, much more Inchanters, if such men be not both. For Idolatrous worship,
and ceremonies, are the seals of a Diabolical Covenant; and amongst Idolaters,
are most Inchanters, Wiches, etc. as in Italy, etc. and formerly in England in
the Popish times; even as the Heathenish Idolaters had commonly a great
interest in the Devil, to give them answers, predictions, and counsel, as is
abundantly to be seen in the Roman Histories; and to appear to them, and do
strange things for them that give to him Heathenish idolatrous or Diabolical
worshipp (the Apostle makes them all one, 1 Cor. 10.20.) as appears in the
Devils proceedings with the Indians and their Powwowes in New England, and
elsewhere. And yet further: If these Diviners, Inchanters, etc. were not in
some Covenant with the Devil, why does the Scriptures mention them under the
notion of THEM THAT HAVE, AND DEAL WITH FAMILIAR SPIRITS, Levit. 19. v. 31.
Levit. 20.6. Deuter. 18.11. 1. Sam. 28.3, 7, 9. 2 Kings 21.6. and Chap. 23.
Verse. 24. 1 Chronicles. 10.13. 2 Chronicles. 33.6. Isa. 8.19. Isa. 29.3, 4. Surely this
notation of a Familiar Spirit, and to HAVE a Familiar spirit, must of necessity
import formally or equivalently, some Covenant or Compact, as the knot and
league of this Familiarity. Hear learned Antiquity. Aben-Ezra, a learned Jew,
whom Buxtorffe, and Doctor Willet, and Schindler, follow, and enlarge, (...)
say they (the word for a Familiar spirit, or one having a Familiar spirit, used
in all those Scriptures but now quoted) signifies one, who in giving answers by
diabolical Arts, enticeth men away from God. Also the word signifies a
Bottle. Hence according to the composition of both significations, persons
having familiar spirits were so called, (...) because from the belly as swollen
and blown up, the Oracular answer proceeded. And for that they were called of
the Greeks, (...) that is, Such as spoke out from the belly. Vocula quadam
(says Tertullian) ab eorum pudendis excitabatur. And they were called (...),
Pythones, by the Greeks and Latins ( forsan, (...)) for the same cause. The
unclean spirit making his seat in an unclean place. And (...) Haoboth, in
Levit. 19.31. is taken for Bagnale oboth, the Masters of Familiar spirits: As
the Witch at Endor is called Bagnaleth obh, the Dame, or Mistress of a Familar
Spirit. As the Familiar spirits are wont to call them Dames, or Mistresses. And
the Hebrew Doctors do further declare the league of familiarity that is
between the familiar spirits and them that have them, saying, (...) one having
a Familiar spirit, is he (...) etc. Qui ex juncturis aut axillis loquitur vel
demonem facit ascendere, seu evocat. Who from Conjoynings, or from between the
meetings of the bodily members, etc. speaks, or calls up a Spirit, etc. Take
it any way, it can import no less then a Covenant between man and the Devil,
as those that have searched, or heard the confessions of Witches, will easily
yield. The word (...) in the Talmud for a Familiar, is the name of the Divil
giving answers, whom some WORSHIP, or of the WORSHIP of the Devil that gives
answers. Which import also a Diabolical compact. For this worship is, says
Schindler, a sort of Idolatry. And such Idolatrous worship, and ceremonies,
says Master Perkins, are the seals in part of some Diabolical Covenants.

6. The advantages and opportunities Satan takes to bring men to this, to enter
into Covenant with him (for that is his Art, to improve his devices, upon men
taken at an advantage, 2 Cor. 2.11.) I say, the opportune advantages, are
chiefly two; one when a man is very high, another when he is very low. First,
when high. High with pride, and selfe-admiration, affecting novelties, and
wonders. This was the Devils fall; and therefore out of much experience, he
knows this to be a fit time to draw away others. By the rule of proportions,
If wicked men do great wickednesses, when swollen with great pride,
selfe-admiration, and affectation of novel wonders: As Theudas did, when
boasted himself to be some body, etc. Acts 5.36. And others did, when durst
speak great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration, etc. Jude,
Verse. 16. Then wicked men may do greater wickednesses, as to compact with the
Devil, to be able to be more wicked, when more swollen with greater pride, and
selfe-admiration, etc. We have a plain Text for it, Acts 8.9. There was a
certain man called Simon, which before time in the same City used SORCERY and
bewitched the people of Samaria, GIVING OUT that himself was some GREAT ONE;
to whom they all GAVE HEED, etc. Saying, THIS MAN IS THE GREAT POWER OF GOD.
In which Text, without my enlarging, the meditational Reader may easily see
that to be true that I have asserted. What will not men of infinite proud
spirits do that they may be admired? Simon Magus, as it follows in this eighth
of Acts (that is, Simon the Magician) first gave himself to the Devil, that he
might be admired. But when the Apostles by their most divine, and more
wonderful Doctrine, and Miracles, drew away his admirers to the Faith, then
Simon Magus pretended also to believe, and also would be baptized; but still
having an eye to the Apostolical new wonders, admiring them, and (as it
follows) hoping to attain to that power. For seeing by the Apostolical
imposition of hands the holy Ghost was communicated to men, he offered Money
for that power of communicating the holy Ghost to them on whom he should lay
his hands. An evident Character how men first bewitched, in a spiritual sense,
with swelling pride and self-admiration, will become any thing to advance
themselves.

They will pretend to be on Gods side, and they will be really on the Devils
side, by Compact. This pride and selfe-admiration, and wonder-seeking in Simon,
made it evident to Peter that he was yet in the gaull of bitterness, and bond
of iniquity: We see in these days, that men will pretend to be Preachers, and
will in public deliver most blasphemous, and impious things, that please the
flesh, and promote beastial licentiousness, to the end that they may be
followed and admired of the multitude, which generally (says Christ) go the
broad way. To me it is clear by laying all good informations together, that Men
and Women come to their height of impieties in this method of pride: First,
they think that a low thing, to wait on Ordinances, which all do: They must
be above the generality of men. Secondly, Next they must pretend they have
revelations, and can of themselves understand strange things (as one of them
said she was as wise as Solomon.) Thirdly, They are strangely bewitched, and
carried by the Devil to say and do any thing that may please the flesh, and
promote their admiration. They can prophecy future things and not miss, as
they pretend. They can go naked, use Women in common, and blaspheme, and drink
an health to the Devil (I am sure I speak the truth) and yet do not (as they
say) sin in all this. Yea, it is a consuming of all flesh, as their phrase is;
that is, to debauch and disgrace all that men (as they say) put righteousness
in, as fleshly. And then fourthly, What is next to all this, but if not in
compact with the Devil already, they are in the ready way, For some of them do
strange things. But let me add this caution, that Satan sometimes does Compact,
and concur with, and assist men and Women to operate Diabolically under a
finer garb, of seeming Art, civiller carriage, and words that sound of
Religion; as by experience has been known of several. Of this more after. The
second opportune advantage is lownes of condition: When Men through crosses,
wrongs, vexations, wants, etc. are in deep discontent; so that they say in
their hearts, what would not they do, that they might be revenged on such and
such. At such times as these the Devil by voice only, or by some shape also
approaches near to them, offering them aid; especially upon his conditions.
The Devil also since his fall into his low misery, knows, and that by
experience, that this also is a fair opportunity to draw men into Compact; as
discontent makes him desperately malicious to do any wickedness, let God be
offended never so much. By the same proportion that Saul in his discontent
would consult with the Devil by the Witch of Endor, though before he had put
away those that had familiar spirits, and the Wizards out of the Land; by the
same reason, men are drawn into league to be Witches and Inchanters. And
truly there is not a little toward a Covenant with the Devil, to go to
Witches with confidence, they can and will answer to their desires; even * as
Faith in God is the maine of godly men's Covenant with God. And if (as Master
Capell proves it, in his Book of Temptations) it be a kind of subjection to
the Devil, to be afraid (because of him) to go into a dark room about
necessary business; or to yield to turn about the face in prayer, to see if
the Devil be behinds, as the fantasy imagined him to be there; there must be
much more then a subjection, in confidence in the Devil; or Witches will and
power to help. This that I have said about discontent is verified by
confession of Witches. And by much experience it is evident that both advantages
and opportunities are most improved by Satan, upon persons most passionate.

Seventhly, The Covenant these men may be in, with the Devil, is twofold,
according to the manner of it.

First, Express, to this effect (as has been confessed by many that have so
Covenanted) The Witch or Sorcerer on his part binds himself by solemn vow to
renounce the true God, and his Word, and his Covenant in baptism, and his
redemption by Christ; and to believe in the Devil, and to expect and receive
help from the Devil; and in the end of his life to give the Devil his soul or
body, or both. And to seal this Covenant, he presently gives the Devil, either
his handwriting, or some dropps of his blood. The Devil on his part promises
to be at this man or woman's command, to appear in any shape; to advise, to
carry him or her any whither, and to do for them whatsoever they shall desire
of him. You may by the way profitably parallel the present times with this; men
now denying the true God, saying, the Creature is God, and God is the Creature;
and have not gainsayed, when it has been objected to them, saying, Then you
will make the Devil to be God. Denying also the Word of God, blaspheming it:
Renouncing likewise all Ordinances, all Baptism, holy Supper, etc. And in
their impieties and blasphemies endeavoring to disgrace all goodness, they
do interpretatively give themselves to the Devil. And therefore no wonder
that some of them can tell, and do, strange things.

Secondly, A Covenant with the Devil may be only implicit; when men use
superstitious forms of words, or Charms in way of conjuring or calling for
the Devils help in the distinct strong thoughts and desires of the heart to
that end; though vocally there be no words of Covenant, or plain bidding the
Devil to appear or do. Here is on man's part a full consent and confidence to
work with the Devil; and on the Devils part he answers to their meaning, and
so witnesses the agreement on his part: And mutual consent, though but
manifested by signs is a Covenant. As if two dumb, or deaf persons should
make signs of their mutual consent to marry. 2. When men use superstitious
means, with the same desire and confidence of the Devils aid. As an Image of a
man in Clay with a Thorn in it, or an Egg-shell in a Paile of water tossed,
with desire and confidence, that so the Devil shall wound such a man, or toss
such a Ship at Sea; or by such and such Circles, Figures, and Anticks, to
desire earnestly, and to believe confidently that such and such things shall be
brought to pass.

These Diabolical Arts, in general, are, either operation of strange things,
or Declaration of hidden things. 1. Operation of strange things, in special,
is either Charming, or deluding. Enchanting, or Charming (which specifically is
the same) is a working of strange wonders by a Charm; as to raise Tempests,
poison the Air to infection, blasting of Corn, hurting of Men, Women, and
Children, killing or mischeiving of Cattle, or other Creatures. As also to
allay, or cure the aforesaid Maladies. What Satan can do, his
inchanting-charming-Agents can do: Or rather they be but the Puppiets, he is
the hand that moves and does all, behind the painted Cloth of Sorcereris,
antic gestures and feits. Now by Gods permission, Satan ( Job Chap. 1. and
Chap. 2.) raised great Tempests of wind that blew down the House on Jobs
Children, caused thunder and lightening, or like fiery Meteors (which as
Keckerman, the Christian Philosopher says, the Devil does much abuse) that
burnt Jobs Sheep and Shepherds. And finally, smote Job himself all over with
most noisome Ulcers. The charming of Adders we touched before, out of Psalm. 58.
Add Eccles. 10.11. The Serpent will bite, without Enchantment; or if he be not
charmed. Of men, see Number. 23.23. Balaam says, Surely there is no enchantment
against Jacob. Should seem that Balaam was an Inchanter; which more appears
because he was hired to curse the Israelites that they might be smitten, and
destroyed, Numb. 22.6. etc. But only God hindered him (as he confesses)
otherwise it appears by the fame that went of him, brought to the ears of
Balaak King of Moab, from far, he could have done it. Ibid. Numb. 22. And
Chap. 23. This Enchanting or Charming as a mischeivous and sinful thing, is
forbidden, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. There shall not be found among you an Inchanter,
Witch, or Charmer (which are all one in Diabolical operations.) Whereby it
appears that neither the thing, nor the means are lawful.

1. A Charm, or Spel express, is a sentence of words (which in themselves are
but a sound for quality, and a measure of so many syllables for quantity, and
therefore ineffectual in themselves) used by the Inchanter or Charmer, as a
watchword to the Devil to help him according to his desire and confidence in
him to work wonders. Sometimes this Charm or Spel is plainer, whimpering and
muttering some sound of praises, or prayer (as in proportion to those now,
Balaam of old offered Sacrifices, when he tried to have power to Inchant) but
usually impertinent and unsuitable to that they intend. I saw one that was
suspected, and had been examined for a Witch (and looked likely enough, and at
a word of hers, a Boy fell down, and his limbs shrunk up) who as she went
along used good words: In the particular of plain Charms, they use also that
in John 1.1. In principio erat verbum; and forms of naming the Trinity, but
still to their own sinful end. More usually they use and mutter uncoth, and (to
us) nonsense forms of words. All which are found in the confessions and
Histories of these Artists; and such their use, by them, whatever the words in
themselves signify, Gramatically, must needs be Diabolical. Because they have
no such efficacy or use by Gods Ordinance; they effect no such thing, as spoken
by those that are not in Compact with the Devil; nor as a natural Agent do
they Physically touch, and work upon the Patient. Master Perkins says, That
much of this nature are Amulets, things to hang about the neck against
Witchcraft; Popish exorcisms, conjuring Salt, holy water, etc. and a verbal use
of the name Jesus, consisting of those letters and syllables in that language,
to drive away the Devil, or Enchantments; so the crossing of the body with ones
finger to preserve one from the Devil; the scratching of a Witch to discover,
or cure witchcraft. But they are not real charmings or Inchantings in them
that use them superstitiously through simple ignorance, having no Compact
expressly or implicitly with the Devil, with desire and confidence to act from
him; although by these they be in a fair way, as going to Inchanters, is the
next door to Enchanting.

A Charm implicit, is when these Diabolical Artists making Characters,
Figures, Images, etc. with several postures and gestures, speak only in their
hearts their vehement desires and confidence, that so the evil event shall be,
and it is brought to pass. As to make Circles, by virtue whereof (as they
pretend, but indeed by help of the Devil) to do wonders; or to make the Image
of Man or Beast, in Wax, Clay, Dough, or, etc. and to bury it in the ground, or
in water, or burn it in the fire, thereby intending, desiring, and believing,
the death of the thing whereof they made the Image; or hiding the Image where
it cannot be found, intending as aforesaid, the utter loss of the thing
represented; or to make impressions on such Images with Pins, Thorns, or the
like Instrument, in any part of it, intending likewise the torment of the
things represented, in the same parts; and accordingly the said things are
done. This is a Diabolical Art, in which some Witches have been taken in the
very act; and is an implicit Charm, because the heart mutters over it, his
cursed desires. Thus of Charming or Enchantment.

2. Of Deluding, otherwise called Juggling. Delusion is, when the Devil by
these Artists makes one believe he sees that, which indeed he does not see.
There are three concurrences to sight, The faculty of the eye, the object of
the thing, and the air, as the medium. Now Satan, a powerful, active, and agil
spirit, can adulterate, corrupt, alter, or sophisticate all these very much.
All this is made out fully by laying together, First, that feat of the Witch at
Endor. Secondly, Satan's showing Christ at once all the Kingdoms of the World,
etc. And thirdly, the word the Apostle uses, Gal. 3.1. to express the
spiritual bewitching of the Galatians. The Devil could not bring up the body of
Samuel that holy Prophet, as he could not meddle with Moses body, though he
contended with the Angel about it. Jude, Verse. 9. For they that dye in the
Lord, do rest, faith John in the Revelations. And the Devil betrayed himself
to the godly Readers of that Story, 1 Samuel 28. 19. For, the Devil represents
one, in the likeness of Samuel, and speaking in the language and godly phrase
of Samuel, etc. and yet tells wicked Saul, that Saul should be with him to
morrow (in the other World.) We know Saul went not to Samuel in the other
World, according to our information out of Scripture. In like manner it was
impossible for Satan to show to Christ's humane eye, all the Kingdoms on the
round World, and all their glory in one moment, upon one and the same
Mountain, as he pretended, Luke 4.5. Therefore this was but a phantasme or
fiction of Satan's artifice. So Gal. 3.1. Paul in his comparison, to signify
the Galatians spiritual bewitching from the truth, uses the word belonging to
the nature of witchcraft, (...) that is, Has bewitched you by making you to
see, that which you do not see; as to think you see that to be truth which is
not truth. (...), pur for easier pronunciation, in stead of (...), ( Budeus,
etc. So it suits with the word in Hebrew (...) (Alapid) which signifies to
change or turn. So it suits more with the Greek (...), to kill with the eyes.
So it suits better with our Latin, Viz. Fascino, to bewitch, which (as our
Latinists may see) is thence derived. So that lay all these together, and it
will be plain, that the Witch, Jugler, etc. can delude a man's sight, as if he
saw real strange things, by altering the visive humor of the eye, the course
of the air, and aspect of the object. This Delusion then, is a Diabolical Art
of Juggling and deceiving a man's sight, above the ordinary course of nature in
shows of strange wonders done, which really and in natural verity are not done.
Active men of great agility of body may do strange feats, through hoops, etc.
And men of great wit and nimblenesse of hand may make beholders admire their
Hocus-pocus. And true Artists, by experiments of Optics, in angled Glasses, by
compoundings and dividings, and reflections, and refractions of light and
darkness, make wonderful shows. And other mysteries of true nature there are,
to make an Egg into any fashion, only by disolving the Shell into softness,
by Vinegar, etc. or to make an Egg-shel to fly up: As for natural feats of
Fireworks you know or see many; but all these are still within the sphere of
nature. And men wonder, because they do not perceive the true natural cause
and way of such facts; which true Philosophers and Artists can declare unto
them. But the Delusion we speak of, is above any true natural cause, wrought by
the help of the Devil, not of God, or of nature. Instances of Delusions we
have, Exodus 7, 8, and 9. Chapters. Where the Magicians turned Rods into
Serpents, Rivers into blood, Waters into Froggs. Which could not be really done
by them (but only they made an appearance of some such things.) First, because
the real working of such things is mediate creation (like the making of Adams
body of Earth.) Now Creation is so the immediate work of Gods Divine power,
that we justly in our Creed, according to the Scriptures, make it the peculiar
distinguishing title of God. Therefore only those that are assisted
extraordinarily with the immediate concurrence of God, can do so. As the
Prophet in raising the dead Child to life; Christ in turning Water into Wine;
and Moses in doing these, and the Apostles other Miracles. But these men of
Egypt are called Magicians, and their Art Enchantment, both which are
abhorringly forbidden every where in the Scriptures; and therefore they did not
act by the power of God. Secondly, because in token of Gods defiance against
their wicked artifice, Moses Serpent swallowed up theirs, as a sufficient token
that Moses wrought by the power of God, which overmastered their devices.
Thirdly, Because there are such testimonies given to the Miracles done by Moses
through the power of God, that they were done really, as are not given to them
done by the Magicians; namely, That the Rivers turned into blood, stunk, killed
the Fish, were so loathsome, that the Egyptians could not drink of them. And
that the Froggs had really life, so that when by the power of God, they were
killed, they putrified, and annoyed all Egypt with the evil favor of their
putrefaction. Fourthly, Because the Magicians could not do lesser things, as
to keep off the Boyles inflicted upon all Egypt, off of themselves; nor could
they make the show of Lice. But which is the fifth reason, they confessed there
was the finger of God in that Miracle: And by the same proportion there was the
finger of God in the other Miracles, seeing they were greater.

Thus much of Diabolical operation of strange things: Next of the other
general; namely, of Declaration of hidden things, either past, present, or
future, called Divination. These things the Devil can help his Agents to
declare, so far as God permits, partly by his skill in the Prophesies of the
Scriptures; as before we gave an instance of his telling Alexander future
things, out of Dan. 11. partly by his swiftness, as a spirit, quickly to be
any where; and so the Legions of these evil spirits are at all the
consultations of state in several Nations and places, Dan. 10.13. Job 1.7.
Matthew. 4. Luke, Chap. 4 Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Partly by his great knowledge
above all natural men, of the Complexions of men, nature of Herbs, Stones,
Beasts, and all Creatures; as appears in part, in the Story of possessing the
Swine of the Gadarens, and their discontent that owned them; Partly by his
effectual power (God permitting) to make men and things to do as he does
predict: For he can (by Divine permission) possess a man within, or obsesse
him without; or suggest, present and inspire into his fantasy strange
imaginations.

CHAP. V.
Of Divination by immediate help of the Devil.

THE Devil in this Art of Divination, either makes the Witch, or Diviner his
Instrument; or else makes other things the Diviner, or Witches instruments;
the Devil still concurring.

1. The Devil makes the Witch or Diviner his immediate instrument in
Divination, when he immediately informing the Witches and Diviners, inableth
them to tell many hidden things, he speaking in them or by them. In this respect
in part, is the Devil called a Familiar spirit, and the Diviner is called, one
that has a Familiar spirit so frequently in Scripture, as we touched before;
showing there, that the ground of this familiarity was a Diabolical Covenant;
and now we add, that the Devils continual presence in, or with the Diviner or
Witch to assist in Divination is the manner of the familiarity.

In the Diviner, giving answers and predictions, as in Acts 16.16. A certain
Damsel possessed with a spirit of divination met us, which brought her Master
much gain by soothsaying. Sooth is an old English word to signify truth: as
in stead of in good truth, men were wont to say, In good sooth. Mark it, in
this Text she is said to have a spirit of Divination; and it was in her, for
he possessed her, and that spirit gave answers thence, for she brought her
Master profit by Soothsaying. And Verse. 18. that spirit is commanded, and
accordingly is remanded out of her. Whereby its plain that from within her he
gave the answers. Of the manner we spoke before, in discussing the name Obh, of
one that had a Familiar spirit. Weigh well, Isa. 29.4. The Devil is with the
Diviners or Witches, when he by his wonderful inspirations, and putting them
into strange transes and furies, reveals hidden things to them; as we have
Histories of experiences in this kind: Which transes of Diviners are far
different from divine heavenly ecstasies; namely, both, because those deprive
the Witches of their reason for that time, mixing a kind of madness and
frenzy with their imaginations, Isa. 44.25. Hos. 9.7. these, on the other
side, preserve the reason of Saints, and speak distinctly to reason. As also
those in Witches may utter some pieces of truth, yet do tend to disparage it,
or draw men to doubt of it. But these in the Saints are altogether for
manifestation, and confirmation of the truth. We read in the Scriptures, and in
Histories, what madd fits the Diviners had, crying out, and clamouring like
frenzy men. And though the Devil in them confessed Jesus ( Mark 1.24.) yet
with a prejudice cast upon him that he was of Nazareth, which was in Galilee,
Matthew. 2.22, 23. which names of Nazareth and Galilee, were both prejudical to
the Jews receiving Christ; because it was prophesied he should come out of
Bethlehem, which though he did, Matthew. 2.1. Yet this the Devil in his
possessed would not confess, but proclaimed him to be of Nazareth, and this
took with the people generally (especially because he had dwelt there a while
because of persecution.) See Matthew. 21.10, 11. And when he came to Jerusalem,
all the City was moved, saying, Who is this? And the multitude said, This is
Jesus the Prophet of NAZARETH of GALILEE. So Matthew. 26.71. They accuse Peter,
one saying, This fellow also was with Jesus of NAZARETH. And then another
saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of GALILEE. And this made them that were good
men that knew not so perfectly his birth at Bethlehem, as his living at
Nazareth in Galilee, to wonder at a good Prophets arising out of Nazareth. So
good Nathanael, John 1.46. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth. But the
unbeleevers upon this account refuse him; and endeavor to keep Nicodemus off,
John 7.52. Search and look, for out of GALILEE arises no Prophet. This is
just like those furies that are in the Ranters of this present Age, they
pretend to Preach and speak some good things; but mix many abominable
blasphemies, to the dishonor of God and Religion. But divine ecstasies in good
men are wholly for the revelation and confirmation of the truth. See in that of
Peter, Acts 10. And that of Paul, 2 Cor. 12. By the first is revealed and
confirmed the call of the Gentiles: By the second, the call of the Apostle, the
knowledge of the excellency of Christ, and the glory of local Heaven, which
are things now doubted of by this present Age.

Thus you see how in Divination, the Devil makes Diviners, or Witches his
immediate Instruments, he speaking in them or to them, to inform their Clients.

Next follows, how in Divination, the Devil makes other things the
instruments of the Diviners, or Witches, whereby to make known his mind to
them for predictions to others, that seek to them for that purpose; and these
Instruments, with the art of using, are as really the doctrines of Devils (as
the Apostle speaks) as any of all that has been said touching Witchery,
Enchantment, etc. And all as truly the Doctrine of Devils, as Doctrines of
Heresy and impiety, if not more immediately of the Devil, then Heresies and
Impieties, which are compounded partly of the wicked reason and lusts in men,
and partly of the Devils suggestions.

These instruments, ways, and devices, with the artifice of using, and
understanding them (of which we are now to speak) are specifically and
principally eight.

First, Auspicie; that is, Aves aspicere, to Divine, by beholding the flying of
Birds.

Secondly, Augurie; that is, Avium garritus, to Divine by the noise of Birds.

Thirdly, Pullarie, of Pulli, to Divine by Pullen, or Chickens.

Fourthly, Aruspicie; that is, to Divine Aras inspiciendo, by looking on, and
into Sacrifices on the Altars.

Fifthly, Sortilegie sortilegium; that is, Divination by lots.

Sixthly, Necromancie; that is, (...), or, (...), a Divining by the dead; that
is, making (as is pretended) the dead to rise, and declare that which is
desired; which we English men commonly call the Black Art.

Seventhly, Oneiromancie, or Oneirologie; that is, (...), seu (...), a Divining
by a judgment given upon dreams.

Eighthly, Astrology; that is, (...), to Divine by judgment on the effects of
Planets, etc. Lawful Astronomy having another name, is the measure, motion,
distances, etc. of the Stars obvious to sight. And because there is a lawful
natural Meteorologie, from apparent causes; as touching Weather, Tides of the
Sea, etc. therefore for more distinction, the unlawful Astrology of secret
events from pretended hidden virtues in the Stars, and their power upon the
arbitrary wills and judgments in men, is called Judiciary Astrology.

Of these eight we shall speak, both because to these, all other Magical
Doctrines of the Devil may be reduced; as also because most of these, in whole
or in part, are in these most evil days in credit with persons named
Professors, or Christians.

CHAP. VI.
Of Diabolical Divination by Auspicie, the flying of Birds; Augurie, the noise
of Birds; Pullarie, the Chickens eating their meat, and by other Occurrences of
Beasts and Things, either conducing to, or concurring with, the said Arts, or
are Appendices of this kind of Divination in general.

OUR first work must be to hear the voice of the Word of God, what it
intimates of, and speaks against these things, as observing the inclinations
of men to these, Deuteronomy. 18.10. There shall not be among you an Inchanter. The
Hebrew is, (...) which by the consent of most, both Jews and Gentiles, in all
the learned ancient languages, signifies such a one as practices the aforesaid
Arts. The Chaldee Paraphrase renders it by a word near the same; namely, (...)
which the Translators of the Chaldee render, Qui observat auguria. The Syriack,
Augur. The Arabic, Augur. The Samaritan, Qui auguretur. The Septuagint, (...),
one augurating. Hierom in his latin Translation, Qui observet auguria. R.
Abraham in his Commentary on this place, renders it, There shall not be found
in thee, one augurating. The Hebrew Doctors say of our word (...) that it
signifies one that Divines by food falling out of the mouth; by the falling of
ones Staff out of the hand; by ones Son calling his Father back again; by a
Crow crying toward, or after one; by an Heart, Kidd, Goat, Roe, interrupting a
man in his way; by a Serpent on the right hand, or a Fox on the left hand; or
by a Weesell, or by Birds, or by Stars.

It appears already by that which has been said. 1. That men are inclined to
the foresaid Diabolical Arts. Evil manners occasion good Laws. 2. That as
Augurie is sometimes taken precisely for divination by the chattering or noise
of birds, so sometimes by the figure Synechdoche, for many other kinds of
Divinations (which we call Soothsayings.) 3. That all these are condemned by
the word of God, both in the fore quoted Deuteronomy. 18.10.
And also in Levit. 19.26. Ye shall not eat any thing with the blood, neither
shall ye use enchantment, nor observe times. The word, ye shall not use
enchantment, are in the Arabian language, do not Auspicate, or use not
Auspicie, that is (as we explained before) Divine not by beholding birds, or
observing the flying of birds in the Syriack do not augurate by a winged living
creature. The Samaritan, is, Neither shall ye augurate: Augurie being properly
taken, signifying (as we said before) Divining by the noise of birds. Hierome
also in latin, and the Septuagint in greek render it, ye shall not Augurate.
So the Caldee also.

The sinful superstition, and diabolical art used in these three kinds of
divination, (that we here put together in this chapter, because of the
interchangeable intermingling of them in several circumstances and appendices)
is in brief this:

The Augure, or Augurer, or he that uses Auspicie, sat on some kind of
Tower, the air being clear without dark Clouds or rain, with his Lituus, a
crooked Staff in his hand, clothed in his Laena, a robe adorned with Scarlet
and Crimson guards; his head covered, his face toward the East; in which
posture, he quartered out with his Staff, the Heavens into certain Temples,
Regions, or divisions, observing in which of them the Birds did appear: If
they came toward his left hand, then that was a token of good luck, because it
showed that they came from their Heathenish God his right hand. For the givers
right hand is toward the receivers left hand. From this superstitious
divination, sprang those phrases among the Latins and Greeks, Auspicari rem,
to begin a matter (with auspicie) to do a thing, Bonis avibus, with lucky
Birds, or Bonis auspicijs, with lucky auspicie. And so on the contrary, Malis
avibus, or Malis auspicijs, with ill Birds, or ill auspicie; that is, with ill
luck, as they called it; and Christians too much to this day use the word Luck.
Tully, l. 1. de divinat. A sinistra cornice ratum. i. e. It was ratified by a
Crow flying to the left hand. And in the Law of twelve Tables, Ave sinistra
populi magister esto: So they had this phrase: They began nothing in auspicato,
without consulting with the Augures; so they had these phrases, (...), The
right hand augurie, (...), An augurie of health or safety. (...), An augurie or
divination of what shall come to pass in the way. Aristot. l. 5. Polit. Cap.
4. says, (...), etc. He fell into a sad or sorrowful augurie. And Lipsius
(Elect. l. 2. c. 2.) says, that the Grecians from hence called the left hand,
(...), because it signified in augurie, (...), the best luck. As the Romans
named sinistrum, the left (as Serve. Aen. 1.2. says) a sinendo, permitting it
so to be. Together with their Augurie by flight and sight of Birds, the Augure
did sometimes kill a Sacrifice, and effata recantat, makes his prayers to this
effect: Father Jupiter, if this thing shall be good and lawful for us, let
there be certain and evident signs within the borders I have quartered out
(namely, by his Staff, as before described.) And according to signs, so he
did, Pronunciare, or Obnunciare, pronounce it ratified, or renounce it as
unlawful: And from this twofold augurating with, and without prayer, were
signs distinguished into Oblative, offered to the Augure, or, etc. without
prayer: and Impetrativa, obtained by prayer. And the good signs were called
Prospera, and the badd Adversa. Add further, that the Augure that did
pronounce, or renounce any thing ratifiedly, did first see more then one only
sign, the one following the other, before he undertook to give a peremptory
judgment; and therefore did not only observe the flying, or crying of Birds,
but secondly Thunder, which if on the left hand of the Augure, Tonitrusve
sinistri ( Ovid. Trist. l. 1. Eleg. 8.) and Intonuit laevum, it signified (as
they speak) good luck. Thirdly, The manner of Chickens, eating crumbs cast to
them (of which by and by.) Fourthly, Beasts crossing the way, or appearing in
some unwonted place. Fifthly, Some supposed voice, they know not whence (as
Caedmus thought he heard such a voice when he killed the Serpent, Vox subito
audita est neque erat cognoscere promptum unde, sed audita est, Ovid. Met. l.
3. Fab. 1.) Sixthly, Casualties, whether (as they had their rules of
interpretation from the Devil) they were Bona omina, of a good signification,
or Dira, i. e. Dei ira, such as signified the anger of their Gods; as the
falling of Salt toward them at the Table, or the spilling of Wine on their
clothes.

For Pullarie, you see it involved in, and chained to Augurie and Auspicie; not
only by our History of their superstitions, but also by those Scriptures before
quoted, as the Hebrew Doctors expound them, that best know their own language;
therefore of this kind of Divination briefly.

The manner was this, that if in a morning the Bird-Prophet cast crumbs to
Chicken in a Pen, the door of it being opened with silence, and the Chicken
made no haste to their meat, or walked by it, or came not at all to it, then it
signified the Gods did not approve of the enterprise; but if the Chicken came
hastily out, and eat so greedily, that some of the meat fell out of their
mouths, this signified the Gods approving of the enterprise. And thus the
Pullarius, the Bird-Prophet did divine by Pullens greedy eating of crumbs, to a
letting some fall, and rebound against the ground; whence the Divination was
called Tripudium; that is, a rebounding on the ground. This Pullarie, it is
thought came from the Lycians, who when they would know the mind of their Gods
in any business, went to the Fountain dedicated to Apollo, into which,
casting their baits, if the Fishes did eat them, they understood it a sign
of good luck; if not, then of ill luck, Alex. Genesis l. 1. c. 29.

For a parallel of these times with these kinds of Observations and practices;
it is easily made, as to the substance, though not in every circumstance.

First, For Birds, it is common in these days for people to make these
observations; That by chattering of Magpies, they know they shall have
strangers; by the flying and crying of Ravens over their houses, especially in
the dusk evening, and where one is sick, they conclude death: The same they
conclude by the much crying of Owls in the night, near their houses at such a
time. The same they conclude of a Cricket crying in an house where was wont to
be none. There is (and I think it is in the Book of Martyrs) a Story of a
persecutor, over whom a Raven or Crow flying over his head, and dunging upon
his head, did so much regard it as an evil sign, that he fell into such a
vehement discontent, that he went home cursing the Crow, and dyed: And as a
just judgment on them that regard such superstitious things as these, the
Devil has manifested his presence with some, to the making of them Witches,
by an Hen and Chickens, and to others, as a Crow.

Secondly, For Beasts, their observations are, If Dogs houle in the night near
an house where some body is sick, it is a sign of death. If an Hare or the like
creature cross the way where one is going, it is (they say) a sign of very
ill luck. In so much as some in company with a Woman great with Child, have
upon the crossing of such creatures, cut or torn some of the clothes off that
Woman with Child to prevent (as they imagined) the ill luck that might befall
her. I know I tell you that which is most true: And I hope in such a subject as
this touching these superstitions, I shall not offend in acquainting you with
these particulars.

Thirdly, For contingencies of things, how common is it for people to account
it a sign of ill luck to have the Salt-seller to be overturned, the Salt
falling toward them: And as common, to look upon any thing almost coming to
pass that is not usual, to be a sign that such an act was well or ill done
(as people please to interpret it) which was done a little before the appearance
of that sign: So how common is it to say a Winter thunder is an ill sign: And
how frequent is it with people (especially of the more ignorant sort, which
makes the things more suspected) to think and say (as Master Perkins relates)
if they find some pieces of Iron, it is a prediction of good luck to the
finders. If they find a piece of Silver, it is a fore-token of ill luck to
them. If their ears tingle, they say it is a sign they have some enemies
abroad, that do, or are about to speak evil of them: So if their right eye
itcheth, it betokens sorrowful weeping; if the left eye itcheth, then it
betokens joyful laughter: And so from the itching of the nose, and elbow, and
several affectings of several parts, they make several predictions, too
silly to be mentioned, though regarded by them.

I am sure these kind of men and Women have as the Apostle says, Itching
ears; giving heed to Doctrines and rudiments, that are not of God. And so such
doctrines, such lives.

Fourthly, For voices, these also are much hearkened after, and heeded and
regarded, in these evil times of spiritual doteages. I speak what I know, of
pretended high Professors. They teach one another to go down to the lower end
of the Orchard, or the like solitary place, there to hear a voice that shall
be spoken to them; and they do hearken for voices: And most likely that they
that do attend for such voices, may hear them; even from the Devil; for we
showed before, how the Devil does not only speak by Men and Women, but to Men
and Women. I say, voices from the Devil not from God; because the word, Isa.
8.20. Heb. 1.1. 2 Pet. 1.19. and every where commands us to hearken to the
voice of the written Word. And to turn away from the certain word, to
uncertain voices, what and whence they are, must needs be from the Devil. As
Papists giving a Stone, or Wooden Cross the right hand as they go or ride
by, some also putting off their Hats, in so doing are guided by Diabolical
superstition; that Cross being not appointed a Medium cultus. (Compare Exodus
32.5. 1 Cor. 10 7.) So these pretended Protestants that do (as I may say in a
Figure) give the right hand to voices, I know not what nor whence, leaving the
Word of God as a surer and more effectual divine instituted means of
salvation, then a voice from Heaven (2 Pet. 1.19. Gal. 1.8, 9. Luke 16.10.) do
herein follow Diabolical lies.

For it is a maine artifice of the Devil, by several fine pretenses, and
degrees, to bring people off from the Word of God. And what follows, these
polluted times do interpret. Being got loose from the divine rule of the Word
that did tie their consciences (most righteously and holily, Psalm. 19.) from
impieties, they break out into Whoredoms and blasphemies; the first to please
the filthy flesh; and the second to stupifie conscience, that they might never
awake more unto repentance.

But in the behalf of these Diabolical and superstitious Divinations and
Predictions, some things are objected by the favorers of them.

As first, That they have been most anciently observed and heeded by men of
strong natural abilities, as appears by Cicero in his Tracts of Divination:
and the Roman Historians, and Poets; and diverse Greek Antiquities, of all
which we have had some touches before.

Answ, The Devil that old Deceiver (says the Scripture) was from the
beginning, and the Devil was a deceiver from the beginning, even from our first
Parents downward: And from that, the Apostle (2 Cor. 11.) warnes the
Corinthians to take heed of Him. And those that most anciently learned these
Doctrines and deceits of the Devil, were Heathens, that had not the Word of
God; which we have heard, is flatly against them, which must fully satisfy
Christians: and it will be their greater sin, that having the rule, forsake the
rule, and transgress against the rule.

Secondly, They object that it is said, Genesis 44. 5, 15, Joseph could Divine by
his Cup. And it is said by Christ, Luke 12.54, 55. When you see a Cloud rising
out of the West, straightway ye say there comes a shower, and so it is. And
when ye see the South wind blow, there will be heat, and it comes to pass.

Answ. First, To that of Joseph: First, That that might be spoken according to
the common opinion of the people, that Joseph could divine in such a way (as
Cicero says, Loquendum est ut vulgus, sentiendum ut sapientes: We must speak
as the common people, but think as wise men.)

Secondly, This kind of language might be used of purpose only to conceal
Joseph from being thought by his Brethren to be any other then an Aegiptian.

Thirdly, That by the taking away of the Cup (often used) not by the Cup it
self, Joseph would find out (missing it) as by a plain experiment, what
manner of persons they were with whom it should be sound, by them to be taken
away.

And in particular, by this seeming guilt and suspicion of his Brethren, he
should have occasion to stay his Brethren (to have further conference with
them) and to try their affections to his Brother by Father and Mother, namely
Benjamin, in whose Sack the Cup was found.

Secondly, To the words of Christ we say, that from natural necessary causes,
to natural events, we learn by experience a certain natural prediction: As
Solomon says, The North wind drives away rain, Prove. 25.23. And we usually
find, that the South wind brings rain to us: And we know when Birds wash
themselves it is likely to rain, with many the like instances. But by
natural, or artificial contingencies, to foretell casual, and arbitrary
events and things mostly depending upon the spontaneous will of man, is not
possible, but by Diabolical assistance. Of the former sort of causes, and their
events; namely, of the natural, true natural reasons may be given; but of the
latter, namely, the arbitrary and casual, no just reason can be given.

Thirdly, To both, namely, that of Joseph and of Christ, we answer, That
whatsoever things do truly predict events, must so predict, either by a gift
of Creation, stamping into them an instinct; as the coming of Swallows, and
other sleeping Birds show Summer is come, etc. or else by divine Ordinance of
God by positive institution; as the Roinbow signifies the World shall not be
drowned, although the Rain be never so great. But the flying and crying of
Birds, or Joseph's Cup, or any other of the things aforenamed, have no faculty
by either of those ways we now mentioned, to predict; and therefore conjectures
by them are taught by the Devil.

3. Object. But accordingly things do come to pass.

Answ. Sometimes they do, as a just judgment of God to suffer them to be
deluded, who contrary to the Word give heed and credit to them. And sometimes
they do not come to pass, and especially not to them that according to the
Word, do despise them; that it may appear to them that will see, that God
overrules all, Devil and all.

I knew a young man diverse years since, that said going over such a style, he
thought he heard a voice saying to him, In such a year of the Lord thou shall
dye, and he related it as a very serious thing: But (that I may speak a little
to voices also) it came not to pass. The Devil and his fantasy were
deceived. And though the dreaming Fantasticks of these times, form in their
brains an hearing of voices, as some divine revelation, they are herein
deceived, because Revelations were given to them that stuck mightily to the
Word of God, and were holy in practice; and to the end (as their Revelations
did express) to enlarge and unfold the mind of God in his Word, and to
promote holiness of conversation, and put men on to walk in that way. But the
Revelationists of these erring times recede from all these four
qualifications, and therefore not to be regarded in their pretended Revelations.

And for that voice of which the Lord speaks by the Prophet, Isa. 30.21. And
thine ears shall hear a word (or voice) behind thee, saying, This is the way
walk ye in it: that voice imports only an impression on the heart by the
spirit of that Word that formerly had been Preached to it, inclining a man to
walk according to it, which is far different both in the original, matter,
and end of the Revelationaries pretended voices.

CHAP. VII.
Of Divination called Aruspicie, and Sortilegie.

THESE two we have put together, because joined together in Scripture, and
sometimes in use, Ezekiel. 21.21, 22. The King of Babylon stood at the parting of
the way, at the head of the two ways to use divination; he made his Arrows
BRIGHT (Hebrew (...) he SHOT, or SHOOK them) he consulted with Images, he
looked in the liver. At the right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to
appoint Captains to open the mouth in the slaughter, etc. Should seem by this
Text that the World has been anciently addicted to these superstitious
divinations, by Aruspicie, or Extispicie (so called, Ab exta inspiciendo, from
looking into the Intrals of Beasts, Cic. de Divinat.) and by Sortilegie, that
is, Lottery. And that the King of Babylon being to go to War did by
Aruspicie, and Sortilegie divine whether he should go against Rabbath of the
Ammonites to War; or against Jerusalem of the Jews, Verse. 20.) Some (as
Vatablus) render (...) as it is in our English, Polivit sagittas, he made bright
his Darts or Arrows; that is, the Iron of them, that it might shine; and so
therein the Diviners might see which way He (the King of Babylon) was to go in
his warlike expedition. For the superstatious World has also used (as R.
David, R. Solomon, Vatablus, Alapide, etc. tell us) this divination; namely
that they call Catoptromanticke; that is, Divination by Looking-glasses, or
Mirrors, after this manner; the Diviners in the glittering and shining of the
points of Spears, Swords, etc. or in the shining of the Nail of the Thumb, or
in some Crystal, or, etc. did (by rules learned from the Devil) see things
past, or foresee what should come to pass.

But this is not so natural a signification of the Hebrew (...) nor the
Divination that the King here used.

Learned Schindler makes (...) a root, an absolute word of it self, rendering
it according to the Chaldee use of the word, Projecit, to throw forth, or fling
out. According to the Arabian use, Concussit, to shake together. But withal
the same Schindler, as also Bnxtorfe, Pagnin. Mercer, and Arias, referr (...)
to the root (...) which signifies Levis fuit velox fuit, He or it was light,
or swift, etc. And in the Conjugation Piel, by doubling of the first radical
(...) signifies, He made to fly swiftly, or shot. The Chaldee Targum renders
it (...) He shot his Arrows out of a Bow. The Syriack, He cast, or hurled, or
shot his Arrow. The Arabic, by shooting his Arrow. The Greek Septuagint render
it, (...) that he might make the Rodd to issue forth. Other Greeks, (...) To
shoot Arrows; adding, (...) that is, This reading the Hebrew also uses.
Polichron. Hieron, his ancient Latin Translation reads it, Commiscens
sagittas, mingling Arrows together. By all that we have said, this in the
general does plainly appear, that anciently there was a superstitious art of
Divination by Darts, Rods, or Arrows, for which the Greeks have a particular
fit name; calling it (...) or (...) Dart, or Arrow-Magick; or Staff, or
Rod-Magick, or Divination. And not only in use among the Chaldeans, as appears
in this Text of Ezekiel: 21.21. but was sinfully imitated by the Jews, as Hieron,
Cyril, and Theophilact conclude from that of Hos. 4.12. My people ask counsel
at their stocks (Hebrew (...) in, or by their wood) and their staff declares
unto them. The word for Staff both in the Hebrew and Greek signifies both a
Staff and Rodd, or Wande, or Branch.

Thus it is plain in the general, that anciently they did divine by Arrows,
Darts, Staves, Rods; and the Word of God condemnesit, as an Heathenish
invention, and sinfully imitated by the Jews.

In particular, the manner was two ways (as we have intimated it a little in
the various significations of the words.

First, By mingling of Arrows, after the several names were written upon them
of the things concerning which the Lottery was to be made; putting those
Arrows up again promiscuously into the Quiver, one blindfolded draws one,
and as it is written on the Arrow, so is the Divination concluded. For
instance, The King of Babylon in this 21. of Ezekiel. Verse. 21. would divine
whether he should go to War against Kabbath of the Ammonites, or against
Jerusalem of the Jews. These two names are written upon two Arrows, which put
up, and drawn again, in manner aforesaid, the first that came, determined
whither he should go to War. And should seem by the intent of this 21. of
Ezekiel, God willing to punish Jerusalem, he permitted that their Lot should
fall upon it. So Hieron.

Secondly, By Staves, Rods, Darts, Arrows, thrown, darted, or shot up into
the Air; and whitherward they tended in their return and fall, thither the
divination (as they conceived) directed them. Of this, etc. Chald, Polichron.
Caelius Rhodoginus. l. 7. Antiq. lect. 29.

And this is the most likelyest way of divination that the King of Babylon used
at this time, in this 21. of Ezekiel. That balancing two or three Arrows bolt
upright (as we say) or shooting them upright into the Air, according as they
fell, as, if they fell (in their return) toward Jerusalem, it was a certain
judgment by Divination, that he was to make his expedition against Jerusalem.

So Rabbi Joseph Kimchi, fecit sagittas, ac volare fecit in aere, ut videret in
quam partem caderent; Et si caderent ad latus filiorum Hammon, iret illuc; sin
ad latus filiorum, etc. And so the Chaldee Targum before (...) etc. He shot out
of a Bow his Arrows, etc. And reason tells us that to this superstition the
King of Babylon would rather incline, at this time (as Alap. conceives.) He
would not now divine by Books, or other means, but by Arrows, with which he
was to fight the Battle he intended. And his shooting of them up to Heaven
was a fair semblance of asking counsel of God. As Gregory Nazianzen expounds
Abaris the Scythian his shooting of an Arrow from some part of Greece into part
of Scythia, to signify a mind contemplating his eternal Country in Heaven.

All this while we have considered but the first clause of this 21. of Ezekiel,
Verse. 21. Viz. the meaning of the King of Babylons use of Arrows in
Divination, in a way of Lottery.

Next, it is said, he Consulted with Images, or Idols, that is, with Bell, Nebo,
and other his Idols.

Thirdly, He looked into the Liver: Here is his Aruspicie, or Extispicie,
looking into the Exta, the entrals of Beasts, killed in Sacrifice, after their
Heathenish manner. Properly the heart and lungs were called Exta ab Extando,
because they are placed in the upper part within a man; as also the Spleen, the
Liver, and the Stomach, were called Exta, because they were placed above the
rest of the Bowels and Inwards.

The Heathens did divine by considering in the Sacrifice the Heart, the Liver,
and the Stomach, etc.

It follows in this 21. of Ezekiel, At the right hand was the Divination for
Jerusalem (Hebrew (...) etc. In, or at his right hand was the divination of
Jerusalem) to appoint Captains to open the mouth in the slaughter: that is, By
his Auspicie, Imagery, and Lotterie, he concluded a certain divination that
he must go against Jerusalem, and there open his mouth, exhorting his
Captains and Soldiers to open the mouth of the Sword (as the Scripture phrase
is, the mouth of the Sword, to signify the edge of the Sword) to destroy the
Jews.

Having heard the Scriptures concerning Aruspicie and Sortilegie, that we may
the better understand the sinful manifold superstitions of them, let us hear
what Histories, Antiquities, and Customs can produce concerning the unlawful
manner and usages of them.

First, Of Aruspicie, or Extispicie, the manner in breife was this. The
Soothsayer observed some things before he killed the Beast; some things in the
entrals of him being killed; some things after, when to be offered up by fire.
First, Before his killing the Beast, whether the Beast came willingly without
drawing, whether he received the stroke without bellowing, and whether he dyed
without struggling, and with one blow only, all which were good signs: And
whether no unlucky signs were seen or heard whiles they were sacrificing.
Secondly, When the Beast was ripped up, he observed whether the Bowels were not
of an unnatural color, or were not Exsiccat, impostumated, or ulcerous, which
were ill signs: He divided the Bowels into two parts, the one was called Pars
familiaris, from which the Diviner foretold what should befall their own party;
the other was called Pars hostilis, from whence he foretold what should befall
their Enemies. Thirdly, After, when the Sacrifice was to be burned, it was
diligently observed, whether the flame of the fire was smoakey, whether the
smoke rolled and tumbled in the air, whether of any continuence or no: For all
these were unlucky signs, as the contrary lucky (as they spoke.) Those that
observed these tokens of the smoke had a peculiar name, Capnomantes, that is,
Smoak-diviners. All this superstition came to the Romans (as the story goes)
from the Hetrusci: They had it from a young youth called Tages, and he from the
Devil. Of these things many touches in Senec. Trag. and Ovid. Metam. And more
in Cic. de divinat.

Secondly, For Sortilegie, Divination by Lots. A Lottery, or deciding by Lot in
the general is thus described.

A casual event purposely applied to the decyding of some doubt: The genus, or
general in this description is, some casual event. And therefore Aquinas,
etc. speak too widely, when they say it is, Cum aliquid fit, or aliquid agitur
ex cujus eventu considerato, aliquid occultum innotescat: A doing of any thing,
or any thing is done by which, being considered, a hidden thing may be
discovered. For a man may leave Money up and down in the House, to try a
suspected Servant, and thereby discovers the honesty, or dishonesty of such a
one; yet this is no Lot.

The specificall difference to make casual events to be Lots, is taken from
the intent and use of a man, applying casual events according to his disposal,
to that purpose of deciding and determining of some doubt; Viz. Either some
doubtful act to be done, as yet in suspense; or some hidden truth to be
discovered in things already done, or suspected to be done. And therefore for a
man to meet some notable person or thing unexpectedly in the way, intending
other business, and a thousand such casualties incident to a man all his life
long, is no Lottery or Lot at all.

Now because some Lottery, or casting of a Lot is lawful; therefore to
distinguish the bad we are to speak of, from the good; were must distinguish
of the kinds of Lotts, and that from the Original of them, which is more
proper to the case of conscience in hand, what Lotts are lawful, and what
unlawful. According to the Original, there are three sorts.

First, Such as are Divine; namely, have prescript from the Word of God.

Secondly, Vain sporting and foolish, invented by the idle brains of men.

Thirdly, Diabolical for Divinations, hatched by the traditions of the Devil.

Of the first sort the Scripture makes mention of the allowable use of these
sorts of Lots.

First, Of Lots in sacred things that cannot otherwise be well determined: As
to distinguish which of the two Goats should be the escape Goat, the other to
be sacrificed, Levit. 16.8. And the Brethren choosing two, it was determined by
a Lot, which of them should be an Apostle in the room of Judas, Acts. 1.

Secondly, Of Lots in moral things; as to find out by Lot who is guilty in a
multitude, of some eminent transgression, that has caused a great affliction
on the rest: As in finding out Achan, Joshua 7. Jonah, Chap. 1. And the Lord
did so approve of Lots in this kind, that he was with them in casting Lots, 1 Samuel 14. to find out who had eaten of the Honey contrary to Saul's adjuration;
though it appears by the event, that Gods intent was rather to show Saul his
sin in his rash adjuration, then to show Jonathan his sin in eating of the
Honey, being ignorant of his Fathers Oath.

Thirdly, Of Lots in political and civil things, as to divide estates, Goods,
Lands, etc. into portions, who shall have which part, Josh. 14. Likewise to
choose Magistrates: So Saul was chosen King, 1 Samuel 10. by Lots.

The Scriptures, together with the thing or matter, shows us the manner how
we should use Lots in the like cases.

First, That it must be in case of necessity, that things cannot so
satisfactorily otherwise be determined.

Secondly, That Lots should be looked on as an Ordinance of God, in which God
has a special hand in the determination by them.

Thirdly, That therefore men should in the use of them, look up to God in Faith
and Prayer, either solemn or secret ejaculatory, to afford his special
guidance in the thing.

These three conditions are hinted in these Scriptures, Prove. 18.18. The Lot
causes contentions to cease, etc. Prove. 16.33. The Lot is cast into the Lapp,
but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord: And therefore, Acts 1. They
prayed over the Lot.

That which has been said of divine Lotts, being particularly and thoroughly
weighed, does easily overthrow such Lots as are vain, lusory, unnecessary, and
contentionary, and causing, or accompanying much iniquity; As in Tables, Cards,
Dice, etc.

For Diabolical Lots, Lots of Divinations, to foretell future arbitrary
events, etc. they do not only want that aforesaid which concurrs to divine
Lots; or only have that evil in them that is in lusory unnecessary Lots
(against which the godly learned Fathers and Ancients have abundantly
inveighed) but there is this superadded, The direction and assistance of the
Devil in them; there being nothing from God, or nature to predict by such
kind of things: The very Name has no good Omen in it. For we all agree that
Sorcery signifies a Diabolical Art; and on the other side, no man can deny, but
that Sorcery is derived, a sortibus from Lots, which (says Minsh.) "men used
that wrought by "the help of the Devil.

And that this Divination by Lots was common among the Heathen, and in their
Diabolical way, is commonly confessed in their own Writings; as we might
abound with instances, Pyndar. Pyth. od. 1. (...), etc. The Diviner by Birds,
and Lots, etc. Upon which the Schooliasts say (...). etc. i. e. They were wont
to divine by Lots, Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 1. Cum inquirendum; extis vel sortibus.
Cum solemni ritu peragendum; sacrificio, i. e. When any thing was to be
enquired, it was to be done by intrals of Beasts, or by Lots, etc. And of these
Heathenish Lots, Cic. in his Books de Divinatione, speaks abundantly,
mentioning Palestine Lots, Dodonean Lots. And Suet. mentions Antiatine Lots,
Aponian Lots. And their Oracles were (as Gloss. affirms) (...), sorts, Lots.
And Festus says, Sors a Deis responsum significat. And Ovid in his
Metamorphosis, Placuit, Caleste precari Numen and auxilium per sacras quaerere
sorts. Mota Dea est, sortemque dedit. Sofforat, Dictae per carmina sorts.
From these Lots, says Varro, and others, were Wizards or Soothsayers called
Sortilegi, sortiary. Sorcerers; which name we still give to Witcheries of all
kinds.

And besides all this, the manner of Lots, as casting of a Dye, opening of a
Book, with names and predictions in it, with a thousand more strange devices
to that end (if I would spend time to name them) do smell of the Devils Claw, I
mean, they are suitable to Diabolieal inventions. And therefore this sorcery,
that is, Divination by Lots (otherwise then is allowed in the Word of God, as
aforesaid) is forbidden, as one kind of those Diabolical Arts, Deuteronomy. 18.10,
11. Though I confess some learned draw the prohibition from one word, others
from another used in that place. The Syriack renders the second of those
Diabolical Artists, which our new Translation renders, An observer of times: I
say the Syriack, renders it, A Sorcerer, that is, Sortilegus, a Lot-sorcerer,
or Lot-Diviner. Other learned men also say, that this kind of sorcery by Lots
is included in the same word. But most certainly in as much as Lot-sorcery was
usually adjoined to most of the Diabolical Arts, as before we have intimated
in part; so it is forbidden throughout this Text, as the Appendix to the
principal. And further in this also appears the Diabolicalnesse of this
Sorcery, or sortilegie; that God never giving to such things an instinct to
predict future things, yet notwithstanding men casting such Lots, do put a
confidence in them, that they will certainly divine future things to them. And
therefore Master Perkins affirms, that as men do put a confidence in these
things, or else cannot attain to any foreknowledge by them, so therein
explicitly, or implicitly they had confederacy with the Devil.

Now for a brief parallel of these times with these ancient practices.

First, It is evident that it is common with Diabolical Artists, to use
Cataptromancy, to divine by Looking-glasses, therein showing to their enquiring
Clyents the shape of persons and things which they would know.

Secondly, For (...), Rabdomancy, divination by a Staff, this also has been
practiced, Viz. to set up a Staff bolt up right, and which way it falls,
thitherward for the owner to go, as directed by a special prediction.

Thirdly, For Extispicie, or Aruspicie, it cannot be so much followed in these
days wherein all Sacrifices are exploded; but I suspect there is too much of
this Art in the minds of men in these days, whiles they so much observe the
birth of Monsters, either of mankind, or beasts. But such things heeded of
late years, as ominous, have preceded only the ruin of the friends of that
superstition; so that those predictors have but prophesied ill to themselves.

Fourthly, Imagery Papists and Witches, do much use. Of which before.

Fifthly, For Sorcery properly so called, Viz. Divination by Lotts; it is too
much apparent how it abounds. For lusory Lots the state groans under the loss
by them, to the ruin of many men and Families; as the Churches lament under
the sins by them. And for other Lots, by Sieves, Books, etc. they abound as
Witchery, etc. abounds.

Was it not a strange thing that a man pretending to some godliness, and much
learning, would cast Lots to know of what judgment and practice he should be,
in matter of Religion? And when that was determined to him, by Lot, then he
cast another Lot to know of what Society he should be, to manifest and practice
that his judgment.

To conclude this Chapter: let me tell you, It is an ill sign when we are more
inquisitive to know what shall be, then to know what we are, or to endeavor
to be what we ought to be: And these times will prompt this to you, that whiles
men do in a Diabolical way inquire after events, they neglect Gods means of
salvation. And in particular, the Word; which is the true Catoptromantia to
know our selves by a Glass, James 1.23. The true Imagery to represent to us
God and good by Christ, and him crucified, Romans 8. 29. Heb. 1.3. The true
Lottery, Psalm. 16.6. whiles men heed other things, they are apt to delude
themselves with interpretations, that are not properly Analogical to the
signs. As Julian the Apostate would conclude, that because his Babylonian
Horse with his Trappings fell to the ground, therefore he should have dominion
over Babylon. And Caesar stepping on the Affrican shore, and falling by the
slipping of his foot, cried out, clasping the Sands in his arms, Teneo te
Africa, I possess thee O Africa, though the standers by looked on it as an
evil sign.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Necromancy, or the Black Art.

THE next way of unlawful Divination, is Necromancy, or (as it is commonly
called) the Black Art, which is a divining by consultation with the Devil
appearing unto the Diviners in the shape of one formerly dead. So the Witch of
Endor raised up to Saul some shape of Samuel. This is forbidden, Deuteronomy. 18.11.
There shall not be found among thee a Necromancer, Hebrew (...) i. e. One that
seeks to the dead: Which in Isa. 8.19. is prohibited under that notion of
explanation. Should not a people seek to their God? Should they seek (so the
words to be repeated) (...) for, or in stead of the living (...) unto the dead?
To the Law and the Testimony, if they speak not according to this rule, it is
because there is no light in them. So that its justly called the Black Art; for
there is no true light in them that use it. God is pleased to raise some from
the dead extraordinarily, for that extraordinary end, to confirm the call of
them that he appoints the great Reformers of the Church; and to cause men to
believe their Doctrine. As one by Elijah, 1 Kings 17. Elijah was wonderfully to
reclaim the Jews from Idolatry, in the very next Chapter. Another by Elisha,
2 Kings 4. who was Elijahs second to confirm them in that Reformation. Again,
others were raised by Christ, and his Disciples, when by them the Christian
Church was to be founded, and established, and Jewish Ceremonies to be
abrogated. And lastly, all the Saints shall be raised (as we have proved in
another Treatise of the glorious state on earth yet to come) when the Church is
to be restored from all misery, to a kind of happiness on earth.

But for any to raise men, to answer private men, about private fantasies and
enquiries; it is but a dreaming mistake. It is nothing else but the Devil
himself, presenting the shape of some dead persons to the Diviner. For, as
that appearance to the Witch at Endor, foretold such things, and so certainly
to Saul, as argued it was not a man raised from the dead (for then Abraham and
Jacob, or Israel, are ignorant of us, Isa. 63.16.) So sure enough, it was the
Devil himself in that shape; not Samuel, or any other Saint. For,

First, They rest from their labors in blessedness, Revel. 14.13. Therefore
not raised, or made to walk (as some fantasy) after their death.

Secondly, God had before denied to answer Saul in any way, 1 Samuel 28.6.

Thirdly, This shape suffered Saul to adore him with his face to the ground, 1 Samuel 28.14. Which the Angel in Revel. 19.10. Would not suffer John to do; much
less would departed Saints suffer it.

Fourthly, That shape, if it had been Samuel, would have as well reproved Saul
of that greatest sin of going to Witches (contrary to the known Word of God)
as of other lesser faults, Verse. 16, 17.

Indeed the Devil made him seem like Samuel, and made the Woman and Saul to
think, and call him Samuel; and Ecclesiasticus (a piece of Apocrypha, as
appears by the Preface, craving pardon) says, Samuel prophesied after his
death, Chap. 46. Verse. 20. But the Scripture, and reason say the contrary, and
forbids any such way of knowledge, as we have heard.

For in this Art, there appears these five great evils.

First, The Devils power (God permitting) to form and represent the shape of
any deceased person.

Secondly, The Devils will to be at the beck and command of the Necromancer,
when he will act any such wicked delusion.

Thirdly, The Devils wit, that he can gather out of circumstances, when God
has forsaken a man, and left him to Satan; and what is the temper of men, what
they will do, and what will probably follow. And if God hinder not, he will
foretell the ruin of men, or cause wicked men to do as he foretells, to come
to their ruin.

Fourthly, The Devils wickedness, that though he be an unspeakable proud
spirit (witness the cause and manner of his fall, and his malice still against
God) yet notwithstanding his mighty pride, he will stoop to the meanest Man, or
Woman, to be at their command, whereby he may cheat them and their clients of
Salvation. This obedience of the Devil to Necromancers, is emphatically noted
in that 1 Samuel 28.7. by calling the Woman- Witch of Endor twice in that one
Verse (...) The Mistress of the spirit.

Fifthly, The Diabolical ground of all aforesaid; namely, the Compact between
the Devil and the Necromancer; else why or how could this be peculiar to such
filly creatures, as the Witch at Endor? Saul was a King, had in his Dominions
all sorts of Artists, and learned men; yet not he, nor all they could thus
raise up the Devil, but only the Masters and Mistresses of spirits, in
Covenant one with another.

From all infer, first, That we beware of departings between God and us; that
we do not depart from him, to cause him to depart from us; for from us begins
the woe of departing. So in Saul, he went on in Rebellion against God;
therefore God departed from him. Beware first of departing in Principles, Viz.
to depart from the Word of God: Thence is the Original of our departing from
God, 2 Chronicles. 39.15, 16. Prove. 29.1. No where else is it said, there is no
remedy; because to leave the Word is to leave the remedy. And this departing
from the Word is the introduction to use Diabolical Arts. So the Prophet Isaiah
intimates, Isa. 8.19, 20. In putting those two together, Men's seeking to the
dead in stead of the living; and not going to the Law and the Testimony; and so
to want light; mark it well. Secondly, Beware of departing from God in point
of obedience; beware of disobedience to God contrary to the Principle of the
Word. Saul disobeying God, his sin is charged to be like the sin of Witchcraft:
Because disobedience to God, is a service of the Devil, and is the introduction
to encourage Satan to tempt them to his Diabolical Arts.

Secondly, Consider that if we depart from God, and so cause him to depart
from us, Satan will find it out, and take the opportunity to tempt, as we see
he did in the story of Saul.

Thirdly, That if Satan does suggest, tempt, etc. let us resist, as James
says, that is firstly and fully; have no conference at all with him, which was
Eves sin and fall.* And therefore the Apostle warnes the Corinthians of it, 2
Cor. 11.3.

CHAP. IX.
Of Oneirologie, Oneiromancy, Somnispicine, or Divination by dreams.

THat there is such an unlawful Art, is evident by the Scriptures forbidding
it, Deuteronomy. 13.1. etc. If there arise among you a Prophet, or dreamer of dreams;
and gives thee a sign, or a wonder, and it come to pass, etc. thou shall not
hearken to them; for the Lord your God proves you. And the Prophet, or dreamer
shall be put to death, etc. Jer. 23.25. etc. I have heard what the Prophets
said, that prophecy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed a dream, etc. By
which places it appears, that that we call Divination by dreams, the Scripture
calls Prophesying by dreams, condemning it as unlawful.

That we may be clear in the thing, note that there are four sorts of dreams.
First, Divine. Secondly, Natural. Thirdly, Humane. Fourthly, Diabolical.

The first must needs be lawful and pre-significative. The second and third
may be lawful: Namely, lawful as to the essence of dreaming; as thinking and
speaking according to the actings of reason; and they may be somehow
significative.

But the fourth cannot be either lawful, or pre-significative, or
significative, unless it be to show that which may be seen without a dream,
Viz. that such a man is much under the power of the Devil.

Divine dreams are either immediately presented to a man's understanding by the
spirit of God, Numb. 12.6. Job 33.15. Or mediately by an Angel presented to the
fantasy, and by the phantasmes thereof conveyed to the understanding,
Matthew. 1.20. Matthew. 2.13. For as the Devil being a most intelligent and subtle
spirit, can (as we know by sad experience) inject into our fantasies, both
waking and sleeping, such evil things, and make our minds receive them thence
and think upon them, which not only our grace, but our very reason abhorrs;
so much more a good Angel deputed by God to that end, can good things. Now for
these extraordinary divine dreams.

First, It is most probable that they are ceased. Keckerman, a godly and most
learned man, both in Divinity and Philosophy, has these words in his natural
Philosophy, Syst. Phis. l. 3. Cap. 29. Cum somnia, etc. i. e. Seeing that
Diabolical dreams may impose themselves upon men, as if they were divine;
therefore they are to be judged and discerned, or discriminated by these two
rules. First, That after the light of the Gospel is manifested, God does no
more act by dreams. Secondly, Whatsoever dream is conjoined with the danger
of some sin or superstition, albeit it may seem divine, yet it is a
Diabolical dream.

You see how his judgment is, that divine dreams are ceased to Christians:
And it seems so to me, because 1 Cor. 13.8. it is said, Prophesies shall fail:
Greek, be done away. Tongues cease. And knowledge done away, i.e. Knowledge of
Mysteries of Revelations, Verse. 2. Now we see the gift of tongues gone; and the
interpretation of Mysteries; and so in like manner Prophesies. Therefore in
opposition to all former ways of manifestation, the Apostle, Heb. 1.1. puts an
emphasis on Christ speaking, God speaks to us in these last days by his Son.
Christ by his Apostles to be the last extraordinary speaking, til Christ come
again.

Secondly, It is evident that the divine Prophetical dreams of them mentioned
in the Scripture are fa^r different from divinatory or divineing dreams which
this evil Age runs after.

First difference: Those truly divine dreams concerned the great affairs of
God, were of high concernment to his Church: As first, of the coming of
Christ, Matthew. 1.20.

Secondly, The alterations of States and Kingdoms, that have opposed the
Church: As that of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. He had the Shel of the dream, but
Daniel the Kernel.

Thirdly, The preservation of the Church, as that dream whereof Pharaoh had
the Shel the type, but Joseph the Kernel, Genesis 41.

Fourthly, Or to bring his Saints into request for interpretation of dreams,
as an introduction to some great design; therefore God put dreams into carnal
men, that his Saints might interpret them, and be advanced for the good of the
Church: So Genesis 40. in the Story of the Butler and Baker: And so in part to
that end was Nebuchadnezzars dream.

5. To pull down Antichrist, Dan. 7. Dan. 11.12.

Second Difference: Divine dreams were always very evident in the thing: The
type was plain to signify what it meant; as Jacobs Ladder, etc. to signify
Gods presence should be with him. Or the type was doubled in application to the
person: As Gen, 37. Your Sheaves did obeisance to mine. The Sun and Moon, and
eleven stars made obeisance to me. Or else there was a plain interpretation
given to him that dreamed, as to Daniel, Chap. 7. or to others, as to Daniel of
Nebuchadnezzars dream, to Joseph of Pharoahs dream, or to both. As to Joseph,
and to his Parents and Brethren, who all understood the meaning; or the type
was plain and doubled, and an interpretation too was given; as of that of
Pharoahs ears of Corn, and the Kine.

God either made impressions of assurance on good men's heatts that dreamed,
what was the meaning; or God sent his Angels to expound to them, as to Daniel;
or else exceedingly enlightened the Saints by his spirit, to interpret the
dreams of others: As they said of Joseph interpreting of dreams, that he was
full of the spirit of God, Genesis 41.38.

Third Difference: Divine dreams are agreeable to the revealed will of God.
They do not contrary it, but Comment and enlarge upon it. See all along the
Bible, the dreams that come after, enlarge upon the truth revealed before.

Fourthly, Divine dreams always tend to promote truth, holiness, godliness,
edification, and the glory of God by these. We heard what Keckerman said before;
to which we add what he adds, Whatsoever dreams tend to superstition, and not
to the glory of God, are Diabolical.

So that dreams are not to be judged but by all these jointly; not by the
subject at all, for badd men as well as good men have dreamed true divine
dreams: Nor by the object only; because some things may be lawful in all
dreams but by the weightinesse of matter; by the cleernesse of the manner; by
their agreeableness to the Word, and their end to promote godliness, and Gods
glory.

But we have no such dreams of future things in these days; and therefore we
are not to pretend a justifiable Divination by dreams. If we by heavenly
mindedness, and by help of the spirit of God, dream of the future judgment,
eternal bliss, the ruin of the Churches enemies, or any thing else known to
us by the Word of God; these are dreams of Prophesies, not prophetical
dreams; or meditationall not divinatory dreams.

And if we have no prophetical divine dreams which proceed from God, and carry
our minds toward God according to his Word, we have no sort of divinatory
dreams left us, but such as we are to speak against, as to the matter of
divination and foretelling by them; accordingly as God (we heard before) speaks
against them in his Word.

Secondly, Therefore we come to Natural dreams, which arise from mere
natural causes, as either from the predominant qualities of a man's complexion
in health, or from the superabounding humor of his body in his sickness, or
inclination to sickness. It Is true that a man that is not an Idiot has many
notions of divine and humane things in his head, whereon to enlarge in his
natural dreams, and to add, compound, and divide, and make up the whole
fantasy; but the rise and spring from whence these natural dreams proceed,
are the predominant qualities and overflowing humors of the body; so that
according to them is the complexion and System of the dream. As from the
predominancy of blood in the sanguine complexion proceed dreams of cheerful
colors, things, actions, as of red and damask Roses and flowers, purple
saffron flowers, etc. of music, banquets, dauncings, leapings, laughings,
jestings, etc.

From the predominancy of Phlegm in the phlegmatic complexion, proceed dreams
of waters, navigation, swimming, fishing, bathes, raines, snowes, lakes,
rivers, drownings; as also of weight hindering ones going, which is by reason of
Phlegm oppresing and slugging the stomach and body.

From the predominancy of Collar, like unto the yellow color, and fretfull
temper thereof, proceed dreams of yellow things, as also of brawlings,
fightings, battles, burnings; and suitable to the speedy fury of this temper, of
flying.

From Melancholy predominant, suitable to the black color, and earthy, cold,
and heavy temper thereof, proceed dreams of black smoakes, and vapors, of
darkness, of night, of death, of obscure solitary places, of ruins of old
buildings, of Hell, of the Devil, of strangling, of cutting off of the head,
etc. Therefore these dreams signify a man's natural temper, or sickly
distemper, but do not presignifie any thing.

3. Humane dreams. Some Philosophers call them Animal dreams: It may be the
reason is, because these kind of dreams being such as are formed in the night
out of such images and imaginations which the fantasy had conceived in the
day time; the Images and representations of the actions and things we had to
do with in the day being newly impressed upon the animal spirits, and
inhering there more tenaciously, do lie in those animal spirits, as in a
storehouse, ready for the operation of the fantasy to renew them and digest
them into dreams. But because Beasts have fantasies, and we see that Dogs
do dream, and that men's dreams have some notions of rationality in them;
therefore deservedly I call these dreams Humane dreams. Of these the Scripture
speaks, Eccles. 5.3. A dream comes through the multitude of business. And
we find it true by many experiences, that all men as they use different Arts
or ways, dream differently; which Claudian the Poet limbs out to the life;
thus,

Omnia quae sensu volvuntur vota diurno,
Pectore sopito reddit amica quies.
Venator defessa thoro cum membra reponit,
Men's tamen adsylvas, and sua lustra redit.
Judicibus lites, aurigae, somnia currus.
Vanaque nocturnis meta cavetur equis.
Me quoque Musarum studium, sub nocte silenti
Artibus assiduis sollicitare solet.
Which in sum briefly is this; What sensible notions we revolve in the day,
return in the sleep of night. The wearyed Hunter reposed to sleep, has his
mind upon Woods and Denns of wild Beasts; Judges dream of Controversies;
Waggoners, or Coachmen, of Wagons or Coaches, and their chary running with
their Horses, their Stages. And Me (says Claudian) the study of the Muses
solicit me in the sleep of night, with their daily arts.

Therefore these dreams do rather post-signifie then presignifie; they do
after signify what we have been doing, or at most signify what is the habit
of our minds; as Aristotle says, the just man dreams of justice; as
experience will tell a man habituated to a particular vice, that he will dream
of the acting that vice. But they do not presignifie what men shall do more
then the disposition and habit in their minds will tell them in the day time, if
acquainted with their own hearts; what they are likely to do if they strive
not against it; much less do they presignifie what shall befall them, more
then what naturally attends the acting of those habits.

Ob. We find by experience that ofttimes what we dream does punctually come
to pass.

Answ. But dreams as dreams (which is the pin of the question) do not
presignifie: Many things may come to pass according to our dreams which are
not foretold us by virtue of our dreams: For,

First, Some events are merely contingent and accidental as to our dreams; so
much Kecherman and the great Philosopher Aristotle confess, Quaedam somnia
sunt (...), non significativa sed fortuita: As suppose a man in his second
sleep should dream it would be day by and by. This dawning of the day by and
by after his dream, though necessary to the revolution of the Heavens, was
merely contingent to the dream: It was by hap that the dream preceded, and so
the dawning followed it. And hundred instances of the like nature may be given,
but that we much endeavor brevity.

Secondly, Some day-notions of the fantasy are passionate, moving much hope,
or fear, at least upon some probabilities. According to these deeper
impressions, a man more pronely and distinctly dreams. It Is true, those probable
things come to pass; but not as foretold by our dreams, but rather by our
waking probable fears, and hopes that such things would come to pass. As to
dream upon probable conjecture; that we shall hear of the death of such a
dear Friend, whose death we feared with our waking thoughts, because we have
not according to the former wont heard of them in such a space of time, or,
etc. and accordingly, soon after, we hear he is dead.

Thirdly, There is a natural and rational dependence between causes and
effects, and between signs and things, necessarily connexed in nature.
Hereupon in our day meditations we foresee such a thing, and in our night sleep
we dream the same; and the thing comes to pass. It Was just waking reason
predicted this, not vain dreams by night: As the shining of light at the
dawning rather foreshews the Sun is about to rise, then a body standing open
to the East foreshewes it by casting a shadow toward the West; our dreams by
night are but a shadow in comparison of our waking reason.

Fourthly, Many heeding dreams rather out of a sinful superstition, then for
any just cause, give up themselves with a kind of confidence and subjection,
that so it shall be, and it must be so with them, and can be no otherwise then
according to their dreams; and hereby tempt themselves to do that which they
dreamed. So that it comes to pass because they will do it; not predicted it
will come to pass because they dreamed it: Just as some melancholy persons
do many strange things only because they had a strange fantasy they must
do it, they should not avoid it, but must needs do it; though the necessity
was nothing in the dependence of things, or of themselves with those things;
but only in the swimming imagination of their own brain.

Fifthly, Satan does often tempt the sons of men to do according to the
dreams of dream-regarders; that so he may bring his Diabolical dreams by this
introduction into credit; of which we shall speak by and by: So that in this
artifice the dreams of men predict nothing, but only Satan by permission,
effects an event suitable to the dream. Just as one should be talking of his
adversary, that he dreamed his adversary gave him a blow on the ear, and an
ill neighbor hearing this discourse should go forth and persuade that
adversary when he meets-that dreamer, to give him a blow on the ear, and he
does it, but had not done it but by persuasion of that ill neighbor. Now does
it at all follow that there was any prediction in this dream: Just so is it in
the Devils temptings and effectings according to men's dreams. And this may be
as well in other men, and their affairs, of which another man dreams, as well
as in the man and his own affairs who dreamed that dream.

Sixthly, God in just judgment on dreame-heeders, does permit, and by his
providence give way that their dreams should be somewhat fulfilled; so that
these things come to pass, not according to a virtue of prediction in dreams,
but by the just judgment of God, because men before they sleep, do not pray
against sinful dreams; and after sleep do not slight their dreams, but
credit them and confide in them, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.

Thus of the third sort of dreams, which we call Humane dreams. Fourthly, we
come to Diabolical dreams. That the Devil can be the maine cause of dreams,
which we call Diabolical, is apparent, in that,

First, He has been such a cause of dreams, as we shall show by and by;
therefore he can be so still, his wit and wickedness not ceasing; and these
times not better in reformation of manners, but rather worse.

Secondly, He can suggest, as appears by woeful experience, evil thoughts to
us when we are awaking, different from the many objects and things that then
our senses, and thoughts are drawn after; therefore much more to us, when the
operation of the senses cease.

Thirdly, If he could represent evil dictates before the mind of Christ,
Matthew. 4. He can inject them into us.

Fourthly, That Devil that can present the shape of a dead man to living Saul,
can represent other Images and imaginations of things.

Fifthly, Good Angels have caused good dreams, Matthew. 1. Matthew. 2. Therefore
proportionably, and by the rule of contraries, badd Angels can cause badd
dreams.

Quest. How may we know any of these Diabolical dreams, seeing evil dreams
may arise from inward corruption.

Answ. First, by the contraries to the notes of divine Prophetical dreams; as
when dreams seem never so good in the matter of them, yet they are dark and
confused in the digest; and are of personal slight things, and do not promote
the revealed truth of the Word, and godliness of conversation, and the glory
of God; but rather have a tendency, and consequence to lead to superstition.
For such dreams as these, are without the sphere of proper natural causes, or
humane actions; and therefore must be from Satan: Especially when,

Secondly, A man has a strong impression on his mind, that such dreams are
Prophetical, or divinatory.

Thirdly, They must needs be Diabolical when they proceed neither from any
observation of the senses, or actions of the body, or fantasies of the mind
in the day time.

Fourthly, When they are horrid, not only to grace, but where no grace is,
even to morality, civility, common reason, and the instinct of poor lapsed
nature.

If all these signs be not sufficient, that which follows of the general, and
specials of Diabolical dreams, as we have it in Keckerman. Valerius Maximus,
Master Perkins, and Alsted; who tell us,

First, That Diabolical dreams are when the Devil, whiles a man is asleep,
does as it were obsesse, besiege, environ, yea, and in a manner possess his
thoughts, forming and fashioning in them representations and dreams whereby he
is stirred up to Idolatry, superstition, or, etc. Which dreams for the most
part are obscure, uncertain, and mixed with vain fantasies and lies, which is
a prime symptom of Diabolical Somnispicine, or Divination by Satanical
dreams.

Secondly, They tell us, that some Diabolical dreams are (...), Solicitous
dreams, which are solicitously obtained of the Devil, by adjurations, vows,
devotions, sacrifices, oblations, or other religious performances; as of those
Somnispices, those Diviners by dreams, counted in a kind religious: Such were
the dreams of the Heathens; who having purified themselves by their
Sacrifices, to fit themselves to receive full manifestations by dreams, did to
that end lie down in the night and sleep in the Temple of Pasithea ( q.
d.(...), Omnibus dea) one of three Graces called Charites (the first Aglaia,
(...), splendour; the same as Pasithea. Secondly, Thalia, of (...), i. e.
Always green, never withering. Thirdly, Euphrosyne, (...), Joy) I say in the
Temple of Pasithea among the Lacedaemonians at the Altar; and in the Temple of
Aesculapius, and at the Altar of Apollo: And in their sleep the Devil formed
dreams in their fantasies, as answers to what they desired; in which the
Devil spoke to them as if at an Oracle. Secondly, Such were the dreams (say
they) of the Maniches in the time of the Primative Church, as appears
abundantly out of Ecclesiastical Stories: For though at the coming of Christ,
Oracles (the greatest and strongest delusions that ever Satan used) then
ceased, yet he has since by visions and dreams wrought in the heads of many
men, most strange conceits for the raising up of Heresies; as he did in the
Maniches (holding that there was a good God and a badd God that were eternal,
the authors of all things. That the souls of Man and Beasts were all one: That
the soul was a part of God, taken from him: That what creature any man did
kill, or eat; into that his soul was turned when he dyed, etc.) who had their
damnable opinions inspired and confirmed to them in and by dreams. Thirdly,
Such were the dreams of the Monks at their Altars, to receive revelations, the
Devil in their sleep in the night, in dreams appeared in the appearance of the
Virgin Mary, or some other He or She Saint, manifesting and confirming the
observation of such and such Popish superstitions.

Thirdly, They tell us, that there are other Diabolical dreams, named (...),
i. e. dreams which were not with those solemnities, and with such earnest
labor sought for; but suggested and formed in men's minds by the Devil,
perceiving them to be given to novelties, strange opinions, and unheard of
Revelations. Such were 1. those that pretended to be imspired with some divine
fury, or strange rapture, called Lympathici, q. d. (...), 2. The Enthusiasts,
or pretended Revelationists. 3. A kind of Anabaptists (as they call them) who
in the time of Reformation from Popery (by Hus, Prague, Luther, Wickliffe,
etc.) pretending visions and dreams to reveal things unto them, did commit
many horrid things, in Westphalia, Thuringia, etc. 4. The Family of love,
mightily boasted of their Revelations by dreams; and they must come to the
height by degrees: A man must ascend by steps before he can be of them, an
Elder eluminate, and a man deified (as they speak.) And when he has attained
to this, then he has strong illusions by visions and dreams.


I need not labor to make a parallel of these times to these practices; every
one of you almost, hears and knows what abundance now heed visions and dreams,
and pretend they have revelations by them, some of which I might easily name,
their persons alive, and their Books in Print. And how like they speak to the
Manithes, that the Creature is God, and God the Creature. And like to the
Family of love; saying, A man is Deified, etc.

Nor need I labor to show the evil of these dreams, in regard of the Author,
the Devil; the subject, Men usually departing from holiness; the matter, a
mixture of vanity, if not sin; and the end to draw men from the infalible word
of truth; you have heard enough by that which has been spoken.

Nor is there need of much endeavor to show that these do not presignifie
otherwise then lies. Nor do they signify any other thing then this that there
is much Communion between them and Satan: Therefore I shall conclude this
Chapter concerning dreams, only with this caution; You that profess a
knowledge of the truth, stick to the word of truth before any revelations by one
from the dead, Luke 16. Verse. last. Isa. 8.19, 20. or visions, or voices from
Heaven, 2 Pet. 1.19. or from any Angel, if he agree not with the Gospel, Gal.
1.8, 9.

CHAP. X.
Of Astrology, or Divination by the Stars; commonly called, Judicial
Astrology, whereby men undertake to predict, divine, and foretell, the good
and badd successes of humane affairs, concerning Nations or Persons.

THIS is another Doctrine of Devils, which the Apostle foretells in 1 Timothy 4. 1^
which in the last days shall be taught, learned, and practiced: For much of
the Devils concurrence is found in this Art, or else nothing of God, either by
institution of Creatures, or inspiration of his spirit to that end; and then
whither that Art is to be referred let wise men judge. That I may not seem to
beat the air, or set up a Mopp of mine own imagination, and then shoot at it;
let me in a word, in the very entrance of this discourse, show you how in this
also these times in which we live appear to be the last days; according to
the Prophesies of the Scriptures.

For now men generally are much given over to unlawful Astrology; they write
Books, greater and lesser Volumes of it. They daily put forth in Print their
predictions of humane events. They associate to countenance the Art; with
selemnities of meetings: They diligently teach many their unlawful Art: They
cast Figures, or form Schemes, and by them pretend to foretell almost, if not
altogether any kinds of things; many flock to them; many speak, if not Preach
for them: Whereby as one cause, the Word of God in general, and that
particular rule of being wise to sobriety is much laid aside, as by woeful
experience we find. So they leave the truth for lies; I say for lies, as we
shall by Gods grace afterward demonstrate.

It Is clear then, that this age, sick, very sick of this disease, had need of
the Physic of this, or the like Treatise, if they will apply it; if not, happily
it may prevent others from infection with the same malady.

That which we shall* by Gods assistance, do, is, First, To give you some
distinctions, descriptions, and observations, touching the nature of
Astrology. Secondly, The opinion of learned men touching it. Thirdly, The
condemnation of it by the word of God. Fourthly; Strong reasons against it.
Fifthly, A confutation of the objections that are brought for it.


SECTION I.
Of the nature of Astrology in some distinctions, descriptions, and
observations.

If I should distinguish of Astrology as Alsted does, calling it, Astrologia
judiciaria, that is, Judicial Astrology, as Master Perkins, and Master Geree
call it; or should I distinguish as Doctor Willet, that this Art is partly
Theoricall, partly Practical, and the practical as partly allowed, and partly
rejected; as if hereby we would separate and set a part for lawful use, the
name and thing of any kind of Astrology; it is of our indulgence, and more then
we need to do. For keeping to our terms, either first to the term
Astrology; it is no where allowed in the Scripture, under that notion, but
every where spoken against, as we shall see afterward. As other things that are
natural, which are brought to countenance Astrology, are not tolerated by the
Eucyclopaedia, and general order, and seats of all Arts and Sciences, within
their own spheres, to be accounted Astrology.

For instance; first, some urge that we know the Tides of the Sea by the state
of the Moon; and tempests by other Stars, etc. but these, and or the like
nature, say we, are properly handled in that part of natural Philosophy which
we call Meteorologie; as also are all fiery Meteors, Comets, etc. of all which
the essential internal causes, matter and form, and one external, namely
the end, belong thereunto, are there handled, and thereby are made an integral
part of Physics. For if you will say, because of their external efficient
cause, Viz. the Stars, they are to be handled as a part of Astrology: by the
same reason there will be left no such Science as natural Philosophy, because
all inferior bodies below the Moon (as says the great Philosopher Aristotle)
depend upon the superior Celestial bodies of the Heavens.

Secondly, Others say, that by Astrology we know Ecclipses, and changes of the
Moon: But say we, Astronomy does challenge this, whose proper work is to teach
us the Spheres, Planets, and nominated fixed Stars, with their motions,
measures, distances, conjunctions, and oppositions; whence arise Ecclipses of
the Sun, or Stars, and changes of the Moon. I give but a touch upon some
particulars, as an hint to understanding men to conceive of the rest. Thirdly,
If any urge that Astrology handles of the qualities and effects of the Stars:
We reply, that so does Astronomy of their qualities; namely, of their light
and color; and natural Philosophy of their effects in watery, aerie, and fiery
Meteors.

Or secondly, if we admit of another term, or title which Alsted gives to
Astrology, calling it, Astrologia Planetaria, i. e. Planetarie Astrology; then
we demand what becomes of almost all the System of pretended Astrology, if its
groundwork be founded mainely on the Planets (the maine part of Astronomy?)
What then becomes of the notions about the tenth Orb, the twelve houses of the
Heavens, the twelve Signs, with hundreds more of such kind of knacks
wherewith they are wont to build up Astrology.

Or thirdly, If we entertain those other terms and titles that Alsted, and
Doctor Willet, etc. give to Astrology, calling it (...), Astromancy, and
Genethliaca, that is, The calculatrix of Nativities, or Magic; all these are
disgraceful terms; and so unuseful to insinuate a lawful Astrology. By all
observe, that there is no place left for Astrology; but is as mere a fantasy
as Palmestry.

SECTION II.
Of the opinions of the learned touching Astrology.

Because the Astrologers give out that there is no body against this
Astrology, but one Perkins, or some one or two more, men not acquainted with
Art; or in the like slighting speeches; it will be very convenient to quicken
your attention as to a point considerable, by setting before you the judgment
of several learned men touching Astrology, with their reasons; Tostatus, a
great learned Schoole-man has a great deal against it, in his Commentary on
Levit. 19. Qu. 28, 29. etc. Doctor Willet gives us the sum of Tostatus, and
his own judgment thus. Of things which are (as to us) accidental as the
success of businesses; or their causes internal, as men's will and free
choice, as to undertake a journey, or to build, or not to build; predictions
are not only uncertain but superstitious: And the same is to be said of
casting Nativities by the conjunction of Planets. So Doctor Willet on Levit.
19. in his 41. Qu. The head whereof, is, The vanity of Astrologers, quoting of,
and referring us to Tostatus. The same Doctor Willet on the same Chapter, in
his 32. Qu. has this discourse: All manner of CONJECTURING (see he calls it but
Conjecturing) is not unlawful, whereof any natural or divine Cause can be
yielded: As first, there are natural signs in the Heavens and air, as of the
alteration of weather, of winds, of rain, etc. And in compound bodies, as in
setting, and planting of Trees; and in humane bodies, as when it is good to let
blood, to purge, etc. These are immediate effects ^n nature of Celestial
bodies: There are also mediate effects, as Comets which show siccity and
combustions, and so may portend Wars, which is caused by wrath among men,
which comes of siccity and heat. So the Crow cries against rain, because the
moisture of the air affects his feathers: And the Dolphin against a tempest
swimms aloft, because the Sand in the bottom is stirred. For these creatures
that are led only by sense, have a quicker feeling of such natural accidents,
then man has, who is most occupied in the use and exercise of reason: For,
Attentio ad operationes secundum rationem, etc. that is, The attending upon the
operations of reason, does take away the attention to the operation of nature:
And therefore FOOLS and SIMPLE persons, that are LEAST GUIDED by reason, are
more sensible of natural things then WISE men.

Again, there are divine and extraordinary signs * which God speaks of, that
shall be for signs at such a time, or of such a thing. As Matthew. 24.29. And
the Dove descending on Christ, Matthew. 3.16. But there is no Judiciary
Astrology in all these.

Doctor Willet adds on the same Chapter, 33. Qu. (to give it you in a word)
thus; Signs observed by men, of humane events, cannot be signs; first,
because Ex varietate causae variatur causatum: The Stars have not the same
influence in Summer, and in Winter, Spring, and Autumn. Secondly, Ex unitate
causae sequeretur similitudo effectus: Of the same cause there should be the
same effects. But there follows not the same effect after the same signs, as
appears by experience. Thirdly, Keckerman a most learned Philosopher, and a
Christian, although he favors some things, which men now a days call part of
Astrology, did not in all his two great Volumes of Arts and Sciences in Folio,
set forth any Astrology: but in his Works has these passages against it, to
this effect: Manent tamen, etc. The Stars abide, as of other sublunary
effects, so of effects in man, the COMMON and REMOTE Causes which many ways
may be hindered, not only by the first cause, GOD, but also by particular
causes, partly in the HEAVENS, partly in the AIR, and other ELEMENTS; so that
the PREDICTIONS OF ASTROLOGY, are with IFFS and ANDS. So that it follows not,
this man is born under an unhappy Starr, therefore he has a dull wit. So
Keckerman, SYSTEM PHYS. lib. 2. Cap. 3. De motu Coeli. The same Keckerman in
another place has these words, Disciplina Astrologica, etc. The Discipline of
Astrology about the Predictions by Heavenly bodies, or Stars, is not yet
confirmed upon true principles; therefore no marvel if that part of
Astrology, which is conversant about the predictions of Comets, does rest upon
most uncertain principles. It is granted to Astronomy to use such Hypotheses,
or arguments, or principles, which are not in nature, but are conceived only
by a kind of similitude. But Astrology may not use such Hypotheses. The
Astrologers assign several Countries and Cities, to several Celestial
Signs; But of Cities plainly, no reason at all appears. So Keckerman, Syst.
Phys. lib. 6. Cap. 5. De Cometis in genere.

Fourthly, Alsted the great Philosopher of these times, and a Christian, sets
forth a thing he calls Astrology; but see his faithfulness in this;
Astrologia (says he) vitio, etc. Astrology by the vice of man has more vanity
in it then Astronomy. Astrology because of our imbecility is conjecturall. And
he adds, Astrologers are often deceived: and therefore we do rightly (says
he) pronounce the divinatory part of Astrology to be but Conjecturall.

Fifthly, The great Galen says of Astrology, Sophisticum est, etc. It Is a
sophistical thing; Contrary to experience.

5. So famous a man as was Austin, famous for learning and godliness in his
time, having been addicted to Astrology, afterward repents of it, and
renounceth it, in his Treatise, De doctr. Christiana, lib. 2. Cap. 21. in fine,
and initio Capitis 22. His words are these, It is Magnus error, and magna
dementia, superstitio, etc. that is, Astrology is a great error, a great
madness, a superstition easily refelled.

Sixthly, Austin brings in another, on Psalm. 63. as a penitent renouncing this
Art, as Paganism and Judaisme: For we know that the Scriptures do much
forbidd it to the Jews, as the evil of the Heathens, as we shall see
plentifully afterward.

Seventhly, Master Perkins, famous for learning and godliness, as his Works
show, has not only a Treatise against Astrology (though once much addicted to
it) but also gives us his repentance and renouncing of it in his Preface to the
Reader before his Resolution to the Countryman. His words are these, I have
long studied this Art, and was never quiet till I had seen all the secrets of
it, but at length it pleased God to lay before me the PROFANENESS of it; nay
I dare boldly say, the IDOLATRY, although it be covered with fair and golden
shows: Therefore that which I speak with grief, I desire thee to note with
some attention, etc.

Eighthly, Master Geree, known to me to be a godly and learned man (being
Collegians in the University) has a learned Treatise against Astrology (which
if men read well, they dare not, if they have any truth of grace, give
themselves to Astrology) His Treatise is called Astrologia Mastix, common to
be had for a small matter.

Ninthly, Master Geree avoucheth, Master Brigs, sometimes Geometry Reader at
Oxford, an eminent godly man (a man I my self knew well, and have been at his
Lectures) and a man for his skill in Mathematics, I think I may say (says
Master Geree) that he was second to none. Of this Master Brigs, Master Geree
gives us this account: This loving Friend of mine (says Master Geree) upon a
question moved to him by me, touching Judicial Astrology, told me this
remarkable Story of himself; When he came to Cambridge, first he thought it a
fine thing to be of Gods Counsel, to foreknow secrets, and resolved to have
that knowledge, what labor soever it cost him; and so early applied himself
to the study of the Mathematics, beginning with Arithmetic, and so to
Geometry, and Astronomy; and to lay a good foundation, he left none of these
Arts, till he had attained exactness in them: The foundation thus laid, he
then applied himself to his maine scope, the search of Judicial Astrology:
But there he found his expectation frustrate; THERE WAS NO CERTAINTY in the
rules thereof; when he had tired his body and wits in vain, he was much
dejected with the frustrating of his expectation: At last he repaired to a man
in Cambridge, famous in that Art, and a practitioner in Prognostications by it:
to him he made his moan what pains he had taken to be expert in Astrology,
and how the uncertainty of the rules of that Art did now defeat his hopes: The
Astrologers reply was, that THE RULES OF THAT ART WERE UNCERTAIN INDEED,
NEITHER WAS THERE ANY CURE FOR IT: whereupon Master Brigs relinquisht that
study. And he did then affirm to me, that he would undertake to the
skilfullest Astrologer in the World, that let him set down any conclusion,
touching any man or State; yea or WEATHER, and he would prove it
CONTRADICTORILY; that is, Both that it would fall out so, and that it would not
fall out so, from their own Rules and Principles; whence (says he) you may
see apparently that there can be no certainty in the rules of that Art: He
further added, that his opinion was; To those that addicted themselves to the
practices of Divining Astrology, the Devil did at first secretly lend his
assistance; and at length, Gradatim (that is, Gradually) did (unless God
prevented) Entice them into contract.

Tenthly, Dominicus Nanus, Barthol. Amantius, Francisc Tortius, Joseph Langius;
have gathered these collections touching Astrology, Astrologia, etc. Astrology
is the Speech of Stars ((...),) But Astronomy is ((...),) the Law of the
Stars; as ascribing more certainty to Astronomy then to Astrology. This
Astrology is said to be invented by Atlanta, King of Mauritanie, witness
Pliny, l. 7. of his Natural History; which, if true, is no commendation of
Astrology. Contemplantur Astronomi, etc. that the Astronomers contemplate the
Stars, not as Judiciary Astrologers and Chaldeans, condemned by the Prophets,
but that by the situation of them, they may set forth the set, or standing
times of days, months, and years; the Ecclipses of the Sun and Moon, and
other things most worthy to be known, and most profitable for the life of man:
The vanity of Judiciary Astrology, innumerable wise men of Old, and in our Age
have disallowed. See what God pronounces of Astrologers by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.10.
Isa. 44. Jer. 10. Phavorinus in A. Gell. lib. 14. cap. 1. was wont to reprove
Judiciary Astrologers with this Dilemma; Aut adversa eventura dicunt, etc. that
is, Either they foretell that things of adversity shall come to pass; or those
of prosperity: If they say prosperous things, and do frustrate or deceive men,
then thou shall be miserable in hoping in vain: If they say things of
adversity and do lie; then thou shall be miserable in fearing in vain and
without cause. If true things answer to their Predictions, but are not
prosperous things, from thence forward thou art miserable in thy mind before
thou art so in the event. If they promise happy things, and they come to pass,
then plainly two inconveniences will attend; namely, both the expectation of
thee in suspense of hope will weary thee; and the hope thou had, will now
deflowre, or take away the grace and beauty of the future fruit of joy;
Therefore by no means may we use those kind of men who presage future things,
Audr. Alciat. Emblem. cap. 3.

Icare per superos qui, etc.
Exemplo ut doceas dogmata certa tuo.
Astrologus caveat quicqua^ praedicere; praeceps
Nam cadet impostor dum super astra volat.
i. e. As Icarus flying too high, melted his waxed wings and fell; so the
Impostor Astrologer, by flying above the Stars: Astrology judiciary, or
divinatory, is to be exploded with all its Patrons: So Epiphanius disputing
against the Pharisees and Manichees: So Basil, Hex. Hom. 1. and 6. So
Chrysostom on Genesis Hom. 5. and 6. And on Matthew. Hom. 6. Surely Augustine who
had prospered in the business of Astrology, does after in his confessions,
lib. 4. cap. 3. lib. 5. cap. 3. and 7. and lib. 1. cap. 6. De doctrina
Christiana, lib. 2. cap. 21.22.23. De civitate Dei, lib. 5. initio usque ad
cap. 8. Contra Academ. lib. 1. cap. 7. One while does greivously complain that
he was deceived, in attributing any thing to that Art; another while he does
sharply inveigh against it, and the Professors thereof: Likewise it is
forbidden more then once in the Councils, as in Council. Toletan. Prim. Can. 21.
Concilio Barracens. Cap. 9.10.26. qu. 2. 3. 4.

SECTION III.
The condemnation of Astrology by the Word of God, in several places of
Scripture.

The first place is in Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. There shall not be FOUND among you ANY
ONE that uses DIVINATION, or an OBSERVER OF TIMES. An il thing that it must
not be found among them, not in any one Man or Woman of all the Nation: Just as
it is said the name Baali, Hos. 2.16, 17 must be removed, not founded, because
Idolaters used it, though of the same signification with Ishi, there appointed,
i. e. My Lord, or my Husband: And as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.3. of
covetousness, Let it not be once named among Christians. So the Prophet Moses
here, as from God, charge that there must not be any one among them that
uses Divination, or is an observer of times: Both which words by common
consent of the Learned of all sorts, signify. Astrology, and Astrologers. The
first word (...) which by our Translators is rendered, one that uses
Divination (the phrase indeed is strong and emphatical, (...) that is, Divining
Divinations) is, as Mercer affirms, taken for the most part in an il sense;
and asserteth out of the Hebrew, R. Kimchi, that it contains every Art which
is used to foreknow things future. Shindler affirms to the same purpose, that
in an evil sense it comprehends all things which are done, (...) i. e. any
curious Diabolical Art, as the Magi of Egypt. And Elias says, that it
signifies to Divine things to come; which is attributed to Balaam (see Josh.
13.) who because he cold not curse from observation of the natural Starts, but
was forced to bless; he yet expressed himself in his own dialect,
Astrologically, of a spiritual Starr that should arise out of Jacob. Avenzara,
they say, an Astrologer, affirms that this word is a common name to all
Diviners, but more proper to Astrologers. Lastly, The Arabian Version of this
18. of Deuteronomy. Verse. 10. renders our word, He that exercises Astrology.

The second word in this 18. of Deuteronomy. V. 10. (...) which our Translators
render, An observer of times, is diversely taken; but all close to signify a
prohibition of Astrology. The sum of what the Learned Hebrews say (who must
needs best understand their own Language) in brief is this (...) praestigiari
(whence is our (...)) Aben Ezra will have to be derived of (...) A Cloud, as to
foretell by the Clouds; that it will be well or il to do, or attempt this or
that upon this or that day. R. Solomon derives it from (...) Time, as to
signify observation of times. The wise Ancients derived it from (...) An eye,
and so (...) to signify him that dazles the eyes of the beholder, that he may
see falsehood in stead of that which is true. Their words are (...) etc. that
is, The wise men say, (...) is he who holds the eyes: R. Akiva says, it is
he which computeth times and hours; saying, It is good to go forth to day; to
morrow it is good to negotiate, etc. Sanedrim, Cap. 7. fol. 65. 2. Of these
Kimchi, in Lib Radicum, makes mention. In the later Etymology are signified
Curious Astrologers, determining by the disposition and operation of Stars,
certain days to be days of good, merry, and prosperous things: Others to be
days of evil, sad, and adverse things: Thus the Learned Hebrews. The Chaldee
renders the said two words; the first, Divineth Divination; the second,
Observes hours, which is proper to Astrologers. Note further, for the
clearing of this first place of Deuteronomy. 18.10. that both our foresaid Hebrew
words are used again by Moses, in Verse. 14. (and in the same manner translated
by our last English Translators: Where again the Arabic Version renders (...)
Astrologers.) And Moses adds these five strong arguments against the said Art
of Astrologicall and other unlawful Predictions.

First, That all such are an abomination to the Lord, Verse. 12

Secondly, That such Arts being used by the Canaanites, God did drive them out
before the Israelites, Verse. 12.

Thirdly, That unless men cast away the use of the said Arts, they cannot be
perfect; that is, upright and sincere with God, Verse. 13.

Fourthly, That godly men must differ from Canaanites and Heathens, in the
abandoning such arts, because God has forbid his people the use of them, Verse.
14.

5. That in stead of such ways of prediction, the Lord raises up Christ the
great Prophet, ( v. 15. compare Act. 3.23.) to foretell unto them what is meet
for them to foreknow: So that only Christ, and they to whom he gives the
divinely inspired gift of Prophecy, must foretell things to come: No Art may
undertake it; for it is opposite to Christ, and presumes upon that which
belongs only to divine Prophecy. So that indeed (as it is in Levit. 20.6.) to
follow such kind of Arts, is to go a whoring (spiritually) from Christ; and
God will (as it is said there) set his face against such, and cut off such a
soul from among his people: Weighty reasons against Astrology, without any
intimation from God of any distinction or limitation.

The second place against Astrology, is Isa. 2. 6. Therefore thou have
forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the
East, and are Soothsayers like the Philistines. The word (...) here rendered
Soothsayers, is rendered by Vatablus in his Notes, Diviners; by Junius,
Prestigiators; that is, that make show of that they cannot do. Greek, Viz.
Septuagint, (...), that is (says Budens, etc.) A kind of foretelling: As (...)
(say they) signifies Divination. And generally the Chaldee, Syriack, Arabic,
Arias Montanus, etc, render it Augurers, or auguries, which by reason of the
antiquity of the word, and because antiquities tell us that the Augurers did
divine as well by the aspect of Heaven as by flying of Birds; Authors of later
times commonly use that word to express Divination in general.

But to come closer to the word; Learned Arias Montanus, does, as well as I,
derive our word from (...) that is, Time, yea so does R. Solomon derive (...)
or (...) (same word in descent and substance) of whose signifying Astrology, or
Astrologers ye heard before abundantly.

The intimations of the sinfulness and prohibition of this Divination, in this
second of Isa. are, First, That the Jews therein to the displeasure of God,
imitated the Heathens, and uncircumcised outcasts; as those in the East, that
is, the Chaldeans, and the Philistims: Secondly, In that the holy Ghost puts
such a singular note on this sin: He says not, they are Swearers, unrighteous,
etc. like the Chaldeans and Philistims, but they are Diviners, like those of
the East, even Chaldeans, or like the Philistims. Thirdly, That with a shrill
and strong emphasis, the Prophet tells the Jews, though considered in their
highest notion, as the house of Jacob, and Gods people; Therefore for their
Astrology, etc. God had forsaken, or cast down, or sent them away into
Captivity: that is, had past an irrevocable sentence so to do.

The third place of Scripture against it, is Isa. 44.24, 25, 26. Thus says the
Lord thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that
makes all things, that stretches forth the Heavens alone, etc. that
frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes Diviners madd, that turns
wise men backward, and makes their knowledge foolish; that confirms the word
of his servants, and performs the counsel of his Messengers. Mark by the
way (before we scan the words in the Original) the Geneva Notes, in the Margin
of our greater English Bibles. Namely, He armeth them (say those Notes)
against the Soothsayers of Babylon, which would have borne them in hand, that
they KNEVV BY THE STARS, that God would not deliver them, and that Babylon
should stand.

But let us come more particularly to the words. First, It Is evident here is
mention of Diviners, a word in our English, generally taken in an ill sense, to
signify those that by unlawful Arts undertake to foretell future things. And
the Chaldee, Syriack, Arabic, Greek, and Ancient Latin, and that of Vatabbus
and Junius, render the Text in part, by Diviners, and Divinations. And Vatablus
in his Notes upon this place, says, Mendacium, that is, of Liars, is in
Hebrew, (...) that is, of Astrologers. And Junius in his Notes on this place,
says, Signa mendacium, etc. that is, The signs of the Liars, of which see
following in the 47. of Isa. Verse. 10. and so forward to Verse. 14. And sure
enough there in Isa. 47.10. Astrologers expressly, and under several other
names and notions also are bitterly inveighed against, as we shall see after,
in the particular scanning of that place. Let us add to all, a little more
particular sifting of the words of this 44. of Isa. 25. (...) Liars, is of
(...) He feigned, lied, and by (...) in Isa. 44.25. are understood (as
Buxtorfe, and R. Solomon, and R. David, affirm) (...) Inspicientes astra,
Astrologi, that is, Gazers upon the Stars, Astrologers. And for the other word
in this 44. of Isa. Viz. (...) that you have here rendered in English,
Diviners, we scanned it before in Deuteronomy. 18. showing you how the Hebrews, yea,
the Astrologer himself confesses that it signifies Astrologers. The
intimations against Astrology in this Text, are, first, That it seems
prejudicate to Gods Creation, and Redemption, and Providence. For when God
would here comfort his people against Astrologers Predictions, threatening evil
to them, the Lord that is most wise, to order his words, begins with this
preface: Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, and he that formed thee from the
womb, that makes all things, and that Stretches forth the Heavens. and
spreads abroad the Earth: Intending plainly thus much: Fear not bondage
under evil men and things, as the Astrologers threaten, for I am thy Redeemer,
that redeemes thee from troubles, in spite of all Astrology. Fear not those
Astrologicall Genethliacos, that is, Casters of Nativities, for I formed thee
from the womb: Fear not their Predictions by the Stars and Heavens, for I
spread and roll them as I please: Fear not their predicted evils, for I make
all things, and spread the Earth as I please. So that God pleads these of his
Creation, Redemption, and providentiall preservation, against the Astrologers;
opposing these by raising false fears from their lying Arts in the hearts of
his people. The second intimation is, That God does call, and can and will make
those Astrologers and Diviners, Liars, and madd men: All their predictions shall
prove but lies and madness; and turn their pretended knowledge into
foolishness. Thirdly, That the Lord will confirm the word of his servants,
and the counsel of his Messengers; that is, the Prophesies of his Prophets, in
opposition to all Astrologers. Astrology opposes the Word, but that shall
overthrow it.

The fourth place against Astrology, is, Isa. 47.12, 13, 14, It is spoken to
Babylon, Verse. 1. The words are these, Stand now with thine ENCHANTMENTS, and
with the multitude of thy SORCERIES, wherein thou have labored from thy youth,
if so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail: Thou art
wearyed in the multitude of thy counsels; let now the Astrologers, the
Starr-gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators stand up and save thee from these
things that shall come upon thee: Behold they shall be as stubble, the fire
shall burn them, etc.

We see in the general if we read but according to the English, how
Astrologers under all names and titles, are enveighed against by God himself,
and in a holy way of Divine taunting of them: The Original also is very full and
home to the same effect; the first word or name in the 13. Verse, (...) which
our English renders Astrologers, is also by the ancient Greek Septuagint
rendered (...) And by Junius also Astrologi, that is, Astrologers whose
business, according to the Hebrew, is to view and behold the Heavens for
Predictions: For the Hebrew word (...) in his prime and native signification,
signifies to play the Astrologer. (...) says Pagnin, and Schindler, is the
Root whence comes (...) an Astrologer, Isa. 47.13. Let now the Astrologers of
Heaven, etc. stand up and save thee. And this is the righter rendering of the
word. The Herbrew Doctors also expound it Astrologers. R. Kimchi does derive it
from the Arabian Language, in which (...) Alhabram, signifies the Decision of a
matter; as (says he) the Astrologers are so called, who decide and determine
things by the prescript of the Stars. And to put the matter out of doubt, that
the Lord means Astrologers, he uses another word, by which he gives them a
second name, to wit, (...) is Gazers IN the Stars. Astronomers look upon the
Stars, to know their color, distance, motion; but Astrologers (says the
Lord) gaze in, or into the Stars; that is, theit business is to know the
influence and predictions by Stars, as they pretend. The Chaldee Targum does
also so render it; namely, (...) Gazers in or into the Stars: And their third
name, (...) which our English renders, Monthly Prognosticators: Vatablus
renders, those who declare what shall come to pass every several month. The
Arabian Version of this Verse renders them all three thus, Let them arise and
deliver thee, who presage future things by the Stars of Heaven; who
contemplate the Stars, and foretell thee what event shall be to thee. All (you
see) amounts to this, that without fail, Astrologers are here spoken against.
And how?

First, As opposite to confidence in God: As our Notes on the Bible affirm in
these words, He derideth (say they) their vain confidence, that put their
trust in any thing but in God, condemning also such Sciences which serve to no
use, but to delude the people, and to bring them from depending on God.

Secondly, As of the same rank, and much of the same abomination with
Enchanters and Sorcerers. Babylon uses both; and as we heard before, from them
that went far in Astrology; that Astrologers that usually hitt any thing
right, cannot do it but by help from the Devil.

Thirdly, As a thing to be derided, that any men should undertake to presage
good, when it is the counsel of God to bring evil upon a people.

Fourthly, As a just thing with God to send such to their Astrologers in the
day of evil of judgment on them, to see if they can deliver them.

Fifthly, As that God will the rather bring irresistible judgment on a people
that besides their evils, do believe Astrologers that they shall do well.

Sixthly, That in the day of calamity, especially Astrologers, and those that
believed them shall fall by the hottest fury of the judgment.

The fifth place of Scripture against Astrology is, Jer. 10.2, 3. Thus says
the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs
of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them. For the customs of the people
are vain. (...) a sign or token, does sometimes and especially when joined
with Heaven, signifies a prodigious portentous, ominous sign. The word is the
same, and the intent of the Text the same, as in Isa. 44.24. etc. (before
discussed) that frustrateth the Tokens, or signs of the Liars. The Geneva
Notes on our Bibles on the word SIGNS, say thus; God forbids his people to
give credit or fear the Constellations and Conjunctions of Stars and Planets,
which have no power of themselves, but are governed by him; and their secret
motions and influences are not known to man, and therefore there can be no
certain judgment thereof, Deuteronomy. 18.9. And the same Geneva Notes on the word
Customs, say thus; Meaning (say they) not only the observation of the Stars,
but their Laws and Ceremonies, whereby they confirm their Idolatry; so the
Geneva Notes. I quote them and others the more, that ye may see, not only
mine, but the judgment of the generality of the godly and Learned touching
Astrology. I add, As Astrology and Idolatry are conjoined here in the
prohibition, so also was it in the practice of men: For they Idolatrously made
Gods of the Stars, as of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc. as the names of our
week-dayes do unhappily to this day signify. And they also did Astrologically
use them to foretell by. And indeed in Prediction by them they made Gods of
them. For future things are in Gods hands, and not for us to know till he will
make them known by his Word; or perform them, Acts 1.7. The Chaldee
Paraphrase renders that of the Text of Signs thus; And be not afraid of the
signs that are put in Heaven: which must needs signify the Stars: And the
Hebrew word for Fear (...) signifies to cast down upon the earth with fear;
which must intimate rather a fear of evil significations, then of adoration.
The intimations against Astrology here, are,

First, That it is the way of the Heathen. Now we, whom God has with so much
cost and care distinguished from the World, must not imitate the World, Matthew.
6.32. Romans 12.2.

Secondly, That the Customs of the people in that and other things, are vain;
and it is not for Gods people to run after vain things, but rather as a sign of
their repentance to do as Solomon, Eccles. 1.2. and Paul, Phillip. 3.7, 8.

Thirdly, That the regarding of such things causes in men an evil fear,
opposite to their confidence and comfort in God: So the Prophet intimats in
exhorting them not to fear them.

Fourthly, That to fear any Astrology, or signs, etc. is an Heathenish thing:
We do not as Believers, but as Heathens. Godly men, yea all men that profess
the true God, ought to go to that God, and to him only to know the hidden
things that are future. For it is the privilege of God only, to foretell such
things to come, either by himself or by his spirit extraordinarily in his
Prophets; and therefore not communicated to Stars: And whatsoever we set up,
as imagining they are able to predict such future things, we advance up into
the place of God, which are not Gods; as is manifest by this very thing, that
they cannot really and truly predict such things: And therefore to go to any
thing to know such things to come, but to God himself, is to do as Heathens
that set up false Gods, and not as men that acknowledge the true God. And this
is fully and plainly held forth to us, in Isa. 41.21, 22, 23, 24. In Verse. 10.
to 21. the Lord having prophesied and foretold good things to come to pass for
his people, he in a holy manner thus taunteth all other things that are set up
by men in which they put confidence, as if they were Gods to declare hidden
things, past, or to come; Verse. 21. etc. Produce your cause, says the Lord,
bring forth your strong reasons, says the King of Jacob; let them bring them
forth, and show us what shall happen. Let them show the former things what they
be, that we may consider them, and Know the latter end of them, or Declare to
us things to come: Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know
ye are GODS, etc. Behold ye are of nothing.

We do not count it considerable to our business to discuss here, what is
the thing mainly meant in this place; as whether Idolatry, or Astrology, (sure
enough in Astrology by them that confide in it for predictions, there is
Idolatry enough, as this Text sufficiently intimates) but we attend the
Argument to confute it, Viz. Because it cannot foretell things to come; Because
that is Gods Prerogative alone. And therefore nor Idols nor Stars; neither
Idolatry nor Astrology, can predict things to come: For as Idolatry is but
vanity, as it is often called in Scripture: As the vanities of the Nations, or
Gentiles, etc. So Astrology is a lie, Jer. 50.35, 36. A Sword is upon the
Chaldeans, etc. and upon her Princes, and upon her wise men: a sword is upon
the Liars, and they shall dote. Upon which words Learned Buxtorfe (ad vocem,
(...)) faith thus: (...) (which is the word in this 50. of Jeremie, only an
emphaticall article is prefixed, (...)) signifies Lies, and Liars, Isaiah
44.25. by which understand, (...) Gazers upon the Stars, Astrologers,
according to Rabbi Solomon: And so understand, that, Jer. 50.36. Rabbi David on
the same: And the Chaldee Paraphrase renders (...) by (...) often times; which
(...) signifies Foretellers: But Jer. 50.36. the Chaldee renders (...) by (...)
Diviners: The result of all is this: First, Astrologers are by God himself
called Liars: Secondly, They that seek to them for predictions, are Idolaters,
therein making them Gods. Thirdly, That God has expressed so much against both;
both against the Astrologer and his Clients, because God will vindicate his
own privilege, that he alone is the God of truth that can truly foretell
things to come.

The sixth place, is Dan. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams;
and the King commanded to call the MAGICIANS, and the ASTROLOGERS, and the
SORCERERS, etc. to show the King his dreams: Then spoke they to the King in
the Syriack, tell thy Servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation.
The King answered; The thing is gone from me, if ye will not make known to me
the dream with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, etc.
They answered again, Tell us the dream, and we will show the interpretation
thereof. The King answered, If ye will not make known unto me the dream,
there is but one decree for you, for ye have prepared LYING, etc. Tell me the
dream and I shall know that ye can show the Interpretation thereof. Then the
Chaldeans answered, etc. There is not a man upon the Earth that can show the
Kings matter: There is no King, etc. that asked such things at any Magician or
Astrologer, etc. But as it follows in the Story, God revealed the dream, and
the interpretation thereof to the King: Then the King answered unto Daniel, and
said, Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of Gods, and a Lord of Kings,
and a revealer of secrets.

In all which we have these particulars against Astrologers: First, That the
Magicians and Astrologers, and the Sorcerers, are put together, as Artists of
the same kind. Secondly, That they themselves did confessedly so name and
number up themselves. Thirdly, That all these laying their heads and hearts,
and Arts together, and that to save their lives cold not find out that dream
of the King. Fourthly, That the King calls them Liars. Fifthly, The King gives a
reason, namely, that if they could certainly by any Art, etc. tell the
interpretation of his dream, they might also tell his dream. Sixthly, That by
a just judgment of God ruin is pronounced by the King, against these as
deceivers. Seventhly, They thought that because they could not tell this
dream, that therefore no man on earth else could; and that therefore the King
was unreasonable to require of them to tell it; intimating strongly, their
incomparable ability and confidence in their wicked Arts, that what possibly
could be done in that nature, by any, could be done by them. Eighthly, That God
according to his Prerogative could reveal it to Daniel; and so confuted the
Lies of the Astrologers, etc. Ninthly, That the Heathen King was hereby
thoroughly convinced, that there was no God like the true God, whom Daniel and
all godly men do worship.

Seventhly and lastly, Note that the word Magician and Magic (so often used in
Daniel, and joined there with Astrologers and Astrology) is by the vote of the
Learned generally taken in the New Testament in the worse sense, Matthew. 2. often.
Acts 8. Acts 13. And as often as Ashaphim is mentioned in Daniel, the Septuagint
constantly expounds it by the word (...), Magicians. Now Ashaphim say the
Learned Critics, signifies Astrologers, and those which observe the Stars in
the morning or evening twylight. And though (...), may in the general signify
Wise, yet because those (...), were among the Chaldeans and Egyptians, such as
used devilish Arts; it is taken in an ill sense; as of that brood (before they
repented) mentioned, Acts 19.18, 19, 20. Many of them which used curious arts,
brought their Books together to be burned before all men, and counted the price
of them fifty thousand pieces of Silver. The most of these Books, in most
probability were Astrological Books, for Divination; because, first, The Arts
are called Curious arts; that is, Curious in the Rules and Principles above
common means of knowledge, and curious in their end and use, to predict things
that were not to be known ordinarily. Secondly, They were Book-arts, which are
chiefly of Astrology; few, if any, are written of Sorcery, Necromancy, etc. but
come down from Generation to Generation by Tradition. Thirdly, Their price
great, Viz. Six thousand two hundred and fifty pounds sterling, which imports
also Astrological Books, because none others of unlawful and sinful Arts (as
they all are here intimated) are so much valued, as Astrological Books.
Fourthly, Its a thing apparently known to men acquainted with Antiquity, that
these Ephesians were greatly addicted to Astrology and Book-magick. Therefore
the Syriack and Arabic render Curious arts by Magic. All which sorts of Arts
are condemned under the name of Sorceries, Revel. 21.8. as those which shall
abound in the last times, before the fall of Antichrist, as by woeful experience
we do already find.

To these things out of Daniel, and the New Testament, I might add much, both
of Antiquities, and Criticismes of Languages, to streng-then our assertion; but
the conveniences of this little Volume constraines me to contract my self.

SECTION IV.
Containing reasons or arguments against Astrology.

The first is from the Concession of the Friends of Astrology: They grant that
either of these four may prevent the predictions of Astrology; namely, either
the prudence of a moral wise man, or the piety of a godly man, or the
tutelarity of Angels, or the providence of God overruling all things; much
more all four concurring, may anticipate. Now these four swallow up, and
gripe within their sphere all things, especially arbitrary things: What humane
prudence cannot do, grace can; if not, Angels may: and where all fail,
providence does order according to the mind of God, who works ALL things
according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. It Is said, ALL THINGS;
for, not a Sparrow falls to the ground without his will. And all the hairs of
our head are numbered, Matthew. 10.29, 30. Which our Savior speaks to comfort
Believers against bodily dangers, and corporal causes of fears. And on the
other side, it is not said in that 1 Ephesians. 11. He works all things according
to the STARS; which are visible things, and natural necessary causes; but
according to the counsel (which is secret and invisible) of his own will
(which is arbitrary and free.) And to express it more significantly and
emphatically, that God does not rule by a deputation committed to Stars,
especially in things either humane and arbitrary, or spiritual; it is said he
rules all things after the counsel of his OWN WILL. Which being set over
against the many soar invectives the Lord makes against Astrological observers
of the Stars demonstrate sufficiently to them that will understand, that there
is no certainety in predictions from the Stars. This argument might be much
enlarged to good purpose; but a word to the wise is sufficient.

The second Argument is from clear experience of Twins conceived at the same
instant, and borne in the same hour, or less; and it may be put forth
themselves in part, at the womb enterchangably in that hour (as Pharez and
Zara did, Gen, 38.) yet before God put any difference by any inward change by
grace, the Twins may be of an apparent vast difference of Complexion, as we see
in Jacob and Esau, at their first birth. And experence knows of other Twins,
either bot natural or both spiritual, that far different events in the World
have befallen them. Where then is the certainety of Starr-predictions? Where is
the verity of Astrology? It may be they will read us a Lecture of difference
from magnitudes and motions of Stars; that some are bigger then the Earth,
some lesser; again, that some finish some motions in twenty four hours,
others not other motions in so many scores of years, or more. But if this be
their defense, the matter of predicting Astrology is thereby made to me more
incredible: For if (as they say, with Keckerman) the Moon be less then the
Earth at least twenty times, and the rest of the Planets below the Sun
proportionably, as Venus twenty seven times less then the Earth; and Mercury
two and twenty: How then shall these at any posture, at any one and the same
time effect or signify any thing to all the World? For all the Astrologers in
the World will undertake to prognosticate from these Planets upon all men on
Earth, borne at one and the same hour. If the Sun, as they confess, be
about an hundred and sixty times bigger then the Earth; and all the Planets
above the Sun proportionably; as that Saturn is fourscore and eleven times
bigger then the Earth;; Jupiter fourscore and fifteen times; Mars one time
bigger, with one third; how then is it that there is difference of natures and
events in thousands borne at the same hour, and especial in Twins, as we said
before. If they say that this is because of the swift external violent motion
of all the Stars, Planets, and Fixed; that they are hurryed round the Earth by
the first movable from East to West, etc. in twenty four hours; which is to
runn sixty times sixty Miles in every hour, then we demand how can the Stars
have time to make any distinct impression by any particular influence on one
borne, especially on one who perhaps may lie in the mouth of the womb, partly
borne, partly unborne, sometimes in the head and foreparts, sometimes in the
hinder parts, for a quarter or half an hour, or many hours. Or what
Astrologer upon the swiftness of those motions, and the slownesse of the
birth, which cannot be borne in an instant, but at best gradually, shall be
able to prognosticate punctually that such Stars, with such influence, did so
complexionate such an Infant at such a Minuit of time? For by the computation
aforesaid, the Stars run, in the said motion, in every minuit of the hour
sixty Miles. If Astrologers will plead any thing to help themselves herein, from
the slownesse of other motions of the Stars, that are natural, and internal to
them; as that all the fixed Stars (which are known by their twinkling to our
sight) move from North to South (as they say, so Alsted) in three thousand five
hundred years, and back again in three thousand five hundred years; so that
they finish not that motion under seven thousand years; how then can any Age
since the beginning of the World have experience what the Conjunction of the
Stars may produce? So for the motions of the seven Planets: If they say (as
Keckerman, etc. affirm) that the Sun has three Orbs: First, that in which
the Sun it self is fixed, and is the middle Orb, and is excentricall to the
World; that is, The World, or Earth is not just in the middle of it; by reason
whereof the Sun is sometimes in the Perige, namely nearer the Earth for some
months; and sometimes in the Apoge, to wit, more remote from the Earth, for
other months. And in this Eccentrick Orb the Sun moves, as they say,
according to the succession of the twelve Signs from West to East, not
finishing that motion under three hundred sixty five days, and about six
hours. And withal as they assert, that by reason of this Orb the Sun moves
as in relation to the center of the earth, one while swifter, another while
slower; that is to say, it moves slower whiles it is on the Northern^ part of
the World, lingering there an hundred eighty six days, eight hours, and
twelve minuits; but runs swifter on the Southern part of the World,
dispatching its race in an hundred seventy eight days, one and twenty hours,
and twelve minuits; and so stays longer with some of the Signs (as they say)
and less while with others. And that secondly, The Sun has, as they say, a
supreme Orb contiguously adjoined above to the aforesaid Orb. Thirdly, an
inferior Orb, in like manner adjoined beneath to the said middle Orb, both
partly Concentrick, partly Eccentrick (the use of which two Orbs, as held forth
by Astronomers, I shall not here stay to relate.) And the motion of those two
extreme. Orbs, is, as they confess, very slow, so that they finish not their
course, which is like some motion of the eighth Sphere, under forty nine
thousands of years (as Keckerman affirms.) All which makes me again demand,
how any men could ever attain to a certain experience of Conjunctions of
Stars, seeing this number of forty nine thousand extends it self to an age
above seven times older then the creation of the Stars?

It would be too tedious to recite all the several Orbs and motions of all
the other. Planets, according to the common opinion; as, that the Moon has
five Orbs, some of which move swifter then those of the Sun, putting her twice
every month in her Apoge or exaltation, and twice in her Perige or descention,
with differences in both, that in the same Apoge it is sometimes higher and
sometimes lower, and so in the same Perige; and has one motion that is not
finished under eighteen years, seven months, and about twelve hours.

That Saturn has a motion whose course takes up thirty years; Jupiter one of
twelve, Mars one of two, Venus of one. And Mercuries motion (as Keckerman
affirms) Est admodum varius imo magna part adhuc incognitus; that is, it is
wonderful various, yea for the most part yet unknown. Now lay all these
varieties and uncertainties together, and then judge what certainty of
experience there can be had of the conjunctions of Stars, just so long and so
much, as to make such a sure impression of such influences and efficacies on
men in the birth, as may duly and truly prognosticate, that so shall such a
man be and do; but so another, especially in Twins.

The third Argument. All rules of Sciences and Arts (by the fundamental
Position of Artists) are Axioms, Maxims, Theoremes, Canons. etc. that is, Most
worthy, and most special principles, experiments, or rules, for their verity
and certainety. But such are not the rules of Astrology. First, Because of the
foresaid various varieties and uncertainties of Stars, both in their own
motions, and in comparison with others. Secondly, Because no man knows the
particular qualities or efficacies of all the Stars. No Artist yet ever
undertook to speak of more then the seven Planets, and some few nominated
Fixed Stars of some few several magnitudes; leaving out millions that are
neither named nor known. Yea thirdly, thousands of Stars cannot be so much as
seen a minuit together; as the Philosophers confess in their discourse of Via
lactea, the Milky way in the Heavens, to be seen in a most starry night,
especially in Winter. Fourthly, Because all the Stars do shine upon the earth
at once, jointly and promiscuously; so that they that are under them cannot by
any rule from nature know what influences shall be predominant in their
effects. Fifthly, They have more time to alter the Complexions of young people
from the Cradle to manhood carried and walking abroad. I say to alter their
complexion by radiation and influence; then to stamp upon them an unchangable
impression upon them in the secret Chamber of their birth; as we see many
natural men and Women, not differenced by grace, much altered from Melancholy
to Cheerfulness, etc. So that if some Stars in one position, in an instant at
birth have a power to imprint; other Stars, and perhaps more prevalent, have
likewise a power to blot out that in many years, and to instill a new one.
Sixthly, There are many causes below between us and the Stars to alter the
influence of the Stars, or interrupt their native operation; as the various
complexion of the air, diversity of winds, the different postures and
situations of men, as sometimes under a direct, sometimes under an oblique
radation, etc. Seventhly, Astrologers depend on Clocks and Dyals, to know the
posture of the Heavens at the hour of their prognosticating; which Dyals and
Clocks often are false, which may make a wide difference in a minuit, in which as
we heard some motions of the Heavens run sixty Miles. Eighthly, The Astrologer
cannot be able to allow exactly for the exaltation in the Apoge and descension
in the Perige of the Planets, with their swifter motion in the one then in the
other, so as to determine justly how much power of prevalence there may be in
their influences at such changes. Ninthly, A man can never certainly conclude
of a particular event from a cause that is most universal, most remote, and so
but a partial cause of the thing predicted. But the Stars are no other but
such a kind of cause of men's complexions and actions; and therefore are no
sure grounds of prediction concerning the future afaires of men. The Parents
complexion, Divine dispensations, occasions, and opportunities among men, and a
man's own obedience or disobedience to God, have far more influence into man
to dispose him to be, or do this or that, then all the myriads of Stars.
Tenthly, Astrology contending for such a power of Stars over the soul of man
(which is the principle of all actions) inferrs as if the soul of man were ex
traduce, generated by the Parents.

First, Contrary to many Scriptures, Psalm. 102.18. The people that shall be
Created shall praise the Lord. Eccles. 12.7. The spirit returns to God that
gave it, whiles the body returns to the Earth. Heb. 12.9. We have had Fathers
of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall we not much
rather be in subjection unto the Father of Spirits?

Secondly, Contrary to the rules of art, reason, and experience, Calum non agit
in animam, etc. The Heavens cannot act directly upon the soul; nor can a man's
body complexionate, alter, or master his natural spirit. So that the To
intelligere, and To Velle, the Acts of reason and will do not depend on sense.
For in sleep, we have strong actings of reason: And when awake, in the time of
deepest rational meditations, the senses are useless, and their acts
suspended, as if we did neither see nor hear.

The fourth and last Argument against Astrology that I shall urge, passing by
innumerable others, is, That a maine part of the ba^s and bottom on which
Astrologers build the structure of their Art of Prediction, is but mere
imagination; for there is no such thing as the tenth, or ninth Sphere: And
therefore the Zodiac placed by Astrologers in them, is but a dreamed fiction;
yea and one of the Quondam great Astrologers (M. P.) will dare to say, that the
twelve Signs, bounded as they suppose, within the demensions of such a thing
as a Zodiac; namely, the Signs of Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc. that is, a
Ram, a Bull, etc. (feigned to have power over the twelve parts of man's body)
are only twelve imaginary Signs: For in the HEAVENS (says he) there is no
such matter as a Ram, a Bull, etc. And how (says he) can it stand with reason
that in a firmament FEIGNED by Poets, and Philosophers, a FORGED Sign (which
indeed is NOTHING) should have any power, or operation in the bodies of men.
Again, the very order of Government of these signs in man's body, is fond and
without show of reason: For according to this platform, when the Moon comes
into the first Sign Aries, she rules in the head; and when she comes into
the second Sign Taurus, she rules in the neck; and so descends down from
part to part, ruling two, insome three days, etc. Where observe (says he)
that the Moon is made to rule in the cold and moist parts, when she is in the
hot and dry Signs; whereas in reason, a more consonant order were this, that
when the Moon were-in hott and dry Signs, as in Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius,
she should rule in hott and dry parts of the body; and when she is in cold
and moist Signs, she should rule in the cold and moist parts of the body; and
so still govern those parts which in temperature come nearest to the Signs
wherein the Moon is. Beside this, some learned Physicians have upon experience
confessed, that THE OBSERVATION OF THE SIGN IS NOTHING MATERIAL; and that
there is no danger in it, for guelding of Cattle, or letting of blood. And the
vanity of the old conceit and imagination of them that have put much in the
Signs, appears in the common practice of men, who commonly upon Stevens day
use to let blood, be the Sign where it will. The truth is (says he) the Sign
in its own nature is neither way available, being but a fantasy, grounded
upon supposed premises, and therefore ought to be rejected as mere VANITY. Thus
far he.

Now let me add some particulars suiting to what he has said to illustrate the
same; and so I shall not only confirm him, but also what I affirmed my self
in the beginning of this Argument.

First, Touching those feigned Firmaments, or Heavens, called the ninth and
tenth Heavens; besides that the ancient famous Astronomers, Plato, Aristotle,
Hipparchus, and many others, knew no such thing; sense also does evince that we
can be sure of no more but eight: For we see distinctly the seven Planets,
Sun, Moon, etc. and their several motions in twenty four hours, etc. And we
can perceive the eighth Heaven of fixed Stars (known by their twinkling) to
move in one motion, round the Earth in twenty four hours; because we can see
the heels of the lesser Northern Bear, adjacent to the North Pole, to be
downward toward the Earth in the evening, and to be upward in the morning. But
we have no sure ground to conclude that there are more Heavens, either the
Crystal ninth, or the first moving tenth. The grand reason brought to prove
them from the two other motions of the eighth Heaven of fixed Stars, beside
that from East to West in twenty four hours, as that the eighth Heaven of
fixed Stars moves from West to East, coming to be in the same posture as when
they began that motion, by the end of forty nine thousand years. And that the
same eighth Heaven has another motion from South to North, and thence to South
again, which process and recesse is a finishing seven thousand years; and
therefore that that motion of the eighth Heaven, from East to West in twenty
four hours, must needs be violent, as forced from some tenth Heaven,
naturally so moving; and that from West to East in forty nine thousand years,
must be also violent, as forced from some ninth Heaven, naturally so moving;
and the last motion of the eighth Heaven, Viz. From South to North and back
again in seven thousand years to be the natural, peculiar, innate motion of
that eighth Heaven; seeing that (as they form the Argument) one simple single
moveable body can have but one natural motion; I say this Argument does not
evince my reason in the least, to believe the existence and being of a ninth
and tenth Heaven. For God that by his Word at the beginning said to the Earth,
Stand thou still, and to the Sea, Move thou continually, with several motions,
as of flowing and reflowing, twice every twenty four hours, and they obey his
voice to this day; the same God commanding the eighth Heaven to runn from East
to West every twenty four hours; and withal to linger and slinck back every
day a little from West to East (as suppose with the Astronomer) as much as
comes to one Degree, or sixty miles in an hundred years (which is about three
quarters of a mile in one year and half a quarter) and also to roll forward
from South to North, and back again from North to South, so gradually till in
seven hundred years it is as it was, cannot choose but obey the voice of God;
and so move without ceasing. And (to throw away Traditions in Philosophy as
well as in Divinity) it is a readier way and surer, to say God commanded the
Heavens so to move at first creation, and they obey, then to say, Primus motor,
God moves the Angels, or Intelligences, they move a tenth Heaven, and a tenth
heaven moves the other heavens. And to the clause of one natural body, we say
that there is hardly any natural motion, without some violent, as the
Philosopher calls violent. For if fire ascends, no more of the flame ascends in
a pure natural motion, but that which ascends in the Mathematical indivisible
line in the point of the Pyramid, pointing from the center-point of the earth,
to its correspondent point in the Sphere of the lowest Heaven. Indeed if the
Pyramicall form of the flame were turned upside down, then all the flakes of
flame might seem to take their natural order proportionable from one
center-point in the Earth to their several correspondent points in the Sphere
of the lowest Heaven.

So of any heavy body, Stone, or Bowl, etc. falling down from some high
places to the Earth, no more of it moves naturally, in a precise notion of
naturally, then the very middle of it tending downward in a Mathematical
strait Line to the Center-point of the Earth; the corners of such a Stone, or
the circumference of that Bowl, falling not with the like natural motion,
because there is but one universal Center-point in the middle of the Earth, to
answer to all downward motions; which is the Physical demonstrative reason why
naturally the Earth is round, the heavy parts more pressing to the general
Center-point, the lighter lesser.

So the Water in its motion in a River, it naturally tends downward, yet
desires not to be so low as the Center of the Earth: And the mean while it
tends progressively forward; and in this progressive motion, no more is
precisely natural, but what proceeds in a strait line: For the water has no
mind of it self to go out of its Line; that being out of its way, and besides
its design. So that either we must say one body may have many natural motions,
or we must no more feign more Heavens then eight, to move the rest, in their
several motions, then we dare feign more Elements then four, to manage the
several motions that are in each one of them.

Secondly, Touching the imaginary Sphere the Zodiac, this must needs be an
infalible conclusion; so far as the Heaven or firmament of the Zodiac is
feigned, so far of necessity must the Zodiac supposed in that Heaven or
firmament be a mere feigned thing. (We heard before, that most Learned
Philosopher and Astronomer Keckerman lay it down for a sure rule: That
Astronomers may make, and use Hypotheses, that is, Suppositions, but
Astrologers may not.) But the ninth and tenth Sphere or Heaven are feigned,
therefore the Zodiac imagined in them is also feigned. It Is worth the while to
hear Alsted (which is to our purpose) what he says concerning the Zodiac.
The Zodiac (says he) of the first mover (that is the tenth Heaven) is
IMAGINARY, of the eighth Sphere real. The imaginary is Primaryly and ORIGINALLY
in the first Mover, or tenth Heaven, in the inferior Spheres it is secondarily
conceited. The Real changes its situation; the IMAGINARY does note. The
signs also of the real Zodiac, are wonderful UNEQUAL, but in the imaginary
equal. In accounts the imaginary Zodiac is more commodious; but not so in
predictions. Thus you see how much fiction there is about the Zodiac; and more
honor ascribed to the feigned then to the real.

Thirdly, Touching the twelve imaginary Signs: There is no such forms of
Stars, as of themselves seem such. Compare Taurus and Aries: And Aries lying
under Balaena. Tradition and Globes tell us such things, but the Stars of
themselves cold never make us so imagine. See the Celestial Globe:

Fourthly, Touching the disorderly placing of the hott dry Signs in parts that
are not hott and dry: Note that Alsted a Learned Philosopher, and was also an
Astrologer (at least in opinion) affirms in his System, or Treatise of
Astrology, that the twelve Signs are divided into four Trigonos, that is,
Ternions, or Threes. In primo trigono sunt signa ignea, videlicet, ARIES, LEO,
and SAGITTARIUS: In his dominatur Calor and siccitas, quae dominantur cholerae.
and sapori amaro: that is, In the first Ternion are the fiery Signs, ARIES the
Ram, LEO the Lion, and SAGITTARIUS, the Archer. In these Signs are predominant
heat and dryness, which have dominion and rule over Choler, and bitterness.
So Alsted, Vranosc. Par. 4. Cap. 4. Now that these Signs are thus assigned to
have dominion; Aries on the head, and Leo on the heart, and Sagittarius on the
Reins and loins; your Astrologers show you in your ordinary and common
Almanacks. But your Philosophers and Physicians will assure us upon strong
reason, that a man has the Coldest brain, and moystest heart, and humidst
reins.

Fifthly, Touching the imagined Signs, and their supposed dominion over the
parts of man's body, this would be taken into consideration; that the Traditions
about them is such a fiction in the eyes of some Astrologers, that some of them
omit them, in their Almanacks, others expressly deride them. So Master Pond in
his Almanac:

Should I but dare to omit the Anatomy,
Which long enough has gul'd my Country friend.
He with contempt would straight refuse to buy
This Book; and it is no Almanac contend.
Ask him its use, he will say he cannot tell;
No more can I; yet since he love'st so well,
I Will let it stand because my Book shall sell.
And for my part, I have of purpose tried the experiment of letting blood in
that part where the Sign has been (as the Almanacks prescribe) with very good
success, and no danger at all.

SECTION V.
Confuting the OBJECTIONS that are brought in the behalf of ASTROLOGY.

I will not be so severe (unprovoked) as to take public Cognizance of, and to
name to the World, the Authors, Books, Predictions, or Practices that have
apologized for, and acted in Astrology; because of other good Learning in them
(which I reverence;) though in their Astrologicalls, I know they have
exceedingly erred. If any will be violently impertinent, Vijs and modis, by all
means to lay low others persons or parts, thereby to advance their mistakes,
the Defendent then is bound to tell ALL THE TRUTH, which can be made good by
substantial witnesses, and testimony. That which I have in my eye to do, is
only to give a light touch, and pointing with the finger upon some few things
that are most speciously pretended to be Patronages of Astrology.

And because some are more Oratorious, others more Logical, I shall suit my
language to theirs. And to the first I must say, it appears by what has been
said in the precedent Treatise, that THE HEAVENS yet never spoke the LANGUAGE
of Astrology, so as the most learned in the World (aforenamed) cold ever
understand. And to rhetoricate high in the behalf of Astronomy; or to kick
down low, them that slight it, is wide from the business in hand touching
Astrology, whose vast difference from the other was before sufficiently, though
briefly, intimated: And though we should own it, that Pleyades, Arcturus,
Orion, and other Stars (mentioned in Scripture, and allowed therein to be
lawfully mentioned by us) have stamped in them by creation a power of
INFLUENCES, whereby accordingly they OPERATE on sublunary Bodies; men knowing
in some measure those influences, so that they lawfully PREDICT according to
the known nature and quality of those influences; yet will it not thence
follow that there is any such thing allowed as Judiciary Astrology, to predict
and foretell what shall befall men, and Cities, and Commonwealths, in relation
to humane affairs, arbitrary actings, and Spontaneous voluntary transactions
that depend immediately upon the movings of the will of man. All that would
naturally follow from those indefinite premises (if granted) would be only a
particular conclusion, that therefore in some things men may be able in a
lawful way probably to predict some kinds of events, as what whether there
shall be, or perhaps whether it will be an healthy, or sickly time for Men and
Beasts, or such like natural effects of the natural influences of stars.
Which if men can atteine at times of the year to see distinctly in their just
positions, exaltations, conjunctions, etc. and have had experience of the
operations of their influences; they may perhaps sometime blunder right, that
so weather, health, or sickness, etc. may follow as they conjectured. But all
this, and if we could name a 100. more natural effects, would not satisfy
the Astrologer, or his Clients; nor keep up the reputation of the one, or
answer the expectation of the other. They ordinarily come to the Astrologer
with these Queries? Such a times was borne, after what manner shall my life and
death be? Thither I intend to go, and so and so to do, what shall be the
success? Such a night I was robbed, what manner of person was the Theife, and
where, or how may I find him? Such a thing I lost at such a time, how may I get
it again? I am loved and do love several persons in a way of marriage which
may I take as lucky, which refuse as unluckie? with infinite the like
Questions, and many more stranger then these. To which if the Astrologer make
no answer, the Resorters despise him. If he does undertake to give a positive
answer to such interogatories, then I must ask him what Scripture, or reason
does teach, or allow such a kind of Astrology? The Heathen Roman Senate
(without direction from Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. whom they knew not, or acknowledged
not) made laws against Vaticinatores; that is, Those that would foretell things
( as Vlpian in his seventh Book, De Officio proconsulis, tells us) And if
Gellius does think that the common people understood by that name the
Chaldaeans ( A. Gell. lib. 2. Noct. At.) this does not conclude that the
learned Legislators so understood it. And if they did, the suspicion is yet
unremoved, whether all Astrologicall Predictors of humane events and arbitrary
transactions are not of the same brann with the Chaldean Foretellers? And
therefore Moses and the Prophets, etc. condemning Astrology, condemn all
without limitation, or distinction: so that we have no warrant to take man's
word against Gods word; but to refuse their distinction of lawful and
unlawful Astrology. For all Astrology, that is properly Astrology in the
opinion of Astrologers (and not Astronomy, Physiologie, or Meteorologie, etc.)
that is, to predict the effects aforesaid, is unlawful, superstitious, false,
abominable, etc. And so are we to understand those Epithites or aditional
titles of Astrology, in divine, and humane pious Writers. For they do no more
intimat a lawful Astrology then in the common expression, Turpe vitium, filthy
or uncomly vice, does intimat that any vice is not filthy but comely. So that
Astrology was not hertofore before the time of Ptolomy, and An. Pius,
unlawful, only because then the Art was imperfect, and its prognostication
uncertain; but because for many other and greater reasons (as we heard before)
did God condemn it in his word the imperfection and uncertainty also still
essentially adhering to it, as learned Astrological Alsted, but of the other
day, and others more assert; before mentioned sufficiently. Melancthon, they
say, teaches us, how necessary Astrology is. Could I have found it by
perusal of all his works, I should have thought so too; but with the same
labor finding the contrary, I must rather believe what I see, then what I
hear. He speaks against Astrology in his Commentary on Genesis Chap. 1. upon
the words, Videre quod sit bonum, etc. it is in the beginning of his works (and
therefore one would think he would uot afterward so grossly contradict
himself: His words against Astrology in that place are, Primum hic
observabis, vanum esse Commentum Philosophorum, quod de ordine causarum, and de
fluxu syderum prodiderunt. Nam ante astra, conduntur plantae, quas potissimum
nasci, et servari virtute syderum existimaverunt. That is, First thou shall
observe here that the FICTION which the Philosophers have set forth concerning
the order of causes and the INFLVENCE of Stars is VAIN. For the plants which
they have imagined to be procreated and nourished by the Virtue of the Stars,
were created before the Stars: so Melancthon. And I much suspect that the
original pretenders of Melancthon to be for Astrology, mistook by a negligent
view of his words on the Epistle to the Colossians, Chapter 3. which are these,
Medicina comprehendit PHYSIOLOGIAM and ASTRONOMIAM. Sunt enim in mendendo,
temporum discrimina quaedam servanda. Est autem et alia ASTRONOMIAE utilitas,
quod oportet habere civilium negotiorum causa certam anni et mensium
descriptionem, etc. Necessaria est and altera philosophae pars quae MORVM
PRAECEPTA TRADIT, ET QVAE LEGES REGEND ARVM CIVIVM PEPERIT. In which words
Melancthon speaks something of the usefulness of Astronomy; of Physiologie (or
Physics; that is, Natural Philosophy:) of Ethics; that is, Moral
Phylosophie, to teach men external good manners; and of Politics; that is,
touching the civil government of Cities, and Commonwealths: But not a word
of the name or thing of Astrology; and therefore I thought it not worth while
to translate this last place. It Is sufficient for us, that Melancthon does not
appear an Advocate for Astrology; though happly the Original first
P^^tenders thought so, by a cursory careless glance of the eye upon those his
words; and the derivative or Seconds, so believed; crediting the first Quoters.
A common and easy way of being deceived.

We have confessed before, that many strange things have, and may be done by the
Optics (the Art of seeing) and several other Arts; as the same may be granted
to Staticks (of Ponderations) etc. So that Ignoramus would think them to be
Juggling, or, etc. We honor all true Art and Artifices, of which the Artist
(at least) can give from nature, justissimam rationem, a due account and cause.
But this does not countenance, in the least, the Astrology, and Astrologicall
Feits we speak of. A friend of Astrology, to patronage it, makes great use of
that place in Joh, Chap. 38. Verse. 31. which our English Translators thus
render, Can thou refrain, or bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades,
etc. And from this one word Influences, draws forth great conclusions for
Astrologicall Predictions. But first note, that in the Hebrew (the sole judge
of the right reading of the Text) there is no such word as Influences, or
Sweet, but only (...) that is, The Pleasures, Delights, or Delicacies; (...)
of Vergiliae, or Pleiades, In the Syriack, and Arabic, there is less;
mentioning only the Face of Pleiades. And in Hieroms Latin translation as
little, namely, The shining Stars Pleiades. In the Chaldee less yet, for it
neither names Pleiades, nor Influence, nor any effect of any virtue upon the
sublunarie bodies, but mentions only the motions of Stars, thus, Will thou
bind Orion with Chains, and loose the Cords that draw Arcturus? And to the
same tune the Greek Translation of the Septuagint, (...), etc. That is, Have
thou composed the bond of Pleiades, and have thou opened the fence, or
enclosure of Orion. Secondly note, that whatever intimation of influence any
Astrologer can draw from this Text, it will prove but a natural influence upon
Plants, and natural bodies, to further their natural effects, nothing tending
to Predictions of voluntary actings, and human events of men, as men, as that
same friend of Astrology has ingenuously confessed enough to this purpofe.
Although (says he) ALL THINGS are not governed by the INFLUENCE of the
Heavens, yet MANY eminent things do HAPPEN in the AIR, and in the BODY of
man, whose Original cause is from the virtue of the Heavens. As sometimes the
influence is helped forward through Diabolical and wicked ENCHANTMENTS, so
oftentimes God is pleased to hinder the influentiall virtues of the Heavens at
the prayers of the Faithful. It is sure that so much credit is not to be given
to such SIGNS as the vulgar and credulous Astrologer does imagine; neither is
their virtue and power altogether to be rejected. Influences though they
descend on man, etc. yet they do not COMPEL, through any necessity: For the
FREE mind of man is not subjected, and as it were, enslaved to any POSITION of
the STARS; For Sapiens dominabitur Astris; that is, A wise man shall rule over
the Stars. Thus far the great Friend of Astrology, if not an Astrologer. In
which, I much commend him for his ingenuous and candid dealing. For according
to this declaration, there can be no due, true, and lawful prediction of
humane things by the Stars: Though we grant Metereologicall effects; yet this
inferrs nothing for rational events. But our lover of Astrology before quoted,
allows not in his gloss on Luke 12.54. a certainty of effects of Stars in
Meteorologicals; How then shall we in Arbitrarirs? Nor will the distinctions
that some make, help up the credit of judiciary, or divinatory predicting
Astrology. They say there is a threefold Prognostication, or Divination;
namely, Superstitious, supernatural, natural: And superstitions is either
Heathenish, or Oraculous.

Not to spend time about the form of these distinctions, either to note the
low debasing, Scripturelesse, and unworthy phrases of Supernatural
Prognostication, or Divination, whereby to signify the wonderful Predictions
of the extraordinary inspired Prophets; or to show that the terms of the
distinctions, Coincidere, are not distinct; superstitious, and supernatural
being both above nature. God so acting in the supernatural, and Satan in the
superstitious. And Heathenish and Oraculous all one; those Oracles they mention
of Apollo, etc. belonging to the Heathen. I say not to spend time about words;
I shall briefly speak to the thing; namely, That by the Arguments, the
Scriptures use and urge against Astrology in general, without the least
distinguishing in favor of any kind of Astrology, properly so called; it
appears that all Astrology is Superstitious, Heathenish, etc. To tell us of
the effects of STARS in Meteors, Elements, Plants, etc. is only to
Physiologie, or Metereologie. To discourse further, as to say the effect of the
Stars is a voluntary action, by which the principal efficient God, is HELPED,
ASSISTED, and FURTHERED, in producing the effect, as the Master Builder is
helped by his servants to build an House, is not only an unwarrantable, but a
most sinful, I had almost said, a blasphemous speech. That God that can do
all things immediately of himself (as we see in the Creation, and miraculous
operations) when he uses any of the Creatures in producing any effects, HE
ASSISTETH THEM, not THEY HIM. And we find not in the Scriptures that He used
any Creatures to predict voluntary actions, but his Prophets.

Those that will defend Astrologicall predictions, by a distinction between
Non illicitum, and Licitum, that though Astrologicall predictions are not
lawful; yet they are not unlawful, do not consider that lawful and
unlawful are immediate contraries; so that whatsoever cannot be truly
asserted to be lawful, is unlawful: And as weak is their defense to presume
to say that Astrologicall predictions are no where in the Word of God
forbidden; either explicitly or implicitly: For notwithstanding their
superficial glosses (not worth a particular answer) on two or three Scriptures
that are against them, whereby to abate their edge, and to save the head of
Astrology from wounding; it has heen abundantly before demonstrated out of many
Scriptures, that Astrology, strology, indefinitely, without exception is
condemned by the Word of God. To whiffle off the dint of any Scripture,
expressly disliking Astrology (as Isa. 47.13. etc.) with the distinction that
there superstitious, or Heathenish Astrology is forbidden, not lawful
Astrology; has been already answered; That all Astrology, properly so called,
is condemned in the Word of God, by such and the like Epithites, of
superstitious, Heathenish, etc. as all vice is condemned by the names of
filthy, uncomely, (etc.) vice. And those terms added to Astrology, of
Superstitious, Heathenish, etc. are of the very dint of the Arguments in many
places of Scripture, whereby the holy Ghost intends to render all Astrology
odious.

For the great matter that some would make of the mention of a Starr ( Matthew.
2.2.) appearing at Christ's birth, etc. whereby to countenance Astrology; I
shall answer briefly (because the Press calls upon me to shut up.) Either we
must consider this Starr singly, or conjunctively: If singly, then if this was
a real Starr, it was either ordinary, or extraordinary: If ordinary, namely,
made and settled in its being in the first creation, and ever since common in
appearance, how should it of its self signify Christ's birth an effect, once
only to be, from the beginning to the end of the World? It is unpossible that
a common cause, or sign, of it self can be a sure demonstration of a new
single singular effect, never to be but once. If it was an extraordinary Starr,
then either so in being newly created; which inferrs that God did not create
all things in the beginning, no not all kinds of things; for the Stars, say
the Philosophers upon the ground of their different natures, do Differ
specie, differ in kind. If extraordinary only in appearance, now, and not before
appearing, how should it of it self teach any Astrologer the said event, who
mainly pretends experience? If it were a seeming starr; that is, a Comet, or
Blazing starr: First, that rather presageth death, then birth, by reason of the
noisome and filthy fumes and exhalations of which it is compounded, and being
on fire diffuseth them into the air in which the Sons of men are enwrapped.
Secondly, Then, this starr belongs rather to Metereologie (a part of natural
Philosophy) then to Astrology. If we consider this starr conjunctively;
namely, together with prophetical explanations upon it (as the stars in Joel
2. And Matthew. 24.) then the consideration of this star was more Theological
then Astrologicall. And this is supposed by the Learned, both ancient and
modern, that the wise men of the East took into consideration the
signification of this star by the help of Scriptures, either immediately
coming to their view (being Estern neighbors of the Jews) or mediatly by the
hands of them that had their glosses (of such a thing to come) out of the
Scriptures. It Is put upon Chrysostom, that he affirms that in the East in a
City called Seth, near the Ocean there were a society of men, twelve in
number, studients in Astrology; who learning out of Balaams prophesy, Numb.
24.17. that such a Starr was to appear, gave themselves from year to year to
observe the Heavens, and to wait for the appearing of it: and for continuation
of that observation throughout many ages till it did apreare, did at the death
of any of the twelve, choose another in his room; by which at last they saw
this Starr. Calcidius likewise a Platonic Philosopher flourishing in the time
of Christ's birth, writing upon Plato his Timeus, concerning diverse Stars and
their wonderful effects, says thus, there is a more holy and divine history
(meaning the scriptures) Which reports that by the appearing of a certain
extraordinary Starr, not diseases and death were foreshown, but the venerable
descent of God for man's salvation; which Starr was observed by the Caldeans,
who worshipped God, new born and become man, and offered him gifts. So far
Calcidius. And whereas in Hebrew, that prophecy of Balaam runs thus. There
shall come a STARR out of Jacob, and a PLANT or BRANCH shall rise out of Israel
(according to which Isaiaeh and Jeremiah Prophecy, Isa. 11.1. Jer. 23.5. and
3.15.) the Greek of the Septuagint (who wrote about 300. years before Christ)
translates Starr by (...), a Starr, but Plant or Branch (which our Translators
render Scepter) the Septuagint translate by (...), MAN; which the Vulgar Latin
follows. So that the Learned Estern people, by their knowledge of the Hebrew,
and of so ancient a Greek Translation, might compound a due sense our of these
two; that ae Starr should arise to signify the birth of a most eminent man to
be borne of the blood of Jacob or Israel. Lastly the Ancient Sibylls (who wrote
long before Christ; Some as anciently as the Babylonian captivity; some
mentioned by Virgil, who flourished above 40 years before the birth of Christ,
etc.) do in their way, foretell of Christ, and sometimes in an Astrologicall
phrase,

Jam redit and virgo redeunt Saturnia regna:
Jam nova progenies caelo demittitur alto.
These Sibylls were so well known in he Estern world, that from them (how ever
they came by it) they might have some hints of this Starr and its pointing at
Christ. These things being so; it is plain, not the Starr of it self
Astrologically, but the theological pre-expositions of that Starr did cause
men to understand, at the oppearence thereof that Christ was to be borne. It Is
well confessed by some, whom they cry up to be for their Astrologicall way, That
both nature and Art may beat a stand in spiritual things, especially
concerning Christ, which as the Apostle witnesses, are very mysterious, Ephesians.
3.4. 1. Tim. 3.16. The wise men hoping well of the Jews, as Gods peculiar
people, go to Jerusalem, and consult with them. These wise men came to Christ
by the guidance of a Starr, which may Justly blame the unwise, who ascribe
their not coming to Christ to fatal necessity, or the influences of Stars; as
Tertullian has it, Deonerant seipsos, et malae mentis impetus vel fato vel
astris imputant. As Austin has to the same purpose, Falso de stellaru^ influxu
conqueru^tur mortales, quod peccatu^ adeo voluntarium est; quod si non
voluntariu^ non est peccatu^; that is, mortal men falsely complain of the
influence of the stars; that sin is so voluntary for if it be not voluntary, it
is not sin. Did we resist by grace our corruptions, we should deceive the
Astrologers, by ruling over the Stars. The highest God can, and does often cross
the course of nature, and often produces that which could not be foretold by
the observation of the Stars. And therefore men should (...), not to think
beyond that we may wisely think, to be wise to sobriety. Certainly to
foretell contingencies is the property of God himself.

Thus far for answer to the Orators for Astrology.

Next we will give a short reply to them that are more Logical.

Obj. God made the stars to be signs, Genesis 1. 14. therefore the knowledge of
the signification of those signs is lawful.

Answ. God made them to be signs of natural effects or events; not of
arbitrary and moral, that depend on man's will, on which the Stars have no
power: Corpus non agit in animam. A body cannot act upon the spirit of a man,
no more then a material Sword can wound an Angel. Again the Stars are not
signs to us of all natural events, as to wit, not of natural contingencies
(to us contingent) as the lighting of a Crow near us, or, etc. but of natural
necessaries known by apparent common experience. As that of Solomon; when they
cause a north wind; it drives away rain, etc. And that of our Savior Mat.
16.3. speaking according to the common experience men had. When the sky is red
in the evening, ye say it will be fair weather. But when the sky is red and
lowering in the morning, it will be foul weather. Further, The Stars may be
signs in regard of their motions, belonging merely to pure Astronomy, as when
there will be an eclipse; though they should never be signs of any events in
regard of their influences or qualitative Virtues.

Obj. The Stars are causes of many things here below. But it cannot be
unlawful to observe causes how they produce their effects, Scire est per
causas scire. All true knowledge is by the causes. And therefore, Felix qui
poterit rerum eognoscere causas, he is happy that knows the causes of things.

Ans. 1. We said but now, the motions of the Stars cause ecclipses; sometimes
of the Moon by the interposition of the earth exactly between it and the Sun;
sometimes of the Sun by the direct interposition of the Moon between us and the
body of the Sun, which the Astronomer (though he never knew the least of the
inward influentiall qualities of any of the Stars) can predict. And therefore
all this does add nothing at all to countenance Astrology.

Secondly, we demand what causes are the Stars? Not particular causes of
particular events, but general common causes that work in common, and alike
upon all things. Now no man can divine of a particular event by a general
cause, unless he know the particular causes subordinate and their particular
virtues. Some give this instance, that a man cannot, by setting many sorts of
eggs under a Hen, foretell what will be hatched, by the mere sitting of the Hen
in common upon them all; unless, also he know the particular qualityes of
those eggs; so from the Stars, being common causes no man can foretell
events, unless he knew the kinds and qualities of causes and things
subordinate to them.

Obj. Experience shows that Astrologers sometimes hit right.

Answ. To this Master Perkins, and other pious Learned men, and with appeal to
many others, and of those of as great antiquity as the times of the Apostles;
gives this answer, and with great confidence; that in this there is a secret
Magic at least; if not an open covenant with the Devil; he making supply what
is wanting in the virtue of Stars, and rules of Astrology. And, say they,
this is the judgment of those that have known this Art. So far they.
Consonant to which we referr the Reader to what before was confessed by Mastor
Brigges, Saint Austin, and others, he makes mention of. Which is the more
confirmed; because if the Astrologers client comes tempting him and not
confiding in him; that is, in his skill, he can do nothing, but if he can
admire the Artist, and rely upon his skill, then he can answer his desires. And
this is confessed by them that have been great Astrologers but now repenting have
left it, whom if need be, I can name

Obj. Moses and Daniel were greatly skild in this Art. For of Moses it is said,
Act. 7.22. That he was learned in all the WISDOM OF THE EGYPLIANS. And of
Daniel, Chap. 1.17.20. That he had skill in all Learning and wisdom of the
CHALDAEANS.

Ans. If they had practiced it in their younger years, it does neither follow
nor appear in the Bible, that they continued to practice it. For we are sure
at man's estate they were precious Godly men. Secondly, It is said, they had
skill, not, that they practiced it. They might have skill, and to use it as
Saint Austin, Master Perkins, and Master Brigges, etc. to abhor and testify
against the evil of it.

Thirdly. It is plain that Moses was opposite to the Egyptian Magicians, etc,
and by his skill conquered and shamed them, and convinced them, that the finger
of God was in what Moses did. And of Daniel it is said, that he was in skill
ten times BETTER then all the Astrologers or Magicians that were in all
Nebuchadnezzars Realm, Dan. 1.20. Therefore his skill must needs be divine,
and above Astrology.

Obj. We see and feel that the Sun and Moon and other Srarres have great
power on the air, and so by it on the bodies of men, as appears even by this,
that in some weathers we are more cheerful, in some more Melancholy; in some
more healthy, in others more sickly.

Answ. All this is nothing at all to Astrologicall prediction of natural
contingents; much less of voluntary moralls. Nor can we tell so much in many
natural things, as to which Star to attribute which effect seeing they all
at once cooperate: As a man in a juice, extracted mixtly out of several
herbs pounded together, and strayned, cannot by all his senses distinguish the
virtues of these acuratly, much less foretell which (being medicinably
applied) shall operate most, and what peculiar effect it shall produce; least of
all if this compound juice must be mingled with some other liquors, as the
operative qualities of the Stars are mingled with the qualities of the
Elements; of them above, in their radiation before they reach to us; and of them
beneath by exhalation of them, and reflection of the beams of the Stars,
which is a second mixture, and so a further confounding of humane understanding
how to judge of them what they will effect.

Obj. Sol and Luna, post Deum omnium viventium vita sunt: Herm. Trism. The Sun
and the Moon, next under God are the life of all living creatures.

Answ. If they be the life of all living creatures, then no more of men then of
beasts, or plants. What is this then to the actings of their understandings and
wills wherein they are distinguished from, and sublimated above all corporal
things, whose forms are (materiales) material, not Spiritual. Food is the
cause of man's life, yet that has no influence upon the soul. The soul of man
acts pure, yea purest reason when the body is as dead by deep sleep. Therefore
all this objection makes nothing for Astrology.

Obj. (...), etc. (...). Phil. Jud. de mund. Opif. Movings and Earthquakes
proceed from the concussions of the Heavens, etc. because the Stars are made
for Signs.

This objection out of FORGED Philo (as learned Broughton calls him) is nothing
for the praise of Astrology. In Meteorologie are handled earthquakes. They are
passions of the Earth, not of men, the earth has a fit of the wind, and
makes it in part, to tumble for ease, till it belcheth it up again. If the
attractive Stars, that at least, draw light things upward, are become
depulsive to make the Air descend: I wonder it is not so said in all the body of
Philosophy? And if any thing be ascribed to the Stars in the ascent of that
Earthquake-ayre, it is needless; for it would as surely ascend of its own
levitating quality (as soon as the Earth gives way) without the help of the
Stars, as without them, water will descend.

If Stars be said mediately to cause Earthquakes (I know not how;) their Hosts
and Myriads, bespangled over the Heavens, surrounding the Earth, operate in
common, as well as constantly; and the Earthquaks are so seldom in time, and
so particular to petty places, in comparison of the Universe, that no just
reason can predict this event by them. To say, that because the Stars are
signs of some things; as of Day and Night, Heat and Cold, etc. which are
natural; therefore they are signs of all or most things, even of
Contingencies, Arbitraries, and Moralities, and to a ground of prediction, of
such; is such a gross Non-sequitur, that no man that has, and uses reason,
will, or can believe it.

Obj. (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 6. Democritus foretold many things, by
the Observation of things above; and it was called Wisdom.

Answ. By what things above? For there are some Elements above; and in them
many ayrie, fiery, and watery Meteors, as well as Stars. If by the Stars,
then what things did he foretell? If that in Clemens Alexandrinus, That Stars
are instruments of time: Or that of Thales Milesius, to foretell Ecclipses of
the Sun, etc. Or find out Vrsa minor, or the like Stars, to direct the
Mariner in Navigation; these belong not to Astrology, but to Physiologie, and
Astronomy. Nor do they conduce to predictions of humane actings. If he
foretold any thing (being an Heathen) which is not clearly pre-visible by
nature or reason, his (...), Wisdom, was falsely so called. But to do him
lawful right, as far as we can know; He was, says the Story, an Astronomer,
which produces nothing for the honor of Astrology.

Obj. Augustine says, Astrologia perscrutanda est ad cognoscendum proprietates
istorum syderum, ut hunc locum intelligere possimus, that is, Astrology is to
be searched into, to know the properties of those Stars, that we may be able
to understand this place: Therefore in the judgment of Augustine, there is a
lawful use of Astrology.

Answ. I have sought this place in Augustine most diligently, but could not
find it. Nor does the Quoter of it direct me where I might. If there be any
such place in Augustine, it can import no more but this, That some place of
Scripture, speaking of some Stars; the knowledge of the qualities of those
Stars, would further the fuller understanding of that place of Scripture: But
what makes this to predicting Astrology, more then Meal, Leaven, etc. ( Matthew.
13.) or the Precious stones, a Jasper, and Sardine, and Emerald, ( Revelat. 4.)
whose properties well understood, help more fully to know the meaning of those
Scriptures? Surely Augustine never intended in that expression, if any such be
in his Works, to advance Astrology, or Astronomy, or the consideration of
Stars and Constellations for understanding of the Scriptures, or any other
good use.

For in his Works * he has these expressions, Edit. Basil per Frob. A.D. 1569.
opposite to any such intent.

Astronomia parum aut nihil commodat Scripturae, Aug. Tom. 3. Col. 38. that is,
Astronomy little profits or lends to the Scripture.

Syderum cognitio paru utilis Scripturae, Aug. Tom. 3. C. 38. that is, The
knowledge of the Stars, or Constellations is little profit to the Scripture.

Augustine in his T. 1. C. 761. T. 8. C. 197. speaks against, Astrologos and
eorum curiositates, Astrologers and their curiosities.

In his 1 T. C. 90.100.102.126.418. He detests the vanity of Astrology.

In his 4 T. C. 742. He pronounces that, Astrologi veritatis inimici,
Astrologers are enemies of the truth.

In his 5 T. C. 279, etc. he abundantly disputes of the uncertainty of
Astrology.

And in his 5 T. C. 291. Augustine has this terrible speech against
Astrologers; namely, Astrologorum res;ponsa ex malis esse spiritibus; that is,
That the answers of Astrologers are from or by evil Spirits.

And in his 8. T. C. 165. Augustine affirms, that Astrology is not necessary
to this life, Astrologia huic vitae non est necessaria.

Augustine in his 10. T. C. 625. shows the vanity of Astrologers.

And in his 8. T. C. 197. is his INVECTIVE against the new Astrologers.

Augustine in his fifth Book, 'De civitate Dei, Cap. 1. (to which some give this
title, Contra Astrologorum ineptias, i. e. Against the FOOLERIES of
Astrologers, Jo. Crisp.) has these words, Illi vero qui positionem stellarum
quodammodo decernentium qualis quisque sit, and quid ei proveniat boni, quid ve
mali accidat, ex Dei voluntate suspondunt, si easdem stellas putant habere hanc
potestatem traditam sibi a summa illius potestate, ut volentes ista, decernant,
magnam Caelo faciunt injuriam, in cujus velut clarissimo senatu, ac
splendidissima curia, opinantur scelera facienda decerni, qualia si aliqua
terrena civitas decrevisset, genere humano decernente, fuerat evertenda: Quale
deinde judicium de homirum factis Deo relinquitur, quibus Caelestis necessitas
adhibetur, cum Dominous ille sit; and syderum and hominum? Aut si non dicunt
stellas, accepta quidem potestate a summo Deo, arbitrio suo ista decernere, sed
in talibus necessitatibus ingerendis, illius omnino jussa complere, it ane de
ipso Deo sentiendum est, quod indignissimum visum est de stellarum voluntate
sentire? Quod si dicuntur stellae significare potius ista, quam facere, ut
quasi locutio quaedam sit illa positio, praedicens futura, non agens (non enim
mediocriter doctorum hominum fuit ista sententia) non quidem ita solent loqui
Mathematici, ut verbi gratia, dicant, Mars ita positus homicidam significat, *
sed homicidam facit; veruntamen, ut concedamus non eos ut debent loqui, etc.
Qui fit quod nihil unquam dicere potuerunt, cur in vita geminorum, in
actionibus, in eventis, in professionibus, artibus, etc. adhumanam vitam
pertinentibus, at que in ipsa morte sit plerumque tanta diversitas, ut
similiores eis sint, quantum ad haec attinet, multi extranei quam ipsi inter se
gemini. Ita Aug. In cujus verba ad * ad hunc modum Erasmus. Mars sydus est
ardens, violentum, cruentum. FIRMICUS, Lib. 3. Martem in septimo ab horoscopo
loco partiliter constitutum, id est in occasu, maxima mala, and immensa
pericula scribit decernere, FACERE scilicet homines homicidas, sceleratos,
facinerosos. Ita Erasmus e Firmico. i. e. As for those that make these
operations of the Stars in good or bad, to depend upon Gods will, if they say
that they have this power given them from him, to use according to their own
wills, they do Heaven much wrong; in imagining that any wicked acts or
injuries are decreed in so glorious a Senate, and such as if any earthly City
had but instituted, the whole generation of man would have conspired the
subversion of it. And what part has God left him in this disposing of humane
affairs, if they be swayed by a necessity from the Stars, whereas he is the
Lord of Stars, and of men? If they do not say that the Stars are Causes of
these wicked acts, through a power that God has given them, but that they
effect them by his express command, is this fit to be imagined for true of
God, that is unworthy to be held true of the Stars? But if the Stars be said
to portend this only, and not procure it, and that their posirions be but
signs, not causes of such effects (for so hold many Learned Men;) Truly the
Astrologians use not to say Mars in such an house signifies this or that; no
but Makes the Child born an Homicide. But to grant them this error of
speech, etc. how comes it to pass, that they could never show the reason of
that diversity of life, actions, state, profession, art, honor, and such
humane accidents, that have befallen two Twins? Nor of such a great difference
both in the things aforesaid, and in their death, that in this case many
strangers have come nearer them in their course of life, then the one has don
to the other, etc. Upon which words at *. Erasmus of himself, and out of
Firmicus, says, Mars is a Starr bloody, fiery, and violent: Being in the
seventh House says Firmicus, l. 3.) in a Partile aspect with the Horoscope
(that is in the West) does presage; that is, Makes men murderers, wicked, and
heinous.

Augustine in the same Book, Chap. 7. has to this purpose: Jam illud quis ferat
quod in eligendis diebus, nova quaedam suis actibus fata moliuntur? Non erat
videlicet ille ita not us, ut haberet admirabilem filium, sed it a potius ut
contemptibilem gigneret, et ideo vir doctus elegit horam qua misceretur uxori.
Fecit ergo fatum quod non habebat, sed ex ipsius fato cepit esse fatale, quod
in ejus nativitate non fuerat. O stultitiam singularem? Eligitur dies ut
ducatur uxor, credo propterea, quia potest in diem non bonum, nisi eligatur
incurri et infeliciter duci. Vbi est ergo quod nascenti jam sydera decreverunt?
An potest homo quod ei jam constitutum est, diei electione mutare, et quod ipse
in eligendo die constituerit non poterit ab alia potestate mutaeri? etc. that
is, But who can endure this foolery of theirs to invent a now destiny for
every action that a man undertaketh? That wise man aforesaid, it seems, was
not borne to have an admirable son, but rather a contemptible one; and therefore
elected he his hour wherein to beget a worthy one: so thus did he work
himself a destiny more then his Stars portended, and made that a part of his
fate, which was not signified in his nativity. O singular fondness! A day must
now be chosen for Marriage, because otherwise one might light on an unlucky
day, and so make an ill marriage. But where then is the destiny of your
nativity? Can a man change what his fate has appointed, by choosing, this day
or that; and cannot the fate of that day which he chooses be altered by
another fate? Again, if men alone of all the creatures on earth, be under the
starry power, why do they choose days to plant, and days to sow, and so
forth; days to tame Cattle, days to put to Males for increase of Oxen, or
Horses, and such like? If the election of those days be good, because the
Stars have dominion in all earthly bodies living, creatures and plants,
according as the times do change; let them but consider how many creatures
have original from one and the same instant, and yet have such diverse ends,
as he that but notes will deride those Observations as Childrens toys. For
what Sot will say that all herbs, trees, beasts, birds, serpents, worms, and
fishes, have each one a particular moment of time to be brought forth in? Yet
men do use for trying of the Mathematicians skill, to bring them the figures of
the births of beasts, which they have for this end diligently observed at home;
and him they hold the most skillful Mathematician that can say by the figure,
this portendeth the birth of a beast, and not of a man, etc. Thus far Augustine,
out of whom I might have quoted much more; but they that list, may in his Works
easily find it of themselves.

CHAP. XI.
A PARALLEL of other particular sins of the present times; with the prophesies
of those Texts before named, of the last days, demonstrating that these are the
times forerunning Christ's next appearance, according to the Prophesies of the
Scriptures.

IT IS further prophesied in the first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 4. Verse. 2.3.

First, That in those later times ( Verse. 1.) Men shall speak lies in
hypocrisy. Two evil qualities, to be Hypocrites, and to speak lies.
Hypocrites do always make or do lies. Their seeming to be in Religion, what
indeed they are not, is a lump of lies. But the Text says, they speak lies,
or (nearer the Greek) Speakers of lies. It Is much for men of no show of Religion
to speak lies; but for men that take upon them the Garb of Religion, to
speak lies, is worse. And in the way here meant, is worse yet; namely, under
the pretense of having the spirit, and of revelations by the spirit to vent
lying doctrines: Of which sort of men this Age abounds; witness your Seekers,
Shakers, Familists, Ranters, Adamites, etc. whose horrid opinions and
practices, it is better to bury in silence, then once to name, although they
pretend for them, Revelations. Their damnable hypocrisy appears; first, in
that whiles they pretend much more of the spirit above other men, they are not
at all spiritualized, but are sensual, pleasing their senses; voluptuous in
their conversation, in meats and drinks, and venerious lusts. Secondly, In that
they pretend the spirit, yet desert, if not despise the Word of God, which is
the voice of the spirit, by which alone they come to know that they pretend to
know; namely, That there is an holy spirit, and that there has been an
inspiration into some men by that spirit, and that still there is an infusion
of that spirit into some that are true Christians. They will pretend to speak
truths, yet forsake the Word dictated by the spirit; which is the rule of
truth: Or else how shall it be discerned whether any speak lies, as it is in this
Text; for other men that speak contrary to them may as well pretend the spirit
and to speak truth, as well as they; unless they will say all men speak truth.
And then they advance all men to be as high spiritually as they pretend
themselves to be, and so overthrow all their own glory.

Secondly, It is there Prophesied, that their consciences are seared with an
hot Iron; that is, they are hardened, and stupefied, as a part of a man's flesh
is when seared. And that a mad kind of professors of this Age have attained to
this sin and misery also, is clear by that mine and others ears have heard
from their own mouths, professing that they were wont to be troubled for every
thing, every small sin, but now troubled at nothing, counting it their
perfection. And have called exhortations to walk by the rules of the Gospel,
Legalities.

Thirdly, Forbidding to marry; which none more do in effect then the Ranters,
Adamites, etc. of these times. The Papists do by retaile, forbidding some men,
as their Priests; and others at some time; Viz. In Lent, etc. But the madd
Professors of these times, by whole sale, thinking and practicing that Women
are common; they say, They are free, their spirits are free; namely to make
their flesh common: And say, that though they go away and lie with others
Husbands or Wives, yet they know no Man or Woman after the flesh: Witness some
of their Confessions.

Fourthly, Commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received with thanksgiving of them which believe, etc. Thus do the Papists of
these last times, forbid certain meats at some times; thus do the Jewish
Christians of these days; if not the Diggers too, forbidd some meats at all
times: And our late wild professors of several Sects, are against receiving
meats with thanksgiving; against praying or praising for their meat at Meals.

Fifthly, It Is prophesied in the second Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 3. Verse. 2.
That in the last days, men shall be lovers of themselves, etc. What men?
Answer, Men that are a kind of Professors: For so is the close to all these
vices, Verse. 5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power. The like
of self-love was never seen, as in these days among men named Professors:
Every man minding himself, shifting for himself, prejudicing his neighbor,
in Estate and reputation; all is his own that any man can get, though with
betraying others: and their religious discourse is to calumniate, and condemn
others unheard.

Sixthly, In the same, 2. Tim. 3.2. It Is prophesied, men shall be covetous. So
likewise, 2 Pet. 2.3. This unhappy Age does too much verify this; and answer
to the prophecy thereof, in that there have and do now abound, not only
unrighteous Plunderers of private men's Estates, but also Sycophants,
State-cozeners, Cheaters of the Commonwealth, unfaithful in their Accounts;
besides Bribe-takers, that sell Justice, if not injustice for Money.

Seventhly, It Is prophesied there, and Verse. 4. that men shall be Boasters,
proud, blasphemers, heady, high-minded: Of such this present evil Age swarms.
Out of pride they boast and that blasphemously, that they are God (in express
terms) assuming to themselves the titles, and authoritative forms of speech
of God himself: Of old, Adam would be as God, the Angels would be as God; the
Heathen Emperors would be a kind of God; but these say, They are the great
God; and that the creature is God, and God is the creature; but with Oaths and
blasphemies vilify the true God, as mine, and others ears can testify: And
to seal up their iniquities; what these high-minded, Super-luciferian proud
spirits, do as with the tongues of Devils belch out, they do as headily stand
in, being past all conviction, by way of Argument, but in stead thereof, as
waters stopped, they swell up the more, and run over, beating down all bancks
and bounds of common civility, and humanity.

Eighthly, It Is prophesied in the same second Verse, that men shall be
disobedient to Parents: Parents in the fifth Commandment signify all
Superiors. Sutably Peter prophesies of the same times, and the same kind of
men, 2 Ep. Chapter 2. V. 9, 10, 11. The Lord knows how to reserve the unjust to
the day of judgment to be punished, but chiefly them that walk after the
flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government, being presumptuous
and selfe-will'd, they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities; whereas the
Angels greater in power durst not. Jude, Verse. 8, 9. Has the same expression,
and the same argument from Angels, etc. Should seem this sin of despising
Superiors is a most damnable sin, and rife in those that walk after the flesh
in the lust of uncleanness: No wonder, because Dignities and Superiors,
Magistrates and Ministers, instruct against, and strike against such their
vices. And by woeful experience I and others do know that this evil Age
abounds with such; namely, with State-Levellers, and Church-Levellers: the
former pulling down civil powers (though the Ordinance of God, Romans 13.)
striving to bring Government down to a Popularity, parity, if not, Anarchie.
Some of them professing against Civil salutations of any man, by putting off
of Hatts, or, etc. And that they know no relations, but of Fellow Creatures.
And if the Scriptures be urged against them, they (if they deny them not) turn
all into Allegories, formed by their own fantasies. The later, the
Church-Levellers, opposing the Offices in the Ministry, of Pastor and Teacher:
and by a pretense of Prophesying, which they could never tell what it was in
the Essential definition, they equally interest many talkative, but unfit
Brethren unto the right or liberty of Teaching; and if they may teach (say
they) they may also administer the Seals: Especially if (as some of them hold)
there be no instituted solemn form of administration, especially of the
Communion: Only the Elements to be put before them, and every one to take
them. We speak what we know to our sorrow, or else we should not speak it.

Ninthly, It Is prophesied, Viz. in 2 Timothy 3.2. That in the last days men shall
be unthankefull: This is proper to these days, wherein men almost of all ranks
have been most ungrateful to them of whom they have received most favors.
'Twas a great speech among the Greeks to say, Giftlesse gifts; but we can say
far more in these days; namely, Hate-procuring gifts: Men that have been
kind to others, have procured nothing at last, but hate for their love; a
sorry exchange.

Tenthly, Unholy: This naturally follows the other, Ingratum dixeris, and
omnia dixeris; say a man's ungrateful and say he is any thing: And this is the
idiom of all false sorts and sects of Professors, and the sure symptom that
they are naught, in that they are unholy, impure, of a filthy converse and
conversation, turning liberty into licentiousness: Their Principles, their
language, their practice unholy. And they are not unholy only with
hypocritical unholinesse; but with profane unholinesse, of aothes,
blasphemies, etc. (using the form of words of the Communion, in their tossings
of their Wine-cups) with Heathenish unholinesse, and worse, transgressing all
rules of civility; and lastly, with Atheistical unholinesse, which is worse
then Diabolical (the Devil being no Atheist, Jam. 2.19.) For whiles they say,
God is all things, and all the Creatures are God (as they did 312. years after
Christ, as appears largely in Lactantius) they indeed make God as nothing. So
that the Apostle puts this unholinesse as a thing like the belly of the Trojan
Horse, or a Commonshore, containing all vices.

Eleventhly, It Is prophesied, namely in that 2 Timothy 3.3, 4. That in the last
days men shall be without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, and Traitors. These are
naturally put together, vices are chained. These in special; and fastened upon
the myriades of Mal-professors, the false Christians of this woeful Age: They
do, or have assumed the name of Professors, or Christians, but now being
incontinent, not abstaining, almost from any vice; and being fierce in their
evil, they have lost all natural affection to their own Kin and Country,
breaking all truces and compacts; brother betraying brother, the Son the
Father, and many betraying their own trust, and so the reputation and Estates
of others, and ofttimes their lives too; and on the contrary, hating all that
are good; Papists against Protestants, and Malignants against true Professors;
as these late Wars have abundantly verified.

Twelfthly, Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God; which is the
complexion of false Professors in these days; whose judgment and practice
tend to wantonness, setting aside the love of God, as a feigned notion, making
God indeed, to be nothing; affirming most blasphemously, that their reason is
God.

Thirteenthly, In Verse. 6. Creep into Houses, leading captive silly Women,
laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts: This most sadly suites to these
pernicious times, as appears by those Ranting Priests, or Teachers, who in
private Preach and practice Doctrines of Adulteries, and running away with
other men's Wives.

Fourteenthly, In Verse. 8. Resisting the truth as Jannes and Jambres did Moses:
Just so now, swarms of those that are unsound in the truth, make it their
whole business to bring the sound conscionable Ministers of Christ into
contempt, accounting it a great piece of Religion so to do.

Fifteenthly, It Is prophesied in 2 Pet. 2. Verse. 1. There shall be false
Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying
the Lord that bought them: Which is woefully fulfilled in these times; wherein
those that take upon them the notion of Teachers, and their followers (not to
mention their innumerable other Heresies) have affirmed, that Christ is a
carnal or fleshly thing: That those that are grown Christians may go to God
immediately without a Christ. Others go higher; that Christ did not rise
again. Others yet higher; Contemning him by the notion of the man dying at
Jerusalem. Thus first in their blasphemous opinions, they deny the Lord Christ
that bought them; that bought them, not only in the judgment of Charity,
which is not the full weight of the Apostles aggravation of their sin; but also
bought them, in laying down a sufficient price for all sinners, and so for
them; yea further, bought them in taking upon him the common nature of all men,
bringing it nearer to him then the nature of Angels, Heb. 2. whereby he makes
mankind saveable (denying it to lapsed Angels.) Yea lastly, bought them, in
preaching to them in the Gospel that he dyed for sinners indefinitely, offering
himself and salvation by his blood unto them, beseeching them to receive him
by faith, and he will actually save them. Secondly, They deny him in their
impious practices, (called A trampling of Christ, Heb. 10.29.) For Verse. 3. It Is
here said, Through covetousness, they make merchandise of you. Verse. 13. They
count it pleasure to riot in the day time, and are spots and blemishes, while
they feast with you. Verse. 14. Having eyes full of adultery, that cannot cease
from sin, beguiling unstable souls; an heart exercised with covetous
practices, etc. Are gone astray from the right way unto the way of Balaam, who
loved the wages of unrighteousness, Verse. 17. Wells without water, and Clouds
carried with a tempest, Verse. 18. Speaking great swelling words of vanity, they
allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness those that were
escaped from them who live in error, Verse. 19. Who promising them liberty,
they themselves are the servants of corruption. Verse. 20. For if after they
have escaped the pollutions of the World, THROUGH THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE LORD
AND SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, they are again entangled therein and overcome, the
later end is worse with them then the beginning. O what a lively Iconisme and
Character is this of these times; limbing forth to the life, the heretical
impious persons thereof, that deny Christ in practice also. Evil opinions will
not be alone, without evil practices. If men teach errors and heresies it
must be for some advantage. They do as in Verse. 3. through covetousness make
merchandise of their auditory. Their hearts being exercised, as it is in the
fourteenth Verse, with covetous practices, they vent wicked strange Doctrines,
and thereby as Verse. 15. receive of their followers the wages of
unrighteousness, as Balaam did of Balaak for coming to curse and seduce the
people of Israel. So they make merchandise of Professors; selling their souls
to sin and Hell, for the gain they receive by teaching such Doctrines: And on
the other side, if people will maintain such Impostors, for teaching such
their Doctrines, there must be something in those Doctrines that must
exceedingly please that people. Now the two ingredients mentioned in this
Chapter, and Preached in this Age by these Varlets, please unsound hearted
Professors exceeding well; namely, Doctrines of adultery, of lusts of the flesh,
and of much wantonness; and Doctrines of heresy, that there is no need of a
Christ, no need to labor or trouble themselves with faith and repentance, and
the rules of the Gospel. Though they were once carried on in a way of
reformation, in and through the knowledge of Christ, yet now they may lay aside
Christ, and it is their LIBERTY so to do; and their corruption of practice is
their perfection, as they openly profess it in these evil days; and though
in the judgment of the Scriptures and of good men, they are as BRUTE BEASTS,
and SPOTS, and BLEMISHES to the beauty of the Church; yet they count it
pleasure to riot, in the day time of the Gospel, and if need be of the natural
day; and sporting themselves in their lascivious ways, though good men count
them deceivings. But that, nor our ears, nor this place will bear it, many
horrid particulars might be here recited, of the practices of these times. They
speak great swellings (but are but) WORDS, and of vanity: Though they seem to
be Wells, yet not to hold the waters of life, Doctrines of godliness; but
only pitts to catch men's souls in. And though they seem to be high, they are
but Clouds, and not set to rain and drop down the Doctrines of truth; but
empty Clouds carried up and down with the tempests of temptations, of motions
of their lusts, and admiration of a fresh auditory, to adore them for their
licentious and flesh-pleasing Doctrines.

Sixteenthly, It Is prophesied in 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. That in the last days there
shall be Scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the
promise of his coming, for since the Fathers fell asleep all things continue
as they were from the beginning of the Creation? Most exactly fulfilled in
these days; thousands of people alleging the Scriptures (as these do) for
their licentiousness, but refuse them where they are against them. They settle
themselves in a way of walking after their own lusts, and then turn Scoffers
and despisers of the Doctrine of Heaven and Hell, and the immortality of the
soul; as mine, and others ears in part can witness.

Seventeethly, and lastly, It Is prophesied in Jude, Verse. 18, 19. That those
scoffers in the last times, walking after their own ungodly lusts, should
separate themselves, but are sensual, not having the spirit. A most high
impudence; yet fulfilled in these times upon many. These scoffers openly making
local Heaven and Hell, and the reunion of soul and body after death, a mere
fiction; they utterly make void the whole frame and System of the Scriptures,
wherein we are taught the spirit, and do receive the spirit, 2 Cor. 3. and yet
will pretend the spirit. They are (...), mere vegetable, or animals, in
comparison of the spirit of grace; yea, live most sensually and contrarily to
the operation of the spirit where it dwells, and yet pretend to have the spirit.
They (...), they separate, segregate, or put a notion of distinction on
themselves in their own opinion, that they have the spirit; that they are
better then others that are more strict, and yet the Apostle will allow them to
be but animals at the best; yea Bruit beasts, as ye heard, 2 Pet. 2. as their
lives testify against them, in that they walk after their own lusts, and not
after the rules and ruleings of the spirit, as it acts in them that have indeed
the holy spirit.

Thus ye have a short survey of the mighty mass of evils of the last days;
ye have had also a parallel of those sins, and these present times we now
live in. And not only here in these Nations we live in, but of other Nations
beyond the Seas, especially where peace and liberty have abounded after great
troubles. Their rotten hearted men, their hellish Books, and Writings, and so
their damnable opinions and ways of practice, have been transmitted hither, so
that the whole Earth, the whole Christian World is corrupted before the Lord.

What therefore can we expect, but that the Lord should take up some such
resolutions as he did, Genesis 6. immediately before the Flood; to bring an
universal destruction or desolation upon the generality of them that are called
Professors or Christians, called there the Sons of God.

And surely (a thing to be trembled at) God has not been silent to tell as well
what shall be the judgment upon the sins of the last times; as the sins of the
last times: And therefore if the sins of the last times be ours, the judgments
of the last times will be ours, unless some effectual course be taken: For Gods
threatenings are conditional in the meaning, however expressed, as we see in the
story of Nineveh.

Though judgments are threatened in the same places of Scripture where we had
the sins foreprophesied. (2 Timothy 3.1. Those last impious times, shall be
perilous times. And 2 Pet. 2. Verse 1. and 8. they shall bring upon themselves
swift destruction, whose judgment now of along time lingereth not, and their
damation slumbereth not. 2 Pet. 3.10. The day of the Lord will come as a thief
in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and
the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that
are therein shall be burnt up:) Yet in the same Scriptures are directions for
escape to them that repent and believe and pray. For the Apostle there tells us,
Verse. 11. Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy Conversation, and Godliness. And what then? What
shall this avail against an epidemical disease of sin, and a general ruin
upon the Earth? The Apostle answers both there, and Chap. 2. That the
destruction shall be to the wicked, not to the godly; his words there in 2 Pet.
3. Verse. 13. are, Nevertheless we according to his promise, expect new
Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. And in 2 Pet. 2.4, 5.
etc. to Ver. 10. his words and comforts are, That God kept the obedient Angels,
though the sinning Angels he cast down to Hell. And though he spared not the
old World, yet he saved Noah the Preacher of righteousness, etc. And albeit
he turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorah into ashes, yet he delivered just
Lot, etc. And upon, or from all, the Apostle draws an universal close of
comfort, that the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations,
though he punish the ungodly.

You see then it shall not be in vain for the little flock of the godly to
humble and pray, when an universal storm is coming. If there had been but ten
righteous in Sodom, it had been spared. One wise Woman in Abel delivered the
City. And Jer. 5.1. to the same purpose. So Ezekiel. 9.4. Mal. 3.16, 17. And the
Prophet speaks in general, Isa. 3.10. Say to the righteous it shall be well
with them.

Therefore, whereas the profane Heretics, adulterous swearers, blasphemers,
Atheists, Papists, debosht men, have been eaten up by the late Wars, by
thousands, and a kind of religi^^s irreligious swarm and spawne of Heretics,
adulterers, swearers, blasphemers, Atheists, and all sinning miscreants, are
risen up in their stead, whose sins are worse, because sinned upor pretended
principles so to do, and may so do, and therefore the cry of their sins
greater, let us that fear the Lord indeed, cry mightily to the Lord, that
through the blood of Christ, that cries better things then the blood of Abel,
we may outcry their sins: Their sins are still extant and insolent, new Wars
threatened; it is no time for true Christians to be secure. So shall the
Catastrophe be to us as to the Israelites going to War with Canaan; if the
Achans be punished and the godly Israelites humbled, Canaanites (though once
their Brethren, yet worshipping God according to the inventions of men, and not
accepting Peace, according to Gods rule when offered) are overthrown, and the
Israelites possess their Land. This is more considerable because Joshua is
made a type of Christ, and called Jesus, and the rest in Canaan a type of our
rest in a glorious estate on Earth, Hebr. 4. (weigh the Chapter, and the
Original they that can, and they shall find it so.) And what is said in that
first of Joshua, and in a particular case of that War, Verse. 5. Is by the same
Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 13. applied to all believers, in all cases: And
that which is spoken in that first of Joshua, that all the ground ^he
Israelites shall tread on should be theirs, is promised to all believers
according to Dan. 2. Dan. 7. etc. in Revel. 20.

Amen.

