A Christian LOOKING-GLASS: OR, A glimps of Christ's unchangably everlasting
love.

Discovered in several SERMONS, In the Parish Church of Sutton-Valence. Kanc.

By Hezekiah Holland Anglo-Hibernus, Minister of the Gospel at Sutton de
Valentia.

Deus sum and non mutor.

Mal. 3.6 (...).

1 John 4 8. I have loved thee with an everlasting love.

Jerem. 31.3. (...).

John 13.1. London, Printed by T.R. and E.M. for George Calvert, at the
Half Moon in Watling-street, near Paul's stump. 1649.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL The Deputy Lieutenants of the County of KENT.
In particular, to the Right Worshipful Richard Beal and Lambert Godfrey Esquire
AS all Rivers pay tribute to the Ocean from whence they receive their water,
so I (remembering my (many ways) engagements to the Honorable the Commons of
England (for countenance and maintenance) coming a stranger (a kind of a
banished man) out of Ireland (knowing ingratitude to be the worst badge of a
Christian) have been bold to present ye with these lines; Worthy and
Worshipful Gentlemen, Ye who are a representative of the Honorable the House
of Commons in this County. Ye usually receive their debts for them Here, --
and give them a just account; Be pleased to accept of this mite; which, though
no way answerable to my engagements to them, yet who pays least, is more out
of debt then he that pays nothing at all. Pardon me Gentlemen, if since I had
occasion to make my thoughts legible, I have coveted your Worships to shrine
them (being worthy to be Sanctuaries to greater offenders:) In these lines ye
may in parr see how I spend my Lords Days -- in Sutton; in which if any word
have but the face of an enemy against Church or State (though every Minister
cannot be at present satisfied with every conclusion in them) remember they are
the words of a quiet man, in whom never was found any true ground of jealousy
or fear of disaffection, no not when the grand rising in Kent was carried on
even with a general applause; when (pardon my boldness) some of your selves
began to play with the bait, I never smelt at it, scarce swam in the River,
though I had more reason then some others to wish his Majesty well, being a
Pensioner of his in the Irish-universitie many years.

And truly it is believed, that the often rising of those who only Christen
themselves by the name of his Majesty's friends, were the occasion of his
sudden death. By the preceding lines you know my Country to be Ireland, a
Country like Joves, where no creature is poisonous (unless you object that
much experience shows poison to be lodged in the heart of the Natives;) Truly
Gentlemen, I understand not the mystery of that Rebellion; perchance the
Spanish King had factors there; surely if a Crown were the the prize of the
game, 'twere no wonder to see foul play among the gamesters: Yet my thinks if
the Irish did not bear some good will toward the English, we might have had
worse carding of late when they had almost the whole game in their hands;
doubtless tyrants sins call for blood; their bodies seldom have any other
enbalming; forbearance is no acquittance. I fear me should they pay the old
debt easily, they would be apt to run (too soon) upon our score again.

And I pray God, the life given to it by the late peace, be not as life given
by some Physician to a wounded man, only for some few groans the longer.

In fine, the chief cause of our misery there, was our sin, de te destructiotua
-- it run over, which made God fill up his Viols to the brim; how sugared
soever it was, God has justly soured it for her Iniquity; but I take my leave
of that Kingdom for the present; the Lord look upon them, and bless the forces
he has intended for them.

Five years ago I came out of that Kingdom into this; how sorry was I to see
English men the subject of English men's valor? as if ye had scorned any
should conquer ye but your selves, Vt nemo Ajacem possit superare nisi Ajax.
When your Supernumeraries were spent, my thought I saw ye spend of the main
stock, half of which would have restored Ireland and to spare.

But that troubled me much (as a Minister) to see such dissentions in Religion.
I am afraid of Heretics, who seem to confute God and truth, but as their
parents, at last they will befoole themselves: the snuffing of a light seldom
puts it out, but makes it burn the brighter. Ye have here unparalleld
Ministers, it is true; but Heretics are miracle-proof, words in them make little
impression.

Errors of smaller bulk (till God shall reveal) may be better tolerated. Sed
haec libertas in vitium ruat. A green error (if no care taken) may fester to
an old soar of Heresy. But being a stranger I forbear; pardon me Gentlemen, I
have been bold as a traveller to give you some account of my travels. He that
made ye, save ye: The Lord bless ye all from Dan to Beersheba.

From my Vicaridge-house in Sutton-Valence July 10. 1649. So prays your most
humble servant, HEZEK-HOLLAND. Anglo-Hib.

To the truly virtuous and religious Gentlewoman Mrs. HELLEN TOMSON, Alias
WOODGREEN: Increase of Grace and Eternal Glory.
WHen I considered your constant reading Meditations, Prayers, Christian
charity, tears, your much sequestring your self from the world: when I looked
upon your dear Sister Elizabeth, whose practice is Christ, whose study is
Divinity, whose whole work is Religion; My thought your religious courses
invited as well as deserved my pains; (much endeared Aunts,) indeed I have not
with a little joy taken notice, how often by me (when have been accidentally at
your house,) you have sent your charity to the door, not knowing to whom,
('it was enough they were poor People,) not desiring your left hand should know
what your right hand did; also how often you have chid with your servants for
calling the poor, beggars (in contempt,) because perchance we are all such; We
all say, Give us this day our daily bread -- Also since the same hand which
made them such can lay our honor in the dust. Indeed the time spent in Gods
service is the most choice time, the only days of comfort, for is not one hour
spent with Christ, more precious, joyous, comfortable, then all the rest of our
days? how do these end in mirth, those in mourning?

I wonder not to hear Moses from a Courtier to become a fellow-sufferer with
Israel, since his recompense as well here as hereafter was so great. He left a
tyrant King for a merciful God, a Court of pleasure, for a Kingdom of grace,
Attendants for Angels, Courtiers for Saints, Dainties for Graces, a kind of
Sonship for true Adoption, a Kingdom of Trouble for a Heaven of Joy.

How insipid are things below to a Christian in respect of Christ? how like the
white of an egg (in Job) without taste? how empty is the Creature, to the
Creator; what delight is there in the Word? what heavenly conference among
Saints? what humble familiarity have they with Christ by Prayer? how does he
answer them, filling their hearts with as it were laughter, and their souls
with joy? they envy not the worlds favorites or darlings, while they enjoy
their Christ. How sad is a Christian that (but seemingly for a time) has lost
his Christ? (who is his life and soul of his soul) what fainting is in that
soul? what enquiry after Christ by Prayer, as the Spouse in the Canticles does.

What hungring and thirsting is in the Saints after Christ? (more then in the
Heart after the waterbrooks)

How dejected is a Saint after sinning? what a Stranger to himself? how
mournfully he walks? how unpleasing is every thing to him? what rivers of tears
does he shed? what sorrow like his, till reconciled to his God?

How do the Saints hate sin (tho they fall into it,) how do they condemn,
strive to crucify it, (tho it dog them?) flesh and blood never taught them
this, nor the Devil will not willingly cast out himself, you may see whose
children they are, by their practice and obedience.

How easily do they kiss the rod when their Father scourges them? how like
Mephibosheth are they content to part with all to enjoy their David? how do
they live by Promise, counting it far beyond an inheritance? how easily do they
submit their will to Gods Will? in sum, how are they delighted in goodness?
how much in the Company of Saints? (to see Christ in them, to see them decked
with his graces,) more then in the company of Princes that have not
acquaintance with Christ? Dear Aunt, I love your practice, and strive to
imitate, since it will bring eternal peace. Pardon me if I have a little
commented upon your (I hope, a Saints actions) I will do no more, I could do no
less; Go on to Perfection, to them that overcome Christ will give Crowns --

Sutton-Valence July 10. 1649. Which that you may do -- and obtain, shall be
the constant prayers and endeavors of your loving friend and obliged kinsman.
H. Holland.

To the Courteous READER.
I Have been very just in publishing these Heads of Sermons (as delivered,)
Time might have made me Parent of some more worthy piece on this Subject, but
whiles I was delivered of this, some as it were present at the labor, (but not
of my said Parish) accused it of Bastardy, not being from the true seed, the
word; which made me own in public this weak exercise: now the world may see I
dare publish what I preach.

I sometimes seem to diminish sin in the Saints; John says, they sin not; I
mean but as he does, they do not (...) make a trade of sin, they do (...) ex
John 3. sin, in some acts, not habit; they do peccare, not dare operam peccato
(as Beza translates the words, (...) and (...)) sin, not walk, (implying an
habit) in the way of sin -- they sin with much reluctance, not with a full
swing, they hate what they do.

They run not after errors, but are overtaken, (...) ex Gal. 6.1. they fully
close not with such: Christ has told John, Rev. 13.8. those that worship the
Beast have not their names written in heaven: but they whose names are written
in heaven, escape the beast, and all false teachers from hurting them much.

The name of the Beast is 666.

The Pope ascribes this name to himself; VICarIUS GeneraLIs DeI In terrIs;
where the numerall letters make up the said number by which you know the Beast.

I have used many modern Authors, which fitted my purpose, and many
digressions, (as my manner of preaching is) digredi patimur non divagari; what
faults you find, suppose them errata. So farewell. Yours to use.

Anglo-Hibernus.

A Christian LOOKING-GLASS: OR, A glimps of Christ's unchangably Everlasting
Love; Discovered in several Sermons in the Parish Church of Sutton-Valence.
Kanc. by Anglo-hibernus.
JOHN 13. verse 1. Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them
to the end.


SEe, see thou (unhappily) witty Arminius, Christ has a people whom he calls his
own in the world, distinct from the world, not all the world. A world of
Believers in the world. A people he chooses in the midst of a people, a Nation
out of a Nation. Peter calls the Saints a peculiaer people; our Savior his a
little flock, distiguished from the large drove of the world. Christ has a
Church in Rome, not all the Romans. A Church at Corinth, not all the
Corinthians. A Church at Ephesus, not all the Ephesians. And though Paul by way
of charity in every Epistle in general call's them Saints, yet in a peculiar
manner aims at the people of Christ, every one of which either was a Saint, or
looked much like one; true, all the world is owned by God, he created all, and
all is provided for by him; Dives is the son of creation and common providence.
Son, remember thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, Luke 16. v. 25.
These are but entertained in the common out-Court; but his own by redemption in
the inner rooms of affection and care.

His own? how came he by them? God gave them to him, even while yet slaves to
Satan; he was (as we say) to win them and wear them; he redeemed them, they
gave up their selves to him in Baptism, he married them, clothed them, entered
into a Covenant with them, and they became his, Ezekiel. 16. v. 8. -- God has a
set number of his own, I heard the number of them that were sealed (says John)
Rev. 7. v. 4. though there is a certain number for an uncertain, to which none
can be added, from which none can be taken; they then who as the Disciples have
their names written in heaven, are happy and may rejoice -- Since we are thine
O Savior, possess thy self of that heart wherein none can claim an interest
but thy self. Let us not, O let us not prostitute our selves to the love of the
world. Come O Savior to thine own, make thine own receive thee, rejoice in
thee.

Christ certainly has not redeemed all; for then having satisfied offended
justice, what should hinder their salvation? Application? He that so freely
gave his Son, how shall he not freely give us all things, even Application? --
You Will say, all fell, therefore Christ must redeem all; nay, rather as all fell,
so all by Christ shall be quickened in the resurrection. Christ paid indeed a
sufficient price for the world, but not efficient: he redeemed the elect only;
now all are not (...), positi: non dispositi. (...) hoc est diem ipsi
constituebant, ordinabant, designabant. actor. ult. v. 23. Noman is naturally
disposed toward Christ. We are not able of our selves to think one good
thought. Away Arminius, God saw no good in us when he elected us, we were in
our blood when he said, live. Elegit nos and fecit fideles, I obtained mercy to
be faithful, sa^es the Apostle. The Hebrew Doctors somewhat agree with
Arminius, and would have a man disposed to good before the spirit of prophecy
light on him; but the spirit found Saul naught, and Balaam mingled with malice
and covetousness; Elisha was not composed in mind (tho sanctified) when to
prophecy, and calls for a Minstrell to dispell grief for Elisha's death.
Aquinas affirms dispositionem non requiri ne ad prophetiam (whether God
reveal himself by Vision, Dream, or the more noble way, as he did to Christ
by word) Spiritus replet pastorum Armentarium -- and Prophetam facit. Yet when
the spirit of prophecy lighted on one undisposed to good, as Balaam or Saul,
especially if in a Vision or Dream, they might be abstracted from these vices
during the prohpecie and time of illumination the soul being in a trance often,
and so most fixed on the object.
ordained or elected to life, for then all would have been prayed for, John 17.
v. 9. and all would believe, for as many as were ordained to eternal life
believed Acts 13.48. But we see few believe and persevere to the end; yet all
Christ's do and shall believe; increase of them is daily seen; every lost groat
shall be found; nothing can hinder, they (when built) are built upon a sure
foundation, Christ the Rock; the gates of hell, that is, hells strength and
policy shall not prevail against them. No weapon formed against them shall
prosper, Esa. 54. ver. ult. Christ's the builder, the Word and Spirit the
means which cannot fail. If God send his Word, great shall be the company of
them that Praise him, even in this sense -- the building as it shall go
forward, so it will last, since the foundation Christ cannot shrink. Christ
assures us his blood was shed (not for all) but for many for remission of
sins; those he loves, those he will continue to love to the end, according to
the text, whom he loves, he loves unto the end.

In the former part of this chapt. consider the love and lowliness of Christ:
his love, in so willingly departing out of this world for us, ver. 1. his
lowliness in washing his Disciples feet, ver. 5. -- that the Head and Master
Christ should stoop to the feet of his servants, and wash and wipe them, is an
unparalleld example of humility.

The first verse speaks him God and man; God, in that he knew his hour of
departing out of this world; for as God he knew all things, though as man he
was ignorant of many; about the time of the sacrificing the Passover, Christ
our Pasteover was sacrificed for us. Man, in that, by death depart he must, for
the Godhead could not suffer; this one text evinceth what ever Jews
Mahometans, Heretics or heathens may falsely conceive of Christ, Intimations
and characters of his Divinity run as parallel with those of his Humanity
almost throughout the Histories in the Gospel concerning him.

His birth spoke him a man; but to be borne of a Virgin (and as some conceive
without The punishment (in sorrow shall thou bring forth) was to the woman, not
the child; So Christ's being without sin ordinarily excuses not the Virgin Mary,
who had sin; and a Redeemer or Savior, My soul has rejoiced in God my
Savior. (...) Athanas. de sententiis Dionysii.
pain) together with a strange Star, and quire of Angels, proclaimed him God.

His swaddling bands and the Manger spoke him man, one disrespected amongst men;
but the Shepherds and Wise men worshipping him, expressed him God. His
Baptism administered by John, declared him man; but the voice from Heaven to be
God. Tempted in the Wilderness, man; overcame as God. Wept for Lazerus, man;
raised him from the dead, God; stepped on the seas, man; but after he was awaked,
stilled the waves, God; tempered the clay with spittle, man; but opened the
eyes of one borne blind, God. Lastly, by his death showed himself man; by his
powerful and most (to us) comfortable resurrection, God.

Each sentence shows his lowliness, in that he was made man, and his love in
that lowliness, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form
of a servant, he humbled himself and became obedient, even to death, even the
death of the Cross, Phil. 2. v. 6 7, 8. Supplicii genus crudelissimum,
deterrimumque, inquit Cicero. The constancy of that love is expressed in the
words, he loves unto the end; the earnestness and integrity of it is
observable in the word there used to love, importing in the original, to love
with the heart and mind by adhering to the thing loved with content and
satisfaction; (...) magis est quam (...), ut Amo apud Latinos magis est
quamdiligo, Me aut amabis, aut quo contentus sim, diliges. Cicero. As Christ
thus loves his own, so ought they to love him; Thou shall love (the same
words) the Lord thy God with all thy heart -- Matthew. 22.37. (...) vel ad finem
vel ad seculum, vel perfectionem significat.
The constancy and perpetuity of Christ's love may be noted from the word in the
Original, signifying the end; it may be rendered by perfection, till we become
perfect men in Christ, (...) Ephesians. 4 13, He loves us; he loves here to the end
of days, and for ever hereafter.

Hence observe these conclusions, God through Christ loves his own; Then, or
secondly, he loves them for ever -- The truth of this conclusion will appear
in the ensuing discourse. Why God loved lost man, not the Angels (being more
excellent creatures) man in whom was nothing but deformity; no other reason can
be rendered a priori, but his own will and pleasure, (...), foreseeing the death
of Christ as the means both of love and election (though not the cause of
either, redemption being the effect of Gods love in the general) he loves man
now because redeemed by the death of Christ, justified by his blood, adopted to
be conformable to his image; sanctified in part by his Spirit, because the
member of Christ, the temple of the holy Spirit, the Spouse of Christ, and
subject of him the King of Saints, Revel. 15. v. 3. God loves his people first,
and gives Christ for them, then love them because they are Christ's, and
partakers of his graces.

2. Conclusion, God loves unchangably and everlastingly.

This is set down, Jer. 31. v. 3. I have loved thee with an everlasting love.
God being love; love, as God, must be everlasting, which he extends to his
people; he loved his people in Christ by way of election defore the foundation
of the world; for to this effect Paul speaks, Ephesians. 1 v. 4 and will continue
to love them till the world shall be no more, and after.

Solomon says, A friend loves at all times, Prove. 17. v. 17. Now Christ is our
friend, so he has proved himself; so he calls Lazarus, John 11. v. 1. Our friend
Lazarus sleeps. Such he professes himself to be to all his people; such he
was to them while his enemies, Greater love then this has no man, Ante omnia
tempora in toto vitae tempo^e and cum non crit temp^s, amaba^amat and amabit
suos Deus.
that a man should lay down his life for his friends, John 15.13. Observe,
Christ calls his, friends, before he died for them; so God is said to love them
before his ^on was sent, John 3.16. Our friend Christ loved us before all time,
through all time, after all time, or when time shall be no more.

O let me then obtain the love of God, and I value not the hatred of the whole
kingdom of darkness.

Ought not we to love this God that loved us first, 1 John 4.19. and continues
to loves to the end? therefore neither sin nor Satan (of which more in the
progress) shall finally be able to remove us from the love of God which is in
Christ lesus, Rom 8. v 2. last.

He is angry with sin and his sinful people; hates sin, but not his people.
God does not hate whom he once loved; though they fall into diverse and great
sins, he hates their sins, loves themselves; thus God seems plainly to affirm,
when he bids the Prophet go love a woman an Adulteress, yet beloved of her
friend, Pone te foen ina amare moechantem.
Hos. 3. v. 1. The woman is the people Israel committing Idolatry, yet beloved
of God; God loved Solomon once; therefore David called his name Jedidiah, 2 Samuel 12. v. 24, 25. therefore God never hated Solomon, notwithstanding his
strange sin of Idolatry, unless you will make him a changling.

God may justly punish his beloved for every act of sin with a temporal
punishment, (...) Dilectus. Dominus (...) Dilectus a Domino.
as he did Solomon in his son, yet love them; nay because he loves them,
therefore he punishes, Amos 3.2.

If any object, Christby death has given satisfaction for the sins of his
beloved, therefore God were unjust to take a double account.

Answ. Christ died to take away eternal punishments chiefly, yet temporal
punishments may be mitigated through him, often quite forgotten by God and not
inflicted.

(...) to correct or instruct, one being the end of the other. quae nocent
docent. (...).
But secondly know, Christ only dyed to satisfy for sin; no created nature can
satisfy divine wronged justice; God punishes his redeemed people not to make
satisfaction, but to drive them to repentance; his corrections are for
instruction, not satisfaction; The Lord has torn, come let us return to him
and he will heal, Hos. 6. v. 1.

Far sweeter are the corrections of God, then the mercies and embracements of
the world; they are as oil says the Psalmist, which will not break the head;
if the very righteous smite me (as from God) it shall be a kindness, Psalm 141.
v. 5. The reason of Gods loving to the end, is, because he is by nature most
the same. I am the Lord thy God and change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are
not consumed, Mal. 3. v. 6. with him is no variableness nor shadow of
changing, Jam. 1. v. 7. thus much his name imports, (...) Exodus 3.14 (...)
absolute; sic Lxx. interpretantur.
I Am, the same yesterday, to day and for ever, Hebr. 13 v, 8.

Now if God should love one once, and then hate the same, God were not the same
unchangable one.

But may some say, God is said to repent, Jonah 2. v 10. and he repented of the
evil (of punishment) which he said he would do to them -- So Adam is threatened
to die (see his servant-ike-servile condition; undoubtedly Gods childrens now
far beyond it) in the day thou eatest thereof, non mutar voluntate^ sed vult
mutationem.
yet lived many hundred years (so that if you consider how many years he would
have been growing to the stature he was created in, and add them, he was the
most long lived in all the world) so Hezekiah threatened, yet lives 15. years.

To which I Answer, as some Schoolmen, God changes not his will, Scriptura
loquitur per (...)and ad captum no strum.
but he wills a change in others; when he is said to repent, he repents not,
but causes repentance in others whom he threatened.

Repentance, sorrow, joy, are not in God, only Scripture uses such
expressions, speaking to our capacity, and according to our wont; but God is
most perfect and free from such passions and imperfections. I am not a man that
I should lie, nor the son of man that I should repent, Numbers 23. v. 19.

But, this is to be noted (the better to understand Gods unchangablenes) that
his threatings are conditional; Mutar sencentiam non consiliam Deus
he will bring destruction on Nineve, unless she repent; on Ahab, unless he
humble himself; on Abimelech, unless he restore her untouched (on whom noli me
tangere, was writ) Sarah; on Adam unless he lay hold on the promised seed --
this condition is expressed, Jer. 18.7, 8. often times upon repentance, God does
reverse his sentence, not change his mind.

Lastly, God verified his word in threatening Adam; he was condemned to dye the
very day he sinned; and so was Hezekiah; both dead men according to Law (as we
say) though repreiv'd for a season; but you will say, why does not God express
the condition always? I answer (as another has, in that case) It Is needless
and hurtful; needless, Qui dedit paenitenti veniam non promisit peecatori
paenitentiam.
because expressed in Jeremy; hurtful, because sinful and secure men hearing
God upon repentace will grant pardon, grow the more secure, supposing it time
enough to repent at any time, as if they could repent at any time, when they
please.

Having thus cleared the truth, let us see more of Christ's everlasting love, or
loving to perfection (as the Greek bears it.) Christ loves his to perfection,
because they are one with himself (and that several ways) therefore he will
love them till they be perfectly happy and glorious as himself.

First, they are one as father and Son are one; I desire, says Christ, they
may be one O Father as we are, John 17 v. 20, 21. Now Christ and his Father are
one, partaking of the same nature; and so are the Saints one with Christ
partaking of the very Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. v. 4 So that of the Psalmist may
even be applied hither, 1 John 2.14 2 Pet. cha. last and v. ult. Ephesians. 4.13.
I said ye are gods -- Christ in Scripture is called the Father of the Saints,
the Word, the incorruptible seed; Paul says he travels with them till Christ
be formed; Saint John, Saint Peter and S. Paul say they grow, Hence Ps. 45.
thou art fairer, because of Christ the Father, or the husbad, whose glory is
the Churches the word fairer
and that strong and in measure perfect according to the stature of Christ; the
Saints do as truly (though imperfectly) partake of the nature of Christ, as he
partook of the nature of man. The nature of Christ is even communicated to them
by their new birth, as the child must partake of the the nature of his Father;
nonsolum ergo communicando gratiam sed and participando essentiam. To this
effect see Mr Dell in Com. in Esaias 54. (...) is of a double form to show, or
double, that is excellent comeliness
-- So having the same nature with Christ (Let it, O let it be spoken with
fear, humility and joy) and acted by the same spirit that Christ was,
therefore according to grace acting in them, and actuating them, they perform
the same duties of meekness, patience, humility; Idem ibidem. Christ's glory
was promised (in the time of the Gospel) to shine upon his people, Esaias 60. and
again thou art a Crown and Diadem of glory, chap. 62. v. 3. and Christ affirms,
John 17. v. 22. the glory God gave him, he gave them; by the spirit of the Lord
says Paul, Question. May not a Saint rejoice in the actions flowing from Chr.
within No not in the act; it is not the Saints but Christ's but he may have joy
flowing from and following the act
we are changed to the same Image from glory to glory; See the excellency and
beauty of Christ's children here below! -- are they not highly advanced even (in
somewhat) above Angels? but you will say you cannot believe that Saints partake of
Christ's nature, -- I answer, the very same oil which was poured on Aarons
head, descended to the skirts of his clothing, and the same graces poured on
Christ our head (of whom Aaron was a type) come to us the members, changing our
nature, from sons of Adam, making us sons of God, though here imperfectly --
The grapes which the Spies brought out of the land of Canaan to Moses were of
the same nature and kind with those in the Land; such is the money of the
earnest, and that of the full wages; therefore whatever privilege the Saints
have in the true Land of Canaan, heaven; whatsoever sonship, divine nature,
glory they shall be partakers of there, they shall have a taste of here; the
same spirit is the earnest here and joy hereafter: Christ and his people are
one, as the Vine and the branches; I am the Vine, ye are the branches, John 5.
Now the branches, tree, root, partake of the same juice and fatness; it is even
so between Christ and his people.

Christ and his are one as head and members; the same soul enlivens the head
and members; from the head come spirits to quicken the body, from Christ
increase of graces in his people, Ephesians. 4.16. and while he is alive, the Saints
must live. John 1^.19 for while life is in the head, death is not in the
members; Christ will not suffer his limbs to be lost, and as unlikely it is to
have dead members; he will love and cherish them, being part of his mystical
self.

Christ and his are one, as husband and wife, his honor is hers: if he a King,
she a Queen; his goods, glory, hers; ubi tu Caius ego ibi Caia. If Christ ours,
all ours, whether Paul or Apollo life or death, things present or to come; his
death merits, resurrection, all are ours, because we Christ's Spouse, and he the
heir of all.

Hence learn (in a digression) that if Christ be thy husband, O Saint, what
ever thou owed'st before marriage or since, Christ thy now husband must, nay
has paid all. If Satan accuse thee for any debt, say thou have nothing to do in
it, bid him go to thy husband, Christ.

No Divorce ever to be between them; the Lord hates putting away, Mal. 2.16.
though for the hardness of the Jews hearts he suffered it yet from the
beginning it was not so. Sin may for a time seemingly separate, not Finally.

Christ and his are one, as the chief corner stone and the rest make one
building; the corner stone and the rest are somewhat of the same nature. Stones
are often trod upon; as Christ, the living Esaias tells us chap. 54 ver. 11.12. How
God will have the spiritual building the Church of precious not common stone,
as those in the first Temple; the living stones the Saints are Carbuncles,
Agates and Saphires. So that in this sense, the glory of the second Temple does
exceed the glory of the first.
stones must learn to endure; stones in the building uphold one the other, to
teach us to bear one another burdens; Stones in the building are knit together
with mortar, to teach us how love yoakes, knits, cements Saints together.

To conclude this point with a general use, Consider as Christ and his people
are one these several ways, so all love to perfection as Christ his. The
father loves the child and desires its life and prosperity -- the husband the
wife, and desires her continuance, not divorce -- the head loves the members,
and desires not parting but perfection the chief corner stone, and the rest
desire to keep together to hold up the building; the corner stone desires not
to shrink from the rest, but delights in a completed edifice; the Vine and
branches mutually clip, embrace and love each other; she covets the company of
her branches, desires not to have them lopt of or to live like a mother
childernlesse.

Christ loves his for ever, because sin which may seem to part him and them is
slain (so it cannot provoke him to give them a bill of divorce) and that three
ways; judicially, for it is condemned to dye both by Christ and his people, so
it is dead according to Law, which is a comfort to a Christian that his greatest
enemy sin (nay and Satan) is condemned to die, and shall not for ever Rival
with him. See death threatened, that threatening a sentencing, Hos. 13. ver. 14.
O death, I will be thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction. Now if death
and the grave (the effects of sin) be destroyed, then must sin that causes
both, as the Apostle quotes the sense of that place, 1 Cor. 15.55. O death
where is thy sting? that is Sin; Sentenced (and more) now, though not fully put
to death til her after

Secondly sin is dead civilly, because the power of it is much abated, its
dominion and tyranny overpowred; thus Ephraim is said to be dead by the Prophet
Hos. 13. ver. 1. When Ephraim (that is the King of the Tribe of Ephraim) spoke
trembling, the people even trembled at his voice; but when he offended in Baal
by serving Baal, he dyed, in respect of obedience not yielded to him as
formerly; thus those fell creatures which in innocence would tremblingly obey
Adam (or rather lovingly) when he disobeyed God, they renounced obeisance to
him or his Sovereignty; and he civilly dyed, even the same day he sinned; thus
says the Apostle, account your selves dead to sin, Romans 6.11. Thus every
good Christian esteems sin dead, not to be obeyed, b^ yiedling to it or
acknowledging it Christ has dealt with sin in part, as the Philistines did with
Israel; they had no Smith to make sword or spear, only, file for fork^s and
mattocks; he leaves sin no deadly weapon, it can fray us, not Considerata
Christi morte.
slay us.

Thirdly, naturally sin is slain, Christ has given it its death^s wound (by
his death and resurrection) it cannot live long though it may linger a while in
a Saint; as a Tree that is cut at the root with a sore gash or two must dye
within a year, perhaps within a month or two, though for the present it may
have leaves and fruit, it secretly dies and will suddenly show it self
withered.

Would thou know whether sin dye in thee or no? Do thou when Summer comes
(I mean temptation) bring forth fruit of sin or no? If thou do not, thou art
dead to sin, sin is dying in thee.

Christ (that for the future his people sin not to hinder his everlasting love)
gives them preventing grace, heales their nature, restraines them (them whom he
redeemed) by his word from sin, showing them the deformity of it the reward of
it; perchance sometime propounding to them the glory of heaven, and above all
the If there were neither a hell to punish, nor a heaven to reward, the Saints
would love Christ Yet as in Moses and our Savior, the reward may be looked at,
to sweeten sorrow, Heb. 11. ver. 26 and 12. v. 2. Non pleno sed semiple. no
anima.
love of Christ dehorts from sin by the voice of his spirit, the voice behind,
that when they are about to sin, says, this is the way, walk ye in it; That we
walk more in his fear, enjoy more of his favor. St. John says he that is
born of God sins not (unto death, presumptuously and constantly.) In a choice
garden weeds may grow up without the consent of the gardener, against his
will. Sin in a Saint borne of God is as those weeds, not of his own sowing nor
of his own growing willingly; to whom he intends a day of weeding. A Saint
cannot sin unto death because of the holy seed, 1 John 3. ver. 9. In an Oak in
winter we see (seemingly at the least) death, but there is juice to conserve it
in the root, Esa. 6. ver. ult. (though that text has another meaning) so Christ
our root by the juice of his word, grace, the holy seed, keeps us from sining
to death; then we have life (like the Oak) in the winter or more dangerous time
of sin when we seem even dead.

We may say of death the effect of sin, and sin the cause of death, as the sons
of the Prophets, death is in the pot (Sin is in our nature) put in flower,
wheat ground, or Christ bruised for our sins, and all is well; the sons of the
Prophets the Saints need not fear.

The Papists hold sin in a Saint Venial; but with judicious Calvin we affirm
all deadly; Omne peccatum mortale est, quia adversus dei voluntatem rebellio
est, and legis praevaricatio in quam edictum est sine exceptione dei judicium.
Sanctorum delicta venialia esse non ex suapte natura, sed quia e^d^i
misericordia veniam consequuntur, Calvin, Libroz. cap. 8 sect. ultima.
because it is rebellion against God; but thus far Venial, because Christ has
satisfied for the sins of all his (of some even before their actual
committing) so they, since God is just, be pardoned.

That there is a restraining grace in the Saints, so that they sin not so
eagerly as before, nor so often, to remove (if it were possible) Christ's love
finally from them, see Psalm. 103. ver. 3. Which forgiveth all thy sin and
heals all thy diseases, that that the wound burst not forth to a new sore. So
Hos. 14. ver. 2. Take away all iniquity and give grace, vid. to restrain (as
some read it) or as ver. 4. I will heal their backslidings. --

God will love his people to the end; for though they have sin, Number. 23.21.
yet he will not behold their sin as to condemn them for ^t, neither indeed can
he, since Christ has safeguarded them, satisfying for them, though he may
bring, as is said, a temporal punishment for every act of sin; yet am not
ignorant how many affirm, since Christ has satisfied, the Saints sufferings are
(only) exercises of faith and trials, not punishments. But Jeremy in behalf of
the captive people (whereof some sure Saints) seeming to correct any private
murmuring against Gods punishing hand, proves the truth of the point, Non solum
non maliciam adversus Moabitas and eorum regent in vob is non vidi. Verum neque
vestru^ O Israel pee catum, sed filium pro te peccatum factum videbo. Neque
maledictionem immittere decrevi, naminferni Portae contravos non valere
p^terint.
ex Lament. 3.39. Why does a living man complain, for the punishing of sin?
Gospel texts hold forth the same.

But to return to the confession of the Sorcerer Balaam (as the famous Dr.
Hall, calls him) Numb. 23. v. 21. he has not beheld iniquity -- Jacobs sin
shall not be looked on by me (but my Sons death) to cause a curse on my people,
Non maledixit populo Deus; non ergo peccatum in iis videret. Parallel is that
of Mica. 7. v. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by transgression? (not seeing it) as Jer. 50.20. In those days they
shall look for the sin of Judah, but it shall no where be found -- for I will
pardon whom I reserve; their sins shall not prevail totally to ruin them or
curse them; I will not behold their sin, but being sasatisfied in my Son, will
pass by it; his death shall prevail to divert often temporal -- judgments, ever,
eternal curses. See Jer. 31. v. 35, 36. If the Sun and Moon can cease to be, or
the heaven and the earth be measured, then my people (typifying the Church)
shall cease to be a Nation, for what they have done. And what had they not done?

I say, by way of repetition, Christ loves his to the end; knowing a full
satisfaction to be paid for their offenses; so though their sins in themselves
(never so much mortified) be deadly, yet cannot damn, because redeemed, and
must obtain mercy -- the word of God is Salt, and keeps his people from
stinking in his nostrils; the word is truth, and sanctifies all his; Christ is
a Sun, and that of righteousness; now the Sun exhales corrupt vapors, that
the sea and waters corrupt not; even so behold the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the World, both guilt and punishment, healing our nature.

Christ was made sin for us, and a sacrifice for sin, Esaias 53, 10. So that
in the Saints, in some sense, there needs no conscience of sin ((...)) -- ex
Hebr. 10.2. Christ being a most perfect Sacrifice for them. (...) Sacrificium
and peccatum.
Not but that Saints make conscience of sinning, nay hate it; what have I to do
any more with Idols? says Ephraim pardoned, Hos. 14.8. They live in a higher
sphere then the men of the world. No less then Angels food (as it is called,
because food even fit for Angels, could they eat) will serve their turn, I
mean the true meat from Heaven; they contemn husks, sin, trash, being come
home by repentance to their Father.

But the souls of the Saints need not be grieved, or consciences troubled (in
regard of hell) for sin, because of Christ's Sacrifice.

Will Christ leave these finally, for whom he has been a Sacrifice? He will
not, nor can they him; the word (...) in Scripture rendered to forsake, as Math.
27.46. cant be applied in a strict sense, because Christ never forsakes his;
nor did the father, Christ on the Cross; only leaves for a while.

Sin then cant make Christ leave his people; if that could, why did it not,
when by sin they had forfeited themselves in Adam, and were by it deformed,
polluted, ugly? He that loved them then, will continue to love them, being most
unchangeable.

I have a little turned aside already to see why man, the bush, not burnt,
though fired by sin; i will go a little nearer and see this wonder, and the love
of Christ the cause. --

The Apostle writing to the Ephesians, chap. 3.19. Being in an holy admiration
of Christ's love, affirms it to pass knowledge. -- That God who is the
eternal being should love man when he had scarce a being, nor ever could have
had, but through him; and when he had forfeited himself through disobedience,
and made himself perfectly miserable, worse then nothing, God should be
enamoured with deformity. For what is more deformed then sin? It seems such
was and is Gods transcendent love that man's extreme misery could not abate it;
the deplorednesse of man's condition, did but heighten the holy flame of Christ's
love, it is as high as heaven, who can reach it? it is as low as hell, who can
understand it? Heaven (through its glory) could not contain him (man being
miserable) nor hels torments make him refrain, such was his perfect love.

That Christ's love should extend to his enemies, and should long after them
that rebelled against him, yea not only so, but hug them in his arms; lodge
them in his bosom, is the highest improvement of love.

That those most excellent creatures the once glorious Angels, should never be
recovered, never loosed from those everlasting chains; and vile sinful dust,
man, should be redeemed, as it is the envy of those wretched spirits, so the
admiration of Saints and Angels.

That Christ should come from the eternal bosom of his father, to a Region of
sorrow and death, that God should be manifested in the flesh, the Creator made
a creature (behold the Gods come to us in the likeness of flesh Act. 14.11. And
(...).
dwell with flesh, Dan, 2.11.) that he that was clothed with glory should be
wrapped with rags of flesh; he that filled heaven be cradled in a manger; that
the power of God should fly from weak man, the God of Israel into Egypt; that
the God of the Law should be subject to the Law; the God of Circumcision
circumcised; the God that made the heavens, busy working (as is supposed) at
the homely Trade of Joseph; that he who commanded the devils to their chains,
should be tempted; that he whose is the world and the fulness thereof, should
hunger and thirst; that the God of strength should be weary; the Judge of all
flesh condemned; the God of life put to death, (the dear Son of God struggling
with his Fathers wrath) that he that is one with his father, should cry out of
misery, my Father, my Father, -- that he that had the keys of hell and death,
should lie imprisoned in the Sepulcher of another, having in his life time
nowhere to lay his head, nor after death to lay his body; and all this for man's
sake; is beyond the thought of created natures.

If this goodly frame of Creation (says the Bishop of Norwich) should run
back to its first confusion, or be reduced to its first nothing, (though a most
strange change) 'twere not so high a wonder as for God to become man, the
former being of things finite, the latter of an infinite subject.

The glorious Angels could not but wonder to see their Creator humbled below
themselves, and humanity so advanced, by Christ's assuming it, which Peter hints
at, 2 Pet. 1.12. Which the Angels desire to look into. (...), translatio sumpta
ab iis qui prono corpore oculos admovent at rem ownem propius and acuratius
cognosoant, says Beza. Yea so look into, as to sound (if it were possible) the
depth of this love.

To see that head (before which the Angels cast down themselves and worshipped
(as I may say) crowned with thorns: Caput angelic is spiritibus tremendum,
densitate spinarum coronatum. Bernard.
and those eyes purer then the Sun, put out by the darkness of death; those
ears which hear nothing (to speak to capacity) but Hallelujah's of Saints and
Angels, to hear the blasphemies of the multitude; that face which was fairer
then the sons of men, (for being born and conceived without sin, he was free
from the contagious effect of it, deformity, and was most perfectly beautiful)
to be spit on, by those beastly, wretched Jews; that mouth and tongue that
spoke as never man spoke, accused for false doctrine, nay blasphemy (let the
Ministers of that Master take false accusations patiently; For if they have
called the Master of the house Baalzebub, what shall they not say to his
servants?)

Those hands which freely swayed the Scepter of Heaven, nailed to the cross;
those feet like unto fine brass (which in the Prophet Zacharies sense, chapter
ult. v. 4.) shall stand upon the mount of Olives or thereabout, it being (as
some say) the middle of the world, and the place where Christ was condemned, to
judge the world) nailed to the Cross for man's sins; each sense annoyed; his
feeling or touching with a spear and nails; his smell with stinking savor,
being crucified about Golgotha, the place of sculs (whereof some might be
green,) his taste with Vinegar and Gall, Anima est aeque ubi amat ac ubi animat.
his hearing with reproaches, and sight with his mother and Disciples bemoaning
him, his soul seemingly comfortless and forsaken, is able to strike amazement
to those excellent creatures. Calvine judiciously affirms Gods love and care
in providing all for man before he made him, concluding he would not forget him
now he was made; but much more of Gods love in Christ, is to be seen in
provideing heaven for man, when he was not, and when after, most sinful; the
joys of a man in Christ, ear has not heard, eye has not seen, nor entered
into man's heart to conceive, 1 Cor. 2. v. 9. those joys are like the new name,
which no man knows but he that has it, Revel. 2. v. 17. but the joys in
heaven with Christ exceed; the Apostle that was there, says, they are not to
be uttered, but unspeakable; and most likely, since out of love provided by
such infinite wisdom; we see the pavement of that glorious edifice, how
bespangled with lights; but what then must the inner glory thereof be? I say
modestly of it, as one did, I will not too earnestly covet to know its glory
before I come there, lest striving to know its glory, I forget the, ^^ay
thither; then my loss will seem greater, knowing the greatness of the loss.
But with a parenthesis, I know whom I have believed, and am verily persuaded he
will keep me safe, and present me spotless at that day.

Consider what most intolerable (yet to be undergone) and everlasting and most
exquisite pains Christ out of love has delivered his from! What never slaking
tortures! what merciless fury of unweariable tormentors! what utter despair
of any possibility of release! what never dying death! ever renewing torments!
never pitied, never intermitted damnation!

His love appears in giving his, his guard of Angels to keep them in all their
ways; Bernard dixit. Bonus Angelus videt; te peccantem and do* let; malus and
gaudet, and cave; deus videt qui judicat ergo ne pecces.
those which wait upon his own throne, guard the cottages of his people, Psalm.
34.7. Whether each Saint has his Angel, I affirm not, says Calvin; yet two
places seem plain, Matthew. 18.10. their Angels behold -- and Acts 12. v. 15.
it is his Angel. See the Churches opinion, then; how ever, it is certain the
Angels take care of them, put good thoughts into the souls which the Spirit
must sanctify; why shall not they be allowed to put good thoughts into us, as
well as the Devil bad? they often resist Satan (unknown to the Saints) when he
would else appear to frighten, nay to devour; See the Jearned M. Leigh on the
word (...).
thus Daniel may be understood, 12.1. Then stood up Michael your Prince which
is for the people; for though Christ may be meant often by Michael the Archangel,
yet the Archangel is used distinct from Christ. 1 These. 4.16. the Lord shall,
descend (speaking of Christ) with a shout the voice of the (rather of an
Archangel. Master Perkins We read Christ shall come with his holy Angels; are
not the Angels distinct from Christ? Now (by the by) If one Archangel, why not
more? the Jews rekon seven, Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Daniel -- but to omit
their testimony in Daniel 10. v. 13. Michael is called one of the chief
Princes, or the first; one implies more, a first, a second. David stirs up
himself by the example of Angels praising God, the true meaning of that Psalm,
103. v. 20. but whom means he they excel in strength? man? that were no
honor, he is but dust, they excel not only the wicked spirits, but one
another, the excellers are Archangels; Peter says as much; compare Peter with
Jude 9. the Angels excelling in strength bring nota railing accusation, 2 Pet.
2.11. Jude says, Michael the Archangel did not bring a railing accusation,
quoting the same Satan branded Moses for a murderer because of the Egyptian,
though he was in commission from God, but his brethren understood it not, Acts
7.25. and would have the murderer his sepulcher known, because a murderer; but
his aim was that Israel most prone to Idolatry, might worship and Idolize the
bones and Sepulcher.
story, the same Agents or Disputants; only one in the singular number, the
other the plural; A Habr^isme; one Gospel says thieves railed on Christ, the
other, one of the thieves; thus understand Revel. 4.5. of the seven spirits
before the throne, not because seven is a perfect number in Scripture,
therefore that number used, not understand septemplicem spiritus operationem
qui tamen in se unissimus est, but understand seven spirits or Archangels,
being more agreeable to that place; so understand Job 38 v. 7. when morning
stars sang together, and sons of God shouted for joy. There are no morning
stars, but one Venus; sometime she is the morning star, sometime the evening;
nor were stars created till the fourth day; therefore could not sing at laying
the foundation of the earth, as these in Job did; again, stars cannot properly
be said to sing; remember the chief of Devils is called Lucifer, the, or, a,
morning star. Esa. 14.12.
Lastly, God had at laying the foundation of the earth, no other sons but
Angels, man not created long after; by morning stars Archangels are to be
understood, as excelling, by sons of God, Angels, Gods sons by creation.

Envine not man and his guard on earth, more guarded then Sine custode
metuendum est, multomajus a custode est metuendum. C.A. dixit.
regarded; thy guard, O beloved, love thee, rejoice at man's good, are thousands
of thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand, Dan. 7. v. 10. had we our
eyes opened as Elisha's servant, we should see more for us then against us. How
great is man, O Lord, how have thou in love visited him? After this life, they
like Chariot and horses of fire, convoy the soul of the Saint as conqueror,
through Christ, to heaven; mark, what an honorable and safe convoy the blessed
souls have; John proves the Saints able to discern the truth from falsehood,
Christ fro Antichrist and to overcome -- because of this annoynting of the
spirit, 1 John cap. 2. v. 13 and 20. veritas enim est index sui and obliqui.
little does the world think what a noble person it abuses, when it abuses a
Saint.

Think not O Saint, I wrong Christ by saying he is not the Archangel only used
in Scripture; behold I rather praise him, showing his glory in his glorious
creatures. Christ's love appears in giving his people his holy spirit, as he has
fenced them without, so he has strengthened them within to resist and overcome;
hence those sovereign graces to stand in time of temptation, to be heartned
against all doubts and fears, assured of Christ's love and salvation, enabled
to cry Abba Father; so in the might of God, his people may bid defiance to the
gates of hell, let all principalities and powers, rulers of darkness do their
worst, his people in right of him whose they are, are above their malice,
though weak in themselves, strong in him; sinful in themselves, but Christ is
their righteousness.

How can thou be but comforted O Christian, that have the holy spirit the
Comforter with thee? I will show thee in a word or two (by way of digression)
Be of good comfort, says Christ, John 16. ult. I have overcome the world,
which would discomfort thee. Christ speaks it, who speaks not to the ear only
as man, but to the heart and soul; he says, be circumcised and repent,
speaking to the elect, yet in sin; not that they have a power to repent -- no
more then the world had to be made, when he said, let it be -- or then Lazarus
being dead, to whom he said, come forth, to arise; but because he gives power
with his word, to the elect, to the world, to Lazarus, to repent, to be made,
to rise from the dead; consider who bids; Christ; against whom all sin (with
the Father --) is committed; he who is Judge, he bids; then thy sins need not
cast thee down; be of good cheer daughter, says he, for thy sins be
forgiven thee, thy faith has made thee whole, Luke 8.48 Who now shall condemn,
since Christ justifies? Romans 8.33. I am near that justify, who will contend
with thee? Esaias 50.8. Survey thy adversaries, who can dismay thee?

Who art thou that art afraid of a man? (I, even I am he that comfort you) of
man whose breath is in his nostrils, and forgettest me thy Maker? of man that
is as grass, and of the son of man that shall die? Esaias 51.12, 13. Remember O
Saint, God tells thee man is grass; consider God gives grass good ground to
grow in, Sun to cherish, dew and rain to nourish; though the oppressor has the
blessings of the world, fear him not; God can bless outwardly as he did
Israel, and curse inwardly and secretly; the meat of God being in their mouths,
the wrath of God may be upon the wealthiest of them. I have read of a lightning
that hurts not the scabberd, yet melts the sword; but consider Esaias 50. v. 9.
they shall wax old as a garment; like a garment, so the oppressor may be in
fashion (nay and do God service for the present) but, Simonides in vitam
humanam.
shall suddenly be out of date, as an old suit of clothes, another shall come
in the rome.

(...). One generation passes away and another comes. Shall Satan discomfort
thee? true, he loves to imprison Christ's people; but Christ having the Keys of
hell, Delphis oracula cessant. juven. Plutarch. de defectu oraculorum Cicero
lib. 2. de divinatione speaks of oracles ceasing. All the Idols of Egypt (when
Christ was there) fell down of their own accord -- polid. postea quam Jesus
colitur ( says the wicked Por phyrius) nihil utilitatis a diis consequi
possumus.
grave, death, none of his can be imprisoned without consent; but wretched
creatures, Christ has spoiled principalities and powers, triumphing over them,
Colos. 2. v. 15. By dying, his death spoiled Satan's kingdom.

There is story in Plutarch, how one Thamus an Egyptian being in a becalmed
ship at sea, a voice came to him, commanding him (though with sorrow) to
proclaim (at a certain place he sailed by) the death of great god Pan; which
he having accordingly done, there followed much s^^^^^i^g, crying, howling,
lamentalion. Pan was Christ the great Shepherd of our souls who (upon search
is found to have) dyed about that time, and so ruined Satan. Christ's very birth
frightened him from oraculizing, (...). the Devils own confession; But however,
Satan could only bruise the heel of Christ people.

Christ is only able to comfort, earthly and creature comforts are but as the
white of an Egg in Job without taste; Christ will, nay has sent the spirit,
the comforter (...). A spirit can only comfort a spirit; he comes skipping over
mountains of sin and obstacles to assist; he puts by Mary Magdalens
overcurious touch (though she had so long waited about the Sepulcher to see
him, or to hear news of him) to hasten comfort to his pensive Disciples and sad
Peter; Go, says Christ, haste to my Disciples, tell them (and Peter) that has
denied me thrice, that I am alive; that as I dyed for their sins -- so I am
arose for their justification.

Christ was anointed for this purpose, to comfort -- Esaias 61.2. he has balm
of Gilead for a sorrowful spirit, and oil of comfort for those that mourn in
Sion; he has promised to send the Comforter, John 14.17. and though he is not
bound to man, to make good his promise -- yet because God, if we believe not,
that is, if we stagger through weakness at the promise, he continues faithful
and cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2, 12, 13. he has prayed to the Father, and
therefore ye shall be comforted, John 14.16. -- creature comforts are like
feasts of a Funeral, seem indeed to gild sorrow over, or flatter woe, but are
indeed as Job's, but miserable comforters; we say as Rachel, give me children
or I die.

Object I have waited, but he comes not.

Answ. Christ loves thee, therefore when he sees time he will come and will not
tarry; wait his leisure, he is they Creator, thy Master, thy Husband; thou have
much sinned against him, he would have come to thee with the spirit of
information often, but thou did refuse; now thou would have him come to thee
with the spirit of consolation; if he would not at all, he served thee well
enough, but he will come; then wait, thou may perceive thou have his spirit
in some measure in that thou do endure; else with Judas or Achitophel, thou
would end thy days. We trust our Physician when we are very low, yet he
brings us lower, he thinks us not low enough for a comfortable cordial; God
perchance sees thee not empty enough of creature comforts, not humble enough
(for many are humbled, yet not humble) believe him, he will yet come and raise
up. If a Merchant having a ship at sea, could certainly be persuaded it would
come home safe and rich, he patiently would wait its arrival, though it be
absent long; as God is true, believe his promise; as Christ has been touched
with the same infirmities, remember his compassion; he is one with thee,
therefore thou can not long be comfortless; he being happy, he desires not
to drink of the fruit of the Vine alone, that is, to partake of glory, or the
comforts of the spirit, compared to cherishing wine, but to drink it with his
disciples.

Christ's are his Temple, there are Hymns and spiritual Songs, he dwells in his
people; how can sorrow, or not comfort be there, where the God of all comfort
and consolation is? Art thou afflicted for his cause? Behold Christ with the
three children in the furnace. Art thou unmindful of Gods visiting his people
by Angels (sometimes by Christ in their shape) and does he not visit thee with
the spirit who is above Angels? as is his name, so is he; Immanuel is his name,
and God is with us; the triple negation may confirm the point, Heb. 13. v. 5.
(...). I will never, never never, forsake thee. No wonder then Saint Paul bids
the Saints rejoice always, I say rejoice, Phil. 4.4. Could Caesar think to
comfort and encourage the fearful Pilo tin the dangerous storm, by saying quid
times nauta? Caesarem vehis. Fear not, Caesar is thy fare; and not rather the
Saints, which (as the Disciples once had Christ aboard) have Christ to command
wind and waves, who is with them to the end of the world, Amen.

The Philosopher gave thanks that he was born in the time of true Philosophy
How happy are we to be born in such a time, not only in respect of protection
-- but information! the Lord does effundere spiritum, not de spiritu, pour
forth his spirit, not send drops as in the Law (though some particular men had
the spirit in abundance) but showers; not only the day star, but the Sun of
righteousness is risen upon his people.

Quest. Object.
Ought we not then to pray exteporally, or by the spirit? Solomon says in
multiloquio non deesse peccatum, in the multitude of words there lacks no sin,
Prove. 10.19. and bids not be rash with our mouths, but that our words be few,
Eccl. 5.2. the Disciples desire our Savior to teach them to pray as John did
his (intimaing a form) and our Savior, in one Gospel, says to them, when ye
pray (...) say, absolutely, Our Father which art in heaven -- not after this
manner; and bids them not use vain repetitions, or much speaking: himself when
he prayed used the same words, and was known by breaking of bread, as using one
form; besides in the law forms were used by command from Moses.

Answ. Sol.
Whether was there that freedom in the time of the Law, when we were under
age, differing not from children, as now when the spirit powerfully teaches
with boldness to cry Abba, Father? so the time of the Law to the time of the
Gospel not comparable; see Perkins on Galat. 4. v. 1. A child, though heir of
all, while under age, differs not from a servant. Whether Solomon be not to
be understood of common talk and vain, rather then prayer; whether sons adopted
having the spirit to guide (with some premeditation) need use or do use
rashness -- whether John or our Saviors teaching their Disciples a form then,
were not more needful then now, considering their ignorance (which the Gospels
make known) and need of an A. B. C. considering the then not descent of the
spirit to teach and instruct them -- whether after, the Disciples used ever
that form; Peter uses another, Acts 4.24.31. -- though that form is a most
full, pithy prayer for so short an one; yet whether he that stirs up the gift
of the spirit in him by exercise, praying longer, reverently, carefully,
offend; whether those repetitions forbidden, were as ours; expressions of zeal
and affection, (...).
and not rather such as Battus used (an old foolish Poet, who to fill up his
Verses would stuff in any what) as O vid quotes him, -- Montibus inquit erant,
and erant in montibus illis. whether our Saviors using the same words, (...)
Luke 24.35
were not rather an ejaculation and a zealous repetition or expression of his
sor^ow, rather then a proof for a set form; Whether our Savior was not known
in breaking bread (just at that time the spirit made him known) rather then by
breaking bread as a form, I leave to the indifferent Reader to judge.

Second Answ. It Is not he that prays most readily and fluently that has the
gift of prayer, he only is the best rhetorician; for I dare say, a wicked man
having texts of Scripture ad unguem, as he may be ready in the letter (witness
those Jews, who can tell how often a word is used in the Law and Prophets) shall
pray as fully, as earnestly as any, yet not feelingly from Christ within; some
lip-labor only it is to such; he prays by the spirit, that from Christ within,
touched with the feeling of his own wants, shall according to Scripture rule,
send the embassage of his soul to God, and treat with him by faith in humility
concerning his Kingdom and his Churches good; since Christ has poured out his
spirit upon his people, why should not his people pour forth their soul to
God? as Hannah -- did, and not by form, 1 Samuel 1. v. 15.

Cannot every child say Abba Father! or shall nature teach her children to ask
what they need, and not grace also?

A Schoolemanster would think that a bad Scholar that never turns over the
leaf, never gets out of the old into a new lesson, pardon me if I say the
prayer (though an unparrallel'd one) taught by our Savior, was taught by him
as a master (the Law as a Schoolmasters not then nulled) Christ bids Peter not
proclaim him the Christ (among many reasons) because he had not by dying and
satisfying the Law proved himself to be the Christ; Compare, Matthew. 16. v. 20.
with 21. and 17. Mat. ver. 9. -- He forbids his Disciples to tell he was Jesus
Christ. ver. 20. of Mat. 16. because he must suffer death, as v. 21.
after the Disciples had been with Christ a while and enlightened after by his
Spirit (as if in a higher form) they take out their own lessons (without
construing). I have quoted you Peter's. I shall strive to Pray as the Apostles
in some measure by the Spirit, but also look back by way of rehersall to repeat
the Petitions of the Lords Prayer, he being the Author; while then I admire
men's gifts in prayer, and strive to imitate them, let none be displeased with
me concluding all my imperfect prayers, with that most absolute one of my
Savior, saying Our Father, etc. --

Question. Is the spirit as powerful now as at first? Answ. No: Miracles and
the extraordinary gift of the spirit, were as props to scaffold up a house when
to be built, which when once built are taken away; Impositio of hands was used
in setting Paul and Baruabas apart to an immediate and particular work, Act
13.2, 3. Who had the spirit before; thus we may yet use it. Paul in the 6 of
Heb. 1, 2. calls it a principle of Religion; therefore not without danger to be
laid aside.
so the spirits extraordinary power; imposition of hands was followed by the
spirit, which now we sadly see otherwise; Anointing with Oil to cure the
sick, was once followed by the spirit; we have laid aside the oil because
the spirit goes not with it, but imposition of hands has its use.

Had we the spirit as in the Apostles time, we might write Epistles -- as
authentic as theirs (which some wretches of our age dare affirm) we must be
content with theirs. Scripture can make perfect (therefore is perfect) nothing
to be added, though our Savior say his spirit shall lead into all truth (by
interpreting Scripture, as he did to the Disciples going to Emaus) yet into no
new truth, but such as Scripture has, though unknown to many.

The Scripture is somewhat like a room full of Candles, but not all lighted;
when new lights are found, as we say, they are but truths of Scripture more
apparent.

Hence O Christian thou (having the spirit of love and power) may conclude no
final falling away, as the Papist and Arminian teach. For how then should
Christ love to the end, if he let go his hold, and let thee sink at last? See a
few reasons and proofs for thy future strengthening. Consider to this purpose,
what God is to us, and what he promises; God is our husband, and no final
divorce to be allowed; no woman (the Churches condition) has power over her
self, no not in this case, but the man. No Saint has power to give away
himself, for he is not his own but Christ's; Christ is the life, the Saints
lives are not in their own power, but hid (feofewed) with Christ in God, Colos.
3.3. As Christ is safe, so is their life; Christ is their head; as long as the
head's alive, so shall the members ( ex loco Joh. praecitato 14.19) the Saints
being the members, how were Christ perfect or complete if they lost?

Yet in this mystical body the best joints are subject unto spraines, yea,
perhaps to bruises and gashes, but no bone so shattered in pieces but may and
still is set again. God has promised his people eternal life, Joh. 10.28.
They shall never perish. He that gave them is greater then all, and none shall
pluck them out of his hand, v. 9. Nay those that believe (in regard of the
certainty of the performance of the promise) are said to have eternal life,
Joh. 5. ver. 24 He that has once faith to believe, shall never lose it, though
it may seem lost for the present; for he that is the author of it will be the
finisher, Heb. 12.2. The Alpha and Omega; if God promise so, he has sworn to
make it good. God abundantly more willing to show to the heirs of Salvation
the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it with an Oath, that we might have
strong consolation, Heb. 6.17, 18. He will confirm you to the end to be
blameless, 1 Cor. 1.8. (...). Triplex negatio, vehementiffime negat.
I have already quoted his promise. I will never, never, never leave thee --
Heb. 13.5. Indeed the Saints and he being one, it is impossible they be should
lost, being part of himself. So the Apostle is persuaded that neither life nor
death, nor Angels, principalities nor powers -- shall be able to separate the
Saints from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.38, 39.

The will of God is like the Law of the Medes and Persians which alter not, Du
Moulin against Armin.
or like Pilates quod scripsi scripsi For whom he has once written in the
book of life he never blots out (there is a difference between the book of
life and living or natural life; blot them out of the book of the living --
let them not be written among the righteous, this natural life the Psalmist
means, and the world, where the righteous and wicked live together. --)

Let me examine the grounds of the Apostles persuasion, Romans 8. Death cannot,
for in Scripture sense it is not worthy of that name, (though in a Philosophique
sense it may) because it cannot separate a St. from Christ; nor is it a curse,
nor punishment since Christ dyed, but a passage to him; the hurt of death is
taken away, Christ has destroyed him that has -- the power of death, the devil,
the executioner; Heb. 2.14. Where then is death casheer'd? Why? Because says
one, an Officer that arrests the Kings son, is to be discharged of his Office;
so death for Arresting Christ. The sting of it by which Satan prevailed to
destroy, is blunted, abated, I will not say plucked out because (...), in many
things we offend all; yet John says, behold the Lamb of God which takes away
the sins of the world; remember the power of the word De medio tollere, as
Budaeus.
(...) there to take away, Joh. 1.29.

Quis neget Aeneae magni de stripe Neronem?
Sustulit hic matrem, sustulit ille Patrem.
Sin in the Saints (Christ dying for them --) is much like the Viper on Paul's
hand, has not a sting to wound to eternal death; Christ took away the guilt
and pnishment of sin, and sactifyes his people much, subduing sin in them ex
Mica ult. antep.
to have a Snake in ones bosom with poison and teeth out, may as cold water
thrown into ones face more startle, fear one, then hurt one. But I forbear,
because carnal men, will make a sport of sin.

Though then that counted death continue among us, yet it continues not to be
what it was. The name is more terrible then it; think not lying in a grave an
argument of the continuance of the power of death, but rather to have all
conformable to our Savior, or to lay aside corruption in the grave. Musculus.
Thy body as now it is, is not capable of immortality, flesh and blood cannot
inherit eternal life; would thou bring a corruptible carkase into heaven to
be a glorified member of Christ? No: then lay aside corruption; suppose it be
sown in -- weakness, it shall be raised in power, Thou fool, that which thou
sowest is not quickened except it dye. Keep thy Corn above ground for fear of
corruption; where then shall the fresh green blade appear? When shall the
sta^ke grow up? When shall it ear? When shall it flower? All this glory and
advantage will be lost, if thy Corn be not cast into the furrows of the earth.
Does not corruption within thee trouble thee more then death? Were thou not
better once dye, then be continually disquieted with the motions of corruption?
There Is no final subduing them, till the body be destroyed, which does so cline
and draw thee to thee to the service thereof.

Death to us is beneficial, though death thinks to do hurt, as Phereus lasons
enemy was to him he having an Aposthem in his body, the enemy pricked the
Aposthem and so gave him life whom he thought to kill. Cic. Not. Deor. Lib. 3.
See if death be not advantage. If a Crab-stocke having his head and boughs cut
often, be grafted with a Pippin or some other pleasant fruit, can it reasonably
complain of hurt? Or has he any wrong done him that has his Cottage of Clay
pulled down, and a goodly Palace of stone built for his dwelling? This is thy
case O beloved. But foolish men think there is no such life in Christ.

Let death be fearful to Heathens, (...), Some Philosophers feared it not, but
said. Si mors est nos non sumus, mors non est.
and let us not through fear (from which by Christ's death we are delivered ex
Heb. 2.15.) be any longer subject to bondage, L^ing in a grave is so sweetened
by Christ's lodging there, that that need not trouble a Saint, they like the
good subject Ittai are content to be where their David is, in death and life.
Christ is risen; so must his members; he is not here says the Angel, for he is
risen; the Angels Philosophy proves one body cannot be in two places. Amesius,
Bellarm. enervatus.

Death is but a sleep; the Nurse is not afraid to put her Babe to sleep; if
he sleep, he shall do well.

Our friend Lazarus sleeps, Joh. 11. V. 11. Caldaico-haebraicum and
significat to lie to sleep.
Hezekiah also slept with his fathers, the grave's asleeping place, (...).
those that sleep expect a morning to rise, we a morning of resurrection.

Neither life -- not the many dangers whereby it is in continual hazard; (for he
gives his Angels charge over his people) not afflictions of this life, for
they draw his people nearer, I have sent ye leanness, cleanness of teeth,
want of bread, but ye have not turned to me says the Lord, Amos 4.6. Ye see
God aimed at calling them nearer, not driving them further by affliction. We
ought not to say depart from us for we are sinful men, but draw near to us --
Gods corrections are like Jonathans Arrows to David, effects of love, to warn,
not destroy. Man is apt to misconstrue, Deus unicum habuit silium sine peccato,
nullum sine flagello
but God has given us a Commentary upon his own actions, Jer. 29.11. But I know
the thoughts I have toward you (says the Lord) they are thoughts of Peace,
not of evil; speaking to his people in case of Affliction. The afflictors of
the world intend not good to the Saints: But God has the ruling of them; the
Assyrian is Gods rod (God keeps (as I may so speak) the end of it in his own
hand, that the Assyrian smite neither deeper nor oftener then he pleases) but he
thinks not so, Esa. 10.4, 7. The horsleech sucks to fill and satisfy itself,
but the Physicians aim is for good; God out of love corrects his, but will not
vouchsafe to correct the wicked, but lets them ripen in sin till the day of
vengeance, the harvest. Be not then troubled or cast down for affliction;
remember Saints are living stones (1 Pet. 2.5.) and to endure; they must be
like the Sea receiving all waters, and not changing quality, or like Job
receiving evil and good patiently; or as a good stomach, receive all meats,
vomit up none by murmuring reluctance. Of them in a moderate sense I dare say
as divine Seneca (who is said to have exchanged Epistles with Saint Paul) no
evils happen to them, Nihil accidere bono viro mali potest. Tot amnes tantum
superne de^ jectorum imbrium non mutant maris saporem nec remittunt; it a
adversarum impetus rerum viri fortis non mutat animum, sed manet in statu, est
omnibus externis potentior, sentitsed vincit, placidusque contra incurrentia
attollitur, adversa exercitationes putat. Vir erectus labor is est appetens
honesti, and ad officia cum periculo promptus. Videmus Athletas cum fortissimis
confligere per quos certamini praeparantut; marcet sine adversario virtus. Dura
non reformidant, nec de fato queruntur, quiequid accidit boni consulunt, in
bonum vertunt, patres mature ad studia obeunda liberos excitari jubent, sudorem
illis, interdum and lachrymas excutiunt, matres so vere in sinu nunquam
laborare volunt. Seneca de provid. cap. 2.
though they feel them and smart with them; they change all into good (in these
being more then conquerours) count all afflictions exercises (but not only);
virtue they know languishes without these. Champions seek opposition; they
that strive for masterie, desire to fight, run, wrestle with others before hand
to stir up their spirits and increase activity and strength. God sends his
Saints afflictions partly for this end, all working together for good to them
that love him, Romans 8.28. Afflictions then (though evil in themselves) prove
good.

The father sends his darling to the School of virtue, early to undergo
difficulties and learn to pierce obscurities; it is a fond mother seeks to keep
them in her bosom idle.

What honest man refuses labor? Will he not undergo honest offices with
difficulty and danger? As a Minister preach truth though it cost hot water? For
'twas once primus in Ministerio and primus in Martyrio. Sure idleness is
painful to some. A good soul can as easily lack fire and water as Crosses.

(...) praeclara rara. Heavens joys are not to be obtained without sweating.

Nor life. If we understand the frailties of life, because if thou art in
Christ, they are pardoned. Christ's death has reconciled all in heaven and
earth; Angels as well as men had benefit of Christ's death. Colos. 1. ver. 20.
Also Christ's have crucified, or condemned at least, the flesh with its
affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. They have the spirit to conquer with (which
is, where ever it be, finally chief master, though Satan may live (not only
prope but una) a while with Christ in the same house, yet there is nor divisum
imperium; in the same believer is the house of Saul, but a kingdom of David;
Dagon falls at last if the Arc be there; though till the last combat, the
spirit appears not finally victorious. Christ thus subdues sin in his people
and casts their sins behind his back, not intending to see them, and drownes in
them in the depth of the Sea, that they may never float or appear against
them, Micah. 7.19. Nor Angels nor Principalities; -- Principalities and powers
are distinct offices (if not kinds) of Angels, to whom God commits the managing
-- of Princedomes -- so powers may be said to be the Angels, in whom or by whom
he manifests his power, as Thrones are they in whom as in a Throne (says
Calvin) Gods Majesty is declared; now Satan and his assume the same privileges
(God tolerating, by them to punish the disobedient) but these cannot separate
-- the good Angels will not, the bad cannot, for they are destroyed, Col. 2.15.
See their power and maliceat least curbed. Christ's death has that efficacy that
whomever he dyed for can never dye, Romans 8.34. Who condemns, since Christ has
dyed? had he dyed for all, application should not have hindered their Salvation;
he that gave Christ, would freely give all things. Let the devil the accuser of
the brethren climb up to heaven (having however his hell with him) and present
himself for their wrong, they have a friend in Court, Christ who is in heaven
to appear for them, Heb. 9.24. Or as Romans 8.34. who sits at the right hand
of God (that is in equal authority and power) making intercession for us.
Christ prays for us (as I may so speak) when we little think of it, scarce
praying for ourselves. Christ's prayer is more praevalent then Satan's
accusation, or else why are not we cast, Satan so often accusing? He desired to
sift Peter -- but Christ's prayer for him, was enough to enable him to stand,
Luke 22.31, 32. His prayer on the Cross for his enemies (but many of them
Elect Vessels) whose sins till conversion are as many, great and heinous
(witness Paul's) as any (as Calvin truly notes) so far prevailed that three
thousand were at Peter's Sermon converted, Act. 2.36.41.3000 men were, says du
Moulin, then at one Sermon converted; now adays 3000 Sermons, and not one man
converted. But further, Christ's will is that all that God gave him be with him
(where he is) to behold his glory Joh. 17.24. Now, who can resist his will? The
good Angels are the executors of his will (having greater power then the lost
Angels) and will with the great assistant God the Father, see the will
performed. Now Christ has prayed for all that ever shall believe, Joh. 17.20.

Nor things present. Not miseries, not sin, not Satan, nor the world; for
greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world, 1 John 4.4. and
Joh. 16. last. I have overcome the world. The Law cannot. Christ has fulfilled
it. We are not under the Law, Qui pro nobis semel mortem vicit, semper in nobis
vincit -- Cyprian.
but under Grace (let the Law be a rule -- to square thy actions by, but where
thou come short of it, rely on Christ, he has performed it for thee) but
least of all shall fear separate; because the cause, sin, being removed, the
effect cannot. --

Not things to come; as for things to be acted in heaven, the Judge is most
just, nay justice it self, and will not, cannot wrong qui videt and novit ut
impartialitas and veritas, sedet ut aequitas -- Bern. fere in his verbis. Job
speaks of the things to be acted in heaven with comfort, I know my Redeemer (my
kinsman says the Hebrew) lives, 19, 26. (...) Goel One who redeemeth in the
right of a kinsman (a usual custom among the Jews) but remember, O beloved,
since thus Christ redeemed thee, he is to enjoy thee -- as for things to be
acted on earth, none can (as is said) imprison any of his without leave, to
wit, in the grave, Christ having the keys of the grave -- which is but a bed
to sleep for a time in; I shall make my bed in the dust; says Job 17.13 --
where none can be kept without consent of Christ, nor longer then he pleases.

Nor height; not the highest of men by afflicting; for he (whose the Saints
are) is higher then the highest. Not the height of pride in the Saints, who are
kept from the height of pride (as Paul was) by the messenger of Satan and other
continual humiliations; the height of Satan's malice and envy is below Gods
love to them.

Nor depthcannot. For depth of affliction is answered by the height of
exaltation; thou bring down to the grave, and bring up again; heavines
may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Nor depth of sin; for as
low as one (in Christ) can be in sin, as high he shall be in repentance, in
grace, in favor; yea though the just fall seven times in a day, he shall rise
again, Prove. 24.16. Because Christ is risen.

Hence Satan, sin, Heresy and all that oppose, have and do fall down;
Christ's may err, be overtaken in an error, seldom an heresy. Errare possum,
haericus esse nolu) but they soon recant. Christ's are sons of truth, embrace
truth, not willing to close with an error.
for Christ, Rev. 6. v. 2, goes forth conquering; and those that are ordained
to eternal life shall believe, Act. 13.48. The word being the incorruptible
seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. And being sowed in the heart, shall not finally corrupt or
return in vain, but work Gods pleasure by beating down sin --

Nor any other creature; for all being under the power and Dominion of our
mighty Creator and defender, we are sure of protection. They can bring upon us,
Nec plus ad desiciendum potest terrere paena, quam ad trigendum tutela divina.
Cypr. It Is a glory to suffer for God. The spirit of glory and of God rests
upon those who are for Christ's sake reproached, 1 Pet. 4.14. The very mystery
of the word (...) Shechinah.
but either -- tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril or sword, Romans 8.35; and that through leave and Gods
sufferance; but in these we are more then conquerours, through him that loved
us, ver 37. For the three children (as we call them) being put into the
furnace, behold four walking loose. Christ was one; who is with his people
suffering. Stephen in the midst of misery, sees the heavens opened -- when the
burden seems too great and heavy, Christ puts under his shoulder to ease.

I remember the story of Theodore the Martyr, how when he was wrack't, a young
man was seen (to the Admiration of al) with a towel to wipe his sweating limbs,
and refresh him with cool water, so that he even seemed to delight in his
misery. Ruffin. Eccles. History.

Object. If nothing can separate the Saints from Christ, why does the Apostle
say, let him that stands take heed lest he fall? 1 Cor. 10. ver. 12. Answ.
That Chapter speaks of very sinful people (perhaps not elected) though they
were baptized in the sea (the outward baptism) and eat of the spiritual meat
(though not spiritually) for God was not well pleased with them, ver. 5 but
destroyed them, ver. 10. By effects (if lawful to judge) these men showed
themselves not Christ's; Good men fall into sin not finally; from Grace, not
from election.
had only the outward privilege of the Church, which alone cannot give an
assurance of perseverance of Salvation. These might fall away, and such as
think they stand; (...). But Romans 11.20. Because of unbelief such fall; thou
stand by Faith, Yet be not high minded, but fear; though a filial fear
fears no falling; God by good admonition, (grace co-working) keeps off falling.
A caveat to take heed from falling, is no infallible proof of falling; but
note, thou stand by Faith, thy feet fast upon the rock Christ, if thou
continuest, Gods goodness toward thee, ver. 22. As thou may be assured thou
shall, for Christ, as he is the Author and Alpha of thy Faith, will be the
finisher and Omega. He confirms to the end to be blameless. 1 Cor. 1.8.

Obj. Those whom Paul calls Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2. he says may eat and drink
damnation, Chap 11.29. Therefore a falling away of Saints.

Answ. The word (...) rendered damnation, ought to be rendered by the word
judgment; the Apostle instances, some among you are sick, some weak (temporal
judgments) and some asleep or dead, God bringing that in his anger (not hatred
of the Saints, notwithstanding their sin) upon his people as a judgment, which
indeed by Christ's death is none, and yet saves the soul.

Ob. Heb. 6.4. One enlightened, that has tasted the good word of God and powers
of the world to come, may fall away, ver. 6. -- Therefore a Saint may fall
away, nay fall into the sin against the Holy Ghost, as most men think, out of
that text, that sin to be included, because it is there, it is impossible to renew
them, because they crucify the Son of God afresh -- again, the Apostle from
chap. 10. ver. 26. proves as much, for if we sin (including himself) wilfully
after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for sin.

Answ. I deny not but some men may be outwardly baptized (for so the word (...)
may be rendered) nay be a hearer with joy (as Magus was baptized, Herod heard,
those in the parable rejoiced, Luke 8.13.) yet being not elected or truly
sanctified, fall away. Vide hist. Ecclesiast. Magdebeburge. Cent. 4 c. 3. page
64. and page 89.
Julian the Apostata had been perchance a practitioner of good in his younger
years, but at last became an enemy to goodness, and concluded his days with
vicisti tandem Galilaee? Thou -- have overcome at last O Galilean; in contempt
calling Christ Galilean. Answ. 2. From that first passage of the Hebrews, no
falling away can be proved; I mean final. The words are (...). The word (...)
is never used for final falling; it is given to the Jews falling (...) Romans
11. v 11. Yet we expect and pray for their conversion, there is a time of their
fullness to come, (...) ver. 12. Certainly blindness is happened but in part
to the Jews, and that only till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, ver.
25. Now (...) does diminish the word; (...) minuit rem cui adjungitur Cornel a
lap. The Jews falling is called (...) ver. 12. hujus cap.

All that can be proved from Heb. 6.4. is but that Gods people may fall into
many sins and errors, after much knowledge and grace. Neither from this
Hypothesis can it be well concluded that they might commit such sins, falling
from such grace; only the Apostle -- shows a difficulty of restoring them, if
they did fall.

Ob. It Is said it is impossible to renew them.

Answ. The word (...) shows it not impossible, because the Jews shall be
restored. I have read the word used in a moderate sense; it is impossible for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven says our Savior; yet Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob (rich men) are there; it shows a difficulty not an
impossibility.

Obj. But these Crucify Christ afresh, therefore they are never likely to be
renewed.

Answ. The Jews which crucified Christ (many) repented and were saved; for
indeed Christ had prayed for them, Father forgive them, they know not what they
do. The Apostle shows the principles of Religion from which these are tacitly
forbid to fall, and the danger of renewing them showed, v. 2. Doctrine of
Baptism, laying on of hands, and the resurrection of the dead. The last the
Corinthians denied, yet being Elected and Saints renewed and saved. The other
two are denied in this age, of whom great hope.

It Is reported that Witches deny their Baptism (so that the water since
receives them not) but such confessions some of them have made, such
repentance, and have made such ends that I dare not but judge charitably;
therefore it is not impossible to renew such as fall from these principles, and
consequently no sin against the Holy Ghost, never mentioned in the Epistles,
never called in the Gospel by that name, but the Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost. See a book of that Title very judiciously pend; and Printed about the
year 1646.

To that of Heb. 10. v. 26. I answer, it is not said there remains no Sacrifice
for their sin, there remains no more Sacrifice, to wit, as in the time of the
Law, when for every sin there was a Sacrifice; now one only Sacrifice, even
Christ, the benefit of whom is to be had even by wilful sinners, by faith and
repentance.

Ob. The word (...) is to be rendered maliciously, if we sin maliciously, there
remains no Sacrifice.

Answ. Though the word be sometimes so used, as by the Seventy, Exodus, 21.13,
14. Yet Aristotle (which understood the Greek as well as they) uses it to
signify willingly or wittingly, Lib. 3. Ethit. cap, 2.

Ob. Peter says, one may deny the Lord that bought them. 2 Pet. 2. ver. 1.

Answ. It Is a prophecy of such as hold universal redemption, the wicked
Prophets or Heretics of which Sect, in their lives deny him whom they falsely
taught had redeemed them.

Saints then persevere, nothing can separate them from Christ; but let not this
make us secure or negligent, let us walk circumspectly and carefully, let us
work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, that is, the application of it.

Christ has wrought out the Salvation for us, we must endeavor ourselves to
get the assurance. Qui creavit te sine te, non redimet te sine te. This
assurance will not be gotten without pains, sweat, fear, trembling. -- Such
fear as is accompanied with joy; serve the Lord with fear and rejoice -- Ps. 2.
Tremble, thinking on thine own unworthiness and weakness; rejoice thinking on
Christ's worthiness (thine by faith) and Christ's strength or thine through him;
Remember God has not called us to uncleanness, but holiness, 1 These, 4.7. God
as he ordaines to the end so he ordaines to the means, which must be laid hold
on. Hezekiah had 15 years added; what more assurance needed he then Gods word
by the Prophet? Yet he must eat and drink -- to preserve health and use a
means for recovery. Job says, man has an appointed time on earth, and bounds
are set which he cannot pass, yet we must use lawful means to live -- Christ
knew the hour of departing out of this world, yet when the Jews talk of
stoning him, he endeavors to get out of danger, to teach us. Paul knew the
Salvation of the Elect to be sure, yet he is said to endure all things for the
Elect, that they may obtain Salvation (2 Timothy 2.10.) as he endured imprisonment
to strengthen them -- and any thing rather then to forbear preaching (to gain
them) the means of God unto Salvation, Romans 1.16.

Let not those who have bound themselves even Apprentises to sin (as I may say)
and daily serve Satan, think to receive any comfort from hence; read Deuteronomy. 29.
v. 18, 19. If any man shall say, I shall have peace though I walk in the
imagination of my own heart, adding drunkenness to thirst; I will not spare
him -- Does Christ only love us? Or does he not also bespeak our love? O love
ye the Lord all ye his Saints, Psalm. 3^.23. It Is a great honor to be beloved
of such a personage as Christ, an honor that he will accept of our love, but
more that he seeks our love. The honor Saints have by being his, is above all
honor, If ye receive honor of men, the honor of God is greater, Joh. 5. Why
do we then court the world and great men for honor; A shadow, vanity; what an
honor is it to be a Minister of Christ, besides that of the University? I read
of a Roman, that when the Consulship was vacant one day (because of the Consuls
deprival) begged it for the few remaining hours, though cum omnium risu; O
vigilan tem consulem qui toto sui consulatus tempore somnum oculis non vidit.
Cicer. jeering.
if we seriously consider the vanity and unconstancy of every thing else which
might steal away our love from Christ, it might be a means to place it better.
Look into the world upon those once lovely Cities, Ninive 66 miles according to
Dr. Heylin, and Babylon 60 miles, as Solinus reports, cap. 69. Athens the once
glory of Europe (so commended and set forth by Mr. Francis Rouse and others)
ruinated. Sic patet exemplis oppida posse mori.

But Jerusalem above provided by God out of love for his people, is
fouresquare, the only sure foundation. Where are Sodom and Gomorrha Cities like
unto Paradise? That sweet land, Canaan, and the City of God of whom so many
glorious things are spoken I Jam seges est ubi Troja fuit -- laudant alii
claram Rhodon aut Mitylenen -- Sed norunt haec monumenta mori -- Where is all
thy glory O Caesar? In Parthia est castellum Passargada nomine, ubi est
sepulchrum Cyri, and Persicis litteris hoc Epit aphium, O mortalis, Cyrus ego
sum, filius Cambisae; Asiae imperavi; Persarum regnum constitui; itaque hoc
mihi monumentum non individeas rogo. Solin. and com. cap. -- 69. --
as the Father demanded? I read of Alexander magnus his lying many days
unburyed; of Cyrus buried poorly; Alexander causing the Sepulcher to be opened,
did find it true, he found Duos Scythicos arcus, clypeum putrem -- and some
such poor monuments; Cuntius Lib. 9. Vidimus and magni parva sepulcra Iovis.

Where is the old proud Rome, the once Mistrisse of the Universe? which was one
of the three things the Father desired to see; The Apostle cou^ts all (in
respect of Christ and heaven) (...): Phil. 3.8. i. e. (...), dogs meat as ^^yes
Su^d^^.
Christ in the flesh Romam in store ( Rome flourishing) Paulum in Ore ( Paul
Preaching) its glory is only now to be seen in the dust. The Prophet calls to
us, Esa. 55.1, 2. Wherefore do ye lay out money for that which is not bread, and
your labor for that which satisfyeth not, or lasts? It satisfies not; for
the world is round, and the heart three-cornered; the round world cannot content
the three cornered heart; the three persons of the Trinity only can; a spirit
can only satisfy a spirit, God that made it, and his love can only please it;
Domine, tu fecisti nos, and irrequietum est cor nostrum donec in te quiescat
Lasts not; constant in unconstancy only. Earth's pleasures are like the
Apples which grew by Sodom, very pleasant and beautiful to look upon, but
touch them and they moulder into dust or nothing. Solin Polyhist. cap. 48. Love
Christ then, thou see all things come to an end, but the commandments -- are
exceeding broad, Psalm. 119. ver. 96. Man of late grows much in love with
Soldiery or butchery, as if it were a virtue to kill those for whom Christ
dyed? If Si fas coedindo coelestia scandere cuiquam -- M^ soli coeli maxima
potta patet. Ennius de Africano.
killing of Christians and believers be to love Christ, why summons he Paul,
with a Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9.4. If they not slain as
professors of Christ, yet in fine professors of Christ slain. Solomon a type
Christ signifies peace, Christ came to reconcile wrath, to prevent death, --
and as he was the Prince of Peace, so he came when the world was at peace most,
in Augustus Reign.
Christ is the only true object of love. Do love preferment? Thou shall be by
him made the son of God; David thought it much to be son in Law to a King,
though an earthly and wicked one; thou shall be an heir; for every son is an
heir, Gal 47. A strange thing, and that to an incorruptible inheritance. Do
love freedom, that so much desired by all, for which so much blood shed? (that
which being gained once and pronounced aloud, the people made such acclamations
and filled the air with shouting, that birds fell down dead because of the
rarefaction of the air, or vertiginousnesse and astonishment, as Plutarch in
mag. Pompeio and in Flaminio) by Christ thou shall be free from the tyranny of
sin and Satan (a choice freedom) and art a free Denison of heaven. Do love
pleasure? with him are pleasures for evermore. Do love riches? Godliness
(the effect of Christ's love) is great riches, 1 Timothy c. ult. ver. 8. a treasure
laid up in heaven, where the theif cannot break through and steal. Do love
travels? thou shall by loving him travel from earth to heaven, see that so
coveted sight, the true holy land, and though not the Sepulcher, yet Christ
raised from the dead. Do desire to hear music? that which so quickened
David's spirit, (notwithstanding he had the spirit in a most plentiful manner
for man on earth;) in heaven (purchased by Christ through love) are Harps and
music (to speak to capacity) to please -- Revel. 5.8, 9. -- there Harpers sing
a new song. I wonder, if music sinful, why in the time of the Law commanded?
God never commanded any thing that was a sin; not wearing long hair, commanded
to Nazarites -- Elisha, (says Rabbi Da. Kimchi upon 2 Kings 3.15.) called for
a Timbrel to dispel his grief, for the loss of Elijah, or to compose his
spirits much moved with indignation at Jehoram; see Music used by the Prophet
to dispel sorrow, or to compose his spirits -- notwithstanding his having the
spirit; if it had been sinful, God would not have set forth the joys of heaven
by it.

If we consider Christ's love in under-going the burden of our sin (it may be a
motive to us to love him) Christ sunk under their heavy weight, he (...)
Bajulavit, Esaias 53. u^^ grave quoddam onus p^rtari solet. Gerh in harm. Evang.
bore our iniquities as an heavy load -- hence make this use, if thine
iniquities are an heavy burden (a good sign, if felt) remember Christ's
condition -- say to him (who was like to us in all things except sin) as the
Psalmist -- pardon my sin for it is Wondrous great, Psalm. 25.11. we may
acquaint him with our condition, our misery the occasion of his mercy;
heaviness of our sin, the occasion of his sudden easing us. --

Consider his love in dying (...) Proprie in humeros tollere ad gest indum
quast leve. Mr. Leigh in verhum. Christ fell upon his face, some say through
weakne* and wo^ship^ bei(...) carry his cross quire along; Simon Cirenaeus
helped. Compare the Gospels. --
greater love then this has no man, that one should lay down his life for his
friends (so call, in respect of election and Christ's deat foreseen, and
consequently reconciliation) nature at his death put on mourning apparel, the
earth trembled to bear a dying Savior, the rocks rent because man's heart was
so hard; and a stranger to Israel cried out seeing such an Eclips, Vel Deus
naturae patitur, vel hic mundus dissolvitur. So much Christ by dying has done
for his, that no Latin word can express his salvation (...) uno vocabulo
Latino non potest exprimi, says Tully, fere his verbis. Servator comes short
of it; Christ may be said to be Servator daemonum -- as preserving them from
relapsing to nothing; Salvator does not express it; he was Salvator angelorum,
keeping them safe from fall; but restored man to all lost privileges and far
better; foelix lapsus qui talem meruit Servatorem. Some would have the Greek
rendered by Sospitator; sospitantur enim ea quaefuerunt perdita. Laurent in 2
Pet, 1.1. Servantur vero and salvantur ea quaenon fuerunt perdi^a. But
Antigonus, for liberty restored to the Lacedaemonians, (...). Were we lost in
Adam? and are we not found (...) Christ? we were sons by creation, ^o are the
wicked, even Dives: heirs we were of an earthly Paradise, not comparable in
any thing to Heaven; we had life, should have never died -- mors a morsu -- But
by Christ we are sons of God adopted; more are we beholding for being restored
to immunities once lost, then the Angels that were only preserved from fall;
magis gratis datur, says Aqui. Christ left the 99 (good Angels) to seek man
that was lost (as well as the 99. Proud Pharisees -- who seem and think to need
no Savior (but some temporal deliverer) no repentance;) by Christ we are heirs
of that Paradise of which Adam's but a Type, and have eternal life through
death; Adam (though great Clerks are against it) should never have died, not
been happy and glorious, but through sin and Christ; yet with the phites we
worship not the Serpent, but God who brought good out of evil. Question, Why
then was heaven made before the fall? Solu. Because God foresaw it, Should all
men have lived on earth for ever, and still begat children, the world could not
have contained them; which God foreknew -- let Christ be only our Savior; let
us have neither other saviors, intercessours, (...): the Pope has he says the
overplus of other Saints good works to dispose of; thus the Saints (in that
opinion so derogatory from Christ) save themselves and others; but remember the
good Angels and Saints have (as wise Virgins, Mat. 25.) little oil enough for
themselves, (God can charge his Angels and Saints with folly.)

The Virgin Mary had sin (as Scotus proved) for she rejoiced in a Savior, the
Apostles were bid to say forgive us our trespasses -- and those that will not,
God forgive them; now where sin is, there no merits are (says judicious
Calvin.) Peter sinned after Christ prayed for him (thus the Pope his successor)
not only in denying his Lord and Master, but continually -- the Apostle Paul
speaking of sinners, affirms himself chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. and advises the Saints
instead of censuring others, and preferring themselves, to think better, or
esteem other better then themselves, 2 Phil. ver. 3. Corn, the richer in the
ear, the more it hangs the head; the more a man is in Christ, the more
sensible he is of his natural misery -- and the more humble -- pray only to
Christ; we have one only Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. and know and acknowledge no
other Intercessor (unless prayers of Saints on earth, so understand Job 5.)
for I am persuaded for particulars, Abraham knows us not, and Israel is
ignorant of us (I say 63.16. and know not our particular wants --) but thou O
Lord art our Redeemer; give not his glory to another, God is a jealous God.

Christ saves; woe to them that imitate the Devil in striving to destroy and to
make men sin; if such out of love, mercy, and Christ's example will not
forbear: yet let me desire them to be as charitable to themselves and others,
as Dives; I have five brethren (to omit that explanation of Moses 5 Books --)
send to them lest they come to this place of torment, says he; what charity in
hell? Aquinas tells us there be no good thoghts there (for they were to no
purpose) but whether a parable or no, thus much gather. Dives knew his bad
example and life -- had made his brethren sin, and therefore concluded he
should have the greater damnation; to prevent which he would have them by
Lazarus admonished. Go and do likewise. Nothing but blood could redeem. I doubt
me Zipporah spoke more out of passion then faith, when she said, thou art an
husband of blood, to Moses, Exodus 4.25. yet it may thus be rendered, thou art a
husband to me preserved by blood.

The Creation to this was an easy work; dictum and factum, the first; but the
second cost Christ's hearts blood. Christ was mastred and overcome by sinful
men; he wrastled with Jacob, and was overcome to prelude to his passion, being
then as man prevailed over; consider his willingness, I lay down my life, yet
the occasion ours; nihil iste -- nec potuit -- mea fraus -- consider the
deformity of sin, how did Christ look (appearing clothed with sin, deformity
of mankind) before divine justice. God even absents himself from him, scarce
acknowledging him; it was his love to lie in a grave (to sweeten it to his
people) two days part of the third; the Sabbath was a Type of it (together
with resting from sin, and eternal rest) now it is the Lords day in memorial of
his glorious On the Lords day our first day of the week, five things we read
done only as the work of the day; 1. Being in the spirit or spiritual
meditations. 2. Preaching ex 20. Actorum. Add in the third place prayer. 4
Breaking Bread or Sacraments. 5. Distribution to the Saints; the Apostle
ordained or commanded thus the Church of Gal^^ia. Dr. Prideaux. To worship --
(being the Moral part of the command, is kept.)
Resurrection and Ascension; let no man therefore judge you in respect of holy
days (the Jewish especially) or the new Moon or the Sabbath, being shadows,
Colos. 2.16.17. consider his love unto man in giving him his reward (out of
mercy, not merit;) As soon as dead, thou shall be with me this day in Paradise,
Luke 23.43. and Lazarus dyed, and was immediately carried by the Angels to
Abraham's bosom, that is heaven, (where note, since Christ's death, the glory of
the Saints is greater then before, but no Limbus; Christ ascending no doubt
gave some more honor to the Saints in heaven as well as his spirit on earth;
the head is more honorable then the bosom; the glory of the Sts before
Christ's death, was expressed by being received into Abraham's bosom, now being
gathered to Christ the head) and Dives dying was in hell in torment, though a
Parable, Luke 16.22, 23.
yet Keckerman hence fetches his greatest argument to prove a fire in hell; why
not I to prove the gluttons immediate being there after death? hence know there
is a particular judgment immediately after the souls departure (as well as a
general at last) as it is appointed for man once to die, so after death comes
judgment (Heb. 2.27.) viz. particular -- else how could Dives be in hell,
except this private judgment passed; the just judge does not as the memorated
judge of the Stannery's in Devon, who hanged a man in the forenoon, and sat in
judgment after; there is a general asize to be hereafter, to condemn the
wicked, but to acquit the righteous; the wicked Angels also are in torment
before the great day, being in chains, restrained, in darkness and as Sodom
and Gomorrah suffering (not to suffer) the pains of eternal fire, Jude 6.7.

Object. If Christ's are in glory immediately after death, did he not wrong
them to return them to the body, in raising them up --?

Answ. It was heaven to them to glorify God by their raising. Paul (though in
the third heaven) most contented to glorify Christ on earth. Perchance they
were said to be dead, and the spi^tt to come again because people did believe
so.
2. Answ. No mention being made by Lazarus or any of them of heaven (but Paul
who was there before death --) I rather conceive they were not in joy -- but
God miraculously (sure much beyond nature) kept the soul in some trance as it
were, or extacy to glorify Christ, and show his power in quickening the body --
from which the soul not departed, but slept, she is not dead, but sleeps --
says our Savior; the sickness is not unto death, but unto the glory of God
-- speaking of Lazarus; perchance had their time (as we say) been come, it had
been otherwise. I hope I wrong not Christ's miracles, or come near the error of
soul-seekers.

But to return to Christ's love, he loves the father and the children; see the
continuance of it. If a believing parent willing or desiring to have his child
baptized (in whom suppose no visible grace) it ought not to be refused
baptism; know, God hears desires, and looks on a willing mind (signs of grace)
considering especially the promise to believers children, Mark 10.13, 14 Acts
3.25. and 2.39. Psalm. 10.17.
I wonder why the Antipoedobaptists wrong their children, and curtaile the
promise, imprisoning Christ's love only in the Believer; it is not the nature of
grace, or this Sacrament, to find or look for a praedisposition, the Parents
desire suffices.

Pardon the digression, if I use a word or two to set forth Gods love in the
promise, and its freeness; but first take it from Origin (who lived but 200
years after Christ) that Baptism of infants was received by the Church from
the very Apostles, declared in Romans 6. and Augustines fourth Book against the
Donatists, cap. 24. affirms Baptism of Infants not to be by man's authority,
no nor counsels, but the Apostles doctrine. Peter tells the Jews, the Promise
is made to them and to their children, Acts 2.39. the answer of the
Antipaedobaptist is, if the children do believe; but let us consider well and
we shall find the text to be otherwise meant. God promised Abraham to be a God
to him and of his seed, and commands him Circumcision, and his seed at eight
days old, Genesis 17. Peter preaching to the Jews, repeats the substance of the
Promise, affirming Christ would be so to them believing, and to all afar off
believing, and to their seed by virtue of the Promise. God promises to Israel
his spirit (and consequently himself to be Isreal's God) and to his seed and
seeds seed, Esaias 59. ult. Isreal's children were Circumcised; and are not we
Gentiles the spiritual seed of Abraham? are not our children capable of the
Promise too? does not Peter so repeat the tenure of the Covenant, Acts 3.2.
ult. ye (speaking to the Jews) are the children of the Covenant first; what
means that word first, if the Covenant belonged not to us Gentiles secondly?
the Apostle was loath to say the Covenant in the second place did belong to us
Gentiles (whom they hated) least it might keep them off -- Paul after, but
saying he would turn to the Gentiles, saw their rage, when they said, away
with such a fellow from the earth; but remember he joins Circumcision and
Baptism together, Col. 2.11, 12. but ye are circumcised -- being buried with
Christ in Baptism, Number, jung antur jam Gryphes equis? it seems Baptism and
Circumcision may stand almost in the same verse, as if they might have some
affinity or acquaintance; as if Paul would have said, ye being baptized, are in
Covenant as those circumcised. -- Could Moses give a greater privilege then
Christ? Could he afford children Circumcision, and not Christ Baptism? Suppose
a Landlord make a Lease to a man and his heirs -- then recall that, and make or
give it to the man and not his heirs, which is the greatest privilege? the
first that is Moses; to the righteous and their seed, freely; the second is
Christ's, to the believer, not his seed, or heir, unless he have some ability
to hold the farm (as I may say) eased -- according to the Antipaedobaptist.
But you will say, it is no privilege for the child to be baptized and in Covenant
by virtue of the father not having faith. I willingly omit that it is in the
world a privilege to be a Gentleman by the Father though the son have not that
stock of riches; but why may not they be said to have faith? is it because
actually they express it not? then neither may they be accounted reasonable;
sure Children have had grace, John and Christ the spirit from the womb, We read
not that either in John or Christ grace and the spirit much appeared when
children, yet sanctified from the womb. John's grace, as himself, seemed to be
in the desert till the time of his showing Christ had a patent dor^ient for a
time. John expressed his having the spirit once, when in the womb he leaped. --
so that Christ (though he be said to increase in wisdom, stature and favor
with God and man, Luke 2. ult.) increased not in wisdom (but in appearance of
men, and so in favor with God and really with men) only in the exercise of it,
having the spirit at first in a plentiful manner; but these examples are
extraordinary; but did not Christ bless the children, and consequently give
them grace? deny not Baptism to known grace? yet you will say he baptized them
not; how is it known but his Disciples did? they were brought by friends; was
not here the forenamed desire? perchance faith; he that gave the greater, the
blessing, will he deny the less, Baptism? to these belongs the Kingdom of
Heaven, says Christ. What Kingdom that of grace, deny not Baptism to visible
grace; if that of glory, much less deny it, Calv. Were not all the fathers and
children baptized to Moses in the Cloud (outwardly?) and eat of the spiritual
meat, but not spiritually? 1 Cor. 10.2.3. If you say Christ bid go and teach
and baptize -- therefore teaching goes before -- I answer, as the Jews, non
dari prius and posterius in Scripturis, the Scripture looks more at the
substance then order -- but when it is said repent and believe, sure faith
should be first. Christ's words were most fit for those times, when ancient
people were most to be dealt with, who were first to be taught -- then
baptized; but their children might (begotten after Baptism, especially) be
baptized first -- Baptism and teaching are the two duties belonging to a
Minister, which that place more aimed at then the order.

The Apostle 1 Cor. 7.14. says, children are holy; federally I say,
matrimonially say the Antipaedobaptists; certainly the Corinthians needed not
to be instructed or taught that their children were holy in marriage, that is,
legitimate, or not bastards, though both parents were unbeleevers for marriage
was before Christ; but it seemed (since Israel was commanded (and consequently
the Corinthians) not to marry with unbeleevers, these doubted whether two might
live together; of whom one since marriage, was converted, the other remaining
in unbelief -- the Apostle resolves they might, first, because the believing
person (by Gods blessing) might gain the other: Secondly, because their
children (by virtue of one parents believing) were holy, and consequently
admittable by Baptism into the visible Church.

Let us continue the memorial of Christ's continued love in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, because Christ commanded us so to do, because every Ordinance
of Christ is very profitable; because to the people of God means of more grace;
see the Directory about the Lords Supper: This may in some measure be gathered
from the Symbols of Bread and Wine (made choice of by our Savior) nourishing,
cherishing, strengthening elements; had the Sacrament been only to confirm, why
then commanded to be used often? once might have sufficed, as Keckerman says
of Justification, est actus semel in vita adhibitus, or to that purpose; if
Sacraments only seal, once adminstired were enough; a Seal fixed once
suffices, where the Testator alters not his Will; now God changes not. Most
call the Sacrament the souls food, therefore must nourish, but not ex opere
operato; let all members of the body of Christ, the Church partake, having
knowledge to examine themselves; Let dogs in the Gospel sense be excluded,
without are dogs; nil aliud fuit totus mundus ante conversionem nisi hara
porcorum aut colluvies rabidorum canum. Aug. Does he then allow his people all
useful means for their souls, who denies them this? let the Saints judge.

As an Appendix; Christ being at meat used the posture of lying (upon a bed)
when he instituted his Supper, not sitting, though we translate the word
according to our custom: when we receive, we use private ejaculations,
therefore kneeling becomes us, considering also what a benefit we hope to
receive: the most humble way were not amiss: The words (...) show as much.
What if the Disciples did sit (as we translate the word (...)) with our
Savior at meat before his death? yet more reverence was expected after he was
risen; he in heaven, we on earth, he a King, we his subjects; we miserable, he
perfectly glorious: Mary Magdalen may not be equally familiar after his
resurrection as before; it is now, touch me not, John 20.17. yet before she
washed his feet and wiped them --

Since believers are Christ's beloved, Uses.
they are sure of protection, being the apple of his eye, Zach 2.8, his Jewels,
Mal. 3.17. His anointed ones, Ps. 105.15. none of which may be touched. In this
life they are safegarded, in time of death, by the power of the spirit and
Angels who immediately carry the soul triumphing through Christ to heaven;
after death care is taken of the dust and ashes, for the Angels which gather
the elect from the four corners of the earth, care for them, and gather (says
Coll. Conimb.) the dust of his people together, out of which God shall restore
the body (as the Phoenix) but not weak as before, but powerful, immortal,
glorious.

God, all know, took care of the litteral Temple, a Type of Christ's real body,
and mystical, the Church; the Saints are a spiritual Temple to him, he will
then take care of them; If any man destroy or defile the Temple of God, him
will God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple are ye, 1 Cor.
3.17. Israel through Christ, is holiness to the Lord: he that shall devour
him (or any true believer) evil shall betide him (says the Lord) Jer. 2.3.
since God has anointed his people with the graces of Christ, he promises to
take off the yoke of bondage, Esaias 10* 27. because of the anointing. So careful
of these is Christ, that he raises up strangers to safeguard them sometimes. Let
mine outcasts dwell with thee O Moab, be thou a cover to them from the face of
the spoyler Esa. 16.4. sometimes natives, even their brethren, in the midst of
trouble, as 1 Kings. 18.4. Obadiah, maugre Ahabs malice against them, took an
hundred of the Lords Prophets, and hid them and fed them. Eliakim is compared
to a nail fastened to the wall or sure place, on which all the vessels of the
Sanctuary, small and great, from those of cups, to those of flagons should be
alike hung, and by him supported: Esa. 22.24.
where observe, the Saints compared to vessels, the weak to small vessels; the
strong to greater, but all to be supported.

Suffer then Gods people in matter of opinion or judgment, Use 2.
till God shall reveal Yet regenerate men for a time may err in points
fundamental. The Apostles did about Christ's kingly office, Act 1. the Galatians
about justification. But as they do not easily err thus, so being convinced
they soon recant.
-- Phil. 3.15. The rather, because they hold the same fundamentals, the same
Christ. Errors not holding the head, Col. 2.19 and damnable heresies, would
quickly un*Saint a man. Opinions of Saints (if otherwise erroneous) cannot
damn. They be wood, hay, stubble indeed, which the fire or operation of the
Spirit burns up in a trial; but their souls shall be saved by fire, to wit,
their understanding being enlightened, and conscience convicted by the light of
the truth as fire, 1 Cor. 3.15. Forbear not to preach matters of duty and
truth: if any by it be offended, remember it is better please God then men. In
this Paul did not forbear Peter one jota, but withstood him face to face, Gal.
2.11. Suffer the Saints in matters of liberty, as eating flesh or herbs, 1 Gor
8. also use no other coercive means but the Word; for God promises never a
blessing to the sword, unless that of the spirit, to gain a member out of a
dangerous opinion. Nor can the Magistrates sword prevail over a Spirit, as is
the soul and that act of it the understanding, to reform or inform it. If in
the time of the Law other coercive power then the Word was used (which that
passage of Josiah proves not, 2 Chronicles. 34.33. for he compelled the people to
serve God, by reading, or causing the Law to be read to them, ver. 30.) yet the
time of the Law differed from this of the Gospel. Elijah then may call for fire
from heaven to destroy: -- but John and James must not; our Savior tells them
they are of another spirit, Luk 9. v. 35. 'Twere to deny Christ come in the
flesh, to hold forth the Law, and use the scepter, which was but to last till
Shilo came. Compel, as in Luke 14.23. (...) by powerful persuasion, by
showing the necessity of believing, as that word may be rendered. 'Twere
needless using any other means then the Gospel, A shepherd may use better
means to bring home a wandering sheep, then by worrying it to death.
that being the very power of God to salvation, Romans 1. Fides non cogenda.
Natura hominis ducitur, non cogitur. Suspendite verbera, ostendite ubera. Non
Christiani ad crucem, sed ad lucem; errantes opinione gladio maledicto ne
corrigas, sed veritate dirigas. Let Gods people be enlightened, not frightened.
Quod verbum non mandavit, veritas damnavit, Christus non approbavit, peccatorem
non curabit. What the Word commands not, to Gods people commend not: What
medicine Christ does not send, thy infirm people will never mend.

What shall be done to damnable seducing Heretics? Quaest.
Answ. Let the Church after due admonition reject, Tit. 3.11. Let the
Magistrate restrain: suffer not a man with a running sore to go abroad to
infect. One way to put out the fire in an oven, is to shut it up. Heresy is
not only of a depraved understanding: (the word (...) to take up (as it were
willingly) he latter part of the word (...) also shows as much; Words ending
in (...) show a quality and a delight taken in it; But if it were, that
Mountebank who out of mistake sells poison for physic, ought not to be
licensed to practice. Thou suffer that woman Jesabel, was a fault objected
to the Church Rev 2.20. and have those that hold ((...)) and stiffly maintain
the Nicholaitans doctrine, which thing ((...)) I hate, to wit, your sufferance
of such, v. 15. An heretic sins after convincing, ex. Tit. 3.11. against
knowledge; for he is (...), condemned of himself; In pertinacia perseverans,
Erring fundamentally ((...)) he is said to be subverted Tit. 3.^^. turning the
Church-fundamentals topsie torve upside down, or as a ship whose keel is above
the water. Peter parallels the sin of such an Heretic with the false
Prophets, 2 Pet. 2.^. who was to die, Deuteronomy. 13.5, 9 We ought to be more
careful of men's souls, then lives.

Oh strive for the faith once delivered to the Saints That is the true shield,
Use 3.
which if preserved, all is well.

-- The wounded Theban cried,
How fares my shield? Which safe, be smil^d and died.
Let not the bleating of Jeroboam's Calves entice thee from the Temple.
Opinions are (says L. Verulam) as the strivings of one Israelite with another,
which Moses fairly composes but Heresies are as the Egyptians striving with
Israel, which Moses knocks down. -- But I return. (...). Hom.
Ministers are shepherds, and should not only have a rod, but must provide
pasture for the sheep. Kings are so too, and must protect and provide folds,
and take care of the poor, sick, weak flock of Christ.

God finds fault that the weak and diseased were pushed away with horns, Use 4.
Information.
that is, by power, Ezekiel 34.21. When the whore in Rev. 19.5. is judged, both
small and great Saints rejoice. Love them who glorify Christ: remember, God
rewards and blesses them who protect his people. Cyrus his shepherd, in the
quoted sense, or allusion had to his education, Esa. 44. v. ult. and his
anointed, c. 45.1. because he took as much care of Israel as if he had been
their King, chiefly, prospers much: for indeed God advanced him for their sake,
ver. 4. though in his male issue he continued not to a grandchild, yet in
Atossa his daughter, One being Cyrus his daughter, the other Morde^a^'s uncles.
H^st. 2. v. 7.
wife to Darius Histaspis (not Hadassah or Hester) his race continued. And to
make the Providence the more remarkable, (says Mr. Goodwyn) whereas Darius had
sons by another wife, yet the Interest of Atossa, for Cyrus sake, carried the
succession to Zerxes her son, Cyrus grandchild; and the last Darius with whom
the Empire was destroyed, was of another race Such regard had God to Cyrus his
shepherd and his seed, that favored the Jews. Gods people are blessing in the
midst of the land where they are well entertained, Isa. 19.24. The new wine in
the grape, is the occasion that one says, Destroy it not. So are Gods people a
blessing where they are, Isa. 65. Read the elegant expression of Zach. 1 ^. to
the 7. ver. to this purpose. The abusing Gods people, is the occasion of a
curse -- The Kings rove up and down freely, Genesis 14. till ^ot Gods anointed is
touched: he is Gods coin, bears his stamp, grace; since they borrow him, they
must repay with usury, paying their lives for the loan. The Church is Christ's
first born, (all heirs) Remember, all Egypts firstborn slain, for opposition
made to their freedom. 'Twere able to make one sad, melancholy, and dejected,
seriously to consider that nights misery: Horrida, squallida, lurida, tetrica,
Herman. Hugo.
terribilis Nox. Not one house, in which not one (and that the firstborn)
dead: But that 'twas Gods just judgment upon his and his beloved's enemies.
This, and their overthrow in the Red sea, was so general, that we hear no
more of that Nation, till the days of Solomon. -- Read but Edom's rejoicing at
Gods peoples captivity, in Obad. the Prophet, v. 8.11, 12. and Gods anger with
them for it, and you will be confirmed in the conclusion, That God blesses those
that bless his people, and curses those that curse them, Signs of love, etc.
or laugh at their calamity. And will he not at last put the scourging rod in
the fire? Read Ier. 50. v. 17. to this purpose.

Since the Saints are so beloved of Christ the head, Use 5.
ought not the members to love one another? If we did, we would not Our Savior
dissuaded the Seventy from rejoicing overmuch, though their victory was over
Satan immediately. Luc. 10.20. God forbid, says Paul, Gal. 6.14. that I should
rejoice, i. e. chiefly or immoderately, but in the cress of our Lord Jesus
Christ.
rejoice at one another ruin; but as Israel, mourn for the loss of our
brother Benjamin, Judge. 21.2, 3. saying, Lord, why is it come to pass, that
one Tribe (and more) is lost this day in Israel? -- If we loved would we not
relieve the poor distressed brethren? Can we truly say we are Christ's, and our
purses our own? Are not all our goods put into our hands as stewards? Must we
not give an account how employed? It Is strange, having a note under Gods own
hand (even his word) to disburse to the poor so much, and he would allow of it
-- that we refuse. -- If we should chance lodge our brother a night, 'twere
rare. -- But as the Jews formerly said, The first day, a man was Oreach, a
guest, the second Toreach, a burden; the third, heaven and salvation (not
earthly things) are the subject of Saints rejoycings.
Barach a runnagate. So we, fish and guess in three days stink. In the
primitive time all things were common, some sold their houses for the common
good -- The Macedonians are commended by the apostle for giving themselves to
Christ, and theirs to saints, as need required, 2 Cor. 8.5. we must not (as
some do now a days) say, all thine is mine and mine my own: but all mine is
thine, and thine thy own.

If we loved, we would not so easily jar; let us see the danger of it, and the
profit of love: Scylurus his will is common, a bundle of Arrows to his sons;
while the Arrows fast together in a bundle, none easily broken; while his sons
knit together in brotherly love, all safe; but, dum singuli pugnant, vincuntur
omnes. It Was Cyrus policy in taking Babylon; the great rivers running through the
city, hindered its taking; therefore he cut it out into channels, and then it
was even fordable and feasible: if love were among us, soon would peace, and
then we should see how concordia parva crescerent, ut magna jam dilabuntur,
small things would increase as now great things grow small. de Clem. lib. 1.
cap. 4.
Cesars safety (says Seneca) was the Romans -- Peace -- ille ut vinculum per
quod resp. cohaeret, ille spiritus vitalis quem tot millia trahunt: nihil ipsa
per se futura nisi onus et praeda, si men's illa imperij subtrahatur; dolentem
dicere verum quid vetat? rege incolumi men's omnibus una; Amisso, rupere fidem.

For want of love are wars -- hint -- caedes, venena, urbium clades, et totarum
exitia gentium, et principum sub civili hasta capita venalia, et subjecta
tectis faces et ingentia spacia regionum hostili flamma re^ucentia; aspice tot
nobilissimarum urbium fundimenta vix notabilia, haec ira dejecit. Aspice
solitadines per multa millia sine habitatione disertas; has ira exhausil;
aspice tot memoriae prodito^ duces, mali exempla fati; alium ira in cubili suo
confodit. Sen. de ira, lib 1. cap. 2. -- hence wars -- murders, poison, ruining
of Cities, Kingdoms, Nations; hence that Princes heads are uncivilly saleable,
Crowns and Scepters trampled under foot (miscenstrue me not, Reader, I am
translating Seneca) hence that famous Cities scarce known by their ruins;
hence Countries, Provinces, dispeopled, in a flame. O my native, bleeding
country, note that every agreement is not commendable, it must be secundum
Christum-saints do agree in truth -- (...), Ephesians. 4.15. otherwise it is
conspiracy -- so all haeretikes agree (as Pilate and Herod are made friends)
against Christ, as Sampsons foxes turn tail to tail to do hurt. Miror qu^ omnes
heretici inter se dissentiunt, contra Christum consentiunt.
Ireland! the historian said, discord was Venenum in civibus Romany, poison
among them. Love by the psalmist is resembled to Balsam or the precious
ointment Psalm. 133. which heals: if love among ministers, we would with the
milch kine carry our ark, neither turning to the right hand nor left: if the
apostle rebuked the Corinthians, because some said I am of Apollo, I of Cephas
or Peter, only magnifying their own minister, -- and asked is Christ divided?
would he not if alive, now ask, is Christ torn in pieces? so many men, so many
minds; quot capita, tot opiniones (I had almost said) religiones, deus bone in
quae tempora reservasti nos? I am sure there should be one judgment de jure,
and one practice or charity, though de facto neither, Jerem. 32.39. I will give
them one heart and one way. In Acts 4.32. the multitude was of one heart and
one soul: where there are differences in opinion, there needs charity --
consider all not at the same time nor equally enlightened; consider Christ's
demeanure to his disciples in this case, Acts 1. they believed Christ should as
a temporal King restore Israel, he modestly answers, It was not for them to
know times and seasons. -- Thus he deals with obstinate Thomas; Reach hither
thy fingers, -- be not faithless. -- Joh. 20.2.

But what place is this I see, like the Almanacks Anatomy full of piercings? Is
this that England the glory of I lands and envy of Continents? Is this that
Isle which strangers came to see? A reed shaken with the wind, rather
shattered in pieces Poor England, like Rebecca with more then twins in her
womb, and whoever prevails she smarts. Poor England, like a Rock cut and
hammered into a Quarry, to dig stones to build up her self in a newer fashion.
Poor England, like an Oak cleft asunder with wedges taken out of her own body.

Where Is the friendship between families! the love of brethren! the seamlesse
coat of Christ spared by the violent Roman soldiers! Where Is the thought of
coming from one Adam, and redeemed by one Christ? being one in Christ? Where Is
the thought of one Lord. (...). Ephesians. 4, 5.
(...); one Faith, (...); one Baptism, (...); one hope of salvation? Quis
talia fando, temperet a -- I will sum up all with that of the Poet, never
more seasonable -- (...), Hesiodus.
(...),
(...).
The peaceful Ministers begin to jarre,
And each Mechanic wages war.
There Is peace in hell, amongst us a strange confusion:
Is this from heaven? in part, sure, hells delusion.


But disputations may beget knowledge, (though ofttimes strife) as two flints
knocked together, do light. Know, diversities of opinions must be too, to
manifest their faith who are approved, I Cor. 11.19. The Lord now does try his
people and prove them, Deuteronomy. 13 1. It Is partly want of love makes us censure.
The Apostles, when Christ told them, one of them should betray him, began to
examine and accuse themselves rather then others, every one saying, Is it I? --
Not straight, Sure it is Peter, Judas, -- Let us (to prevent censuring) look
upon our own unworthiness -- Non videmus id manticae quod in ter go est. -- I
have read of a people who when they went abroad, did borrow eyes to see other
men's faults; but when they came home, would take out their eyes, lest they
should see their own. Somewhat like the fish that bedarkens all the
neighboring water with some spissie vapor which it casts out of its mouth,
that it may escape unfound out. So, many private Reformers, like the Lapwing
cry, Here it is, here it is, to wit, the nest of other men's faults, but never
come near their own.

Tecum habita, and noris quam sit tibi curta supellex.
Examine thou thy self, and thou shall find
Thy self but miserable, naked, poor and blind, Rev. 3.17.
They are fittest to reprove others, who are most free from blame. Otherwise
men will certainly say to thee that Proverb, Physician heal thy self. Are not
they only fit to preach Christ, that are in Christ? otherwise they do but tell
a story as it were of the East Indies, which they know not but by hearsay. But
a man in Christ, preaches what by experience in himself he knows. How can
others promise liberty, who are themselves the servants of sin? 2 Pet. 2.19.
Yet if the Pharisees, sitting in If the right and allowed-of Ambassador speak,
though a wicked man, hear the embassage.
Moses chair, bid me do this or that (if good) I Will do it -- If the water be
good, whether the pipe be lead or silver, it shall be all one, I le drink it.
Some preach Christ out of envy, -- yet since Christ is preached, the Apostle
does rejoice.

If we loved, * Note. Alencis affirms, that Christ gave Judas the Sacrament,
(though the opinion is not generally received) because he would use all the
means of salvation to win him
we would pray for one another. It Is a sin for a Minister to forbear. See 1 Samuel 12.23. God forbid, says Samuel, that I should sin against God in
ceasing to pray for you. -- Sometimes God forbids to pray, as Ier. 14.11. and
Ioh 1. and cap 5. v. 16. to show, quod aegre possit remitti, non
impossibilitatem; to show the difficulty to prevail with God to pardon such
great sins and sinners, not the impossibility. Israel sinned against God;
Moses privately prays, and the power of faith was such, that Gods hands seem
tied. Let me alone, says he, Deuteronomy. 9.14. Elias was so powerful, that one
calls him Fraenum coeli, the bridle of heaven. I know it handle as a School
point, that if a Minister knew one of his people to be damned, yet he ought to
pray for him; for God else might use the Ministers negligence in omitting the
means, as the means (secondarily) of his damnation. It Is most plain, Ezekiel.
3.18. Remember if by using lawful means, Prius Omnes dam. nati quam nati.
as prayer -- a sinner be converted -- God is glorified having a new son;
Christ rejoices to see the work of redemption go forward, the holy Ghost has a
new temple, the Angels a new charge, the Church comforted and strengthened by
the prayers of the new convert; therefore pray --

Christ's beloved are entitled to the The wicked have the good things of this
world (the rather because no part in the world to come.) de facto, but
perchance as Tyrants and Usurpers, de jure.
all are your -- 1 Cor. 3.22. ye being mine.

Christ's are never wholly dead in sin; they may be a sleep as David and Peter,
but Nathan awakes the one, the Cock the other; a man dead in sin is like
Lazarus in his grave, needs a Christ, the resurrection and the life, to quicken
him: the Church in the Canticles confesses the truth hereof, I sleep, but my
heart waketh, 5.2. A man asleep in sin by the preaching of the word may be
awakened, his heart (even in his sin) being toward his God, as Asas 2 Chr.
15.17. though the high places not removed -- Why's this thrown into the kings
dish, if they had not a great stroke in matters of religion? Dr. Andrews.

The effect of Christ's love is true repentance: not to hang down the head Jehu
for a space (as a reformer) and to worship the calves at Dan and Bethel; to be
intentive as Herod to John, -- and after give away his head; to tremble as
Felix momento turbenis, to turn believer because others did, as Magus, and then
offer money to buy the Spirit, is nothing worth; do not the Heathen, the
Scribes and Pharisees do more? yet your righteousness must exceed -- the
wicked may have grace (but not sanctified) and seem for a time more eager then
the righteous: he that has some fits of an ague (though naturally cold) is
hotter for the present then one naturally hot: perseverance to the end is the
blessing of Christ, not as Judas, Magus, Demas. -- Christ gives his grace to
repent of every sin; the smallest chink in a ship may endanger it, repent of
thy bosom sin; thy Dalilah, Herodias -- God will be Alexander or Nemo.

Hos. 2.14. He can provide a table in the wilderness.

Christ's also suffer, to be conformable to him their head, who was vir
dolorum, a man of sorrow.



Amor semper habet quid sui simile --

Quest. Has every member and every beloved of Christ grace as he?

Ans. According to order they have; yet thousands of children saved, in whom
grace not so apparent as in promise. 2 Suppose the thief on the cross had died
without confession, yet elected, and (gravidus erat operibus) great with good
works, was safe. 3 Diverse may be justified, and therefore elected and saved,
yet die before visible appearance of faith; sed haec obiter.

Then hate sin, O beloved; it ill becomes Caesar wounds from him of whom he
meritted better usage with (...) Sin is the sword that put our Savior to
death; hate that sword that slew thy dearest friend; consider sins odiousness,
compared to the vomit of a dog, the menstruous cloth, the mire of the street in
which the sow wallows: do not live as Heathen under the name of Christians,
Muta nomen, vel age fortius. Let not Christ be wounded in the house of his
friends: never more pretenses for Christ then now; if the wine good, what need
so great a bush? cur pudeat nos dicere, quod non pudeat hos facere? Bishop
Jewel.
Contemn the world: sine mundum vadere ut vult, says Luther, thou art not of
the world. Say to it as Diogenes to his servant Manes (in Seneca) which run
away from him (as the world will serve thee in time of trouble) turpe esset
Manen posse vivere sine Diogene, Diogenem non posse vivere sine Mane: If thou
can live without me, Ise strive to live without (serving) thee: think not of
husks being converted, think of thy joy and spiritual food of comfort; --
since thy coming home by repentance, say as the Father, I have wanted my sweets
too long already: remember how the Father fetched thee home being a great way
off in sin; he went not softly but ran, not a step or two, but quite to meet,
did not barely bid welcome, but fell upon his neck and kissed him.

retexere telam, but remember Lots wife: she became a pillar of salt, which
Josephus says he saw, being after Christ's death: why into a pillar of salt? ut
te sale condiat, to season thee --

Hebrew for the Jews, in Greek and Latin (the language of the Gentiles) for
thee?

what good is it to thee to hear of Christ's love which reaches thee not? to
hear of water in a well and have not a vessel to draw? even faith; or to hear
of Abraham, Isaac aad Jacobs being in heaven, and thou shut out? presume not on
mercy, love, or peace; what have thou to do with them as long as thy rebellion
against God (which is witchcraft) and thy sins are so many?

Know, as one thief was saved to Exemplum latronis servati est admirandum, non
imitandum: Mane is the devils verb, he bids tarry, time enough to repent; but
Mane is Gods adverb, he bids repent -- early, in the morning of thy youth: The
ancient warriers would not accept an old man into their Army, as unfit for
service; when thou know not what else to do with thy time and self, art sure
of his entertainment? because he accepted one at the eleventh hour (answerable
near to six a clock at night, with us) a time to discharge servants (says Mr.
Goodwin in his Moses and Aaron) rather then to hire new: are sure of thy
repentance and acceptance at last? Christ loved us, and gave himself for us
when in the prime of age (being supposed to be about 33.) deserves he thy
worst? verify not that of Pamphilius, Cum nemini obtrudi potest itur ad me.
God called for the first of all things in the Law, to teach thee to give him
thy heart, primum vivens, thy youth and strength; he gave thee all, give not
him the worst, even those -- days wherein thou have no pleasure, when occasion
of sinning does leave thee, not thou sin.

Do not I hate them that hate thee? says the Psalmist.

some less as buckets cast into the sea, all are full, yet some have more
water, others less, as the capacity of the vessel is: what manner of love is
this? that Christ should die, justify -- giving faith to lay hold on him and
eternal life?

-- et opera illius nostra sunt. Christ has left a letter for us behind vero
nil verius; Paul himself has quoted a Poet; yet sure here is knowledge enough;
search not too deep into the earth for hidden treasure, lest a damp endanger
thee, and it -- Here in Scripture is copia, without which all knowledge is but
inopia -- which can guide our feet into the way of peace; Nonest attendentum
quid alij ante nos secerint, sed quid christus, qui ante omnes est, faciendum
praeceperit. Cyprian.
then follow Christ speaking in the word; seek to gain the Apostles spirit to
understand the Apostles writings; as for Commentaries and Ministers, do not
jurare in verba ministri; follow them as they follow Christ Jesus, amicus
Plato; amicus Aristotelis, sed magis amica veritas, follow none in an error --
Siquid legem sibi dixcrit, nihil contra Zenonis Chrysippive dictum committere,
et unius sequi sententiam, non id vitae sed factionis est, says Seneca.

Gods word is plain -- a light, a lanthorn, God out of love and Justice would
not leave his word over dark or difficult, since to guide his people; he has
moreover left us an able Commentary, his Spirit. Vas vitreum ut lambimus, sicet
pultim attingimus. Take heed of embracing new Cannons, orders for worship -- if
they be Scripture (which is full) use Scripture; if not, if an Angel from
heaven bring them, let him be accursed.

Plow up, O Lord, the furrows of our hearts by sorrow and contrition for sin,
sow in the incorruptible seed of thy word, water it with the dew of heaven,
thy grace from above; make it bring forth fruit in some sixty, in some thirty,
in all some, and in some all, to the praise of thy Name, the good of our own
souls, the edifying of our brethren, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Phosphore read diem; quid gandia nostra moraris,
Caesare venturo? Phosphore read diem.
Day Star, bring the day, make no delay; Our Caesar is to come, in his
kingdom: o Savior bring that day, make no delay.

Even so come Lord Jesu, come quickly.

(...) FINIS.
To the Reverend, His carefully-loving Father, Mr. RANDOL HOLLAND A Minister of
the Gospel in IRELAND.
SIR,
MY Letters seldom arrive safely with you in Ireland, by reason of the
distance. Wherefore I have annexed this printed to my Book, which I doubt not
but in time (if alive) you will receive. It will certify you (somewhat) the
state of my soul (though not of my body.) If you ask me the reason of my
publishing so mean an Exercise in a time of such Paper-prostitution: among many
reasons, I Will give you (Sir) this, as most concerning your self. The death of my
ever gallant Uncle Captain Stephen Hussy, and the never enough by me deplored
loss of my two dear Brothers, Henry and Joshuah Holland, slain in these
unnatural wars, made me first apply my self to this subject. I have
comforted my self, considering the graces God formerly wrought in them as
footsteps of himself, and then considering his loving to the end; considering
that afflictions are signs of love; that death is beneficial; and sudden
death no argument of his hatred: Josiah's death was such. And indeed, I had
scarce with sighs dried the tears off my face (which I had shed for them) when
God blessed me with a son. I thought God had sent me a summers day in the winter
of my sorrow; little did I dream its sun would set so suddenly I baptized it
with your name, and thought with Hannah to have given it to the Lord all his
days. But indeed it proved but an April sunshine, which had a present shower
waiting on it. God saw me not humble enough nor fitted for such a blessing. For
by that time it had twelve months blessed me with many a smile -- peor babe! as
if it had performed the errand God sent it for, it returned to him that gave
it: doubtless it has took possession of the heaven of Saints for me, of which
our Savior long since took possession for us all. This made me more earnestly
study on this subject, (Gods love in affliction) that I might the more
willingly kiss the rod that scourged me. This was one reason made me publish
these lines; That whiles I could not enjoy my friends here, (nor my sweet
Randol) I might at least have, as it were, their Funeral sermon to read.

Thus thanking you for your care to wards me in my Education, for your Prayers
(of which I believe I have had benefit) desiring the continuance of them and
your health, -- I rest

Your dutiful son, Hezek. Holland.
Sutton-Valence, July 10. 1649.

