THE TRUE GUIDE: OR, A short Treatise wherein is showed how the weakest
Christian may be able to discern the true way of the Spirit of God, from all
false and erroneous ways.

Very useful and necessary for weak Christians, that are willing to know and
be led in the truth, in these distracted times, wherein so many Errors and
Divisions abound.

By a lover of the Truth, R.H.

Viewed and approved by diverse worthy Ministers of the City of LONDON.

Psalm. 119.128. I esteemed thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and
I hate every false way.

Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Shephard, at the sign of the Bible in Tower-Street.
1646.

To THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THe causes of error in Religion are many and various: some there are who
being possessed with a giddiness of spirit, will not rest satisfied with
necessary and saving truths, others are misled by Enthusiasms, and their own
private spirits: Some err by reason of the weakness of their judgments, and
not attending to them that can better inform them: but above all, what Christ
once said to the Jews, was, and ever will be true, Men err not knowing the
Scripture.

Never was there better opportunity never more plentiful and powerful means,
then at this day (in many places) to acquire saving knowledge, and never did
private opinion or strange Heterodoxie more prevail. The custom is every where
now to contend and quarrel about every part of Divinity, and he is no body that
cannot carp at, and wrangle against (almost) every truth: So that all our
Practical Divinity is turned into Polemicall, and the power of godliness runs
out into disputes, and those truths which formerly seemed most Orthodox, plain,
and unquestionable, are now by the crotchets of men's brains, spun but into such
divisions, and become so knotty and prickly that a man knows not where to
fasten on them or how to hold them, but he is in danger to prick his fingers
with one thorny objection other.

It is therefore high time for all that are the sincere lovers of peace and
truth, and that have any ability to manage Gods Cause, to gird up their loins,
to put on their Arms, and to appear in the defense of truth, by word or
writing, by conference or calling on the name of God, by one means or other,
according as occasions and opportunities invite, least Satan's vigilancie rest
in judgment against us for our negligence.

There must be Heresies (says the Apostle) that those which are approved may
be made manifest among you, 1 Cor. 11.19. Hence Christ's caveat, Mat. 7.15, 16.
Beware of false Prophets, etc. And St. John says, believe not every spirit but
try the spirits whether they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone
out into the world. 1 John 4.1. For the Devil is Gods ape, and will
counterfeit very cunningly, and therefore where God has his Church the Devil
has his Chapel, as says the Proverb.

Now amongst all other Heresies and errors, those seem to be most dangerous,
which are most plausible and pleasing to flesh and blood, if withal they have
some near alliance or sem^lance with saving truth, and pass under specious
titles, for they are like unto sweet poisons which are easily taken down, or
Anodynes which bring men asleep; and keep them from feeling their misery, but
cannot heal, they remove the pain, but not the disease, such ^^e the errors
that are here encountered in this small Treatise, vented and broached under
pretense of greater light, and opposing the ways of Antichrist, and crying
down his limbs, advancing Free Grace, setting up Christ alone etc. specious
pretenses. Whereas upon due enquiry, it will be found that the authors and
abetters of these Novall opinions have not received a clearer light, but having
forsaken the true light of Gods Word are miserably misled by the Ignis fatuus
of their own brain. And whilst they would seem to exalt Christ alone, and
magnify Free Grace, they show themselves enemies unto grace, and strong
abetters of carnal liberty, and so whilst they would seem to be the only
Gospellers, they are indeed apparent Gospel-spillers. And under a pretense of
crying down Antichrist, and eradicating his limbs, they disable, disgrace, and
(as much as in them lies) labor to root out the most faithful and powerful
Ministers of the Gospel, whose labors and lives have always advanced the
Kingdom of Christ, and as so many valiant David's, laid the Goliath of Rome
grovelling on the ground, and now ready to expire.

The truth of this: this small Enchiridion will in part manifest to those that
contend for truth, not victory, who are wise to sobriety, not ambitious of
contention.

All that I crave of thee, Good Reader, is this: Read without prejudice,
examine each matter thoroughly; and judge impartially. I say no more but prove
and approve. and the Lord direct all our hearts into the knowledge and love of
the truth. So prays he that is an unfeigned lover of peace and truth.

G. D.

ROMANS 8.14. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of
God.


FOr explanation of these words we will show: 1 What is meant by the Sons of
God? 2 What is meant by the Spirit of God? 3 What it is to be lead by the
Spirit of God?


First, By sons are meant, sons of grace, that have received Christ by faith,
John 1.12. Gal. 3.26. Yet are all the children of God by faith in Christ.

Secondly, by the Spirit of God is meant the Holy Ghost, the third person in
Trinity, that spirit of truth that leads into-all truth, John 16.13. That
Spirit that enlightneth, that sanctifies, that enableth us in all duties.

Thirdly, to be led by the Spirit, is to yield to the motions, rules,
directions, and persuasions of the spirit either inward, or outward and
ministerial.

Now the observations from those words might be many:

First, that we are naturally blind, and cannot see, much less are we able to
walk in the ways of God without a Guide o^ Leader.

Secondly, that there be many false guides or leaders, as sense and carnal
reason, and nor these only, but there are erroneous, false and seducing spirits
they have been, and now are especially in this last age of the World: as is
manifest in Scripture, as in Mat. 24.5 Christ says, Many shall come in my name,
saying, I am Christ and shall deceive many, V. 11.23, 24. Then if any shall say
unto you, Lo, here is Christ or there, Believe it not: For there shall arise
false christ's and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders,
insomuch (that if it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect: Behold,
I have told you before: Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in
the Desert, go not forth: Behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not,
Ver. 25, 26. So in 2 Pet. 1, 2. As there were false teachers among them: So
there shall be false teachers among you which shall bring in damnable heresies;
etc. and many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of, so, in 1 Timothy 4.1. The spirit speaks
expressly, that in the later times some shall depart from the faith; giving heed
to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils. So in 2 Timothy 4.3.4. The time will
come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts, they
shall heap unto themselves teachers, having itching ears and they shall turn
away their, ears front the truth, and shall be turned to sables. So Acts
20.30. Of your own s^^ves shall (...) arise speaking perverse things, to draw
Disciples after them. 1 Cir. 11.10. For their must be heresies among you, that
they that are approved may be made manifest among you. So that ye may see by
these and other Scriptures, its manifest there be false leaders, seducing
spirits now among us: therefore it is good to be careful by whom we are led:
but as many as are led by she spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

Thirdly, but the thing mainly intended is this: That they and they only that
are the sons of God, are led by the spirit of God: as in this Chapter and 4
Verses, Gal. 5.18. If ye be be led by the spirit of God ye are not under the
law, but under grace, for they only have the promise. Esaias 30.21. Thou shall
hear a word behind thee saying, This is the way walk in it. So John 16.13. I
will send you the spirit of truth and he shall lead you into all truth; 1 John
2. 27. That anointing shall teach you all things etc.

We would all be counted the sons of God: but who is our guide, what spirit are
we led by? Now the most are led by an erroneous spirit, the spirit that now
works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. That old Serpent the
Devil, that deceives the whole world, Revel. 12.9. and he is called sometimes
the spirit of error, sometimes a seducing spirit, sometimes the spirit of
Antichrist, and such like: but they all proceed from that old serpent the
Devil. Consider further what instruments these spirits work by: not only by
hypocrites such as can transform themselves into Angels of light, and the
Apostles of Christ as you may see 2 Cor. 11.13, 14. but they can through Gods
permission) make use of Gods people, of Prophets, and Apostles, the more to
seduce and deceive others by; and by this means they do marvellously prevail.
So the old Prophet deceived the young Prophet: which all the world before could
not remove from the Word of the Lord, till the old Prophet came under the
color of a new light, or revelation from heaven: and thereby he prevailed
with the Prophet, and drew him from the commandment of the Lord: but it cost
the good man his life, as you may see, 1 Kings 13.18, 24. So Satan makes use of
Peter to tempt Christ, Matthew. 16.22. See how this spirit prevailed by Peter's
example to draw many to separate. Gal. 2.12. insomuch that Barnabas a man full
of the holy Ghost was led away with them: even so this spirit prevails now by
the example of some eminent men to separate from the public Ministry and
other Ordinances of God, but as many as are the sons of God, they are led by
the spirit of God.

Well, you hear what spirits and Leaders there be, and what instruments they
make use of, and how they have prevaild, deceived, and misled many; Loving
friends it marvellously behooves us to look to our selves, and not to believe
every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they be of God or no.

Q. How may one know the spirit of truth from the spirit of error.

A. By the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5.20. and they are these, love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance,
now where the spirit of God is, there are these fruits in some measure.

But if you see men given to hatred, variance, emulation wrath, strife,
sedition, heresies, and envyings, you may know, such are led by the flesh, the
spirit that now works in the children of disobedience, therefore be not led
by such spirits but reject them: for as many as are the sons of God, they are
led by the spirit of God.

But seeing the Devil makes use not only of Hypocrites but of Gods own people,
and that of the most eminent in the Church of God, to seduce and deceive others
by: as we have proved before, then the main question will be.

Q. How we may know the motions or persuasions of the spirit of God from the
m^tions or persuasions of the spirit of Satan?

A. 1. The motions and persuasions of the spirit of God, are always from the
Word of God, or agreeable thereunto, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my spirit within
you, and will cause you to walk in my statutes, etc. there is such an agreement
betwixt them that they are put often times one for another. What the Word speaks,
the Holy Ghost speaks, Heb. 3.7. Chap. 10.15. Wherefore the Holy Ghost says,
Today, if you will he are his voice, etc. 1 Timothy 4.1. Now the Spirit speaks
expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving
heed to seducing spirits, etc. The spirit speaks that the Word speaks: for
the spirit of God endicted the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.21. Ephesians. 6.17. Then try
all motions or persuasions by the Word. Esaias 8.20. To the Law, and to the
Testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them Therefore when Peter would have persuaded Christ from suffering:
Christ would not be led by that spirit; but says, Get thee behind me Satan,
because it was contrary to the Scripture. So the when the Disciples would
command fire from Heaven to consume the Samaritans, Christ rejects their
motion, and told them, they knew not what spirit they were led by, because it
was contrary to the Word of God; which bids, Avenge not your selves, but give
place unto wrath. Therefore if any shall persuade you to separate from the
people of God, or the Ordinances of God; know this persuasion comes not from
him that calls you (as Paul told the Galathians, when they were seduced from
the truth they had formerly walked in, Gal. 5.1, 8.) therefore to be rejected,
because it is contrary to the Scriptures. Heb. 10.25. Not forsaking the
assembling your selves together, as the manner of some is, 1 John 2.9. They
went out from us, because they were not of us, etc.

If any shall persuade you from the public and faithful Ministry of the
Word, reject it, for it is a spirit of error, 1 John 4.6. We are of God: he
that knows God hears us: he that is not of God, hears us not: hereby we
know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.

So if any shall persuade you from the Sacrament, it is not from the spirit of
God, but of error: for Christ commands me to do this in remembrance of him.

So if any shall persuade you from praying, telling you, God has decreed what
he will do, and you cannot change the mind of God not alter his decree by your
prayers; and so from craving a blessing on the creatures, or from giving thanks
after meat: know, this is not Gods spirit, but from Satan. Therefore say to
such as Christ to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me:
for these motions are contrary to these Scriptures, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. James 1.5.
Matthew. 7.7. to 12. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Deuteronomy. 8.10. When thou have eaten and filled
thyself: thou shall bless the Lord thy God, etc.

Q. 3. Then may I be led, with every one that brings Scripture.

A. No, not always, for none are readier to produce Scriptures then seducers.

Q. How then shall I know the difference?

A. Observe these two rules to know deceivers by.

First, those that are deceivers, they will practice many things, they have no
rule from Scripture for: as the old Prophet, 1 Kings 13. had no rule from
Scripture to cause the young Prophet to eat and drink, but a pretended
revelation.

So what warrant out of Scripture have some to deny the children of believers
Baptism. So what Scripture have any for crying down the public Ministry of
the Word of God, to cry down praying and singing of Psalms in the public: what
Scripture have any to rail against the Parliament and Synod, whereas Michael
the Archangell durst not rail against the Devil, but said, The Lord rebuke
thee, Jude 9. What Scripture have any to cry down Superiority and Inferiority,
that neither Magistrates, Masters, nor Fathers shall command those that are
under them to serve the Lord, contrary to these Scriptures. 2 Chronicles. 33.16.
Manusses commanded all Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel, so did Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.33. He made all Israel to serve the Lord their God. So Genesis 18.19. I
know Abraham that he will command his children and his household after him, that
they shall keep the ways of the Lord, Josh. 24.15. Luke 14.25.

But secondly, if they seem to bring Scripture, try whether that sense they
give of the Scripture they bring, do not contradict other Scriptures, if it do,
reject it; it comes from the spirit of error. The Devil when he tempted
Christ brought Scripture out of Psalm. 91.12. but it was directly against
another Scripture, as he applied it, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 6.16. which was
cited by our Savior. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, as some would have
us tempt God in neglecting the means; as heating, praying the Sacraments, but
it comes from the same spirit as tempted Christ. So some that are contentious
will bring, Jude 3. and Matthew. 11.12. Contend for the faith. The violent take
it by force. But as they apply them, they plainly contradict other Scriptures,
as Philip. 2.3. Let nothing be d^ne through contention, or vainglory, 2 Timothy
2.23. The holy Ghost bids us to avoid such questions as engender strife, For
the servant of the Lord must not strive: but be gentle unto all men, apt to
teach, patient, etc. so Titus 3.9. 1 Cor. 11.16. If any man be contentious we
have no such custom, neither the Churches of God, Chap. 14.33. God is not the
author of tumult or unqu^etnesse: but of peace in all the Churches of the
Saints: therefore contentious spirits are not from God, but are earthly,
sensual and devilish, James 3.14, 15. Therefore, if you have bitter envying
and strife in your hearts, rejoice not, neither be liars against the truth,
says the spirit of God: But as many as are led by the spirit and Word of God,
they are the sons of God.

2 Another way to try the Spirits may be this: Those motions or persuasions
that are pleasing to the flesh, and take most with natural men, are not from
the spirit of God, but from Satan, for the spirit lusts against the flesh,
and the flesh lusts against the Spirit, for these are contrary the one to the
other, Gal 5.17. 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man cannot receive the things that
are of God. Observe then from whence these motions come, that tend to the
neglect of the Sabbath, and of the means of grace, and casting off the Law as
no rule to walk by: and would not be under command of superiors, but would
have the liberty of their conscience, to do or hold what they list. These are
pleasing to the flesh, and are received and embraced by mere natural men, and
therefore cannot be of the spirit of God, and to be rejected as erroneous and
devilish.

What spirit, think you, were they led by in Mal. 3.13, 14. who said, It was in
vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances, and
that we have walked mournfully before him? and is not this spirit among us
still, that dare thus to speak against God, for so God charge them, and what
is it but to charge the only wise God, who is wisdom itself, with folly, in
ordaining and setting up Ordinances in his Church, that are of no profit:
therefore consider it well, and be not led by such spirits, least you be found
fighters against God. But those motions that moves you to use and reverence all
Gods Ordinances, and to watch over your hearts and ways, to sanctify the
Sabbath, to mortify sin, to fast and pray and give thanks for every mercy, to
walk according to the law, and word of God in all things that moves to love,
and peace, and holiness, and such like: Quench not these motions, but
entertain, obey, and follow, and be led by them, for they are the motions of
the Spirit of God, and as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the
sons of God. Now the Spirit bids you to stand fast in the truth you have been
taught, and be not like children tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, by the cunning craftiness of men, whereby they ly in wait to
deceive. Ephesians. 4.14. But hold fast the form of words ye have been taught. 2 Timothy 1.13. So if any shall say, Lo here is Christ in the desert, believe it
not: if they say he is in the secret chambers, go not after them, Mat. 24.26.
Nay, the Spirit of God bids you to mark them that cause divisions and offenses
among you, contrary to the Doctrine that ye have learned, and avoid them, Romans
16.17. Now if you obey these and be led by them, the same spirit will witness
with you, that you are the sons of God, Romans 8.16. For as many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God, but if you will not obey and be
led by these motions and directions of the Spirit of God, then you resist the
Spirit of God as those in Act. 7.57. Take heed of sinning against the Spirit of
Ood, consider the words of our Savior, Mar. 3.28. All manner of sins and
blasphemies shall be forgiven to the sons of men, but he that sins against
the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven: Therefore I say again, take heed of
resisting the motions of the spirit of God,

Ob. The Apostle bids us try all things, and keep that which is good, 1 These.
3.21.

Ans. But he bids you in the next words, to avoid all appearance of evil, ver.
22. so you see those things that have but an appearance of evil, and wherein
is any danger we must avoid.

Ob. But they teach many sweet truths.

An. Therein lies the more danger: So did the false Prophets come in the name
of the Lord, saying, Thus says the Lord, as you may see, Jer. 23.17, 28, 31.
but with that they mixed their own dreams, so the false Apostles transform
themselves into the Ministers of righteousness, so the Devil when he tempted
Christ, brings a sweet and comfortable truth, but under it there was hid
poison, which Christ discerned, and therefore rejected it, so you shall have
some now will teach: He that exalts Christ highest, and lays man lowest, is in
the right, (and this we do say they) now this is a sweet truth, who dares
deny-it? but there is a Colloquintida hid under it, there is death in the p^t,
for when they explain it, it is this Christ has done that is needful for our
salvation it is truth, then where is the danger? why here. then we need do
nothing: true, not in way of justification, but in way of sanctification and
obedience, and out of love, we must hear and pray, confess our sins, watch
over our hearts and ways, etc. you see there may be danger hid under the best
Doctrines, if they be not explained. Now if you were to buy some sugar, and one
should tell you there is a dainty sweet sugar at such a place, but they that
sell it, many times, mix some rats bain with it, and it can hardly be discerned
either by sight or taste, being both white and sweet, but they that eat it, are
poisoned by it, would you buy there to try it, or would you not rather go buy
at some other place where you hear a better report, and where has been no
such danger? I suppose you would. And would you be more careful to preserve
your body from poisoning then your soul, therefore take heed how you hear,
says Christ. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, that is their Doctrine,
for a little leaven leavens the whole lump.

Ob. Another main allegation is: They tell us we have been led in an ignorant
and blind way, but if God open our eyes, as he has done theirs, and we saw
that as they now see, we would be of another mind, and do as they do: and
the way to have our eyes opened is to forsake our Antichristian Ministers, and
come and join with them in their meetings.

Ans. I confess this must needs take with people, for who would willingly be
led in a blind way, but desires to see and know as much as may be, therefore
the Devil that old serpent knowing this, makes it his main argument to
prevail with Eve to eat of the forbidden fruit, telling her, if she would eat
of that fruit which God had forbidden, then her eyes should be opened, and she
should be as God knowing good and evil: this did so take with her; that she
looked upon the fruit, and saw it was pleasant, and much to be desired, being it
would be a means to open her eyes, and bring her to that knowledge, she did
eat of it, but it brought death upon her and all her posterity: so the devil
seeing this argument prevailed then, makes use of it still. So he did in the
old Prophet, 1 Kings 11, so in Zedekiab, so in the Pharisees who accused
Christ's Disciples of ignorance, John 7.49. yet boasting themselves of their own
light, as the false Apostles did, but says Paul, 1 Cor. 8.12. He that thinks
he knows any thing, knows nothing as he ought to know, 2 Cor, 10.18. He that
commends himself is not approved, but he whom the Lord approves, therefore
avoid such, you hear this is no new thing, but an old bait, therefore be not
troudled at it.

Ob. But I cannot answer their Arguments they are so deep, must not I then be
fain to yield to them.

A. By no means, if you will be led by the spirit of God, which bids you avoid
them, go not after them, believe them not, Mat. 24.26 Again, the spirit of God
bids you, Remember how thou have received and heard, and hold fast and repent,
etc. Revel. 3.3. and hold fast the form of wholesome words, that you have bin
taught, 2 Timothy 1.3. And if any man, if an Apostle, or an Angel from heaven
teach any other Gospel then you have bin taught, let him be accursed, Gal.
1.8, 9. The Church of Thyatira had a seducing Prophetess among them: that was
so deep in her doctrine that many could not understand her, much less answer
her arguments: but mark what counsel the spirit of God gives them, and as
Revel. 2.24, 25. But unto you I say, As many as have not known this doctrine,
neither the depth of Satan, as they speak, I will put upon you no other
burden. But that which you have already, Hold fast till I come. Let him that
has an ear hear what the spirit says unto the Churches, Verse 29. For as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. In Psalm. 27.8.
says David, When thou saydst, Seek my face, my heart answered, Lord, thy face
will I seek. Now if the Lord has given us such hearts, that when his spirit in
his word shall bid us do this: but do not that: go this way, but go not that
way: I say, if our hearts answer, Lord, I will do, what thou biddest me do,
and go that way thou will lead me: then we shall not only have the spirit of
God to witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God. Rom 8.16.
But the spirit will seal unto us our assurance of the love of God. Ephesians. 4.39.
which is the firmest and strongest assurance that possible can be made, etc.
Therefore, I beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
our assurance in him, that ye be not shaken in mind, nor be troubled, neither
by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. But I have met
with an allegation or two of theirs, whereby they deceive and draw many to
their meetings, which I will set down and answer very briefly.

The first is this: they persuade people, that the word delivered in private,
and by private men of their way is more sweet, and they can profit more by it;
then by that which is taught in the public Ministry: to which I give a
twofold answer.

Ans. Though it be as truly and as profitably taught in public in public (nay
more truly and profitably) yet it seems more sweet to you in your private way
and manner, because you have it not in so lawful a way: for the holy ghost
says, Prove. 9.17. Stolen waters are sweet, and bread that is eaten in secret is
pleasant: and the forbidden fruit was more sweet and pleasant to Eve, then all
the fruits in the Garden: which God allowed her to eat of. Genesis 2.9, 16, 17.
Chap. 3.6.

And whereas you say, you cannot profit more in that way, I answer: herein your
hearts do much deceive you, for that people that profits by the word, they grow
thereby not only in knowledge, for so Hypocrites: nay, Devils may do, but they
that profit indeed by the word: grow in faith and love.

They grow more humble and low in their own eyes, apprehending themselves the
greatest of sinners and the least of Saints: they think every Christian better
then themselves, Phil. 2.3. and that others know more of God then they do: as
Elyhu, Job 32 6. And Agg^r, Prove. 30.2, 3. So they grow more charitable, more
holy, more conscionable, more obedient, more patient, more like to Jesus
Christ, then a people profit indeed. But when people grow more proud and highly
conceited of themselves, thinking better of themselves then of others, boasting
themselves of their own light: counting all others that go not their way to be
blind and ignorant creatures to them: besides when they grow more uncharitable,
more censorious, more unconscionable, more impatient, more unlike to Jesus
Christ: Can any believe that these profit so much in their meetings: no, no,
they merely deceive themselves and others.

Again, they would persuade people that we are not able to mayntain what we
teach or hold: for they have offered to reason with out Ministers or private
men, but they cannot get us to it.

For answer: some of you have been reasoned with and confuted to; though you
will not acknowledge it: but if any have refused, it is not because we cannot
mayntaine the truth we hold, but because you are a perverse people, that will
not yield to the true meaning of the spirit of God in the Scriptures: but will
make all Scriptures to speak what they would have them to speak, to mayntain
what they hold and practice.

And then to what purpose is it for any to reason with such as will hear no
reason: again, some of them have not stuck to deny the truth of some
Scriptures: and what wise man would reason with such.

Again, it has bin their practice to cast aspersions upon those that do
oppose, and will not yield to what they say, such shall hardly escape without
some blot: now when we see men so perverse and obstinate in an erroneous way,
we are commanded to avoid them, Rom, 16.17. Mat. 15.12, 13, 14. Revel. 21.11.
He that is unjust let him be unjust still and he that is filthy let him be
filthy still: so he that is erroneous and obstinate, let them be erroneous and
obstinate still: if they will not be reclaimed, though we much desire and pray
for their return: and herein we have not only Gods command, but his example,
Psalm. 81. O th^^ my people would have harkned unto me, and have walked in my
ways: but they would not he are, nor regard; so I gave them up to their own he
arts lust: and they walked in their own counsels, etc.

Therefore you see their fair glosses and pretenses, whereby they go about to
delude people, are but fig leaves and gilded shows: if they be well examined:
therefore take heed and be not deceived, nor drawn away by them.

Ob. But it will be further objected, You bring many Scriptures to persuade
people to stand fast in the truth they have been taught, but they have not been
taught the truth, but have been taught in a false and blind way, by your false
Ministers.

Ans. It is a very false and scandalous imputation, cast upon the faithful
Ministers of Jesus Christ, for have they not taught us Jesus Christ, that we
are freely justified and saved by him alone, without any thing of our selves,
and that there is no other name given whereby we can be saved, but by the name
of Jesus Christ, that he is our wisdom, our righteousness, our sanctification
and redemption, that we are perfect and complete in him, and other foundation
then this can no man lay.

With what face then can any man say, we have been taught in an ignorant and
blind way, except they will deny the Scriptures, as some have been ready to
do. And that this we have been taught by our faithful Ministers, our own
consciences can witness, besides their books now extant can testify, as
Doctor Sibs in his Book on the Canticles, and of Christ manifest in the flesh,
so Calvin, and Perkins, and Hooker, and an hundred more: therefore I say
again, stand fast in the truth ye have been taught.

Ob. I but say they, your Ministers are Antichristian, for they were called by
an Antichristian power, therefore it is not lawful to hear them, etc.

Ans. That must be proved first which you say, and I think they have as lawful
a calling as your teachers have, and more lawful too. But if it be granted,
they were called by an Antichristian power, It is a poor argument to draw
people from the ministry of the word, as if a man should refuse good and
wholesome meat, because the cook that dressed it was made cook by a Member of
Antichrist, or as if one should throw away the deeds of his land, because the
Clerk that writ them came into his Office by a corrupt Judge. They that should
do either, I should think it were rather out of malice to their persons then
any thing else, I desire it be not so in these objectors, but I would ask them
two or three questions.

Q. 1. First, whether have Ministers their principal calling from God or from
men?

Q. 2. Whether that corruption in their calling from men, can disanul their
calling from God?

Q. 3. Whether that corruption in those that gave them their outward calling,
can corrupt the word of God? If it can (as it cannot) why then were not Martin
Luthers Works rejected, but embraced, who had a far more corrupt calling then
our Ministers had. And why are those words in Numb. 23.21. The Lord sees no
iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel, why, I say, are these words so
embraced, by those that object against our Ministers, seeing they were spoken
by a false Prophet and Sorcerer, if the sin of the person could pollute the
word. Besides, I would have them show some rule from the Scriptures, that we
ought to refuse to hear such Ministers, because of some corruption in them, or
in their calling. I am sure Christ gave no such rule, neither by precept nor
example whom we ought to follow.

But this is a mere stratagem of the devil, to take people of from heating the
public Ministry of the word of God, that he may the better prevail to draw
them to errors and heresies, yea to Atheism. Therefore I beseech you brethren
and sisters in the Lord be not drawn away by these delusions from the public
and faithful Ministry of the Word, but reverence it, embrace, follow and
defend it to the utmost of your powers, as the only ordinary means which God
has ordained for the saving your souls, Romans 10.14. to 18. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Jam.
1.21. If any teach you otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words, even
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud knowing nothing, but doting about questions and
strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, etc. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. therefore
avoid such, and be not led by them, for as many as are the sons of God, they
are led by the spirit of God, therefore I say again, stand fast.

Mark what comfort and encouragement Christ gives to poor weak Christians
Rev. 3.8, 10, 11, 12. I know thy works, behold. I have se^ before thee an open
door (in the ministry of the word) which no man can shut (when they have done
all they can, they shall not shut this door) and mark what follows, for thou
have a little strength, and have kept my word, and have not denied my name,
ver. 10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I will also keep thee
from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world to try them
that dwell upon the earth (and I am persuaded this is that hour of trial,
therefore mark what follows, ver. 11, 12. Behold, I come quickly, hold that
fast thou have, let no man take thy Chown, (but if you let go your hold and
be drawn away, you lose your Crown, but if you stand fast with that little
strength thou have) mark, here is yet more comfort for thee, ver. 12. Him that
overcommeth will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out, and I will write upon him the name of my God, etc. mark this you
weak Christians, if you stand fast, your weakness shall not hinder your
happiness. Now the God of truth and peace, guide us in the truth, and in able
us to stand fast in the same, to the end. Amen.

FINIS.

