A TREATISE CONTAINING THREE THINGS. Viz. 1. A Discovery of the unsupportable
Burden of Sin, to a heart that is Saint like sensible of Sin. 2. The
restless Resolution of a Soul to return to God, who is Saint-like sensible
of his withdrawings. 3. A Discovery of the sweet and unexpected Entertainment
that wandering hearts meet with in their returns to God.


Written by Lieutenant Colonel PAVL HOBSON.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. Make me to
hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

Psalm. 51.4.8. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where no
water is.

Psalm. 61.3. Ephraim my dear Son, is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my Bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

Jer. 31.20. London, Printed by M. S. for Tho: Brewster, and are to be sold at
his shop at the three Bibles in Paul's Church yard, near the West End. 1653.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN READER; Unto whose hands these few lines of mine may come, that
which I beg of God, both for my self, and you (is) That we may both in writing
and reading, be made able to understand the Truth from an enjoyment of it
self. Light is never known till it is enjoyed. I am very sensible that my
appearing in public may occasion many strange reasonings in many men's minds,
if I had only hearkened to that, or to the reasoning of my own spirit, which
did strongly importune my silence, I should not a presented my Judgment, and
present condition to a Public view, but being by providence, after a large
travel and strong encounter with my own spirit, through the discoveries of my
own great mistakes, and also through the sense of the great unsutablenesse of
my own soul to God: I am cast into these parts, where there is not many more
Eyes then there is Censuring Spirits, condemning the practice of many with whom
I meet, to discover to each other the daily Experiences that we have of the
Fathers dealings with us, and what power we enjoy from Heaven, to make an
Improvement of those Mercies. We are by many, I say, Censured as men creeping
in private to divulge Untruths, and discovering things contrary to Faith in
Christ, and Holiness of Life and Conversation: And whatsoever miscarriages,
and unsuitable walkings was of any of us in former times, is brought as an
occasion to cloud our present practice, and to render us odious amongst men,
affirming that we dare not divulge that publicly, which we do privately
vent; which occasioneth a stumbling to many precious hearts, and Causes many
Scandals and Clouds to be Cast upon truth, by the gainsayers thereof. Upon
which Consideration, many Friends did desire me to present that in public
which I had delivered in private, which I have here done in the same form and
manner as it was there delivered, not being willing to add any fine spunne
Expressions or quaint distinctions, to Court any Man's fancy to mind it, but in
the plain downright and humble Expressions, as being most suitable to them to
whom I speak, and to the present Condition and frame of my own Spirit. God
having very much wounded my heart, as for doing things dishonorable to him,
(so) doing or saying any thing that may procure honor to me amongst men, that
does not punctually suite with the sincerity and simplicity of Truth:
Therefore I beg of the Christian Reader, that in Reading over these few Lines,
that you would seriously Read over all before you Conclude any thing to any:
And to mind and seriously weigh, as what is spoke, and by whom, so to whom:
And let not any thing that is really Truth, be disowned, because it is
accommodated with such poor and low Expressions, I am very much persuaded that
those hearts who have been brought home thorough a sense of their wanderings,
and long for nothing so much as the Enjoyment of Gods Love and Power to Live up
to it, may and will find something in this that may Refresh their poor
drooping Spirits in that Condition: It is to them Especially that I desire to
present These: And as for them I beg the same Refreshments thorough Reading, as
was the Cause of Speaking: And as for others who may Critically Carpe at the
Expression, or the party Expressing, I desire them to take notice that the
Father has made it a very small thing to me to be judged of Men, All I beg is
to have my heart kept up in daily Communion with God, And to have a Life
suitable to his Love, for the Enjoyment of which mercies, I desire of all that
really Live with God to mind me, as I desire to mind them in our
approachments to God, And that they would in Reading over these not suffer any
Infirmity they know of the Author to Cause them to aggravate, or Enlarge any
Infirmity in the Expressions of the matter, but that they would in Christian
Wisdom and Love Endeavor to Cover and Remove both.

And I further desire, that if any to whom these may come, who have wantonly
gone from God, and are at present unsencible of the great necessity of their
Returning to God, and of a Close walking with God, That they would Heartily
Read over these few Lines: It may please the Father thorough that which they
may look upon as folly to manifest Wisdom, And Darkness to manifest Light,
Such an Effect as this, is the Earnest prayer of him, that is

Christian Reader, Yours in that Life which Commands me to Love all, but to
serve none in a way contrary to that Life. P. H.

A DISCOVERY of the unsupportable Burden of sin to a heart that is
Saint-like sencible of Sin.
What sin is in a Saints sense.
BEloved, those sayings are most suitable that flow from seeing, and those
seeings are Saint-like when they flow from Enjoyments: And whatsoever is said
or seen and not upon that account, it may probably profit the hearer, but not
the speaker; God by a providence has cast me amongst you after a large
travel in a wilderness condition, wherein God has made me travish all my
former tracts and mistakes, in and under all Gods dealings with me, and my
Actings toward him, God was pleased to carry me thorough Strength and Weakness,
thorough good Reports, and bad Reports, to honor and dishonor. In which
Conditions I sometimes stood, and sometimes fell; sometimes my heart was raised
up with some high Ravishments, which I judged Experiences, and at other times
very low and in my self much lost. After all God has been pleased thorough a
sense of my own unkindnes to bring my heart upon its knees; and to lay me very
low before himself; but has again by a discovery of his own kindness and
love Refreshed me, and caused that which was made dumb to speak; now that
which is at this time most sencible in my heart to speak to you from what God
has spoke to me in my present Condition, is three things. The first is a
discovery of the unsupportable Burden of sin when discovered by the light of
Gods love. Secondly, The restles resolution of a Saint, when he is Saint-like
sencible of his withdrawing from God to turn to God. Thirdly, The gracious and
sweet Entertainment the soul finds with God, when that he is brought home. And
I shall declare it from three portions of Scripture. The first from Psalm the
38. and the 4th verse; the second from Psalm the 11 6th and the 7th verse; The
third from Luke the 15th and the 20th verse; but I shall begin with the first
at this opportunity.

Psalm the 38. and the 4th verse. For my Iniquities are gone over my head, as
a heavy Burden they are too heavy for me.


Dear friends, this Scripture I have formerly viewed, and have formerly spoke
something from it, but I am now constrained to declare what God has preached
to me; for he has been pleased, thorough a discovery of my unsutablenes, and
my unkindnes; by which he has not only broken my bones, but he has left no
soundnes in my flesh. I do not mean by flesh fleshly nature, but all the
fleshlines of my own Righteousness, by which formerly I refreshed my self with
the sparks of my own performance, and refreshed my self with the peace and
tranquillity I gathered from thence. But now, my wound is too large to be
healed with such a salve: but no more of that, but to the words, and in them
you may consider in general an affirmation, wherein you may first consider the
partic affirming, that is, David. Secondly, the affirmation it self, that is
twofold; first, That his iniquities are gone over his head: Secondly, They were
a heavy burden, too heavy for him. Thirdly, You may consider the time when
it was when God had showed him so much of his own nothingnes, that he had
nothing left to live upon besides free love. There was no rest in his Bones,
nor no soundnes in his flesh; by bones and flesh, we are not to understand it
naturally, but spiritually, and by flesh, we are to understand it in a double
sense, according to these Scriptures: Galatians the 5. and the 19 verse, Gal.
the 6. and the 12 verse, Philippians the 3. and the 3 and 4 verses.

Dear friends, we might observe a Conclusion from the party affirming the
affirmation it self, and the time when, and the manner how; but we shall draw
up all into one Conclusion, and that is this.

Doct. That sin to a Saint like sencible heart is an unsupportable Burden.
In the prosecution the Conclusion, observe these four things: First, the
proof of it by Scripture. Secondly, Consider what sin is. Thirdly, What a
Saint-like sencible heart is. Fourthly, The reasons why sin to a Saint-like
sencible heart is an unsupportable burden. First, The Scriptures to prove the
Conclusion are these; In the first place, view the Text which clearly Confirms
the Truth of the Conclusion: Further see Romans the 7 and the 24 verse; how
Paul cries out as a restles man under the sense of sin. You may further see,
Psalm. 51. the 1, 2, 3. and 4 verses; Jeremiah the 3. and the 25 verse:
Lamentations the 5. the 15, 16, 17 verses. All which do discover how
unsupportable the Burden of sin is to a heart that is Saint-like sencible of
sin.

Dear friends, we need not much proof to him that knows it, as I am
confident every heart that is acquainted with God, has sufficient Experience
of this to confirm it. The daily heart-breakings in that soul who is sencible
of his own unkindnes by reading Gods kindness does demonstrate it. But I shall
add no more but this; That heart which needs Confirmation of this truth
without himself, and has not a sufficient proof within himself, his
Condition is sad.

Secondly, let us Consider what sin is.

And in that Consideration we will Consider three things.

First, The nature of sin. Secondly, The Concomitants of sin. And, Thirdly,
The Effects.
First, What is sin: the Apostle tells you in the first Epistle of John the 3
Chap. and the 4 verse; That sin is the Transgression of the Law; had there
been no Law, there had been no sin. The variation from a Law is sin. To
speak out the nature of sin is almost as impossible as to speak out the
nature of God. For sin in all things is contrary to God. Whatsoever you can
say of Darkness, of Death, of Hell, and Devils, you may say of sin. Sin
comprehends all, and is one with either. John in the Revelations tells us of the
depth of Satan's Temptation, Revel. 2.24
which Temptation peradventure is but the limb of the least lust: Oh! what a
depth is there then in the whole body! Whatsoever happiness and glory is seen
in Light, the contrary is found in Darkness: whatsoever content and freedom you
find in love, and Light, the contrary misery and bondage you find in Death:
but the perfections of all these miseries is comprehended in sin as the body
of them both.

That heart which is most sencible of sin, is not able to speak out the
nature of sin. But I know that that heart which is Saint-like sencible of
sin, and does see sin to present himself as it does so ugly in his own
eyes, thinks sin can never be presented ugly enough, and especially because
they see that in sinning they do not only cross Law, but Love, they do not
only pierce paper, but the precious tenders of grace and love. Zech. 10. It is
endless and boundless to Anatomize the nature of that, where not so much as
nature dwells, but is inslaved by it.

Secondly, Consider the Concomitants of sin.

There are many, but I shall only present so many of them as it at present in
my own view.

First, Its that which draws a dark Cloud over a man's eyes, and hinders him
in his clear beholding of God. Though a Christian has never so glorious a
view of divine Light and Love that lives in God, if God suffers that heart to
be padling and meddling with sin and Darkness; Isa. 59.2. Psalm. 30.7. Cant.
5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and then the heart goes expecting to view God as before, though God be as he
was before, (an unalterable God) yet there is a thick mist drawn upon the eye,
that he is like a man in a mist, and knows not where he is, nor what he sees;
just like a man whose eyes are fixed upon the Sun, and there he beholds
glorious objects; than takes them off from that Sun, and looks upon the Earth;
and then goes to look up to the Sun again, his eyes dazell that he can see
neither; (Though it is true) It is not the glory that we view in God that
covers our eyes, but rather the thick mist that intercepts our view of that
unchangeable object. And therefore the Example of the Sun in an Eclipse is
more suitable; for the Sun at that time does not loose its glory in it self,
but to us, our eyes being Intercepted by an Earthly substance.

Dear friends, If there be any that thinks this Concomitants is not
unsupportable; I will then appeal to that heart who does not only love to
look, but lives by looking upon Gods everlasting Love. He will not only say
as the Philosopher did, who only delighted in viewing the Sun, who would
oftentimes say to them that Intercepted the beams of the Sun; You take that
from me, which you cannot give to me.

But they will say, O take away sin, which is not only that which intercepts
my view of that which is the comfort of my life, but it is Life it self. But I
shall say no more to this particular, but this; O happy is that heart which is
often with God, and whose eyes are fixed upon that glory.

Secondly, It takes off a man's edge off his earnest desires after God: the
comings in of Heaven is that which quickens, enlivens, Heb. 3.13. Heb. 12.1.
and sharpens the Eye of a man's affections after God. And the Trading with
sin is that which deads and dulls a man's Spirit in his progress toward God.
Romans 8.10.
If you ask me the reason, it is this: The Enjoyment of Heaven, is the Element
of a Saints life; And there is in sin a direct Antypathy. Take a fish out of
the water, at first he may be full of motion, but when he has moved a little
upon the Earth, the eye of his activitie is soon lost: And though a Foul that
can soar very high, yet if once it comes down to the Element of water, it
flies very heavily: It is just so with a heart who is made able to fly high
thorough the comings of Heaven; yet if once it paddles in the filthy poole of
sin, it becomes like Pharaohs Chariots, whose wheels are off. The sadness of
which Consequence I leave to that heart which God has made sencible what it is
to live in Divine Loves as his proper Element. And what it is by sin to be made
dull in his motions heaven-wards.

A third Concomitant.

Sin always brings horror and terror with it, not only as the Cause
producing it as an Effect, Isa. 57.2.
but as the handmaide, for it lives in the very nature of it. Sin brings
smiles in the hand, but frowns in the heart: Isa. 33.14.
honey in the mouth, but bitterness in the bowels; and though we do not see
it, and therefore we think it not a Concomitant (yet it is so.) Lightning is
seen before thunder, but they are both together; Its true, if men could hear
the thunder before they see the Lightning, it is possible they might avoyde it,
but there is a secret in nature preventing that: So there is as to the other a
great mystery in Divine pleasure. But I shall say no more as to this, but
remember when you see Lightning that Thunder will come, and that heart is
constrained to say it who sees both.

Fourthly, and lastly, It so far darkens the heart, that it makes the heart to
love that least which discovers sin most: O this is a sad Concomitant, but it
is so. Joh. 3.19, 20, 21.
Truly sometimes it is with a Saints heart as it is with a young Scholar that
has played the Truant, he is afraid to go to School, and ashamed to go home,
though he knows not how to live abroad: It is just so with a Saints heart, who
has dealt unkindly with God. And though he cannot live without God, yet sin
has so duld his spirit, and brought such a shame upon his heart, that that
which discovers God most, produces most sadness and shame. It is in this case as
it was with Adam, Genesis 3.8, 9, 10.
When God called he was unwilling to make answer; At last said, I was naked,
and therefore was ashamed. I need not mind that heart which lies under the
sense of his unsutablenes what the meaning of that is. He knows the frame of
his own heart, and the motion of his mind, while he was Trading with sin,
then he knows he loved that least which discovered truth most, and loved that
most which discovered sin least.

The third thing in order are the Effects of sin, and they are these:

It disframes the heart from either harkening to, Heb. 3.13. Mark. 6.52.
or pleading with God, nay it makes the heart incapable of performing any duty
savourly that he owes to God, his heart is as it were benumbd, and his language
lost. O what sweet Exchanges of language that does flow from that heart where
God lives, and sin dies: and how savourly does a Saint speak out God and
Heaven when he lives sencibly in that Light, but when there is any withdrawings
from his daily Communion with God and Heaven; come to a heart then, and you
will find him very unable, either to say, or do, especially when his Light is
Eclipsed by some trading in Darkness.

The Effects of sin is not so in all; for those men that are only
professors, and act duty in a bare form, and speak by art, they are not
capable of these alterations of the frames of the Spirit, in being framed and
unframed upon this account we are a speaking off, and all times are alike to
them, unless it be when nature is made drunk with sin, and so has lost his
ability and art to move in Religion, so as to cover vice with seeming virtue;
but I shall say no more to that.

The second Effect in sin.

It brings the heart not only to question his Interest in God, Matthew.
26.70.72.74.
but to question God in his truth: O this is a sad Effect, often seen, but
seldom sencibly seen. The nature of sin is to endeavor to cloud Light,
though it cannot conquer it: and if there be so much of the Dictates of Light
left in the heart, as to tell, it does not do well to deal so unkindly with
God. The Devil then begins to work, to make the soul question his propriety
in God, and so go from him; If that will not do, then to question God, and
truth, and by that to undervalue him: and as much as in us lies to shut out of
doors all dictates of Divine Light that does any way invite the heart to
return: O that heart which is in this Condition is much to be lamented; and I
fear there are too many in these times.

Thirdly, Mat. 5.6, 13.
Trading with sin places the heart in a Station and Condition wherein the
sweet Riches of Light and Love, runs not into. It is true, God dispensing
grace, makes sinners Saints, and so finds them in sin when he comes Ezekiel. 16.6.
: but for Saints to run out in the practice of sinners, Romans 5.8.
they go beside the Rivers and Streams in which God was pleased to refresh
and make fat their hearts. Though it is true, some of Gods people which run
wantonly from God, do for sometime Live in that wantonness, upon some of the
Relics of their former Enjoyments, so long as they will last, which is but a
little time; for then they must Live upon husks wish the Swine, Luke 15.15 16,
17.
till they are brought to Return to their Fathers house: O that all who have
wantonly strayed in their hearts from their Fathers Streams, wherein they were
Refreshed, as with marrow and fatness, would now consider where they are, and
that so long as they sit down in the practice of sin, they Live not near
the Enjoyments of Saints.

Fourthly, Sin brings shame upon the soul, and most when the heart is
nearest God. A Converted sinner is brought home to God with much shame, seeing
himself look so unlike God when he is brought before him. But a revolted Saint
when recovered has much more Cause of shame. Jer. the 3 Chap. and the 24 and
the 25 verses, for God has more ground of lashing and wounding such a heart;
for he can tell them not only of lying in their blood in the day of their
nativitie, but of their destroying and spoiling the Earerings and Jewels he
bestowed upon them: As you may see in the 16 of Ezekiel, beginning at the 10th
verse, and so to the end of the Chapter. It is impossible to express how much
the heart of a Saint blushes, and what shame covers the Spirit of a soul that
has gone astray from God, when it is brought again to look upon the old wonted
loves, and to mind again his happiness in Gods heart. He is then like the
Publican, Luke 18.13
dares not look up to Heaven; or like the Prodigal, Luke 15.19
who desires to be but a servant. Let me speak but this one word or two to
them who have wantonly gone from God, and now delight in sin.

Did you know what shame will accompany your Spirit, if ever God brings you
home, it would much imbitter that seeming sweetness you gather from sin. There
are many Effects of sin, but I shall reduce them I mean to speak of to
these two heads.

First, Sin is injurious to God. Secondly, It is injurious to a Man.
First to God, Job 22.2, 3.
but in that consider this Caution, God as God, can neither be injured by us,
nor receive any addition of good from us: but when we speak of Injuries, we
are to look upon God in his administrations or appearances toward us, and so
God may be said to be Injured, 1 Samuel 2.30
and to be honored or dishonored, and in that sense the Injury to God consists
in these things.

First, It clouds his glory amongst men, especially the sin of Saints: The
Light, Romans 2 23, 24.
Life, and Love of God in Saints are beams of that divine body, they are
sparks of that fire which purely lives in God: and when this Light and Love
appears in a Saints life, they are said to glorify God, and to cause men that
view them to see their good works, and to give glory to God, Mat. the 5.16.
But when the lives of the people of God are full of darkness and sin, they do
exceedingly Cloud the beams of Gods beauty (as to men) Like the Clouds in the
Air which cover the Earth from beholding the Beauty of the Sun.

Secondly, It denies the Authority of God, for a man that is a member of a
Commonwealth not to conform to the Laws, does deny the Authority there: and
so those souls that acknowledge themselves related to God, and yet in their
lives do practice things contrary to God; they Tit. 1.16. Jude 4.
do deny his Authority.

Thirdly, Sin does as much as in it lies bind Jer. 5.25.
and hinder the goings out of God in his Love to do us good: as you may see
Isaiah the 59.2, 3. It is true, when God will arise in his Majesty in glory,
sin is drove out before him, and expelled by him, and no sin Isa. 1.4.
can hinder him: but sin tends and does what in it lies to oppose the goings
out of Divine Love, and in that sense he is said to be hindered.

Fourthly, It brings blackness upon that beauty which God delights to view, God
loves a soul so as to beautify him with the beauty of Ezekiel. 16.14.
himself, and then he delights to view Cant. 2.14.
that beauty: but so far as any of the people of God do trade in, or meddle
with sin or darkness, so far they draw a dark Cloud over, and throw dirt in the
face of this beauty. As for the Injuries that sin does to the people of God, it
may be reduced into three heads.

First, It is Injurious to him as he is a Christian. Secondly, As he is a
Member of the State. Thirdly, As he is a Master of a family.
First, The Injuries that sin does to the people of God as they are
Christians, I have already spoken of, and therefore shall say no more, but
only speak a word or two from the two Latter.

Secondly, Sin is Injurious to a man as he is a member of the State, that's
clearly demonstrated in many men's practices. What is that weakens the heart and
ties up the hands of many men in Authority from suppressing of sin, but the
guilt of sin in their own Romans 2.22, 23.
Consciences; how is it possible for any man in any office to be zealously
carried out in suppressing of unrighteousness, when they themselves are
unrighteous? Can a drunkard punish drunkenness, or a swearer, punish swearers,
or an oppressor, punish oppressors? but as they are constrained to it, either
by an overruling hand of providence, going beyond them, while it makes use of
them: or else the necessity in their Employments constrain them to it. But
such doing is done very coldly, with a faint heart, and a weak hand, vice
rather finding out their Authority, then their Authority finding cut vice:
but such Actions are not honorable to the Actors in Gods sense, though the
Action may advance them among men.

It is true, Providence sometimes puts on 2 King. 10 8, 9, 10.1.14. Isa. 10.5,
6, 7.
guilty men to suppress and subdue guilty persons, and unrighteous things: but
then providence does it in going beyond them: As has not Experience proved
that many men have done that which when it was done, it appeared in their own
eyes, and others, to be very righteous: yet it was so far beyond them that they
themselves had been Instruments to occasion the taking away of the lives of
many honest hearts for the standing for the same things but the year before.
If you ask me the reason why sin hinders men in suppressing sin, my answer
is this:

First, Because it takes away much of the face of Authority in the party
punished, by his knowing the party punishing to be guilty of the same thing.

Secondly, It does weaken the spirits of a man when he lies under the guilt of
that which he is punished for, all his prosecuting does but pierce into his
own spirit, and all his stirring does but rouse up guilt in his own heart,
and all his rubbing, does but rub upon his own soar, which does much kill,
disturb, and disquiet his own spirit, which causes many men in Authority
when they are a punishing, to wish they had not known it; and they are apt to
curtayle and lessen it, if not cover it: And all this is occasioned as a fruit
of sin, from which we may observe thus much:

That none are like to be good Commonwealths men, but they that are godly and
honest men; for them that have a chief Authority in the State, or in
Counties, or Parishes, can never suppress vice virtuously, if themselves are
strangers to virtue, and practisers of vice. In the close of this, remember but
this Scripture, Prove. the 28. and the first verse; The wicked flies when no man
pursues, but the righteous is as bold as a Lion.

Thirdly, It is Injurious to a man as he is a Master of a family; and that
thus; It binds him up in Exhorting his family, to walk holily, when he knows
that his family knows that he himself walks unholily; or can he reprove vice,
when he himself is vicious? No, he cannot do it; If it be, it is very cold,
poor, and empty. The guilt in their own hearts, produced by their unsaint
like carriage, does exceedingly straiten their hearts, and tie their hands, not
only to themselves, as reproving and correcting, but also to their family
reproved and corrected; for at the very best, their family, who are sencible
of their evils will judge it as the Devil correcting sin. Therefore in the
close of this, let all that desire to be profitable in their families, in
suppressing evil, and encouraging good. Let them first show it in their 1 Timothy
6.2. Mat. 7.5.
practice, before they first show it in their power. But I shall say no more as
to the Effects of sin, though there be many more; but I shall come to the
reasons, why sin to a Saint-like sencible heart is an Insupportable Burden,
and the Reasons are these:

A Saint sees that sin has brought him into a Condition so bad, and so low,
that himself with all the world cannot recover him. Act. 2.37 Act. 16.30. Job
7.20.
If a Christian had any crevis to behold help besides Christ, he would have
some way to uphold his heart, and enable him to bear his burden without going
to Christ, but sin is so large, and so broad, and so full of weight, that it
sincks all things under on this side of Heaven, which go to bear it: (And
this a Saint sees) and therefore sin to his heart is an unsupportable burden.

Secondly, Sin takes away the ground of patience, and therefore unbearable, and
that it does; why? because though there are promises to bear all oppressions,
yet no promises to bear the practice of sin. Therefore my former thus:

That Condition which is without promise is unbearable; but the practice of
sin, as the practice of sin, is without promise (Ergo) Gal. 3.29


The third Reason which makes sin so unreasonable, and so unsupportable to a
Saint-like sencible heart, is because he sees that sin is not only a Romans 7.11.
lie in speaking that which it will nor cannot do, but whatsoever is contrary
to sins promise, is brought upon him. Contradiction in Expectation works
distraction, but no where so unsupportable as the business of sin, for there is
no contradiction like that: It expects joy, but beholds sorrow; it promised
Light and Life, but behold Darkness and Romans 6.23. March. 24.50, 51.
Death.

Fourthly, That which makes sin so unsupportable to a Saints heart is this,
though it be the last, it is not the least, It is this;

That Light and Love which discovers a man's sins to him, and by it his Lost
Condition, it does sweetly make up his Losses, by supplies from it self, that
makes the soul in seeing sin, to see that it has not only sinned against
Law, but against that Light and Love which discovers and Zech. 12.10. Luk 15.21
Isal. 51.4.
supplits: And for a heart to see that he cannot lie safely no where but in the
Fathers Love, and for him to Reflect upon himself, and see how much not only
below, but contrary to that Love he has lived in: Oh! how much does this
break the heart, and wound the spirit: I leave to that Soul that after all
his own unkindnesse has now all his Refreshments from the sweet Incomes of
the Fathers loving kindness, he cannot choose but there see to the
continuation of the Fathers nature as he is the Father: yet the want of his
own as he is a Child, and he cannot but see how much he endeavored to kill
that by which he now lives: it is impossible to declare how much the Reflection
of this Love does kill and Crucify a Saints Spirit. The knowledge of which
does make sin to be unsupportable: but no more of the Reasons, but a word or
two of use.

The first Use

Is an use of Information, to Inform us of the miserable Condition of those
who make light of sin, If sin be so unsupportable to one that is made alive,
sure these people must needs be dead.

But some will object and say, They bless God they see sin, and they conceive
sin is cast out, and subdued in them. In this there may be a very great
mistake, for men may see sin, and yet not Saint-like sencible of sin. And in
some the Devil is said to go out, when he is not Cast out; according to that
Scripture, Matthew. the 12.43, 44, 45. But know this, sin be only gone out, and
not conquered, it will Return again, according to the same Scripture, and if
you see sin, and not Saint-like, you may see it and be sencible, and yet
nothing. As Pharaoh, Cain, and Judas, etc. And therefore for fear of mistakes,
I shall propound two questions, and give my Answer to them, according to what
Experience I have found in the like Case.

The first question is, What the difference betwixt a Saint-like sense of sin,
and the sense of sin a man may have, and be nothing.

Secondly, What are the demonstrations to discover that sin is not only gone
out, but cast out?

To the first.

The difference betwixt a Saint-like sense, and a bare seeing; lies in these
things.

First, Where it is really Saint-like, it is always sencible of that most,
which is by men seen least: Romans 7.24 Psalm. 51.^0 Jer. 17.9.
I mean the emptiness, barrenness, baseness, and unsutablenesse of its own
heart. But others who are Judas-like, are sencible of that which men see most:
If they are but conformable to what is without, they are never troubled for
what is within: but he that is made sencible of sin by the comings in of grace,
he is so sencible, if God should cut off all dead branches without, yet that
will not satisfy him so long as there is an old Coare within, but he will cry
out as Paul; O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
sin.

The people of God know that Actions without are but branches (though they
oppose that) yet they mind the body most which is the unclean fountain
within, and therefore you shall always find them crying out of an unsuitable
heart, quite contrary to others practice, who will sometime complain of such
unsuitable and sinful acts: but at that time they will say, they have a good
heart, and a good desire, (alas, can the streams be foul, and the fountain
clear, that's impossible.)

Secondly, A Saint-like sencible heart when it is most sencible of pardon, its
most earnest for power, quite contrary to the other: which never cries for
power, but when it is sencible of a want of pardon: and if any thing comes in
the Imagination to prompt fancy, so as to cause any conceit that it enjoyes
pardon; it is then not more but less earnest for power, and so their
apprehensions of Liberty, does immediately beget Looseness. But that heart
which is Saint-like sencible of sin, the more God discovers pardon, the more
they are earnest for power, for all the discoveries of Gods love to such a
heart binds up the heart more in Gods love, and the sense of his kindness
produces double indearments of their hearts to God.

Thirdly, A Saint-like sencible heart is always as thankful to God for power
as he is for pardon: Romans 7.25. 1 Cor. 15.56, 57.
nay I dare say, that that heart which ever was really wounded thorough the
discoveries of his own darkness by the comings in of Gods Light, thinks it
self so much bound to heaven for any sin as well as pardon, that when he does
enjoy any power, he is with as much Light and Love carried out, to bless God
for that mercy as he is for pardon: quite contrary are other hearts, who see
sin, but not Saint-like, they have some carryings out sometimes, to acknowledge
mercy in pardoning sin, but at that time they are cold in begging power: nay,
if they could see into their own hearts, they would see that they had a heart
that would think it a mercy to Enjoy pardon of sin, and with it Liberty to
sin, not less but more.

Fourthly, Those hearts which sees sin Saint-like, their sorrow for sin does
very much swallow up the sense of danger: but others that are only sencible of
sin by the Convictions of a Law, without the Comings in of his Love, they
through the sense of danger are so swallowed up in horror, that there is hardly
any room for a godly, or a Gospel sorrow. Dear friends, if God would give us
hearts to mind our hearts in this thing, we should see very great mistakes in
Relation to this godly or Gospel sorrow; but I shall leave that, knowing all
souls that live with God see the difference of that in their own spirits: And
to make others see before God gives them Eyes, it is impossible.

Fifthly, A Saints sense of sin makes him run not less but more to God: The
other man's sense of sin makes him run not less but more from God: The one runs
like the Luke 15.19, 20.
Prodigal Son to his Fathers house, or rather his Fathers heart: The other
is far from it, but it rather causes him like Mat. 27.5.
Judas to run to the place of Execution: Truly in this there is a very strange
Paradox: that Light and Love which comes into a Saints heart, does not only
discover sin, but produce much shame upon the heart, upon the sense of sin, and
most when it draws nearest God: yet the soul cannot choose but run to God, and
is never well but when it is nearest God.

Sixthly, A saint-like sense of sin is always so strict upon his watch, to
prevent sin, that he fears the appearances of sin as well as the power; but
another heart is not so, but no more of this, but to the second question, to
demonstrate the difference betwixt sins going out, and sins being cast out.

First, If sin be cast out it always leaves an awful fear and care behind
it: but if it only went out, it leaves a man very secure, as you may see by
the Text, Matt. the 12th. and the 45. verse.

Secondly, That heart which Christ has conquered in, and cast out sin for, when
it is sensible, it is (not less but) more humble, and it must needs be so, for
that Light, and Life that did conquer sin, and does discover sin, does discover
to the heart its unsufficiency, as before to subdue sin, now again to keep
under sin, that the soul cannot choose in that sense but lie very low: But its
otherwise with that heart where sin only went out. They think highly of
themselves, and are apt to sacrifice to their own nets, or like the Pharisee,
Luke the 18.11. I thank thee that I am not as this Publican, but alas, it is
not so with a heart that is sencible of sin by the commings in of Christ, he
judges himself the worst of Creatures: Psalm. 22.6. Ephesians. 3.8.


Thirdly, If sin be cast out, the Light and power that cast it out teaches that
soul to lean more upon Gods power, and to go less upon his own Legs, but it
is not so with the other.

Fourthly, That heart which sin is cast out of, and does not go out, is so
sencible of what is done for it: that it does not only lie low before God, and
fear the appearances of sinning against God, but it is much carried to bless
and give glory to God: Romans 7.25. 1 Cor. 15.57.
But where sin only went out, that man is not wounded thorough the sense of
his own sin and weakness, so as to give glory to God, for any victory over
sin, but rather mind his own Industry and strength, and attributes much to his
own care, but little to Gods kindness.

But I shall say no more in answer to those questions, but another word or two
of some other uses, and so conclude.

The second use is an use of advise to the people of God, by any means to
beware of sin; I might use many Arguments, but I desire you to mind what I
have said before, and do not only consider, how unsupportable a burden it
will be, and how much it will wound you, when the Lord causes you to return;
but consider withal these things following.

First, Consider the nature of sin, how low, base, and unworthy a thing it is:
you shall never see what it says, unless it be in the last pangs, when God
makes it speak out its own nature, and that is death and darkness. Romans 6.21.
Mat. 24.50, 51.


Secondly, Consider how much it is below a Saints Hos. 14.8.
spirit, nay, the truth is, if you consider sin well as Sin, it is below the
Reason of a natural man: it is so poor, base and Ignoble, that Reason in a
natural man, were his eyes but open in his own Reason, he would kick it out of
doors: It is a mere Jesuiticall Tyrant, speaking fair to accomplish its own
ends, and by it to bring the Creature to slavery and bondage. The truth is, if
the people of Gods heart were often with God, and fed upon those glorious,
noble and divine enjoyments: Sin would not find so easy an entertainment in
their hearts, but they being so often abroad, and so little at home, I mean in
their fathers house, or rather in his heart, is that which occasions many slips
and falls, by harkning to those deluding Intisements, which afterward will
appear to be an unsupportable burden.

Thirdly, Consider most of all against whom you sin; It is not only against
Law, but against Love, and against that dear Love which is your life: Truly,
if the people of God had always power from God, to consider how injurious and
unkind they are to Gods heart, when they shake sin by the hand, they would
have much more Resolution against sin, and say as Ephraim, What have I to do
any more with Idols? Hosea the 14. chap. and the 8. verse. or say as Joseph,
Genesis the 39. and the 9. How can I do this and sin against God, or as the
Apostle says, Roman the 6. the 1, and 2. I know it is not in the Creatures
power to mind it self, but I am sure when God gives power, it is a great
advantage to us and disadvantage to sin, to weigh well the great opposition sin
makes against the Comings in of Divine Loves, nay, how much it wounds the Lord
Christ afresh: Some think that the worst that even sin did was to bring Christ
upon the Cross: but I must tell you, though that was great, yet know also that
every time the people of God sin, Heb. 6.6. Heb. 10.29.
they do as it were crucify Christ afresh, for Christ is as really crucified
within us, as he was upon the Cross for us: and therefore every time you sin,
know this, that in your own soul, you accuse, you arraigne, condemn, crown
with thorns, spit in the face, and smite with the hand, nay, pearce and wound
that dearly beloved unction, that is come down from God, and truly had we but
power to consider, that indeared Love and Life that from God speaks to us, nay,
that woes and entreats for Entertainment with us, not to add to it self, but
to advance us, undoubtedly such thoughts would much conquer us, and sin in us.

There are many other motives, but I shall leave them, only take notice, it is
dangerous to be a Dydimus, not to believe till you feel: Take notice of this
from what my soul knows, that sense will be very sad, and the rather, because
there is no Relief when you are wounded, but in that you have wounded, by that
which wounded you; oh! what will you say when you come for Relief from that
dear heart: and to draw life from those sweet Loves, that you did no less
then throw dirt in the face of; oh! if there be any of the people of God, who
are so far deluded as under the notion of Liberty, are run into loosnesse:
oh! I beg, nay I would beg with tears for them, to consider from whence they
are fallen, and to remember their first Love, Revela. 2.4, 5. It is possible
some may be made so unsensible by their wanton sinning, as that they may make a
jest of these sayings: As for such spirits I shall leave them, desiring to see
my self in them, and so rather conclude with mourning, then to spend time in
dispute with all the objections that such may bring, and shall only give
answer to two or three objections, which are more common and accustomary, yet
like deceiving.

Object. How can this be, when as the Apostle Saint John in the first Epistle
3.9. says, he that is borne of God cannot sin?

Answ. In my answer to this, I shall not trouble you, in rehearsing how often
the Devil has presented we with this Scripture, to persuade me that the
people of God cannot sin, but my answer to this Scripture is briefly thus.

The same Apostle in the same Epistle, chap. 1.8. verse, says, that whosoever
says he has no sin is liar and deceives himself; Therefore he does not
intend but that the people of God, may and do sin, but it is true that in them
which are borne of God; in them I mean that Saintship or unction, or
anointing, or spirit of life which comes from God, and is one with God: that
does not nor cannot sin: it is true, it cannot sin, because it is borne of God.
We may as well say, we can turn Heaven into Hell, and turn light into
darkness, as to turn that into sin (or that to sin) no, dear hearts, that is
of another nature, that is Gods little one: that is placed in us to justify
Wisdom, Mat. 11.19.
and to condemn folly: and to breath out Love and Light in opposition to
darkness, and it is so far from being capable of joining with sin, that its
proper work is to arraigne, accuse, and condemn the old man, which was in
Paul, though he was a child of God, Romans 7.20, 21, 22, 23 verses. Now this
unction, 1 John 2.20, 21.
or this thing borne of God gives us the denomination of being the children of
God; but though it is the power of God in us to kill sin, by the nature of it
self; yet it never did nor will turn sin into grace: nor yet manifest so much
in this life as to fill Saints with grace, and free them from all sin, but they
must have some Canaanites and Hittites in their hearts. 2 Cor. 12.7.


Now the people of God is a general term, and envolves the whole person
either men, or women in a Scripture-sence; but that general does include at a
new, so an old Man, and both in one subject; Romans 7.21, 22, 23.
The one to be pulled down, and the other to be exalted; one to dye, and the
other to live (for it is Life) now when the Apostle says, that which is borne
of God, cannot sin, he intends that principal of Life which lives in us, and
does not include the whole man: and when he says, he has no sin, he deceives
himself and is a liar: he intends the old rotten Man in our form, which is in
us, and as to our fleshly part is one with us.

Object. Where there is no Law there can be no sin, but the people of God are
by Christ freed from the Law, and if freed from it, then there is to them no
Law, if no Law, then no sin.

Answ. That Christ has freed believers from the Law, the Scripture is clear:
but that Christ which has freed us from a Law, has given a Law to us, which
he calls a new John 13.34. 1 John 2.8.
Commandment: but as the Law was in the hand of Moses a condemning and a
killing Law: so Christ has freed us from it, and as it was merely considered
without us, and not wrought in the administration of the Law, in that sense we
are free from it: Romans 18.4, 5.
yet take notice that we are under that Law, that does engage a close walking
with God, and though God has been pleased to write that Law within us, yet
know it is suitable to that Law which is without us: I must confess in some
sense, it is improper to say a child of God as a child of God, a Christian as
a Christian, to be under the Law; and why? because the Saintship of a Saint, or
that in us which makes us, or gives us the denomination of Christians, or Gods
child is made up of the Law, and is Law it self, and is no further under the
Law, then a Law is capable to be under it self. That holiness, purity,
spirituality, that the Law Heb. 8.10.
without us presented to us, is now wrought in us, and so the power commanding,
is the power Conforming. Now whether this be any ground for Looseness, I leave
to any soul to judge, or whether this be not much more binding, and admits of
no Liberty to a loose walking, but engages much Romans 7.6.
more.

Object. If the Law be within us, what need we mind any thing that is without
us?

Answ. 1. The Law within us is not contrary to the Law without us, as I told
you before, if you look upon it in a gospell-sence, that's to say in the hand
of Christ (for the heart and hand is both one) and any Laws relating to
Religion in another sense, we are not to mind as being bound to it.

Secondly, But the Law in a Gospell-sence, souls that lie in the life of that
Law cannot choose but love it, as a glass to look upon that which by its Light
appears lovely; I mean holiness and Righteousness, which is one with the
delight of God.

Thirdly, I shall give no further answer to this last objection, but only
thus, to tell you from what experience I have formerly found, that it is a
great sign of a heart that's sick, when it endeavors to draw tolerations for
Looseness, from a discourse relating to a Saints Liberty. Dear hearts, let me
conclude with this, that that soul which is really acquainted with his Liberty
from Divine Love, is so swallowed up, and so conquered by it, that its never in
its proper course, but when it lives up to that Love. And his being unbound to
the Law, in that sense which before I expressed, does not admit of acting
loosely, See Romans 6.1, 2.
but acting Lively, as you may see: Gallat. the 2. and the 19. verse, I
thorough the Law, says Paul, am dead to the Law, that I may live to God: so
his freedom was not the cause of his dying to God, but living to God: but no
more of this use. The next use is an use of comfort to the people of God, who
groan under the burden of sin.

If sin to a Saint-like sencible heart be an unsupportable burden, then it
is a discovery of a Saint like sencible heart, when sin is thus a burden to
it: Dear hearts, though it be sad to lie under the sense of sin, yet it is ten
thousand times sadder to sin, and not be sencible.

Truly though the heart be wounded, yet those stripes God will heal, Mat.
11.28. Matthew. 5.3, 4.
and they are but dear lashes of his Love, in bringing out the soul into a
further enjoyment of Life, and if any souls have cause to rejoice, it is them
that mourn, and for your comfort consider these things.

First, God is more ready in Christ to take off the burden, then to lay it on,
see the Prodigal, Luke the 15. and the 20. When the Prodigal did but come,
the Father ran and gave him ease, before he discovered his burden: truly did
groaning hearts know, how much the Jer. 31.20. Isa. 63.15.
Bowels of God earnes toward them, and how freely Christ is held out to them,
and how sweetly God in promises runs out for them with freeness, to give out
himself to them: It would much refresh them: does Christ come to save? it is
not the Righteous Mar. 9.13. Luke 19.10.
but sinners, Does God justify? then it is the ungodly, Romans the 4.5. Does the
Father make a Feast? It was for the return of a poor Prodigal; Does the
Heavens rejoice? it is for the return of the lost sheep. Truly the people of
God never mourn as sinners, but then God rejoices over them as Saints.

Secondly, Consider not only the readiness of God to take off the burden,
but the freeness of Christ to bear Isa. 63.3.2 Cor. 5.21. Phil. 2.5, 6, 7.
it: As upon the Cross, where he willingly submitted to the lash of the Law,
and the frowns of Heaven for the sins of poor undone Creatures: so he does
also call upon poor hearts oppressed under the burden of sin, to exercise faith
in entertaining his tenders: to ease their burdens, and to give them rest:
Matt. the 11. and the 28.

Thirdly, Consider that thy condition is not alone, all that God will crown he
thus crosses, and all he makes to live, he thus crucifies, and all he heals, he
thus wounds; Isa. 40.4, 5. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3.
and therefore when thou art most under the burden of sin think of David,
not only in this text, but in the 51 Psalm, and in many other places, where
he cries out as a man undone, so did Paul, Romans the 7. so did Jeremiah, so did
Esaias, saying, Woe is me, for I am undone, being a man of unclean lips, Esaias
the 5. and the 6.

Fourthly, Consider it is Gods way, not only by Light to discover darkness,
but by discovering Darkness and Death bring thee to Light and Life; Therefore
under the Cloud look to the Conclusion, and behold Light: for though there be
darkness in the habitations of Egypt, there is Light in the dwellings of
Exodus 10.22, 23. Micah 7.8.
Israel; my meaning is, though there be trouble and darkness in thy Egyptian
heart, yet there is enough Love and Light in the bosom of Jesus, which is the
place of rest for the Israelites of God to dwell in.

Fifthly, Consider, That though God in thy eyes seems to frown, yet know that
they are but the beginnings of his smiles. And though in thy eyes he has
seemed to withdraw himself, yet know it is but for a moment, and he will meet
thy heart with everlasting kindness, Isaiah the 54. and the 8 verse.

Object. But alas my trouble has been very long, and therefore I fear it is
not that burden which God is so ready to remove, which makes me think my
heart is not Saint-like sencible.

Answ. To which I shall answer thus; That it may seem long in our eyes, yet if
it be Gods time it is not long, Isa. 54.8.

Secondly, Consider that though we have stayed long waiting for Heaven: Heaven
has stayed longer waiting for us Can. 5.2. Isa. 30.18.
.

Thirdly, Know that it shall not abide one hour or moment longer then to
accomplish Gods 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Cor. 4, 17
end: and though it seems a loss, that loss will be a great gain.

Fourthly, Though thou have stayed long, thou art not alone. David groaned so
long till his bones were broken, and there was no soundness left in his flesh:
so when God has destroyed thy strength, and thy self Righteousness, which
Paul calls flesh, Philip. the 3. He will then come and not tarry.

Object. But alas I cannot think it is with others as with me, for my sins
are not only sins before Conversion, but I have often withdrawn from God
since.

Answ. Was not the Prodigal Sons Condition so? was it not so with David,
which I desire you to Consider, and other two or three Scriptures, which God
was pleased to speak much Comfort to my heart by: As Jeremiah the 3. and the
1. and so on; God says in the first verse thus much; That if a man's Wife be
put away for Adultery, he will never return; But, says he, you have played
the harlot, not with a few, but many, yet Return unto me: and gives them this
Argument afterward; For I am married to you; and again and again three or
four times, he says, Return unto me, for I am thy God. And these Entreaties
were expressed to a people that were fallen from God: and he speaks to them
before they Return, that they may return. If there were such heart-earnings
after them before they returned, what dear affection was and is expressed, when
a soul does Return. Dear friends, at your leisure Read over the 26 of
Ezekiel, the beginning of the Chapter discovers Gods great Love to them when
they were in their blood: and how he brought them home and beautified them with
his own beauty, that was a time of Love. In the middle of the Chapter, he
discovers how his people had run from him, and given their Jewels unto
harlots, and gone a whoring from God, not only once but again and again. Now
in the latter part of the Chapter, verse the 59. he declares that he might do
by them as they had done by him; yet in the 60 verse, he tells them he will
not, but he will Remember his Covenant, and know further for thy Comfort that
he speaks this not to a people that were ashamed, but to a people that had
dealt unkindly, and sinned, that so they might be ashamed. So then if God has
discovered thy sin, and made thee ashamed, (know) that he is not less carried
out in kindness to embrace thy heart, though peradventure at present thou see
it not; according to that in the 11th of Hosea and the first verse.

Object. But that which sads my heart is, the longer I live, and the more Light
I enjoy, I yet still see not less, but more deadness, darkness, and
baseness in my own heart.

Answ. In my answer to this objection, Consider these things.

First, Think it not strange, for this is a truth, that all Saints find by
Experience, that the more they enjoy discoveries of Light from God, the more
unkindnesse and darkness they see in themselves, Job 42.5, 6. Isa. 6.5.
and it must needs be so. The darker the room, the lesser the filth is
discovered; The brighter the Sun, the more prospectious the motes, and where
the beams of the Sun give out themselves, as the flowers give out their
sweet smells; so the dunghill gives out his noisome smell: so the more the
Sun of Righteousness does arise in us, though the graces in us flowing from
him, do give out their sweet odours in their ready giving way to him; so the
noisome appearances, and the ugly shapes of the old man do appear the more;
as Paul tells you, Romans the 7th and the 9th, That when the Law of the Spirit,
or the Law of grace came, sin revived, and he dyed: Nay it so Revived, that is
to say, it was not only discovered, but also Rose up in opposition against the
comings in of grace, that Paul at last had little else to glory in, but his
Infirmities, Cor. the 1. and the 12, the 9 and the 10th. Sin is like a stream,
the more it is bunged up, the more it will roar. Therefore, dear friends,
think it not strange, but rather with satifaction sit silent in the will of
God, knowing it to be Gods way as with one hand to Lift up thy heart thorough a
discovery of kindness, so to lay thee low by the discovery of thy
unsutablenesse: and he will never leave thee till he has discovered all the
rotten Rooms in thy own Spirit, and the longer you live you will not see
less but more, for there is still more to be seen.

Secondly, Knowing it is the Devil and sins way to work, not only to
Endeavor to go on in its old Course in a gracious heart, but being opposed by
the Spirit of God, it makes still new oppositions; and does manifest it self
with more varieties of motion in opposing Light, then it does in that heart
where nothing but darkness dwells, for there is nothing to oppose it. Now when
the people of God see such fresh motions of Darkness to oppose Light, they
presently judge their Condition worse then it was before: But they have great
cause to Rejoice, who are sencible of these things; and for your Comfort take
notice, That all Saints find not only by comings in of Light, a greater
discovery of sin, but there is really new motions of the old Man, in
opposition to the new, which never was before; and in that sense Paul says,
Sin revived, as well as in his seeing sin more.

Thirdly, In the last place Consider a Cunning practice that the Devil has,
not only in making Christians question grace, because they see themselves want
grace, but in persuading them that all motions to sin, is sin, and for that
End sometimes in half a quarter of an hour, he will cast in a thousand
several motions of sin, and though the heart does not Entertain them, but
lies groaning, as being afraid of them, yet the Devil immediately will come
with applications to that heart; telling him that it is impossible he should
have any thing of Heaven in his heart, having such unheard of sins there, and
sins not to be reported; The poor soul thorough Ignorance groans under
this burden, concluding all is truth: And so is apt to exclude all Interest in
Heaven upon that account. But dear hearts, take heed of such delusions; and
do but mind it, and you will see many such appearances every day. But I shall
say no more as to the answer of that objection.

Object. But my Condition must needs be sad, and much unlike a Saint, for I
have not power to exercise Faith in drawing any Refreshment from Christ, or
Comfort in applying any promise.

Answ. Thy Condition is not alone, it is and has been the Condition of many
Saints; but yet in answer to this, Beloved friends, I would have you Consider
these things.

First, Though it is our duty, and with it our Refreshments to lay hold upon,
and to make applications of Jesus Christ: yet our happiness lies more in
Christ's laying hold of us: Joh. 15.16 Jud. 24.
1 John 4.10.

Secondly, It is Gods way many times to leave his people without the sensitive
part of their Comfort: and though they do believe, and do know, and do see,
yet they are many times left without power to be sencible they Hos. 11.3 1 John
5.13
see, that so in the Close they may be brought off from Living upon their own
knowing, and seeing God: and made to Live upon Gods knowing and seeing them.

Thirdly, Many times the people of God are hindered in applying Christ and
promises, because they look upon them thorough a wrong glass (viz.) thorough
their own Righteousness and goodness, and when that seems dead, their eyes
grow dim, for there is so much penurious proceedings in the best of Saints,
that they will not, nor dare not touch a promise without holy hands and holy
hearts. Whereas we are not to believe, because we are holy, but we are to
believe being unholy, that we may be holy.

I now remember what Mr Hocker said in the same case concerning the hinderance
that Christians meet with in applying promises. It is with them, said he, as
with a man that goes to take a staff in his hand, if he puts the back of his
hand to the staff, he cannot hold it till he puts it in the palm of his hand:
so it is with the people of God; when they go to a promise, they go to lay
hold on it with the back side of the hand of faith, and that they do these
ways.

First, When they look upon themselves, as they are in themselves, and not
look upon themselves as they are in Christ. In themselves they are altogether
unworthy: In Christ they are worthy; In themselves they are black, in Christ
they Can. 1.8. Ephesians. 5.27.
are comely.

Secondly, So they also do when they endeavor to go to Christ thorough a
promise, and not to a promise thorough Christ, wherein they move by their own
strength, and that is their backside, and not by the power of Christ, which is
properly the hand to Lead them to the heart of all promises: He is the sum of
every promise, and all promises are summed up in him: In him we enjoy every
one, and without him we enjoy never a one. If you would know what a promise is,
I shall discover my thoughts in this general Term that includes all.

A promise is the declaration of Gods good will: Christ is the principal
declarer, and he is also the thing declared: and so he is the sum of
promises, and in that sense promises are summed up in him.

Thirdly, We are said to go with the backside of the hand to a promise, when
we so look upon corruption in us, that we dare not apply promises of Life, but
as we see sin dye, and do not Endeavor to apply promises, that sin which is
alive may dye.

And therefore dear Friends, in the Close of this Remember two or three
things, that Experience has, and Experience will Confirm to all believers.

First, None applies Christ, till Christ lays hold on him, 1 John 4.19.

Secondly, That no heart brings any holiness to Christ, but what they first
had from a promise in Christ.

Thirdly, It is not Gods way for us to conquer sin, and then believe, but to
Conquer sin through believing, 1 John 5.4.

Fourthly, If the apprehensions of sin getting some strength, does occasion a
Saint by fear to weaken faith: that gives not less but more strength to
sin: but it is Christ's way to kill sin through believing.

Therefore beloved Friends, Let me beg of you to be very serious in weighing
the worth of Gods tenders, and also the way of Gods tenders. And know this, As
it is dangerous for men, under the notion of believing free grace, to give way
to sin, so it is dangerous to stay from believing grace, till we Conquer
sin. Pray take notice that God brings fulness to emptiness, and Light to
Darkness, and Life to Death, and goodness to Matthew. 11 28. Romans 5.6. Isa.
40.29.
unworthiness. Therefore there is no Soul so empty, and so poor, and so
unworthy, and so sinful, but there is enough in Christ to answer all. And
dear Friends, take heed that you do not penuriously stand out, and say, you
will make your selves fit before you come to Christ. That kind of humility is
great pride: And you endeavor to do that which is endless and easelesse.
Therefore Consider, as the promise, and your need of a promise, so consider the
way how to apply a promise, and do not endeavor to take hold of the staff
with the back of your hand, but the palm: And for that End seriously mind
what has been said. And the Lord give us to understand the truth as it is in
Jesus; but I shall say no more in answer to this objection, nor to the Text at
this time. Though there are many other uses might be made of it; but I shall
only at this time Conclude with the words in the Conclusion; Which is:

That sin to a Saint-like sencible heart is an unsupportable Burden.

The restless Resolution of a Soul to return to God who is Son-like sencible
of his withdrawing.
Withdrawings from God are dangerous.
Dear friends, I told you before that my desire was to discover to you three
things.

First, How unsupportable sin is to a heart that is made sencible.

Secondly, How restless a heart is, that is sencible of his withdrawings from
God, till he does return to God. Of the first I have already spoke, I am now
to enter upon the second, and of that I shall desire to speak suitable, to what
God has made known in me; and that Scripture which I desire to speak it from
is:

Psalm the 116. and the 7. verse. Return unto thy rest O my soul, for the
Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.


IN which words you may consider in general two things.

1. An Exhortation. 2. The Reason and foundation.
The Exhortation in these words.

Return unto thy rest (O my soul.) The Reason and foundation in these words.

For the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. In the Exhortation we may
consider several things.

First, The party exhorting, that's David.

Secondly, the party exhorted, that's his soul, O my soul.

Thirdly, The Exhortation it self, Return, In which Exhortation there is
something employed, besides what is expressed.

The thing implied is, that his heart had withdrawn from its rest.

Fourthly, there is the manner of the Exhortation, it is an earnest Exhortation.

Return oh my soul.

Besides, it is a spiritual Exhortation; therefore he calls upon his soul. We
might now divide the Reason and foundation, as we have done the Exhortation,
and from each particular draw a Conclusion: but that kind of speaking is
neither profitable to you, nor satisfactory to my self.

Therefore we shall pass over the particulars, and reduce all to these three
Conclusions, and they are these.

First, That the best of Saints are apt to draw from their Rest.

Secondly, that heart which is made sencible by the Lord, that he is withdrawn
from his Rest, he is restless till he does return.

Thirdly, That the knowledge of the fullness, and bounty of God is the grand
ground of moving a soul to turn to God, that has withdrawn from God.

Of the first Conclusion we shall speak briefly but a word or two, because
what is considerable to speak to, we shall speak in the second Conclusion.

Doct. The best of Saints are sometimes apt to withdraw from their Rest.

In the opening of the Conclusion, we shall consider these things.

First, we shall declare the truth of this by Scripture.

Secondly, To show you what I mean by the people of Gods Rest.

Thirdly, We shall declare what it is to withdraw from that Rest.

Fourthly, Give you the Reasons and grounds, why the best of Saints are
sometimes apt to withdraw from their Rest.

First, Scripture, its clear from the text it self; for it is clearly employed
in the words, for had not his soul withdrawn from its Rest, he need not
exhorted it to return: but yet for further proof, view at your leisure these
Scriptures following. Ier. 2.13. Judges 10.10. 1 Samuel 12.10. N^hem. 9.28. H^s.
11.1, 2. Psalm. 51.4. So Paul: Romans 7.


Secondly, To declare to you what a Saints Rest is: is that which we are to
speak to now in the second place, and in it we might discover to you the
varieties of Rest, which men have, which some call a Saints Rest, but it is not
so, but far from it.

First, There is a worldly rest, like to the Glutton, Luke the 12th Chapter,
and the 19th verse, Eat and drink O my soul, and be at rest, for thou have
enough laid up for many years. It is so with many men in these days, they are
restless till they have gained accommodation, either for wealth, or honor,
and when that is accomplished they sit down, and are at rest. But alas, this
is not the rest: see what God says in the 20th verse of that Chapter.

Secondly, There is a Natural rest; I do not mean for the body, but for the
mind: for many natural men, walking civilly in the form of their fore
fathers, and are never within disquieted, being no way from Heaven convicted,
and poor hearts, they think all is well, because they see no ill, and they
conclude themselves alive, because they were never sensible they were dead.
These men go out of the world as unsensible as they came in, and so dye like
Nabal, who ended his days like a stone, 1 Samuel 25.37. Dear friends, take
notice that this rest is a miserable rest, and not that rest which we are to
speak to.

Thirdly, There is a Diabolical rest; some men are so swallowed up in sins
that they are never satisfied, nor at rest till they are a sinning. Like unto
those people in Jeremiah the 44.17. who said it was well with them when they
offered up Incense to the Queen of Heaven: and there are two sorts of these
people. The one is those who have lived so long in sin, that their only life
and delight is in sinning. John 10.3, 4. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
The other sort are those who have some inner checks of conscience, by which
they are disquieted, and they to stop the mouth of that disquieted mind, will
make themselves drunk with sinning, and care not what time or money they spend
to purchase a little peace, to expel that trouble, and that hour they can
purchase that mirth, Isa. 22.13. Isa. 56.12.
or rather madness, they are then at rest. But alas, the rest of these men is
not only sinful, but diabolical, their condition is much to be lamented.

Fourthly, There is a Legal rest; I call it so, because it is a rest which men
attain to by their exact conformity to a Law, and not by their acquaintance
with the Lord. I fear that many go on in this rest, thinking all is well,
when alas there is no such matter. They only rest upon the rotten reed of
their own Righteousness, and warm themselves by the fire of their own
performance, but the conclusion will be restless, for they will lie down in
sorrow, Isaiah the 50. and the last verse. If these sort of people are but
exact in the form of their performance, in answer of a Law or Letter, and that
done all is well. They have no rest till they do perform, and when they have
performed, they are at rest. I would have Gods people restless to perform
duty, Job. 22.3. Isa. 64.6.
but not rest in performing duty. I would have their rest, as I know it will,
carry them out to perform duty, but not to rest upon their performance.

Fifthly, There is a Pharisaicall Rest: that is, when men take Rest in a bare
profession, without any enjoyment of the thing they do profess, this is
pharisaicall: so it is also when men in their profession walk up to gain the
applause of men: John 5.42. John 12.43.
these people have peace when they judge themselves approved on, especially by
a professing people, then all is well, but the least censure there, does
exceedingly sadden them; whereas those souls which have rest in that Rest
which is the Rest of Saints, all the commendation of men does not heighten it,
Romans 2.29. 1 Cor. 4.3.
nor the Censures of men groundless does not straiten it. Therefore, Dear
friends, consider if Creature-smiles will increase your Rest, and the frowns
decrease it: your Rest is but that which will end restless.

Sixthly, There is another Rest which comes more near to the Rest of the people
of God, and yet it is deceiving. I tear too many of the people of God, rest in
that Rest. It is a Rest which is seemingly, evangelically, and a Gospel rest,
but it is not so, and it does consist in these things.

First, When men, who thorough a sight of the great mistakes of all other
rests, and do by it condemn Pharisaicall Rest to be but beggarly, and legal
Rest to be very empty, and the other sorts of Rests to be very foolish, and
this they are brought to from apprehending a higher and more glorious discovery
of God, in a way of free grace, and Gospel-unfoldings; but in this they rest,
and therein their rest is false, in that they rest in the bare knowledge, and
not in the thing known.

And they are satisfied by apprehending truth so far as to condemn falsehood,
and so rest upon the act of condemning evil, but go no further.

But in the close of this, take notice thus much, that there is many times much
pride in condemning pride there, and much ignorance in condemning ignorance
there; and thus to rest in condemning the fallacy of rest, though men may
think their spirits high, they are but low, and in the end it will appear
restless, and though they may be saved, yet this work with many others will be
burnt, Corinthians the 1. and the 3. and the 12, 13, and 14 verses.

Secondly, There are many people who are exceeding restless till they have
embraced the external administrations of the Gospel, and when they have done so
they think all is done, and then are at quiet. Alas! if Christ be not as well
formed in Gal. 4.19.
you, as acknowledged by you, your condition is not less, but more sad; and
though you think you are at rest, your state is restless. Am. 6.7.
But no more of false Rests, though much more may be said; but a word or two of
that Rest, which is the rest of Saints.

Under the Law there were varieties of rests, but all rests were swallowed up
in one, as being the Antitype of all those types: now this rest is the Lord
Jesus Christ, as you may see at large in the 4th of the Hebrews: Now when we
say Christ is the rest of Saints, or a Saints sabbath, we are to look upon
Christ as one with God, nay very God, and is that Eternal Love and Life, which
was and is for ever. It lives in God, and is communicated to the Creature by
the Spirit of God, that Love is very God, as you may see in the first Epistle
of John, the 4th and the 8th. For it is true, we may look upon Christ as the
grand Ordinance of God, and so he is the stream, and not the fountain, and so
he is inseriour to the Father, as you may see, John the 14. and the 28 verse.
Now so to rest in, or on Christ, is to rest in the stream, and not in the
fountain, and in a word, it is to rest upon an Ordinance, though it be the
public and grand Ordinance, yet in that sense he is an Ordinance. But a
Saints rest is to rest in the sweet enjoyments of God in Christ: that
foundation will stand, not only now, but when Christ gives up the Kingdom to
the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24.27.
then all streams will be gathered up into the fountain, and all beams will
be gathered up into the body: then a Saint will not be unseated in his Center,
but will be more glorious, for God will be all in all, and all in him will be
one with him in that glory. We might speak very large in reference to a Saints
rest, both as to the Author, and the matter, and the sweet content a soul
injoyes in that rest, but what I have spoken is sufficient to discover a Saints
rest to be unmovable, to be matchless and unalterable. O happy is that heart
who is lulled asleep in nothing but in those Loves, nor does not rest in any
appearance, though in near relations, but upon the marrow of that mercy. Dear
friends, thus to say is good, but they and they only are happy, that do enjoy
it, and they which do enjoy it are not able to express the tithe of what they
enjoy. As it is a peace, so it is a rest past all understanding. Phil 4.7.
But no more of this second thing.

Thirdly, We shall speak a word or two what it is for a soul to withdraw from
its rest; and therein we might be very large, in reckoning up many particulars,
but we shall briefly declare our thoughts to it. (Dear friends) know, that all
stardings from Isa. 59.7, 8. Ier. 12.13. Hos. 11.1, 2.
God, either in spiritual communion, or external withdrawings from any thing
that is exactly Gods way (unless God hedged up your way from it) is a
withdrawing from rest; nay, all our runnings out to, (or embracing of) and
living upon any thing besides God, though seemingly it may have a Law to own
it, yet for us (so) to embrace it, is to withdraw from rest, nay all low and
loose actions or thoughts, Pro. 24.2. Genesis 6.5.
which are contrary to the mind of God, is a startling from God, and a
withdrawing from God, and so a going from rest, for God is our rest; all which
I leave to you, to beg of God to inform you, and so far to overcome you, that
you may for ever abide with God, from Gods abiding with you.

I am now to speak a word or two to discover the Reasons and Grounds, why the
best of Saints sometimes are apt to withdraw from their rest.

I shall reduce the Reasons to these two.

The one is taken from themselves, and the other is taken from God. As to the
Reason relating to themselves, we may reduce that to these two heads.

The first is the grand cause. The second is the accidental or occasionary
cause.
As for the grand, it is because there is darkness, sin, and corruption in the
best of Saints.

That which is the reason why some men for ever stand in opposition to God, is,
that which does cause the people of God sometimes to withdraw from God; it is
the relics of the old man that are not yet fully crucified, but still move
hel-ward and death-ward, to accomplish its own ends: and that this remains in
the best, you may see Galathians the 5th, and so also in the Romans, the 7th
and the 21. which made him cry out thus, the 24. O wretched man: And therefore
all the people of God had need not only to watch, Mar. 24.42. Mat. 25.41.
and walk humbly before God, but to live much upon God, for there is that in
self which will carry the soul with a strong stream from its proper Center.
Now from this grand cause, there are many accidental occasional causes
flowing from it to cause a soul to withdraw from Christ, and they are these.

First, The hearkening to, or disputing with inclinations or temptations to
sin, this was the occasion of Eves and Adams Genesis 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Psa.
137.9.
fall. To admit of a dispute with sin and temptation, does very much strengthen
temptation, and weaken us: and when the heart through the power of Christ does
make sudden resistance, it does commonly conquer with little spoil, or breach,
upon its own quiet and peace.

A dispute of sin admits of a familiarity with sin, and it gives sin
opportunity to present new objects of delight, which never leaves till it has
drawn the fleshly part of the creature into alabyrinth where the heart is much
lost: and then it hearkens unto any dictates that propound reft, and content;
but this state is very dangerous, and the heart now begins to be sick, happy is
that soul who is seasonably recovered, for there is no end of sins promises,
nor no beginning of its performance, till in the end it brings forth death.
Romans the 9. and the 24.

Dear friend, mind this, and the Lord in mercy give you understanding to
keep at home, and not stragle abroad: I mean to live much with God, and in
necre communion with his loves. No more of that.

Secondly, Neglecting society with them that live with God, and to live in
fellowship with them that are not acquainted with God, is a dangerous occasion
to cause the people of God to withdraw from their rest. Genesis 42.16.
Joseph had never learned to swear by the life of Pharaoh, had he not come
into Pharoahs family, Pro. 1.15. Pro. 6.27, 28.
and show me any place of Scripture where any of the people of God did ever
withdraw from them that lived with God, and embraced familiarity and society
with others, but they commonly fell before they returned. It is impossible to
touch pitch, but to be defiled, it is not possible for a man to walk in a
corrupt Air, but he must suck in some of the corrupt fumes. Dear friends, in
the close I desire you to mind this, not only as a duty, but as a mercy, to be
often with them that are often Mal. 3.16. Can. 1.8. Heb. 10.25. Col. 3.16.
with God. They are not only Gods factors, offering and tendering varieties of
discoveries of Light and Love, but they are Gods Merchants, nay their hearts
are Gods Magazines, wherein he does treasure up varieties of the discoveries of
his Light, Life, and Love.

Truly did people know the worth of the enjoying Saints, they would not scorn
them, but rather endeavor to purchase their society. Dear friends, all I
shall say to this, is, prize them that are precious to God, for their society
will be profitable to you.

Thirdly, Misapplying the truths of God in Scripture, is an occasionary cause
many times of a Saints withdrawing from his rest, as thus:

The Scripture clearly discovers, that all praying in an outward form is but
prating, unless it flow from the spirit of God, and that is a Romans 8.26. 1
Cor. 14.15. John 6.44, 45.
truth worth our owning, for if there be a thousand words in our form of
prayer, if there be but ten words in that prayer which flow from the spirit,
that is prayer, and all the rest is nothing. Now this truth is falsely applied by
two sorts of people, and does cause them to run into evil, and withdraw from
God.

First, Of those who think all extemporary prayer is to pray by the spirit;
when alas a man by mere natural parts, and by mere acquired habits may be able
to preach and pray in a form extemporary, and yet not be acquainted with the
Spirit of God, and their runnings from those set forms of worship, to those
Extemporary performances, is a great occasion to boulster many up in blindness,
and to cause them to Run to a Restles Rest.

Secondly, There are a second sort, and they are yet further Convinced, that
all praying is so empty without the Spirit of God, that they will not attempt
the form till the power move them, and upon that score neglect the form of
prayer, may be weeks, months, years. Now, dear Friends, I must speak a word
to you, relating to these people, and then a word or two to them; as to you.
First, Be very tender of their persons. Secondly, Believe the truth of this
opinion, that nothing is prayer, but what the Spirit performs: for prayer
truly and properly Considered, is nothing else but the Exchanges of Gods own
Language, and it flows from God as well as it goes to God; Its not to alter
God, but to change us. Now the mistakes of these people lies in the application
of this truth: Therefore a word or two to them in these particulars following.

First, Dear Friends, so many of you as are of that opinion, I desire you
carefully and heartily to mind what I shall say as to that; for I shall desire
to say nothing, but what my Experience has discovered to my own heart: And
therefore in this first particular, take notice that I so own this truth of
God (viz.) that there is no prayer without the Spirit, that I cannot but
acknowledge all other sayings or speakings to be but empty and vain: and yet
in the second place Consider.

Secondly, Though God does own no prayer but what flows from his own Spirit,
and we do well to own it so, yet it is better for us to wait for the power
in the form, then to wait for the power without the form: and as it is our
duty to Conclude the form when we want the power, to be but a dead Carcass;
so it is something dangerous to neglect waiting upon God for the power in the
form: And truly if we well Considered it, there is reason for it.

For first, we know we oftener find God, or rather God finds us in the
form, then out of it, Cant. 1.8. Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Cant 7.12.

Secondly, It is as good to be employed in the form, as to imply our selves in
that which is as bad or worse, which I fear we often do when we omit
opportunities in lying at the Pooles mouth, waiting for Gods coming in.

Thirdly, Know this, that as it is duty when the Spirit performs it, so it is
no sin to embrace the form, waiting for power; so that in the Close we
Conclude that it is no duty, because the Spirit did not perform it: I know
the sense of that will make Saints lie not less but more low before God.

Fourthly, Dear Friends, I must needs tell you in the fourth place, that
though that opinion be true, that is no prayer without the Spirit, yet know
that that truth, with many others, are true in themselves, yet if they are not
as well truly apprehended, as truth apprehended, it is not a truth in power in
us: and I would have you to take notice, that it is a very bad sign when the
apprehension of this truth is accompanied with so long a neglect of the form
and power, as weeks, months, and years, For though the truth teaches that
the for me without the power is nothing, yet that Truth does not leave the
Soul without power long; for though it seems to hide it self sometimes for a
season, it always comes with a double Enlargement: and therefore deceive not
your selves: but the Lord give you power, as to apprehend Truth; so to
apprehend Truth truly: and if so, the application will never admit of Liberty
to Loosnesse, but strong Engagements to walk Close with God.

I might in this third particular about misapplying of Truth, which is an
occasion of Causing many to withdraw from God. We might mention many more,
besides what we have named, as a Christians freedom from the Law of a
Christians perfection: In him in whom perfection Lives: and also that no
unfaithfullnesse in the Creature, can destroy his union with the Creator. These
and many more glorious truths, which are to be believed by us, yet if they be
not truly apprehended, and sutably applied, will be as well in particulars, as
Christ is in the General, a stumbling block, and a Rock of offense to some,
as well as a foundation of Salvation to others. But no more of the first
Reason, why the best of Saints are apt sometimes to withdraw from their Rest.

The second Reason is taken from God, God is pleased sometimes not to throw
down, but to suffer Saints to fall, that they may stand more firmly in Gods
power, and live less upon themselves. God in this deals like a wise Father,
who is pleased sometimes not to hold the Child, but to let it slip, that it
may see it self to be weak, and to know that his power of standing is from
the father. I fear many people look upon this Truth with a wrong Eye, and do
conceive that sin is not only permitted, but caused by God. And they form
their Reason thus; All power is of God, in him we act, move, and have our Act.
17.28. Romans 11.26.
being; if so then the very acting of sin must needs be of God. But as to
these people I shall only say thus much, They err not knowing the truth, for
the action is one thing, and the pollution of the act is another thing. Sin is
the variation from a Rule in an Act: and though actions be caused by God, yet
the pollution of the Act flows from the sickness and soar which is in the
Creature. But I shall say no more of that, but beg of you to be tender, and
careful to avoyde the Embracing of any such thing, as to lay fin upon James
1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
God; for he is Light, in whom there is no darkness, and purity, in whom is
no pollution: and you may as well say, that the noisome stinkes of a dunghill
do flow from the Sun, because it smells when the Sun shines upon it; as to
say the sinfullnesse of an Act flows from God, because the Act flows from the
power of God: but I am confident, those hearts who are Saint-like sencible of
sin, will not lay sin upon the Father, though he does sometimes suffer them
to fall, that they may stand the faster when he is pleased to raise them. But
no more in answer to this Objection, nor yet to the Reasons of the Conclusion,
but a word or two of Use, and to Conclude.

The first Use.

If it be so that the people of God are apt to withdraw from their Rest in this
sense which we have before discovered: O then what cause have all the people
of God, not only to walk humbly before God, but with care and watchfullnesse
endeavor to avoyde all occasions that may occasion their stumbling and
withdrawing from 2 Timothy 2.22, 23. 1 These. 5.22. Mark. 13.33.35. 1 Pet. 4.7.
God. We might use many Arguments, but the thing it self is sufficient; Know
that the Estate of withdrawing is a restles Estate, and the further we go in
that Tract, the way to return will be the Larger, and without Return there is
no Rest.

The second Use, is to Exhort the people of God, as to watch over themselves;
so to watch over each other; in answer to the Apostles words in Heb. 10.25. 1
Pet. 4.7. If thy Brother be fallen, Restore him with the Spirit of meekness,
knowing thou thy self may also be tempted, Gal. 6.1. Dear Friends, the
practice of many in these times are quite contrary; for if they see one fallen,
they will rather lay him lower, and unchristian him, and ungrace him rather,
then with tenderness and tears endeavor to restore him. But, dear Friends, I
beg of you to avoyde such Employments, and rather mind what a Gospel Spirit
is, and with kindness and care watch over each other: and if you see weakness,
wants, or faylings, endeavor to heal, restore, and return such hearts.

This Use in the second place is to Exhort you, in relation to them which are
not yet brought home to God, if you see any run on in sin, and commit
iniquity, Remember that the seed of that Serpent dwells in 1 Cor. 6.11. Romans
11.18. Gal. 2.20.
you: and know, that nothing but free grace has made a difference betwixt them
and you, and if they fall, and you stand, it is not you, but the power of
Christ in you. And therefore this should Exhort you to humbleness and
meekness toward them, and with humbleness and meekness endeavor to
disslave them, by mourning over them, seeing your selves in them, and saying
when you see them commit Iniquity, that sin should I commit, were it not from
love and grace, which is not mine but another. The Consideration of this would
not only cause us to walk meekly and humbly toward others, but thankfully
before God: who has been pleased only through grace to make a difference.

The third Use, Is to Comfort those poor hearts, who lie under the sorrows of
their withdrawings from Rest, and are apt to Conclude they belong not to it,
because they run so often from it. Dear hearts, Consider, that the best of
Saints sometimes are apt to withdraw from their Rest. Therefore if Psalm. 51.4,
5. Romans 7.23, 24.
David, and Paul, Complain of being carried Captive by this body of sin, well
may you: Therefore be not discouraged, but know thy Condition is not alone.

Besides, further Consider, that thy Rest longs for thee, as well as thou art
Restless for it. Further know, that though thou art weak, and cannot go to
that, that will come to thee, and when it comes it will Conquer thee with
kindness, and not upbraid Jam. 1.5. Joh 6.37. Isa. 55.1, 2. Rev. 22.17.
thee for thy unkindnesse, and thy weakness will not nor cannot cause want in
that to supply thine. Dear Friends, the Lord make your hearts consider this
that has been said, and if any be fallen, the Lord cause them Return, and
they that do stand, so stand as knowing they may fall, that so they may sit
fast in that seat, which is a Saints Center and Rest; but no more of this
first Conclusion.

The second Conclusion in order is this;

Doct. That heart which is made sencible by the Lord, that he is withdrawn
from his rest, he is Restles till he does Return.

In the prosecution of this Conclusion we shall briefly speak to these three
things.

First, Prove it to you by Scripture. Secondly, Show you the Reasons and
grounds why a soul that is made sencible of his withdrawing from Rest, is
restles till he does return. Thirdly, A word or two of Use.
For the first, the Scripture is very clear; The very Text it self shows how
Restless David's spirit was; for he cries out, saying; Return unto thy rest, O
my soul. You may see him in the same posture in the 63 Psalm, and the first
verse; where he cries out in the sense of the want of God, saying; His soul
thirsted for God, and his flesh longed in a dry and thirsty Land, where no
water war. The words import much more; for they Imply as much as this; That his
heart broke in longing, and that he looked upon his condition without a
sencible view of God, to be without any satisfaction: Like a fish out of the
water, that does nothing but gasp, and pant, longing for his own Element,
without which he cannot live: It is just so with that heart which has ever
tasted of Gods Love, cannot long Live without those Enjoyments: though
sometimes the best of Saints are apt to withdraw, yet when Light and Life
appears, Raising up a Remembrance of the former solace it had in Divine Loves,
O it pants, groans, and is Restles, till again it is refreshed with those
Enjoyments; and it will say as Sampson in another Case said; Give me her or else
I dye.

At your leisure read the fifth of the Canticles, you shall see where Christ
came to the Spouse in the beginning of the Chapter, and put in his finger at
the hole of the door, that is to say, he gave in so much Light, and so much
remembrance of former Loves, which did not only show her where, and what she
was, but caused in her a Restlesnes, till she found him whom her soul loved,
and she was so earnest in the pursuit of his society, that all the oppositions,
reproaches, and smitings of the watchmen of the City could not take her off,
but she still cries out, and tells the Daughters of Jerusalem, that she was
sick of love, and she was never at rest till she had found him whom her soul
loved.

Dear Friends, Look upon any place of Scripture, where any soul did withdraw
from God, and is now by him made sencible of that withdrawing, you will then
there find them very restless till they did return.

If you ask me the Reasons for it, they are these:

The first Reason is employed in the latter End of this verse, which is the
reason and ground David gives his soul to Return to God: It is because God
has dealt bountifully with him. That power of Life and Light that does
convince a soul of his withdrawing from God, does raise up a remembrance and
sense of the former sweetness, plenty and bounty he enjoyed in God, Psalm. 77.
and the 6. It is that which is clearly seen in the Prodigalls Expressions,
Luke 15. where he says, There is enough in my fathers house. Dear Friends,
the sense of this is a conquering and overcoming power, and the rather because
that Light which presents this remembrance, does exceedingly plead and
expostulate with the heart, telling it that it was not as now, when he lay in
his Fathers bosom, there he had bread enough; he had there smiles without
frowns, and was always danied upon the knees of his fathers kindness, and was
fed with marrow and fatnes: and then it will ask and demand of the soul,
saying, What do thou here? Dear Friends, I am not able to tell you how these
lively appearances of Gods precious plenty, does break and wound the soul;
That heart who ever lived under it, can and will say, that it is unexpressible
how the heart breaks in longing after God: and how the sense of his fullnes
makes it Restless till it does Return.

The second Reason, Why a soul is and must be Restless that is convinced of
his withdrawings; Is because that Light and Life, which is raised up in the
heart, makes that part which is made sencible of his withdrawings, not only
sencible of the fullnes of God, but brings him into an union with God;
Therefore I form my Reason thus:

Every thing does and must be eager in its running to its Center: God is the
Center of the heart, and by the soul that is made sencible, he is known to be
so: Therefore it cannot but be earnest in his running to God. Streams must
return to the fountain, and beams to the body, and O how restles are these
streams which are hindered in their pursuit! It must needs be much more with
that heart who is brought to know himself one with Jer. 3.23. Cant. 5. Mat.
11.22
God; and also sencible that he is withdrawn from God. The sense of this
onenes and propriety in God, was the cause of David's heart-breakings after God,
Psalm: the 63. and the 1.

The third Reason, That Light and power which makes the soul sencible of its
withdrawing from God, does not only show its onenes with God, and a fullnes in
God, but also by it shows the emptiness of all things besides God: Take notice
it was the Argument the Prodigal used: that was that he was in an empty
starving Condition: truly there is very much of the sweet dealings of God seen
in that discovery; for God never shows this emptines, but by his own fullnes;
and when he does it, he does not only show the emptines in something, but in
every thing besides Jer. 3.23, 24.
himself; For he presents all things to be as they are, and even those things
which sin and the Devil presents pleasant, and lovely, I mean all the wanton
practices and withdrawings from God, and all glory, pleasures and contents on
this side God; and God does do it in away of sweet pleading with the heart,
telling it, when it was at home in his bosom, it had all contents, which was
not for a moment, but for ever, and the last would be best: and saying to the
soul, What are all these delights and Isa. 41.21, 22, 23. Ezekiel. 23.5.22.
Loves thou have spoused with? They speak fair, but they end foul: and if
they smile in the day, commonly in the night they frown: or if smile in the
night, in the day they frown: All content ends with the action, and all
profit, pleasure, and honor, ends with the person, and place, and what was, is
no more, but all things are vanity, and a mere bubble. Can all the contents
and pleasures procure peace in the day of a storm, or make thee well when
sick, or give thee life one hour when dead? No, all things are so empty, not
only in themselves, but in their remembrance of thee, that when thou ceasest,
it takes its leave, as never manifesting more Psalm. 37.10.17.20. Psalm. 34.16
Love: Oh! it is not so, says the Lord with me to thy heart: What I was I am,
and shall be for ever: and the last will not be the least, but the greatest (O)
the sense of this emptines thorough the discovery of Gods fullnes, makes the
heart exceeding restles, till it is seated in that Center. Friends, I could
wish my soul were able to discover, how taking and overcoming this kind of
dealing is with a poor broken heart, but it is God alone that can make out the
fullnes of this to you. I shall say no more to the Reasons, but speak a word
or two to the Uses of this Conclusion.

The first use is an use of Information to inform us of two things, from what
we have already spoke from this Conclusion.

First, It Is to show you how Restles that heart is to return to God, who is
really made sencible of his withdrawings from God. It is easier to keep a
stream from the fountain, or a beam from the body, then to restrain such a
heart from his returning to God: Alas, God is not only his Life, and so his
Center, but he so lives by him that he cannot live without him. Those days and
nights wherein a heart is thus sencible of his withdrawings, and has no
Refreshings in his returning, they are days and nights of Death, and not of
Life to such a heart; and how sad a Condition that is, and how Restles that
Condition is, I leave to you to judge?

Secondly, You may see from what we have already said, that this restles
running out to God, does arise from Gods making the heart sencible of his
withdrawing. Therefore this is to Inform us, that the power of a hearts
returning to God, is of God, Can. 1.4. Joh. 6.44. Phil. 2.13.
Oh what cause then have souls in that condition, to acknowledge the power to
be of God? they cannot but cry out as David, Psalm the 66. and the 16. O come
see what the Lord has done for my poor soul. The mercy and kindness of God
in this act, is beyond what any can express, but he that does enjoy it. Oh you
that do enjoy it, have cause for ever to speak out Gods love. To convert a
sinner, and make him a Saint, is an eminent favor, but to return and call
home a Prodigal Son, is that which speaks out much more of the power,
kindness, and unchangeable love of God: Oh you that have tasted of it, let
your life speak out Gods love, and I shall say no more to you but this that
Christ says, John the 5. and the 14. Sin no more least a worse thing come unto
you.

In the next place, this may Inform us of the great mistakes of some men, who
in their writings and expressions declare that they are again brought home to
God, but yet they are so far from being restless in their return to God, that
they rather rest in their satisfying of others, then in their assurance of
their entertainment with God. Alas, Gods mercy is double and treble, in
returning such a heart to himself, but the returns of such are hardly single
toward him, but to such I shall say no more, but rather with tears beg that
they may be sensible of the want of sense, I mean of their withdrawings from
God: I am sure then they will be restless till they do return.

Again, This is to inform us, If it be so that those hearts who are
withdrawn from God, when made sensible, are so restless till they do
return, then it is no strange thing why they get so much ground of them who
have all this time stood, and not withdrawn. Christ says, Matthew the 19, and
the 30 verse, The first shall be last, and the last shall be first. Alas, these
souls that are thus recovered, are exceeding swift in their returns; though
know by experience what it is to capitulate with, or to give entertainment to,
or to shake hands with sin; the bitterness they have found out of their fathers
heart, makes them cleave close. A burnt Child dreads the fire. Dear friends,
observe it, that a child so soon as he has gotten a knock, commonly does not
only lean to, but lay hold of with both hands, the Mothers knee.

Dear friends, I speak this the rather, that any of you that stand, may not
too much rejoice and glory in your own condition, over them that are fallen,
as many in this poor Nation are, who through a gathered light liberty, have
put themselves in it before God brought them to it, and so have turned their
liberty into Looseness. These sort of people do either belong to God, or they
do not, but I am confident many do, and if so, God will bring them home, and
they will be restless in their returns. And take notice, you that God has
made yet to stand, that for ought I know these poor lost hearts may get ground
on you; and therefore do not neglect your pursuit in spending time to censure
them, but rather double your own diligence in your own pursuit, and
endeavor with humility, care, and tears to recover them.

The second Use is an Use of Comfort, to Comfort those poor hearts who are
sadly fallen from God, and being made sensible, are restless in their
returns, though their condition seems in their own eyes sad, yet they have
much cause of Comfort and Rejoicing, and that in these things.

First, Their condition is not alone; there is not only a David, and a
Prodigal, but many more who have sadly fallen as well as they.

Secondly, Consider that you are changed, God is not changed, for though we be
unfaithful, God is faithful, and cannot deny himself, as you may see, the 2
Epistle of Timothy, the 2, and the 13. Malachy the 3, and the 6 verse.

Thirdly, Consider that there is as much readiness in God to receive you, as
restlesnesse in you to be received by him. Do but view what Christ says about
the lost sheep, Luke the 15. the 5, 6, and 7. verses; there was greater
rejoicing for the return of that one, then was for the ninety nine, it was so
with the lost groat, and with the Prodigal more then his elder Brother, Luke
the 15. and 30. verse. All these Scriptures hold forth the great rejoicing God
takes in, and the great readiness of Gods giving entertainment to a poor
soul thus returned. I know the Devil does set upon such a heart drawing
Arguments, not only from the breach of a Law, but their sinning against Light
and Love, which Arguments are of such a power and force, sufficient to sink
any soul in the world, were it not for the abundance of love and kindness
given in from the Father, suitably at such a season. But, Oh dear souls, I
speak to them which are in such a condition, do not be discouraged, but
consider, not what you are in your self, but what you are in God, and at your
leisure view these Scriptures, Jeremiah the 3, and the 1 verse. Zech. the 13,
and the 1, Isay the 1, and the 18, Isa. the 43. the 22, 23, 24, and the 25, and
26. verses, Isa. the 44. the 21, 22. Isa. 49. the 15, and 16. Jer. 31. and the
20. Read the 16. of Ezekiel, from the first to the last. 1 Ep. of John, 2, and
the 1. Mat. the 11. and the 28. Psalm 147. 3.

The Third and Last Use is an Use of Exhortation, to Exhort all that are thus
fallen, and thus made sensible, that they give glory to God for giving of them
a heart again to return; it is a double mercy, Oh what has God done for you?
he has not dealt by you as you have dealt by him, Ezekiel. the 16. the 59, and
the 60. verses, but he has returned love for hatred, and showed himself to be
a God, though thou wast but a creature; O praise him and prize him, loose no
time in speaking out his Love, thou have lost too much time already, all thy
days are too little to declare what God has done for thee. But I shall say no
more of this use, nor of this conclusion, but I shall speak a word or two of
the last Conclusion, and so conclude.

Psalm the 116. and the 7. verse. Return unto thy rest O my soul, for the
Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.


THe third and last Conclusion is from the ground of David's resolution, in
these words, For he has dealt bountifully with me.

The Conclusion from thence is this: That the knowledge of the fulness and
bounty of God, is the chief ground to turn a soul to God, which has
withdrawn from God.

I shall speak very briefly of this, because I shall have an occasion in my
speaking to the third thing, viz. The Entertainment a soul finds with God, to
speak much of the bounty and plenty he injoyes in God. The word plenty implies
fulness without any emptiness, readiness without any backwardness,
freeness without reluctance, to do that which he is a doing: and upon all
those accounts Gods bounty is fully and clearly demonstrated, Psa. 26.5. Psalm.
12.7. Psalm. 13.6. Ephesians. 1.23.
in the discoveries of himself to us, for he does not only tender grace
freely, but in that holds forth a supply fully, and in dispensing he does it
readily and delightfully. It is the joy and delight of God to give out Love to
lost hears; never did any soul withdraw from God, apprehending a want in him,
nor never does a soul turn home again to God, but through the knowledge of
the bounty and plenty that is to be enjoyed in him. That which moved and
carried on the Prodigal, was the remembrance that there was enough in his
Fathers house, Luke the 15. and the 17. It Is that which here in this Text is
fully discovered, for he calls upon his soul to turn saying, He has dealt
bountifully with him. If you look in the 5th of the Canticles, you shall see
that that was the ground which drew the Spouse after Christ, with so much
eagerness, it was the fulness, and matchless excellency she saw in Christ,
as you may see at large, from the 10 verse to the last, and she tells you that
he is the chiefest of 100, verse the 10, and so she goes on, and in the last
verse, she says, His mouth is most sweet, nay, he was altogether lovely; this
discovery of bounty and love, did not only draw the Spouse but did also cause
the daughters of Jerusalem to enquire after Christ, chapter the 6. and the 1
verse, Where is thy beloved gone, that we may seek him with thee? this was the
ground that caused Israel to return to God, Jeremiah the 3d, in the last part
of the 22 verse, Israel says, We come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our
God; in the 3. verse he tells you it was in vain to hope for salvation from
the hills, or from the multitude of the mountains, for in the Lord our God is
the salvation of Israel, which words imply, as a safety in God, so a sufficient
supply from God: So that from all these Scriptures you may clearly see, That
the discoveries or knowledge of the bounty of God, does draw and turn a soul
to God, that is withdrawn from God. If you ask me the Reasons, they are these.

First, It is Gods way to conquer a soul, and crucify a soul to things below
himself, by appearing more full and glorious then all things besides him. Isa.
40.15, 16, 17, 18, 21.
The Sun draws up all men's eyes to admire it from other Lights that are below
it, by out-shining and out-glorying every light besides it self. The Father
never comes, but he brings so much in his hand and heart, that the soul cannot
see or enjoy elsewhere.

Second Reason, It must needs be so, for that light and life which turns a
soul to God, through the discoveries of God, does present and discover God to
be as he is: if so, then it must needs be a knowledge of the bounty of God, for
God is bounty Psa. 113.4, 5.
it self. Whosoever has a view of God, Psalm. 86.8. Isa. 46.9.
must needs see all variety and plenty in him, for it is not only of him, but
so one with him, that we cannot view one, but we must view both, for there is
all variety in unity, Psalm. 16.11. Revel. 7. ult.

Third Reason, As it is Gods way to present himself so, and as it must needs
be so, because he is so, so there is a great necessity for it; for a soul is no
sooner in his way toward God, but sin, and the Devil, with varieties of
Arguments, do endeavor to encounter the soul, and presents it with varieties
of objects, to persuade the heart to bow down, and worship it: it was the very
same way the Devil took with Christ, as you may see in the 4th of Matthew,
verse the 8. and the 9. Luke the 4, the 5, and 6 verses. But take notice of all
the Devil and sin presents, it is not only a lie, but in the best it is but
things relating to this transitory and empty being, but truly did not God speak
out that which the Devil and sin cannot speak out, the hearts of poor creatures
would very much stumble, but the Father is pleased, not only to unspeak what
the Devil says, but to out-speak and out-say whatsoever the Devil and sin can
say, and by it the Father is pleased not only to put words into a Saints
mouth, but also ability in his heart, by which the soul is made able to resist
sin and Satan. I am sure that heart which is acquainted with this condition,
knows what great need and necessity there is of those discoveries, to supply
him with strength, when he is with temptation surrounded. But I shall say no
more as to the Reasons.

Obj. Some may Object, and say, What has been said to these Reasons, holds
forth so much, as if the drawings and discoveries of God, were the good we
enjoy by him, and not the Essential good that is considered in him, and if so,
that kind of Love and Life must needs be selfish.

An. In Answer to this Objection I shall present you with these particulers.

First, Those hearts that thus Reason, I fear are not acquainted with the
discoveries of God, for if they are, they know it is impossible for a soul to
enjoy the streams, but they must be swallowed up in the fountain; and it is
impossible for a heart to love God for loaves, and not for himself, that is
acquainted with his Loves. It is not here as it is in Creaturecontents, for the
soul is no sooner in this sense in Gods hand, but at the same time he is
seated and centred in Gods heart (I speak after the manner of men) but those
hearts which Live in the Loves of God, know what I mean.

Secondly, The bounty we receive by God, in a metaphorical discourse, seems to
be distinct from God, but in Gods sense, and that Saints see the bounty of God,
and God, is both one, unless you speak of Gods bounty in a providentiall
sense, but according to our intent in this discourse, God is love, and love is
God, according to John's words, the first Epistle of John, the 4 Chapter, and
the 8 verse; and so the bounty of God, is one with God, and God one with that,
and he that loves one, must love both, but not as two, but one (for they are
one) But no more to the Objection.

A word or two briefly of Use, and so conclude.

The first Use is an Use of Reproof, and of sad Complaints against those that
are wantonly gone from God. If there be any such here, give me leave to desire
you seriously to consider your condition, and to weigh well from what you are
fallen. Was there not enough in God, why went you from him? The truth is, that
saying lies sad upon my own spirit, yet give me leave to tell you, and my own
heart, there is not that abroad which we find at home, and whatever you may
Pro. 20.1. Romans 7.11.1 Cor. 6.9.2 Tim. 3.13. Heb. 3.13. Isa. 57.21. Romans 6.23.
be possessed of, through the delusions of a seeming delight in sin, which
prompts flesh to plead for that sinful liberty. Yet know, though it may seem
sweet in the palate, when it comes to concoction it will be so far from
communicating strength to life, that it will bring forth nothing but sorrow,
weakness, and death. Beloved friends, amongst all the people in the world,
that undervalue the bounty of God, and go from him, none so desperately
dangerous as those who have often refreshed themselves with Gospel-discoveries,
from whence they have enjoyed much strength, and by it seem to trample upon all
transitory contents, for these to go again down to Egypt, Isa. 33.14. Heb.
6.6. Heb. 10.26.
and to shake hands with their old enemy, endeavoring to make friendship
there, I mean with sin and corruption, their condition is very sad, and they
are not able to give a reason for what they do, if they would exactly and
heartily examine their own hearts, they would be ashamed: There is no soul
that thus acts, but he is worse then Esaias, who sold his Birthright for a
mess of pottage, Heb. 12.16. Mat. 26.15.
and worse the Judas, that sold Christ for thirty pieces of silver. Let the
sins that they practice, bring all the honor, pleasure, and profit, it will
not be able to weigh down Judases, and Esay's portions; and do but view what
was the result of them, and you may see your self in them, and a great deal
worse. Alas, Judas sold a Christ without, but you endeavor to sell a Christ
within; Esaias sold a portion that was in some sense but earthly, but yours is a
heavenly. Oh it is a mercy that our title in heaven stands upon such a
foundation, that we do not retain that, but that retains it self for us;
and though we like the Prodigal change abroad, yet our portion with our Father
is unchangeable at home. Dear hearts, the knowledge of this is no ground at all
for loosnesse, Romans 6.1, 2.
but the sense of this will exceedingly wound our spirits, when we are made
sensible how ill we have dealt with him that deals well with us. O do but
consider your selves under a dispute with God, say he should say unto you as he
did unto the Church, Isaiah the 5th, and the 4th, What could I done more to you
then I have done? or Hosea the 6th, and the 4th, O Ephraim, What shall I do
unto thee, O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? Adding this, which in your own
hearts you must needs equcast with, if you have experience of Gods bounty, Did
not I, says the Lord, lay thee in my bosom, and carry thee in my arms, and
Can. 2.4. Isa. 40.11.
had thee often into my Wine-Celler, and refreshed thee with flaggons of wine,
and my banner over thee was love, did thou ever come to my bosom, and went
away crying for want? Nay, whatsoever thou had, thou might have had more,
then why would thou go from me? Alas, what will you answer the Lord? O that
the same effect upon such a discourse may be seen in you, that was seen in
the people of Israel, the 2 of Judges, the latter part of the 4 verse, When the
Angel had reckoned up the kindness and goodness of God in the former verses, The
Text says; The people of Israel lift up their voices and wept. I know no
Arguments can divert a heart who is gone from God, till God comes. My own
experience proves that, or else I should use many Arguments; but I shall at
present cease, only mourning over them, desiring the Lord through the
discoveries of his Bounty to return them, then they will see the truth of what
I have here said. But I shall forbear, and say no more to this Use.

The second Use, Is an use to Exhort all those hearts that have withdrawn from
God, and thorough the discoveries of his bounty are brought home again to God,
to bless and praise God. O what has God done for your poor souls; nay,
Consider not what he has done, but how he did it? It was thorough a discovery
of his own bounty: he might have done by you, as you have done by him, but
alas, he cannot, he remembers the contract he made with thee in thy youth,
Ezekiel the 16. and the 59 and 60 verses. You have great Cause for ever to
speak out in your Life the kindness and love of God, who is pleased not only
to lay up a portion in his bounty for you, but thorough the discoveries of his
bounty to bring you home to him, when after you have done all the ill you can
against him, God does most Eminently appear in this to be a father not only
free and full, but unchangeable: O declare wherever you come the unsearchable
mercy, and kindness of God, how often have you frowned upon him, but he still
smiles upon you? you have run from him, but he runs after you. And though you
have caused him to stand knocking at the door, begging entertainment, till his
head was filled with dew, and his locks with the dropes of the night,
Canticles the 5. and the latter part of the 2 verse. O Consider this, and as he
has prized you, prize and praise him, and remember that when he returns you,
he does not only bring you to bounty, but thorough the discoveries of bounty
he returns you. The work is his, do not only praise him, but lie low before
him, Considering how much you are bound to him, and go no more from God; But I
shall say no more to this use, nor to this Conclusion, but the Lord make you
sencible of what has been said. Beloved Friends, I did engage my self to make
known to you what the Lord has made known to me, as in relation to the
unsupportable burden of sin to a sencible heart, and the restles longings of
a Soul to return to God, who is sencible of his withdrawing from God; So also
to discover in the third place, the sweet Entertainment that the soul finds
with God when he is brought home. As I desire to declare suitable to what God
has declared to me, so I desire to speak it from that Scripture, in and by
which the Lord was pleased to speak it forth to me, by which he did very much
refresh and encourage my poor and unworthy Spirit: The Text is in these words
following.

A Discovery of the sweet and unexspected Entertainment that wandering hearts
meet with in their Returns to God.
The Prodigalls Entertainment with his Father discovered.
Luke the 15. and the 20 verse. And he arose and came to his Father, but when
he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and
fell on his neck and kissed him.


BEloved Friends, These words do clearly and sweetly Anatomise the tenderness
of Gods affection, as he is a Father; and the truth is, those hearts that do
by the Spirit of the Lord, Really view God in these words as he is presented,
cannot but as a Son be melted and overcome in the sense of the Fathers
kindness. As for the first part of the words, Concerning the Prodigalls rising
and coming toward his Father, I shall not say any thing, having spoken at
large what is there included in our former discourses. I shall only speak to
the unexpected Entertainment the poor Prodigal found with the Father, and
that is employed in these words; But when he was yet a great way off, his Father
saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell upon his neeke, and kissed him.
All which does wonderfully manifest the full, free, and tender kindness of
God, to unkind Greatures.

Before we come to speak of the Entertainment it self, we might speak
something of the party Entertained: And as to him we might say something of his
resolution to come, his preamble in coming, his apprehensions about his coming,
and how much his Entertainment did Extend all: All which you may see in the
dependence of these words on the foregoing verses: but I shall pass over that,
and only sum up all in this general Conclusion, which we shall observe
from the words as they have dependence upon the former verses.

Doct. That soul which is brought home to the Father, through a sense of his
own wanderings, meets with unexpected Entertainment with the Father when he
comes.

If you read the former verses, you will not find the Prodigal expecting to
meet the Father before he came to the Father: And for the Father to run when
he only went. And for the Father to fall upon his neck before he fell down
before his Father; Nay his Father kissed him before he could confess how
unworthy he was of a kiss: truly the very thoughts of this is a Cordial
sufficient to put Life to a dying Spirit, and does exceedingly advance the
glory of Gods grace and Love: Especially if you see how God by this Love does
not only give unexpected Entertainment, and so in that went beyond the
apprehensions of the Prodigal, but he did also prevent the Prodigal in his
practice; for the poor wandering heart being sencible of his wanderings, and
what a breach by it he apprehended he had made in his Interest in his Father:
he now resolved to do that which all poor Souls in the like Condition, does
endeavor to do, in their returning to God, to prompt their expectation of
their Entertainment with God: they resolve to do and say something to make way
for their Entertainment. As the Prodigal here in these words; I will arise and
go to my Father, and will say, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee,
and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired
servants. Poor souls, when they have these preparations and resolutions, they
have some hopes that God by it may be wrought upon to manifest Love again.
Dearly Beloved, that God may show you the emptines of this foundation: see how
God goes beyond the poor Prodigal: Before ever he said any thing, the Father
saved him; and when he did but come the Father did run, and before he ever
performed his resolutions, his Father transcendently answered his expectation
and desires, falling on him and kissed him before he fell down in the presence
of his Father: Beloved, the Father is God and not man, he moves all, but is
moved by none; preparations are wrought by him, but they are no Causes moving
and procuring Entertainment with him Job 32.6, 7. Psalm, 16.2.
Effects of his Love cannot be the Cause, and this would all Prodigalls say in
their Returns, if they were sencible what God is: and they will be drawn to
acknowledge it from their Enjoyment of the unexpected Entertainment with the
Father. Poor David, when he had sinned against God, said, He would confess
his sin, but, says he, when I said I would confess, God forgave, Psalm. 32.
and the 5. So that when he did only Resolve to confess, before it was done,
God did actually forgive. The very same you may see in Ephraim, Ierem. 31.18,
19 verses, he there bemones himself, being ashamed and confounded, thorough a
sense of his own unsutablenes, crying out to be turned to God, as knowing
himself undone without him: but see in the 20 verse what a transcendant and
unexpected Entertainment he found with God, Expressed in these words; Ephraim my
dear Son, is he a pleasant Child, for since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him still, therefore my Bowels are troubled for him, I will
surely have mercy upon him says the Lord. O what sweet soul melting
Expressions are these! It was an Entertainment far beyond Ephraims Expectation;
and as Ephraim, so all poor souls who have strangely wandered from the Father,
and are ashamed in their Returns to beg Entertainment, even in the lowest
degree. They undoubtedly shall be sweetly Entertained, beyond what they do or
can expect. If you ask me the reasons why wandering hearts in their Returns
find Entertainment beyond their Expectation; The reasons are these.

First, Because Gods thoughts are not our thoughts: Esaias 55. the 8 and 9. but
as the heavens are above the Earth, so are his thoughts above ours, in relation
to the dispensation of mercy to undone souls. The confirmation of which truth
is Gods intent in that Chapter, and those Verses. Alas, the poor heart, that
is wounded in the sense of his own sins, and desires nothing more then
Entertainment, if it were but to look upon God at the door, and to be owned by
him, though he did not sit at the Table with him, and had but asmile, though
not kisses, and looks of Love, though no Embraces; Though as a Servant, yet he
would think himself happy. Dearly Beloved, You shall not only stand at the
door, but Can. 2.4. Cant. 3.10. Isa. 62.5.
sit down at the Table, and not only have smiles and looks of Love, but
varieties of Kisses and Embraces; and Entertainment far beyond thy Expectation;
believe it to be so, for Gods thoughts are not thine.

Second Reason; Every poor wandering soul in his Return is apt to look upon
God thorough himself, if not thorough his Corruptions, yet thorough the narrow
measure of his own Resolutions and Reformations: and does measure his mercy
and Entertainment in the Compass of those narrow Limits: But alas, that is not
a glass to behold God in, or a measure to measure his mercy by. Suitable to God
is his kindness, and Love, and suitable to that measure is our entertainment. The
Creatures Entertainment is suitable to its apprehension, and apprehension is
suitable to the glass it apprehends the object in. Now seeing the poor
creature eyes God, and his entertainment with God, thorough the narrow Compass
of himself, his Expectation must needs be low, and fall much short of that
which a wandering soul returned, finds when he is sencibly possessed with it: but
no more of the Reasons, but a word or two of Use.

First Use is an use to Reprove the people of God, who after they have wandered
from God, and are thorough real Convictions returning home to God, yet are
fearful and question their entertainment with God, thinking he must needs
deal hardly with them, who have dealt so unkindly with him Psalm. 77.9 Psalm.
42.9. Psalm. 31.12 Isa. 49.14.
Dear Friendt, I must confess the state and condition of such poor souls is
much to be pitied, for they are surrounded with temptations in a double and
treble sense; yet give me leave to Reprove them, as Christ said in another
Case, Matthew. 22.29. You err not knowing the Scriptures: So you fear your
entertainment, not knowing the endeared affections that live in God, when once
you come to be possessed with it, you will Reprove your own Spirits, and say
what I now say to you: Was it not enough to sin against Love, but must you now
sin in questioning Love? Was it not enough to sin in running from God, but must
you now sin in thinking God will run from you? Was it not enough for you to sin
in clouding the nature of a Son, but must you now sin in questioning the
nature of the Father? O leave off those disputes, and go with boldness,
believing that God is what he was, though you are not so; and know, your
entertainment will be far beyond what you do or can expect.

A second Use is an use of Comfort and Consolation to all poor broken Spirits
who have wandered from God, and thorough a sense of their own unkind dealings
with the Father, they are ashamed to look upon him, and afraid to go up to
Luke 18.13.
him, and yet cannot live without him. There is great Comfort to these poor
broken Spirits, in the Consideration of the sweet entertainment that poor
wandering hearts find in their Return to God: Know that the Father is God, and
not Man. It will go better with you then with Hester in her desperate attempts
to the King Ahasuerus, in the 5 of Hester, she according to a Common
Expectation looked for nothing but Death: but see in the 2 and 3 verses, how
the King holds forth his Scepter, and tells her that her Request should be
granted, if it were to the half of his Kingdom: and Entertainment beyond her
expectation.

Dear hearts, know that in your approachments to the Father, he will not only
hold out a Scepter to you, but fall upon the neck of you, and will not answer
your desires to the half, but to the whole of his Kingdom, for all shall be
yours; and he will not only speak words of kindness to you, but will give
you power to speak out your unkindnes before him; he will not only pass by,
and pardon your adulterous withdrawing from him, as you may see Jeremiah the
3d, at the beginning of the Chapter, but he will also heal your backslidings,
v. 22. And though you with the Prodigal, desire to be but a Servant, he will
entertain you as a Son, and before you confess, he will pardon, and before
you acknowledge how unworthy you are of Love, he will manifest Love; he will
not only entertain you, expecting exactness in the future, but he will also
meet you, and kiss you with the kisses of his mouth, saying, Thou art mine,
Isa. 43.1. Isa. 44.1, 2 Isa. 45.4.
and he will pay off all the old scores, and arreares, that are produced by
your former Ramblings from a close Communion with his Love. At your leisure
read those words, Luke the 10.34. where you see Christ did not only find them
in their blood wounded, but he also with great pity and love, powers in oil,
binds up their wounds, takes them up, and carries them to his own Inn, which
Inn was Gospel Imbracements in the heart of God: and what Entertainment was at
that Inn, you may see, it was far beyond the Expectation of the poor wounded
Soul. The Case is thine, I am certain thy condition cannot be worse, and know
your Entertainment will be as good. It was a wounded soul who was stripped and
left naked, though he was alive, yet he lay in his blood, and though he was
beloved, yet he was very unlovely: he was robbed and stripped of all, and had no
accommodation but his own blood and soars. Dear hearts, can your condition
be more sad? (that is impossible) And what encouragements or comforts can you
propound to your selves, but they will be doubled and trebled with God? He will
not only meet you when you meet him, but he will meet you before, that so you
may meet him; he will not love you because you are lovely, but he will love
you, being loathsome, to make you lovely, Ezekiel. 16.8.14. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
and he will not entertain you when you come, but he will meet you before you
come, and answer you before you ask. O what a comfort is there to poor souls
that desire nothing more, then to be re-entertained with God? I beseech you
consider seriously what has been said, and let not the dispute with your own
unworthy heart, nor the dictates of the Devil, draw a cloud over Gods
kindness, or hinder your confidence in your Entertainment: God takes nothing
so ungrateful, as to question his kindness. Truly it is impossible for any
one, though with the tongue of men and Angels, to speak out the tenth part of
Gods tender kindness, and sweet imbracements, to a poor unworthy heart that
is gone from him, and now returned again; did broken hearts know what great
delight God takes in healing broken spirits, Ps. 147.3. Mat. 5.3, 4. Mat. 11.28.
in making the poor rich, and setting at liberty them that are in prison, and
to exalt them that are low, and to recover them that are lost, they would not
dispute so much against the imbracements of grace, and mercy. At your leisure
read the 66. of Esaias, and the two first verses, the 16. of Ezekiel, the 11 of
Matthew, and the 28. verse. It is endless to reckon up the great
heart-earnings, and the tender and sweet entertainments that God gives to poor
unworthy spirits, beyond what they can expect. The Lord give you power to
believe it, and cause you to rejoice in it with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory.

The third and last Use is an Use of Exhortation, to exhort all those that are
withdrawn from God, and are again returned, O take heed of wandering any more;
Sin no more least a worse thing come unto you, Joh. 5.14.
know that the second withdrawing will be a great deal worse then the first,
and further consider, if you are really brought home, what panges and throws
you had, before delivered, and know it was enough, nay too much, that you have
trampled upon Gods kindness so long; and besides, take notice, it is very
dangerous and desperate to make second attempts of withdrawing from God. Heb.
6.6. Heb. 0.26, 27.
Alas, you cannot have better provision abroad, then you have at home, (Why
will you go?) Jacob reproved his Sons, and said, Why look you upon one
another, is there not bread enough in Egypt? Genesis 42.1, 2. But I say unto you,
why will you return back again to Egypt? Is there not delight enough in
Canaan? It is better to abide with your Father and friends, then to shake hands
with Enemies that harbor nothing in their hearts, but darts of death (as sin
does) Romans the 6th, and the last. O, I beg of you to consider what has been
said, and the Lord so discover it to you, that you may be overcome by it, and
so endeared to it, that you may never again go from God, but for ever dwell
with him, O it is good to be there.

I shall say no more to this Use, nor to this first Conclusion, but come to
speak briefly a word or two from the words in order as they lie.

The words are these.

But when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion,
and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him. The first Doctrine from these
words, He saw him a great way off, and had compassion on him, is,

Doct. Large distances will not cause so great a disdain, but that the least
real movings toward God, is eyed and embraced by him, with great compassion.

The word a far off, is a metaphorical expression, it does not imply any thing
that does deny Gods omni-presence, but implies and holds forth thus much, that
the poor Prodigal was very low, and very far from that state or frame of
heart, wherein the did apprehend to meet God, and the truth was, there was so
little and small a beginning, of what in comparison ought to have been, and
also was, when he was further enriched with commings in of God, and in that
sense also he was a great way off. How far off think you those people were, in
that sense which the Lord speaks of, in the 42. of of Isaiah, and the 3.
Concerning the goings out of his grace and love in Christ, he tells you he will
not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax: The words imply a
great deal more then is there expressed, for they do imply thus much, That if
there be but so much fire (that is to say, so much grace) as causes smoke,
though the flame be not discerned, God will run through the smoke, and
embrace the fire, he will by no means quench it, but nourish, and cherish it:
and if there be but so much beginnings of life, as to give a soul the
denomination of a Reed, though it be a bruised Reed, which commonly men cast
away, as being not worthy of the ownning, yet God will own it, and by no means
reject, but embrace it. Beloved, all this holds forth thus much, that the least
and lowest motions toward God, if real, are embraced by him. How far off do
you think Ephraim was, Hosea the 11 and the 3, when God taught him how to go,
leading him by the arm, and laid meat unto him, but he knew not that the Lord
led him. David in the first of the Kings, and the 18th, had a thought in his
heart, to build a House to God, but it was only a thought in his heart, not
brought up so far as to expression, or action, yet the Lord pierces through
all, and comes into the secret Cabinet of David's heart, and finds those
thoughts, and tells him it was well that it was in his heart. How sweetly did
God embrace those thoughts, though they were a far off from the act of doing,
for it was Gods intent he should not do it. Beloved, how far off do you think
those hearts are, whom the Lord speaks of in the 50. of Isaich, and the 10. God
there sends comfort and consolation to a people that fear him, and obey his
voice, but alas, it wat a far off, for the Text says, they were a people that
walked in darkness, and see no light, that is to say, they were surrounded
with sorrows and trouble, and had no comfort, but though they had not so much
light as to rejoice in Gods Love, yet God in his Love, runs out to meet them,
rejoicing over them, and embracing them in that condition with great compassion.

If you ask me the Reasons why the Lord does eye and take notice of such small
movings toward him, and does embrace them with great compassion, though a far
off, the Reasons are these.

The first Reason is, because the beginnings, as well as the Phil. 1.6! Heb.
12.2.
perfecting of any good in the creature, is of God, it being therefore one with
him, it must needs be owned by him. The least desires, or smallest groanings,
or heartbreaking after God, though it be but a desire to desire, or longing to
long really after God, it is that which God ownes, and he cannot but do it,
for it is a stream that flows from no fountain but his own fulness, he is
a Father that must and will own his own child, though covered with a ragged
coat; my meaning is, if there be the least spark of life in a poor groaning
heart, groaning after Love, and though it does but groan and sigh, and cannot
express it self, but with poor, ragged, and tattered expressions, yet God
will embrace it, and why? because it flows from himself, Romans the 8. the
26. and 27. O what comfort and sweet encouragement is this to poor broken
spirits, were they but sensible.

The second Reason is taken from the nature of God, which is so free and so
ready, and prone to show mercy, that he longs and waits to show mercy, Isa.
the 30.18. It is the delight of his soul to meet with objects to manifest
Love. The same pity that is in Parents, is transcendently in God, if the Child
cannot speak but cry for the dug, the mother will take it up, and lay it in her
bosom, and if it cannot stand, she will carry it, and hold it, dandling it
upon her knee, delighting to serve that then, more then in the service she
expects from her Child afterward. This is eminently in God, Isa. 49.15. Mat.
9.11. Mat. 12.7.
for he delights more in dispensing mercy, then in receiving sacrifices from
us; and the Reason is, because he is made up of it, his nature prompts him to
it, he delights in it.

The third Reason we may draw from the promise of God. Beloved, if you look
upon all the tenure of Gods promises, they run out to poor, low, undone, and
broken spirits. At your leisure view these Scriptures, Isaiah the 55. the 12.
Isaiah the 66. the 2. Matthew the 5. the 3, 4, 5, 6. verses. Matthew the 11.
the 18. Truly it is in this, as in the mountains, who give down their water
to their valleys, that are very much below, and far from them; so the high and
glorious love of God, in the promises which are the Gospel-mountaines which the
Prophets often speak of, they give out their sweetness and marrow to low,
poor, undone, and broken spirits, though a far off, and much beneath them, that
is to say, they are not yet come up to that height of knowing, believing, and
conforming, which the Gospel requires. They have eyes, but they are dim, only
see men like trees; they have mouths, but they are very narrow, that they
cannot be otherwise fed, then with milk, like Children, Heb. 5.12. Yet God will
in Gospel-discoveries nourish them there, and communicate discoveries
answerable to that strength he gives them to receive it, Mark 4. 33.

The fourth Reason why God will embrace poor low spirits, and that with
compassion, though a great way off, it is that he may by it bring glory to his
own grace and love, it is that which the Apostle drives at in Romans the 3, 4,
5, Chapters, where he discovers the ground why God justifies the ungodly, and
dispenses grace freely to unworthy creatures, it is that no flesh may glory in
his presence, and that his grace alone may be exalted, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7. Psa.
50.15. Isa 25. 1, 2, 3, 4.
were there any good in the creature, before God loved it, we should be apt to
conceive that there were reason why God should love us, and so sacrifice to our
own goodness; but when the soul is sensible that there is no goodness in it
to move God, but sees that all good must flow from Gods love, as well as to be
a cause to carry on Gods love, it is then brought to lie low before God, and to
give all glory to him. Had the Prodigal performed his Resolutions, and brought
them forth to practice, before God met and embraced him, Gods grace and love
had not been so naked, and appeared so glorious as now it does.

But I shall say no more as to the Reasons, but a word or two briefly to this
Conclusion.

The first is an Use of Comfort to all poor souls, who through a sense of
their own unworthiness, and unkindnesse toward God, are exceedingly broken
and cast down in their own spirits, apprehending that they are at so great a
distance from God, that they shall never meet with him. Let all such know, that
God does see them, and will embrace them with great compassion, though a far
off. The heart cannot be so low, but the high God can reach it, and they cannot
be so unworthy in their own eyes and so great a distance from God, but he that
is infinite in mercy and kindness, can and will meet them. Therefore, Beloved
friends, if there be any of you in this condition, consider what has been said
of Gods dealings toward David, and his kindness in dispensing mercy,
according to that which we have already spoke of in Esaias the 42. and the 3. the
5. of Esaias, and the 10. and also the dear and sweet carriage of the Father to
wards the Prodigal, which Scripture is written for thy learning, that through
faith and patience thou might have hope. Beloved, know, that God is the same
God still, retaining the same endeared love and pity, to poor and undone
spirits, as I know it is the Devils way to prompt poor hearts, presenting
varieties of fancies to draw them from God, and when withdrawn, he uses all
means to keep them from returning, either by presenting new objects of delight
in sin, or by blinding and stifling their consciences through often sinning; if
that and many other ways will not do, rather then fail, if he sees any
conviction lies upon them from God, or his word, he will cause them to question
the truth of both, but if that way will not take, he will go in a more fine
spun way, and endeavor to draw wrong notions from a Saints liberty, to prompt
them to looseness; but for all this, if he sees God will bring them home
through a sense of their wanderings from God, then he will lay load upon load,
bringing all their sins to their sense, to multiply their sorrows, and to cause
them to see their distance between God and them, so great, as if it were
impossible ever to meet.

Beloved, if this was or is your condition, know you are such a soul that God
did, and still does, see and embrace with great compassion, though a far off.
And therefore be not discouraged, but hold up your head, for your redemption
draws Lu. 21.28. Isa.42.16. Isa.29.18,19. Isa 35.5,6.
nigh: And take notice, that God sees you, when you do not see him, and though
you cannot rejoice before him, yet he in his love rejoices over you; and he
has long Lines of Love to Embrace a poor heart, though they be a far off. The
Lord make you to believe it, that you may rejoice in it, and live up to his
Love in the benefit of it.

The second and last Use is an Use of Reproof to many of the people of God,
who in their practice walk very unlike God in this thing; for they are so
far from meeting or minding a poor Soul that is a far off, that they will
not so much as cast an Eye of Encouragement upon them, nor give out any
discoveries of Compassion to them. And of these sort of people, there are these
two, which principally I will speak to.

The first are those who in their apprehensions have attained to a high
discovery of Light, and Enjoyments of Love; yet cannot nor do not manifest any
endeared affection to poor groaning Spirits Phil. 2.5. Jam. 3.17.
who are not come up to that Light and Love. Truly, I dare not Censure these
men, but give me leave to Censure their sin, and tell them their walking
looks very much unlike Gods Love. I fear they have forgotten their Rock from
whence they were hewn, or the varieties of Gods dealings with them in the
Wilderness, before they came into the good Land.

O remember beloved, if any of you be Romans 11.20.1. Cor. 10.12.
such, that though you now stand, you may fall, and though you are high, you
were low, and though now strong, you were weak: and further, Consider that
your strength is not your own, and seriously weigh what the Apostle says to
the Gentiles, Romans 11.18, 19, and 20 verses. And further, mind what Paul says
of himself, concerning the Joy and Comfort he had more then others, it was not
for himself alone, but to Comfort others with the same Comforts, the 2 Ep: of
the Cor. the 1 and the 4. O therefore suitable to the practice of thy Father,
lend thy helping hand, and go meet, encourage and embrace poor groaning
Spirits, meeting them with compassion, though a far off, from the measure of
thy Light and Enjoyments; and remember when thou art in the banqueting house
with thy Beloved and his banners over thee are Love, Cant. the 2, the 4. Mind
them which stand begging at the door, knowing that thou wast once there,
though now thou art exalted. Therefore to them that are now poor and naked, O
act, Godlike, binding up their wounds, and manifest some breathing Room for
their oppressed Spirits: and if their oppression be so great that they cannot
speak it out, speak it for them, by declaring what God has done for thee in
the like kind, and endeavor to Remove their mourning, by mourning over them,
and give out the soul melting mercy, which is the Cause, and if they cannot
bear the Ravishing discoveries of Love which thou do enjoy by living in Gods
heart, then tell them what God did for thee when he first took thee by the
hand. O beloved Friends, this is and ought to be the work of Saints, and this
is that Labor of Love which the Gospel calls Gal. 6.2. Joh. 21.15, 16.1 Pet.
4.10.
for, happy is that heart which is employed in it.

The second sort of the people of God, who come under this Reproof, are such
who do not, nor will not manifest ownning affections to any, unless it be
such as are brought up to, or brought over to live in the same form of
worship, or practice of Ordinance with themselves: What ever they think, they
are far from a Gospel frame of Spirit, and they have forgotten where they first
met God, or rather where God first met them, they have forgotten, and are now
apt to despise the day of small things, Zech. the 4 and the 10th. Beloved, if
there be any such here, do you not know the day when you were not brought up
to this, nay saw nothing in it, peradventure opposers of it, and yet you dare
not but then say that God was with you, and you were with God. O remember that,
and remember Gods practice, and in Imitation of that manifest love and
tenderness to any that you see any work of grace upon them, though it be never
so little. Follow the practice of the Spouse in Cant. 8. the 1, 2, and 3
verses; and do not as Jehue did in a wicked way in another sense, saying, If
you are as I am, give me your hand; the 2 of the Kings the 10th and the 15th.

If any object and say, they know no such people, as I here reprove. Beloved,
what makes all this opposition and strange censorious dealings that are between
the people of God, who live in particular forms, one saying he is of Paul, and
another of Apollo, the 1 of the Cor. the 3, and the 3 and 4 verses. Beloved,
without all question there are very precious hearts dear to God amongst the
Presbyterians and Independents, and them also which are falsely called
Anabaptists; and many others which are in neither of these forms, and yet if a
Christian goes to look upon any of these, or either of these, and see how
their affections runs out to them which are brought up to them in that form
where they are, and what little pity, kindness or compassion is given to
them which are not yet brought up. It would make a poor heart in the very
thoughts of it blessed. Beloved, if any such be here, O Consider what I have
said, and know though it be lawful to stand up and contend for truth, yet you
must do it with a Gospel frame of Spirit, that is, Instructing those with
meeknes that do oppose you, 2 Timothy 2.25. And be employed in the practice of
bearing and forbearing, and if you see a poor Soul who is broken under the
sense of his own unkindness, and though he be not come up to you, go you as
far as may be to him, taking him by the hand, endeavoring to lead him to the
knowledge of your Fathers heart. Let it appear to all the world, that you own
Ordinances but as a way to express love by, and not as a foundation to love
upon, and let all see that your love is not only to some, but to all the
Saints, Ephesians. the 1. and the 15. and let the same Spirit dwell in you that
lived in Paul, Phil. 3.15. If any be otherwise minded, wait with patience and
love, conquering them with kindness, knowing God in time will reveal it, and
if you meet with a poor member, that is uncomely, put more comeliness upon
him, 1 Cor. 12.23. Dear friends, Paul tells you 1 Cor. 9.21. That he became to
them that were under the Law, as under the Law, and them that are without Law,
as being without Law: Nay, his Condescension was more to all, that he might
win some; this Scripture was written for our Example, O therefore mind it,
and among all, that you mind, think of, and remember to give out much love
and compassion to poor broken Spirits that long for nothing more, then a look
of Gods love. And know, nothing presents you more God-like then humility and
love*, and by your practice shame and confound the World in their Censures of
you, who say, there is more Censorious walking, amongst the Tribes of Israel,
then amongst them that are not one with them. O be not wanting to love one
another, and from a sense of your oneness with Jesus, suffer not your
differences of things without, but own Christ wheresoever you find him, though
it be in a poor Prodigal, who is gone no further then under the resolutions
to Confess his unworthiness before God; and know, it is a higher and more
glorious employment to be abringing home a lost Sheep, then to stay at home and
Rejoice with the ninety and nine, Luke 15.5, 6, 7. Herein you present God, and
follow the practice of God: the Lord make you all sencible of it: But I shall
say no more to this use of Reproof, nor to this Conclusion, but I shall speak
briefly a word or two to the next in these words: And he ran and fell upon his
neck, and kissed him.

First, To the word ran, which Implies Gods readiness, sweetness, and swiftness
to manifest grace and kindness to poor broken spirits, who are sencible of
their wanderings. The Doctrine from thence is this:

Doct. There is a sweet readiness in God, in mercy to mind and meet poor
wandering hearts in their Returns to God.

The truth of which the Scripture does very pltifully prove; at your leisure
read these following, Isa. 61.1, 2. Psalm. 86.5. Jer. 31.2. Gods readiness in
mercy to mind and meet poor broken spirits, will clearly appear, if you mind
and consider these things.

First, God does not only answer their desires when they come, but he gives
them a heart to desire, and power to come 1 John 2.6.24.1 Joh. 3.7.18. Phil.
2.4.
: Joh. 6.44. And were not the Father exceeding ready and willing to bestow
grace and mercy to poor undone Souls, he would never give them a heart to
seek for it; he it is that provides an eye and an object, and both the mouth
and the meat.

Secondly, Power to seek, and the matter sought: God does not only give the
poor Creature power to come, and a heart to desire, but before ever they
crave, and can speak out their Request, their Request is answered. The power
moving the Prodigal to Return was of God, and when he came to desire, his
Father ran and fell upon his neck, and gave him an answer before he could
speak.

Thirdly, And when God does answer, he does not only grant a Soul what he
does demand, but does grant much more. The Prodigalls Request was to be a
Servant, he made him a Son, and if poor broken Spirits do desire a look of
Love, and an Enjoyment of Life, they shall have the Inrichments of the
Everlasting Love, and Eternal Life. If they beg peace suitable to what they
understand, they shall Enjoy a peace that passes all understanding, Phil. the
4. and the 7. Nay, Beloved, Reckon up what you will, or what you can, that is
suitable to the mind of God, the poor wandering Soul in his Return shall be
sure to Enjoy a double and a treble portion, beyond what he can ask or think,
Joh. 14.2.1 Cor. 2.9. Isa. 64.4.

Fourthly, Consider in the last place, that which sures with the knowledge and
experience of all Saints, and the Scripture fully holds forth, viz. When poor
wandering hearts come to beg mercy and grace, God never puts them off, as having
it not ready, but he has it always ready by him, Mat. 7.7, 8, 9, 10. For
supplies in that kind lie always ready by the Psalm. 87.7 Psalm. 84.11 Psalm.
46.1. Joh. 1.16. Col. 2.3.
Father, as being made up in him, and he made up of them.

Beloved, Consider what has been here said in these four things, and see if
it does not fully declare the ready Runnings forth of God in mercy to mind and
meet poor wandering hearts in their Returns. What can be said more to manifest
his Love and sweetness; for he does not only answer them that ask, but gives
them a heart to ask, and answers them before they ask, and gives them more
then they ask; and whatsoever they desire, it is ready by him to supply them.
If you ask me the Reasons of the Conclusion, they are briefly these.

First, God must needs be swift and ready to run forth in mercy, because mercy
is not only of him, but it is himself, and 1 John 4.16.
therefore I form my Reason thus; Every thing does and must needs run to
accomplish that which is most suitable to its own nature: But to be ready to
mind and meet poor wandering hearts, is suitable to Gods nature (Ergo)

Second Reason; Mercy and grace is not only one with God, but it is the great
delight of God Mich. 7.18. Isa 42.1.
he takes much joy and content in showing favor, and in manifesting Love to
poor broken and undone Spirits, who in their own eyes appear as objects no
way suitable to Love.

Third Reason, He is not only one with it, and secondly, delights in it, but
thirdly, he brings much glory to himself by it Psa. 50.15 Psalm. 52.9. Isa.
43.7. Romans 4.2. 1 Cor. 1.20, 30, 31. Psalm. 51.4.
: grace appears Eminently glorious, in manifesting it self in poor
worthless and graceles hearts: therefore it is Gods way to manifest power in
weakness, to discover light in darkness, to answer unkindness with great
kindness, and to declare his faithfulness to them who have dealt unfaithfully
with him: herein God appears a God, and not Man, and by it all flesh are, and
will be forced with great acknowledgement to give glory to him. Beloved
friends, I should now make use of this Conclusion, there being many sweet
refreshments held out in it to poor weak and worthles Spirits, who are a
returning to the Father thorough a sense of their own wanderings. But I shall
speak briefly a word or two of the next words; so make use altogether, having
spoken so largely already to the former words.

He fell on his neck and kissed him. These words are a Metaphorical
Expression, but it holds forth abundance of sweetness, as to the dealings of
God with us. The word falling, implies the great Condescension of God to us;
the words, upon his neck and kissing him, holds forth the sweet Love,
familiarity, and communion with God. But to both these we shall speak very
briefly; And as to the word falling, which as I told you holds forth Gods great
Condescension to poor Creatures, in his dispencing mercy and grace, you may
clearly understand it, that if you do but Consider, First, what God is; and
secondly, what God does; and thirdly, to whom he does it: As to God, Psalm.
95.3, 4, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 33.26.29. Psalm. 97.9. Dan. 2.47. Job 35.7, 8
he is one single Simple and infinite being, in whom all varieties of glory
and good lives, from which fountain all good comes, unto which glory no
addition can be made, all stands in need of him, but none can give a supply to
him, he has all in himself, and there is nothing out of him any thing, but as
it is made something by what flows from him. All power, Love, Life, glory, and
Light, lives in him; he is over all, in all, and above all; this and much more
might be said of the Father. But the tongue of Men and Angels are not able to
declare it.

Secondly, Consider what he does in his Dispensing grace and mercy to poor
undone hearts; in which description many things might be said, but briefly
thus; He is pleased to make Romans 5.6.8.10. Gal 4.5. Ezekiel. 16.5, 6. Ephesians. 2.3.
Revel. 5.9, 10. Joh. 15.15. 2 Cor. 5 21 Phil, 2.7, 8.
Slaves Sons, and to Grown them who in all their Lives endeavor to cross
him: And as to Men he appears to Cloud himself, to Cloth them, and makes
them who are Tyrants and Traitors, to become Kings and Princes, and to make
them his bosom Companions, for whom he is willing to do all, and from whom he
will hide nothing: and Beloved, mind in what way God is pleased to do it; he
stoops to the weakness and low capacity of the Creature, and does communicate
things suitable to their capacity and spirit, bearing as you may see, Mark.
4.33. And he never comes, but he brings a power to bear as well as matter to be
borne, a Capacity receiving as well as matter to be received. And further, take
notice that all this he does by bringing strength into weakness, and manifesting
Light in darkness, and causing the glory of his Love to shine and break forth
in our poor base loathsome form, thorough which he does break down all the
corrupt fabric that lives in men's fancies, and there places the Authority of
his own beams of Love and sweetness, wisdom and meeknes, by which the
Creature becomes a partaker of the Divine matter, 2 Pet. 1.

Thirdly, Consider for whom he does it, it is to a people that are altogether
worthless Isa. 61.1, 2 Isa. 65.1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 2.3.
, they have not only been ignorant of him, but all along have endeavored to
bring dishonor to him; they are not only one with, and carry on designs for
the Power and Prince of darkness, but they shut their eyes against the tenders
of Light and Love; As you may see, Joh. 1.11. and Joh. 3.19, 20. They are so
far from being objects to attract and draw on Love, that they are altogether
loathsome lying in their blood, Ezekiel. the 16. the 5 and 6 verses. Truly it is
Endless to reckon up the Creatures nothingnesse. Whatsoever may be said of an
Enemy, of a Traitor, of a Runnagate that spends all, and despises every thing,
and minds nothing but what may dishonor God: These are they whom God does
all this for, and that he waits all the day long for, and whom he in mercy
finds, meet, and seeks, before they seek him, Isa. the 65. the 1 and 2. Nay
he is pleased not only to do so, but to woo us and beseech us to be
reconciled to him, the 2 of the Cor. the 5. and the 20. Beloved, if you do
seriously weigh what has been said in these 3 things, you will see how much
God Condescends to us in dispensing mercy and grace to poor wandering Spirits,
and it may fitly be Expressed in this word falling, which holds forth the great
Condescension of God, as well as the familiarity of God: And he fell upon his
neck and kissed him. Beloved, you may observe from thence this Conclusion:

Doct. That it is Gods way to bring all poor hearts, upon whom he casts his
favor, into a friendly and a near familiarity and communion with himself,
Joh. 15.15.

Jonathan and David's love and affection and near communion, was never more
Expressed then when they fell upon each others neck, 1 Samuel 20. Wherein did
Joseph's love appear more to his Brethren, then when he fell upon their necks,
to manifest his love by weeping over them, and kissing of them, Genesis 45.14, 15.
But far beyond all this, does God manifest his Love and sweetness to poor
broken hearts, falling upon the neck of the soul, kissing and embracing it,
and bringing it into a dear and near friendly communion with himself: at
your leisure read these Scriptures following, Cant. 2.4, 5. Cant. 5.1. Isa.
61.10. Isa. 62.5.

Now Beloved, I should further illustrate this Conclusion, and speak more
largely to it, being that which is worthy of our minding, and worth our
believing and embracing. I know all hearts that have tasted of this Love and
Life, after the bitter pangs and throws of sorrow and death, through a sense of
their wanderings from God, will freely acknowledge this, and declare a hundred
times more then I can here express: But I having spoken largely of that which
relates to this, in the former Conclusion, I shall briefly speak a word or two
of the Use of this and the other Conclusion, and so conclude.

The first is an Use of Information, to Inform us from what has been said in
relation to these three last things, Viz. Gods ready running forth in mercy to
mind and meet poor wandering spirits in their returns to him; which is from
the word Ran. 2. The great condiscention of God in dispensing grace and merey,
and in entertaining poor wandering souls, and that is implied in the word
Fell. 3. The sweet communion, and near and dear discoveries of love that are
given out from the Father in their returns, implied in these words, He fell
upon his neck and kissed him: from whence we might observe many Consectaries,
and Conclusions, that might eminently present God in his dealings with us, and
the high exaltation of the creature, who is enriched with these enjoyments. But
I shall pass over all these, and make brief and plain use of them, according
to the dictates of God to my own spirit, and that is to inform us of these
things.

1. Of the great mistakes of poor broken spirits, they apprehending by the
Reason of their own sin, and unsuitablenesse, that they have so provoked the
Lord, that mercy will not be easily gained. O remember from what has been
said, that God is not only sweet, but swift in dispensing mercy, he runs,
mercy being not only one with him, but the delight of him. Beloved, take
notice, that he is more ready to embrace you, then you are to beg imbracements;
and though you can hardly go, yet he runs; experience proves, that he that
acts in a delight is more ready then he that acts to gain a delight. O it is
the joy and content of the father, thus to befriend poor broken spirits in
their returns, who have dealt unkindly and unfriendly with him. 2. It is to
Inform such hearts, who through an apprehension of Gods highness, glory, and
greatness, apprehended with a sense of their weakness and nothingnesse,
apprehended so great a distance, that they think it is impossible that ever
God and they should close: they see themselves unable to come up to God, and
they being so unkind and unsuitable, that they dare not conclude he will come
down to them, and upon that account rather sit down fearing and trembling
before him, then expressing faith in him. O know that it is Gods way, as in
mercy to run forth in dispensing grace, in great readiness to meet us, so it
is his way and delight to condescend to us: he it is that does manifest
strength in weakness, fulness in emptiness, light in darkness. O therefore
let the apprehension of what has been said, take us off from all
discouragements, as to our entertainment with God; and let us know and believe,
though we cannot come up to God, God will come down to us, and it is not our
weakness nor wants, that can or will hinder a poor nothing spirit from being
something in him, who is all in himself, and all to us. 3. It is to Inform us of
the sweet inrichments that poor wandering souls enjoy in their returns, God
falls upon the neck, and kisses them; that is to say, they are entertained, and
brought into a near, and dear fellowship and communion with himself. O what can
a soul desine more, then to be made Gods bosom friend, his daily
acquaintance, nay, his near and dear darling, unto whom he will give out kisses
and embraces, and they shall be daily his delight.

The second use is an use of Comfort, and Consolation to all poor wandering
spirits who are carnest in their Returns to meet the Lord, yet their
apprehension of the great distance from him, and the consideration how much
they are beneath and below him, does exceedingly discourage them. O beloved, if
this be any of your conditions, take notice for your comfort, what Scripture
and Experience here declares. It is not our distance to him, or lowness before
him, or unsutablenesse to him, that can hinder his dispensing of Kindness,
Love, and Grace to us, Isa 1.18. Isa. 38.7. Isa. 44.21, 22, Isa. 43.25. Mat.
1.28.
and he will not go, but run, and stand when we fall, but he will fall on us
that we may stand by him, and not only entertain our Request when we come
begging to enjoy relation to him, but he will enrich us with a near and dear
communion with himself, falling upon our necks, and kissing us. O Beloved, I
beg of God to give you power to believe it, and as cheerfully to entertain
that, as that entertaines you. But no more of this Use, but a word or two of
Exhortation, and so conclude.

3. And lastly, These are to exhort all souls that are again returned, to
consider what has been said, and seeing God is so transcendently carried out in
mercy to mind us, let us be tender and careful to own him; and know, as grace
transcends sin, so sin becomes transcendently sinful, in transgressing and
neglecting the tenders of grace. At your leisure carefully and heartily read
these Scriptures, Heb. 2.3. Heb. 6.6. Heb. 10.26, 27. O they are sad saying, I
beg of the Lord that you and I may never be brought to justify the truth by
woeful experience. O walk close with God, and live up to his Loves, death is
near them that live below that, does God run with great readiness in mercy to
meet and mind us? (O) what cause have we to run out to him, and keep near him
when he come? Is he pleased to fall upon our necks? let us fall at his foot, is
he pleased to kiss us? let us cheerfully embrace him, and what is commanded by
him. Beloved friends, I beg of the Lord to make you sensible of what has been
said, and not to mind the scorns of the world, nor the undervaluing expressions
of some who seemingly profess God, as to a careful endeavor to walk close with
God; know it is not men, but God that you must mind, and consider from the
consideration of the sweet entertainment that poor souls in their returns to
God, find with God; consider, I say, what duty Heb. 2.3. Ps. 116.12. Romans 12.1,
2 Tit. 2.11, 12.1 Jo. 3.2, 3.2 Pet. 3.11.
that calls for, and know our time is short, and our life too little to speak
out his love. There is much more to be said to these Conclusions, and to this
Use, but I shall say no more, but the Lord hand over the knowledge of this
truth to you, from his own heart, that by the knowledge of it you may abide
with him, from his abiding with you, which is the earnest prayer of him that
has declared this, from what experience God has made him find in his mistakes
in wandering, and from his unexpected entertainment in his return.

FINIS.

