AN EXPOSITION OR, A short, but full, plain, and perfect EPITOME of the most
choice Commentaries Upon the REVELATION Of Saint JOHN.

Especially of the most learned and judicious Authors, as Bullinger of
Helvetia, Francis Iunius, Thomas Brightman, Aug. Marlorate, Aug. de Civitate
dei, but especially (among many) the excellent and learned David Pareus.

With several remarkable Notes, Observations, and Doctrines very profitable.

As it was for the most part delivered by way of Commentary in the
Parish Church of Sutton-Valence, Kanc.

By Hezekiah Holland Anglo-hibernus, Minister of the Gospel at Sutton Valence.

If our Gospel be hid, it is hid ((...)) to them that be lost, (...).

2 Cor. 4.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear -- the words of
this Prophecy.

Rev. 1.3. London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for George Calvert and are to be
sold at the Sign of the Half Moon in Watling-street near Paul's stump. 1650.

portrait of Hezekiah Holland The true effigies of Hezekiah Holland Minister of
the Gospel at Sutton Valence in Kent.


To my Noble and unparalleld friend the truly Worshipful Edward Futz Of Hill
in Gloucestershire, Esquire
Much honored Sir,
IT is recorded of Marcus Antonius the Philosopher (and Emperor of Rome) that
he chose rather such Senators as were most apparreld with virtue, to be
husbands for his Daughters, then who could produce a large scrowle of their
Pedigree, or could boast of being rich Tenants to fortune, esteeming virtue the
best inheritance. (...). Herodian lib. 1. cap. 1. Though providence has given
you a large portion: though your name pleads antiquity (they who seek the
original of Printing are acquainted with it) yet I rather make choice of you
for Marke's reasons; especially considering how your hands have been always
open to me a Pilgrim in England; and indeed, I even blush to think how long I
have continued in your debt, like an ungrateful -- And now have nothing with
which to repay your noble courtesies; but some fewpoor sheets of Paper. I know
your gallant mind can as well forgive as give: but what acquittance is that to
my conscience? I was by you used more like a brother then a stranger, more like
a Son than a banished man, (for such almost I was when I happily arrived at
yours (as another Calanders house.) I was told before I had need to see
England, That this was a Kingdom of Courtesies for strangers: And truly Mr Futz
(I fear God and flotter you not) had all English hearts been lost but your own,
I might have found England epitomized in your most incomparable self. Pray Sir
take this mite in part of payment; as a ((...)) testimony of my thankfulness:
and the use of what is behind. It is a lean Commentary upon that excellent
Book, which is the contents of all that was to happen from our Lords ascension
till (and after) the dissolution of all things: And therefore most worthy
reading by the most curious eye; herein (I hope) I have not raised the sense of
Scripture one note higher, then the Spirit first tuned it to; doubtless I come
short of many things: bonus Bernardus non vidit omnia; yet I hope many an
honest Christian shall by the means of my poor Torch receive some glimpse of
light to walk better and surer in the dark paths of these mysteries: wherein I
have strove more to speak to capacity, and to edify, by much plainness, then
by either affected expressions, much quotation of Authors, or many Languages to
show my self to have been bred as a Son of the Muses. Sir, I doubt not but
these times have given you occasion to examine (like the wise Bereans) many
things, which all of us formerly took upon trust. Among the rest I recommend to
your serious consideration to weigh, 1. Whether the seven Angels of the seven
Churches treated on in the three first chapters of this book were not ordinary
Ministers, ordained by the Apostles to succeed them as Ministers (not Apostles,
or comites Apostolorum.) 2. Whether these were not seven particular private
Congregations (for so the Ancients seemed to esteem of them.) 3. Whether they
were to give any account to any but Christ, (remember however John was then
alive.) 4. Whether every true Church and Minister (without looking further then
the word) have not a power to cast out -- as well as they: and will not be as
liable to Christ's censure in case of neglect (as well as they.)
Thou suffer that woman Jezabel Rev. 2.20. -- though these were distinct
Cities, of distinct Customs, Manners, and Laws: yet the Churches acknowledged
but one head Christ, and each respective Church and Minister had a peculiar
power under him, without dependency, to give account to no other person or
Church, no though Romes Church had then a being; but I Will not make too great a
door to my little house. I leave you to read your Book, wherein (if as a
dwarf on a giants shoulder) I have seen more then some giants (pardon the
expression) let Christ Jesus my Savior have the glory; and his holy ones the
comfort. The Lord increase your spiritual and temporal blessings.

June 20. 1650. From my Vicaridge house in Sutton-Valence. Sir, I am your most
humble and most obliged Servant HEZEKIAH HOLLAND.

Prolegomena, OR, Certain advertisements to the READER.
WHen I considered how searching (after secrets) the nature of man is, and how
in this our Age every one is prying into the secrets of the Revelation, (some
of very ordinary Capacities) having no easy guide in brief, such as they will
read and buy; and in English (for that many of these pryers can only or best
understand) except the godly and learned Mr Dent, who also has not (methinks)
hit the mark every where, nor satisfied me and others; I thought fit, having
many extraordinary helps that way, and having an infinite desire to satisfy my
self and others (if possible) in the mysteries of the Revelation, after the
perusal of the most choice Commentaries, as Bullinger of Helvetia, Francis
Junius, Thomas Brightman, Augustine, Marlorate, also Augustine de Civitate dei,
but especially (among many) the excellent and learned David Pareus, to gather a
small, yet full and perfect Epitome of Expositors on the Revelation, or the
marrow of the choicest of them to comfort and instruct the meaner sort of godly
people (for they will I, nill I, will be walking in this dark path) with and in
the most heavenly and high mysteries of this Book, I hope so plainly that one
may run and read.

The learned sort of people may use larger and far better Commentaries then
this; the common and ignorant people can neither attain to buy or read them
(considering their language and largeness) who may easily understand and
purchase this. Why Calvin, Luther and others abstained from the Interpretation
hereof, I discuss not; perchance their other weighty occasions gave them not
leave; they no way question the Authority of the Book, and many excellent
Teachers in all ages have labored to expound it (though some have anciently
supposed this Book to be forged by the Heretic Cerinthus, because seemingly
favoring the error of the Millenaries, though it be indeed full of divine
testimonies of Christ's divine nature, and no way favors that Millenary error,
as will appear in the progress;) if the objections of Heretics and others had
presently been believed, we should long since have had little or nothing entire
in the whole Scripture. Among all Commentators Pareus (who borrowed much of
Brightman and Bullinger by his own Confession: but especially of Anonymus upon
whom he seems sometimes to be but a large Commentary) most affects me (yet
sometimes I borrow light of a seemingly less glorious torch then his.) This
book is a Prophecy (as Mr Goodwin observes it out of Mr Mede) of the
destruction of the Roman Empire, either as heathenish in the whole, or else
Christian (yet persecuting) in both the parts of it, East and West: The Book is
tragi-comedy, which begins with a kingdom given to be won by conquest, Rev. 6.
-- and ends with the Coronation of a King, and the Marriage of his Bride: and
all between is but the removing of all such lets and impediments, namely, of
the Roman Monarchy, and all other kingdoms which that was broken into, so far
as they stand in the way, and possess the room of that kingdom which is to
beset up. When Christ first began (the whole world then worshipping Idols) he
sets upon conquering the whole Roman Empire, as it was heathenish, and the
worship of Satan and Idols in it, and in three hundred years he dispatcheth
that, and throws down all both Idol worship and Princes that did uphold it;
And then when the whole Empire was turned Christian, yet the devil (as one
ewll said) did not turn Christian: but under the name and profession of Christ
he stirs up the Arrian Christian world to prosecute the Orthodox Christians
as much as heathenish Rome had done; but Christ takes further vengeance for
this persecution under both these, Heathenish and Arrian Rome (it was the cry
of the blood of the Saints -- slain under both that brought on them the
vengeance that followed, see Chap. 6. verse. 10.11.) The Empire having been
before divided into two parts; the Eastern (all which now the Turk possesses)
and the Western; this in Europe: he falls first on the Western Europian part,
breaking that by the incursion of those barbarous nations Which the four first
Trumpets did sound forth, as M. Goodwyn affirms, Rev. 8.
the Goths and Vandals; then for the Eastern part of the Empire (although his
revenge was slower, yet) he reserved them for the forest vengeance that could
befall the Christian world, the Conquest and Tyranny of the The 6. Trumpet
sounded forth this, chapter 9.13.
Saracens first, afterward the Turks; Thus here is an end of the Roman
Monarchy under the Emperors in the whole, and in the parts of it. The Western
part in Europe was by occasion of the Goths invasion broken into seven
Kingdoms, which though helping the Woman against the flood of Arrian
persecution, yet (through Satan's seducing of them) they set up the Beast or
Antichristian Rome. And these altogether did join to make us as great a war
against the Saints in Chapter 13. as the Heathens and Arrians had done; and so
Christ in a manner was as far off his Kingdom as at first. The next
counterplot of Jesus Christ is to overcome these Kingdoms; so you find Rev.
17.14. They shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them; for
he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him are called
chosen and faithful. Thus far he.

Which general methodicall division I in the general like and allow of, though
in particular I have showed upon Chapter eight, that the first four Trumpets
did not signify the incursion of those Nations, Goths, and Vandals, neither
indeed came they to help the Woman, but to destroy her, though they embraced
her faith when most corrupted, of which more in order and place. See Chap. 12.
I desire the Reader to remember that though the Revelation may seem to be one
continued Vision, yet indeed it is not one, nor revealed at one time, but
seven, as so many sights exhibited to John in the Spirit. John was not once
only, but often times ravished in the Spirit, neither saw he all in one place,
but some things in Patmos, some things in heaven, some things at the seashore,
some things in the Wilderness. Note the Revelation (says Pareus out of
Augustine) speaks the same things after a diverse manner; the former Visions
are for the most part more obscure, the latter bring clearer light to the
darkness of the former, if one rightly observe them, (says Pareus;) for
example in the second Vision, the black horse denotes the Church made black
with heresies after Constantines time: the pale horse having death sitting on,
and drawing hell after him, the Church sick even unto death toward Antichrists
rising: In the third Vision by the sounding of the third, fourth, and fifth
Trumpets, the same state of the Church is indeed represented: yet more
especially the declining, corruption, and lastly, the Apostasy of the Sea of
Rome -- plainer. Some Visions represent the four conditions, or the four acts
of the Church, to wit, of its flourishing and groaning under Roman Tyrants till
peace brought in by Constantine. 2. Of the Church reigning and rioting under
Christian Emperors till the rising of the Western Antichrist, Boniface third
Pope of Rome, and of the Eastern in Mahomet six years after. 3. Of the Church
trodden upon, and oppressed by Antichrist, especially the Western, till the
measuring of the Temple, which began to be effected by the Two witnesses John
Husse, and Jerome of Prague, who were slain by the Beast in the Council of
Constance, Anno 1414. and thence until Luther, by whose Ministry the measuring
of the Temple (hindered through the tyranny of Popes) began to be continued,
Anno 1517. The fourth of the Church reformed from Popery, and of the declining
of Papacy, to endure till the end; Some Visions represent not the entire, but
only the two The 2, 3, 4, and 7. Visions contain the 4. Acts or estates of the
Church: the 5. and 6. Visions are more particular: containing the 7. last
plagues, and the judgment of the Whore.
latter conditions of the Church: Thus the most excellent Pareus. It is safest
expounding the Revelation by the Revelation, one thing explaining another: yet
much of this Book the Lord has yet reserved in his own power (yet this latter
age has had better help of experience then that of the Fathers, many things
being fulfilled, which they dived not into.) The fourth Actor condition of the
Church with its accomplishment is secret: Because the seventh Trumpet has not
yet sounded: Neither is the seventh Vial yet poured out into the air; a great
part also of the third Act is reserved unto posterity which in time shall see
the gathering together the Kings of the earth into Armageddon, the burning of
the whorish woman, the desolation of Babylon, the event of the Goggish war --
More then the beginning we have seen, and further shall see.

E. H.

The Errata of moment are these.
CHap. 1. page. 2. line 10. Alcasar should be set in the margin against that
line. l. 13. read (changeable causes) for unchangeable cause. ch 3. p. 30. l.
6. after does r. not. l. 26. for spiritual r. spirit. chapter 8. p. 54. l. 31. r.
Bishops, successors -- chapter 9. p. 66. l. 30. for eye r. use chapter 9. l. last for
withdraw r. wrath chapter 10. p. 72. l last. after locusts r. doctrine. chapter 11. p.
83. l. 37. for show r. flew. chapter 12. p. 88. l. 11. for of Christ's birth, r. at
Christ's birth.

AN EXPOSITION, OR, A short, but full, plain, and perfect Epitome of the most
choice Commentaries upon the REVELATION Of Saint JOHN. Especially of the most
learnedly judicious DAV. PAREVS.
CHAP. 1. Vision. 1.
Verse. 1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ..

THE Word Revelation or Apocalypse signifies the unfolding of a secret. It Is
called a Revelation for two reasons. First, because we need the knowledge of
it. Secondly it shows the divine authority of it; for the title answers the
title of the ancient Prophets; as the vision of Isaiah, so the Revelation of
John.

Of Jesus Christ which God gave him] God may be said to give it to Christ, as
he was man; nay (as God) for the father is the fountain of the Godhead. So
Christ's wisdom is from the father by an eternal generation; it shows Christ
to be God, because it belongs to God only to reveal secrets. Isa. 41.23. now
it is Christ office to reveal to his People the Will of his father.

His servants] To wit. Christ. This proves Christ's divine nature, because all
the faithful are his servants.

Which must shortly come to passe] therefore this book does not treat of things
then past (as some would persuade) but things to come.

Must come] shows the unchangeable decree of God. Also secondary causes, (as
the malice and rage of Satan and his instruments against the Church, (though
unchangeable causes) if not hindered by the overruling Power of God) bring
forth necessarily an effect.

Shortly] That is, shall begin suddenly to take effect, though the things
herein mentioned were not in a very short time to be all performed: for many
hundred years are past already, and yet many things are not come to pass; yet
the time is short in respect of the age of the world already past, or in
respect of eternity, Alcazar.
or God, with whom a thousand years are but as one day.

And signified it by his Angel] God gave him the Revelation, not to keep for
himself, but to show it to his servants; now is expressed the faithfulness of
Christ in executing his charge committed to him of God.

And he sent] This proves Christ's Divinity in that he commands the Angels, and
they obey him. This is Paul's argument of the Deity of the Son, Heb. 1.6.

His servant John] Christ takes notice of, nay does register the names of his
servants. Poor Lazarus is mentioned, when the rich man's name is buried in
Oblivion; only there was a certain rich man. Happy are his servants whom he
has graven (unto their comfort be it spoken) on the palms of his hands, not
on iron but flesh, not on his back parts, but his hands, not the back of them,
but the palms of his hands.

Verse. 2. Who bare record of the Word of God] That is, of Christ the Word; note
three things. 1. That the Penman was one that writ of Christ. 2. That 'twas
John, who in the entrance of his Gospel, says: In the beginning was the Word,
to wit, Christ. 3. That John wrote his Gospel before he wrote the Revelation:
who bare Record of the Word.


And of the Testimony of Jesus Christ] the doctrine of Christ, the death and
martyrdom of Christ; for John stood by and saw him crucified.

And of all things that he saw] to wit, now in visions; also he alludeth to a
place in his Gospel, where he says, he that saw it bare record, and his record
is true.

Verse. 3. Blessed is he that readeth] because by reading comes faith and
observance also, he commends the reading of this book to all men.

And which heare] those then that cannot read may be blessed, let them procure
others to read to them, this and other books of the Scripture (especially
explained)

And keep the things] reading and hearing without observance, will avail
little: yet it may be both a means to remove what may hinder our happiness,
and to direct us in the right way of attaining the same.

Of this Prophecie] This shows it is from God, for all Prophecy is of him, 2
Pet. 1.20. it may also the sooner stir up our hearts to feek the knowledge of
this book: for men do covet to know the things to come. See my little book,
called A glimpse of Christ's love. p. 14. concerning a Prophet and Prophecy in
part.

For the time is at hand] The time of the beginning of the performance. The
time both of the fury of the adversary and the deliverance of the Church, this
should stir up in us a diligent care to read this Prophecy: for the
knowledge of good and evil at the door ought not to be neglected.

Verse. 4. John to the seven Churches] gathered (in Asia the less) by the
preaching of the Word, (chiefly by Paul) to whom John dedicates and sends his
book, because the first Vision directly concerns them.

Grace he to you and Peace] by grace understand the free love of God in
pardoning sin, by peace chiefly that of conscience, but also all temporal
blessings included in that word peace; he is to reprove these to whom he
wishes thus well; it teaches that reproof should be the effect of love, not
of malice.

From him which is, which was, and which is to come] that is from the father,
alluding to that name in Exodus 3. I am, which is because the father is from
none; which was, because he was before all time in eternity; which is to come,
because he shall come to judge the world by the Son; the Son also is one
with his father; was, for in the beginning was the Word; is to come, to judge
immediately the quick and the dead; yet I rather understand this of the father,
because by the seven spirits before the throne is meant the holy Spirit, as
Christ is expressed in the next verse.

From the seven Spirits before the throne] the holy Spirit is called seven
because he is perfect in working; for seven is used for a perfect number in
this book. In my quoted book. page 43. I proved that by Angels excelling in
strength archangels are meant, Psalm. 103.20. the rather because the ordinary
Angels are meant in ver. 21. ye his host. Also I affirmed that by seven
spirits, chapter 3. v. 5. happily these angels may be meant; but in this verse the
Holy Ghost is meant by seven spirits, because grace is prayed for from them.
Also Pareus agrees with me, that in chap. 4. ver. 5. created angels may be
understood, but not here.

Verse. 5. And from Jesus Christ] Peace comes by Christ, Ephesians. 2.15. Christ here
is treated of as the Mediator, and therefore is put last; the order is
sometimes in the Scripture omitted, as 2 Cor. 13. ult.

Who is the faithful witnesse] Faithful, because he confirmed the truth, not
only by preaching and miracles, but by suffering.

Witnesse] because by way of Prerogative he is so (though there be three that
bare record in heaven, 1 John chap. 5.) because he first (also) and only shed
his blood for his own testimony, therefore on earth he is the witness.

The first begotten of the dead] because Christ first and only raised up
himself by his own power to immortal life; others were raised by his power, and
became subject to death again.

And the Prince of the Kings of the earth] that is as chapter 19. verse 16. He
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Who loved us and washed us from our sins by his own blood; Verse. 6. And has
made us Kings and Priests unto God and his father] He concludes his dedication
with a Thanksgiving. First, because Christ loved his People, and became man for
See my Glimps of Christ's love. p. 36, 37.
them. Secondly, because he died for them; justifying them by his blood (nay
sanctifying them). Thirdly making us Priests and Kings. Priests, to consecrate
our selves as a living sacrifice to God through him. Kings, not only in a
dopting us to be heyrs of his Kingdom above: but through his power making us
Conquerours of Sin and Satan.

To him be glory] either understand the glory of his Godhead, or that glorious
exaltation of his manhood, at the right hand of his father.

For ever and ever] shows Christ's Eternity.

Amen] That is, be it so.

Verse. 7. Behold he comes with clouds] This may comfort the Saints, though the
wicked tyrannize a while, he comes to judgment. This also proves against the
Papist, that the humanity of Christ is not everywhere, because he comes with
clouds, and they are not every where.

Every eye shall see him] that is, every man: his Crucifiers, Scoffers; also
the righteous; the former to their confusion, the larter to their comfort; And
they that pierced him, as in Zach. 12.10. to wit, the Soldiers. John here, and
in his Gospel, applies that of Zechary to Christ, and teaches us two things. 1.
That Christ is God. 2. That John writ this Revelation.


Even so, Amen.] it shows that there is no doubt but Christ will come to end
the afflictions of the Church, and to punish the wicked, with whose coming the
Saints are well pleased.

Verse. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end] Alpha is the first
letter of the Greek tongue, Omega the last; it shows Christ is first and chief;
the verse proves Christ's deity. See Isa. 41.4.

Verse. 9. I John who am your brother] it is no vainglory to name himself here,
otherwise we might have thought 'twas Christ spoke, also Paul repeats his name
twice in one Epistle. I Paul with my own hands; his name being prefixed before.

Brother] there is a spiritual brotherhood among the members of Christ. John is
their brother in three things, named in the text. 1. In tribution, 2. In the
spiritual Kingdom of Christ, (which we being Kings and Priests ought to
maintain. 3. In sufference.


Was in the Isle that is called Patmos] Domitian the Emperor first cast him
into a Caldron of boiling oil, but receiving no hurt, banished him into this
Isle, where he received this Vision. The Emperor being slain, he returned to
Ephesus, and ministered to the seven Churches.

For the Word of God] John shows the true cause of his banishment, and it is
worth observation, that the Romans (as they conquered) worshipped the gods of
every nation, (Jesus only excepted) it seems the devil was content that they
should worship any god but the true.

For the Word of God] to wit, Christ.

For the Testimony] To wit, the doctrine of Jesus Christ.

Verse. 10. Was in the spirit] John was in spiritual meditations when he saw the
Revelation, which he saw not with mortal eyes, but being ravished in spirit,
his mind was carried beyond it self.

On the Lords day] the first day of the week, on which Christ arose from the
dead, which by the example and command of the Apostles, (1 Cor. 16.1.)
Christians keep and observe as holy. It Is not probable Christ would burden the
mind of John with all the Vision or Revelation at once, especially considering
chapter 4. ver. 1, 2. and chapter 17.3. John confesses he was in the spirit at other
time, but doubtless John (as all true Prophets) understood every particular of
the Revelation.

I heard a great voice behind me] great, either in regard of the great mystery
of the vision, or in regard 'twas the voice of the great God.

Behind me] Shows the freeness of Gods love to John in the voice, he not
expecting any such voice or Vision.

As of a Trumpet] in respect of its shrilnesse, and being heard afar off, it
notes the terror and power of his Word.

Ver. 11. Saying, I am Alpha and Omega] in the voice three things are
contained. 1. The Eternity of Christ. 2. John's commission to write, warranted
by divine Authority. 3. To send the Vision wtitten to the seven Churches.
What Christ carefully commands John to write, it becomes us carefully to read;
for though particularly this Vision concern the seven Churches, yet all
Scripture is written for our instruction.

Ephesus] Where Paul constituted a Church, to whom he after writ an Epistle,
'twas in Asia the lesser.

Smyrna] a sea-coast-towne (now called Smeer) where John or some other Apostle
constituted a Church. --

And to Pergamus] Here Paul, (Acts 20.) raised up Entychus dead, and happily
planted a Church.

Thyatira] of this city was Lydia a seller of purple, who was converted to the
faith by Paul's preaching at Philippi, Act. 16.12, 14.

To those of Sardis] the once famous city of Craesus.

Philadelphia] a city of Mysia, of the lesser Asia.

And unto Laodicea] a city near Ephesus. Paul preached here, and commanded his
Epistle written to the Colossians to be read here, Col. 4. ver. 16. The Pastor
hereof was an hypocrite, neither hot nor cold, with whom Christ was much
displeased. Note, though Paul had preached the Gospel at Rome long before this,
yet that Church not remembered: perchance because Christ foresaw her usurping
authority. The Apostles are ever very silent of the Virgin Mary, the spirit
foreseeing the Church of Romes idolizing her. But what say I? Christ sends not
to the Church of Rome, truly (with some difference of time considered) great
part of this book concerns the whorish or Antichristian Church of Rome? who
boasts her self to be Christ's.

Verse. 12. I turned to see the voyce] That is, him that spoke.

Seven golden Candlesticks] Meaning seven Churches, verse. 20. called,
Candlesticks, because as they hold light in them (to wit) Candles, so the
Churches had or ought to have the light of the Gospel in them -- golden, notes
the choycenesse of the light of the Gospel in respect of any other light.

Verse. 13. In the midst etc.] Christ is in his Church among his Ordinances,
among his members; even where two or three are met together in his name.

Like the Son of Man] 'Twas Christ, as appears by verse. 8. who is like us in
the truth of our nature.

Clothed with a garment down to his foot] 'Twas the custom of the Eastern
countries to go so: it notes Christ's righteousness, which was enough for
himself and all his members. Men are (one the other part) corrupt from the head
to the sole of the feet. Esaias 1. verse. 6.

A golden girdle] Alluding to the custom of the Eastern countries, who
because they wore long garments, used to girt them up, that they might not
hinder them; it notes Christ's care and diligence.

A golden girdle] Notes Christ's Majesty, and divine nature, it alludes to Esaias
11. verse. 5. and righteousness shall be his girdle. About the paps (not the
ordinary way) shows Christ's love to the Church, because the heart (which is
the seat of love) is between the breasts.

Verse. 14. His head and his hair white as wool and as snow] It notes five
things. 1. White hair notes wisdom (it usually does accompany them.) 2. It
shows Christ is the ancient of days in Dan. 7. nay from eternity (as the
Father.) 3. It shows Christ ought to be reverenced, (gray haries are
venerable.) 4. As wool, notes Christ's innocence, (such is the creature from
whence wool.) 5. As snow, notes Christ's pure nature. See Isa. 1.18.


His eyes a flame of fire] Because in his wrath he will consume the wicked, (as
the fire does the chafe) it notes likewise the searching peircing knowledge of
Christ.

Verse. 15. His feet like unto fine brasse] It notes the divine power of Christ,
his strength, constancy, or his humanity tried as in the furnace of sufferings.

His voice as of many waters] It notes the efficacy and terror of his voice.
For waters run violently, none can hinder their course: Also they make a
terrible noise, the wicked tremble at the voice.

Verse. 16. He had in his right hand seven starres] Being the Angels or
Ministers of the seven Churches, verse. 20. This commends the dignity of
Teachers (who ought to shine in life and doctrine) they are in Christ's hand. 1.
Because he gives them to his Church. 2. Because he preserves them, rules
them with his Word and Spirit. 3. Because (as he works by stars on this
lower world) he works salvation for his Church through them.


Out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword] It shows either the power of
his Word (which is of a peircing nature, Heb. 4.12.) or as in chap. 19. verse.
15. it notes his readiness and power to take vengeance.

His countenance was as the Sunne] it notes either Christ's divine nature, or
his humane nature glorified.

Verse. 17. And when I saw him, I fell down as dead] It notes the weakness of
man, before the Majesty of God; how then shall the wicked stand before him?

He laid his right hand upon me] See Christ's readiness to help, also learn by
whom all the faithful are upheld.

Fear not] For fear might unfit John to understand the Vision; what need the
Saints fear, since Christ (who is with them) bids not fear?

I am the first and the last] This teaches John that he saw no fancy, but
'twas Christ who spoke.

Verse. 18. I am be that lives, and was dead] The Jews and Heretics scoff at
us for trusting in a crucified God; in the mean time, woe to them that CHRIST
dyed not for.

I have the keys of hell, and the grave] by keys power is understood, so that
CHRIST is Lord of hell and grave.

I am alive for evermore] It notes Christ's eternity and Godhead. Let the Jews
scoff, we are herein comforted.

Verse. 19. Write the things which] That is, all the Revelation. It Is requisite
for us to read what Christ so carefully commands to be written.

Verse. 20. The mystery of the seven starres] The seven stars signify the
seven Angels of the seven Churches, (but they were not properly seven Angels)
so the Rock is said to be Christ. That is, signified Christ; so the seven lean
kine ( Genesis 41. v. 27.) are said to be seven years, that is, signify seven
years. So Christ says, the bread is his body, that is, signifies his body. Now
the Ministers are called Angels, because they act by commission, because they
are employed about the Kingdom of Heaven, because they should be somewhat
unspotted (as they are) because they aim at man's good. Concerning the
candlesticks. See verse. 12.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write]

JOHN writ to this Church first, either because it lay next to Patmos, or
because of its eminency and greatness.

To the Angel] That is, the Pastor; it notes both the dignity and authority of
the calling: for Angels are in commission extraordinary. Some would persuade
that Timothy was this Angel; if so, it shows that in many things we all err.

Write] No doubt Christ told John word for word what he should write, and it
shows the authority of the book.

These things says he] This answers the title of the Prophets, who to stir
up attention in the people, use the expression of thus says the Lord.

Who holds etc.] None can destroy the Ministry or 7. Stars, (unless their
sins cause God to destroy them.)

Who walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks] John saw our
Savior in another posture before. This notes Christ's activenesse, that he is
present by his providence in his Church.

Verse. 2. I know thy Works] Christ knows our good works, and acknowledges
them, and rewards them; he knows our bad actions, to punish them without
repentance: it shows Christ's deity being omniscient.

Thy labor and patience] That is, thy unwearyed pains in Preaching the Word
(it is an office of much pains) patience in enduring all affliction he was
exercised in by Jews or Heathens for the Word of the Cross (as our Apostle
therefore calls it) herein may a Minister be comforted, because Christ takes
notice of his works.

And can not bear them that be evill] It shows the Pastors zeal in observing
Church discipline, 1 Cor. 1.18.
and executing censures against scandalous persons.

And have tried them which say they are Apostles, etc.] Meaning Ebion and
Cerinthus with others who boasted themselves to be Apostles, but were indeed
enemies oppugning the deity of Christ. Now it is the Pastors duty as to defend
the purity of doctrine, so to oppose such devouring wolves.

Verse. 3. And have borne etc.] Christ points at some particular kind of
affliction (as stripes or imprisonment) which he had sustained.

And for my names sake have labored etc.] His unwearied pains is again
mentioned: that all might imitate his diligence (who is a pattern of a
faithful Pastor.)

Verse. 4. But nevertheless I have somewhat against thee] The Judge of all
hearts sees not perfection in any Saint.

Because thou have left thy first love] To wit, in not being liberal to poor
and hospi^able (which is a choice duty in a Pastor or Bishop). Note, Christ
commends many excellent virtues in this Angel, yet is so far from taking notice
of his merits that he reproves him. This verse also teaches that perseverance
is required in a good Pastor, and how one vice does spot the other virtues.

Verse. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen] Here is briefly the nature of
repentance. 1. To take notice of sin committed. 2. To eschew the evil and do
the good: 3. To manifest repentance by works of piety, and love to the poor.


From whence thou art fallen, etc.] Shows his going back from his former zeal
in godliness, and love to the poor (perchance his ambition may be thought on;
for covetousness and ambition are usual companions of Churchmen) here is
however no final falling from grace. See my book called A Glimps of Christ's
love. page 28.72.

Or else I will come quickly] To punish thee before thou art aware. Here note
two things: 1. It Is equity with God to punish more for the sin of one;
especially considering this particular Church might be fallen from her first
love to the poor, 1 Cor. 5.6.
as well as Pastor. 2. That a particular Church (as this) may fall to pieces
and be destroyed: but not the Church in the general.


Out of his place, except thou repent] Notes the manner of this Churches
destruction, not (but that each member upon repentance might be saved) for
'twas destroyed and visibly removed by a barbarous nation afterward upon her
impenitency and security. This teaches, that the abode of the Church in this
world is uncertain; we (nor the Church) have in this world any continuing
place.

Verse. 6. But this thou have, that thou hate, etc.] This shows he was not in
a desperate condition; you see the Angel had virtues which the Lord takes
notice of, and commends.

The deeds of the Nicholaitans] Their heresy was that fornication and eating
things offered to Idols was no sin, which also was that cursed doctrine of
Balaam. See Numb. 25. compared with chap. 31. verse. 8.16. -- This heresy was
not as as some suppose, taught by Nicholas one of the 7. Deacons, for he is
commended both for piety, and continency, (as also his son and daughters) by
Clem. Alexandrinus, but by some other Nicholas; or fathered upon him by the
upholders of this heresy, as a cloak for their wickedness: We all hold the
doctrine of Christ, and are called by his name, and not after the name of any
other teacher.

Verse. 7. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear] This is to stir up
attention to observe the things formerly written to the teacher of the Church
of Ephesus.

What the Spirit says to the Churches] Because Christ speaks by the spirit, as
proceeding from him; which proves Christ's deity to the Churches. The things you
see concern the Churches and not the Pastor alone; and indeed it is usually,
like Priest, like people.

To him that overcomes will I give, etc.] He is said to overcome, who manfully
to the end fights against the world, flesh and devil. Here is nothing promised
to fallers away. Christ promises a reward to those that overcome (though with
his own power.)

To eat of the tree of life etc.] Alluding to the tree which stood in the midst
of Paradise, so called afterward: because had our first Parents eaten of it
once, they had lived; or because it signified Christ who is the truth and the
life. So it is but thus much; he that overcomes shall be restored to life by
Christ, to whom he will communicate himself. It Is an argument of Christ's deity.

Verse. 8. Unto the Angel of the Church in Smyrna] It was writ to this, next,
because next to Ephesus; to the Angel, to to-wit Polycarpus John's disciple, who
was by him ordained Pastor of this Church: whom Christ reproves not, but
encourages to be constant, foretelling the persecution of the Jews raised
against him; for they were the cheise agents preparing the fire wherein he was
afterward burned.

These things says the first and last, etc.] Christ is first and last
according to his divinity, but dyed according to his humanity.

Verse. 9. I know thy workes] That is, I approve thy works. Christ sees and
takes notice with delight of whatsoever is good.

Thy tribulation] Which thou have sustained both of Jews and Gentiles for my
name sake.

And poverty] Being spoiled of thy earthly estate by the adversaries of the
truth; for public sale was usually made of the goods of Christians.

But thou art rich] The faithful are possessors of heavenly riches; for by
faith they inherit Christ, who is to them all things, and heir of all things.

And the blasphemy of them who say they are Jewes] The Jews who persecuted the
Christians, blasphemed Christ; counting him a deceiver, a magician, and justly
crucified; saying, the Christians were foolish men, and worthy of nothing but
stripes: But Christ affirms them to be a blasphemous congregation led by Satan
to their destruction.

And are not] He is not a Jew who is only outwardly one. We see titles avail
nothing when men are degenerated from the truth.

Verse. 10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer] This is a
forewarning (and a forearming) against troubles at hand.

None of those things] Showing that they must not expect one, but many sorts of
trials.

Satan shall cast] Christ shows that Satan is the author of these miseries (as
torments, banishments, martyrdoms which the word prison notes.)

Some of you] Not all, for Christ bridles him, and restraines him. Hence learn
three things: 1. The godly in this world must suffer affliction. 2. The deity
of Christ in foretelling afflictions. 3. The devil the chief author of all
persecution, who hates Christ and envyes man's salvation (Tyrants are but Satan's
instruments)


That ye may be tryed] Here is the end of afflictions, that your faith and
constancy may be more approved, and more apparent, (for though Christ know the
hearts of his Saints, yet he will have their faith more apparent, that those
without and those within the Church may take notice of it;) this should teach
the Saints to approve themselves to God when tried, by patient suffering. Satan
then though he intend hurt in casting some of them into prison, yet God (whose
sergeant Satan is) intends good

And ye shall have tribulation ten dayes] Some comfort Christ gives them in
this expression, showing the shortness of the continuance of their
tribulation. By ten days I understand a short time, and not the ten years
persecutions of the Emperors; which might rather terrify, then comfort them.

Be thou faithful unto death] Christ exhorts him to constancy: for he that
endures to the end, the same shall be saved.

I will give thee a crown of life] It Is a Simile taken from runners in a race
where there is a crown proposed as a reward to the conquerours, and it
signifies eternal life. So Jam. 1 v. 12. This proves Christ's divine nature,
since he can give eternal life.

Verse. 11. He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death] A good
reward (out of mercy, not merit) to be partakers of eternal life. Note, the
first death is a separation of the soul (through sin) from God, and was the
cause of corporal death. The second is a casting soul and body into the
everlasting lake of fire. He that is faithful to the dissolution of the body
(says one on this verse) need not fear this second death.

Verse. 12. To the Angel of the Church of Pergamus] Who he was, is unknown; only
it is probable he was the successor of Antipas, who was put to death by those of
Pergamus. Some say he was put into a brazen Bull, and by fire tortured to
death. Now Christ sends this Epistle to his successor, to exhort him to
constancy (who it seems was now in bonds) least he should be drawn aside for
fear of the same punishment.

Which has a sharp two edged sword] To wit, his divine word.

Verse. 13. I know thy works] To teach they had to do with him who searches and
tries the heart and reins.

Where Satan's seat is] Pergamus was the abode of King Attalus; and the devil
reigned in City, Palace, Court and Temples; yet Christ had a Church there, as
he had in Israel 7000 that bowed not the knee to Baal, though not known to
Elijah. So in the Papacy a Church preserved.

My faithful Martyr] Christ commends and honors him with this tittle to
encourage his successor to constancy, who in the days of Antipas and yet was
faithful; though Pergamus was the most Idolatrous city of Asia, and most
persecuting the Saints.

Verse. 14. But I have a few things against thee, etc.] Few in respect of the
evils of ungodly men. Here we see there is no Church without failings. The
Doctrine of Balaam and of the Nicholaitans they held; whether 'twas the same or
not, few know; but perchance as the doctrine of Balaam was fornication to be
allowed: so that of the Nicholaitans was near it, as the community of wives, or
polygamy: however it was a spreading heresy. Here learn, it is lawful to call
Heretics and Sectaries after the name of their Author, as Christ does these
Nicholaitans from Nicholas.

Verse. 16. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly,] It seems the
Doctrine was countenanced by the Pastor and openly practiced to the scandal of
the godly, the danger of the Church, and the reproach of the name of Christ by
the Heathens: note, that repentance is the best means to divert a judgment.

And will fight against them with the sword of my mouth.] Christ's word is to
convince, wound, condemn and cast off the irrecoverable.

Them] To wit Pastor and Church, as verse. 5. Christ will not countenance a
general scandalous error in his Church.

Verse. 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna] He
alludeth to the Omer of Manna laid up in a pot in the Ark. Christ is meant by
this Manna; who is hid from the wicked, and reserved for the Saints.

And I will give him a white stone,] To wit, absolution or remission of sins:
for the ancients used in judgment to cast white and black stones into a ba^on;
he that had the white, was innocent and absolved; he that had the black, was
guilty and condemned.

And in the stone a new name written,] It Is an allusion to the foresaid custom;
for on the stones were written the names of the innocent and guilty, which
being given them, the innocent were freed, the guilty condemned.

A new name] To wit an excellent name, meaning of adoption of sons -- because
in the world to come the adopted have their full inheritance.

Which no man knows, saving he that receives it] Because the happiness of
Gods sons here, but especally hereafter, cannot be expressed. Only they which
are so, know what it is to be so. Here is an argument of Christ's divinity, since
he gives the hidden Manna, the white stone, the new name to them that overcome.

Verse. 18. And unto the Angel of the Church of Thyatira,] Christ (Gods Son by
nature) said these things. Of other things in this verse See chap. 1. verse.
14.15.

Verse. 19. I know thy works,] Good and bad, the good are four. Love to God,
charity to the poor, faith which was showed by the sincere preaching of the
Word, lastly patience in suffering for Christ.

And the last to be more then the first] It seems this Pastor had lately, with
much courage undergone some great trial, for which Christ commends him. It
should teach us to increase in the works of faith, love and the like.

Verse. 20. Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee] Not simply few,
but in respect of the sins of the ungodly; Christ also like a good Physician
lessens the disease, that the Patient may the sooner admit the cure, and not
despair of amendment.

Because thou suffer that woman Jezebel, etc.] Called so, because equal in
craft, power and (happily) malice, to Jezebel, Ahabs wife. It seems she was
some famous strumpet then in the Church, which held the doctrine of the
Nicholaitans; for under the pretense (of liberty and Christian charity) they
taught, 'twas lawful to communicate with heathens both at bed and board. Now
here was a great neglect of zeal and courage in the Pastor: Where note, that
censures (as they must be used) so, but upon urgent occasions, as in verse. 2.
against Ebion and Cerinthus against the Nicholaitans and Balaamites, ver.
14.15. and now against Jezebel

Verse. 21. I gave her time] it notes Christ's patience.

Verse. 22. I will cast her] here note a threefold judgment on her self; the
bed on which she was wanton, shall be a bed of sickness; for by a bed
sickness is understood; where observe God punishes the sin by an answerable
punishment, a bed of sickness for a bed of lasciviousness. 2. Them that
commit adultery with her, meaning her lovers, and that either outwardly by the
Magistrate, (for 'twas a breach of the Commandment,) or inwardly in
conscience. However, see God hates the defilement of body as well as soul, and
that the courrupters of the truth shall be punished. 3. In ver. 23. her
children, meaning those born in fornication. Here see Christ's long-suffering;
for she had long lived in this sin, yet upon repentance may be forgiven; See
Gods mercy!

And all the Churches shall know] Here is the end and use of Gods judgments to
declare his omniscience, that he knows all sin, and his power to punish
sinners and wicked men. This should teach us, seeing other men's judgments, to
beware and look upon Gods hand upon others.

Verse. 24. But unto you] who have not the doctrine of Balaam and Nicholas.
There was some wheat among the chafe.

Depths] These heretics (it seems) called their doctrines deep mysteries;
Christ confessed they were depths, but of Satan.

As they call them] the heretics called them depths, and more excellent
doctrines then the Apostles knew, but Christ says their Original was from hell
and Satan.

No other burthen] the deceivers imposed on them the burden of the Ceremonial
law which Christ had took off. For by burden is not understood punishment, for
Christ does comfort, not threaten them.

Until I come] to wit, in the clouds at the last day. So that Christ is yet
bodily absent, and not in the Sacraments.

Verse. 26. Overcometh] to wit, by faith, through Christ, (not by his own power.)

My works] To wit, of faith, commanded in the Gospel. So on the contrary, works
of infidelity are called works of the devil.

There only remains two promises to the overcommers. 1. Power of nations, that
is at the last day to judge with Christ, the world and Satan; it is taken from
Psalm. 2. 2. The morning star, that is himself; called so because of its
heavenly brightness and glory, Rev. 22.16. Christ will communicate himself
both in power and glory to his members.


CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. Unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis write]

NOt of Sardica where a Synod was held in the eleventh year of Constantine:
But of Sardis the royal City of Craesus; the Angel or Pastor was not Melito;
for he was not Bishop of Sardis till sixty years after in the reign of
Antoninus Pius; also he was a good Bishop; but this is reproved for negligence
and hypocrisy.

These things says he that has the seven spirits of God] Though Christ may be
said to have (procured and sent) the holy Ghost (called the seven spirits,
Chap. 1.4.) from the Father to his Church; yet since these seven spirits are
joined with the seven stars or Ministers, I rather understand created Angels;
now they are called the seven spirits, not in relation to those in Chap. 1.4.
but because seven choice or principal Angels by way of pre-eminence. Now in the
Preface of this Epistle Christ is described holding the seven spirits, and the
seven stars, to note that as he upholds the Ministry, if sincere, so he has
Angels to defend the righteous, and oppose and punish the wicked.

I know thy Works] Observe three things: First, Christ's Divinity, seeing the
Pastor and Churches hypocrisy. Secondly, That all that make show of holiness
are not so; thou have a name that thou live but art dead; some members of the
Church are good, some bad. Thirdly, The efficacy of the Ministry does not
depend upon the goodness of the Minister; Christ does often quicken and govern
his Church by dead Officers. Thus it might be in the Papacy, where Christ had a
Church before Luther. See ver. 4.

Verse. 2. Be watchfull] Shake off the hypocritical drowsinesse into which thou
art fallen, and strive to live the life of faith again.

Strengthen the things which remaine] Meaning those dying members in the Church
by holy life and doctrine.

That are ready to dye] Therefore the Pastor is exhorted to take speedy care of
their recovery being not quite dead, where observe, how mindful and careful
Christ is of his poor people.

I have not found thy works perfect] Christ here reproves not the common
frailties of the Saints, but some notable hypocrisy and defect.

Before God] God looks narrower after truth then men do, though this Pastor
might pass for current among men; yet Christ sees a defect. Here note, Christ
as man has a god, but as a Son is God and life. This I observe because some
read, before my God; As Montanus.

Verse. 3. Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard] Because this
Bishop or Pastor was unmindful of the faith committed to him by the Apostles,
Christ bids him remember what he had heard of them; where observe, the only way
to redress corruptions of life or doctrine, is to have recourse to the rule of
the word. Also here observe against the Bishops of Rome, that though Christ
made that Promise to his Church, the Spirit shall lead you into all truth: yet
not only this Bishop of Sardis, but all of the seven Churches but two were
heretics or hypocrites and much defective; and how comes it to pass that they
are so infallible?

And repent] Forsake thine hypocrisy, and carefully perform the duty of thy
place: which though we cannot do of our selves, yet they are unexcusable who
willingly disobey the commandment. Of this see my quoted book page 46. lines
18, 19, 20.

If therefore thou shall not watch] Christ adds this commination to his
exhortation, and that righteously; for if he repented not upon so mature gentle
praemonition, he deserved a sudden judgment to come upon him.

As a thief in the night] Unawares; this does not countenance or uphold a
thief, because Christ attributes the title to himself, no more then when
Christ bids his servants put their talent to usury; he (perhaps) countenanceth
that; yet when Christ speaks of music in the receiving the Prodigal home in
the Gospel (intimating joy, and the peace of conscience following his
reconciliation with God through Christ) which was allowed in the Law, it proves
the lawfulness of it (if lawfully used) since the joys of a man in Christ are
expressed by it, as I have noted in my little forequoted book, page 84, and 85.

Verse. 4. Thou have a few names in Sardis] Meaning, a few true believers,
though some were dead (or ready to dye rather) yet Christ reserved a few to
himself notwithstanding the negligence of the Pastor. See verse. 1. Christ had
seven thousand that never bowed the knee to Baal, though the ten Tribes of
Israel were fallen away; in the Papacy some who resisted the abuses of the
times unto blood.

A few] Gods flock is a little flock; for though many are called, few are
chosen. It is not the best to follow the multitude.

Who have not defiled their garments] Their constant sincerity is set forth by
this metaphor: By garments is meant, that as their bodies were not polluted by
the filthy lusts of the Nicholaitans, so their souls were not not stained with
that impious doctrine. The body is our garment with which we are clothed;
righteousness and faith (in Christ) is the souls garment, which they had kept
somewhat undefiled.

They shall walk with me in white] Alluding to the Garments of Kings and
Conquerours which was white, thus in scorn Christ was clothed in earth; now
as he is glorious, so his Saints shall partake of his glory; note, the Saints
righteousness in earth (though white in some degrees) is defiled in respect of
this in heaven, therefore they groan till clothed with this.

And they shall walk] It notes the Majesty of the Sons of glory; and perchance
the curious question of some Philosophers and Divines may hence receive light,
that the Saints move and walk from place to place in heaven after the
resurrection.

For they are worthy] Not in respect of merits and works, but of free grace;
for they are worthy whom Christ esteems his Sons, and has made worthy. So
Christ calls them, Heb. 2.13. Behold me and the children God has given me.

Verse. 5. I will not blot out his name out of the book of life] Since the names
of the Elect are said to be written in heaven, that is, they are sure and
certain of eternal life, observe two things. 1. Believers obtain not salvation
by chance, but were elected of God through Christ from eternity, and known from
them that perish. 2. That the Elect are certain of life; none can pluck them
ont of Gods hand; God is said to have books metaphorically, for he needs none,
but does all things by his foreknowledge, counsel and judgment; he is said to
have three books in Scripture; one of Providence, wherein he has set down how
every thing shall come to pass; when the wicked are destroyed, (who are
equally written here with the righteous) they may be said to be blotted out of
his book. Gods second book is of Predestination and eternal life, out of which
none can be blotted His third is of the general judgment, of which it is said the
books were opened. chapter 20.


I will confess his name] an honor beyond thought to be called by name (as it
were before the Throne and Angels, and to be acknowledged publicly. This might
stir up in us a care to get the first white garments of grace, that we may
enjoy these of glory and this glorious acknowledgement. I omit ver. 6. being
easy.

Verse. 7. Unto the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia write] Some conceive
this to be Quadratus, a disciple of the Apostles, whom Eusebius mentions.
Ignatius wrote to these Philadelphians.

That is holy] because he is in himself holy, and made to us of God
sanctification.

And true] constant in keeping promise and loving truth, hating falsehood and
hypocrisy. As this is an argument of Christ's being God out of Isa. 6. so it is
an Argument that the Pope is Antichrist, calling himself not only holy but
holiness; and whereas Christ calls himself but a great high Priest in Hebr. 4.
the Pope calls himself the greatest High Priest, showing himself not to be
Christ's vicar, but the successor of the Pagans Arch-flamens or Priests.

Who has the Key of David] or of the house of David, to wit, the Church; by
Key, power is noted, for Christ has an absolute power over the Church as Lord
and head of it, and has committed the ministerial power and keys to the
Apostles and their Successors.

He opens, and no man shutteth] to wit, the door of grace, and heaven, and
Scripture: men are already blind in the things of God, yet he may for further
punishment darken them more and more.

No man shutteth] because none can hinder his from entering in at his opened
door, or can pluck them out of his hand.

He shuts, and no man openeth] because whosoever is not elected and drawn by
Christ can never enter; this proves Christ's deity; for the Apostles
ministerially do it, Matthew. 18 and Eliakim as High Priest. Isa. 22.22. -- but
Christ absolutely.

Verse. 8. I know thy works] I approve thy good works. Christ praises his good
parts to increase them; particularly because he had kept his word, and not
denied his name; in the former he commends the sincerity of his doctrine; in
the latter his constant Profession of the same before the adversary. But least
this holy teacher should be lifted up to think he did ought by his own
strength, Christ tells him he set before him an open door, that is, 'twas by
Christ's power, that the Church over which he was Pastor, embraced the truth.

For thou have a little strength] outward help and assistance, or any what in
thy self without me? so that it is Christ that opens. Christ had opened a door in
Sardis, and gathered a Church, (which though the Pastor had little outward
means or help) he would so defend that none should shut or overthrow it.
Sometimes by an open door is meant an occasion or opportunity of doing good.
Our Apostle said there was a door opened to him in Troas; so it is Christ
prepares the hearts of the People to receive him it is he that preserves the
People that do receive him. Christ has opened a door in many Kingdoms, though
Antichrist did his devoire to shut it.

Verse. 9. I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan] this is a tacit answer to
an objection that might be made; for since both unbelievers of Jews and
Gentiles opposed, it might be questioned how this Church could stand, and not
be shut? to which Christ answers.

I will make them, or give them, etc] showing his power above theirs, so
comforting the Pastor; also it might comfort him thus, that if these
unbelievers did molest him, Christ did but use their innate malice to teach him
and the Church patiently to rely on him, and that it should prove good to them.

Synagogue of Satan] The Jews called themselves so from Judah, which in Hebrew
signifies to praise, as if they had been the Praisers of God; but they lied,
being enemies to Christ, and of the Synagogue of Satan; so then hypocrites
vainly brag of their glorious titles.

I will make, etc] Here is comfort that these opposing Jews should in time be
converted, and reverence him as their Pastor, and worship God, both which are
noted in these words, shall worship before thy feet, as a dog fawning on one.
This notes the insufficiency of man to convert himself; it is God makes, also it is
not the minister. I will make, says Christ, note also the mercy of God, those
of the Synagogue of Satan shall worship. Christ not only comes by persuasive
but effectual means of grace, to gain man, who is averse to, and blind in
every thing of God naturally, and so gains the will (not forcing it,) which
after works freely through the means of grace.

Verse. 10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience] Christ out of a
fatherly love and mercy promises a reward to obedience; be cause he had kept
his Word, the reward was, that he would deliver him, either in the approaching
persecution of the Emperor Trajan, (See Plin lib. 10. Ep. 97. that he
commanded the accused Christians to be put to death) or in regard of the
persecutions of Antichrist, which troubled these and all the world.

From the houre] this comforts the Pastor that it was but a short trial, and
therefore the more cheerfully to be undergone.

To try them] This notes the use and end of affliction, that 'twas not for
destruction, but trial and salvation.

Which dwell upon the earth] God tries hypocrites as well as his faithful
People, the one show their constancy and faith in trial, the other their
corruption in Apostasy. Thus the chafe is winnowed from the wheat.

Verse 11. I come quickly] here is another use of comfort, since Christ will
come quickly to destroy the wicked, and deliver the righteous.

Hold that fast which thou hast] to wit, faith and a good conscience. By faith
they had righteousness, sanctification and adoption, -- and a good conscience
helped them forward in sincerity and patience under the Crosle, which were
therefore to be kept.

That no man take away thy Crown] this notes the dangerous effect of
slothfulness, such lose their Crown. Observe three things. 1. The promises of
God ought not to make us secure, Christ promises to deliver them in the hour
of temptation, yet they must hold fast what they had. See my book (already
quoted) p. 79. 2. They only who hold fast what they received shall be crowned.
3. Each shall have his own Crown, so there are differences of reward in heaven,
as well as of punishments in hell. See the same book, page 122.123. all have
the like glory, not for the degrees, but quality; they shall shine as the
Sun, there is the quality; some degrees yet are no doubt allowable to be
affirmed, for as one star differs from another in glory, so also is the
resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.41.


Verse. 12. Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the house of my God]
This verse has a promise of a threefold reward to the overcomers. 1. That they
shall be glorious members of the Church triumphant, understood by Pillars in
the Temple. 2. Their glory shall be unchangable, perpetual, eternal, understood
of the perseverance of the Saints in those words.

He shall go no more out] alluding to the brazen pillars thrown out and
destroyed with the Temple by the Babylonians. 3. The promise of the inscription
of a threefold name.

1. I will write upon him the name of my God] either alluding to Salomons
pillars which had names, or to the Romans who usually write upon their statues
of triumph, the actions of the Conquerours, and the names of the conquered
nations. These names are perished, but those Christ writes are indelible. 2.
The name of the City of God] as the first name signifies their being sons of
God glorified; so the second, their being members of the Church triumphant. 3.
His new name] since his exaltation, Christ will make his partakers of perfect
happiness, being members of his body.
To the godly in Pergamus he promised a new name, but to these his new name
which he received of his Father, which is above every name, now as it signifies
Christ's glorious exaltation at his right hand, so he promises to make them
glorious according to measure, being members of such a head. Concerning the
Churches or Cities coming down from heaven, who sees not that her Original is
from heaven, grounded on Gods Election, also it receives its birth here from
heaven. But lastly John saw the Vision in heaven. ver. 13. has been mentioned
elsewhere. verse. 7. chap. 2.

Verse. 14. Unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans write] Whoever this
Pastor was, he was a carnal crafty man, and though he bore the name of a
Minister, he was void of God linesse. Our Apostle twice mentions these
Laodiceans in his Epistle to the Colossians, as chap. 2.2.4.16. though in John's
time 'twas very corrupt. Yet upon Christ's sending this sharp Epistle,
doubtless it repented of its evils, for Eusebius commends this Church as
flourishing in his time.

These things says the Amen] Aman in Hebr. signifies verity: now Christ calls
himself so, because he is true both in promises and threatenings, that by
promise-keeping he might win this hypocrite from sin: or by threatening, and
assuredly (without repentance) punishing he might deter him. Again, Christ is
not yea and nay, that is variable and inconstant, but in Christ all the
promises are Yea and Amon (2 Cor. 1.19, 20.) Therefore he takes upon him this
name here, because the hypocrites he was to deal with, being grown secure, it
should seem begun, to esteem of the faith of Christ as a thing indifferent, and
that for the cause thereof they needed not suffer affliction, or contend with
the Opposers, thus then the more plainly to tax their luke-warmnesse, he
declares his truth and faithfulness, concerning his being a faithful witness.
See chapter 1. ver. 5.

The beginning of the Creation of God] this proves Christ's deity; for the Son
with the father and the spirit gave unto all creatures the beginning of their
being. Touching the Son all things were made by him. Now Christ calls himself
the beginning, that these poor Laodiceans might return to him the fountain of
all good.

Verse. 15. I know thy works that thou art neither cold nor hot] Neither were
these Laodiceans enemies to Christ, nor true friends, but served Christ and the
world alike, as occasion served. They were neutrals, that is, fained
hypocrites, worse in Christ's esteem then his professed enemies.

I would thou were either hot or cold] He first wishes they were hot, that is,
truly zealous in faith and godliness; or cold, that is, altogether without
faith and godliness: he wishes not this absolutely, but comparatively,
insomuch as they that seem to be cold, seem to be more excusable then those
that be lukewarm; and more easily to be reformed, and better avoided.
Certainly it is a worse thing not to follow the truth we know in sincerity, then
to be ignorant altogether thereof. Hypocrites, and those that have faith only
in show, and think that they see, but are blind, are greater enemies (yet with
pretense of Religion) to Christians, then those who are quite cold. One may be
sooner hurt and deceived under the name of a friend then of a foe. A Pagan also
were sooner gained to Christ then a Jew or Hypocrite. Here you may see what to
think of the members of Antichrist, who join Christ and Belial, Images and
Scripture, God and gain together. --

Verse. 16. I will spue thee out of my mouth] the metaphor is taken from warm
water, which is loathsome to the stomach, it notes the hypocrites creeping
into, and being in the Church with a form of Godliness, but to be cast out,
because wanting the power thereof.

Verse. 17. For thou say I am rich] either because many rich Merchants were in
this Church, and therefore they boasted as having all wordly comforts, (though
they be weak arguments to prove our being in Christ, to reason from outward
blessings, or rather because hypocrites do imagine they are rich in spiritual
things, wanting nothing, here is their Pride also reproved.

Because thou say thou art rich, and know not] ignorance was the cause of
their pride, they knew not themselves nor their own wants. The best way to beat
down pride, is to examine and know our selves.

Thou art wretched] Christ shows in five things what naturally we are all,
(and what hypocrites are.)

Wretched] is one oppressed with calamity and sickness, which must here be
understood of the soul.

Miserable] deprived of mercy.

Poore] destitute of true righteousness and holiness.

Blind] ignorant of his miserable state, (which is a very great misery.)

Naked] wanting Christ the wedding garment.

Verse. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried by the fire] meaning faith or
the word: tried in the fire of affliction, is much more precious then gold that
perishes. By faith, righteousness, forgiveness of sins, and eternal life
through Christ is purchased.

Buy of me] Christ is the rich Merchant that has the Monopoly of all good,
which we may buy and come by, by Tears and Prayers alone, or as Isa. 55. Come
and buy, -- without money, without price; but with that caveat, O ye that
thrist.

That thou may be made rich] he that enjoys much gold is in the world
accounted rich; but it is not gold, but faith that possesses Christ and all his
treasure, which will make us rich in Gods account.

And white raiment that thou may be clothed] because we are naked, Christ's
garment of righteousness (which is white and unpolluted) he advises to buy,
there are two white garments mentioned on v. 5. where the heavenly glory is
meant as a reward of victory after this life: but here the Robes of Christ's
righteousness is meant, with which we must be clothed in this life, that so
we may be acceptable in the sight of God. It Is thought allusion is had to the
Romans, who when they sought for an office in the Commonwealth, came clothed
in white to the place of Election, by their garments testifying the integrity
which becomes Magistrates.

And anoint thine eyes with eye salve that thou may see] Because he was
blind, the meaning is, to ask of God the illumination of the spirit, by which
their darkened hearts may be enlightened.

Verse. 19. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten] here note the difference
between the afflictions of the Saints and the wicked, these are chastised as
children, but the wicked are condemned and judged to hell. Of Gods love in
affliction see my book at large, p. 64, 65.

Be zealous therefore and repent] Since the means is yet to be had (as gold,
white raiment, eye salve) which may restore thee, -- make good use of them, and
show thy zeal for the time to come, and repent of thy former luke-warmnesse.

Verse. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock] Formerly Christ compared
himself to a Merchant and Physician freely selling the Merchandises and salves
of salvation; now to a wayfaring man (but a rich one) who yet stands (to note
his care and diligence for to forward our salvation) at the door: does
presently go away, though the door be not presently opened. The door here is
our heart which is naturally shut against Christ, yet Christ knocks more then
once or twice, even till it be opened, it notes the assiduity and constant or
continued care Christ has of us. Christ knocks many ways; First, By the
preaching of the Law and destruction. Secondly, By the Gospel and free pardon
of sin. Thirdly, By laying the cross of affliction. Fourthly, By his spirit.
Outwardly we hear Christ knocking when we attend upon the word preached:
Inwardly, when we embrace the same.

And open] Christ has the key to open, though he be said to knock; we open to
him when we savingly apply the Promises of the Gospel; for then Christ with all
his benefits enter into our hearts.

I will come and sup with him] Here are three mercies promised. First, He will
come together with the Father and the Spirit and dwell in our hearts, an
infinite favor, greater then if Kings should dwell with us and make our
Cottages their Palaces.

Secondly, Will sup with us] Christ sups with us when by faith he makes us
partakers of his word, spiritual Sacraments, when he delights in our faith
and conversation.

Thirdly, And he with me] Christ is rich, comes laden with blessings to
communicate to us the good things of the Gospel. I willingly omit any cavils
upon the words. Christ knocks, it is certainly spoken to capacity, we have not
a power to open till he bring the key, for we are dead by nature, now what
power is there in a dead man, till Christ does by his powerful knocking awaken
us?

Verse. 21. To him that overcometh] He shuts up the Epistle with an accustomed
conclusion. It is a promise upon victory. I will grant to him to sit with me on
my Fathers Throne; but note the condition taken from Christ's example, As I
overcame and am set down with my Father. Christ's throne is the glorious power
of his exaltation, for the word. Throne notes Majesty and Power, so that Christ
will make his really partakers of that his glory if they overcome, for they
shall be coheires with him, so yet as there shall remain a remarkable
difference betwixt Christ the head and the members.

Verse. 22. Is easy by what has been delivered.

Concerning the Epistles to the seven Churches, that to Philadelphia seems to
be the excellentest, next to which that to Smirna, the sharpest to Laodicea.
They all are (almost) for substance alike, I mean, consisting of three things:
First, A description of Christ the Author of the Epistles. Secondly, The praise
or dispraise of each Angel, being a narration. Thirdly, Good things are
promised to those that overcome, and destruction to those that fall away, which
may be called in other terms thus: A Preface, a Narration, Exhortation, and
Exclamation of Promises annexed. But I study to be brief.

CHAP. IV. Vision 2.
Verse. 1. After these things I saw].

AFter I had seen the first Vision.

Behold a door opened in heaven]. The heavens appeared opened to John, wherein
as a Theater he saw this Vision. Some by heaven understand the Church, and the
opened door to be the sense of Scripture interpreted.

The first voice which I heard etc.] Meaning Christ's voice, who had formerly
promised to show to his servants things that must shortly come to pass, to
wit, hidden things of Gods secret counsel concerning the condition of his
Church in this world.

Verse. 2. And immediately I was in the spirit] He was in a Trance the second
time and so ascended into heaven by Christ's Commandment from Patmos, where the
holy Spirit represented these things to his understanding, and revealed the
mysteries thereof to him, these kind of Visions are called intellectual.

And behold a throne was set] Hereby is represented the dominion and judgment
of God over all things.

Verse. 3. And he which sat on the throne] He is not named, yet doubtless it
was God, for it is called Gods throne, chap. 7.15.

Was like a Jasper] This stone is green and clear, though there be of other
colors; some say the Jasper (refreshing the eyes) represents Christ's divinity;
and the Sardine, which is red, Christ's humanity, bloud-red in his passion, who
came from Bozra in red garmens, Esaias 63.1. The Emrauld and this Jasper are
alike much, and represent his divine Majesty. But I seek for no mystery, the
preciousnesse of the Stones set forth the condition, and of him on the Throne
-- The Rainbow notes his mercy, for in Genesis he sets the Rainbow in the cloud
promising not to destroy the world any more.

It was round about the throne] Because he is clothed with mercy, let him look
which way he will, there is the Rainbow like the delightsome Emrauld, to show
how he delights in Covenant-keeping, in Promise-keeping, and in mercy. You see
then here was God the Father represented sitting and reigning in the person of
his Son, so he that formerly appeared to John walking among the seven golden
Candlesticks, now appears sitting on a throne, sometimes under one figure
Christ is represented, sometimes under another.

Verse. 4. And round about the throne 24. Seats, and upon the Seats four and
twenty Elders sitting] An honorable Session of Elders: hereby are represented
the company of Patriarks, Prophets, godly Kings and Judges, nay, all the Saints
under the Law, who now triumph with Christ in heaven; but certain here is a
finite number put for an indefinite, by the number is noted a perfect Senate.
They sit on thrones, because with Christ they shall judge the world: They be
said to be Elders because of their wisdom.

Clothed in white raiments] Here is the Priestly dignity of Saints shadowed
out (as by crowns on their heads, the Kingly is) white, undefiled robes become
Priests, also the purity of Saints in heaven is hereby signified, their
Garments being washed in the blood of the Lamb. Crowns note their reigning
with Christ; this is the crown of life and glory.

Verse 5. Out of the Throne proceeded lightnings, and thundrings, and voices] By
Lightnings, and thundrings, and voices, to wit of thunder and lightning, for
thunder is the voice of the Lord; by it is noted the Majesty and power of him
that sits upon the Throne, who sends forth judgments against the wicked.

And seven Lamps of fire burning before the Throne] To wit, chief Angels, who
are his eyes and feet, etc. by which he executes his pleasure.

Verse 6. Also before the throne] The Sea of glass like Crystal is the world;
very frail; a sea, because instable and tumultuous: as Crystal clear,
because all the counsels and actions of men are before God and the Throne, he
clearly discerning every thing Bulling.

And in the midst of the Throne, and round about the Throne were four beasts]
Near the Throne and close by it; as, I send ye as Lambs in the midst of
Wolves; So here, these four beasts were near the Throne; though some think
the four Evangelists are here meant, as Matthew in likeness of a man, because
he begins with the generation of Christ as man; Mark of a Lion, because he
begins as roaring the Law, The voice of one crying in the wilderness. Luke of
an Ox, because of the sacrificing of the Priest, which he begins with. John of
an Eagle because soaring aloft, In the beginning was the word -- and the word
was God; such high divinity John begins with, that one of the Ancients said,
had he flown a little higher he had flew quite out of sight, we being not able
to comprehend him. But how can this be well understood of the four
Evangelists; since John was yet alive? I understand the State of the Christian
Church triumphant, who are of diverse forms because diverse Nations and peoples
are now under the Gospel received, but the 24. Elders, or Jewish Church was
more uniforme in the Law; Four, perchance alluding to the four Evangelists,
or a finite number put for an indefinite. Beasts, because of their great pains
and difficulty to enter into the kingdom of heaven --

Full of eyes] As the former notes the pains and labor of Teachers to gain
souls to Christ: So this latter notes the watchfulness and singular wisdom
and insight of Teachers; we should all be thus quick-sighted to understand
Scripture.

Verse. 7. The first was like a Lion etc.] The Church is described from her
gifts, a Lion notes fortitude, a Man wisdom, an Ox labor and industry, an
Eagle sharp sight, as in knowledge.

Verse. 8. And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him] Alluding
to Esaias 6. with two they fly, noting their quickness and readiness to serve
God; with two they cover their face, not being able to behold the Majesty of
God, with two they cover their feet, not knowing when Christ shall come to
judgment, or that nothing unbeseeming the Divine Majesty might appear about
them. Thus the Seraphims. In that their wings are full of eyes, it denotes that
full and perfect light or knowledge which the Church enjoys with God in
heaven.

And they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy etc] But incessantly
praise God (for they are never weary.) Now note both Beasts and Elders praise
God; here is the excellent consent and harmony of Prophets in the Law, and
Apostles in the Gospel, acknowledging Christ's holiness, power, and Godhead.

Verse. 10. The 24. Elders fell down before him that sat on the throne etc.]
Rose from their seat, and fell down before the throne, giving due worship and
reverence to him that sat thereon.

And cast their crowns before the Throne] Attributing their victory and reward
to God the Author, Greg. The rest is easy.

CHAP. V. Being a continuation of the second Vision.
Verse. 1. And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the Throne a Book]

Doubtless this Book is the Revelation it self, which was not a material, but
a Visionall Book, Now as Christ is said to receive the Revelation from God (of
which before) and to deliver it to John by an angel; So here, this Book was in
the right hand of him that sat on the Throne, and taken out of his hand by the
Lamb, verse. 7. Opened and delivered unto the Angel who gave it to John,
commanding him to eat it, chap, 10. Forasmuch as all things thus agree, no
question this Book was the Revelation.

In his right hand etc] Because God is the Author of the Revelation, also
because he held it forth to Christ to open and unfold.

Written within and without] This signifies the multitude of matters which were
exhibited to John in the Revelation, no place in the Book was empty.

Sealed with seven seales] Because the Book was shut up and kept secret and
kept close from the understanding of men; this is one use of seals, it notes
the obscurity and secrecy of the Revelation till by Christ opened.

Verse. 2. And I saw a strong Angel proclaiming with a loud voice] Or one of the
seven Spirits excelling in strength (See my Glimpse of Christ's love, page 43,
44.) who cried with a loud voice, because with a mighty courage he proclaimed
before the whole Company of heaven the question about opening the Book.

Who is Worthy to open the Book etc] Not who can; for not only skill and
strength, but worthiness is also required in the opener of the secret counsel
of God about things to come. Note this.

Verse. 3. And no man in heaven etc.] Silence in heaven, all creatures dumb as
unable and unworthy to open the Book, in earth men and beasts, under the earth
fishes and sea monsters, being under the earth according to the sense of the
second Commandment, that is, in the water under the earth. By heaven, earth,
seas unablenesse to open the Book is understood but thus much, no creature
could.

Verse. 4. And I wept much because no man was found worthy to open etc] He
concluded sure some worthy matter is in the Book; therefore wept because it
could not be opened and known; this weeping was not in vain; for by prayers
and tears he has his desire granted him. Let this instruct us how to attain
to the knowledge of the mysteries of God.

Verse. 5. Then one of the Elders said unto me weep not etc.] Who is unknown;
the Papists would needs persuade it was Peter, but it was one the Jewish
Church, not Christian (as is observed) perchance he that was next to John.

Behold the Lion of the Tribe of Iudah] Alluding to Jacobs blessing, where
Judah is called a Lions Whelp; it notes Christ's dignity, strength, and Kingly
power; Christ's mother was of this Tribe.

The root of David] Mary came of David.

Has prevailed] Being found worthy; observe here Christ's manhood, of the root
of David. Christ Godhead, since he was worthy and overcame, admitting no
creature with him into the Society of his function.

Verse. 6. A Lamb] Before a Lion conquering sin, hell, death -- now a Lamb
noting Christ's innocence.

In the midst] To wit between the Throne and the Elders, as Mediator betwixt
God and the Church; also it notes Christ's exaltation at the right hand of God.

Stood as it had been slaine] His standing notes his Resurrection, being stain
his death; a Lamb slain noting his manhood; a Lion and a Lamb standing noting
his Godhead, victory, Resurrection.

Having seven hornes] Seven is taken indefinitely for many, or answering the
seven seals; horns note power, eyes Divine insight, so that Christ wants
neither skill nor power to open the seven seals of the Book.

His eyes are said to be the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the
earth] meaning seven choice created Angels, which proves Christ's divine nature,
since the Angels are his servants, who give him account of the sons of men,
(whose hearts however he knows without them; and which they know not, whom he
uses not for need, but majesty and comfort to the godly. --)

Ver. 7. And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat
upon the throne] to wit, out of the midst, and went to the throne, and took the
book to open it. Thus that is fulfilled, chap. 1. ver. 1. God gave the
Revelation to Christ, and he to John. Christ gives it to John as God, receivs
it of his father as God-man, Sits on the throne as God, goes to the throne for
the book as God-man.

Verse. 8. When he had taken the book] which was not yet opened; though the
Latin version read it so, which Alcusar would feign excuse. Here is noted the
cause of the heavenly inhabitants joy, because Christ had received the book,
wherein the whole counsel of God touching the good of the Church, and the
destruction of the adversaries to the end of the world is contained.

And fell down before the Lambe] giving him divine worship, which proves his
deity.

Having every one of them harps] not as if God were pleased with music, but
because it stirred up the affections of Saints to Godward; with such
instruments the holy Prophets and Kings were wont to praise God, and to delight
themselves and others; for the same instrument might praise God and please
others.

And golden vials full of odours, which are the Prayers of the Saints] as
perfumes ascend upward, and give forth a sweet smell, so Saints in Prayer seek
for heavenly things, and are pleasing to God through Christ. Now as gold
excels, so Prayers from a pure heart. Let the viol of our hearts be pure, and
the Prayers of thy People be as sweet odours in thy sight O Lord.

Verse. 9. And they sung a new Song] A most excellent Song containing the new
benefits of Christ.

They] both Churches, see the consent of both Covenants, Know by the way, the
Prayers carried by the Elders in vials were their own Prayers only.

Saying, thou art worthy to take the book and to open the Seals thereof]
excluding worth from any other, the worth is the preciousnesse of his blood,
which we should well consider.

For thou were slaine] Christ by his death has merited for others, and he only
can give salvation.

Verse. 10. Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, etc.] Here the Church
applies the price of our redemption to her self, with the effects. For he has
made them Kings and Priests; of which already. And we shall reign on earth, not
only mortifying our earthly desires, and trampling them under feet, but also as
Christ our head does reign here (not by a secular power, for his Kingdom is
not of this world, and the weapons of our warfare are not carnal) for the head
reigning, the members reign, but this we understand not of an earthly but
spiritual dominion.

Verse. 11. And round about the throne] The Angels, whose number is even
infinite, (only known to God) join with the Church triumphant, (of which they
are members) in the praising Christ, who though they had not a redeemer as man,
yet had benefit by Christ's death. See Col. 1.20. compared with 16.) praise him
for man's redemption (and perchance their own gathering together, Ephesians. 1.10. is
thought on.)

Verse. 12. Saying with a loud voice, worthy is the Lamb. etc.] These Angels
with Songs set forth seven divine Titles of the Lamb; yet his ubiquity, (as
Pareus notes) is not mentioned.

To receive power,] because he is omnipotent.

And riches] because in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

And wisedome] being the eternal wisdom of the father.

And strength] because he has overcome the world and Satan.

And glory] because he reigns gloriously.

And blessing] he is worthy of blessing in whom we are all blessed.

Verse. 13. And every creature which is in heaven] all the creatures (nay devil
and all) do in some sort set forth the praises of God. Now here is another
argument of Christ's deity, since all the creatures worship him with religious
worship.

Verse. 14. And the four beasts said Amen] here the Beasts and Elders manifest
their joy and consent to the praises of Christ, sung by the Angels (to speak to
capacity) by saying Amen, that is, so be it; and the Elders by worshipping
Christ, who lives for ever and ever.

What joy and companions in praise, what holy members has the Church
triumphant in heaven? that it is even heaven to us below to think of it.

CHAP. VI.
J. Act of the second Vision.

Verse. 1. And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the Seals, etc.]

NOw the book begins to be opened, for Christ now reveals unto John the
Councels of God, which were yet hidden and shut; he showed to John in types
which he made him understand; but he shows us the types, only concealing the
mysteries, that we might exercise our selves in the diligent observation of
things, both from histories and events.

One of the four beasts saying come and see] the beasts it seems performed the
office of public Cryers, whose work it is to call Persons nearer the Throne of
Judgment Seat; they in order call John who stood afar off, either for
reverence, or that he might more certainly write down what he saw.

As the voice of thunder] The first beast was like a Lion, who now called to
John to come and see, (requiring hereby great Attention) and hence this
Lyon-like voice as of thunder.

Verse. 2. And I saw and behold a white horse] to wit, went out of the book or
seal, for indeed as all the mysteries were in the book, so upon opening it
they came out, that is, were expounded to John; now if the book were so great
to contain a horse and man, how great was he that held the book? how great he
that opened it? how great were the mysteries and events? The white horse
denotes the Purity of the Primitive Church, compared to that warlike creature,
an horse, because the Church militant should fight against the world, flesh and
devil.

The rider is Christ, who was swiftly carried on in the Ministry of the
Apostles and other faithful Teachers in the first times. Thus Paul bare his
name before the Gentiles; the Bow is the Word, by which he wounds the hearts
of the Elect, that he may heal and restore them to life: the Crown notes his
Regal Crown of triumph, because he goes forth conquering; by his death he
conquered sin; by his resurrection, death, hell, Satan, and the world, and
tyrants. Julian the Apostate confessed so much in his blasphemous speech, thou
have overcome O Galilaean: he conquers heretics, he conquers, converting
sinners, many ways he conquers; which for brevity sake I omit. Christ in one
respect opens the book, in another comes forth conquering, the first as the
chief Prophet Godman, the last as God and King.

Verse. 3. And when he had opened the second Seal, behold a red horse] John is
called to see the future condition of the Church under persecution; behold it is
blood-red under many tyrants, it is the same Church though called another,
because of its differing color; the rider I take to be Christ (not Satan) who
is with his People in all misery, He came not to send peace on the earth, but a
sword and fire, yet by accident (not in himself) because of the malice of
Tyrants and Heretics opposing truth.

Verse 4. And that they should kill one another] Heretics under a color and
pretense of Christ, persecute and kill the servants of Christ; learn hence, the
devil can do no more then Christ will suffer for our good, to wit, the exercise
of faith. Christ suffers tyrants to afflict his Saints. --

Verse. 5. Lo a black horse, and he that sat on him had a pair of balances
in his hand] To wit, the Church in her afflicted condition by wicked heretics,
who cloud the light of the truth with their black heresies, and bring in a
deformity upon the Church, who was formerly white. I omit the names of the
Heretics, who in the age following the Apostles, till the time of Greg. the
first (though they professed themselves Christians) overthrew Christianity;
after also the faith of Christ was oppressed, and way made for Antichrist, who
shortly after came into the Temple of God; when Boniface the third obtained the
primacy over all Churches from Phocas the usurper. Thus the white horse became
black, yet Christ rides on it, with the balance of holy Scripture in his hands.

Rides] For the worst and grossest Heretic professes Christ: 2. By his
providence rules them, for in greatest confusion of heresies he is not wanting
to his Church, as they came not unawares, but for the trial of his Church, so
they are continually examined and confuted by the balance of his word, he so
ordering it, for a balance is the trial of just or unjust weights: so
Scripture is a true touchstone to try gold and brass. --

Verse. 6. And I heard a voice in the midst of the 4. beasts etc] 'Twas the
Lambs voice in the midst of the Throne, and four beasts, Chap. 5.6.
proclaiming a famine of the Gospel, for through the ambition, Luxury
covetousness and negligence of Bishops, the Gospel should be so corrupted; and
by Here ticks so adulterated that nothing should be pure and sound; by wheat in
this place, sincere teachers are meant, who should be rare; by barley, the
comforts of the Gospel, which should be scarce, though some understand a plenty
hereby, since a measure of wheat and three measures of barley should be sold
for a penny, a measure containted a quart, being a man's allowance for a day a
penny was near 7 pence with us, if so, then Christ in the midst of all heresies
had truth The penny was wages for the day as Mat 20.13. now a measure (being as
much as a man could cat in a day) was to be had for the penny or days labor.
enough for his people.

See thou hurt not the Oil and the Wine] By Wine and Olye some understand the
Orthodox faith which should not be totally obscured by heretical blackness.
Now as Wine Cherishes and Oil clenses, so sound doctrine does glad and cleanse
the conscience. Alcasar applies Oil to the light and true knowledge of
happiness, and wine to spiritual joy which the Lambs voice promises the
Elect shall not be deprived of, notwithstanding the dearth of truth by the
darkness of heresy: Which happened partly, when the whole world groaned under
Arrianisme.

Verse. 7, 8. And I looked; and behold, a pale horse, etc.] This fourth beast
having the for me of a flying Eagle, with quick fighted eyes, having spied
something (as it were on high) calls to John, for I believe hereby may be
signified these plagues coming from above, to revenge the injuries done to the
Saints, and to punish the impenitent. This pale horse is the same Church of
Christ in the succeeding age, though of another color. Pale. because it is
infirm, weak, sickly, near unto death and hell: it by accident was occasioned
by Constantines excessive bounty to the Church, for then Pastors began to be
proud luxurious, idle and fertile in vices. Jerome complained in his time, that
after Princes became Christians, the Church indeed was greater in power and
riches, but less in virtue; the remote cause was, the guile and malice of that
old serpent the devil. Also now Bishops by infinite ceremonies, and human
traditions increased the pale disease; Nay Monks (whose (at first) solitary,
hard life wrought much upon the people) increased this palenesse for people
that desired pardon for sin, were sent to the Monks dens (not to Christ)
whereby this mortal wound came upon the Church, drawing more to hell then
either the blacknes of heresies or sword of tyrants, though this might seem
rather to be expressed under the notion of the darkning the Sun, and rolling up
the heaven, then by the pale-horse.

He that sat opon his back was death, etc.] Though Christ doubtless was
carried up and down as rider in the Church (for all professed him) yet since in
works they denied him; death the effect of sin is said to sit upon his back,
drawing hell, for that waits on death without Christ) after him. Now though by
beasts, beastly lusts reigning in the souls of the people (through the
negligence, slothfulness and security of Bishops) wounding and killing many:
may be understood; And by famine, that of the word Amos 8.11. By the sword, the
wounding tongue (which cuts like a sharp rasor, Psalm. 52.2.) or false wounding
doctrines of Heretics suffered in the Church: by death, the spiritual death,
for want of Christ the life and the Gospel: the food of the soul (for I hear
not of a persecuting sword in this age) yet certainly there is a plain allusion
to Ezech. 14.21. where the Lord threatens Jerusalem for her Apostasy, with his
four sore, that is, some cruel punishments, to which Christ likens here the
cursed effects of security in teachers and heretics, wounding doctrines,
destroying a fourth part, that is, a great part of the earth under the Roman
Empire.

Now follow Act. 2. Vision second.

Verse. 9. And when he had opened the first Seal] In this second Act are three
things contained: 1. What he saw, and the place where: 2. What they said: 3.
The answer they receceived.
The sum of all is to comfort the godly against the scandal of the cross,
shadowed out especially under the red horse; particularly, least John should be
daunted much at the effusion of so much blood of the Martyrs, he sees their
souls safe under the protection of Christ; Observe then the soul is separable
eternal.

I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God,
and for the testimony which they held] To wit, of all the Martyrs slain from
Nero to Boniface the third the first Antichrist.

Under the Altar] To wit, Christ Heb. 13.10. We have an Altar, not then in
purgatory, but in heaven: Thou shall be with me this day in Paradise; Not under
the robbes of Mary, but under the safety of Christ: the Altar, not lost, for
they enjoy the presence of Christ and of God as far as created natures are able.

Verse. 10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, how long etc.] By this is
showed their earnest desire of the hastening Gods judgments ('it was no vocal but
visionall crying) which imports no impatiency (for the glorified Saints are
free from such corruption) their desire is just, that Gods glory may be
vindicated, the Church finally delivered. They do not prescribe God a time, but
closely submit to the same, as unknown to them, only they intimate that to
them, it seems just and equal that he should deliver his Church, and no longer
suffer the blasphemies of cruall Tyrants.

Verse. 11. And white Robes were given unto every on of them] They are answered
in words and deeds, for white robes were given them, this notes the beginning
of glory Moses and Elias talking with Jesus, had such shining garments; the
perfect robe (though this former be without spot) is referred till the day of
judgment. Now for the word.

And it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season] To
wit, by him that sat upon the Throne, or the Altar under whose protection they
are: Now Christ is called an Altar, because he was sacrificed as a Lamb upon
the Altar of the Cross (or his divine nature) which sanctified and made the
sacrifice worthy and able to pacify divine Justice. In the answer note many
things. 1. Antichrists time is short. 2. God hears always the prayers of his
Saints. 3. The cruelties of the wicked are not forgotten; but shall be
revenged. 4. The cause of the forbearance, is first to lead men to repentance,
that the full number of the Martyrs may be accomplished. 5. A communion
between the Saints above and these below; We ought not therefore to pray to
them, being our fellow servants; Neither (though they love us) do they pray for
us, because it would derogate from Christ in whose presence they are, as if his
intercession were not satisfactory, or he were asleep: however we ought not to
pray to them, since they know not our particular wants (though they be in the
presence of GOD) For Abraham knows us not, Esaias 93.


Act 3. Vision second.
Verse. 12. I beheld when he had opened the sixth Seal, and lo, there was a
great earthquake, etc.] This Act consists of two parts, 1. Treats of the
greater and more horrible confusion of the Christian world under Antichrist,
verse. 2.15. then and in the 7. Chap. is treated comfortable things as the
sealing of the Elect to verse. 8. I refer these Earthquakes to the last
persecutions under Antichrist, upon Phocas the Emperors proclaiming Boniface
the 3d. universal Bishop and Prince of Priests (or indeed Antichrist) then the
Christian world began to be horribly shaken, for now Christ the Son of
righteousness began to be obscured, (that is) the doctrine concerning his
offices and benefits darkened; the Moon or Church turned into blood; the
Stars or Pastors fall from heavenly offices, the opened Book of Scripture, or
the Heaven rolled up and forbidden to be read; the mountains, Kings and Princes
(for they are higher then the other people) in Jeopardy. The Islands brought
under Antichrists yoke and tyranny: First of the earthquake, sometimes it is
taken in a good sense, as Heb. 12. I will shake heaven and earth, meaning, in
reforming the world by Christ. Note also that the signs foretold to be at the
last day ( Math. 24.) in the Sun and Moon, shall literally come to pass; when
the Isles shall fly away, and mountains were not found; to wit, at the day of
judgment.

But here the Earthquake signifies the shaking and oppressing the Church by
Antichrist, who darkened the Sun, to wit, Christ, and the true light of the
Gospel; and the Hypocritical Monks who wore garments of sackcloth (glorying
of perfection) do (as by a true badge) testify that they live under this
darkness spoken of.

But (say they) the Pope professes Christ against all Heretics.

Answ. Should he openly cast off the name of Christ, then he could not have
brought under his bondage the Christian world? But his coming (as the Apostle
writes) is withal deceiveablenesse in them that perish. Christ is darkened,
and Mary adored, free grace rejected, for polluted works; the Sacraments
changed into Idols, the Gospel into Traditions: scarce any thing but the name
of Christ remaining.

The Moon became as blood] The Moon is the Church: Now as the Moon borrowes
light of the Sun, so the Church all of Christ.

Into blood] The cruel tyranny of Antichrist: makes the Church red with the
blood of the Saints, the often Massacres prove this in part.

Verse. 13. The Stars of Heaven fell into the earth] Stars do not really
fall but false ones do, so false teachers like untimely figs fall to the earth;
or earthly and worldly affairs; by Antichrist, or the Popes mighty wind, or
threatenings, as excommunication or the like.

Verse. 14. The heaven departed, as a scrowle when it is rolled together] The
light, to wit, departed, alluding to the old custom of rolling up their books,
(not binding as now) so being shut, they could not be read, but enough to be
expound this place; either the true Church of Christ shall be hid in the time
of Antichrist, or the light of the Scripture shall be darkened, and it forbidden
to be read, or in sum shall be shut up.

And every Mountain and Island were moved out of their places] That is, Kings,
for as mountains are higher then the rest of the earth, so Kings are above
other People. Kings are interpreted mountains, Rev. 17.9, 10. The Empire of
Rome is the mountain, chap 8. ver. 8 the Persian Kingdom is a mountain before
Zerubbabel, Zach. 4.7. the mountains or Empires were moved by Antichrist;
Ecclesiastically, when Kings and Emperors were made to kiss his feet; Civilly
when deposed by him, and some trampled under foot, (witness Alexander the
third, trampling on Frederick the first,) many of the like nature I omit, and
of his boasting himself above Councels.

Islands were moved] As waters note People, chap. 17, 15. so Islands are
nations, and subjects of Princes, now necessitated upon pain of salvation to be
subject to the Romish Bishop.

Act. 4. Vision second.
Verse. 15. And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rirh men, and
the mighty men, etc.] This Act consists of joy here being treated of the final
punishment of the wicked (in the general) at the last day; here the servants of
Antichrist (of all sorts,) who have been instruments of his advancement and
tyranny over the Saints, or who have drawn their swords for him against them,
by reason of Antichrist are brought to miserable destruction, and desire to
hide at the last day from the sight of the Lamb, who formerly made the poor
servants of God thus hide in dens and caves. Now what shall become of the
series of Antichrists if their instruments be thus punished? if the serpent be
cursed, woe to the devil himself.

The wrath of the Lambe] Christ is never said to have wrath until now. Here is
the judgment of the last day treated of, when Christ the Lamb shall pour
forth his wrath upon the wicked, Go ye cursed. Now this proves Christ's divine
nature, for Antichrist sure and his adherents shall be afraid of none else but
God.

Verse. 17. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand] To wit, the day of judgment; here is the reason of the wickeds horror,
because of the day of judgment, because of their evil conscience against God,
Christ, and the spouse of the Lamb, to wit, the Church. Thus the wicked shall
not stand in judgment.

CHAP. VII. Act. 4. Vision second.
Verse. 1. I saw four Angels standing on the four corners of the earth,
holding, etc.]

THese Angels were the wicked instruments of Satan and Antichrist, who by fire
and sword did endeavor to hinder the preaching of the Gospel, whether Kings,
Emperors, Cardinals, Bishops, Jesuits, Friars, or the like; Now as good
teachers are the Angels, as ch 1.20.) so bad instruments, (as those Ministers
of Antichrist) are understood by those Angels here.

Foure] Alluding to the four corners of the earth; Now by four corners of the
earth all the earth is understood, so by four Angels many instruments of
Antichrist are to be understood in many parts of the earth; by wind the Gospel
is understood, by which the spirit is conveyed to the hearts of men, the wind
blows whether it lists, to blow the wind is to sound forth the Gospel; to
hinder the blowing of the wind, is to hinder the preaching of the Gospel; the
wind cherishes, keeps the air from corrupting, by its means the trees bud
(together with the Sun) it is piercing and vehement; the Gospel comforts,
sanctifies (by conveying the spirit) is the incorruptible seed by which we are
regenerated. -- Now certainly those Angels were wicked ones, for Christ in the
following words says to them, Hurt not: those that blowed were such teachers as
preached Christ sincerely, (even for many hundred years ago) as John Scotus (my
In my native Country, Ireland, there is a noted place called Down, where
Scotus taught School: called from thence Scotus dunensis, or Duns by
Contraction: yet -- other places challeng right to Scotus his birth.
Countryman as is believed) Bereagarius, Bernard, Hierome of Prague, who
strongly have blown by their Sermons and Writings, against the idol of the
Mass and transubstantiation; and here I might bring in Luther and Melancthon
with others, who began to blow the Gospel of Christ.

By Earth, Sea, Trees] I understand particular Churches, either in midland,
woody, and hilly countries, or near seacoasts (as Islands) not the faithful
particularly, because Christ forbids these Churches to be hurt, till the
faithful in them were sealed. Now the Bishops, Cardinals, and the like, who
have their Colleges and Fraternities fixed (or standings upon the earth,)
forbid these teachers, by their edicts, excommunications, persecutions,
forbidding the reading of Scripture, here note two things, 1. Christ has
Preachers of truth in the midst of Antichrists Kingdom. 2. The way Antichrist
had to set up his kingdom was by hindering the preaching of the Gospel.


Verse. 2. And I saw another Angel ascending from the East] This is Christ, who
came from the East, from an high, from heaven, though born at Jerusalem. He
has the broad seal of heaven with him, by seal I understand that of
Election, as 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal,
he knows who are his. Now in Christ we are all sealed or chosen before the
foundation of the world, allusion is had to Ezech. 9. Christ sealing here, is
justifying, regenerating, giving his the Seal (that is the assurance) of
Election. Now though all the members of these Churches were not Elected, yet
were they separated from the hurt of Antichrist.

Aloud voice] This notes the power of Christ above Antichrist.

Till] This notes Christ's care of his people, forbidding the hurting of the
Churches till his Saints were called home -- lest they might be promiscuously
wrapped in the danger of seducement, but afterward they might hurt them.

Verse. 3. Till we have sealed the servants of God etc.] Meaning his Ministers
with him, not the Angels before mentioned which hinder the blowing of the wind.

In their foreheads] alluding unto Ezech. 9.4. but the Seal here is internal,
imprinted in the elect by Gods eternal purpose, together by sealing them in
vocation, justification, sanctification; invocation on the name of God hating,
Antichrist and Idolatry, so that one may run and read whose servants they are
as plain as if it were written in their foreheads; hence observe twelve things
flowing from these three verses, 1. Antichrist hates the truth of the Gospel
(for it is a discovering his nakedness.) 2. The Gospel sanctifies, and
cherishes man's nature. 3. Satan and his instruments are under the power of
Christ (hurt not says Christ.) 4. Christ is God, for he has the Seal of
election. 5. He Takes much care of his people (hurt them not). 6. His Gospel is
preached, and he has sealed ones in the Kingdom of Anrichrist. 7. There is a
set time of our calling -- until we have sealed. 8. Christ's servants are to be
known by their profession of him, and obeying him, (in their foreheads). 9.
There is an assurance of salvation to be had in this world, understood by the
word sealed; for the use of a Seal is to confirm (so that the Saints need not
fear falling away) 10. There is a certain number of the Elect. 11. Christ and
his Ministers do co-work (till we have sealed). 12. All the sealed ones are
servants to God.


Verse. 4. Of all the Tribes of the children of Israel]. That is, of all Nations
imitating the true faith of the true Israel, because God has elected to
salvation some out of every part of the world, says Annonymus upon the place,
or as chapter 5.9. Thou have redeemed us out of every Nation, kindred, tongue,
people; here is a certain number put down for an uncertain (though there be a
set number elected and known to God) the Tribe of Dan is left out, not because
Antichrist was to come out of that Tribe (as the Papists affirm, and many of
the Fathers, grounding on Genesis 49.17. Dan is a Serpent in the way) but because
that Tribe forsook the fellowship of their brethren, and became like Gentiles,
Judge. 18.1.30.

Verse. 9. After this I beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man could
number,] This shows this to be a differing act from the former; the sealed
ones were in earth, but this great multitude is seen in heaven, before the
Throne; the sealed ones note the Church militant, this multitude the Saints in
heaven observe, as in chap. 6, 12, 14. Antichrist makes a great earthquake in
the Church, and darkens the Sun, makes the heavens depart as a scrowle; so on
the other side, here the Gospel is preached, though hindered chap. 7. ver. 1.
and the Elect sealed. And as the Antichristian adversaries tremble at the last
day; chap. 6. verse. 2. last. so the Martyrs and sealed ones, chap. 7. ver. 9.
Enjoy eternal felicity; the multitude are those under the Altar, chap. 9, And
the hundred forty four thousand sealed ones, ver. 4. They had white robes, to
note their glory; and palms in their hands, to note their victory and reward,
for the palm was given in token of victory of old

Verse. 10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, salvation to our God] The
Angels, Elders, Beasts, nay the whole Assembly of heaven sing joyfully to God
and the Lamb: but the Antichristian adversaries say to the mountains fall on
us; this thanksgiving of the heavenly inhabitants is indifferent plain,
therefore for brevity sake I omit it.

Verse. 13. One of the Elders answered, saying unto me, what are these which are
arrayed in white robes?] the Papists say Peter, I believe 'twas the same that
chap. 5.5. said weep not one that was next to John; who asks who they were in
white robes, not as doubting, but to take occasion to instruct John, as the
Baptist once sent his disciples to Christ to confirm them of the Messiah.

Verse. 14. They have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb] hence their
whiteness; hence they are before the Throne, or enjoy felicity, not because of
works or martyrdom then.

And serve him day and night] That is, ever: for there is no night, where all
Saints shine as the Sun, -- but it is spoken to our capacity.

In his Temple] To wit, Heaven. The Lamb and the Almighty are the Temple of it.

Christ shall dwell among them] That is, they shall for ever enjoy the favor
and glory of God. Thus much for the positive good they shall enjoy. Now
follows what they shall be freed from.

Verse. 16. They shall hunger no more] Hunger and thirst and heat are put for
all the defects and troubles of this life as tears note the afflictions and
sorrows of it, which Christ will deliver them from; for he will feed them with
satiety of joys in his presence; And will lead them to the fountains of living
waters of comfort. For in his presence is the fullness of joy, as in his
absence are miseries for evermore.

CHAP. VIII. Act I. Vision third.
Verse. 1. There was silence in heaven about the space of half an houre]

THough the 7. Chapter concludes with the day of Judgment, and the freedom of
Saints from all miseries, yet this silence I understand not of that tranquillity
which we expect to follow that day, because that is to last for ever, this for
half an hour; what then? by it I understand a short space, in which (the
former Vision being Acted) John had permission to desist from the contemplation
of these high mysteries, and to prepare himself to contemplate on new Visions.

Verse. 2. And I saw the seven Angels] The seven Angels whom he saw before,
Chap. 4.5. to whom Christ that sat on the Throne gave seven Trumpets to sound
withal.

Who stood before God] Their office was (as Heralds) to stand in the presence
of God speedily to perform his commandments. Now these Angels do represent
the Ministers of the Gospel; who, as trumpeters by commission, were to cry
alound, and proclaim the will of God: Seven is a perfect number, it notes
Christ's sending a complete or perfect number of Preachers, or laborers into
his harvest: yet it is supposed the seventh means the Archangel mentioned, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. to sound at the last day.

Verse. 3. And another Angel came and stood at the Alter] Christ (before these
Ministers begin to preach or sound, steps in to sanctify them, by sending them
his spirit to enable them to go through with their work) comes forth with a
golden censure. I follow Annonymus upon the place: who by the Altar understands
Christ, under whose protection the Saints are, chap. 6.9. By the fire of the
Altar his spirit, which as fire descended and lighted upon the Apostles. Acts
2. Thus 'twas cast into the earth; Now as the fire is from the Altar, so it
notes the spirit to be God and from Christ: If I go, I will send you the
comforters, says Christ. Here note an allusion to be had to the Types of the
Old Testament, where the Priest went to the Altar, whereon continual fire was
preserved; And he took a golden Censure, and he put incense therein, which
being kindled by the fire of the Altar, was resolved into an odoriferous smoke
acceptable to God. Now in heaven there is no Altar but Christ, who as our
High Priest appears, being God and man, who sanctifyes the prayers and
endeavors of the Saints with the Censure, that is, his most precious death and
passion, which he applies to the Saints; which is expressed in that he offered
up the Incense with, or to the prayers of the Saints. Thus by prayer Christ
offering up the Incense of the application of his passion unto it, the Saints
may get the assurance of Christ's death, and consequently of eternal life: Now
upon Christ's offering himself up for us, and upon the preaching of the Gospel,
comprehended under the word voices; there followed the thundering of Tyrants,
the lightnings of Heresies (you see they be dangerous) and the great earthquake
of Antichrist spoken of chap. 6.12. where observe that this part of the Vision
agrees with that in chap. 6. Christ at the Altar giving seven Trumpets to seven
Angels, here resembles Christ on the white horse there. The thundering here
after the voices, or preaching of the Word, and the fire of the Altar sent, or
Spirit given to the Church, resembles Christ on the Red horse. The lightning
which burns, destroys and makes look pale (as experience testifyes) resembles
CHRIST on the pale and black horse of sickness and heresy.

Verse. 6. The Angels prepared themselves to sound] To wit, now after that
Christ had sent his spirit, till then the Apostles were not to departed from
Jerusalem, nor these Angels to sound; Thus then the seven Seals and Trumpets
agree, and perhaps the voyals for Christ signified the same thing to John under
several forms.

Verse. 7. The first Angelsounded, and there followed hail,] By this
expression, the contradictions and persecutions of the enemies of the Gospel
are set forth; for as hail is hurtful to green Corn, so is opposition and
gainsaying unto young believers; fire and blood resemble persecution and
banishments which happened to the Disciples when the Gospel began to be
preached from Penticost, and forward as the Acts of the Apostles witness; it
has allusion to the seventh plague of Egypt, and agrees with the first Seal; by
this means most of the Apostles and chief Teachers in the Primitive time, meant
by trees, were burnt up or destroyed; And diverse (even very many) Saints as
green grass (being weaker then the trees) were consumed, at least bodily. This
may teach all sincere Teachers to expect at least hail, that is,
contradiction, its well if not fire and blood; let us be however, like the
trees planted by the water side. Psalm. 1.

Verse. 8. And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain
burning with fire, etc.] This Mountain I believe not to be immediately the devil
as some think, but the Roman Empire (for he began not to burn with envy
against the Church now, but was a murderer from the beginning) perchance
stirred up to do this mischief by the devil. Now the Kings and Emperors or
Empires, are mountains, is said chap. 6.14. being higher then ordinary; but
what high mountain was in the world now (in this sense) but the Roman Empire?
The Sea is the gathering together of waters, and by it either the world or
Church is understood. Now the Roman Empire violently rushed in upon both, and
in the Church with fiery rage oppressed many thousand Saints, witness the many
persecutions. Thus the Church was the red horse, red with the blood of Martyrs;
Many in the Church bodily were destroyed understood by creatures dying in the
sea.

And the third part of the ships were destroyed] That is, many Teachers who
under Christ, were able to manage the Sea or Church; (see the skill that ought
to be in the Ministers of the Gospel,) but their souls were not lost, though
they were bodily destroyed, since Christ was aboard: but here is comfort, not
all, but the third part of the sea was blood; also the Sea quenches fire, so
the Church through Christ shall have the victory at last. And perchance it
might be spoken, because the Roman Empire should embrace the faith of Christ as
Constantine did. Thus the mountains was swallowed up with the sea, but by this
means Antichrist was nearer home.

Verse. 10. And the third Angel sounded, and there fell a great star from
heaven.] Here as Chap. 6. are denoted all Arch-hereticks, who for many years
after the Apostles deformed the Church: but especially here is signified the
Apostasy of the Bishops of Rome, as it were falling by degrees; For indeed
above thirty Bishops before Sylvester, for the most part shined as stars in
heaven, and suffered martyrdom for Christ; But after peace brought in by
Constantine (it is pity such fair weather should do hurt) the Roman star like
the Babylonian Lucifer (or the devil himself) began to lift up himself above
his fellow Ministers -- Sylvester is said to be the first that much
degenerated, burdening the Church with Heathenish rites and ordinances.

On the third part of the Rivers] By Rivers I understand the Bishop (successor
of Sylvester and other Teachers) from whom divine doctrine ought to flow to
others: By fountains I understand the Scriptures: by waters the comforts and
doctrines of Scripture infected.

The star was called Warmewood] From the effects of it, because it did
imbitter. -- Thus also did Arrius that Heretic imbitter the Rivers (partly by
force, partly by cunning) that who drank did endanger their salvation, here is
an allusion to the waters of Marah, this bitterness continued until Gregory:
Too too long, had it pleased God otherwise, yet here is comfort, since but the
third part of either was infected.

Verse. 12. And the fourth Angel sounded, and the third part of the Sun Was
smitten,] In the sixth Seal there is a total Ecclips threatened, the Sun should
be as dark as sackcloth of hair, that is very dark; but here only the third
part of the Sun is smitten, yet the apparitions much agree; or as the pale
horse noted the sickly estate of the Church, (of which see the exposition) so
somewhat of the same thing is here foretold; the Sun shadows out the chief
Prelates, as Pope and Cardinal, who ought to shine forth in life and doctrine;
the Moon which receives her light from the Sun, signifies other inferior
depending orders, as Priests and Curates. -- The stars being less in light,
signify the layity (thus Annonimus upon the place) all which grew sickly pale
and dime in the matters of Christ, yet here is comfort only the third part, for
Antichrist was not yet lifted up into his seat.

Verse. 13. And I beheld, and heard an Angel flying thorough the midst of
heaven] John saw this Angel fly in the midst of heaven, which noted some
notable Minister living in the Church or Kingdom of grace, who spoke of the
miseries of the Church ensuing; it is conceived Gregory Bishop of the Church of
Rome was meant by this Angel, who as a heavenly Herald foretold of the
grievous calamities to befall the Church by Antichrist, witness his Epistles
to the Emperor Mauritius.

Woe, Woe, Woe,] noting the three following Trumpets, or many great miseries
ensuing.

To the inhabitants of the earth] Noting earthly-mindedmen, and hypocrites
contradistinct to Saints, whose names being written in heaven were more happy.
Note how Muckwormes and Hypocrites are called inhabitants of the earth, but
Saints as they have their Original from, so their conversation in heaven.

CHAP. IX. Act. 1. continued.
NOw follows the fifth and sixth Trumpets, the fifth prefiguring the dissipation
of the Western Europian Churches by Antichrist. The sixth, the destruction of
the East by the means of the false Prophet Mahomet, and the Turks after him,
these began to blow together as it were, of which histories sufficiently
testify.

Verse. 1. The first Angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the
earth] who this Angel or Minister was, is not certainly known (perchance the
said Gregory) upon whose preaching this star fell; but the star notes some
notable Bishop, falling from the heavenly truth to earthly traditions and
doctrines of devils, -- certainly as Christ did not signify the devil by this
star (fallen long since, of which therefore John needed not to be informed)
so certainly 'twas not Luther a poor Monk, who had little, and left nothing
behind him, except footsteps of Reformation. The star notes some notable
Prelate long before him, who began to ruin the West, as Mahomet did the East,
and 'twas none but the Pope of Rome, (signified by the star, chap. 8. ver. 10.
who burning as a Lamp, that is, clearly and gloriously (as the Bishops of Rome
did at first) yet did fail at last, and together with Arrius, (not Mahomet, who
neither was one of the stars of heaven, that is, of the Ministers of the
Church, nor did ever shine, being a wretched villain always,) imbittered the
waters by falfe doctrines, traditions, heresies. Now to whom or what
Ecclesiastical person can this be applied, but to the Antichristian Apostasy
of the Bishops of Rome? Gregory, as all know, makes him to be Antichrist that
should affect the title of Universal Bishop. Boniface the third his successor,
three years after his decease, was declared by Phocas the intruder, (as all
agree) universal Pope, chief Priest, or Bishop of Bishops. Behold the Star;
though this is not to be applied to Boniface alone, who sat not on the chair
scarce a year, but to his Successors the whole Series of Popes.

The Key of the bottomless pit] by Key power is meant, (for he that has the
Key of the house has the power of the house.)

Now the Pope says he has the power of hell or the bottomless pit, to damn
whom he will, and to deliver whom he will; thus he is the Angel of the
bottomless pit, ver. 11.

God permitting, the devil tempting, Phocas gave him this power, behold the
man; Christ then though he gave the first Bishop of Rome, (and all other) the
Key, that is, power of binding and loosing, casting forth, and receiving in,
according to the word; yet the Pope having thrown away Christ's Key, he makes
use of Satan's usurped one. This his triple Crown can prove, whereby his power
over heaven, earth and hell is meant; but enough his practice makes him known.
Where note Christ has the Key properly, as head of the Church and Mediator;
the Pope usurpingly and deceitfully, as Angel of the bottomless pit, (not of
the Church) or sink of hell; also God suffers the sin, by it to punish another
sin, to wit for not receiving the knowledge of the truth, see 2 These. 2.10,
11. and Romans 2.24, 26.

Verse. 2. And he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose a smoke out of the
pit.] Hell and the doctrine thereof was shut up by the Prophets and Apostles
who led men to the true fountains out of the snares of Satan, but the Pope has
opened it to the destruction of poor souls; behold the smoke of the pit, I
mean the Popes black divinity, worshipping of Images, forgiveness of sins by
Mass, Penance, Alms, Pilgrimages -- of which the Volumes and practice of
Papists sufficiently testify. Now as smoke does hurt the eyes darken the air,
cause things not to be seen as they are, so does the doctrine of Papists.

And the Sun and the Air was darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.]
Christ the Sun of righteousness was obscured formerly in part by Heretics;
but after the fall of this star much more (as the times after Boniface the
third make known) the Air (signifying the Church) as receiving light from the
Sun (as the Church does from Christ) was darkened: and no wonder; for if the
doctrine of Christ be darkened, how shall the Air or Church have light? Thus
it is plain, though the Papists profess they know God, yet in works they deny
him; Note, that some by Air understand the Scripture which conveys the light
of the Sun (as the Scripture does the light of Christ) which was much darkened
by Popish doctrines and expositions; If the Air signify the Church, yet
Christ had the sealed ones, and consequently a Church notwithstanding this
darkness among the Papists.

Verse. 3. And there came Locusts out of the smoke] After the falling of the
Star; First, the bottomless pit was opened (there the Angel of the bottomless
pit takes the Keys, to wit, absolute authority upon him.) Secondly, there
followed smoke, to wit, divellish doctrines. Thirdly, the darkning of the Sun
and Air, Christ and the Church. Fourthly follows the generation of the
locusts; they are small creatures, having little wings, by which they lift up
themselves a little from the earth; and seem rather to leap then to fly, but in
some parts of the world there be some have bigger bodies. God plagued Egypt
with an Army as it were of locusts. John the Baptist did eat them as well as
wild honey. Pray mark; do not the Monks, Fryeryes, and religious Orders (as
they call them,) come out of the gulf of the sea of Rome? sure not by Christ's
authority or his word; the opening of the pit brought them: so then the Goths
army cannot be here understood, which came not out of the pit; but the Popish
Clergy, who seem to be holy, to fly a little from the earth, but indeed are as
the locusts, gorbellied devourers, and earthly; some are greater, behold the
Bishops and Cardinals. -- And as the Baptist did eat locusts, so some have fed
on those (as I may so say) but with this difference, to their destruction. Who
as locusts skip in the Summer, sing and delight in ease, but the Romish Clergy
where are greater troops then of Locusts? Where then of Friars? What creatures
destroy more then the Locusts? Who more then the Romish Clergy? who devour
widows houses, gather infinite riches without labor, build Colledgesand
palaces; but as the Locusts, do good neither to God nor man.

If it be objected that these cannot be understood of the Romish Clergy because
verse. 4. these cannot hurt the sealed ones, but Antichrist and his instruments
shall kill the two Witnesses, Chap. 11. ver. 7.

I answer, they may kill them, yet not hurt them (in this sense) the outward
killing (of which in its place) may befall the Saints, not the inward hurting
of the soul, for they are sealed by election, redemption --

And power was given them as the Scorpions of the earth have power] The Locust
being a little weak creature, has power only to hurt herbs and flowers, which
it destroys much; but these Locusts in the text have a power like a Scorpion;
now the Scorpions hide under stones and clifts of walls, and hurt and poison
unawares those that pass by; also a Scorpion is a little worm and no way
terrible to the sight: Thus the Romish Clergy seem little but have great power
from Antichrist and Satan; God permitting to punish those that obey not the
truth,) they seem as friends, no way terrible, but destroy both estates and
souls for their own gains, and as Scorpions lie hid, so Monks and Friars -- out
of Cells, Monasteries and Fryeryes unawares, wound those that come to them, by
false doctrines, confessions, and the like.

Verse 4. And 'twas commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the
earth] to wit, by God, who has a secret restraining Providence, so that these
locusts cannot rage and range over all; by grass understand the godly; and
perchance the same may be understood by green things, though some understand
the Civil Magistrate; for by green things some conceive green wood is meant,
which is strong (no doubt the Civil Magistrate may deal with wicked men, such
as the locusts, Antichrist, and those that are without). Now Christ defends
these Magistrates who withstand popish doctrines, from the hurt of the locusts.
By trees understand such godly Pastors and Teachers (who are strong and rooted
in Christ Jesus) as contradict the wicked devices of Antichrist; none can pluck
these out of the fathers hand; thus God had an unhurted Church in the Papacy
before Luther, yet not the Papacy; here the seeding perchance of the spiritual
locusts is noted, not on grass, herbs, or the like, but on cates and
delicates, but chiefly hence observe that the locusts can hurt only the
disobedient, (and that by a just power and punishment from God on them) and the
unsealed ones, as chap 7. ver. 2.

Verse. 5. And it was given them that they should not kill] The first limitation
was that the Popish locusts should hurt only the unsealed ones (of which sort
Antichrist and the locusts are) the elect Christ preserves from the mortal
biting of the locusts. 2. They should not kill men: but torment them. 3. The
limited time should be five months; these Ecclesiastical locusts were not (as
the Goths and Vanda's had,) to kill presently, but perchance by a worse
lingering disease, to torture and torment the consciences of men, as by penance,
satisction, merits of good works, pilgrimages, purgatory, images, -- by which
deceitful doctrines the souls of men (as on a rack) are continually wracked,
not being taught true Justification by the blood of Jesus. Thus God by the
locusts justly punishes those that receive not the knowledge of the truth.

Five moneths] doubtless here is a definite and certain number put down for an
indefinite and uncertain; by it is meant -- a short time which God had set
these locusts, and their biting which they cannot pass. Now if it be objected,
that their biting has lasted long; know a thousand years with the Lord, are
but as one day; God be thanked, long since many kingdoms feel not the smart of
these locusts: their biting in my native country Ireland (and other places)
has begun long since not to be forcible: and sure the five months with us in
England are already expired: we fear none of those Popish locusts.

And their torment was as the torment of a scorpion etc.] when a scorpion
biteth a man (to take the sense of the place) the pain at the beginning is not
great, but suddenly so increases, that if remedy be not had, it will within
few hours kill the wounded person; so though men regard not at first the
biting of the spiritual locusts: yet at the hour of death, if not before, all
things appear horrible and mortal.

Verse. 6. And in those days men shall seek death and shall not find it] Here
is noted the condition of mad men, showing how this biting shall infatuate,
befoole and besot people; these little spiritual Locusts have many years even
befooled many Kings of the earth and (otherwise) wise men; some have laid down
the Scepter, and taken themselves to Monasteries, persuading themselves (so
these Locusts have wrought on them) that eternal life was comprehended under a
Monks hood; and that a little holy water (as they call it) can purge sin,
whereby their consciences have been so troubled (wanting the true peace and
comfort of Christ) that they desired rather to die then live, so that they
might be out of this torment: but they shall not obtain death, nor lay violent
hands on ways terrible to men not acquainted with Christ) yet to shun the
former torment, like mad men they seek it.

Verse. 7. And the shapes of the Locusts were like unto horses prepared unto
battel] John really in the Vision (as I may so say) saw this strange monster,
as it is here described, which signified the Romish Clergy; now by the effects
and adjuncts we may see how these Locusts are shaped like horses; for these
Locusts are fatted in their Cloisters as horses in a stable, and being
strengthened by the King of Locusts the Pope, having the Devil (as a furious
rider) on their back, they oppose the Gospel of Jesus, and are ready upon
command given, to destroy either King or Prince (thus they furiously rush upon
any as the Horse into the battle.) Note, that as Christ in the Primitive times
had a godly company of Teachers that carried him on the white horse, so Satan
and Antichrist are in some sense carried by the Locusts or spiritual war-horses.

And crowns on their heads] Either because the Friars cut and shave their
hair crown-wise; or in respect of the great kingly power the Popish Clergy
usurp over the consciences of men, though according to the letter it may be
taken; for the King of Locusts (the Pope) wears a triple crown of pure gold
upon his head. O brave Vicar! and the Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots -- shine like
Princes, that one may demand, is this thy sons garment?

And their faces were as faces of men] Meaning the Popish Clergy; who because
they do not marry (yet do worse) as others do, but live retiredly, and separate
themselves from men and the world (as Monks --) because they also are more wily
and subtle then ordinary men (and for many other reasons, which for brevity
sake, I omit) they are said to be but like men.

Verse. 8. And they had hair as the hair of women] They delight to cherish and
soften and dress their hair (and by a synecdoche, other things practiced by
women, are comprehended here) thus the Romish Locusts are effeminate, using
much curiosity to shave and compose their hair, to wear gorgeous and silken
apparel (as women.) --

And their teeth were as the teeth of lyons] Here is noted their cruelty;
though they pretend mercy, piety, religion, many poor souls have they crushed
by their tortures; witness the inquisition of Spain; which though made and
pretended for the Moors, yet destroys Christ's servants. Also by their lions
teeth is understood their snatching all things, devouring widows houses, laying
waste Orphans fields. By their lions teeth the Romish Clergy in their writings
and disputations tear the Truth. --

Verse. 9. And they had breast-plates, etc.] Iron breast-plates keep off blows;
so these spiritual Locusts are not easily hurt. For first their Priestly
privileges exempt them from any civil power; so that the Magistrate dare not
touch (without endangering the Popes curse). Secondly, they have Kings, Princes
and great men to patronize and protect them. Thirdly, they are by several
orders, societies, fraternities, vows, -- so linked together, that as they may
hurt any, so none may hurt them.

The sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots] As Locusts with beating
their little wings together, can make a great noise; So the Romish Clergy by
their many privileges (by which as by wings, they are lifted up above the
condition of all other men) make a dreadful sound. The Chariot notes majesty
(and terror if in a battle, whether they often carry Princes and Generals); so
these by their privileges are terrible, their sermons spare none, of what rank
or quality soever, keep all under with fear of excommunication.

Verse. 10. And they had tails like unto Scorpions] Of the Scorpions striking,
see verse. 5. Note the Locusts had faces like men, seem as friends, and promise
salvation; but in fine wound as Scorpions, through false doctrines, purgatory
and the like; thus they have a tail (or sting) causing sorrow at last.

Verse. 11. They had a King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless
pit] The literal locusts have no King, Prove. 30. But these are more wise and
politic, having a King to protect them. His name (from the effect) may be well
called Abaddon or Apollyon; that is, a destroyer (in Hebr. and Greek) for he
destroys the Church. Or the Angel of the bottomless pit; to wit, the Pope,
for he opened and preached the doctrine of hell, of which see verse. 1. Now as
we have noted on chap. 1. v. 20. Angels are Ministers; so the Pope here is an
Angel (and so is the devil) but a bad one.

Verse. 12. One Woe is past] To wit, to John, in the Vision; otherwise this woe
of the Locusts torturing, in many places is not yet past. Note how the Locusts
kingdom is a kingdom of woe and misery to men.

And behold two more come hereafter] One upon the eastern Churches by Mahomet;
the other upon Antichrist, and the wicked at the sounding of the seventh and
last trumpet.

Hereafter] to be set down by John (for he had seen them, though not then writ
them) indeed they came together; I mean, the eastern and western Antichrist (as
I may say) by Mahomet and the locusts with their King; though John saw one
after another in the Vision, employed in the word hereafter.

Verse. 13. And the sixth Angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four
horns of the golden Altar] This golden Altar is Christ, the author of the
Revelation; (there is no other Altar in heaven) who is both the high Priest of
and sacrifice for his Church. (See chap. 8.) This voice is from Christ,
commanding the four Angels to be loosed as actors of the future tragedy. In the
sounding by the Angel, I know no mystery; John by this means is stirred up (and
we are) to take notice of the future events.

Which is before God] As the Altar in the Vision seemed to be before God; So
Christ is in the presence of God to appear for us, as our intercessour.
Concerning the four horns, see Exodus 30.10. they were Types of Christ's
expiation of our sins.

Verse. 14. Saying to the sixth Angel which had the trumpet] John perchance
heard Christ's voice (as from the Altar) commanding the Angel after he had
sounded, to loose the four Babylonian Angels. By which, Christ's divine
authority commanding the Angels of heaven, appears.

Loose the four Angels which are bound, etc.] It seems by divine providence
hitherto they were bound; but now at Christ's command let loose to punish the
Christian world for idolatry and wickedness. Now who more punished the
Christian world then those four Nations, Armenians, Arabians, Saracens,
Tartarians (from which last came the Turk, though now all four are comprehended
under the name of Turkey). Euphrates formerly did bound the Roman Empire,
separating the Christian world from the barbarous people who inhabited beyond
it (where they were bound) but now loosed. So these Angels are four Nations;
who at an appointed time brake forth with their hostile armies upon the
Christian world in the reign of Heraclius the Emperor; the occasion this; the
said Emperor having ended his wars with the Persians, dismissed without pay
his Saracene soldiers which he had then in the army, which they not well
liking, by the counsel of the false Prophet Mahomet, after they had drawn the
rest of the Arabians into a society and war with them, they with their captain
Homar in short time brought under the neighboring Provinces of the Roman
Empire, establishing the blasphemies of Mahomet, and rooting out Christian
Religion (which was much corrupted;) to these Arabians the Turks a people of
Sythia (now Tartaria) joined, professing Mahomatilme; over whom (to be brief)
Ottoman a Turk, became Emperor, who and his successors since the year 1300.
have subjugated great part of the world; so that Keckerman thinks Mahometisme
is more and larger professed then Christianity. But enough; he that desires
more satisfaction in the Turkish original and conquests, may read Knowles his
Turkish history. --

Four Angels] They are called Angels in respect of their ministry, God
stirring them up as his instruments, Officers and Angels (as it were) to punish
the idolatrous world. So then these Babylonish Angels (for Euphrates which was
the bounds to these Nations, run through Babylon) came not but by permission
and divine Providence.

Verse. 5. The four Angels were loosed] God spoke, and it is done.

They were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month and a year] God has
set a time to the tyranny of the four Angels, it is his mercy to mitigate his
judgments. Here is a short time set them; but to say how short or how long, I
believe none knows, though Brightman has taken pains herein. But we hope their
strength decays daily; of which see Dr. Heylins microcosmus in Armenia.

For to slay the third part of men] Here their cruelty is noted; they are of a
murdering disposition. True, they obey God in the executing his judgments, and
are his servants (as Nebuchadnezzar was) though they intend not to, nor know
they do serve him. They aim at nothing but rapine, murders and the advancement
of Mahometisme; so though they came by commission from God, and act (as Pilate)
by Gods leave and counsel, yet heel pay neither no other wages for their
service then hell and destruction, wherewith he has long since rewarded Pilate
in part, and deferres the rest until the day of judgment.

Verse. 16. And the number of the army of horse men were two hundred thousand
thousand] Noeting the Turkish forces to consist of horsemen especially, of
which one Emperor of the Turks can bring forth more to a battle then all
Christian Princes joining together. 400000. is common.

And I heard the number of them] John having named the number of the Turkish
horse (noteing what an innumerable army the Turks sometimes draw into the
field) least it might seem incredible, affirms he heard the number of them; to
put all men out of doubt. I well remember that living in the University of
Ireland, a gentleman that newly came from Scandrown or Alexandreta told me, he
saw the Turkish army march by to recover Badget or Babylon, and that the army
was above a week marching by, consisting of fifteen hundred thousand men, with
which he recovered Bagdet from the Persian. By which however I may guess thus
much, that the Turkish forces are incredible many.

Verse. 17. And thus I saw the horses] To wit, in the Vision; otherwise, neither
are horses in heaven, nor such a number in one army in earth. Xerxes came
nearest.

They that sat on them had breast-plates etc.] This Nation (of Turks) carries
not so much harnasses of steel (for they come light into the field, the readyer
to assault, fight or fly (if occasion be) as strength of nature; for the
breast-plates here mentioned, note the inward courage of the Barbarians; for
their breast-plates were of fire jacinth and brimstone; noteing their fiery
cruel natures; jacinth is in color like fire, and brimstone is easily
kindled; so are those Barbarians quickly incensed and provoked to war, where
by fire they make great desolation. --

And the heads of the horses, were as the heads of lions,] The Lion is a
generous, strong, cruel beast. It notes the swiftness, and valor of the
Turkish horse, in which they most confide, and hope for victory. The Locusts
teeth were Lions, but these horses heads are such, because the Locusts deal
more secret (the teeth being covered with the lips) but these Barbarians are
more open, breathing nothing but war and destruction professedly.

And out of their mouths proceeded fire and smoke, and brimstone] Out of the
mouths both of horse and rider; noteing the fierceness of their war-horses,
but chiefly this is to be applied to the rider. Brightman applies this to the
Turks guns out of which come fire, smoke -- yet perchance the savage, hydeous
cries of these Barbarians (which they eye before they begin battle, to terrify
the adversary) may be understood by fire. So their blasphemies against Christ
may be meant by smoke, which proceeded out of their mouths, as by brimstone
may be meant the stinking sulphurous doctrine of that wretch Mahomet,
wherewith millions of souls are and have been destroyed.

Verse. 18. By these were the third part of men killed.] Great has been the
Turks success; many Kingdoms and Nations. have they devoured; and though the
Christians have given them many defeats (witness brave Scanderbeg, Hunniades
King of Hungaria, and the Venetian, 1571) yet finally, by multitude they
prevailed. They have conquered the third part of our cities, Provinces,
Kingdoms, Churches, and Armies. The holy war (of which see the sweet tongued
Mr. Fuller) destroyed many hundred thousands of the Turkish men; yet they
(through sundry accidents) slew many more hundred thousands of Christians, and
at last went away victorious.

Verse. 19. For their power is in their mouth and in their tailes] How they kill
with their mouth, is said verse. 17. now they kill with their tails; (the
tails are behind, by which the retreats of the Turks are noted) either
wounding and killing by deceit, and fraud, by lying in wait for poor
Christians, or by perfideousnesse (though they often keep their promises --) or
by wounding with their arrows upon a retreat, fighting backward, as the
Parthians of old, who were most feared when they turned their backs. Either
then by serpents tails we may understand their deceit and fraud, or their
shooting headed arrows (and perchance poisoned) upon their retreat. The
retreats of the Turks are cunning and dangerous; compared to heads therefore,
and to serpents tails.

Verse. 20. And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues] The
sins of the Eastern Churches (as Idolatry that mother of mischief) caused this
loosing of the four Angels bound formerly by Euphrates. Now if God so punished
these, shall he spare Romes Idolatry? but she will say, she worships not the
Image, but the party expressed by it. Answ. And truly when Israel worshipped
the calfe, Exodus 32. and said, this is thy God, O Israel, which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, verse. 4. can I think they were such calves, as to
think this Idol-calf brought them out of that land? doubtless they were not
such sots; they saw the powerful hand of that God on Egypt, on the Sea, and
they see this is the work of their own hands -- but they thought to express
that God, by this calf or ox; yet how displeased is God with them? nay the
learned Jews have a saying, that no punishment ever happened to them in which
there was not an ounce of the golden Calfe, grounding on Exodus 32. ver. 34.
Nevertheless I will remember to visit this sin upon them.

Yet repented not of the works of their hands] The end of Gods judgments is not
for destruction, but instruction and amendment of life.

Verse. 21. Neither repented they of their murder, etc.] Here I observe, that
the Eastern Churches were addicted to strange sins, as sorceries, impurity of
life (living many unmarried, I mean of the Clergy) Sacrilege, for the Clergy
under specious pretenses, did devour widows houses -- yet repented not. O
Rome look to thy own self, for thy neighbors house is fired, and thou lie
impenitent, though guilty of the same sins; truly you may expect the four
Angels to kill the third part of you, since you thus provoke God to withdraw.

CHAP. X. Act. 2. Vision 3. Verse, 1. And I saw another mighty Angel come down
from heaven]
HEre in this Act are comforts for the godly under so long continued
afflictions: as the fifth Seal contained the comforts of the Martyrs under the
Altar, in respect of the evils of the foregoing seals; so this chapter
belonging to the sixth Trumpet does contain consolations against the evils of
the foregoing Trumpets, which I have already mentioned in the preceding
chapters. --

This mighty Angel is Christ, whom John saw in a Vision descending from heaven,
not by a local motion, but by the presence of his Spirit and special help, to
relieve the afflicted condition of his Church. Thus Christ has promised to be
with his Church to the end.

Clothed with a cloud] This notes the majesty of Christ, for God in old time
often appeared to the people in a cloud. So then Christ clothed with the cloud of
our flesh is not here meant, because his birth is not here treated of, but his
coming to assist by his spiritual presence, nor his coming in clouds at the
last day is not to be here conceived, but chap. 19. verse. 11. --

And the Rainbow on his head] The Rainbow signifies mercy, because God set it
in the cloud as a sign he would not destroy the world by water any more,
notwithstanding the sin of man. Christ comes to his poor afflicted Church as a
Messenger of peace and mercy (who is our peace, and procured us mercy) a
comfortable sign for an afflicted people, promising one day to his true
servants eternal rest and peace.

His face was as the Sun] Noting two things, Christ's glorified condition and
his being the Sun of righteousness, illuminating his Church, dissipating the
tempests of calamities, promising as it were by the clear beams of his
countenance to dispel adversity from his people.

His feet as pillars of fire] Pillars note strength to uphold, fire notes
Christ refining his Church, for fire consumes chafe; also hereby is noted
Christ's consuming his adversaries and enemies; so Christ appears as upholder of
his people, refiner of his Church, devourer of his adversaries: Thus Christ the
strong Angel is above the Locusts and like the Sun looks upon the rage of the
four Angels loosed and the rest of the adversaries, ready to support, refine,
consume.

Verse. 2 And he had in his hand a little book open] This is the same book which
was formerly sealed with seven seals, which Christ opened and holds it so in
his hand; 'twas less now, then when the seven seals were one, for now many
events were revealed to John out of it, and the seals taken off.

Quest. Why does Christ open the book and now keep it so?

Answ. Because Christ is the revealer of secrets, and of the will of his
Father, and he keeps the holy Scripture open, so that the Locusts nor their
King (notwithstanding the smoke of the bottomless pit) can darken the truth of
Jesus totally; nor the armies of the Barbarians could root up the faith of
Christ.

Mark then, notwithstanding all opposers of the truth the book is kept open;
for Christ raised some always to defend his truth; furthermore he keeps it
open for his two Witnesses in chap. 11. to purge by it the dregs of the Locusts
and their King.

And he set his right foot upon the sea, etc.] Some by Christ's right foot
understand powerful ministers, and by the left foot more weak ones; however
Christ sets his feet on sea and land, that is, takes possession of the world,
as preserving in all places some remnants of a Church to himself,
notwithstanding the many persecutions of tyrants, who endeavored to root out
the very name of Christ; mangre also the cunning endeavoring of that old
serpent by many heretics, and by the Bishop of Rome's falling from heaven to
earth, turning the doctrine of Christ into wormwood, and opening the
bottomless pit; this is a great consolation to the Saints that none can put
Christ out of possession.

Verse. 3. And he cried with aloud voice as when a Lion roareth] This lyon-like
voice shows the efficacious spreading of the Gospel, which should and does
frighten the opposers, who the more they rage the louder the voice is, the more
earnestly the name of Christ was professed, and this Christ's loud voice did
foretell, so that the enemies and opposers, though they did rage, yet they had a
kind of secret fear in them.

Seven thunders uttered their voices] These represent seven, that is, a perfect
company of thundering ministers or Boanergeses of the truth: who should (upon
the books being open, and the voice of Christ, (as the Lions roaring,) to wit,
in the publishing the Gospel, notwithstanding all opposers) undauntedly preach
Christ against tyrants, heretics, and Antichrist, to make them unexcusable.

Verse. 4. I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, etc.] This voice did not
absolutely forbid the writing of what the seven thunders uttered, but in
respect of the event, God foreseeing that the opposers would not hear but
despise their voice, causing the same to be sealed, secret and hid to them
through their own default. Note that some Copies read (After these things,
write what the seven thunders uttered) However here you see how true that of
Paul is, the Gospel is hid to them that are lost.

Verse. 5. And the Angel which I saw stand -- lift up his right hand to heaven]
So they did in old time that did swear; God once swore by himself, Christ
here swears by God. -- Christ forbade not swearing upon a just occasion, an
oath so is the end of strife; idle oaths Christ forbade, as by ones hair, head,
Jerusalem -- by which none ever swore before a Magistrate; rash oaths then are
forbid, not other. -- Observe Christ's sword as Mediator and God-man by his
father, who in that respect is greater then he.

Now in Verse. 6, 7. And swears by him that lives for ever and ever, etc.]
follows what was sworn, to wit that time should be no longer: but the
accomplishment of the mystery of God under the seventh Trumpet at the day of
judgment, was at hand: but Christ is not to be understood, as if he had swore
time should be no more after that day, but should be swallowed up in eternity;
for what needed an oath to confirm so apparent a truth? Christ's swearing was
to comfort the godly under tyrants, and especially Antichrist, who had
established his kingdom; as it made the Saints fear much more misery (for it
seemed so firm that it should not be demolished) now Christ promises a time of
Reformation tacitly; of which in chap. 11. also the ruin of Antichrists
Kingdom; and that no more time of such misery and sadness should happen to
the Church. So the oath here is for the confirmation of the promise, and for
the Saints consolation.

The mystery of God shall be finished, etc.] either of the Jews calling a
little before the seventh Trumpet, (of whose calling the Prophets speak, and
Paul, Romans 11.) or rather the mystery of the resurrection, (as Paul calls it, 1
Cor. 15. behold I show you a mystery) and destruction of the adversaries, of
which see Zach. 14 Mal. 3. penult and Mal. 4. thus the sixth trumpet shall
continue (fulfilling) till the last day; then the seventh by the Archangel
shall sound, 1. Thessal. 4.16.

Verse. 8. And the voice which I heard from heaven, etc.] to wit, that bade not
to write the things uttered by the thunders, ver. 4 commands him, 1. To take
the book out of the hand of Christ. 2. To eat it. True, seven thundering
ministers in the time of Antichrist, and opposers preached undauntedly the
truth of Christ, but without fruit; but now John must eat the book, by which is
signified that the Gospel is to be preached anew, (though not by John himself)
in the time of Antichrist with success; this book then written within and
without, chap 5.1. is the Gospel as well as the Revelation; that without is the
known word of God, or the Gospel, which Christ held open, ver. 2. in all the
time of the heretics, tyrants, and the kingdom of the locusts; that within,
the Revelation. This eating the book is a Preparation to the act of the two
witnesses fighting with Antichrist, (of which in chapter 11.) which in some sort is
acting in this age. Hence observe that the open book does manifestly set forth
the mysteries of God, not the canons or traditions of Papists. --

Verse. 9. And eat it up, etc.] So John did (however in the vision;) to eat it,
is to read, preach, meditate, digest, -- so all ministers should be devourers
of books, understand them before they preach. -- Christ bids John eat the book,
and then prophecy. We must not then presumptuously rely upon the extraordinary
revelation of the spirit without reading.

Verse. 10. And I took the little book, etc.] 'Twas foretold John, it should be
in his belly bitter, yet he readily takes the book. -- So the bitterness of
the events should not dishearten us from preaching, -- now the word in it self
is most sweet, comfortable, bringing peace; but in the event it brings by
accident bitterness, gripings, hating the world, fighting with sin, nay and
persecutions, banishments, martyrdomes. This bitterness to follow in the third
act of this vision is foretold John, that he might not be thereby troubled,
being already an exile.

Verse. 11. And he said to me, thou must prophecy again, etc.] The true
pteaching of the Gospel was destroyed by Antichrist, but now to be renewed,
purged from the dregs of Antichrist. And the locusts reformed, meant by John's
prophesying again.

Thou must prophecie] hence I believe John was restored in time, and performed
his office ministering to the Churches: but this proves not that John is alive,
and reserved to preach toward the end of the world; for John's prophesying
again did not so much concern himself, as other witnesses to be raised up to
reform religion, as he tells us in chap. 11. for since the seven thunders
wrought little on the enemy, Christ raises up his two Witnesses as defenders
and maintainers of his truth.

CHAP. XI. Act. 3. and 4. Vision. 3.
Verse. 1. And there was given me a rod like a reed].

HEre Reformation is treated of. This rod was a measuring staste, such as
builders use to mete ground with when about building, to which the reed was
like. Of this rod see Ezech. 40.5. by it is meant the Word of God by which the
Temple, that is, the Church of Christ was to be reformed, and it is the very
little book, of which before. Now the Word (as a rod) chastises sinners and
reforms them. Here observe that the Temple or Church was ruined and wasted;
then observe that the visible Church could err, since it wanted this reed.
Lastly, observe the Word is the best means and rule for Reformation.

And the Altar] The Altar is Christ, as is said; now Christ needed to be
reformed; how? because under the pretense of the name of Christ, he was thrown
out of doors, and the true doctrine of Christ (as the Sun was darkened before.)
Now by the Altar the whole worship of Christ is to be understood, which by the
corruption of heretics and Antichrist, needed measuring, rebuilding or
reformation.

And them that worship therein] meaning the true worshippers of God in the
midst of Antichristian defilements; now to measure them is to sever them as
chosen members, or to seal them, (as it is said of them chapter 7. for these are the
very sealed ones)

Therein] Though none (but the chief Priest) worshipped in the Temple, other
worshippers stood in the Court; yet here the true worshippers (because of their
coming near to Christ) are said to worship in the Temple, being indeed the very
Temple of the holy spirit. Concerning the Temple, Altar and Courts (to which
here is a plain reference,) see 1 Kings 6. and Ezekiel. 40. where the Temple is
described.

Verse. 2. The Court which is within, cast forth, and measure it not] The inner
Court in the time of the Law was holy, and for the Priests and sacrifice, (the
outward was common, and therefore not to be cast out,) now the Masle-priests
have an inner room hallowed, (in allusion to the old in the law) into which the
common People are not to come. John must not mete this Court, but cast forth;
certainly by the Court the People are meant. So those seemingly holy Priests of
Rome are not to be measured or reformed, but to be declared as cast out by the
word, as none of the Church.

For it is given to the Gentiles] Antichrist and his ministers are Gentiles, to
whom the inner Courts are given to possess and pollute. Thus those seemingly
holy Priests are Antichrists servants, nay are Gentiles, being as idolatrous
almost as they; worshipping images, -- and are cast out in the sight of God,
and counted as heathens, though they color and cover their idolatry.

It is given] God has given this inner Court of Priests to Gentilisme and
Idolatry, by a just judgment.

And the Holy City shall they tread underfoot forty two moneths] Jerusalem
(who should have been holy, and was by the Jews esteemed so --) was a type of
the Christian Church, which was by the Romans burnt and destroyed, which
nation now again under Antichrist was to tread under foot Christ's Church. Nay
thus, the man of sin (in particular) has exalted himself to be the Temple of
God, trampling under foot the Church of Rome, making himself king of it.

Forty and two moneths] God be thanked, 'twill not last always. Doubtless by
forty two months a shorter time then to the end of the world is meant: else
what needed the limitation at all? yet I confess Antichrist after Romes
burning, (of which chap. 18. shall survive and not be fully destroyed, nor his
false Church till Christ's coming, for he must destroy him with the brightness
of his coming, 2 These. 2.9, 11. yet his tyrannizing shall end before that;
indeed, if I may be allowed my judgment, I conceive the forty two months
shall expire, when Rome shall be literally burnt, which we expect daily:
Though I confess (to the praise of God be it spoken) Antichrist has in a
great measure ceased to tread underfoot the holy City or Church (in England,
Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany, Sweethland --) long since, and perchance
cannot last but to the firing of Rome, which if wise men conjecture aright, will
be 216 years hence. Doubtless here is a definite number of months laid down
for an indefinite, certain to God, but unknown to us. Learned men resolve the
forty two months into years, each month containing thirty years, and the
whole to arise to 1260 years. begin then at the time when the Gentiles began to
trample underfoot the Church or holy city, (which was when Boniface usurped the
chair, An. 606.) from what time to this, the Roman Antichrist and his
Gentiles have trodden underfoot the Church or holy City, the space of 1044
years, this being the year of our Lord, 1650. So there remains 216 years more
for the City to be trod down, and so many years remain for the two witnesses to
preach against Antichrist.

Verse. 3. And I will give power to my two Witnesses, and they shall prophesie]
Some have thought Christ and the spirit or annoynting were these witnesses: but
Christ makes them distinct from himself, saying, I will give to my two
Witnesses. Also Christ nor the Spirit cannot be killed as these were; Christ was
to die but once; lastly, the Revelation is an history (though mystical) and in
this particular almost literally fulfilled, as shall appear. Here also is a
plain allusion to Zerubbabel, Zach. 4. ver. last, who brought literally Israel
out of captivity (with Joshua, Nehem. 12.1. Zach. 3. and 4.) And are called
anointed ones. Now certainly the first Kings, States, and chiefly Ministers of
the Gospel, who endeavored to bring Gods People out of Antichrists spiritual
thraldom are here to be understood, being a plain allusion to the history of
Zerubbabel and Joshua, as will appear. John Husse and Hierome of Prague, were
the first witnesses, olive trees and candlesticks of Reformation in Bohemia and
thereabout, who in their successors prophesied or preached a thousand two
hundred and sixty days; Of which anon. Not indeed as if the witnesses should
ever quite give over preaching before the last day in their successors: but
because chiefly they should manifest their testimony, when Antichrist was
exalted, and trod down the Church in a most violent cruel manner. Certainly
notice may be taken, that since Hierome of Prague, John Husse, and others began
to witness the truth of the Gospel against Antichrist, the truth has
increased far and near. Thus whiles Antichrist trod down the Church most,
they witnessed most earnestly, and shall do till the burning of Rome, as will
appear in this chapter to a diligent Reader. After which as Antichrist will
with weakened strength survive, so shall the witnesses powerfully to the end.
But most notice is to be taken of the first forty two months, and the
thousand two hundred and sixty days, being all one, as shall appear.

Now if any yet object that anointed ones will not agree with Kings or
Ministers of the Gospel; I answer, that neither Joshua nor Zerubbabel were as
we read of anointed, yet Conductors of Israel from Babylon, Nehem. 12.1. and
called anointed, Zach. 4. last. Now certainly every minister of Christ, nay
every true Christian is anointed with the spirit, 2 Cor. 1.21. but enough.
Only note, that the first witnesses had the spirit and power was given them in
a peculiar manner to oppose Antichrist, and therefore are called the olive
trees. By the two witnesses therefore we are not to understand the two
testaments, who though they do testify of Christ, yet cannot be said to be
killed properly, and restored to life, -- by two therefore, a sufficient
company of witnesses we are to understand, (alluding to Moses and Aaron) who
also by their successors should preach and maintain the truth of Christ, after
the Court of Priests was departed from the Church to Paganism and idolatry, and
Antichrist had trodden underfoot the holy city.

They shall prophecy] Thus John in the two Witnesses does prophecy again.

A thousand two hundred and sixty dayes] Here is the same time allowed to the
witnesses to Prophecy, and to Antichrist and his Gentiles to tread down; so
that the beginning of the treading down the Church, and the Prophesying of the
witnesses was at the same time; for though Christ raised up two faithful
witnesses, that is, some more then ordinary toward the time of the Gentiles
treading down and taking full possession of the Church; yet he never from the
first beginning to tread down, left himself without some witnesses.
Berengarius, Scotus, Wickliffe, nay the very Romish Bishops and Emperors have
complained of the tyranny of Popes; after Boniface the thirds usurping. Thus
the witnesses time of Prophesying is not yet expired, nor shall be, till the
Gentiles give over treading down. --

Clothed in sack-cloth] Either because they prophesied, to gain men to
repentance, sackcloth and ashes; or because they mourned and were in
bitterness for the miseries of the Church intimated by sackcloth: or because
they were poor and contemptible in the worlds eyes, not clothed with silk -- as
the Romanists. --

Verse. 4. These are those two Olive trees, and the two Candlesticks,] To wit,
mentioned Zach. 4. meaning Jehoshua and Zerubbabel who brought the people from
captivity. Where observe, these two witnesses have some allusion to these two,
as to Moses and Aaron, sufficient witnesses against Pharaoh; and so by two
witnesses a sufficient company are meant, to whom Christ gave, to wit, power to
prophecy, that is, courage and ability to teach his truth and oppose
Antichrist) when the holy city was much trod under by Antichrist and his
Gentiles; Christ raised up his two witnesses, John Husse and Ierom of Prague to
prophecy against these Gentiles; and after their martyrdom. God stirred up
Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, Calvin and others to witness his truth. But
observe the dignity of these witnesses; they are Olive trees and Candlesticks;
the Candlestick bears up light, by which darkness is expelled; so the
witnesses bear the true light, and bear witness of the true light. Then, an
Olive is always green, bringing forth wholesome fruit; so the Ministry of the
witnesses is efficacious and lively; and the oil of the spirit (or the holy
anointing) comes upon Gods people by it; perchance hence may be observed that
Emperors, Kings and Princes (called son of oil) out of zeal to God, might be
witnesses, reformers of Religion, and nursing fathers to the Church, Zerubbabel
(Zach. 4) a Prince is called an Olive (in this sense) and an anointed one --
then as Zerubbabel a civil Magistrate, rebuilded the Temple and city: so God
raised ud faithful Princes and Magistrates as witnesses of his Truth in every
age of late.

Standing before the god of the earth] Here the dignity of the witnesses is set
forth; who though vile in the worlds eyes, yea in sackcloth, that is, poor,
neglected, contemned, yet are acknowledged by the god of the earth, who
therefore will regard them prophesying on earth.

Verse. 5. If any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, etc.]
This fire is spiritually to be understood; the word is a hammer and a fire in
Jeremy 23.29. Nay, and his Ministry is compared to fire, Jer. 5.14. Behold, I
will make my words in thy mouth as fire -- and the people as chafe. The fire
is light and consumes; so the word of the witnesses shall detect the dark
abominations of those that hurt them, opposing their prophecy; they shall
confound the Idols and Purgatory of Antichrist, and refute his lies. Thus the
two witnesses shall spiritually devour the Adversaries; though otherwise they
shall slay the witnesses. Here is an allusion to the fire procured by Moses and
Elias. Numb. 16. 2 Kings chapter 1. thus the Gospel has prevailed over those
that labored to hinder it.

Thus be killed] The witnesses of late ages as Luther -- have thus spiritually
undone and devoured popery and the beast; several Kingdoms of late in some
measure being enlightened, and Antichrist there destroyed by the witnesses and
faithful Ministers of Christ, notwithstanding all the plots, arms threatenings
of the Adversaries. So then, as the witnesses have (as it were) weapons; so
they are not carnal, but spiritual.

Verse. 6. These have power to shut heaven that it rain not, etc.] Alluding to
the Ministry of Elias, 1 King. 17.1. this is not to be taken literally; for
then there should be no rain during Antichrists kingdom, which according to the
letter is false. Spiritually the witnesses by the power of the keys shut
heaven, so that the rain of grace does not mollify the hearts of opposers and
contemners; either the spiritual rain of the Cospel comes not to them or works
not upon; they trusting in merits, pilgrimages, masses -- thus the word hardens
accidentally; though it soften the heart of the Elect. Here also may be thought
on the imprecations of the Saints against the utter enemies of the Church (as
Antichrist) which with God is of great force.

They have power over waters to turn them into blood, etc.] Alluding to Moses
and Aaron, turning the waters of Egypt into blood. So when the spiritual
Pharaoh of Rome kept the Church in spiritual bondage, God raised up witnesses
as Mofes and Aaron to gain home his people; but upon Antichrists refusal, the
witnesses by their sighs, tears, prayers, procured great famines, pestilences
-- (which have been common) upon the adversaries, for the contempt of the word;
thus also the witnesses spiritually smite the earth with plagues. Where observe
the reason and cause of great punishment by famine, plague, war, was contempt
of the word and witnesses; thus the word and witnesses accidentally bring
miseries.

Verse. 7. Moreover when they have finished their testimony, etc.] The
preaching of the Gospel is called a prophecy and a testimony of Christ and the
Truth. Which when the witnesses shall have finished (for before, Antichrist
shall not overcome them, and then only them; not their testimony for the Gospel
cannot perish) the beast arising out of the bottomless pit (out of which the
locusts came, chap. 9. v. 3. and Antichrist (or the Pope) too) shall make war
with them and kill them; the war here, is by disputations in behalf of
Antichrists Sermons, branding the witnesses as heretics, seducers -- by
councels condemning the witnesses; by excommunications and bulls, cursing and
casting them out -- by force, by fire and faggot and the like; not by the word
of truth (for so the witnesses shall kill Antichrist and the Locusts,) or the
goodness of the cause. Thus Jerome of Prague was overcome, and Wickcliffes
bones were taken up and burnt; so was John Husse destroyed after he had
prophesied (even literally) 42 months; for from the first time he began to
maintain Wickcliffes opinions, being Anno. 1412. to his martyrdom were
precisely (say his friends) 1260 days or two and forty months. Now though
some famous witnesses were put to death suddenly after their finishing their
testimony, and so the beasts treading down the holy city to be a time larger
then that of the witnesses (whereas the text gives both the same space of 42.
months or 1260. days) remember that the two witnesses (in their successors)
revived and prophesied again, verse. 11. So God has not lest himself without a
witness to this hour, nor will not, till the Peast cease to tread under
foot the holy city, or give over tyrannising at least.

Verse. 8. And their dend bodies shall lie in the street of the great city,
etc.] This must not be quite taken literally (for the bodies of the witnesses
were burnt and needed no burial) but as the Church of Rome is the great city,
consisting of many Kingdoms, and is spiritually called Sodom, because of her
uncleanness among the Clergy -- and other sins, and as Rome is spiritually
called Egypt, in respect of the spiritual slavery she keeps the people (as
Egypt did Israel) and in respect of the thousands of Idols of Rome like that
most Idolatrous Egypt; and as Rome spiritually crucified Christ, (not because
Pilate a Roman and the soldiers did it; though that is somewhat) but because
Christ is recrucified at Rome, and in the Idol of the Mass; where they (of
Rome) say, they crucify him daily, as being (say they) bodily present; but
especially, because she spiritually crucifies Christ in his members, and is as
wretched and as ready to do it, as Jerusalem that literally did it: So
spiritually their carcases lie unburied; that is, their names are cursed and
exposed to shame, their books burnt, condemned and not suffered to be bought,
their friends abused, and their very houses made jakes. Thus the great city or
Church of Rome is in respect of her Idolatry, tyranny over the people,
darkness in the matters of saving faith; obstinacy in matters of obedience to
the witnesses and word, contempt of God and his messengers and judgments;
notwithstanding the pure water of life is become puddle to them -- and other
judgments meant by the waters turned into blood, called spiritually or
allegorically Egypt.

Verse. 9. And they of the People, tongues -- shall see their dead bodies, etc.]
To wit all those that adhered to Antichrist, should applaud their King Abaddon,
and see with joy the dead bodies of the Saints cast forth as dung into the
street in the fore quoted sense.

Three days and an half] If the Popish Council of Constance (where many of
several nations met) be the kin^ed and people that rejoiced over the witnesses
(as our John Fox thinks) then by three days and an half may be understood three
years and an half; (for so long that Council sat) Now days sometimes signify
years, as Ezekiel. 4.6. each day for a year. However the witnesses shall be
exposed to reproach but for a short time; this is for the comfort of the
Saints, and in the first place for John that he might not be troubled.

Ver. 10. And the inhabitants of the earth shall rejoice over them etc] Meaning
those servants of Antichrist called inhabitants of the earth, as having nothing
to do with Heaven; It Is bad to do ill, worse to rejoice in it. Now behold it is
come to pass in a strange manner, that men in killing them shall tink they do
God service. It Is said, during the Antichristian council of Constance, public
shows and feasts were kept at the burning of Martyrs; And the Romish locusts
when they condemn a Saint to the fire use to feast; gratulate each other, and
send presents one to another. Well, Lazarus saw Dives in hell in torment in the
Parable. The reason follows.

Because these two Prophets tormented the inhabitants of the earth] The word
Prophet here is taken in a large sense; sometimes in Scripture to prophecy, is
to interpret; here it is to preach, etc. Here remember what Ahab said to Elijah,
thou troublest Israel, when he was the troubler of Israel. Indeed the little
book will be bitter in the working, it brings sorrow not to be repented of to
the Saints, though it torment the consciences of wicked men accidentally; the
Physic works most upon the fowlest stomach, where the fault is not in the
Physic but in the body; so the word will have its proper effect. The locusts
are the wicked tormentors, chapter 9. ver. 5.

Verse. 1. But after three days and an half, etc.] That is, after a litlle
while, the spirit entered into them (to wit, in the Vision to John); The truth
is, the same spirit (being immortal) shall enter (one day) into the bodies
again when to be glorified; but here it is meant, that God would raise up such
men with the like spirit (as the spirit of Elias is said to be in the Baptist)
to witness his truth against Antichrist. Thus God raised up Luther and
Melancthon to succeed the former witnesses, in whom they are said to live, etc.
But literally Antichrist never got the bodies to burn, -- yet the locusts have
exposed them to what shame they can in writing -- this may comfort the godly;
and encourage them not to fear them that can kill the body -- hence it is plain;
God is not left without a witness, so that the term of the witnesses
prophesying is not come to an end: Lastly you see the Locusts and Abaddon their
King can kill the witnesses, yet not hurt them nor their testimony; God will
raise them up in their successors here, -- and glorify them hereafter. --

Verse. 12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, etc.] The witnesses did;
not the enemies.

Great] Because of the power thereof; for it shall bring the witnesses to glory.

Saying unto them, come up hither.] To wit, to Christ, (who is not bodily
everywhere) but in glory. Now John saw the witnesses ascend (perchance bodily
in the Vision) teaching how after the death of the Saints their souls
immediately are in glory; This confirms the doctrine of the witnesses, though by
the enemy condemned as heresy.

And their enemies beheld them.] So in the Vision. Truly thus have the enemies
beheld the witnesses whom they slew; raised up to life in Luther, Calvin, --
and standing upon their feet (as it were) and consequently believe they
ascended into glory after death, though they rage against their successors.
Thus, at this restoration of the witnesses to life in their successors; the
Antichristian adversaries are amazed, seeing their doctrine so glorious.

And fear fell upon the beholders,] They beheld them dead with delight, but at
their ascending to honor they are amazed and afraid. These, as the enemies in
the Gospel, raged (at Christ, to wit, and the disciples) yet feared them
against whom they raged -- they fear, because they feel (though perhaps too
late) that they warred against Christ and Truth. Therefore, also they shall
fear their kingdom, riches -- and they shall dread the judgment of GOD but not
escape it.

Verse. 13. And there was a great earthquake the same houre] Antichrist raised
an earthquake against Christ. Chap. 6. Now Christ against Antichrist. By this
earthquake I understand, not only the great stir among themselves about
Religion (which much shakes great Britain at this hour) but Luthers
preaching, and before that the Bohemians war; but to say no more, experience
shows, how both multitudes of witnesses, the revolt (by the witnesses means) of
many Kingdoms from papacy, the many wars made aganst Spain ( Romes most
beloved son) have made a most terrible earthquake in that great city (I mean
the Church of Rome).

The same houre] That is, presently after the killing of the witnesses. I know
not one whole Kingdom (God be praised for it) except Spain and Italy (and
herein the Venetian begins to hare the Locusts) that totally adheres to his
unholinesse the Pope.

Thus the tenth part of the city fell] In the Vision; Nay by Luthers Ministry,
great part of the Romish Religion and tyranny or jurisdiction fell in Germany,
which was a great part of the Romish city; and in England and other places upon
it.

Seven thousand names were slain etc.] By the fall of the city, names are put
for men. Now as Brightman has it, the revenues and profits of many parish
Churches (as I may add) Monasteries and Colleges being lost; by the rising of
the Gospel, impoverished (and as it were) show many Priests also by the
preaching of the Gospel many Papists being more hardened perished.

And the remnant were affrighted, etc.] The falling of the great city, builds
Christ's little one; this proved a good fear; many seeing the works of God,
turned to the Gospel, of which experience and histories speak.

Verse. 14. The second Woe is past, and behold etc.] To John in the Vision. The
first woe it was under Antichrist from his rising to the council of Constance;
when the city began to fall. The second is yet under both Antichrist, Pope and
Turk. The third lasts to the seveth trumpet, to the end, for the wicked.

Verse. 15. And the seventh Angel sounded] This is the Archangell mentioned 1
These. 4.16. so the seventh trumpet is that which shall sound when the dead
shall rise.

And their were voices in heaven saying] To wit, of the 24. elders or heavenly
inhabitants rejoicing for the just judgment to come -- so the Woe threatened
belongs to Antichrist and the damned, which Woe Christ uttered in those words,
Go you cursed -- and is now to be fulfilled. The former woes did belong to the
godly and wicked alike under both Antichrists, Turk and Pope, this only to the
wicked. Now the cause of the heavenly rejoicing was in part, because the
kingdoms of the world (which the adversaries had violently taken into their
possession, and as much as in them lay thrust out Christ) now return to
Christ; who (having destroyed his enemies) shall reign alone, after which time
Christ shall deliver up his Kingdom, (for now he rules by his word, Spirit,
Sacraments, Ministry, as Mediator -- but then as God and one with the Father,
for ever) of which see 1 Cor. 15. hereafter Antichrist and the wicked shall not
rival with him; but our Lord and Christ, that is, our Lord Christ Jesus alone
with the Father and Spirit.

Verse. 16. Then those four and twenty Elders which sat before God, etc.] Of
which before, largly chap. 4.4. Here all the heavenly host shut up the third
Vision with a song of triumph, humbly falling down (on their faces in the
Vision; otherwise they are not bodily in heaven) giving thanks to him that is,
and was, and is to come, the Almighty (of which before chap. 1.8.) the cause is.

Verse. 17. Because thou have taken to thee thy great power and have raigned]
Taken; that is, do exercise thy great power, destroying all thine enemies,
and delivering thy afflicted Spouse; blessing her with thy self, eternally in
heaven.

Verse. 18. And the nations were angry, etc.] The heavenly host give this a
reason why they rejoice in the great judgment -- because the Nations have
sufficiently been angry and raged against thy Church (and to this purpose was
that chap. 6. verse. 10. how long --? of which see the exposition.) It Is time
therefore that thou reign and be angry with them for ever. By Nations here I
understand all enemies what ever; with whom the 24 Elders -- desire Christ to
be angry; in those words, thy wrath is come, or let thy wrath come.

And the time of the dead, etc.] Or the resurrection to wit, is come. But
surely Christ revealed this to them in heaven, otherwise it is very secret.

That they should be judged] There the righteous must be acquitted (however
must appear before the tribunal) and the wicked be condemned.

That thou should give reward unto thy servants the Prophets, etc.] To wit,
of eternal life; a reward out of free gift not debt; so the Apostle; the wages
of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6. verse. last. And
though God has promised, life eternal is not a debt; neither is God a debtor,
but to himself; but enough. The 24 Elders seem to make two sorts of people of
them that were to be judged; some who were to be destroyed; others to be
rewarded; these three sorts. 1 The Prophets (comprehending Patriarchs,
Apostles, Evangelists) 2. The Saints, to wit, Confessors, Martyrs, who opposed
Antichrist. 3. The fearers of Gods name, comprehending all other servants of
God.


Great and small, etc.] All have the reward alike, and perchance a like reward.
So St. Paul seems to say; a crown of righteousness (says he) is laid up for
me, and not only for me, but for all those that love his appearance. Because in
another book I have touched this point, -- and in this page; I Will name the
choice proofs of each side, and show the more probable opinion; It Is said, one
is the glory of the Sun, another of the moon, 1 Cor. 15.41. and so shall be the
resurrection; therefore one Saint in heaven is to outshine another. Answ. As
Peter Martyr, fol. 579. there is nothing said of the glory of heaven; only as
one star outshines another, so the bodies in the resurrection shall much differ
in glory from them as they are now sown in corruption. (as verse. 42. speaks)
note, it is not said, so shall it be after the resurrection; (to wit, in heaven)
but so is the resurrection, therefore that place proves nothing. Now to this
place I annex that of Math. 22.30. on the other part. We our Savior says, we
shall be like the Angels of God in heaven; now the Angels have but one and the
same glory. But secondly, it is said every one must receive according as he has
done in the body, 2 Cor. 5.10. and it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the
day of judgment then -- now if there be differences in punishments, why not in
rewards of glory?

Answ. Because punishments are for desert: rewards out of mercy, who has
promised to give the last as to the first, even every one a penny, Matthew.
20.13.13. Thirdly, but the Angels differ in dignity (there be thrones,
principalities --) therefore we shall perchance in glory; for we shall be like
them. Answ. At the day of the resurrection (when we shall be like them) all
those offices (which were for the use and service of the Saints and Church)
shall be done away (as well as tongues which were for the building the Church,
according to 1 Cor. 13.10.) so then all shall be alike.

Answ. 2. Archangel, and perchance these forequoted are different kinds; to
which Christ does not say we shall be like; now the Angels differ not. But I
rather retain the first answer. Fourthly, in my fathers house Christ says are
many mansions, Ioh. 14.2. Answ. Many, not diverse; for all shall shine as the
Sun, Mat. 13.43. Now nothing shines more, therefore all shall be very glorious;
yet alike glorious. Thus that in Dan. 12.3. doubtless is meant, for they that
be wise are teachers in that place who instruct (as the Hebrew has it) and they
that turn many to glory are Teachers too, now the same laborers are to have
the same (not a differing) reward (every one his penny) therefore Daniel says
they shall shine as the firmament or heaven of stars (which is all one) not as
the stars (among themselves) but gloriously as the stars. Fifthly, there is a
greater and a less in the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.19. A ruler over ten
cities, and a ruler over five, Luke 19.19. and it is said he that sows
bountifully shall reap bountifully, -- 2 Cor. 9.6. therefore there be
differences of reward. Answ. all these quoted places are to be applied to the
Kingdom of grace, not of glory, and therefore prove nothing. The more
carefully the Saints employ their talent here below, the sooner they are
preferred in the Church, and the greater the preferment. And the more one sows
or gives to the Saints, the more temporal blessings God gives him, or the more
grace; but enough. The more probable opinion is easily discovered. Christ
promises that all his shall be with him, and consequently partake of the same
glory, and if the twelve Apostles shall sit upon thrones, so the twenty four
Elders do, nay all the Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2. and be
glorified together, Rom, 8.17.

But enough for a digression. I hope no transgression. Ver. 19. And the Temple
of God was opened in heaven, etc.] There is no Temple in heaven, but the Church
triumphant is here meant; the opening it is the manifestation of its perfect
glory, which shall be after the day of judgment (of which John was even now
speaking) which is now hid and kept secret.

And the Ark of the Testament was seen] Meaning Christ, (for the Ark in the
Temple typified him) who was formerly seen in earth, (in form of a servant)
but now, after the great day in perfect glory.

And there were lightnings, thundrings, voices, etc.] Here is a Preparation to
the fourth vision; and the lightnings -- are the punishments to befall the
wicked at the last day; God shall rain upon the wicked fire and brimstone,
storm and tempest, Psalm. 11.6. -- these things signify the conspiracy of the
elements to take vengeance on the wicked, and may come literally to pass at
the last day.

CHAP. XII. Vision 4. Act. 1.
Verse. 1. And there was seen a great sign in heaven].

TO John in a vision, great in regard of the events.

A sign, to wit a woman clothed with the Sun -- ] Some read it a wonder,
because the woman was wonderfully clothed and delivered. To omit the story of
Eve and the serpent, and Mary with Christ persecuted by Herod, (which are here
(as it were) represented) doubtless this woman is the Church, (for women as
the Church are weak, depending on their husbands, fruitful --) she is in
heaven, partly because she appeared so to John, also the Church has both her
original and conversation in heaven, This vision begins (as it were) of Christ's
birth.

Clothed with the Sunne] Because the Church is clothed with Christ who is the
Sun of righteousness; the Church then in the general shall be ever safe,
Mat. 16. the gates of hell shall not prevail against her, yet particular
Churches; as Corinth, Rome, -- may err and fall away as experience shows.

Having the Moon under her feet] By it is showed the variable condition of the
Church here below, sometimes shining in full light, sometimes scarcely to be
seen; but rather here is noted the Churches despising and trampling underfoot
all sublunary, vain and perishing things, possessing Christ -- by faith.

And a crown of twelve stars on her head] She professes the faith of the
twelve Apostles (who are compared to bright stars) which is a crown (as it
were) to her head: thus the Church is a crowned Queen, and the faith an
adorning.

Verse. 2. And she being with child, cried, etc.] Alluding to women who bear
not without pain, nor bring forth without sorrow, the Virgin Mary not
excepted. See my Glimps of Christ's love, page 16. -- The Papists cannot tell
how to believe that this place any way concerns the Virgin; -- Well, the Church
cannot bring forth her fruit of Christ without crying, labor, sorrow; the
propagation of the Church ever was with great troubles, cares, cries; thus
Saint Paul traveled in birth with the Galatians, chap. 4.19. tyrants make the
Churches pain the greater.

Verse. 3. And there appeared another sign, a great Dragon, having seven heads,
etc.] Because he is an old Serpent who has devoured other Serpents, and so
becomes a Dragon.

Red] Notes his cruel, bloodthirsty nature, persecuting the Church. This Dragon
is the Devil, ver. 9. the crowned heads of the Dragon are Kings, Emperors,
Tyrants, as Herod, Nero, Domitian -- for seven is taken for many. By horns,
strength is meant; by them Governors, Captains -- are meant, as Pilate,
Festus -- Now ten notes a great many; the Dragon differs from the Beast, chap.
13. (the description of each makes it appear) yet this Dragon begot that
Beast, and are somewhat alike.

Verse. 4. And his tail drew the third part of the stars, etc.] Now follows
the action of the Dragon; he by his tail, that is by cunning flattery and
insinuation (for Dogs fawn with their tails) drew or enticed many teachers of
the Church (compared to stars) to leave their heavenly function, and to fall
to humane traditions and earthly cares -- yet I rather by the Dragons tail
understand (under several tyrants) many and long persecutions (for the Dragons
tail is his strength) whereby many (at least seeming stars) fell to the
worship of Satan: Nay, some faithful teachers too, for a little season; here
are things noted first, yet not many years after performed. Esaias says, the
Prophet that tells lies is the tail, chap. 9.15. Now perchance by Dragons
tail, false-teachers and heretics (as Arrius --) may be noted, who drew many
from the faith. Now by this Dragons means that star chap. 8.10. and chap.
9.1. fell to the earth, I mean the Roman star and Arrius --

And the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, etc.]
Like a hungry Wolf before the fold to devour the Sheep: Peter calls him a
roaring Lion (intimating his hungring after a prey, 1 Pet. 5.8.) First when
Christ was literally born, he fought to devour him by Herod (when the children
suffered for him, before he for the children) and ever since he strives to
devour Christ (the manchild) in his members, by Tyrants, Heretics, Antichrist.

This Act answers to the first four Seals concerning horses, chap. 6. and to
the Trumpet, concerning the fire mingled with blood, the burning mountain, the
star falling; containing the time from the birth of Christ, to the rising of
Antichrist. Now follows comfort in act the second, being answerable to the
fifth Seal, of the souls being under the Altar, chap. 6, 9. and to the Angel
standing on sea and land, chap. 10.2.

Verse. 5. And she brought forth a manchilde, who was to rule all nations, etc.]
The Sex notes strength, thus Christ is the mighty God.

Who does feed] that is, rule all nations with an iron rod. as Psalm. 2. that
is, with a powerful Scepter; the nations with an iron rod: but his People with
his word, or as Psalm. 53. in green pasture, as a shepherd, not a tyrant. Is
the devil a dragon? So then remember Christ is that strong manchild, who by his
power and iron rod defends himself in his members, whiles here below. Note by
the woman's bearing a son, many sons, nay multitudes of sons are signified,
who first believed.

And he was caught up unto God, etc.] Christ literally and the Saints
spiritually are caught up into heaven, that is defended and protected, and
after death (as the witnesses) are caught up, or ascend to heaven out of the
danger of the Dragon, his heads or horns.

Verse. 6. And the woman fled into the wilderness; etc.] Here that is said to
be done first, which was not done till afterward; to wit, when the Dragon was
cast to the earth, and the woman had wings, ver. 13. To which place I refer
the Reader for the interpretation of this verse.

Verse. 7. And there was war in heaven; etc.] After the manchilde was caught
up to heaven, and before the scattering of the Church. John in the vision saw
the war in heaven, and it signifies how Christ ascending, overcame Satan,
destroying his Kingdom bringing to the Saints eternal safety. Brightman
applies this to Constantines suppressing the enemies of Christianity, which in
part may hold. But doubtless this war began before; Christ is Michael in this
place, for the Angels cannot be said to be any other Michaels: though perchance
John saw one Angel as Commander of the rest in the Vision. Christ and Satan
fought in the temptation, bloody sweat, passion (when our Michael overcame (as
Sampson) by his death) but especialy by his resurrection and ascension (though
the whole mystery of our salvation is here shadowed out) he destroyed the
Dragon; and to this hour in some sense, the battle from heaven lasts with the
Dragon. This Vision was to comfort the Church in her miserable persecutions,
seeing at last her Michael prevailed and she in him; now though in the Vision
more Angels fought (noting perchance how all his members must fight against
Satan) yet Christ doubtless trod the Winepresse alone, Isa 63.3.

Verse. 8. And prevailed not, etc.] Christ sits triumphing in heaven (and in his
Church in great measure at this day) therefore there is no room for Satan
there. I beheld him as lightning fall from heaven, says Christ; the preaching
of the Gospel, and Christ's death cast him out and destroyed his Kingdom. Thus
Christ entered the strong man's house (or kingdom) and spoiled it, Matthew. 12.29.
perchance here is some allusion to Satan's first casting out of heaven.

Verse. 9. That old Serpent called the devil and Satan, etc.] he is called old,
because of a long standing, even before the fall. A serpent because of his
craftiness and poison of sin, wherewith he infects the nature of man. A devil,
because an accuser and slanderer of the brethren (for so much the Greek word
signifies;) Satan, because an adversary and hater of mankind.

Lastly, he is called the Seducer of the whole earth, etc.] for he has
deceived mankind generally; now this shows the greatness of the benefit
obtained by the victory, since such an enemy and his Angels, (whereof Baalzebub
is Prince) should be spoiled, (signified by his being cast out of heaven in the
Vision); How Christ by his birth and death spoiled Satan, see farther my quoted
book. p, 48.

Verse. 10. And I heard a great voice in heaven, etc.] Here follows the Song of
the Church. The great voice notes the multitude of rejoycers, and the greatness
of their joy. The cause, because the accuser is cast out; neither our sin, ill
conscience, the law, nor Satan, can cast those out of favor who are in Christ
Jesus. I mean, their former sin and ill conscience, of which 1 John 3.20, If
our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knows all things; if
we can truly say we love the brethren to wit, as the preceding verses speak.
Now concerning Satan's accusing, see Job 1. from verse. 7. forward. These things
being easy to ver. 13 I pass them for brevity sake, with these notes, 1. The
heavenly host call us brethren; the accuser of our brethren, a great dignity.
2. They rejoice because we shall not be accused; see their love to us, for
Satan's accusation could not hurt them, but us, who have not finished our
warfare; but now by Christ's victory there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. Of which very largely see my Glimpse of Christ's love,
page 60, 67. Where the particulars, life, death, -- are examined. 3. Christ
manifested his love, power, salvation -- when he drew us as a lost prey out of
the Dragons jaws. Of which see the quoted book everywhere. 4. Though Satan
cannot prevail with God by his accusation, yet he stirs up many adversaries in
the world against us; therefore we should walk very carefully, for Satan is not
dead, though overcome. 5. The blood of Christ is the cause or means of our
victory; by the blood of the Lamb they overcome, (the Lamb and Michael you see
are the same, by whose death, passion, resurrection, -- the victory is
obtained.) 6. Since Satan cannot prevail with God, but is cast out of heaven
and the Church, he will domineer the more over the nations, the inhabitants of
the earth, by making them idolatrous, and bringing woes and miseries on them.
Woe to the inhabiters of the earth. 7. Satan's greatest malice is against the
manchild, the Church and Saints (whose happiness he envies) but he will play at
small game rather then sit out, disturb the earth rather then do no hurt.
This Prophecy concerns the times of Antichrists rising Anno Dom. 606. and
after, when Satan by Antichrist and his Locusts troubled sea and land, Priests
and people of Antichrists Church, known by the name of Inhabitants of the earth.

Verse. 13 And when the Dragon saw he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman etc] Here the persecuting of the woman is renewed by the Dragon,
notwithstanding the Church had got Constantine the Emperor (that man-child in
some sense) to profect her: for his excessive bounty to the Church did much
hurt (as I noted chap. 6. v. 7, 8. about the pale horse) by which means the
venom of Pride, Ambition, Coveteousnesse, Luxury -- was breathed into the
Clergy, which ministered occasion of new persecution. Now also Arrrius (whose
name is enough to tell the misery of that age) most beyond thought vexed the
Church; here the Dragon persecuted the woman, for often times the Emperors were
Arrians.

Verse. 14. And to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle etc.] The
Church after her many battles with heretics and Tyrants, obtained Constantine
to defend her; but by means of that peace brought to the Church by Constantine
many sins reigned in the Clergy, and the Church then began to take her flight
into the Wilderness; by that time Antichrist arose she was gotten thither,
Anno 606. (for her flight was long, therefore she is said to have Eagles wings,
which Foul flies longest and strongest) So that Church which formerly was the
woman clothed with Christ, having (as it were) a Crown of Apostolical faith to
adorn her, is now fled into the Wilderness; by it we are not to conceive any
local flight, as into Arabia deserta, or the like: But the wilderness here is
opposed to heaven; now when the woman cast off the graces of Christ and his
robes wherewith she was clad, and put on the whorish attire, she so altered her
visage that she seemed not the same; thus she became invisible more and more;
true there were many that feared God in every Age, but they as the Church in
Elias time were contemned and invisible or unknown, rather keeping private in
Families then public in Congregations; Now (as we say in our proverbial speech
of any thing that is confused (or unweeded or overgrown as a neglected garden
--) it is a mere wilderness; so) the Church by reason of her spiritual
confusion is said to be a wilderness, though formerly a chaste Virgin. Note
the Popish Church has ever been visible and flowrishing, but not this woman,
therefore that Church is not this woman, for she became by little and little to
live (as those seven thousand in Israel in the time of Idolatry) private and
retired, hating the whore and her poluted Garments, Doctrine, Worship, and
ways, (though she were perchance in the literal or local Rome, or that
spiritual Wilderness.)

Eagles wings] Note the power of her deliverance, for they have strong wings,
not as a small bird -- By wings then I understand not so much the two
Testaments, by which she preserved her self, but an allusion to that foul who
by her strong wings flies far and strongly out of danger; so the Church by
faith flies toward heaven or out of danger into some private retiring place
(like Elijahs) where she is to be spiritually fed, as he was literally.

A time, and times, and half a time] So Antichrist shall triumph not for ever,
yet not a very small time neither, but a time, yea, and times, known to God,
not to us. I conceive (as my Paraeus) by this time the same space is noted as
formerly, to wit of 1260. years, which time is given to the reign of
Antichrist. So this Antichristian Church of Rome succeeded in the room of this
chaste woman, who was fled into the wilderness or gotten out of sight by that
time he arose, and abode, and is to abide there till Antichrist leaves off
treading down the holy City; God be thanked she has been in some measure
visible a good while, and Antichrists days are partly expired; when their date
is quite out, we doubtless shall see the woman much more glorious and visible;
for the time of Antichrist reigning is her hiding; and as he decreases, she
increases.

Thus we have heard of Romes corruption and invisibility in respect of her
former luster for the first three hundred years, which was by degrees, as the
Eagle flies, not at once, for the woman was a great while flying into the
Wilderness, even from a little after Constantine to Phocas the usurper who set
up Antichrist. None (whether Church, Kingdom, or person) is corrupted at once,
but by little and little.

Verse. 15. And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood etc] This
flood I understand not to be those Nations, Goths, Vandals, Almans -- (who as a
deluge came about this time to destroy the very name and faith of Christ, and
to carry away the woman: nor by earth do I understand them (though their
earthly religion swallowed up persecution by embracing -- Christianity) for
this helped not the woman, but drove her farther into the Wilderness: for the
faith was most corrupted by Arrius and other damnable heretics when they
embraced it, so they were for the most part Arrians, or Nestorians --) because
John had treated of the Dragons persecuting the woman before, therefore here,
by the flood I understand the most wretched heresies (now reigning) vomiting
out of the Dragons mouth, for the Doctrine of the Gospel coming out of Gods
mouth is compared to streams of water, Joh. 7.38. and so heresies may be well
said to be a flood, considering their violence and impurity, for a flood washes
the banks -- and draws all corruption into it. Now in this Age was Arrius
against the Son, Macedonius against the Holy Ghost, Nestorius against the truth
of Christ's Person.

Verse. 16. Yet the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up the flood, etc]
Alluding to the old history of the earths swallowing up Corah and his Company,
Number. 16. or to the earth swallowing up the flood which destroyed the World. In
sum God used some extraordinary means to destroy this flood, by which the
Dragon thought to destroy the rest of the woman's seed, that is, those retired
righteous (of which I spoke but now) who withdrew themselves from the Idolatry
of Rome. These are described to be such as have the testimony or Gospel of
Jesus, whereby (and the blood of the Lamb) they are said to overcome, verse. 11.
for the Gospel brings faith that lays hold on Christ, by which all the Saints
overcome. Thus we have seen what a furious Creature the devil is against us,
and how he makes use of his short time (which he knows is so, seeing the signs
of the last times are fulfilled, and fulfilling;) this should teach us to make
good use of out short time, which hastens as the weavers shuttle.

Verse 18. And I stood upon the sand of the sea] To wit, ready to behold the
Beast arising out of the sea, as Chap. 13. or to denote the dangerous and sandy
condition of the Age of Antichrists arising, able to destroy (if it were
possible) the very elect. Mat. 24.24.

CHAP. XIII. Act. 3. Vision 4.
Verse. 1. And I saw a beast rise up out of the sea, etc].

THis Vision depends on verse. 17. of Chap. 12. as one with it, the act
describes the Dragons war there mentioned, and Antichrists arising, mentioned
Chap. 11.7. by the beasts ascending out of the bottomless pit, and agreeing
with Dan. 7.8, 11. of the little horn speaking blasphemies, meaning Antiochus
(or Antichrist himself) of whom Antiochus was a Type. Now it is usual in
Scripture to set forth Empires by beasts, as Dan. 7. where the Assyrian,
Persian, Grecian, Roman Empires are so described rising out of the sea, verse.
3. that is, out of Nations, Tongues, People over whom they reign, and from
whence they arise, answerable to Rev. 17.15. This beast arises out of the sea
here, and out of the land, ver. 11. yet the same one according to the last
verse; here is wisdom to count the number of the beast (in the singular
number) and that because of Antichrists double form, as King and Priest,
having the sword of Paul, and key of Peter, as the whorish Church or queen,
Chap. 18.7. 17.3. and false Prophet, Chap. 16.13. clothed with the spoils of
the Roman Empire, and pretended Vicarship of Christ, or as a Tyrant and
seducer. Let then the Papists feign an Antichrist to themselves to be begotten
of a Jewish woman of the Tribe of Dan, by some evil spirit to reign three
years and an half, and to fulfill literally all things spoken Antichrist, in
this Book, we have found the man sitting in the Temple of God, even for God --

Out of the sea] To wit the bottomless pit, out of which the Locusts came,
chap 9 3. and chap. 11.7. out of which the beast ascended; yet John saw the
beast arising out of the sea in the Vision, noting the Popes arising out of the
sink of hell, by the means of Phocas the intruder; thus the Sea of Rome is the
sea of the beast, or perchance that flood of the Dragon is the sea out of which
Antichrist arose. Now though Councils and Bishops of Rome condemned Arrius --
yet through the Devils enticements they set up Antichrist as chief Priest and
King of Bishops, (though for a long while the Bishops of Constantinople and
Alexandria -- were his Corrivals) Nay to that height by degrees he arose that
he would not be present at any Eastern Council but by his Legates or
Ambassadors, lest the Emperor being present he should be forced to give him
place.

Having seven heads and ten horns, etc] This Beast is very like the Dragon,
but that the Dragon wore his Crowns on his heads, this on his horns; by horns
strength is noted, who these horn be, Rev. 17.9, 12. makes known, to wit, ten
Kings, and the seven heads are seven Mountains of Rome (for she was built upon
so many) to which chapter I defer the interpretation of this place.

Blasphemy] The Beast will not wear his horns himself, but his ten horns or
Vassal-Kings shall; on his own head is blasphemy, not openly written, yet
plain enough, for all his Religion and Doctrines are such against God and
Christ.

Verse. 2. And the beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard etc. The word in
Greek signifies a she-Leopard, which has a speckled skin, and very
odoriferous, swift, and subtle. Thus the Beast is something like a monster
compounded of a Leopard, a Bear and Lion. The Church of Antichrist is spotted
as the Leopard, being a mingle-mangle of diverse Heresies, Superstitions,
Idols, Traditions -- consisting of several Orders, Sects, Clergy men; it is
very odoriferous, full of the sweet smells of honor, riches -- it is very
swift, for after the world was persuaded that Rome was the seat of Peter, that
sea of Rome quickly swallowed up all -- it is crafty, so Antichrist is a false
Prophet, full of cunning deceits, gaining home much riches by this means. Now
he is like a Bear in the feet; her feet are flat, large -- by which the
stability and firmness of Antichrists Kingdom is noted, this Creature has
sharp nails, which it fastens into the ground and so goes more firmly. Now
these feet are the large grants of Emperors, Canons of Councils --

His mouth as the mouth of a Lyon] Now thus Antichrist roares in his Bulls,
Excommunications -- and devoures very much as the Lion; who knows not the
devouring Inquisition of Spain, and the covetous Clergy, forgiving any sin for
money?

And the Dragon gave him power] All these things will I give thee, said he to
Christ. Now all lawful power is from God, but the Beasts is as his key, chap.
9. usurped and unlawful; the Dragons power is his malice, deceit, power to hurt
(God permitting.)

And his seat] Or throne. Satan is the Prince of this world, and the Pope his
Vicegerent or Vicar.

And great authority] Thus Antichrists coming is after the working of Satan
with all power and lying wonders.

Verse. 3. And I saw one of his heads were wounded to death etc] Here is the
weakening of the beasts power treated of (understood by the Beasts head being
wounded) which Brightman does refer to the Barbarians ( Goths, Vandals, Hunni,
and the like) sacking Rome; for by the space of 42. year she was by them taken
and spoiled, no less then five times, but the wound was healed by Belisarius
and Narses (two famous Captains) who drove the Barbarians out of Italy, and
restored the Pope with enlarged dignities and power by command of Justinian the
Emperor; but in this sense the wound of the Beast is healed even before
Antichrists rising which was not till after, to wit, at the reign of Phocas
who exalted Boniface the third to the Chair; this wound therefore with my
Pareus I refer to the great schism of Popes, Anno 1378. wherewith the Papacy
was afflicted more then 40. years when almost Antichrists kingdom was ruined,
(this wound the Dragon (not enduring the Beasts pride) gave (God permitting) as
a punishment;) for two or three Popes strove together for the Popedom, so that
all was endangered; now also Jerome of Prague, and especially John Husse in
Bohemia began to stir: two witnesses of the Gospel, which increased the deadly
wound: But the Council of Constance strove to be the beasts Surgeon, causing
the two witnesses to be burnt, displacing three Antipopes, confirming Martin 5.
the Bohemian war in behalf of the witnesses (which opened the wound wider) is
hushed up upon terms, they being allowed their conscience in many things; now
Luther and Melancthons preaching like a sword wounded; but now some Kings
command upon pain of fire and faggot men to obey the Beast; now many massacres
healed the wound, and many notable Jesuits, as Cajetan, Faber, Staphylus --
applied their skill, who by writing, boldness, and craft, have been (with many
others) the Popes best Physicians at all times; and our own dissentions (says
my Pareus,) have been as wine and oil powered into the wound to heal it.

And all the earth wondered after the Beast] They wondered after the Beast, (I
mean his followers) before he was wounded; but perchance the healing might
increase admiration; they wondered at the seat of Peter, at the keys (though
false,) at his power (though from Satan,) and even worshipped the Beast as God.

The whole earth] Here observe 1 The admirers are men of the earth (not
Saints.) 2. The admiration is general (their Catholic Church admires after
him, meaning the Romish.)


Verse. 4. And they worshipped the Dragon which gave power unto the Beast etc]
To wonder thus after the Beast is to worship the Dragon; for religious Worship
and admiration (in this sense) is to be appropriated only to God, thou shall
worship the Lord thy God and him only -- Deuteronomy. 6.13. Now it is to be feared
(for it is certain) these admirers give divine Worship to the Beast: for they
say, Who can war with him? Who is like him? as if they had took up that of the
Prophet, Who is like the Lord our God? Esa 40.18 or as Paul, Who has resisted
his will? Romans 9 19. So who can war with the Beast? Thus he is called
Antichrist, that is, against Christ, exalting himself above Kings, nay Angels,
being called by some Jesuits, God upon earth. Now though the worshippers
excuse themselves when they worship Antichrist and his Images, Crucifixes --
and say they worship God -- I answer as Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 10.20, the things
which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, not to God; yet I
believe they aim at God in their sacrifice. But enough.

Verse. 5. And to him was given a mouth speaking great things etc.] By the
Dragon; for he gave him this power; now by his speaking great things and
blasphemies, great blasphemies are understood as Antiochus in Dan. 7. did ver.
20. who afflicted the Jews, as Antichrist the Christians.

To do] That is to rage and destroy.

Forty and two months] Then the Beasts power is not absolute, God has set him
a time; by the 42. months the time of the Beasts treading down the holy City or
Church is signified, as chap. 11. then the Beast shall rage but 216. years
more: but last to the end.

Verse. 6. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy etc.] Calling himself God upon
earth, Christ's Vicar, Peter's successor highest Priest, having the keys of
heaven alone -- forgiving sins, and taking a was (as he teaches) iniquity from
the world -- his blasphemies against God, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell
therein; against God: for he opposes and exalts himself against all that is
called God (whether they be Judges (as Magistrates) or Angels, for they are
called Gods) or that is worshipped, showing himself that he is God -- sitting
in the Temple, or instead of a Temple, God and Oracle. Thus he arrogates to
himself the name and worship of God; against his Tabernacle, that is, his
Church, above whom he exalts himself as head and Lord thereof; or against the
flesh of Christ (that Tabernacle of the Deity) whom he says he can create with
some few words in the Sacrifice of the Mass; also he utters his blasphemies
against the Office of Christ, boasting himself to be the greatest high Priest,
when Christ is called but the great high Priest.

And them which dwell therein] His Tabernacle is chiefly his Church against
whom the Beast blasphemes, not only against the Church and Saints on earth: but
against the Saints and Angels in heaven; for he exalts himself above Angels;
also obtrudes false worship upon the Saints and the Angels (the Inhabitants of
heaven) for his own gain sake, setting them over Towns and Cities, Horses,
Hogs, as Tutelar gods, as the Heathens did.

Verse. 7. And it was given to him to make war with the Saints] Here is another
usurpation of his power; this also is spoken of the little horn, Dan. 7.20.
that Type of Antichrist to which our Gospel- Daniel here alludes. This is the
war spoken of chap. 11. with the two witnesses that is many (as is said)
alluding to Moses and Aaron (who were instead of a thousand) this war is to
last but 42. months, of which already. Note the Beasts swords (usurped) are
two, secular by Kings and Emperors, but Chiefly Ecclesiastical, by Bulls,
Excommunications, and hissing Sermons against the Saints, condemning them as
Schismatics and Heretics. Now as here the Beasts rage lasted 42. months, so
the little horn warred with the Saints till the Ancient of days came, and
judgment was given the Saints, Dan. 7. Now this is the last judgment. Note
the Catholic state of the Beasts power, it was over all kindreds, tongues --
these are the wonderers already spoken of verse. 3. remember Christ's flock is a
little flock.

Verse. 8. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him etc.] Here is a
most comfortable restriction; the worshippers of the beast are not all (Christ
has his people) but Inhabitants of the earth, contradistinct to Saints, whose
conversation is in heaven, and whose names are there written, being elected.
Now if none of the Beasts worshippers have their names written in heaven, there
is no salvation for them in the state they are in; God be thanked we follow not
the Beast; this is one sign we are written in the Book of life, of the Lamb,
because we were elected to life through him.

Slain from the foundation of the world] To wit, in the eternal purpose of
God, and by promise: that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents
head. Thus the efficacy of Christ's death was to the Fathers by faith, before
his actual slaying, typified out by the sacrifices.

Verse 9. has been often spoken of.

Verse. 10. He that leads into captivity shall go into captivity] this may
comfort the Godly; for Antichrist (though he lead his own worshippers to
destruction, and domineer over the bodies of the Saints) yet he shall be led
into captivity, by being cast into the lake of fire, chap. 19. in the mean time
they need patience to conquer withal.

Verse. 11. And I beheld another beast coming etc.] Doubtless it was the same
Beast, as is said, but called another, because of another form, See verse. 1.

Out of the earth] Here the original of the Beast is treated of, who came out
of the bottomless pit before; now by his coming out of the earth is meant,

First, That this Beast is not so terrible as the sea monster before spoken of;
land beasts are more familiar to us.

Secondly, This notes the ignoble and earthly rise of the Beast; the Pope was
but a poor Friar first, the Cardinals once but Deacons employed about the
burial of the dead of the City of Rome, though now fellows for Princes; but
here perchance is noted how that muckle, trash, money -- is that about which
the Beast and his worshippers are most employed, and which is the usual cause
of their arising and preferment.

Having two horns like a Lamb] You see the Beast seems no way terrible; looks
like a Lamb, like Christ, as if he were his Vicar, and servant of servants, yet
in speech he is like the Dragon. Remember the Lamb had seven horns chap 5.6.
this Beast but two, because he has not the true Lambs strength, nor his
meekness and truth, for he speaks as the Dragon; by which we are to understand
the Beasts false Doctrines, as Justification by works, Satisfactions -- also
his blasphemies against God, the Temple, and Saints, nay, and Scripture, saying
it is so far true as it is confirmed by him and his Church -- therefore this
Beast is truly called a false Prophet chap. 16.13. teaching doctrines of devils.

Verse. 12. And he exercises all the power of the first Beast before him etc]
Doubtless here Antichrist as a deceiver -- is described. Now the whole series
of Popes is here meant, who have usurpedly exercised the power of the Beast
already mentioned; perchance the Cardinals arising may be here noted, who as a
second Beast exercise the same mentioned power of the former Beast, and that
before him and by his authority; but these are better comprehended under the
notion of Locusts: otherwise this Beast might have been called another, yet the
like (for that begot this) and yet arose after the other, for these Cardinals
were once scarce Parish Priests, and in time are after the Pope; however the
series of the Popes have made (and so have these Cardinals) the earth or the
Inhabitants thereof (in the forequoted sense) to worship the former wounded
(but healed) Beast: that is, the Pope as a deceiver -- here causes himself to
be worshipped as a secular Prince: Or these Cardinals as a second Beast (yet in
some sense the same with the former) cause the former Beast (or Pope) to be
worshipped of all the admirers and wonderers: of which already.

Verse. 13. And does great things, so that he makes fire come down from heaven
on the earth] Antichrist shall deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect.
Wonders and miracles have ceased (the Church being built) and now they belong
to Antichrist, not to the Church of Christ. Now one of his great signs is:

He makes fire to come down from heaven] Whether alluding to Elias or Satan in
Job 1. it matters not; 2 King 1.
for certainly he would be accounted a man of God, though his working be after
Satan. Now the Pope -- does not literally do this, no more then the Disciples
removed mountains, yet they did very great things, and were the true
Disciples, as the Pope is the Beast, although he literally bring not fire from
heaven, since he does other great signs belonging to Antichrist; yet the Spirit
is likened to fire, and so descended and lighted upon the Apostle; now the Pope
takes upon him to give the Spirit in consecration and forgiveness of sins; and
as Satan destroyed Jobs sheep by fire, chap. 1. so this Beast destroys Princes
by thundering Excommunications. --

In the sight of men] That is openly.

Verse. 14. And deceives them that dwell upon the earth by those miracles which
he had power to do etc] Thus Antichrist is a seducer, but not of Saints, but of
the Inhabitants of the earth. Thus God punishes them that desire not, nor
receive the truth to salvation; the Saints rely on Scripture, and with the
Bereans examine all things, and so are not deceived; miracles must not prove
the faith nor truth then in this Age. Now follows the grand Idolatry of Rome;
his worshippers are commanded to make an Image (or Images, for that is the
meaning of it) to the Beast, not of the beast, but of the Father, Son, Holy
Spirit, Mary -- so that the Beasts kingdom (you see) is a kingdom of Images or
Idols; thus the Pope commanded his Worshippers to do.

Verse. 15. And he had power to give life to the Image of the Beast] Satan gives
the Pope this power; thus though the first Bishop of Rome had his power from
Christ (as also Aaron had from God) yet the Pope (now a beast) has his usurped
power (as also Caiphas) from Satan, by which the one condemned (or helped to
forward it) Christ, the other Christians. But how can the Images speak? Why,
remember the worshippers pray to them, sacrifice to them, confide in them,
believe they help them -- thus the Beast and his Locusts persuade the
wonderers: so in some sense you see the Images have life -- (as Bell and the
Dragon had) they applying that to the Image which is in the party represented
in some sense.

And cause that as many as will not worship the Image be slaine] This the Pope
or Antichrist causes. Babylons Law is universally to be observed by all
Romanists, Whosoever will not fall down and worship the Image, let him -- Dan
3.5, 6. Constantine the Pope caused John the Emperor of the Easts General to
be slain; and his Master the Emperor to be deposed because of this: viz.
refusing and prohibiting the Image of the Beast to be worshipped.

Verse. 16. And he causes all to receive a mark in their right hand or in
their foreheads.] Christ sealed his (as is said chapter 7.) now Antichrist
imitates the mark is nothing but the confession and acknowledgment of the
beast.

In the right hand] Meaning by oath, for lifting up the hand is meant, or
swearing to obey the Pope, and openly profess his worship (meant by having the
mark or character in their forehead, as chap. 7. I have noted.) The laity
adore the beast and worship the image, but there is a most strict tie (of
oaths and vows) laid upon the Clergy.

Verse. 17. And that none might buy and sell, but he that has the character of
the beast, etc.] This is to be understood of a spiritual traffic. Now the
Priests, Jesuits and Bishops (sworn vassals of Antichrist) are the only
merchants to trade in the sea of Rome. None else may preach, sell the wares of
Masses, absolutions -- for it is a money matter. Yet literally Martin the fifth
in a Bull commanded, not so much as any commerce to be had with any that
professed not themselves servants to the Romish Church; that is, that had not
the badge or mark of the beast.

Verse. 18. Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number
of the beast, for it is the number of a man -- ] The character differs from the
number of the beast; the former chiefly belongs to the Clergy by Oaths and
special Vows, the latter is more general to all the laity to acknowledge the
Kingdom and Religion of Antichrist; (for the character seems to look at the
spiritual merchants specially) the holy Ghost propounds it as easy to find
out this name, being but the number of a man, or for a man to reckon; then the
finding it out, is commended for wisdom to stir up people to reckon and
search to find it. Now if John received the Revelation in Hebrew, then the
number must be in Hebrew, and this fits in, Romanus, a Roman. 666. 300. 6. 50.
70. 40. 200.

For the beasts seat is Rome (of which more in its place.) Put John writ in
Greek. See then the word l a t e i n o 30. 1. 300. 5. 10. 50. 70. 200. 666. The
former our John Fox found out; Ireneus 1400 years ago the latter. But since the
Latin tongue was known much in John's time; perchance the Spirit might show it
to John in that tongue of which they so boast, and have their prayers, m^sses
-- in it. Now the Pope commonly ascribes this name to himself, v i c a r i u s
g e n e r a l i s D e i i n t e r r i s. 5. 1. 100. 1. 5. 50. 1. 600. 1. 1. 1.
Christ's Vicar general in earth. 666. The numerall letters of these names make
up 666. I have examined the Papists objections against Luthers name out of
Pareus, but find their objections nothing to the purpose. This name and the
Popes practice according to every passage in this book concerning him, show him
to be Antichrist, that sits pretended head of the Church.

CHAP. XIV. Act 3. continued.
Verse. 1. And I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on Mount Sion..

CHIRST is the Lamb who stands as a watchman looking to the Churches safety.
Mount Sion is the Church which cannot be quite removed, but stands fast for
ever; for the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; the Mount is high,
so the Church is advanced many ways. The 144000. are the sealed ones chap. 7.
Now Christ appears after the cruel beast, to show he had not, nor should
devour all; Christ had a Church of sealed ones (though the woman were (as it
were) quite fled.) Thus Christ, as in the time of Elias, has his people before
Luther, on mount Sion 144000. This standing on mount Sion belongs to all the
time from Antichrist, or the beasts rising. Thus the latter part of the Act is
comfort against the woman's flight and the beasts arising.

Having his Fathers name written in their fore heads] His, to wit, the Lambs.
Now as the beasts followers had their character, so Christ's have theirs,
openly professing true Religion and separating from Idolatry.

Verse. 2. And I heard a voice from heaven] As chap. 7. v. 9. where a multitude
clothed in white robs sing praises to God; so now the harpers, some of the same
company.

As the voice of many waters,] That is, of many Nations, Chapter 17.15. the waters
are Nations, Tongues, People; who being redeemed by Christ, sing praises to
him, (not as if these were the very Nations, or waters over whom the whore
sits, of whose salvation I doubt.)

As it were the voice of thunder] Denoting the vehemence of the joy and praises
of the blessed, compared to thunder.

And harpers, etc.] Where note here is mention made of two companies; these are
a company of martyrs and professors who dyed before Antichrists arising, and
sing before the other company.

Verse. 3. Singing as it were a new song] To praise God, I perceive is great
part of the joy of the heavenly inhabitants; a new song, is an excellent song.
See chap. 5.9. expounded. Note that the 144000. are the remnant of the woman's
seed mentioned Chap. 12. who were to make war with the beast, Chap. 13. who
were not as yet received into glory (for here some things are spoken of them,
as if they were yet on earth, to wit, their docibility.)

Before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the Elders:] Then observe
this voice was in heaven, the voice of the Church triumphant, though distinct
from the Elders and beasts, they being the faithful of the Jewish Church and
of the Primitive Believers (as is observed already) these sing before the
beasts and Elders who were in bliss before them. Note the hundred forty
thousand are said to stand upon mount Sion; but when Antichrist arose; or
thereabout.

And no man could learn that song, but the one hundred forty and four thousand
which were brought from the earth.] Learning belongs to this life, not to
heaven; Note the sealed ones are docible, the adopted are taught of God; they
know only the mysteries of God, or the harpers song. The new song then being
the serving and celebrating the name of God, is to be learned by Gods children,
imperfectly here, perfectly hereafter. Note the harpers, beasts and 24 Elders
are all before the throne, therefore partakers of the same glory, and all
follow the Lamb, because redeemed from the earth, to wit, by the efficacious
blood of the Lamb.

Verse. 4. These are they who are not defiled with women, for they are Virgins,
etc] Marriage does not defile (though Jerome was against it, extolling
Virginity) being the means to keep men undefiled, and Gods own ordinance; these
harpers were a very great multitude, who are called waters therefore; now it is
improbable they should be all real Virgins; but Virgins are those, not
polluted, whether in wedlock or single life, who especially have not been
defiled with spiritual fornication with the whorish woman, chap. 17.2. These
are opposed to the inhabitants of the earth who are defiled; but the harpers
are holy -- and follow the Lamb, Christ.

Whether so ever he goes, etc] The servants of Antichrist wondered and followed
the beast, chap. 13. these, the Lamb, and serve him night and day.

Hence observe (after the resurrection) there will be motion in heaven; and now
is, in its kind.

Secondly, all the Saints are to be where Christ is according to his prayer,
therefore all the Saints follow the Lamb a like -- and partake of equal glory;
of which largly already. These be the first fruits to God, that is holy; for so
were the first fruits in the Law; and bought and redeemed from among men, so
are all the Saints as well as these; therefore this is but a privilege common
to all the Saints of heaven.

Verse. 5. And in their mouth was found no guile, for they are without spot
before the throne of God.] To wit, now in heaven: for now they are without
fault (having washed their robes (by faith) in the blood of the Lamb) before
the throne, to wit, Gods Majesty in heaven; the being before the throne is the
cause of their bliss.

Verse. 6. And I saw another Angel flee in the midst of heaven] An Angel for
many Angels, who represent Preachers of the Gospel. And now another state of
the Church is to be looked for: This Angel is conceived to be Wickliffe,
Professor at Oxford who Anno 1371. preached the everlasting Gospel against
Antichrist. He writ many volums; which came to other nations and people to
read; to him many witnesses were raised suddenly.

Midst of heaven] shows the imperfection of the doctrine at first, not quite
heavenly, nor quite earthly; men see not so clearly at first when Reformation
begins.

Having an everlasting Gospel,] Because it cannot perish, but in Wickliffes
successors continued. So the word sowed cannot return in vain; in a state it
continues here, and in heaven for ever. It Is a folly for Antichrist to strive
to suppress it.

To preach to the inhabitants of the earth, etc.] Sworn vassals to Antichrist.
Therefore at first the success could not be imagined to be great, for the task
was very hard. The substance of his preaching was, that God might have the
glory, not the beast nor his image Because the hour of his judgment is come,
to wit, of his giving understanding, grace and judgment of the truth: or rather
because the day of the great judgment is at hand, of which anon.

Verse. 8. And another Angel followed, saying, with a loud voice, etc.] The rest
of Verse. 7. being plain, I omit. This is conceived to be Luther to whom many
witnesses were joined.

Babylon the great City is fallen, it is fallen, etc.] That is, shall suddenly
fall, and assuredly fall. Now the Caldean Babylon is not here meant, but that
which then ruled over nations, 2. That which was to be the seat of Antichrist.
3. That defiled all nations with fornications; but this was Rome plainly.
Neither did heathenish. Rome ever make merchandise of souls; but Popish Rome,
chap. 18.13. A most plain argument, that not heathenish, but Popish Rome is
here meant; also this Rome (I mean the whole Antichristian Church) has more
kept the people of God in bondage, then heathenish Rome. But I speak to
Believers; therefore will use no more arguments here; is fallen, twice said to
note the certainty of it.

That great City,] To wit, Rome, or the Church of Rome; which in this Angels
time began to fall in many places, as Germany, Saxony.

Because she made all nations drink] You see Rome is the mother of spiritual
whoredoms.

Of the wine of her fornication,] So called first, because Idolatry is more
pleasing to man's corrupt nature, then the true worship of God. 2 Because one
may soon be drunken and overcome by it, it is a bewitching sin.

Of the wrath of her fornication] So called, because it brings Gods judgments
and wrath.

Verse. 9. And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, etc.] To
wit the successors of Luther, as Bullinger, Calvin, Zanchius -- who with a
loud voice, that is courageously, forbad the worshipping of the beast upon pain
of Gods wrath. As

Verse. 10. The same shall drink also] They that love the wine of Idolatry, must
pledge in the wine of Gods wrath; without mixture, without allaying with water,
that is, without mercy.

Of his indignation and anger] To wit, in the seven Vials, of which in order.

And he shall be tormented] This should dehort from Idolatry. The Verse being
plain for brevity-sake I pass.

Verse. 11. And the smoke of their torment] To wit, the smoke of the fire of
their torment, ascended; it seems hell is below.

For ever and ever.] See Drexelius of eternity; Concerning the beast, Image,
mark and name, is already spoken. Now to verse. 13. is easy and comfortable.

Verse. 13. Blessed from henceforth are the dead which dye in the Lord.] Not
only from the hour of death, but from the preaching of the three Angels, for
now Reformation teaches purgatory is a lie. Now men believe the truth,
henceforth men die in the truth, in the Lord, and for the Lord; That is, for
his cause (there is no salvation then to them that are not in Christ). Hence
learn, is there such torments for Antichrist? Here then is good ground for the
Saints patience a while under trial. Are they blessed that depart in Christ?
then death's not the end of all. The death of the body under tyrants, hurts not
the soul of the Saints. Lastly, it is infinitely more comfortable dying since
the Reformation (by the three Angels --) then in the days and Church of Popery;
blessed be God; but enough till verse. 14.

Verse. 14. And I looked, and behold a white cloud] Behold the great day, and
Christ on the cloud. Now the Saints shall (henceforth) be perfectly happy; and
the good works of all their former life (which are said to follow them, not go
before them, as the cause of glory) shall through mercy and grace crown them
for ever. Yet perchance that verse may be taken thus, write, to wit for the
Saints comfort, and as a thing remarkable; from henceforth blessed are the
dead, to wit, since Reformation by the three Angels, for now purgatory-lyes are
confounded; and men are taught to be presently happy after death, and are
taught justifying faith which brings comfort at death; now men are taught works
follow the workers to heaven, not to justify, or save absolutely; yet they
follow, for Christ out of mercy and promises annexed to good works, will reward
them with glory. This white cloud signifies Christ's divine Majesty: for God
because of his heavenly power, is often in the Psalms said to ride on the
clouds. But here Christ comes according to his promise, Math 26.64. upon the
clouds to judge the world; the clouds being his throne. Thus comes in Act
fourth containing comforts for the godly, showing the joyful change of the
Churches afflictions at the day of judgment.

Having a crown of gold upon his head, etc.] This notes Christ's Kingly Majesty.

As the sharp reapers sickle in his hand] notes his judging and destroying the
ungodly (as it were mowing them down) at the last day; for the sickle is to
reap the ungodly.

Verse. 15. And another Angel came out of the temple] Noting the desire of
Angels and Saints at the last day to see the destruction of the wicked. Which
Angel John in the Vision saw coming out of the temple, viz. heaven.

Thrust in thy sickle and reap,] Judging is the office of Christ, yet the
Saints and Angels shall come with Christ, to wait on him, and approve his
righteous sentence.

Thrust] Desiring Christ (not commanding) to do his office.

Because the time is come, etc.] To wit the time prefixed in the counsel of
God to judge the world, which the Angels and Saints (noted by the Angel coming
out of heaven) knew, because they saw Christ on the clouds as on a throne; and
the signs of the last day, fulfilling, and fulfilled.

To reap] To gather the good into heaven (the barn) the tares in bundles for
the fire.

The harvest is ripe] The measure of the Churches miseries, and the sins of the
wicked was full.

And he that late on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth, etc] Thus
Christ fulfills the desire of the Saints, and reaps the earth, saying, come ye
blessed: go ye cursed; thus the harvest is the end of the world, Matthew. 13. The
reapers are the Angels; yet Christ is said to do what they do, because they act
by Christ's authority.

Verse. 17. And another Angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, etc.]
Heaven. Noting how Angels shall be reapers and gatherers of the vintage, (the
wicked --) Yet perchance Christ is here meant, to whom power of the sickle or
judging is only committed. Note all over this book several persons come in
acting as in some Comedy.

Verse. 18. And another Angel came out from the Altar, which had power over
fire, etc.] In the Vision, that is, out of heaven from God. Yet Christ is the
Altar, from whom, and by whose power the Angels act at the last day. This Angel
(so all the Saints, as is noted Chap. 6.10. cry how long?) hastens the judge
who is not slack to reap the earth, and gather the sour wild grapes thereof;
meaning the wicked; for the good grapes in Scripture and the vine are taken in
a good sense; but the grapes of the earth (as the graps of Gomorrah) in a bad
sense.

But why does the Angel who has power over fire demand this?

Answ. Because God by the Angels will cast the wicked (or grapes) into hell
fire; now the Angels have power over fire thus; to wit, by Christ's command to
burn the grapes, tares, wicked. Also perchance over particular elements.

Verse 19. And the Angel thrust in his sickle -- and cast the Vine of the earth
into the great Wine-presse] To wit, into hell. For as clusters are trodden in
the wine press, so the reprobates in the lake of hell.

Verse. 20. And the Wine Press was broken which was without the City] To wit,
Heaven, of which City in 'its place, chap. 22.15.

And blood came out of the Wine-presse] Alluding to the blood of the grape
called so in Scripture; Noting the bloody, that is, horrible punishments to
befall the wicked in hell, that spiritual winepresse.

Unto the horses bridles, etc] Innumerable multitudes of clusters are to be
pressed of all the wicked from the Creation (which however shall be quickly
done) that in the Vision the blood flowed a thousand six hundred furlongs, each
furlong being a hundred twenty five paces, able to make a sea of blood. Now
Christ uses no horses: but the blood in the Vision so streamed out as it would
have run a great many miles for length (understood by furlongs) and reached the
bridles of horses for depth, had there been any. Perchance alluding to
Conquerours, who after a battle ride up in the blood of the slain, to view the
enemy. Thus the Antichristian Tyrants rode to see the Martyrs die. Thus Christ
triumphs over them.

CHAP.XV. Vision 5. -- being but a Preparation to the Vision.
Verse. 1. I saw another signe]

JOhn was informed by many signs or visions, one expounding another. The acts
of which bring at last (ever) either joy to the Saints after sorrow, by showing
heaven, Angels, Martyrs, and their bliss and protection, or destruction of the
adversary. To this purpose the Reader may see this book speak.

In heaven] So John saw them in heaven: which were to be performed on earth on
the Antichristian Church.

Great] shadowing out great things.

Admirable] shadowing forth the admirable judgments of God.

Seven Angels] meaning a perfect company; these note ministers in the Church,
by whom God in some sense poures forth his wrath, as in some sense he did by
the witnesses, chap. 11.

Having the seven plagues] Of which see ver. 7.

Last plagues] because to be poured out in the last age when Popery declined
much.

Filled up] The Plagues are to continue in the several Angels till the
judgment day, when the Archangel shall sound and the wicked have the full
wrath of God on them for ever.

Verse. 2. And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire, etc.] A sea
of glass, as chapter 4.6. the word is noted, brittle as glass, troublesome as the
sea: full of fiery persecutions, afflictions, contentions in which the Saints
are involved. Of glass again, because all the actions of men there are
apparent before God and the throne But behold many Harpers praising God for his
judgments or seven vials to be poured out justly on the wicked! behold a
company standing as Conquerors by faith on the sea or world! They overcame the
Beast his images, mark of subjection or obedience, and the number of his name;
of all which already, chap. 13. Here note, the beast is in the singular number,
therefore but one, though of two forms, chap. 13. Observe, many Saints had
obtained victory over Antichrist already, the seven vials not being poured out,
which would not be suddenly finished when pouring out; therefore the Papists
lie saying Antichrist should rage but about four years. These harpers are not
only to be taken for those, chap 14.3. who congratulate the 144000. standing
with Christ on the mount, but are to be taken for the Church militant (as
Brightman observes) rejoicing and singing of Songs of praise, as Moses did for
victory over Pharaoh: so these over the national name of the beast; for the
word in Greek is overcoming as it were now in earth, though it be represented
to John in heaven; having the harps of God in the Vision, meaning excellent
harps.

Verse. 3. And they sang] so it seemed to John, yet there are not tongues, lips,
nor voices -- as yet, enough in heaven to make music; but this is spoken to
our capacity; yet the Saints most sweetly and joyfully (but as spirits) praise
God in heaven.

The Song of Moses] Exodus 15. or like it.

And the Song of the Lambe] as often before. It Is a Song composed of many places
of Scripture together; by which you see the way to praise God is out of his
lasting Word.

Thus his Word endures for ever in heaven, and praises out of his Word.

Thou King of Saints] God in a peculiar manner is their king, and they his
subjects.

Verse, 4. Who shall not fear thee] (not Antichrist.)

Being only holy] The Popes unholinesse is here reproved.

All nations shall] Some of all nations upon Antichrists declining.

For thy judgments are manifest] In weakening his kingdom, by the preaching of
the Word, making him odious: This the Harpers worthily pronounce.

Verse. 5. And after that I looked] to wit, after the Song as an interlude.

And the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in heaven was opened]
Alluding to the litteral Temple: the meaning is John saw heaven open, out of
which came these Angels. There is no mystery in it, but Antichrists judgments
proceed from Christ the High Priest of the Tabernacle.

Verse. 6. And the seven Angels came, -- having seven plagues, -- clothed in
pure white linnen] White linen notes their heavenly Purity.

With a golden girdle] So Christ had, chap. 1.13. noting his Majesty, and
Diligence which his servants the Angels have, -- ready to execute his pleasure;
Or this imports the decency of Angels, who assuming bodies or appearing in
bodily forms for our sakes come not naked: but clothed as the Priests by Gods
command in the law.

Verse. 7. And one of the four beasts] Of these is spoken, chap. 4. it matters
not which of them gave the seven Vials, perchance he that was nearest (not
Peter as the Papists think) Thus much is apparent; the Church desires Gods
judgments to be hastened upon Antichrist, as chap. 6.10. upon tyrants, O Lord
how long? the beasts resemble the Gospel Church: now they especially desire it,
being greatest sufferers.

Vials] noting the vessel, holding as much as a man can drink at a draught, but
doubtless these were great ones: noting Gods great judgments.

'Golden] Noting the justness of the judgments; though then John saw Vials in
the Vision, they noted the cup of wrath and fury spoken of in some sense chap.
14, 10.

Verse. 8. And the Temple was filled with smoke, etc.] Not a cloud, as 1 Kings
8.10, 11. but smoke, noting how the Church (of Rome) was to be filled with
darkness and confusion, and consequently wrath of God. Which though formerly
it were in the Romish Church (not of new) yet now it began more plainly to
appear, after the light of the truth; that no man could enter into heaven above
(noted by the Temple) because of darkness of ignorance and sin; nor could
enter into the Church to receive light (because nothing but blindness and
darkness) till the seven plagues were past, that is never: for the seventh
Angel is the Archangel at the last day; thus none of the beasts worshippers
have light, nor can enter into the Temple of heaven, in the state they are in
for ever. But Christ we hope will call many of them home, as that great City or
Church of Rome decays. -- Thus far the introduction to the fifth Vision. The
smoke comes from Gods glory and power: and the blindness from God as a
righteous judgment.

CHAP. XVI. Vision 5. Verse 1. And I heard a voice out of the Temple, saying to
the seven Angels, go, etc.]
FOrmerly two witnesses chap. 11. that is a few, were raised up against
Antichrist. Now seven, that is, very many, who by their preaching -- shall as
the witnesses cause Vials of wrath to be poured upon Antichrist. We have heard
of the Beast against the witnesses Chap. 11. the Dragon against the woman Chap.
12. the Beast against the Saints by war Chap. 13. -- and suffering none to
buy and sell but his spiritual Merchants: not follows a strange change;
Judgments for the Antichristian company.

Beast and Merchants goe] There is Commission:

Pour out] not drop, aggravating the punishment.

Pour out his vial upon the earth] Leave none at all in the vessel upon the
earth, in verse. 2. these Angels note ministers.

Verse. 2. And the first went and poured out his Vial upon the earth] Note the
readiness of the Angels in obeying the Lord, whose voice out of the Temple or
heaven commanded them even now, ver. 1. On the earth, that is, the inhabitants
of the earth, or worshippers of the beast.

And there fell a grievous noysom sore upon the men which had the mark of the
beast, etc.] To wit, on Antichrists markked ones. It Is an allusion to the first
Egyptian plague of boils and blaines, Exodus 9.9. for here is often such
punishments as hail, locusts, blood. --

Now though God may punish the Roman Church with outward diseases (as the
French pox which follows the wanton Clergy --) yet since outward diseases are
common to all, chiefly with Brightman) I understand these plagues to be in men,
as hatred, envy, malice against the true light upon the preaching of the Gospel
to the inhabitants of the earth by the first Angel; note the Gospel is the
savor of life to the Saints, though it be as a Vial and torment to the marked
ones, because it hinders their riches, honor, pride, tyranny, -- Now what
greater sore then a tormented, vexed mind.

Verse. 3. And the second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea, and it became
as the blood of a dead man] So in the Vision the sea is the Roman Church, or
gathering together of Churches; Perchance the Council of Trent, whether all
People gathered for help, when the first Vial was poured out; it lasted many
years; many rivers, as Cardinals, Bishops, Archbishops, etc. run hither and
made up the sea (to consult against Christ's true witnesses,) however, the sea
of Rome (or Church) is the sea; the Bishops and Doctors are the rivers and
fountains (which make up the sea) or the fountains are Scripture all corrupt
(at least to them) this is a plain allusion to that Egyptian plague when the
waters were blood: so here the Church, Bishops, Doctors, are polluted; so the
Scripture the fountain in some sense of water, is polluted to them, and become
(by a just judgment) but as muddy and puddle to them, being hid to them that
be lost. Hence the Angel of the waters, ver. 5. who to wit, poured out his Vial
in the Vision on the waters, praises God for the equity of his judgment,
giving them blood to drink (spiritually, for that Scripture was puddle to them,
which is pure water in it self, for that the Doctors -- were besotted, given to
delusions and traditions; So that their People compared to the creatures in the
sea, do spiritually die, wanting the true waters of comfort) who shed the blood
of the Saints really. Perchance suddenly the sea of Rome may literally become
blood, by Protestants opposing her, and when the Kings shall hate the whore,
chap. 17, 17, 18. and burn her.

Ver. 6. For they are worthy] Evil works are perfectly evil and deserve
punishment; but good works are always imperfect, (nay if never so good, debts
to the Creator; therefore) deserving no reward, but have it out of free mercy
and promise. But enough to ver. 7. which is easy. The Angel from out of the
Altar was mentioned; chap. 14, 18. who said, thrust in thy sickle: and here
praises God; to which place I refer the Reader; and for brevity sake have
done with these seven verses.

Verse. 8. And the fourth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sunne] In the
Vision this may be as well called the Angel of the Sun, as well as the others
of fire and water: they are called so because of their pouring out their Vials
on the Sun, Water, Earth, -- and because God perchance by these gathers the
Saints at the last day to himself, and casts the wicked into hell fire.

The Sun notes the holy Scripture, by which our dark minds are enlightened, as
the world is by the Sun: God by way of a judgment is said to give the Sun to
the bright Scripture, making it in the latter days much more clear, piercing,
scorching the consciences: or because the Antichristian notwithstanding, (shall
by a just judgment) have strong delusions, believe a lie, and not receive the
knowledge of the truth or repent unto salvation, but continue in unbelief,
malice, envy, noted by their being scorched.

Thus the Vial is poured out upon the Sun, giving more light, to the envy of
the marked ones, who for madness gnawed and bit themselves, having yet no mind
nor grace to recant.

Now had the Vial been literally poured out on the waters formerly, or now on
the Sun, the punishment had been common to all, not proper to Antichristians
(noted by the men,) as the text intends.

Verse. 9. And men were scorched, etc.] to wit, the marked ones. Thus the word
as a fire burns, though chiefly 'twas intended for salvation; no wonder then
there appeared beforehand smoke in the Temple or heaven, noting the blindness
of Antichristians and obstinacy, and Gods wrath upon it, hindering their coming
into heaven. Observe, men yet repented not; though God send his Word and
Judgments to call to repentance, nay though they knew God had power over the
plagues, yet they returned not to him, but hardened their hearts The Popelings
though they be scorched by this light, as by a fire, yet will not for their
Riches Honor, and Ambition-sake take notice of it to amendment of life, to
give God the glory, to wit, of the justness of the punishment inflicted. 2. Of
the truth of the Gospel discovered. 3. Or their recovery desired.

Verse. 10. And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the seat of the Beast,
and his Kingdom waxed dark] Upon the preaching of the Word to Antichrists Seat
and Kingdom (for the noise of the truth by books and preaching has reached
thither) his Courtiers, subjects and self-continuing obstinate, God by a
further judgment darkens them more and more, punishing one sin by another,
as Romans 1.26. which darkness begins every day to be more manifest. Here is an
allusion to the litteral Egyptian darkness; but this is to be spiritually
taken, for the darkness of the mind: the profoundest Doctors of Rome, are
fools in the saving matters of faith by a just judgment of God. So that Gospel
which naturally brings light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of
death, by accident brings more darkness upon these.

And they gnawed their tongues] Noting the extreme rage of Antichristians
against God and truth.

For paine] Or grief, because Rome is declining, and grown to be a kingdom of
darkness.

Blasphemed the God of heaven] In that they condemn the Gospel of Christ for
heresy, and the true Preachers for heretics.

Repented not] But taught their marked ones they were in the right and light:
though ver. 8. and 9. they rage and are mad at the Sun of light, which they
cannot darken nor will acknowledge to be true; but who is more blind then those
that will not see?

Object. How can Ministers inflict plagues, or pour out Vials?

Answ. They communicate in the work of God as Coworkers, they preach the
Gospel, upon contempt of which the Lord for them punishes the obstinate and
contemners, as is noted, chap. 11. about the witnesses smiting the earth
largely, ver. 5, 6.

Verse. 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great river
Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up, etc] This Vial and the former
have been pouring out a great while. Babylon had two strong fences: the walls
which were one of the wonders of the world, very thick and high: Then secondly
the great river run thorough it (as I noted out of Solinus in my quoted book.
page 109.) which was greater strength to the city then the walls, being very
deep. Cyrus and the besiegers, despairing of the walls, make many deep ditches:
and whiles the Babylonians riot and feast within securely, scorning and
contemning the besiegers: they brought the river Euphrates into those ditches
or channels, and so enter into Babylon as it were on dry ground and took it.
The mystical Babylon has in stead of walls, Emperors, Kings, Princes to defend
her; inwardly Rome (the mystical Babylon) has tithes, first fruits,
Peter Pence, indulgences, and the like, in stead of Euphrates, which the Kings
of the East, (alluding to Cyrus and Darius Kings of the Medes and Persians, who
are East of Babylon, and caused the literal Euphrates to be diverted) that is,
Christian Kings, Princes, Ministers, (People, for they are from Christ, who is
the Angel of the East, chap. 7.2. and the dayspring from on high, Luke 1.78.
who visited us) who shall divert Euphrates of Rome, throw down her riches, and
bestow them toward the maintenance of Schools, Gospel-teachers; these the
Ministers first preached against, as against Peter Pence, Absolution-money and
the like, and other revenues Emperors and Kings have better employed,
diverting them and their course from Rome (witness King Henry the eighth in
England --) so in time Rome will be more feaseable when her Riches and Honor
cease more and more. This the sixth Vial means. And Anonymus two hundred and
seventy years ago, said, the preaching of the Gospel should cause to take away
earthly dominion, and temporal possessions from the Clergy: to wit, of Rome.
God be thanked no Kingdom in Christendom, (except Spain and Italy) but have
more or less diverted the Euphrates of Rome, and made way for the Kings of the
East, (Ministers and good Christians) to take her.

Verse. 13. I saw come out of the mouth of the Dragon] Since the riches and
Euphrates of Rome is drying up, she sends Ambassadors to the Kings of the
earth to help her.

These come out of the mouth of the Dragon, Beast and false-Prophet] In the
Vision which is but one, as is noted. chap. 13. the Dragon furnishes them with
lies, the monster or seabeast (representing Antichrist as a secular Monarch)
with tyranny, the false Prophet or land-beast (who was like a Lamb in part,)
with all deceit of unrighteousness.

Three impure spirits] Meaning the spiritual fathers of Rome's Church. Three
denotes Perfection or a sufficient company, as two witnesses do chap 11.

Impure spirits] So are these locusts in their original and life;

Like Frogs came out of the mouth of that Dragon, etc.] In impudent loquacity
and filthiness; what more irksom then croaking of Frogs? So the clamours of
these messengers to the Kings of the earth prating any thing to gain their aid
for Antichrist; what more impure then frogs both in their original and living?
the same is true of the Romish Parats and Friars; who may well be said to come
out of Antichrists mouth, being orders of his confirming, having no ground in
the Word. Now these are Antichrists usual Legates or Emissaries.

Verse. 14. For they are the spirits of divels] From the Dragon who gave
Antichrists place, chap. 13. Their craft and subtilty is from hell; though then
they make a fair show of religion, yet they are of the disposition of the
devil their father.

Working miracles] No Church so brags of miracles as that of Rome: but it is
known Antichrists coming is with signs and wonders, and with all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness.

Who go forth] as Ambassadors.

To the Kings of the earth] To wit, heathen and idolatrous. It seems toward
the end, Antichrist to keep up his false tottering power, will make league with
Indians, or any infidels. Thus the prating frogs, (Jesuits) lie most uncleanly
in ditches and mire (of riches, vanity, and temporal honor) and are sent as
the Popes Nuncio's or Emissaries, to gain the help of the Kings of the earth
against the day of the Lord.

Verse. 15. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments, etc.] To wit,
in this dangerous deceitful time, and keeps his garments, See chap. 3. ver. 18.
that they be not defiled with the world and flesh: for Christ comes unawares as
a thief in the night. This then is a cautionary parenthesis, because the day of
the Lord is at hand, against which we should watch and be prepared.

Ver. 16. And gathered them together] To wit, the unclean spirits shall gather
them, that is, the Kings of the earth, by their false miracles, lies and
prating.

To battel] to fight against Antichrists opposers, (truly a great miracle that
men should fight for the beast of Rome, when his other vassals shall hate him,
as chap. 17. ver. 16.17.) no wonder if they come to Armageddon or a place of
destruction and ruin, Since they fight against Jehovah for the beast.

Called in the Hebrew tongue Harmageddon] This Word and such like prove this
book was delivered to John in Syriack or Hebrew.

Megiddo was the place where that most hopeful Prince Josiah was slain, 2 Chronicles. 35.22. by Necho King of Egypt, whereupon (for it was an infinite loss)
the sad Prophet Jeremy composed the book of Lamentations, ver. 25. Harmageddon
in Hebrew signifies a mountain. So Har-megiddo is but the hill of Megiddo.
True, Megiddo was the city, but the hill and field where the battle was fought,
was after called by that name. So the kings of the earth shall be brought to
another place of confusion, or another Megiddon. The alteration of letters are
nothing, if the tongues be considered in which they are writ. Two things are
here to be noted. 1. The opportunity or fitness of the place. Such was the
field of Megiddo. 2. The great lamentation which here the adversaries shall make
because of the slaughter; therefore one day when Antichrist is almost ruined by
the Word, and several Kings revolting from him and opposing him, he shall be in
league with Turk and nations, whom he shall entice to help him and to prop up
his ruined state; but these shall be opposed by other Kings (of the East or
Christians) to their great ruin, for the great day shall there overtake the
wicked.


Verse. 17. And the seventh Vial was poured out into the aire] The six Trumpets
signified Preachers, (I mean the six Angels of the Trumpets) as the temporal
events proved, but the seventh could not be, chap. 10. ver. 7. then the mystery
of God was to be finished. So now the six Angels of the Vials may: but the
seventh proclaims the day of the Lord the end of all things.

And there came a great voice out of the Temple, saying, it is done] Upon the
sounding of the Trumpet the air is corrupted, infected with Pestilence, and
smitten with Gods wrath: so that needs the destruction of all creatures and the
end of all things must follow. To which purpose a voice from heaven and the
throne confirms the truth of it, saying, It is done. This is the great voice of
the Trumpet, 1 These. 4.16. the Lord shall descend with a shout. -- Thus the
world's ended, and the grapes of the earth to be pressed in the lake of hell,
and the kings of the earth destroyed at Megiddo.

Verse. 18. And there were voices, lightnings, thunders, and there was a great
earthquake, etc.] These things show the horrible effects of the last Vial, when
Christ shall come to take vengeance at the last day; then may be voices of the
damned, lightnings burning the earth to pieces and the works thereof; thunders
from heaven; for all elements shall conspire against the wicked, and such an
earthquake as never was, for the earth shall be rent to pieces and dissolved.

Verse. 19. And the great City was divided into three parts] To wit, the Church
of Rome wherein or in whose streets the witnesses lay, chap. 11. ver. 8.

In three parts] Three notes perfection, so it was quite demolished and rent by
the earthquake: yet I believe the literal City shall be destroyed before this
day, chap. 17.16. But her Dominions and jurisdiction may in some measure last
to this earthquake or the end.

And the Cities and Nations fell] To wit, of Turk, Saracen, American, and all
earthly Kingdoms now at the great Day. Yet perchance these may come (helping
the Whore by the mediation of the three unclean spirits) to some, nay many
private overthrows or Armegeddons before the last day, for many Kings shall
hate her and burn her before, as chap. 17.16. Why may not Kings of the earth to
their destruction strive to help her before, by a secret judgment?

And great Babylon came into remembrance before God, etc.] God thought on her
before but now at the appointed day pays the old debt fully. Great Babylon
and the Cities of the Nations are distinct, you see; So Constantinople is not
meant by Babylon, but the Cities of the Nations comprehend that, and all other
heathen Kingdoms. That City which trampled under foot the holy City and
Witnesses is remembered.

Verse. 20. And every Island fled away, and the mountains were not found.] These
things shall literally come to pass at the last day, when the great earthquake
shall happen, so that the wicked shall have no hiding place.

Verse. 21. And there fell great hail as of a talent weight out of heaven upon
the men,] God plagued Egypt and destroyed the Canaanites with great hail and
hailstones, Josh. 10.11. and by it is noted Gods terrible judgments against the
wicked, and vassalls of Antichrist. (noted by men)

A Talent] Being a hundred pound weight, notes the greatness of the judgment.
Now I know not but these things may in some sort come literally to pass at the
last day; when Earth Sea, or Islands, Air or Hail, nay and fire, all the
Elements shall conspire against the cursed and wicked.

Yet they blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail, etc.] I confess I
was long of the opinion that the judgment-day was not here treated of. 1.
Because men shall subscribe to that judgment as being convinced. 2. Because
they seemed to live impenitently on earth and blasphemously, notwithstanding
the judgments which should beget fear and repentance;
But upon second and better thoughts I find, that the cursed raging of
hell hounds against God is here expressed after the great day; who though they
shall at the sight of the judge, cry mountains -- fall one us, yet despairing
(and convicted in conscience of the justice of the sentence) shall never cease
(with their mouth's however) to pour out blasphemies against God, as if he were
unjust and unmerciful, because of the hail or eternal torments of hell. Thus
ends this Vision with the world.

CHAP. XVII. Vision 6. Act. 1.
Verse. 1. And there came one of the seven Angels which had the seven Vials, and
talked with me, etc.].

EIther that Angel which poured out his Vial upon the seat of the beast, or the
last who by his Vial raised the earthquake to the destruction of all; and
talked with me, saying, come hither; behold the readiness of these ministering
spirits, to do any good to the Saints, and with what joy they are employed
about things for our consolation; what familiarity between them and the Saints,
noted in that expression, he talked with me, saying, come hither.

And I will show thee the damnation, etc.] not any longer nakedly describe the
beast, but set forth plainly the beast and whore before thy eyes (yet in a
vision).

The judgment] Not only the temporal upon the city, but eternal, of which
anon.

Of the great whore that sits upon many waters] Not Jezabel, chap. 2. but
doubtless Rome an insatiable strumpet. Now by whoredom, not common fornication
is noted, for she is a City, but spiritual fornication, viz. apostasy from
God, perfideousnesse, Idolatry. The true Church is Christ's Bride and Spouse; he
is married to her in faithfulness, righteousness, judgment, Hos. 2.19. and
her Apostasy is spiritual fornication and whoredom often in Scripture. See
Ezekiel 16.9, 25, 26.

Verse. 2. With whom the Kings (of the earth to wit) committed fornication.] She
enticeth them, pretending her being the only Catholic Church and Spouse of
Christ, to receive her superstition and Idol-worship; bewitching them as
Dalilah did Sampson, so that they have made themselves and kingdoms tributaries
and slaves to this whore of Rome.

Not only Kings but inhabitants of the earth] Sworn vassals of Antichrist, and
enemies of the Gospel commit this fornication with a whore. None of the Saints
(whose names are written in heaven) are finally thus overtaken. It Is compared
to wine, 1, Because of its specious pretenses of holiness. 2. Because it
bewitches and besots man's corrupt nature, and even makes him drunk of the
waters in verse. 15. Wine is sweet but proves deceitful: So Idolatry is to man's
corrupt nature, but brings wrath and judgment at last.


Now the Act begins.

Verse. 3. And he led me away in the Spirit] John then was not in one continued
ecstasy, but several times in the Spirit; neither saw he all in one place, but
formerly in heaven, now in the wilderness, the fittest place to see a Church
that was a wilderness. Formerly John saw a chaste matron in heaven clothed with
the Sun; now a whorish woman riding upon a beast in the wilderness. Behold he
talked that of succession of most venerable Popes, called a whorish woman in
the wilderness!

And I saw a woman sitting upon a Scarlet colored beast, etc.] It is much,
women usually are afraid of cruel beasts, but this woman rides on one. The
woman signifies the Church, as is noted chap. 12. v 1. the whorish woman notes
the adulterous Church, her scarlet notes her Kingly, Majestic power, giving
laws to all: for Kings and Emperors wear scarlet. The Beast is the Empire of
Rome, with whose spoils she is adorned. Thus as a whore she is an adulterous
Church, having usurped power, as a Beast or Monarch she has a temporal sword,
and command, as is noted, chap. 13. yet but one Antichrist.

Full of blasphemies] Or blasphemous doctrines. See chap. 13.6. against God,
his Tabernacle, and them that dwell therein.

Having seven heads and ten horns] So it is the same breast or Antichrist, chap.
13. who had seven heads and ten horns, ver. 1. deceiving the men of the earth
as this does, ver. 2. by which I often noted Antichristian vassals are meant; of
the heads and horns anon.

Verse. 4. And she was arrayed in purple] The Beast was in scarlet; so they be
alike yet attired, both in scarlet and purple. It follows.

And decked with gold, precious stones and pearles] Noting the riches and pride
of the Roman Church, which are to be seen in her Churches, Altars, Idols,
Robes, Palaces; or noting how her attire is like a Queen as she boasts her self
to be, chap. 18. v. 7. I sit a Queen. Thus as some real whore, she adornes her
self to entice her lovers to fornication. This also her scarlet and wine (one
being delightsome, the other pleasing and sweet) note; for under most specious
pretenses of being the Catholic most holy Church, Christ's Spouse and Peter's
seat, she bewitcheth the Kings of the earth, and Inhabitants thereof.

And had a golden cup in her hand] Read the description of the whore in Prove.
7. By this cup all Romes glorious pretenses are meant to entice people; as that
her Orders, Sacraments, Ministers, succession are only right; That she is the
Queen of Churches, the Pope the father of fathers, and only chief shepherd --
out of this cup (which John saw in the Vision) she makes the Kings of the earth
drink.

Full of abominations, etc.] Gold without, but filthiness and poison within;
fair in pretenses, wicked and adulterous in practice. This is not heathenish
Rome, for she enticed none, -- but served the gods of all nations; but Popish
Rome with whom even all Kingdoms have once committed fornication.

Verse. 5. And upon her forehead a name written] In the Vision; It notes how
openly this whorish woman shows her self to be another Babylon, but in a
mystery.

A mystery, that great Babylon] So Rome in a mystery is Egypt, Jerusalem,
Sodom, chap. 11. and now Babylon, keeping the inhabitants of the earth in
spiritual bondage. Indeed all Romes religion is mysterious, full of mysteries;
openly the Pope calls himself Christ's Vicar, and the Church of Rome Christ's
Spouse; mystically he is Antichrist, and she the whorish woman.

The mother of fornication] Rome brags of her being the mother of Churches, but
indeed she is the mother of Idolatry or spiritual fornication; For all
abominations that ever were in the Christian world came from Rome. You heard
before of a chaste Matron, the mother of the Martyrs and man-child; now of the
mother of fornication and whoredoms. Thus as openly, (as if it were written in
her forehead) yet in a mystery does Rome show her self to be the spouse of
Antichrist, and the mother of fornication, another Babylon. --

Verse. 6. I saw the woman drunken with the blood of Saints] Either full of
blood which she had shed (as the book of Martyrs can testify.) See chap. 11.
(of the witnesses) so that she even raged and was drunken as one with wine, or
because as one drunk, she shall not be sensible of many of her judgments.

And of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus] Their blood she shed by warring
against them, chap. 13. for whom Christ out of love shed his; no wonder then a
judgment follows for this and her fornication, chap. 16.6. The blood of the
Saints and Prophets is said to be shed also; the word Prophet is there to be
taken for a teacher; as Prophecy is for teaching, chap. 11. the Witnesses shall
Prophecy, else Antichrist came not near the time of Prophets. Several
Massacres prove this point, and what is said, chap. 11. and 13. of her burning
the Witnesses and warring with the Saints. Now John in the Vision sees the
woman drunken with blood; because by her means, instigation and doctrine, Kings
have raged against the people of God. Heathenish Rome did thus against the
Saints openly, but Antichrist in the mystery only; whose rage agrees with the
time spoken of; so does not heathenish Rome.

And when I saw her I wondered, etc.] To see a whorish woman upon a beast, so
strangly attired, etc. for otherwise he had seen the beast before. c. 13.

Verse. 7. And the Angel said to me, wherefore did thou marvel? etc.] The
Angel observing John's desire by his countenance to know the meaning of his
sight, does of his own accord open to him the mystery, saying, I will tell
thee. --

Verse. 8. The beast which thou saw, was, and is not,] To the Beast the Angel
ascribes four states according to times.

Was] Or has been, viz. formerly in Monarchical power in Kings, Consuls,
Dictators and the like; for thus the Beast had been when Rome was governed by
these, for the Pope by force took this power to himself by degrees, and now
reigns as an Emperor or King; thus something of the Beast had been, to wit,
the secular power, which he made more his own afterward.

And is not] In the time of the Revelation, when the poor Bishops of Rome
dreamed not of any Monarchical power, but suffered martyrdom under it 300
years.

And is to ascend out of the bottomless pit,] To wit, when Boniface the third
invaded the Ecclesiastical Monarchy, Anno 606. See chap. 9. v. 1. of the
bottomless pit, and chap. 11. expounded verse. 3. of Antichrists time of
arising Stephen the second also laid hold on the secular power 649 years from
this Prophecy; Thrusting the Greek Emperors out of Italy, depriving the French
King Helderick of his Kingdom, admitting Pipin (to whom he gave the Kingdom of
France) to kiss his feet. Thus the Beast arose out of the bottomless pit by
degrees.

Out of the bottomless pit, etc.] The Beast may be said to come from hell,
because his working is after the working of Satan. Hell is said to have no
bottom, because none ever return thence, but are as it were continually
sinking into misery.

And shall go into perdition] Here the last state of the Beast is treated of.
The Antichristian Church decreases daily and suddenly will arrive at the
Armegeddon of destruction.

And they that dwell upon the earth shall wonder] As is expounded chap. 13.4*
8. none of the Saints, who were elected before the foundation of the earth in
Christ to glory, whom it is impossible to deceive, Matthew. 24.24. the
non-elected are in miserable condition.

Beholding the Beast which was] Before John's time in Kings, Consuls -- who are
fallen a sleep. verse. 10,

And is not] Because Roman Bishops in John's time had not usurped (not dreamed)
of any great power.

And yet is] In respect of the imperial power of Caesar's then (which the Popes
should usurp) when John was alive.

Verse. 9. Here is the mind having wisdome] In the things that remain to be
expounded touching the heads and horns greater mysteries lie did then
ordinary, which are above man's reach or wisdeom; Therefore the Angel somewhat
explaines it to John, stirring up our attention and desire, lest we be
slothful in knowing and shunning the Beast.

The seven heads are seven mountains] That is, signify seven mountains; as the
Rock was Christ, that is, signified Christ.

On which the woman sitteth] To wit, the whorish woman or great City, verse. 18.
or Rome, seated on seven hills (as every man knows) one mountain is called
Capitolinus, 2 Palatinus 3 Caelius, 4 Aventinus, 5 Aesquilinus, 6 Viminalis, 7
Quirinalis of which see Mr. Godwin in his Roman Antiquit. Quest. Why did, not
Christ by the Angel plainly name Rome? Because men should the more study to
find out the mystery; also if the Antichristians had been plainly named,
perchance they would have (in rage) burnt the Prophecy, and many more
inconveniences would have followed. The Jesuits begin to say this is Rome, yet
heathenish Rome as under heathenish Kings and Emperors; but it is plain John
speaks of things to come, of Rome as it was to be Antichrists seat, not the
Emperors then,

Upon which the woman sitteth] She sits upon waters, verse. 1. as commanding
people, tongues, nations called waters, ver. 15. upon the Beast or Roman
Empire, as commanding and ruling the Empire, for sitting notes Dominion upon
the mountains, as Antichrists dwelling place and seat; now thus the Pope sits
even in Antichrists seat: therefore he is Antichrist.

Verse. 10. And there are seven Kings] That is, governments (at Rome) where the
seven mountains were, as is most remarkable; to wit, by Kings, Consuls,
Dictators, Decemvirs (which lasted but two years) Tribunes, Emperors, Popes.
Now no Kingdom can show such seven mountains and seven Kings, but this Rome
the now seat of Antichrist.

Five are fallen] To wit, the former five now reckoned.

One is] To wit, Emperors, Domitian then reigned who banished John.

One is not yet come] To wit, the Pope; for though there was a Bishop of Rome
then, yet he did not Lord it, or use any Papal jurisdiction; thus Brightman;
but according to him the seventh must be Antichrist, being however but part of
the eighth, as will appear; the seventh is the Government by Constantine and
Christian Emperors, for now the face of the Empire began to be new, and
another in some sense; for he left the mountains of Rome and went to the East,
to wit, Byzantium, calling it after his own name, Constantinople, or the City
of Constantine. Thus he remained a short time, to wit, at Rome; the ninteenth
year of his reign, departing thence to Byzantium; neither in some sense did the
seventh Government continue long, being swallowed up by Popes in the West, and
Turks in the East.

Verse. 11. The Beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth] The seventh
was but part of him, Constantine and his successors removing from Rome; the
Popes (seeing the Emperors even weary by reason of wars and incursion of
Barbarians) began to beg, and after to usurp Kingly authority at Rome, which
was the old seat of the Empire.

Thus the Beast that was] In John's time in Monarchical power of five Kings.

And is not] Neither an Ecclesiastical nor secular Monarch in John's time, to
wit, in the Pope.

Even he is the eighth] To wit, regiment consisting of an Ecclesiastical and
Civil Monarchy, as Priest and Caesar.

And is of the seven] Heads, to wit, or Kings, borrowing power of them; he is
not one of the seven heads; but of them, as exercising himself all the power
that had been in the seven Kings or Governments (whether Priestly, as the
Roman Emperors had done (for they were called after Augustus, the greatest
Priests) or Kingly.) Thus the seventh King was not Antichrist, but the
Christian Emperors, who made way many ways for him.

And goes into perdition] He has been going apace a good while, ever since
the Witnesses began chap. 11. to prophecy, and will suddenly arrive at his
Armegeddon.

Verse 12. And the ten horns which thou saw are ten Kings] Horns are not the
heads, but something of the heads. Now as these horns grew out of the heads in
the text; so those Kings (whether more or less it matters not, for by ten many
are understood) who receive power with the beast in one hour, and afterward
hate the Whore, are those who sprang out of the seventh Beast, or Christian
Caesar's and Emperors, in place of whom succeeded the Emperor and several
kings of the West, as Spain -- and her King -- The beast then, though he
devoured the seventh head, yet he exercises all his authority under the name of
Christ's Vicar and general Bishop, suffering the Emperor to keep the name.

Who have received no kingdom yet] To wit, when John writ the Revelation, but
since.

But receive power] That is shall receive power.

One hour with the Beast] Though God be the doner of Kingdoms, yet these ten
Kings through the wicked means of the Beast obtained their Kingdoms; for his
rashness translated the Greek Empire unto the French: but God by his secret
just working ordered it (as in the translation of the ten tribes, 1 Kings
12.24.)

With the Beast or from the Beast] For here the spirit seems to point at the
Popes creating Kings, Emperors, as Leo did. These Kings then reigned by the
Popes favor.

As Kings] Noting their dependency on the Pope, whose vassals they are, holding
their kingdoms as farms from him, having the name of Kings though it may be
well said in all the Popish dominious Antichrist only reigns, whom these Kings
obey rather then reign.

One houre] That is, as they received the faith by degrees, (for they were
Barbarians who received these Kingdoms, which belonged once to the Christian
Emperors,) so they reigned accordingly with the Beast, or the successors of
the Beast: by one hour, a strict time is not noted. England, France, Spain,
Germany, -- by degrees reigned with the Pope, and by his leave being once all
Papistical (one hour.)

Verse. 13. These have one mind] All had their kingdoms in some sense from the
Beast, offering up their kingdoms to be ruled spiritually by him,
acknowledging his supremacy, (for the defense of which, our witty (otherwise)
Sir Thomas Moor lost his head in England) and had one mind; all Popelings to be
of one mind is not commendable, but only in thee truth. Thus even at onetime
all the Kingdoms of the West compared to horns (because springing out of the
seventh head of Christian Emperors) either received their power from the
Beast, as tributaries really, or acknowledged his superiority.

Having all one mind] Nay, and prayed all in one tongue, viz. the Latin.
Though these Kings might have private differences among themselves, yet when
the Popes matters were a foot, they wonderfully agreed in the prosecution of
them.

Giving him their power] Help and Aid to advance Idolatry and Superstition.
Here observe how these inhabiters of the earth wondered after the Beast, as
chapt. 13. Admiring and Reverencing the Popes, and Idolatry of Rome.

Verse. 14. These shall make war with the Lamb] They by consequence make war
with Christ, who defend the false Vicar of Christ, and his Idol-worship. This
war the Kings began with the Lamb, as soon as they received their kingdoms,
above eight hundred years, and shall be most cruelly prosecuted by the Kings of
the earth gathered to Armageddon, by the enticement of the three impure
spirits, after the spiritual Euphrates of Rome is diverted by Christian Kings
and States; observe then, many of these ten Kings shall give out.

Being overcome by the Lamb] Convinced by the truth; and hate the whore; the
rest shall with the kings of the earth continue the war against the Lamb till
the last day.

Yet he shall oveecome them] Not only finally then, but before (even before the
ten Kings gave out) partly by the word, gaining and winning ground; Partly by
the courageous sufferings of the Martyrs. For the Leader is Lord of Lords, --
they that are Partners in the fight, are 1. Elect. 2. Called. 3. Faithful,
therefore through Christ Conquerours. --

Christ being God and King of Kings, is sure enough to conquer Kings and
Kingdoms; the house of Saul decreases, and the Kingdom of our David
increases daily.

Verse. 15. And he said to me, the Waters which thou saw where the woman
sits, are People, Nations, Multitudes -- ] That is, they represent People,
Nations, -- thus the Chaldaean army, Jerem. 47.2. is called the Waters of the
North. Waters are raging and unconstant, so are People and multitudes; Rome in
John's time had many nations under her, so has the whore now, and had more when
Antichrist was at the highest.

Verse. 16. And the ten horns which thou saw upon the Beast, etc.] Meaning
ten Kings of the West, of which already, shall hate the whore. (when God shall
put it into their hearts) The occasion of these horns of the Beasts hating the
Beast and Whore, was the Lambs victory, convincing them of the truth. God be
thanked all kingdoms ( Spain and Italy excepted,) more or less, hate the
whore and oppose Idolatry.

Shall make her desolate] By leaving the great City, and with their Kingdoms
and Dominions turn to Christ.

And make her naked] Detect her abominations by confession, writing, and
keeping back her gold, riches, pearl, etc. that should adorn her.

And shall eat her flesh] Her flesh here, is her annuities, riches, rents,
possessions, (wherewith she was fatted) which they shall employ upon their own
territories, Churches, and several better uses.

And shall burn her with fire] Rome, to wit, the nest of Antichrist and whorish
Seat; So that the Pope shall fly to some of the Kings of the earth for
shelter, (as the Spaniard perchance, who may be called one of the Kings of the
earth, contradistinct to the Kings of the East, and may join with the other
named Kings of the earth to his destruction) now Antichrist is not thus to be
quite ruined though his Palace be, but in the succession of Popes shall live
some where or other till Christ's coming to judgment, 2 These. 2.8. whose
brightness shall destroy him, and the remaining Kings of the earth.

Verse. 17. For God has put it into the Kings hearts] They were ready enough
else to have continued in idolatry with Antichrist, so that God must have the
glory. Here England, Germany in part, Scotland, Swethland, and other places
recovered from Antichrist, and hating him, may be thought on, once of the ten
Kings.

Obj. What is putting into their heart? and how it is done?

Answ. God moves the heart of them by his divine cooperating spirit
effectually, so that it cannot but act, yet leaves it free, because the divine
determination hinders not the judgment of reason about choosing or refusing;
note

God put it into their hearts, first to do his will or pleasure in executing
his mind for the Beast, as chap. 13. to agree and give their Kingdom to the
Beast, (of which largely, verse. 13. of this chapter) fighting with their might
for his spiritual Empire.

Until the Words of God were fulfilled] That is, his decree touching the
rising of Antichrist in this book, and in the Apostles often. Now he has
altered their minds, convinced their consciences, and they do his Will in
executing his judgments upon the Whore, after she was at the height, and the
Word of God was fulfilled, that Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God or
in the Church for God and oracle, and after the Worshippers had admired after
the Beast. The Lord put it into more of their hearts to their salvation. Amen.

Ver. 8. And the woman which thou sawst is that great City, which reigns over
the Kings of the earth] To wit, Rome: for no other city in John's time (mark it)
had dominion over the Kings of the earth (to whom they were tributary) but
Rome. And thus the Church of Rome at her height held all and ruled all, either
by the sword or under pretense of Religion; note God by his revealed Will
(grace coworking) put it into these kings hearts to fulfill his will; formerly
God put it into their hearts to do his will in serving the Whore. The action
and motion materially is from God always, the form or obliquity of the action
is from Satan and man's corrupt nature, in which, and by which God has a secret
working and end.

If a man ride well upon a lame horse, the going or action is good as from the
man, the lamenesse is from the horse; so the action in the Kings (when they
were for the Whore) is from God, the lameness and pravity of it (serving the
Whore) is from their corruption; by which however God wrought his pleasure.

The sum is, the Angels, or Preachers and Kings shall divert Euphrates of
Rome (the Preachers noted by Angels having made Rome weak in part and odious
before;) then the three unclean spirits gather the Kings of the earth to help
her, but her former Vassals shall many of them hate her, and burn Rome; yet
the Pope with the Kings that are left shall be gathered to battle against
Christ and these converted ones; but the bloody field of Armageddon, or the day
of judgment shall overtake them --

CHAP. XVIII. The sixth Vision continued. Act 2.
Verse. 1. After these things, I saw another Angel come down from heaven]

TO wit, after the sight of the woman upon the Beast. another Angel] for this
book is as a Trage-comedy, where several persons come in as Actors; here Angels
signify no Preachers (as formerly the Angels bid) but are real Angels (one
perchance Christ) publishing future events to John; they come from heaven, and
so do the judgments upon Babylon.

Having great power] All the Angels are great in power; how great in power is
God then, whose servants these are? it notes the greatness of the matter in
hand, to wit, great Romes overthrow, who is not invincible.

And the earth was lightened with his glory] This notes that he was a glorious
messenger from heaven. 2. That the judgment of Rome shall be public and open.

Verse. 2. He cried with a loud voice, saying.] It notes, 1. That the
inhabitants of the earth, and worshippers of the Beast shall not plead
ignorance: for so the Gospel has long cried down Rome and threatened her
destruction. 2. It notes the stupidity of Rome lying in pleasure, though her
judgments were at door.


Babylon is fallen, is fallen, etc.] As in Esaias 21.9. concerning the literal
Babylon, it notes the certainty of its destruction, therefore it is doubled. The
Angel chap. 14.8. who proclaimed its ruin, did it as a Preacher, by the Gospel
battering that spiritual City which about Luthers time began to decay and
decrease in honor and greatness. Here the destruction of the City of Rome is
foretold by a heavenly Herald, because she rejected the former warning, the
Gospel Truth; and killed the witnesses, -- this Babylon is Rome, having seven
heads or governments, sitting on seven mountains, making drunk the Kings of the
earth with her fornication, being the seat of Antichrist, and which in John's
time ruled over Nations.

And is become the habitation of Devils] See Esaias 13.16. to 22. or of Satyrs;
it was formerly Satan's dwelling place, being a Kingdom of Idolatry and
Antichrists seat; but now this notes its utter desolation as that place of Esaias
shows. This Angels Proclamation belongs to the time a little before Romes
destruction, and is not yet come.

And the hold of every foul spirit] Noting the apparitions of Devils to be
there after its destruction; not only Fairies and Satyrs.

And cage of every unclean and hateful bird] As Kites, Owls, Vultures, Ravens
-- This notes the utter desolation of Rome and her stately Palaces and Temples
before the end of all things; for Satyrs and Devils appear in Deserts and wild
places, and these birds inhabit ruinous Towns and Castles, such as Rome must
be, and a just punishment upon her Idols and Temples; hell is the Devils hold
properly, so that this shall be a fearful place, where the Pope, Cardinals,
Bishops and Clergy sinned and feasted luxuriously, now Devils shall dance
commonly.

Verse. 3. For they have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication,
etc.] All Nations have, that is, many Nations, all Christendom and more. Now
here spiritual fornication is meant, because she is a City, chap. 17. verse.
last, with whom the Kings here mentioned, could not commit literal fornication;
it is called wine, because pleasing to corrupt nature (as all sin, all heresy
is) and enticing, overtaking one as wine unawares; called wrath, because it
causes Gods wrath. So here is the true reason of Romes desolation, her
damnable Idolatry, so that the place is justly punished for the sin committed
therein.

And the Merchants of the earth] To wit, Cardinals, Bishops and the like, who
only have leave to trade in holy wares of Masses, Indulgences, Pardons,
Peter Pence, spiritual riches and souls of men, verse. 13. (which old Rome
never traded with.)

Are waxen rich] By most unlawful means (which brings a judgment) as spiritual
whordom, damnable Idolatry and deceit; thus heaping up riches, living by this
means delicately, luxuriously, dishonestly; for by this means these spiritual
Merchants (called Princes of the earth, verse. 23.) could buy any temporal
merchandise of common Merchants.

Now certainly all things are vendible at Rome, any sin to be forgiven for
money by the spiritual Merchants.

Verse. 4. And I heard another voice, saying, -- come out of her my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, etc.] So Jerem. 51.6. and 45. 1. Here is
commission to separate from Rome (in heart and bodily) and any thing that is
Antichristian. 2. God has and ever had a people in Babylon (though at least)
spiritual captives, yet elected and to be saved. 3. The means of salvation is
to be laid hold on, and to fly to the Word and Christ; to wit, out of Babylon.
4. If we partake not of the sins of Babylon, nor of her punishments shall we
(lest we partake of her sins and of her plagues). 5. Because our corrupt
natures are easily enticed to sin, fly out of her.
Indeed travelers (who really are not for Rome) must uncover the head and bow
the knee by force at Masses -- which is too much connivence, even adoration;
therefore be not there, fly out of Babylon, lest God be angry, and ye partake
of her plagues.

Verse. 5. And her sins have reached unto heaven] Abels blood, and the Sodomites
sins called to heaven (in a metaphor) for vengeance. Sin is of a crying nature,
especially spiritual whoredom, noted by her sins, being of a more wicked and
heinous nature then ordinary.

And God has remembered her iniquities] Fully to punish them; otherwise God
remembered Rome before, though he for many reasons forbore her. The Jesuits
confess that Rome shall be wasted by ten Kings before the coming of
Antichrist; pray examine why she is to be wasted? because of her Idolatry --
therefore Antichrist that causes men to commit (by counsel from the Dragon)
this great abomination is come. O Jesuits, see, the cause of your Cities ruin
is your beloved Idolatry and Fornication.

Ver. 6. Reward her even as she has rewarded you] reward to sin is due, which
the godly shall in time see done to Rome when she is wasted; at what time they
are bid to reward her (that is, to rejoice at her punishment, being Christ's
great enemy, for they are not to reward her otherwise; neither need they, for
God is said to have done it in her overthrow by the Angel before the godly are
bid to reward her or rejoice.) The Saints approving Christ's judgment at the
last day is called their judging the world: So the godly's rejoicing here is
called their rewarding Babylon.

Reward yee] Ye of the ten Kings who are converted and against Rome, ye
Preachers also teach that she is to be rewarded (so private revenge is not here
thought on.)

And give her double according to her works etc.] That is a very sore and
sufficient reward of punishment, for so the word double is used, Esaias 40. verse.
2. comfort Jerusalem (to wit, after her captivity) because I have rewarded her
double for her sin, that is, abundantly, enough; thus Rome is to be rewarded,
yet according to her works; as she has afflicted the Saints, so she shall be
sorely afflicted; the Lord remembers his peoples miseries and tormentors, to
return both double, the one of joy, the other of punishment. O Ireland how
can thou escape?

Verse. 7. How much she has glorified her self and lived in pleasure, etc.]
Saying, she was Christ's only Spouse, the Catholic Church, the Apostolic
Sea, the Pope Christ's Vicar, condemning all the Saints for Heretics; calling
her self the head of all Churches, a Queen -- by so much sorer punishment she
shall be afflicted: as by a law of equality. Now never was such a boasting
Church as Rome.

Saying, I sit a Queen] Not only in her heart; but in her Sermons, writings and
actions.

I sit] Noting her pride, and security (as if she were unmovable.)

A Queen] Noting her self-confidence and usurping authority above all Churches.
Thus Antichrist exalts himself. 2 These. 2.4. above all that is called God,
whether Angels or Magistrates; for both are so called. Thus (in a parenthesis)
the sons of God (or Judges, great men, Magistrates) took the daughters of men
being fair (or ravished them, taking them by force, being men's sons of power
and without control) and giants were gotten (Apostates (for so the word in
Hebrew may be rendered, Genesis 6.2.4.) from God and Religion then arose: God not
blessing those unlawful courses of marriages, which occasioned the flood).
Thus Magistrates are called Gods, above whom Antichrist exalts himself; as
above Emperors, Kings, Churches and Councils, as is noted.

I am no widow] As by a Queen is noted the pride, pomp, riches, state, power
of Rome: So by her being no widow -- is meant her being Christ's supposed Spouse
(for so she calls her self) and her extraordinary boasted of honor, and pomp
which abounds at Rome; and that persuades them there that God loves them, as
Ephraim boasted foolishly, Hos. 12.8. I have found me out much riches -- when
indeed Christ's Church is denominated from her affliction, Esa. 54.11. O thou
afflicted, and riches and pomp are more companions of the wicked, Job 21. to
verse. 15.

I shall see no sorrow] This is Romes language. Yet many Kingdoms and people
have revolted from this proud harlot; so her sorrow increases, and some of the
ten Kings have long since begun to hate her.

Verse. 8. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death and sorrow, etc.]
That is, suddenly, swiftly. She delighted in pleasure, behold sorrow: She gave
her self to gluttony and luxury, behold famine; She burnt Martyrs, behold fire,
burning her seat and Palaces. She said I shall see no sorrow, behold her
destruction in one day.

For strong is the Lord who judges her] Therefore though her territories be
large, though the City be very great and strong, yet stronger is the Lord who
can and will bring this judgment upon her, by the victorious army of the
converted Kings, who shall throw fire into her and consume her.

Verse. 9. And the Kings of the earth shall bewail her and lament for her,
etc.] To wit, who are contradistinct to Saints and had lived deliciously with
her in committing fornication, as perchance Spain, the Emperor -- such of the
ten as remain with the Pope, and are enemies to the truth of the Gospel. They
shall lament her: 1 Because they cannot commit any longer Idolatry at Rome
(that beloved, but whorish City.) 2 Because they cannot riot any longer within
the City.


Verse, 10. Standing afar off for fear of the torment, saying, Alas etc.]
God shall strike a fear into them, that they shall not dare to approach near to
help her, (though they are sorry, they cannot sin any more with her.)

Afar off] as far perchance as their own countries; though it is wonder they
are so daunted that they send not to help her, (by some army to rescue her from
burning) though they be destroyed, as at Armageddon of old Josiah was.

Verse. 11. And the Merchants of the earth shall weep] 1. Kings, 2, Merchants
shall mourn for her, meaning spiritual traders in the Romish sea, who only can
buy and sell, as chap. 13.17.

For no man buyeth her merchandise any more] To wir, her Pardons, Absolutions,
-- which shall be discovered to be abominable, rotten and false, (in the city
to be sold however no more, being burnt.)

Verse. 12. The Merchandise of gold and silver, and of precious stones, etc.]
See Ezekiel. 27. where Tyres destruction (then a famous mart-town) is foretold;
and this Catalogue of wares there mentioned; also the neighboring nations who
brought their Merchandise to Tire there mentioned, (to which here is a plain
allusion.) Now by Romes ruin the spiritual Merchants could not vent their
ungodly wares of pardons, etc. Nor could gain riches enough to buy Merchandise
as formerly from other nations) as horses from France, Gold and Silver from
Spain, Sheep from England, Beasts from Germany, -- all nations furnished Rome
with souls being subject to the Arch-flamen of Rome. So here is noted the
nations (from their Merchandise) who furnished Rome with wares (as Brightman
has observed) the spiritual Merchants could not reach to buy these
commodities ( Rome being destroyed) nor common Merchants or nations so well
vent them ( Rome being burnt;) for brevity sake I omit the Catalogue.

Wherein observe the heathenish Rome never did traffic for souls of men,
though she did for slaves, but here Rome deals for both expressly slaves and
souls of men. Sure here Popish Rome is meant, most ungodly domineering over
souls, by threatening Purgatory, by pardons, masses, -- the sum is, Romes
destruction shall hinder the spiritual merchandise of the souls and estates of
all nations (which a long while has flowed to Rome,) for which the Roman
spiritual merchants shall grieve.

Verse, 14. And the fruits which thy soul lusted after] To wit, the cates and
delicates, the spiritual fathers (or Clergy of Rome,) riotously filled their
tables with.

Are departed from them etc.] Or perished by Romes perishing.

Verse. 15. The Merchants of these things which were waxed rich, etc.] To wit,
souls and other merchandise, shall lament; namely Merchants, Ship-masters,
Masters-mates, Pilots, Partners, and common seamen shall lament: that is,
Cardinals (and those who are even equal with them) Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Monks, and all spiritual seamen that have an oar in Peter's boat
shall lament, and as the kings mentioned stand afar off (in regard of help,
but near enough in heart if they durst help) saying alas, alas: pitying the
great revenues of their Arch-bishopricks, Cardinalships, -- now lost. Hence (as
mourners) they cast dust on their heads, (as in old time they did) because of
Romes desolation; the rest is plain to ver. 20. Only observe, the cause of the
lamentation, is not their sins and Idolatry (which brought the judgments) but
their temporal losses, and their revenues and honors.

Verse. 20. Rejoice over her thou heaven, etc.] Formerly she shed the blood of
Saints, Prophets, Apostles: Now those Inhabitants of heaven may rejoice,
because their cruel enemy (and Christ's) is destroyed; This should teach us to
rely upon Christ, who will one day destroy our enemies and give us occasion of
rejoicing. chap 6.10. The Saints cry. O Lord, holy, and just, how long? Here
they are bid rejoice -- because God has avenged them, and suppressed Antichrist
and blasphemy.

Verse. 21. And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a millstone, etc.] Whether
this Angel represented Christ (since he took up the millstone, as it had been a
feather, and speaks by a similitude of Romes overthrow; for from Christ come
Antichrists judgments) I dispute not; 'twas another Angel that enters the stage
as it were, representing Babylons overthrow, wherein consider.

1. A mil-stone is not easily removed, nor Babylon easily destroyed. 2. A
mil-stone is cast down by force: so Babylon. 3. The Mil-stone is cast into the
sea; so Babylon shall be burnt by fire. 4. The Mil-stone cast into the sea, is
covered, never recovered; so Babylon shall be utterly desolated, and never
built.
Verse. 22. The voice of harpers -- shall be heard no more] At feasts in thee;
nor flute for dancers, not trumpet for civil meetings, nor war; nor crafts-men
(whether Physician, Lawyer --)nor husbandman, nor miller, but it shall be a
mere desolation.

Verse. 23. Nor lights shall shine any more in thee] Convenient for night season.

Nor bridegroom nor bride shall be in thee] Therefore no procreation of
children, therefore Romes desolation shall be consummated.

Because thy Merchants were great men of the earth] To wit, Cardinals,
Archbishops -- here is the grand cause of Romes desolation (including other)
her Merchants sold damnable wares; if this were understood literally, it were a
weak reason; because thy Merchants were great men, therefore comes thy
destruction: No, but because thy great Cardinals, Bishops -- sold cursed and
abominable spiritual wares (of Purgatory, Pardons --) Therefore Rome is to be
destroyed for her Idolatry, false doctrine, riot (the consequent of riches)

For her sorceries] Or false doctrines (compared often to bewitching or enticing
wine) have deceived the Christian world.

Verse. 24. And in her was found the blood of Prophets, etc.] The old Rome
caused Apostles to be slain: the new Popish Rome Prophets or Teachers (as chap.
11.)

In her] Either because the doctrine which caused their blood to be shed, was
from Rome; or because she gave commission to slay the Saints who were slain in
other places and kingdoms (as England --) God plagues Rome as the Original
cause of all this.

CHAP. XIX. Vision 6. Act. 3.
Verse. 1. And after these things, I heard a great voice of much people in
heaven].

THe occasion of this praising God, is from verse. 20. of chap. 18. Where the
heavenly voice bids the Saints rejoice as here they do. Now it is usual in this
book (as in a comedy or tragedy) to bring in harpers or music to delight the
spectatours Hence it is remarkable after Romes destruction, men shall rejoice
on earth for Gods just vengeance on her before the day of Judgment. (For though
John heard the voice as in heaven; yet it noted also joy on earth among the
Saints.)

After these things] After the scarlet colored City was burnt (for so both
women chap 17.3, 4. and City are arrayed chap. 18.16.) and the Merchants riches
partly burnt, partly made incapable of sale: After the common Merchants of
Nations had bewailed the City, for now they cannot trade with the spiritual
Merchants of Rome with gold, pearl -- for Masses, pardons -- nor could the
spiritual Merchants (being impoverished) reach the price of fine linen,
pearl -- after these things (as in the last five Visions) a chore of singers
appear, praising God; Because Antichrists blasphemy, Idolatry -- is destroyed
in part, so the cause of the rejoicing is good.

To verse. 10. and 11. things being indifferent plain, and to be understood by
the reading, with adding some few notes, I Will pass them by.

From verse. 1. Allelujah (that is, praise the Lord) being an Hebrew word, by
which all the quire of Heaven (both of Old and New Testament) praise the Lord.
Note the sweet concord of both Churches under the Law and Gospel now in Heaven.
Also perchance, hence may be noted that the Hebr. tongue (used in Paradise, and
by our Savior on earth, mixed with the Syriack) after the resurrection shall be
the tongue to celebrate God in Heaven; perchance here may be thought on the
Jews Hallelujahs (whose tongue this is) after their fuller conversion according
to Romans 11.

Verse. 2. It becomes us all to take notice, and praise God for the equity of
his judgments upon his and our enemies, as Antichrists. --

Verse. 3. Hell is below: for the smoke ascended, here is noted also the
eternity of Romes judgment, for ever and ever.

Verse. 4. After the former rejoycings, the 24. Elders or Jewish Church, and the
four Beasts alluding to the Apostles, see chap. 4. succeed in the praising God,
saying Amen. So that none but he who sat upon the throne is worshipped (not
one worships another) and he for ever by succession of companies, which is to
be noted.

Verse. 5. Another voice inviting to more praises is heard out of the throne (by
which is noted its being from heaven) and it was not the voice of him that sat
on the throne, because the voice invites to praise him: also the two companies
had ceased their song, so this was Christ's voice who as Mediator calls God his
God, saying, praise our God; it seems they had ascribed to God salvation --
that is, the power of saving, acknowledging salvation to be from him -- but
greater motives for praise remain, then their deliverance from Antichrist, and
his judgment and their salvation, to wit the Lambs marriage -- which all his
servants, of more or less faith, children or men, that fear him (so the
Catholic Church is here comprehended) must praise him for.

I hence observe, it is our duty to praise God and take notice of his love --
that his will ought to be done by us in earth as it is in heaven.

Verse. 6. Now follow the praises, by all the people of God in heaven and earth
as it were, compared to waters because of multitude: ( chap. 17.15. and noise,
and to thunder, filling heaven and earth ith echoes; thus John heard it,
noting the exceeding joy and praises of both Churches Militant and Triumphant,
see chap. 14.2. where the like noise of praise is heard. Now this Song belongs
to the time a little before Christ's coming to judgment, as will appear.

Because the Lord has reigned] that is, by subduing the enemies, as Antichrist
-- had declared powerfully himself to be God --

Verse. 7. For the marriage of the Lamb is come, etc.] The betrothing between
Christ and his Church is in this world by faith and the word preached; the word
wooes the Church for Christ, faith imperfectly embraces him, the consummation
of the marriage is at the last day, when Christ and the Church shall for ever
be together, enjoying one another perfectly: there she shall as a wife enjoy
him; here only as a Virgin betroathed. --

She has made her self ready, to wit for glory: but to her it was given to be
clothed in white linen, ver. 8 to wit, by Christ: by whom and with whom (as
with fine linen,) she is clothed: being her self naked, Ezekiel. 16.8.

It was given] Noting her natural nakedness of grace and righteousness: but
through Christ's endeavors as a Bride to trim her self: but is much (nay most)
helped by Christ to be dressed (as Brides are by others) for here both
dressings are meant: of grace, but especially of glory: so she must needs be a
most glorious spouse being dressed with Christ.

Verse. 9. Write] As a most remarkable, comfortable note: Blessed are they that
are called (internally and effectually) to the marriage of the Lamb, begun here
and perfected hereafter. Sure eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it
entered into man's heart to conceive the joy, banquet, attire, and graces of this
marriage and friends truly invited.

Now against the Papists (if they be blessed that are invited) assurance of
heaven is to be had here; for this is one of the true sayings of God, to wit,
that it is given to the Bride to be clothed in fine linen (therefore there is no
Predisposition in her) and that they are blessed who are (in this world)
invited, having heaven in part upon earth.

Verse. 10. And I fell at his feet to worship him, etc.] The Angel's who talked
with him. Abraham civilly worshipped Angels as Travelers, Genesis 18. and was
blameless: which may persuade that this worship offered by John was religious,
because forbidden. Now John had seen Angels before now, and heard them speak,
yet never offered to worship till now: either being now over-joyed about the
comforts of the Lamb and his spouse: for which discourse (for this Angel had
familiarly talked with him a great while) by way of thanks he would have
worshipped him: or perchance supposing he had been Christ.

To be brief, John's weakness is here showed, and the Angels faithfulness:
since John confesses in writing his error, as Moses shows his original,
Matthew his calling impartially, it shows that these men were inspired by God
who were the Writers of these books. And since the Angel refuses the worship
(for two reasons. 1. Because he was John's fellow servant. 2. Because God was
only to be worshipped) therefore no worship (neither douleia nor latreia: for
they are indifferently used for the same worship) is due to Saints or Angels:
So that as the Angels refuse it, so the Saints would blush, did they know the
several honors and adorations offered to their pictures and idols.


For the Testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy] The Angel confirms that
he was fellow servants with them that had the spirit of Prophecy or the
Testimony of Jesus, because he also had that Testimony, revealing to John by
the spirit these future events in this book.

Act. 4. of this Vision.
Verse. 11. And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse, etc.] Behold the
Judge and last day. Now the reason why this is here inserted, is because the
destruction of the city of Rome had been spoken of: but not of the whole
Churches ruin, and Antichrists utter desolation, who yet might lurk at some
other place, with some of the Kings of the earth his Confederates, therefore
here the final destruction and Armageddon of all is brought in.

Thus ended chapter 11. and vision 3. from verse. 15. where the seventh Angel
sounded:

Thus ended chap. 14. vision 4. touching the harvest and vintage.

Thus ended chapter 16. from ver. 16, 17. of vision 5. where the Angel said it is
done.

Thus the Prediction of Christ is come to pass (in the Vision to John) Matthew.
25.31. -- Christ and his Angels coming to judge the world, hence the heaven was
opened, and Christ in likeness of a Captain, and troop of Horse, coming thence
to judge the world. Christ has a white horse, noting his excellent, pure,
divine nature: not as if horses or men, or swords were really here used; but
under the Allegory of a General and an Army, the brightness of Christ's coming
to judgment is signified, which some Expositors on this book not well noting
have erred.

Behold a white horse, and he that sat on him was] Came out of heaven opened.
One day doubtless we shall see the heavens opened, and Christ's coming -- Now
Christ in the primitive times came riding upon a white horse, chap. 6. meaning
the pure Apostolic Church conquering Heathenisme: but here it notes his
divine majesty and glory, to be avenged on all his adversaries.

Called faithful and true, warring and judging in righteousnesse] This is for
the comfort of all Gods People, since the Judge cannot, will not do wrong: nay
the adversaties shall confess the justness of the sentence pronounced against
them: and the Saints shall be sure of pay and reward (who have fought against
sin for him) for the General is faithful and true: and therefore his officers
calling to offices is most right and true.

Verse. 12. His eyes a flame of fire] As chap. 1.14 Fire gives light and
consumes (and it noted the vigilance of Christ for his Church there) so Christ
sees into all secrets, and will burn up the ungodly as stubble, being fervent
and victorious, as fire usually is.

And on his head many Crowns] Noting his royal Majesty, Dignity and Power above
Antichrist, who had ten Crowns, chapter 13.1 and two horns, ver. 11. but the Lamb
more, even seven, chap. 5.6. and here many Crowns.

And he had a name written, that no man knew but himself] This name is after
expressed the Word of God, -- now as chapter 2.17. the new name given to the
overcommers is known to none but them that have it: because none know the
happiness of adoption -- but the truly adopted: so none know Christ's name, but
he to whom the father sanctifiedly shall reveal it even to salvation.

Verse. 13. He was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood] Thus he came in the
Prophet from the spiritual Bozra or Edom, to wit, hell: conquering by death all
his enemies, Esaias 63.3. whose blood as it were seemed, to be upon his garments;
but more on verse. 15. of this.

And his name called THE WORD OF GOD] We know his name, and they to whom it is
revealed. Now this John in his Gospel calls him the Word, chap. 1. A word best
expresses a man: so Christ is the image of the father: and his spokesman to the
Church or his Word.

Verse. 14. And the arms. etc.] To wit, which came for honor sake out of
heaven to attend him.

Clothed in white linen, etc.] Not armed: for Christ was strong enough; Here
is noted the Purity and Splendour of the Army attired, as if they were indeed
going to a marriage in the same livery as Christ, having white horses, being
innocent, pure, glorious. Of this army, see Mat. 24.30.25, 31. -- concerning
the holy Angels. --

Verse 15. Out of his mouth goes a sharp sword] As chap. 1.16. where it noted
the power of his word (as a two edged sword, Heb. 4.12.) wounding sin in his
people, and wounding the enemies of his people; but here it notes how by the
word of his mouth and divine power he will at last destroy his enemies, saying,
Go ye cursed. --

That with it he should smite the Nations] He comes meanly armed (for his power
is inward needing no outward defense;) Now Christ formerly (as Psalm. 2.) ruled
the Nations with an Iron rod of judgment, pushing them as he thought good, but
now will confound Antichrist and his Gentiles or Nations (for he imitates them
in Idolatry) as by a rod of Iron:

For he treads the witnesses of Gods wrath] See the Exposition chap. 14. ver.
20. No wonder that his garments seem bloody; See also Esaias 63.5. for here
Christ conquering his enemies as some General (dipped in his blood) is presented
in a Simile; here then is not intended Christ's passion, as in Esaias 63. but
concerning Antichrist and all his enemies at the last day.

Verse. 16. And he has on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, etc.] In
the Vision John so saw Chrst, noting Christ's being Monarch of heaven and earth
in that he is King of Kings -- this proves Christ's Divine nature, and
encourages his people to trust in him, and not fear the adversaries, since he
is above all, and will suddenly manifest his power in their destruction. This
name was written on his vesture, because all one day shall openly acknowledge
it; and on his thigh, because he was eternally begot by the Father (for the
thigh in Scripture notes generation, Genesis 46.26.)

Verse. 17. I saw an Angel standing in the Sun, who cried with a loud voice,
saying, etc.] That is in some clear, high place to be seen and heard of all,
who as an Herald or Trumpeter went before the Army, calling to the fowls to
devour the slain as it were after a battle; yet I take this to be the
Archangel sounding at the last day, 2 These. 4.16.

Come and gather your selves together to the Supper] alluding to Ezekiel 39.17.
where the fowls are invited to devour conquered God and Magog (perchance Turk
and Pope) but literally this shall not come to pass at the last day; for
fowls and elements (wherein they are) shall then be consumed; but under this
similitude the horror of the last day is set forth; for Raven, Vultures --
usually devour corpses after a battle.

The Supper of the great God] because provided by him, who is King of Kings and
Lord of Lords --

Verse. 18. That ye may eat the flesh of Kings, etc.] Who by the unclean
spirits, chap. 16.14. were to be gathered to Armageddon. Both the Kings of the
earth (suppose Persians, Tartarians, Indians -- and those of the ten Kings who
forsook not the Whore) who shall be a feast for birds (indeed for hell, for
the Lord shall overtake these his enemies combining against him, and utterly
destroy them for ever) I mean the judgment day shall overtake them, for they
shall war against him, and last in some sort till then.

And the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, etc.] So it is after a
battle; but here at the last day, though all shall be destroyed, yet only the
Beast and the Kings -- shall be cast into hell: (not the horses) together with
their Armies, which being plain in verse. 19. I pass.

Verse. 20. And the Beast was taken alive etc.) The Beast and false Prophet here
are one, as the Beasts, chap. 13. v. 1. and 11. are one; for the false Prophet
is but Antichrist, as a Deceiver (together with the Cardinals and Clergy of
Rome) as chap. 13. v. 11. -- who has two horns as a Lamb, and does wonders in
the sight of the Beast as this does here; and the Beast is Antichrist as a
secular Prince, as I have noted, chap. 13. and are but one Beast called by
John, chap. 13. verse. last. They shall be cast alive into hell, either because
being taken alive at the last day, they shall only be made incorruptible,
changed and cast into hellfire (and never dye a temporal death) or because
they shall always live in hell in torment and never die (a living death or
dying life) however; by a double punishment he shall be plagued (as a secular
wicked Prince, and as a false deceiving Prophet) the Lord having long since
begun to destroy Antichrist by the preaching of the word, as by the spirit of
his mouth, 2 These. 2.8. now finally casts him into the lake of fire and his
friends: thus the brightness of Christ's coming shall destroy Antichrist. 1. By
preaching. 2. By this spiritual (not proper) slaughter or destruction in hell.


Verse. 21. And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sits upon
the horse, etc.] Alluding to Ezekiel. 39.15. Go ye cursed. Now as literally Gog
and Magog were slain, and birds eat their flesh; so shall allegorically this
be fulfilled in the destruction of Antichrist, after such a manner as the last
judgment requires; for the Devil shall have enough, and hell shall be even
filled with reprobates by reason of this Armageddon.

CHAP. XX. Preface to Vision 7. or last. Act. 1.
Verse. 1. And I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the Key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.]

THis Vision is in some sense the recapitulation of all the former, and
concludes the marriage of the Lamb and history of the Church from Christ's
incarnation to the last day, or the consummation of all things; the Angel is
Christ, who came down from heaven being incarnate for us, being the woman's
seed, and to bruise the Serpents head; having the Key, that is, power of hell
and death ( chap. 1.18.) or the bottomless bit, and that by right, not as
Antichrist who usurps it.

And I saw] Noting the order of the Vision, not the order of the events; for
after the day of judgment (now mentioned chap 19.) there shall follow no
binding and loosing Satan; so that here is not a continuation of history and
times observed.

A great chain in his hand] Noting Christ's omnipotency and power above and
over Satan; a chain of providence showing how Christ by his Birth, Passion,
Burial, Resurrection, Ascension, sending the spirit (chiefly preaching by the
Disciples) bound up and hindered Satan's tempting the world to Idolatry, of which
see my Glimps of Christ's love, page 48. and margin.

Verse. 2. And he laid hold on the Dragon, etc.] In the Vision, this is the
battle betwixt Michael and the Dragon, chap. 12. v. 9. there he is bound from
accusing the brethren, and cast out of heaven, and Church, and packt into the
earth, wilderness, heathens, and dry places; here, lest he seduce the Nations
keeping them from believing, being but almost the same with the former. So
Satan was not so bound the thousand years absolutely (for he tyrannized by the
Roman Emperors over the Saints, in the red horse, chap. 6. and overspread the
face of the Church with Heresy in the black horse, chap. same v. 5.) but in
respect of seducing the Nations: Now since the thousand years began, many
Nations have believed, which Satan could not hinder: Thus Christ beheld Satan
fall like lightning, Luke 10.18. thus the Prince of this world was judged, John
16.11. when Christ in earth.

And he bound him a thousand yeers] Though from Christ's Nativity Satan's
Kingdom began to be ruined, yet his death and resurrection did him most hurt;
but the Jews much hindered the calling of the Gentiles with any great efficacy,
till the ruin of the Temple, from which time chiefly the thousand years of
Satan's binding are reckoned being Anno 73 (according to my Pareus, who
conceives them to be ended, anno 1073. when Gregory the seventh a Monk and a
Magician, poisoning Alexander the second, invaded his chair at Rome, and so
the devil began to be let loose by him, who gave himself to all manner of
looseness --) yet from the Angels descent or Christ's incarnation, Satan began
to be bound: for then temples, idols, oracles, were forsaken fell down and were
silent as histories testify. See Master Smiths arrow against Atheists.

Thus however, Satan's loosing has been 577 years or thereabout.

Verse. 3. And cast him into the bottomless pit, and set a sea upon him that he
should deceive the People no more] Into hell, and confirmed him there as with
his seal: now though truly, Satan had been cast into hell from his fall
(according to Peter and Jude) yet he had more liberty to range abroad, then
after Christ's incarnation for a thousand years, after which he was.

To be let loose a little season] No doubt from the expiration of a thousand
years, after the Angels descent, to the end of the world Satan shall be loosed;
called A little season, either in respect of God with whom a thousand years are
but as one day, or in respect of years past since the Creation, or of eternity,
or in respect of the Scripture wont, who calls the Generation since Christ the
last hour. Now Satan is to be let loose to manifest his rage against the
Church to increase his future torment. 2. For the trial of the Saints. 3.
Justly, (I mean in respect of Gods punishment upon the nations) to seduce them
that will not believe the truth unto salvation.

Act. 2.
Verse. 4. And I saw thrones, and they that sat upon them, and judgment was
given unto them, etc.] The former act answered to chapter 6. about Christ's riding
on the white horse, and to chapter 12. about the woman's traveling, (for when Satan
was bound this was done) and as some in this fourth verse appear beheaded
(being part of Act. 1.) so chapter 6. there was a red horse (of which see the
Commentary) this also belongs to the three former trumpets, chap. 8, 7. about
fire and blood mingled, viz. persecution and death; the burning mountain, and
the star falling; as in this verse some worshipped not the Beast: so it
belongs to chap. 13, about the Beasts raging. -- The second act is comfort
about the safety of the souls ( chap 6. under the altar of Christ's Protection)
here upon thrones. By which the cohaerence and parallel of this Church with the
preceding may be understood.

I saw] Souls are not to be seen; but John saw them visionally, perchance after
the form of a body (for they were sitting upon thrones,) Thrones note
judiciary and royal dignity. Sitting notes the souls resting from their labors
for ever.

And Judgment was given] To the souls. Noting (not the day of Judgment, of
which after) The Royal dignity given them, fitting for the Kingdom, of which
anon. So the Psalm, Give thy judgments to the King, Psalm. 72.

The souls of them that were beheaded] Not them that were beheaded (as if in
bodies, as the Millenaries foolishly dream) but their souls as Augustine
observes.

For the witness of Iesus] Meaning the Gospel: for the Roman tyrants for
three hundred years, cruelly killed those that were servants to Christ. Chiefly
meaning those under the Altar, chap. 6.

And for the Word of God, etc.] Meaning Christ who is the essential word, John
1.

And them that worshipped not the Beast] The former were Martyrs, these are
Professors, who in all the time of Popery adhered to Christ, being the sealed
ones, now in heaven, and the 144000. chap. 14. glorified, of which some
perchance might escape without beheading; See chap. 13, of the Beasts slaying
those that worshipped not his image -- after 606 years of the thousand, the
Beast arose, trampling underfoot the Saints, whom John also saw happy, reigning
with Christ from the very time of Satan's binding (for his binding and the
Saints reigning with Christ began together, being the same thousand years) from
what time however many Saints bodily perished by Roman tyrants.

That worshipped not the beast] This shows they were such as were slain partly
under Antichrist who reigned in part of the thousand years. Also this proves
the Papists fiction of Antichrist reigning four years toward the very end of
the world to be a lie, since he killed some of these (now on thrones) in the
thousand years mentioned, and it proves his reign to be longer (for the
thousand years are past, and yet Antichrist reigns.)

And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years] I see no difficulty
in this place if well perpended; which the Millenaries wrested to prove the
Saints bodily reigning with Christ a thousand years before the general
resurrection. The souls never die; the souls of Saints, whether Professors or
Martyrs (from Christ's binding Satan; and perchance here Stephen and John the
Baptist with those primitive Professors, as Symeon, Anna, Zachariah, Magdalen
-- may be thought on) live gloriously and reign with Christ in heaven. So all
that either were slain for the Word, or however were not vassals or marked ones
of Antichrist, of which chap. 13. lived, and as they dyed (by degrees) reigned
with Christ a thousand years, or some part of the thousand; for there is no
necessity to believe that they reigned at once: But as it is said of the ten
Kings they received power with the Beast one hour, chap. 17.12. That is, by
degrees as they were converted to the faith; so these reigned with Christ
according as in the thousand years they were gathered to Christ; as if many
travelers come to their Inn, some at one hour, some at another, he that
comes a five a clock, comes but that day, and so does he that comes at twelve
at noone; he that was received into glory some few years before Antichrists
reigning was but there in the thousand years; so was he that was received into
glory some few years before Satan's loosing; These then reigned in the Kingdom
of grace, first with Chrst, and now in glory; to wit, in soul, not in body, of
which in order.

Verse. 5. But the rest of the dead lived not again, till the thousand years
were past] All naturally (who even were borne in the thousand years of Satan's
binding) are dead in sin, but Christ quickened those who belonged to him in the
thousand years and after death received them to reign with him. But Satan was
not so absolutely bound, but that he hindered many from believing, or living the
spiritual life of grace, and after of glory in the thousand years. The rest of
the sons of men dead in sin, were not quickened when these mentioned before
were, who did reign with Christ and shall for ever (when the thousand years
are past.)

Quest. Why was the thousand years mentioned?

Answ. To show what great events should happen in so short a time ( Paganism
and Iudaisme being much destroyed) that the name of Christ should be spread
over great part of the world.

Till the thousand years] Not as if any of these dead should live a spiritual
life afterward: but to note,

1. How in such a believing age many should not believe or be quickened. 2.
That after the thousand years many should live again (we, God be thanked, are
quickened though the thousand years be past; and shall reign with Christ a
thousand years even to all eternity after death.) 3. That the common
resurrection belongs to them and all at the last day: but not the first, to
wit, this of regeneration and grace which belongs to the Elect only. --
This is the first resurrection] To grace says Aug. not to glory. Which
against the Millenaries may be many ways proved.

1. Because, were this a corporal resurrection, 'twere not the first, for many
in Old and New Testament were risen before. 2. At the last day some shall rise
to glory, some to shame; but all together almost (the Saints somewhat first,
the dead in Christ shall rise first) not one a thousand years before the other,
but one for glory (presently) the other for shame, 1 Cor. 15. but that is to be
common to all, not to the Saints only; therefore this must be some other
resurrection. 3. The first death was to the soul a separation by sin from God
and eternal life: therefore the first resurrection must be to grace.
Ver. 6. Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first resurrection; on him
the second death has no power, etc.] Here is perseverance to eternal life
proved. They have part of the first resurrection who by faith and repentance
turn to Christ, from the death of sin to the life of grace, and are holy in
part, having by faith purified themselves, and laid hold on Christ. Now their
blessedness who have part in the first resurrection is set forth in three
ways.

1. The second death shall have no power of them, that is eternal death, the
first is that of the body which passes on all. See my Glimps of Christ's love
concerning temporal death and its benefit now through Christ, page 61.etc. and
the impossibility of falling, page 57. to 60. and 75. etc. 2. They shall be
Priests unto God here, chap. 1.6. and for ever hereafter: But all the Saints
shall be so as well as these Martyrs and confessors, having part of the first
resurrection, and living the life of faith; therefore that resurrection is but
a spiritual one, of which all the elect shall partake. 3. Shall reign a
thousand years; not the thousand past, but another thousand even for ever and
ever. Thus the Millenarian or Papian error is confuted, which some in the
primitive times not being able to answer, denied the authority of the book.
This Act will be plainer if the reader confer it with the 144000. chap. 14.
standing on Mount Syon, and with them in chap. 7. who were sealed, and with the
harpers chap. 15.2. upon the sea of glass who were preserved and sealed, or as
it is here quickened by grace and faith in the midst of Tyrants, Heretics and
Antichrist raging against them and the Gospel.
Act 3.
Verse. 7. And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed] Here
follows the Churches calamities under both Antichrist, Turk and Pope, to last
till the end of 1260 years; for so long (though with diminished forces and
power) the holy City may be encamped and trod under by them.

After those thousand years] To wit, of the Martyrs and confessors living and
reigning with Christ, being the same which is past and Satan let loose: So
Papias his Millenarian dream is ended.

Out of his prison] Either hell or deserts whether he was banished and
frightened the nations. He has been let loose near 600 years, and was bound
about Jerusalems sacking by Titus, and the Jews dispersing, who formerly
hindered the Gentles embracing the faith of Christ.

Verse. 8.9. And he shall go out to deceive the Nations] Formerly Satan was cast
out of heaven: now though loosed, yet in a great measure is restrained from
hurting the Church, but may deceive the Nations, Gog and Magog. Now what is
this but the loosing the four Angels or Nations bound up by the means of the
great River Euphrates? (from Christendom now, or the Roman Empire as formerly)
See chap. 9.14 and the exposition upon it; so that I need seek no other meaning
of Gog and Magog; for according as this Vision agrees with the former: So the
four Angels in Euphrates formerly were Arabians, Tartarians -- and here they
are understood by Gog and Magog. Here is an allusion to Ezekiel. 38. and 39. about
Gog and Magog, all the open and secret enemies of Gods people, who after the
captitive and before the Messiah coming were to oppose the Jews, to wit in the
latter days, Chap. 38.8. Meaning after the captivity (not toward the end of
the world (as the Papists affirm) supposing this to be the army of their
Antichrist.) Now these nations (says Iunius and Tremelius) were those of the
lesser Asia and Syria (called Gog from Giges King of the Lydians) who under the
cruel Antiochus, Nicanor -- oppressed Gods people, but by the valor of the
Macchabees were often miraculously discomfited, of which see the History. (For
the things are accomplished partly.) Yet doubtless those chapters of Ezekiel,
allegorically seem to aim at a slaughter from heaven. So then John alluding to
that (as he often does to the Prophets) foretells of some grievous wasters of the
holy land, or Church, or Christendom by some cruel enemies under the name of
Gog and Magog, who shall have many overthrows (as the former had by the
Macchabees) but shall finally be destroyed by fire from heaven at the last day;
where observe, that Turk and Pope (though Rome shall be burnt before) shall
remain warring against Christ till the last day.

To deceive the Nations] But how? by the spirit of Devils, or three unclean
spirits, chap. 16. who came out of the mouth of the Dragon to gather the Kings
of the earth to Armageddon, ver. 13.16. So Satan deceives the Nations, making
them Heathens again (for many had embraced the faith) and Gog and Magog in hope
of overcoming the holy City, Church, or Christendom (which in relation to
Jerusalem, a type of the Church, is called holy, because it ought so to be; and
in respect of the Nations and their Idolatry, is so) it is plain, Satan has
been let loose; for not only the secret and mysterious enemies (Antichrist and
his worshippers) have wasted the Church; but the four Angels, or Gog and Magog
(with their innumerable army, as chap. 9.16.) have furiously raged and
conquered what they listed, so that the name of Mahometism is larger then that
of Christianity; but Satan deceives Gog and Magog, and under hope of victory,
shall lead them to Armageddon.

Which are in the four quarters of the earth, etc.] Magog son to Japhet, Gen
10. from him came the Scythians (now Tartars) from them the Turks, to whom the
Arabians, Armenians, Saracens are joined, wasting for a long time far and
near; Gog means the people of lesser Asia (called from Giges) to whom the
Macedonians and Egyptians of old joined against Israel; these as from the four
quarters of the earth (now under the name of Turk and Pope, Gog and Magog)
destroy the holy City, the one openly thirsting after the Empire of the world,
the other more cunningly and Ecclesiastically traducing the Church, drawing
them to Idolatry. Now Satan deceives the Nations, and Gog and Magog (Turk and
Pope) as Leaders of these seduced Nations.

And they ascended, etc.] Noting the base original of these Nations and their
sudden rising to honor.

On the breadth of the earth] For their conquests are large, of which see
Knolls Turkish History.

And they compassed the Camp of the Saints about] Christendom --

And the beloved City] The Church, alluding to Jerusalem; see how Christ loves
his Church; the word compassing notes the many irruptions into Christendom, and
cruel attempts against the Churches therein: How the Gogish war began I just
named, chap. 9.3, 4. Perchance we increased their fury when Gregory the
seventh, alias Hildebrand solicited Emperors and Kings to regaine the Holy
Land by force of arms; and after him Vrbanus second, Pope of Rome (who indeed
prevailed) so that mighty forces and vast sums of money was sent, and great
were their conquests for awhile (the Christians subduing Saracen and Turk) but
through discord among Christians, they won all, and have followed hard upon
Christendom (by a war which sprung out of this, and of which perchance the
Christians were partly occasioners) see the sweet tongued Master Fuller his
Holy War on this subject most satisfactorily. The sum is, those thousand
years of Satan's binding and the Saints reigning (being the same) is past, in
which time the Pope as his Vicar took up his power in Anno 606. in Boniface the
third; but Satan being let loose Ann. 1073. Gregory 7. raged with both swords,
spiritual and civil, deposing the Emperor Henry, forbidding marriage of
Priests, advancing Idolatry.

Now comes in the grand Idol of Transubstantiation (and Purgatory) called by
Pareus the god of forces out of Dan. 11.38. because by the means of it and
Purgatory, the Popes became rich, and all their forces were employed to
confirm this Idol, it being also the strength and nerve of Popery. In the
first Millenary the flourishing Churches of the East indeed became adulterate,
but Mahometisme (though it also began in the thousand years) has infinitely
more spread after Satan's loosing, by which means the Nations have been much
deceived. Now the judgment upon Satan, Gog and Antichrist, follow in the last
act.

And fire came down from heaven and devoured them] The first Gog and his Army
fell partly upon the mountains of Israel by the Macchabes: here follows the
last destruction of Gog and Magog, some notable judgments shall overtake them
before, or to be sure however at the day of judgment; these judgments are set
out by fire, a merciless Element (so Psalm. 11.6. God shall rain upon his
enemies fire and brimstone) alluding to Ezekiel. 38.22. where Gog's destruction is
set forth, perchance as relating to the last day of vengeance, and that by
fire. Thus the old Goggish war and the new somewhat agree.

This fire from heaven is the sharp sword, which proceeded out of Christ's
mouth, Chap. 19.21. to devour or slay the Adversary.

Verse. 10. And the devil that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire,
etc] Master and servants are tormented for ever; but doubtless Satan's
punishment shall be greatest, as the seducer of them, to wit, of the nations
upon whom the whore sits, chap. 17, 15. who through Satan deceives them, and
Gog and Magog, with all their forces, Princes and retinue under the Turk and
Kings of the earth, which I the rather mention, because here is mention made,
not only of Satan and them (as of Gog and Magog) whom he deceived; but of the
Beast and false Prophet suffering in the lake, whom he also deceived; the
Nations then or inhabitants of the earth are deceived chiefly by Antichrist and
Satan after the thousand years; and Gog and Magog with their adherents
distinctly from them; thus we have an Eastern and Western Antichrist.

Verse. 11. And I saw a white throne] Here is the description of the day of
judgment (which I observed in this Congregation was after every Vision after
some sort expressed except in the first, which being a peculiar Vision, omits
it) and after follows the joyful marriage of Christ and the Church, with the
description of the heavenly Palace or new Jerusalem, which Master Brightman
mistaking, applys it to this life.

A great white throne, and one that sat on it] Great, because set up for the
general judgment of all; white, because of its celestial splendour and majesty;
it is the white cloud mentioned, chap. 14.14. he that sat on it was Christ, to
whom God has committed all judgment, John 5.22.

From whose face the earth and heaven fled away, etc.] Being not able to endure
his Majesty, yet they shall not depart as a scrowle till the judgment be past.

And there place was found nowhere] Most say the renovation of all things shall
be; and that only the fashion of the world, that is, the outward form and
corruptible qualities shall be destroyed, and so the earth shall be found no
more as it was, but shall be made most beautiful and glorious, being to be
delivered into the glorious Liberty (as far as it is capable) of the sons of
God, Rom 8. being to be freed from corruption and bondage. But few show good
reasons for this renovation (except that the Saints might contemplate on the
creation renewed; which they in heaven shall know to perfection, though this be
altogether consumed) now since all the sons of men shall be in heaven or hell,
to what purpose shall the renovation be? It is some may say for the Saints
sometimes to visit, delight in and live, but their mansions are prepared in
heaven; These shall be changed (if Philosophy could bear that interpretation)
into nothing, having served the creatures for the creators pleasure, as they
were created out of nothing, or shall be exchanged for the heaven of heavens:
Now perchance to be delivered out of corruption, is liberty enough for this
whole creature (Man excepted). But we expect new Heavens and new Earth, that
is, the glorious heavenly condition of the Church above in perfect glory, and
the bodies of the Saints (which are earth) consummated: Sea shall be no more,
c. 21.1. We scarce hear of 'its renovation or use? why then should Heaven and
Earth be renewed without their fellow Element? But I refer the reader till
anon to the most learned discourse of Dr. Hackwill upon this subject toward
the end of his most delightsome book of Gods preserving the world and governing
of it.

Verse. 12. And I saw the dead small and great] Meaning those who had died from
Adam to the last day (but now raised up by the power of Christ) but those who
are found alive at the last day shall be judged also, being less in number
then the said dead (who now are quickened through Christ.)

Small and great] Great men and beggars, men and children. It seems John saw
children in the stature of children, though then made capable of understanding
their sentence; but most believe we shall be of a full stature, to which the
Apostle alludes, till we come to a full man the stature and fullness of Christ.
Ephesians. 4.13. For as in Paradise (the type of heaven) Adam was created perfect
in stature and of a ripe choice age: So it is thought, it shall be in heaven.
Such was Christ, so the young man appeared in Christ's grave, as typing out the
resurrection, Mar. 16.5. but enough.

And I saw the dead] Yea and living to be judged, who shall be changed in a
moment (and I believe the false Prophet or Beast shall be so found, and after
changing be cast alive into the pit, as chap. 19.20.)

Standing before] That is, brought to judgment. The guilty standing ready to be
condemned (who are already condemned) and the Saints standing in Christ's
presence to be absolved (who were formerly in soul, in bliss, and absolved)
but here perfect misery and joy is expected.

And the Books were opened] alluding to humane courts, not as if God wanted
books. The Reprobates own conscience will be an open book against them; God
forgets not their impieties. Perchance the Scripture may be produced against
those who knew them and disobeyed them according to that saying: The words
which I spoke shall judge -- at the last day, John 12.48. then Heretics will
answer for abusing the book of God.

And another Book was opened] The book of all those that were elected and
redeemed to life through Christ Jesus.

And the dead were judged] Sentence was pronounced.

According to the things that were written] Gods Word as it is the rule of our
life so it shall be of our judgment.

According to their works] Good or bad, but the just are not judged or saved
because of their works. Good or bad works are known to all, and by them, as
open testimonies, shall all be judged. The good works of Saints Christ wrought
in them, yet he will reward them for what he has wrought O blessed Jesus? work
thy work in us. --

Verse. 13. And the sea gave up her dead which were in her, etc.] Sentence being
pronounced, all the Elements give up their dead; the Water those that were
drowned; the Earth those that were buried (whether Saints bodies or Reprobates;
but the Saints so long before the rest, that they might meet Christ and the
rest of their brethren in the Air, and come to see and approve Christ's
judgment of the wicked) by Hell: I understand how the damned shall appear to
receive their final sentence, who are called dead, because they were dead in
sin, and once bodily dead. By death, I understand the grave (or the earth as
before) the effect of death. All that were burnt, eaten by birds of the Air,
or fishes of the Sea, shall appear; the Angels shall gather the ashes of the
Elect from the four corners of the earth. --

Verse. 14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire,] That is, the
devil, who brought death and caused destruction, or enticeth to hell. Thus
death shall be swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. in verse. 10. by an
anticipation of time the devil was said to be cast into the lake of hell, which
indeed was but now fulfilled.

This is the second death] Or eternal death. The first was a temporal death
(if it may be called one) or rather a separating man by sin from God.

Verse. 15. Is easy. All but the elect are damned, being not written in the
book of life; If any man demand why so often this book speaks of the last
judgment. It Is answered, because the Saints my be comforted, and patiently
endure persecution for a while. This Act answers the harvest and vintage, chap.
14. latter end. And to the seventh Vial of the hail, chap. 16.21. and to
chap. 19.20. concerning the armies of the Kings of the earth, together with the
Beast and the Kings casting into the lake of Hell.

CHAP. XXI. Being the seventh Vision continued.
AFter the Renovation (if not destruction) of the world, the heavenly glory is
showed to John under a twofold simile.

First, As a glorious bride adorned;

Secondly, As a most excellent choice City which is set forth by things which
are most rare, and precious to man; to give a glimps of the Saints glory in the
glorious heaven.

Verse. 1. And I saw a new Heaven] The devils and the reprobates being cast into
hell being mentioned: Now follows the description of the Saints glory.

And I saw] John (as Moses saw the promised land) sees heaven before death,
into which Paul was wrapped and heard unspeakable things.

A new heaven] Esaias foretold of a new heaven and earth, chap. 65.17. which
began to be accomplished after the shaking heaven and earth, Heb. 12.26. by a
Reformation by Christ and the Apostles, when all things became new, men became
new creatures: here the new heaven may signify the Churches glory in heaven
with Christ; and the earth, the bodies of the Saints most glorious. Master
Brightman applies the latter to the glorious condition of the Church after the
Jews Conversion, which cannot hold though we expect their Conversion (but do
not believe it to be tied to Judaea as he supposes,) who in some measure are
daily gained to the faith. The Millenaries apply this to their golden age (of
whose opinion in part, Augustine confesses he once was,) but our Savior tells
us of no such brave time in earth toward the end: but says, when the Son of
man comes shall he find faith in earth? and though Rome shall be burnt, yet
both Antichrist and Gog shall rage to the end. Concerning the new heaven and
earth (though I almost stagger in the point) I will follow the most common
opinion (notwithstanding what elsewhere I have said in this book concerning the
dissolution of all things) and by a new heaven and new earth, (prophesied by
Esaias, and in some sense fulfilled by the renewing of the Church,) I understand
the renewed condition of heaven and earth, literally to be fulfilled according
to Esaias, and Peter 2.3, 13. The substance whereof shall not be utterly
abolished, but the corruptible qualities: and it shall be pure, bright,
glorious. Thus the first heaven and earth were passed away, being not vanished
quite for substance but quality: being to be renewed and purified by fire.

A new heaven and a new earth, etc.] John saw not the very glory of heaven
(which eye has not seen) but types and similies of it.

And the sea was no more] According to corrupt qualities, and rolling with
waves, as now, but made solid, and in a globe, -- though I know no use of these
things, unless to remain as monuments of the great works of God, and of his
Power, and to be renewed (as having in their nature and course faithfully
served their Creator,) as a reward for their service, being delivered from
bondage into the liberty of the sons of God (according to their capacity.)
And perchance the heavens may not as now compass the earth or move, there
being no use of it. But the brightness and luster thereof shall be much
augmented (as of the Sun and Moon.)

Verse. 2. And I saw the holy City] Here is the glory of the renewed Church
showed to John (after he had seen the renewed world,) and indeed this
renovation of the Church, seems distinct from that of heaven and earth renewed,
therefore one cannot be well the other: or the new heaven and new earth the
glorified condition of the Church: for it is said And I saw, as distinct from the
former. Let the Reader perpend this; also John seems to insert his name to
confirm it, saying,

I John saw the Holy City, -- Ierusalem] Meaning the Church which the Scripture
calls Jerusalem.

A City] Because of its choice and rare building; such was Jerusalem built by
Solomon; more rare is this which is not built of common stones (but as Esaias
54.13. which I may apply in some sense here) the Citizens are Saints: (who know
one another as Citizens do.)

She is called holy] Because glorious in heaven and perfectly holy (so
appearing to John in the Vision;) she in some sort is holy here below; for
Christ sanctifies her, washing her by water, regenerates her by faith and the
spirit. The old Jerusalem was polluted; this is new, (newly glorified in heaven
in the Vision) perfect, holy.

Coming down from heaven] So chap. 3.12. noting her original to be from God
(this must not be understood of local motion) her abode is heaven, as chap. 12.
verse. 1. a woman in heaven, but here is noted her heavenly grace and majesty,
(called Galat. 4.26. Jerusalem above) God from heaven has chosen her.

Prepared as a Bride trimed for her husband] Not preparing as in this world, in
deed chapter 12. she was on earth (though her original was from heaven,) but here
she is actually prepared, chap 19.7. she on earth had (through Christ) made her
self ready: but now she is actually adorned: So her militant condition on
earth is not here meant, as Brightman thought. The most learned Pareus
observes, she is not prepared for the Bridegroom, as before the marriage feast,
(for that is past) but for her husband, the feast being ended, and she married.
--

Verse. 3. And I heard a great voice out of heaven, etc.] We have partly heard
what John saw; now follows what he heard. Two voices he heard; The first comes
from heaven, showing joyful news to the Bride; The second is his that sat upon
the Throne, ver. 5.

Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men] Meaning that the Bridegroom and the
Bride shall live in heaven for ever together. Gods dwelling is with men, since
men being glorified, live in heaven. Now it had been no news to have said
Christ lives with men on earth because he lived in the flesh with them, and
after by his spirit; but now having ended the wedding-feast, he and his Spouse
live gloriously in heaven. This the voice notes.

And he will dwell with them] As in one house together. This is happiness
indeed, to enjoy God the fountain of happiness. His absence must needs be
torment, chap. 7.15. The Saints did enjoy God; but God is said there but to
dwell among them, because they did not perfectly enjoy him: but now he does
dwell with them as a Bridegroom with the Bride after the wedding, perfectly,
by his glorious presence.

And they shall be his People] Here is the Communion of Saints, most perfect in
earth they were by his inchoated grace; Now they are his in part, partaking of
him in measure: but then they shall be as he is, perfectly glorious.

Verse. 4. And God will wipe away all tears from their eyes, etc] No tears are
in heaven to be wiped away, but it notes how free from all sorrow or cause of
sorrow heaven is; no troublesome thought of kindred does possess them there.
This life is a vale of misery. There is no death, but life; no mourning but
mirth, joy, pleasure; No cry, but peace and tranquillity; No pain or labor,
but ease, rest, delight.

For former things are passed away] Meaning the miserable state of this life,
and a new heaven shall succeed, or a state of happiness, read chap. 7.16. to
this purpose expounded. This proves that this belongs not to this life, for
here the Church was ever, and shall be (more or less) afflicted.

Verse. 5. And he that sat upon the Throne, said, etc] Meaning Christ, as chap.
4. or God. Christ calls himself Alpha and Omega, chap. 1.18. as this does, ver.
6. whoever it were (Christ or God the father) he commands John for the
consolation of the Saints beforehand to write, how he makes all things new,
because the world to them is troublesome, full of causes of tears and sorrow,
-- therefore this was to be writ and laid up for the Churches comfort, that a
most strange should happen, a new world they should enjoy. Observe Gods love in
two things here, 1. He makes all new for the Saints sake, (not his own, who
from eternity lived with them, and could to all eternity.) 2. He for their
sakes commands this to be written (being most true) that they might not want
consolation.


Verse. 6. And he said unto me it is done] The thing is as true and certain as
if it were done, viz. That all things shall be new, and all tears wiped away,
and God would dwell for ever with men in heaven. Thus the certainty of our
salvation is set forth, John 5.24. he that believes is passed from death to
life, that is, shall surely pass to life. It is an asseveration full of weight.

I am Alpha and Omega, etc] As chap. 1. ver. 8.

I will give unto him that is athirst] So John 7.37. and 38. Christ calls, which
proves this to be Christ's voice, who sat upon the Throne.

I will give of the fountain of life freely] The water of life notes joy,
comfort, refreshment -- Christ gives without our deserving, freely, eternal
life. The fountain notes the lastingnesse of their joy, and the abundance of it
(being never to be dried up) the Angel deservingly praised God (among other
great works) for creating the fountains of waters, chap. 14.7. which are
strangely conveyed from the sea through the crannyes of the earth for man's use;
But much more thanks need we rerurn him for giving us himself, the fountain of
joy ( Ier. 2.13.) but note the qualification, it is given only to them that
first thirst after it.

He that overcomes shall inherit all things] This being a Prophecy, speaks of
things as to come, (but the Church now in the Vision, was in glory inheriting
all things as heir of all) Now every Saint is an heir of heaven, Gal. 4 7.
certainly they are rich who are heirs of God and the promises, and he is very
covetous whom God cannot content and suffice. But here is a fighting noted
against the world, Satan and the Beast, which the Church by faith overcame. --

And I will be his God, and he shall be my Son] Now we are adopted, but then
actually shall enjoy the benefits of Sons. See 1 Ioh. 3.2. we shall be like
him.

Verse. 8. But the fearful and unbeleeving -- shall have their part in the
lake,] Being not written in the book of life, Chapter 20.15. or as c. 13.8. meaning
chiefly the worshippers of the Beast; who are afraid to disobey the Beast or
oppose his worship (as the valiant Champions of Jesus always have done). Note
a servant of Christ is a man of valor having the Spirit of Christ.

Fearfull] Not having faith in Christ for remission of sins, nor assurance of
salvation in this life, as the worshippers of the Beast teach none have,
standing ever in fear of hell and purgatory.

Vnbeleevers] Such are all strangers from God, and in particular the enemies of
true assurance and justifying faith (as all popelings.)

Abominable] Hating God, or hated of God.

Murderers] Here among others comes in the inquisitors of Spain, the burners
of Heretics (as they call the Saints.)

Whoremongers] All in general who are impenitent and not written in the Book of
life: Here comes in the Romish Locusts, who under pretense of vowed chastity,
live most dishonestly.

Sorcerers] None greater then the Roman Clergy have been, as histories tell.

Idolaters] What thinks Rome of this? what think covetous men? what Epicures
whose belly is their god.

All lyars] Framers of lies and enemies of the Truth. Let Antichrist and his
worshippers, and all Heretics think of this, and be confounded.

Shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, etc.]
See Psalm. 11.6. of the wickeds portion. They that are cast into this lake, have
not their names written in the book of life, chap. 20.15. therefore the lake is
hell. Now though things are spoken here, as yet to come (being a Prophecy) yet
in the order of the Vision, the wicked were before in hell, chap. 20.10, 14,
15. and the Saints in glory.

Verse. 9. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels] What John heard and
saw generally is now ended. Here follows perchance a kind of a special Vision,
or the glory of heaven more opened, then hitherto.

I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife,] Here is noted the familiarity of
the Angel with John by which we may guess they desire none of his worship.

I will show thee] Formerly John saw her in the Wilderness, now he shall
Visionally see her in glory.

Verse. 10. And he carried me away in the Spirit] It should seem to be indeed
another Vision.

To a great high mountaine] John had hitherto been in the wilderness, as chap.
17. where this Angel showed him the Whore -- and perchance having turned aside,
now returns to him to show him the Lambs wife; Another like sight far then
the former, in the Wilderness John saw a strange Whore: From this high
mountain, high mysteries of the Church gloryfied. --

And she showed me a great City] The Angel promised to show John the Lambs
wife, and now presents him with this sight; for indeed the Church in glory is
both the Lambs wife and City of God. A Bride, because of her marriage and
ornaments. A City, because of her most magnificent building, comely order,
invincible strength to last for ever. Her Maker and Founder was God, Heb.
11.10. this City only has foundation.

A great City] In respect of her largeness; full of Saints and Angels. So the
glorious condition of the Church seemed to John like a fair City; which argues,
that whatsoever one may require to make up a complete City, is found beyond
thought in the Church triumphant; honor, riches, multitude, learning or
knowledge, order, all things -- convenient for that state, see chap. 18.22.
what Babylon shall want, as music, trumpets, harpes -- which this City shall
abound with.

The holy Ierusalem] The old was unclean, this perfectly holy, being (according
to the order of the Vision) in perfect bliss. Called Jerusalem, because of her
everlasting peace (for so the word in Hebrew signifies) under which is
comprehended all manner of happiness.

Coming down from God out of heaven] So in the Vision. Noting her descent and
Original from God, who is her husband, who elected her through Christ.

Verse. 11. Having the glory of God, and her shining was like unto a stone most
precious, etc.] As if her situation and air were commended; She enjoyes that
unaccessible light of Gods Majesty and presence. And her light (far beyond Sun
and Moon) was like to precious stone; even a Jasper, excellent in virtue (good
against poison) like a Christ all that is most bright, and no wonder, since God
was the light of it, verse. 23. By these stones the bright majestique light of
heaven is set forth excelling and comforting or driving away ill (if possible
any should be there) and hence the precious stones and gemmes are mentioned, by
which not only the choycenesse of the City is set forth (because most pleasing
and precious to men) but the imcomparable virtues in them, show the most
incomparablenesse of God to the Church, who is all to them, and the Author of
these virtues in the stones (of which somewhat anon) and must have them in a
most plentiful measure in himself.

Verse. 12. And had a wall] alluding to a City. Now the wall is the safeguard
and protection of God. The safeguard of heaven depends upon the wall of Gods
omnipotency.

Great] Being thick and broad, therefore strong.

High] Therefore not to be scaled.

Had twelve gates] Meaning the doctrine of the Gospel or twelve Apostles by
which heaven is opened to us.

At the gates twelve Angels] Gallant Porters, meaning the Fathers, Prophets and
Apostles, who by preaching showed us the way to the City.

And names written thereon] The names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, noting the
gathering of the spiritual Israel thither (and perchance the literal seed).

Verse. 13 On the East three Gates, etc.] I seek no mystery here, but look on
the allusion to Ezekiel. 48.30. where such a City is described, by which is meant
the Church of the New Testament, gathered from East, West, North, South; that
is, from all corners of the world. Such is the represented Church above.

Verse. 14. And the wall of the City] The foundation is Christ, it is said to be
twelve, because the twelve Apostles by their preaching laid the foundation
Christ, for honor sake the names of the twelve are written upon the
foundation, because so fully laid by them; because they (if there be
differences of glory, as Christ's right hand and left hand seeem to prove) shall
excel others in the Kingdom of glory; doubtless the laborious Saint Paul is to
be reckoned among them.

The Apostles of the Lamb] Christ, for so in their Epistles they style
themselves.

Verse. 15. And he that talked with me] One of the Angels of the seven Vials,
ver. 9. and chap. 17. 1. who said come and I will show thee.

Had a golden Reed to measure the City] Not as chap. 11. v. 1. concerning
reformation, but only to acquaint John with the largeness and figure of this
City to describe the same to us. So it is Ezekiel. 40.3, 4, 5. where the Lord (and
now Christ by the Angel talking with John (perchance who poured his Vial on the
air as) chap. 16.17.) setting the Prophet on a high Mountain (as the Angel
does John here, ver. 10.) shows him a City and Christ measuring it.

A golden Reed] Because to measure so precious and glorious a City.

Verse. 16. And the City lies four square, etc.] Which form is most solid and
perfect, the Longitude and Latitude being equal, consisting equally of elect,
this notes the firmness of the City, the largenes of the City is showed in v.
16, 17. to confirm what multitudes of Saint and Angels (as Citizens) are
there, being larger then the old Jerusalem (but after that form) nay larger
then the literal Babylon, which was one of the greatest Cities of the world,
being 66. miles compass, whose walls were one of the worlds wonders; yet the
walls of this are stronger and higher, being not to be vanquished or conquered,
as Babylon and the old Jerusalem were: I seek no mystery here.

According to the measure of a man] Which measure the Angel used, as he might
say, the City is so large according to the common measure of men, which the
Angel used. John saw the City out of heaven when it was measured, yet not in
earth, and it was only measured to show every way the largnesse and majesty of
that mystical City above.

Verse. 18. And the building of the wall was of Iasper] Babylons walls were
choice, yet but of Brick, Sand, Pitch; but this wall is of Jasper, a precious
stone; I see no more here, but the most happy, everlasting life of Saints set
forth.

The City was pure gold] This metal we chiefly-esteem; therefore the Holy Ghost
sets forth the glorious condition of the Church or City by it; pure Gold is
without dross, if tried in the fire, it comes forth without any such; showing
the most pure estate of the Church above.

Like to Chrystall] Or clear Glass, the matter is solid Gold, the form bright
as Glass or Crystal so it is as a golden City shining in glory; not really,
but to stir us up to seek after this heavenly Jerusalem, which far exceeds
all these precicious things to which it is (as it were) compared.

Verse. 19. And the foundation of the wall] The matter of the wall and City is
mentioned; the foundation is very precious, being of precious stones; stones
are for foundations, preous stones; for this (being Christ laid by the twelve
Apostles whose names were upon the foundations) the foundations were all of
whole Pearls or Gemmes, which were Pillars of the wall (as it were;) thus the
foundations were garnished with pearls or precious stones.

The first was a Iasper] Clear and green, which the Papists say signifies
Peter, who did show a lively flourishing love toward Christ indeed Peter being
first converted, is usually first named, but the same order of mentioning the
Apostles by the Evangelists, is not observed always, and it is conceived all
loved him and dyed for him as well as Peter ( John only excepted perchance, who
was the beloved Disciple and writ most of love) therefore this of the Papists
proves little; neither is it said the Apostles were the foundations, but their
names were written upon them; doubtless the preciousnesse of the stones
set-forth the preciousnesse of Christ the foundation, and the Gospel preached
by the the twelve; so the stones set forth the choycenesse of him that sat
upon the throne, chapter 4.3. which is a plain sense.

The second a Saphire] being skie-coloured it aswageth lust; it is wonder (says
my Pareus) that Writers apply not this to John, who only lived unmarried; the
Papists apply it to Andrew; but since the order of reckoning the Apostles is
not always the same, we hence can certainly gather little. But this observe,
if the twelve had their names upon the foundations (then had John before his
death) and why may not the Beast like a flying Eagle resemble John. chap. 4.7.
who though alive had written his Gospel, where he sores aloft (like an Eagle)
about Christ's Divinity? See the exposition on that chap. 4 7. I see little
hindering.

The third a Chalcedony] A kind of a Carbuncle, of a purple color, good
against black choler, that is, sadness and fear. Now the foundation Christ,
and the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles, both teach love as in the first stone,
chastity in the second, and expel all base fear as in the third stone.

The fourth an Emerauld] A most pleasant green color, refreshing the sight,
good against poison and the falling sickness. Now the foundation Christ is
most pleasing and cordial.

The fifth a Sardonix] Resembling in part a man's nail and the color, it is
good against pride; so is the foundation Christ and the twelve Apostles
doctrine.

The sixth a Sardius] Of a dark red color, it emboldens, sharpens the wit.

The seventh a Chrysolite, etc.] Being good against shortness of breath, the
Papists apply them to the Apostles; but for brevity sake I omit them; Christ
completely comprehends what is in them to perfection, who is the true foundation
of the heavenly Jerusalem; the Apostles have their names written upon the
foundation, because they confirmed the foundation Christ with their blood.

Verse. 21. And the twelve Gates were twelve Pearls, etc.] Christ is the only
Gate, he is the way, door and life, but because by the ministry of the twelve
Apostles we come to Christ, hence the City is said to have twelve Gates; now
the Doctrine of the Apostles leading to Christ, is more precious then Gold or
Pearls, who in heaven shall shine (with the brightness of Christ) like
glorious Pearls.

And the street of the City was pure Gold] Now follows the inward beauty of
the City; there are many streets in a City, and a Marketplace or place of
meeting, I see nothing else here: but the whole course of the Saints in heaven
is most incorrupt and pure, their walking or motion and meetings (comprehended
by streets) are righteous and pure as Gold; our meetings below are full of
corruption, and the purest Church and members sinful, therefore the state of
this life is not here meant.

Transparent Glasse] Is the Cities unutterable brightness.

Verse. 22. And I saw no Temple in the same] Solomon's glistering Temple was a
type of Christ's spiritual Church; heaven shall need none; preaching and all
outward exercises of Religion shall cease; in this world our weakness needs
these helps, then God will not be served with external worship; Christ shall
give up his ministerial Kingdom (by which he now governs the Church) 1 Cor.
15.24. and God according to the Essence in three persons, shall be all in all;
each one then shall be taught of God, Ier. 31.34. None need say, know the Lord;
all imperfection shall be laid aside, 1 Cor. 13.10. and tongues (which were
only to build up the Church) faith and hope which were to lay hold on Christ,
which now in the Vision they enjoy, only charity remains. So when I speak of
meetings or motion, ver. 21. I mean no such as these; but conceive they may
move -- and not always in heaven sit, stand still or rest in one place, which
were improbable.

For the Lord Almighty -- is the Temple of it] Here the Saints praise him in
Temples, there they shall immediately rejoice in him, and keep a perpetual
Sabbath to him, serving him day and night before the throne -- so they shall
rejoice in God as in a Temple, God in heaven is instead of a Temple, chap.
11.19, the Temple of God was open in heaven, meaning the triumphant Church who
were Gods Temple in earth, now he is the Saints Temple in heaven.

Verse. 23. The City has no need of Sun nor Moon to shine in it, etc. It Is not
said the Sun and Moon were not; for as Esaias has it, The Moon shall shine as
the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be seven fold, (for a recompense
for their unwearied former pains) chap. 30, 26. speaking of the renovation of
all things. But God and the Lamb (as equal in light and glory) shall be the
light of the City, and shall obscure the other lights, which shall remain
glorified as monuments of Gods mercy, power and wisdom: but the city shall
not need them, having the father of lights there, where also every Saint shall
shine as the Sun for ever. O glorious City! But observe, that Esaias is partly
to be understood of the great light of knowledge and grace under Christ's
spiritual Kingdom (in respect of the dark clouds of the Law) where the Sun of
light is prophesied never to set fully till the second coming of Christ, chapter
60.20. but not only of this spiritual Kingdom; nay, verse. 19. speaks as the
place now in hand, as if there should be no use of Sun nor Moon hereafter.

Verse. 24. And the nations that were saved, shall walk in the light of it] Thus
much for the building and glory, now of the Citizens somewhat. They shall enjoy
the glorious presence of God, who is the light of the city. John having spoken
of the city could not conveniently but mention citizens, who are indeed the
very city or part of it; the Patriarchs, Prophets and Jewish nation (or the
elect of them) are the rest. But this must be taken according to the order of
the vision; and city first, and then inhabitants.

And Kings of the earth do bring their glory thither] Not the Kings of the
earth, who stand for the Beast, of which often. But Kings converted in the time
of the Gospel, of which see Esaias 60. at large. To which passage here is an
allusion, though it were in the time of the spiritual Kingdom of Christ,
partly fulfilled: now these Kings brought their power and honor to Christ's
spiritual Kingdom, when they were converted, and upheld the same, and they
bring their honor to the city above, when their abode is forever above, being
consummated in glory, praising, honoring, and lauding God and Christ for their
salvation for ever and ever.

So these Kings are not such as bring now again their earthly honor to the
Church militant, for they are saved (as well as the nations,) not to be saved,
implying their being in joy and safety.

Kings of the earth] Some of the ten converted ones: who (when in heaven) are
not Kings but fellow-citizens, Ver. 26. is much the same.

Verse. 25. And the gates of it shall not be shut by day, etc] Noting the
security and peace, and freedom from all dangers for we shut gates day and
night in time of War or Siege, but there shall be no danger: now if in the
day time the gates shall not be shut, then never, for there is no night, being
the glory of God shall expel darkness by everlasting light. This is an
allusion to Esaias 60. thy gates shall be open continually, (speaking of the
Church militant under the Gospel) to admit members, to wit, into the Church,
Gentiles and Kings, and never shut as excluding none: and here it is applied to
signify the security and happiness of the Church triumphant.

Verse. 27. There shall in no wise enter in any thing that is defiled] See verse.
8. Expos. on it. Paul long since 1 Cor. 6.9. foretold as much. Now Christ will
judge according to the Gospel. These places prove nothing against the Saints,
who have been overtaken in some sin, and have washed themselves by faith in the
blood of the Lamb, but it is understood of them who make a trade of sin.

CHAP. XXII. The same Vision partly continued.
Verse. 1. And he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal,
etc.]

THese two last chapters concerning the Saints felicity, answer to chap. 7, 15.
where the redeemed, clothed in white robes praise God before the throne day and
night, that is, for ever.

The pure river alludes to Ezekiel 47. or rather to Paradise watered by the river,
that came out of Eden, Genesis 2.10. but that river drew corruption, this is pure,
and water of life, having no mixture of filth, that came out of Eden, this out
of the Throne. What more pleasant then a water? behold not a fountain, but a
great river, not rounding the walls of the city, but running through the streets.

Let us entertain no earthly thought, for God by this shows us glorious things,
in Ezekiel. 47. waters issuing out of the house of God or Temple, is the doctrine
of the Gospel flowing from Christ. But in this place, as also chap. 7. last,
the living fountains of water are to note the fullness of knowledge of God,
which the faithful shall have by the immediate Vision of God and the Lamb; as
also unspeakable purity and joy. Now the comforts of the Gospel in this life,
and its doctrine, is compared to water, John 7.37. Others say, the river is the
Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Throne or God, constantly refreshing the city
of God.

Verse 2. And in the midst of the street of it, and of either side] Here follow
the abundance of all things necessary for the Citizens.

Was there a tree of life] Conferring and preserving life, alluding to the tree
in Paradise, but that was not to be touched, and this is common for all the
Citizens: There was but one, (the which that in Paradise typed) See Rev. 2.7.
where I expounded it to be Christ, who is the bread of life. Now the tree
(though but one) with its boughs and roots, reached both sides the river,
(though the river was very broad) noting how sufficient Christ is for all the
Citizens, Ezekiel. 47.7. (to which here as an allusion) speaks of many trees, yet
'twas but the same Christ conveyed many ways to the Saints, therefore called
many trees (as the foundations were said to be twelve) but here is but one
Christ whom all enjoy alike.

Of the river, etc.] The tree is in the midst of the street, because barred
from none; by the River, because always fruitful, never decaying.

Bearing twelve manner of fruits] I dare not say, here is meant the Apostles
doctrine, who though they preached one Christ, yet drew comforts from him
several ways. Nor will I mention the twelve articles of the faith, all
comforting; But the tree notes Christ, who monthly, that is, continually, is
bringing forth the fruits of joy and comfort to refresh the city of God; the
earnest whereof the Saints have in this world several ways. So Christ in heaven
(alluding to the twelve months of an year) brings forth twelve (nay thousands
of) fruits of joy and comfort. --

The leaves were for the healing the Nations] Alluding to Ezekiel. 47. So that
nothing of Christ but is most sweet and good (not as if there were need of any
Physic in heaven, but to keep the Allegory of the tree;) ordinary trees loose
their leaves: Nothing of CHRIST but is profitable.

The Nations] Chap. 21.26. who brought their glory to Christ as the Kings did,
by being converted and upholding his Kingdom, and by being at last glorified by
Christ, and perfectly cured.

Verse. 3. And there shall be no more curse, etc.] What ever might hinder
happiness shall be removed (as chap. 7.15. all tears shall be wiped away.) By
curse we may understand, not only that of the law (which is nulled) but the
Anathema's of Antichrist; also sin, sorrow, torment, death which are destroyed.
Here may be intimated the curse of delivering over to Satan in this life,
because of sin in the Church; but there above is purity, and therefore no
curse, as Beza has it. There shall be no curse, because the throne of God shall
be there, and consequently bliss: There shall be no curse, because his
servants there obey and serve him (deserving no curse; but obtaining honor
unutterable) such are Angels and Saints. Since the Queen of the South wondered
to see Solomon's attendants, sure in heaven is matter of admiration.

Verse. 4. And they shall see his face] That is, shall be in the presence of
God, and shall see Christ's humane nature gloryfied and comprehend God to
content and satisfaction (as far as created natures are capable.) See my Glimps
of Christ's love.

And his name shall be in their fore-heads] Either alluding to the Beasts
marked ones, chap. 13. by which is noted his property of them, and so Gods
owning the Saints may be here meant; or his name is his nature which they shall
partake of in heaven. See chap. 3.12. expounded to this purpose. I will write
upon him my Name. -- The Beast marked his, that they might only serve and
worship him; Gods then are also marked, that is consecrated to openly praise
him and serve him for ever.

Verse. 5. And there shall be no night, etc.] Darkness is but sad, therefore no
night of darkness or sorrow shall be there. The glory of God there hinders all
night or darkness; so there needs no Sun, being there is no night, see chap.
21.23. where this verse is fuller explained.

And they shall reign for ever and ever] As Kings and Priests, as chap. 20. v.
5, 6. expounded the thousand years of Satan's binding; the primitive Saints
lived with Christ in heaven after the expiration of them; all others that were
regenerated (or partakers of the first resurrection) after death reigned with
Christ forever.

Verse. 6. And he said to me, these sayings are faithful and true, etc.]
Hitherto the Prophecy; which one of the seven Angels who poured out the Vials
and talked with John, chapter 17. commends to John to recommend to us. So not only
the two last Chapters concerning the glorious Bride or City (wherein, by most
choice things as gold, pearl -- the glory of the Saints above is (as it were)
shadowed out) but all the book is commended. And indeed it is the true sum of
all things to happen to the last day, nay for ever: What ever may be said of
any book of holy writ, may be said of this; being an Epitome of holy Scripture
in some sense, so that herein is enough for salvation, if well understood and
practiced.

Faithfull] To which we may give credit.

True] Which shall in time and order be accomplished.

And the Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angel] Christ the revealer of
the Prophecy, is the Lord God of the Prophets who sent his Angel, verse. 16. I
Jesus sent my Angel, which proves two things.

1. That the Angel was not Christ, but his messenger (though in the
Old Testament Christ appeared often as an Angel, to wit, of the Covenant.) 2.
That Christ is God being Lord of the Angels, see chap. 1. v. 1. expounded.
His Angel] Meaning himself who spoke to John. See chapter 1. v. 1. about the rest
of this verse.

Verse. 7. Behold I come quickly] The voice is Christ's, perchance represented by
the Angel; Christ is the Lord of the Prophets, who confirms the words of the
Angel, saying, the things must shortly be done; for he comes quickly. Time runs
away apace and deceives men who live in security and carelsenesse; Christ will
come before such are aware to judgment.

Blessed is he that keeps these sayings, etc.] See chap. 1. v. 3. expounded.

Verse. 8. And I John saw these things, etc.] Visionally, and heard them,
therefore a good witness. This is the very style of John in his Gospel; he
that saw it bears record, and his record is true. chap. 19.35.

And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the Angel] He
ingeniously confesses his error again. Perchance he committed his error
twice; If so (as it is probable, for 'twas upon the joyful news of the Bride
and her marriage that John was formerly taken in the error about worshipping
the Angel, ( chap. 19.10. See the exposition) which now in the Vision was past)
it shows the pronenes of the best men to sin more then once after reproof (as
John had, chap. 19.10.) without Gods special assisting hand; also it notes our
natures being prone to Idolatry, no wonder the world ever has been so prone to
that sin in all ages.

Verse. 9. See thou do it not -- worship God] As chap. 19.10. The words here
differ from them in chap. 19. which proves 'twas not the former error, but a
second, upon John's taking leave of the Angel. Now John worshipped not, but
composed himself to worship by falling down: So the very gestures of Papists
before Idols is sinful and forbidden, let them worship whomsoever under the
Idol or Image. The Papists say the Angel out of modesty commanded John to
forbear, because also in Christ's sight; but the Angels reproving John, proves
the contrary.

Of them who keep the sayings of this book] The Angel confirms that it was not
lawful for John to worship his fellow servants (for such are the Angels to
Saints) but God only. Now the Angels fellow servants are those who hate the
Whore and Beast -- and fly out of Babylon -- keeping the sayings of the Book,
worshipping neither the Beast nor his Images (of which his Kingdom is full) so
the Angels reasons against John's worshipping are seasonable. All worship is due
to Jehovah alone.

Verse. 10. And he said to me, seal not the sayings of the Prophecy, etc.] This
the Angel says; but chap. 10.4. God commanded the things uttered by the seven
thunders to be sealed, which seems to be taken out of Dan. 8.26. where the
Prophet is commanded to shut up the Vision (or seal it) because it was not to
be accomplished for many days; The Angel commands this not to be kept secret
or sealed, because all might read it, and beware of the Beast; also because the
time was at hand when John writ (and Antichrist has been now long revealed;)
God commanded the things uttered by the seven thunders to be concealed (not
absolutely, but in respect of the event) because Antichrist would not take
notice of them, and therefore they were as good be kept secret, see chap. 10.4.
expounded. And indeed it is worth noting, Christ's Angel says, seal not, but
let Scripture be read; but Christ's pretended Vicar says, seal all Scripture,
let none be read (but by the Clergy) opposing Christ.

Verse. 11, He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, etc.] Here is a kind of
tacit Objection answered; for some may say, the Prophecy being open and to be
read, Tyrants and Antichrists will (through Satan's instigation) rage the more,
knowing their time is short; or knowing the short time comprehends hundreds of
years, they may say as the wicked servant, our master deferres his coming, and
will rage the more in the mean time. Therefore 'twere better the Prophecy were
concealed. To which is answered, he that is filthy, let him be filthy still --
in hope to escape unpunished -- which words are not a permission or approving of
filthiness; but a threatening a secret judgment; for reprobates shall be given
up to a reprobate sense; if after admonishing -- such will be filthy, let them
be filthy still.

He that is righteous, will be righteous still,] As Dan, 12.10. many shall be
pure: but the wicked shall do wickedly; to which our Gospel Daniel here
alludes. All the righteous will believe, and do righteously (though the day of
judgment be not very near;) the Word in them is the incorruptible seed; now
for their sakes the Prophecy is chiefly, therefore seal it not. Here observe
how the same word causes diverse effects accidentally, it is the savor of life to
the Elect, to the rest the savor of death, as our Apostle 2 Cor. 2.15, 16.
bravely.

Righteous still] Continuing in righteousness, and increasing in
righteousness. Here the Papists say, second Justification by works is proved;
for they who were justified first by Christ, may be more justified by works, as
charity -- but it is false; no works justify; and Scripture which commands
charity, never speaks of its justifying. Christ justifies alone, but our good
works declare us to be in Christ, and justified. So James may be understood,
chapter 2. ver. 24.

Quaest. How is a man that is justified, justified still or more? (for the
words in Greek bare that interpretation.)

Answ. We are justified but once, but sanctified often more and more (both which
Sanctification and Justification are here expressed) but though we are but once
justified, (as was David,) yet after sinning and falling from God, when by
repentance we return to the God of our Justification, we have the benefit of
Justification renewed, as Psalm. 51.7. David had; as that most pathetique Psalm
proves every where; but enough.

Verse. 12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me] This is Christ's
voice, perchance represented by the Angel, yet it might be Christ distinct from
the Angel; for it is no unusual thing in this book as in some Comedy or Tragedy,
to have several Persons brought in speaking of Christ's coming quickly. See ver.
7, and chapter 1. ver. 1.

My reward] Because Christ freely gives it. Now the reward is eternal life, and
that is the gift of God, Romans 6. ver. last. Damnation is properly a reward, so
is not eternal life, but improperly, being out of free grace and promise.

To render to every one according to his works] The good man's reward (out of
mercy and promise) shall be good; the wicked man's shall be evil (to him, but
just as from God) out of desert. The wicked man is rewarded for his works,
being perfectly evil: the good man according to his works, which are due debts
to the Creator, but imperfectly good, to which God has annexed a promise out
of free love, not desert.

Verse. 13. I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, etc] This proves it to
be Christ's voice, who chap. 1. ver. 8. calls himself so. Now Alpha is the first
letter, and Omega the last among the Greeks. So Christ is first, even eternal
with his father, and last, as God to eternity. See chap. 1.8. expounded. Christ
though the Son, is as soon as the Father, as light and heat are in the Sun,
and fire, (yet the Sun and fire are causes of them;) he that pleases may read
the learned refutation of Engedinus the heretic against Christ being Alpha and
Omega by my Pareus upon this verse.

Verse. 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandements] It seems as if spoken by
an Angel of Christ, whose commandments are mentioned: but it may be referred to
the Commandments of the book, or sayings of the Prophecy, ver. 7. and then it is
Christ's voice. Now the sayings of Christ or Commandments, are touching the not
worshipping the Beast, nor his image, as chap. 13. flying out of Babylon, chap.
18. and forsaking any thing of Rome; if they be blessed that keep them, what
becomes of them that break them, worshipping the Beast? The Lord remember all
his People, and them in Ireland, to call them from Popery to salvation through
Christ Jesus.

That they may have right to the tree of life] To wit, Christ. Now that we
have, in being his spiritual members and spouse, who have right to their head
and husband: The servants of the Beast have no right to Christ, being neither
elected nor redeemed in general.

Verse. 15. For without are dogs and sorcerers] Out of heaven, to wit, being not
written in the Lambs book, chap. 21, 27. Now though all wicked men and
reprobates are here meant: yet in a most peculiar manner the servants of the
Beast: By which you perceive how God hates all Idolaters and Idolatry,]

Dogs] Are unclean, and tearers or devourers. Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which
is holy unto dogs. Julian the Apostate was such a dog, who receiving some
knowledge of Christ, tore the Gospel, and rent it with arguments out of its
self, but wrested. Now who are greater tearers of the Scripture then Papists
wresting it to destruction? who greater liars against Christ and truth? who
teach more false doctrines then they?

Verse. 16. I Jesus have sent my Angel to testify unto you these things, etc]
He is the Person speaking, the Author of the Revelation, the Alpha and Omega,
the Lord of the Prophets, the Commander of the Angels, the doner of eternal
life, and therefore God Omnipotent. Note, Christ gives himself that name, which
long before was given him by the Angel, Matthew. 1.20, 21. This name we should
chiefly acknowledge him by, this is the only name of comfort; so he says thus
muth; I Jesus, or your Savior, have sent my Angel, putting us in mind of his
love and mercies toward us.

To you] Of or in the seven Churches, chap. 1.11. But these things concern all
the People and Churches of Christ; though particularly the seven Churches in
Asia, long since ruined. First, this is comfort to us, that our Jesus is the
Angels Commander, therefore we shall not want their assistance. Secondly that
we should carefully read what Christ commanded his Angel to testify, and John
to write. How ill did they who question the authority of this book?

I am the root and offspring of David] The root bears the tree: so Christ as
God upheld and saved David, but according to the flesh he was the offspring or
son of David, and by consequent the true Messiah.

The bright and morning starre] The meaning is, that as Venus outshines all the
stars: so Christ's glory excels all the glory of Saints and Angels; thus Christ
resembles his glory to the heavenly brightness and luster of the morning
star. Balaam Numb. 24.17. and Peter 2 Pet. 2.1. v. 19. calls Christ a star.
Christ expels the darkness of sin and ignorance, and brings the light of
knowledge and grace: and at the morning of the resurrection will drive away the
darkness of this life, and show himself most gloriously to all the Saints.

Thus Christ promised himself to the overcommers, chap. 2.28. as is expounded,
he being the morning star.

Verse. 17. And the Spirit and the Bride, say come] That is, the Spirit in every
Saint, says come. Every Saint having the Spirit, longs after Christ; so David,
Psalm. 42.2. As the heart pants after the water brooks, (that hot, and
therefore dry or thirsty creature) so does my soul after thee O God? And the
Bride or Church longs after Christ to be fully gloryfied by him, and to live
ever with her husband; the Church Militant, Cant. 8. verse. last, calls for
Christ, saying, be like the Roe (that nimble creature) and come in haste; The
coming of Christ is fearful to the wicked, but the regenerate long for him.

Let him that hears say, come] As the Bride does. Truly the reading and
hearing this book will make every spiritual man say, come Lord Jesus; such
sweetness is here.

Let him that is a thirst come] That is the qualification required in the
comers; come to me for redemption, salvation, glory; if athirst, for a thirsty
man is fit to drink of the fountain of water of life. Now he that is athirst,
is he that has the Spirit crying to Christ to come, to perfect him and the
Church in glory.

And whosoever will] Being qualified and a thirst; none else can come, these
the father draws. --

Let him take the water of life freely.] Being a thirst, and drawn by the
Father. The invitation is general, Isa. 55.1. Hoe all -- but note the
qualification, that thirst, come ye to the waters -- but note, God works in
us to will and do, Phil. 2.13. whosoever comes then, God draws.

Verse. 18. For I testifie] This depends upon verse. 7. blessed are they that
keep the words of this Prophecy; now he threatens those who any way corrupt or
abuse it. Sure Antichristian falsifyers of the truth are here meant.

For I also testify or testify together says the Greek] Because the Angel had
spoken, now Christ confirms the Angels testimony, witnessing also with the
Angel.

Unto every man that heareth] Not the Pope excepted.

If any man shall adde] By false interpretations (as 2 Peter 3.16.)
adulterating the Text. Let the Papists take heed how they mingle traditions and
lies with the Text.

Unto him God shall add the plagues] To wit, not only the seven last plagues;
but to be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone for ever with the dragon and
false Prophet, chap. 19 20. O Arrius and Engedinus -- where are ye? O Popelings
and Heretics, take heed.

Verse. 19 If any man shall take away from the words of this Prophecy, God shall
take away his part out of the Book of life, etc.] To the adders he will add
plagues; to the takers away he says, he will take away his part out of the book
of life; That is, what part he seems to have; or will utterly condemn him one
day. Indeed they may be said to take away from the Book that deprave it, allow
not of it, slight it or the like. The overcommers were promised choice rewards
in the seven Churches; these deprayers shall have no share with them, nor with
the glorious Bride in heaven. Some have denied Saint James his Epistle, some
this book through mistake not malice (being otherwise true Christians) and are
not to be comprehended here. Luther doubted of James, many ancient Christians
(through weakness) of the authority of this most Divine book; on whom I dare
not doubt but God had mercy. But note, not only the integrity, but perfection
of Scripture is hence proved; since nothing is to be added, away then with
traditions; the written word is perfect and only to be followed to salvation.
Deuteronomy. 4.2. Moses gives the same command, let no man add -- by which it is
plain, the holy Scriptures of the Old Testament were full enough and perfect to
salvation Now our Savior (not John) takes this passage from Moses, and other
things in this book are taken from the Prophets everywhere; To note the perfect
agreement of the New Testament and Old, and also to show how this Book (says
my Pareus) is a sum of holy Scripture: Well, we must not depend upon
Revelations, but the written Word. By this Christ proved himself and his death
to his disciples, Luke 24.27. see my Glimps of Christ's Love, page 57.

Verse. 20. He that testifies these things, says, surely I come quickly, etc.]
They be the words of Christ, not of John; who testified and revealed this
Prophecy to John, being the true and faithful Witness, chap. 3.14. who
promises to come quickly, to confute those who make a mock of his coming to
judgment, 2 Pet, 3.2, 3, 4. and to stir us to patience and watchfulness. And
truly if when John writ this book, Christ promised to haste, then now he is
even at the door; many Jews are daily converted, the Gospel much spread,
Antichrist manifested and spiritually killed by the Witnesses, forsaken by the
Kings of the earth (or many of them) nay and Christ has powerfully reigned by
the Reformation of many Kingdoms in matters of Religion; We expect to hear of
Romes literal desolation; but the utter ruin of Turk and Pope we expect not
till the seventh Vial be poured out into the air, or the seventh Angel sound
at the last day; other things are most fulfilled, and we hope God for the Elect
sake will hasten his coming.

Surely I come] It Is an asseveration confirming his promised coming to comfort
the godly, and to stir them up to watchfulness and patience in well doing and
ill suffering.

Verse. 21. Even so come Lord Jesus] Says John after all the most joyful
glorious things in the Prophecy (the Beast and Dragon in the Vision cast into
the lake of hell) longing for the consummation of glory. Indeed Christ is the
good Ahimaaz, 2 Samuel 18.27. that brings true and good tidings here in this
life, but chiefly hereafter; of perfect redemption (which all the creation
groans for) and perfect glory for the Elect. Or John may be understood to
desire Christ to hasten Antichrists destruction, to hasten comforts to Syon;
and lastly to come to judgment to condemn the Dragon and Beast, and deliver
the Saints, redeeming their bodies out of their graves, consummating them in
glory. Thus the Spirit in all the Saints teaches to long after Christ, and say
come Lord Jesus, come quickly, even so Amen.

Hanc epitomen praecipuorum Commentariorum supra Revelationem JOHANNIS, unacum
annotatiunculis quibusdam, feliciter peregi 30 Martii 1650. Ann aetat. meae.
31.
Trinitati gloria sempiterna, Amen.
FINIS.

