A GARDEN ENCLOSED, and WISDOM JUSTIFIED ONLY OF HER CHILDREN.

Being two Exercises, discovering the Glory, Beauty and Perfection of the Love
of God to Saints that are so comprehended, and in such a glorious enclosure:
And also the sweet Reflections in, and from Saints, in Justifying Wisdom: Which
were delivered at New-port Pagnell, about a year and a half since: for
declaration whereof, the Author was then imprisoned, and since accused, for
delivering of Blasphemy.

by Paul Hobson.

Cant. 8.13. Thou that dwell in the Gardens, the Companions hearken to thy
voice, cause me to hear it.

Mat. 11 19. But wisdom is justified of her Children,

Acts 4.20. For we cannot but speak the things we have seen, and heard.

LONDON. Printed by James and Joseph Moxon, for Henry Overton, and are to be
sold at his shop, in Pope's Head Alley: and for Giles Calvert, at the spread
Eagle, at the west end of Paul's. 1647.

To the Impartial Reader.
THE Sons of Strife delight in striving; but my soul shall rather strive to
salve, then to increase that sore. Were myself alone concerned, I should rather
pass over men's judgments, and sentences with silence, then bring forth this
my ensuing discourse to a public view. It is now above a year and a half
since for delivering of this following Treatise to some friends, in a quiet and
peaceable manner, in New-port Pagnell, and Lathbury, in the County of
Puckinghamshire, I was imprisoned by the Governor of New-port: But since that,
not my self alone, but the Truth becomes a sufferer, through the sunday
reproachful Epithites of Mr Pryn, his brother Gang^aena, and some that had a
hand in my imprisonment; affirming that what I delivered there, was Blasphemy:
But what shall I say? I could be (I hope, through the power of God) as
voluminous to answer folly, as folly is constantly voluminous against Truth:
but to strive to answer contentious spirits, gains no honor to truth, and that
makes me unwilling to write an answer to such men as they are. I could wish
that all the sons of Sion, and the Israel of the most high God, would rather
spend their time in prayers and tears to God, for their deliverance out of
that unexpressible and incomprehendible Prison of darkness; as they have
formerly sought God for Mr Pryns deliverance out of his past imprisonment,
which I my self Cordially desire to do; for I had rather spend twenty days in
tears for them, then spend one hour in giving an answer to them; And had not
the Vindication of truth commanded me, I should not have brought forth this, to
the view of all men; but knowing that the sons of Truth, are best able to
judge of truth, makes me bold to present this to them: desiring thee
(courteous Reader, whosoever thou art) not to look upon this, or me, or any
scandalous reports of the people of God, through the multiplying Glass of men's
envious expressions, of which these times are full; but lay it to the rule of
Truth, and what truth you find in it, give Truth the glory of it: But if you
find it within the Verge of Condemnation for Blasphemy, (as Mr Pryn affirms)
let me beg that favor as to receive a loving information (if thou can afford
it) from thee. I must confess I was something unwilling in my self to come in
public view in this way, conceiving myself the leost of all Saints, and not
worthy to be a servant of the most high God: But in relation to the precedent
reasons recited, and expressed; and seeing God has made me worthy to hold
forth his Name: I cannot hold my peace, I must speak the things that I have
seen and heard: And therefore that Truth may be triumphant over Falsehood, to
the real discovery of Blasphemers and Blasphemy, is the real desire of

Thine really PAUL HOBSON.

Errata.
Page 44. line 20. read he that knows God. p 68. l 21. for upholding, r
upbraiding. p 71. l 9, for have r has: p 74, l 23, 24: for afterward, r
affirmed.

A GARDEN enclosed: and WISDOM justified of Her CHILDREN.
CANTICLES 8.13. Thou that dwell in the Gardens, the Companions hearken to
thy voice: cause me to hear it.


I Shall not at this time speak any thing of the CANTICLES in general; which of
all Scriptures is so full of the discoveries of the Saints glorious privileges
in Christ; and sweet relation and oneness with Christ; as also that sweet
exchange of love that is betwixt Christ and them, which is so transcendent in
the nature of it; so full of light and life in the operation of it; that no
soul can truly declare it, but he that does enjoy it: and he that does declare
this love from the enjoyment of love, is so swallowed up in love, that he is
never weary of declaring love; for love enjoyed is a sufficient power, and life
to the soul enjoying, to carry him out to declare it self, by him that so
enjoyes it.

And as this CANTICLES does discover the exchange of Love betwixt Christ and
the Saints; so it also discovers the love that is in each Saint to one
another: chap. 8.1, 2. and 8, 9. verses.

But I shall say no more of the CANTICLES in general, but come to this verse in
particular: And in the Verse there is these two things considerable.


declaration; in these words, Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions
hearken to thy voice.

Secondly, A sweet desire, or thirsting; Cause me to hear it.

A sweet acknowledgement or declaration.
In the acknowledgement or declaration, consider these things.

First, The party acknowledging. Secondly, The matter acknowledged. Thirdly,
The manner of the acknowledgement.
The party acknowledging.
First, The party acknowledging, and that is a soul possessed with Christ, who
was able from the enjoyment of Christ, to understand as privileges in him, so
the sweet and glorious communion the Saints have with him: And from thence we
will observe this conclusion:

That they, Ioh. 14.17.19, 20, 21.
who understand Christ from enjoyment. Ioh. 15.4, 5^. verse 6.


Others that do not enjoy him, and go about to declare him, only speak of him
as one that speaks of a thing at a distance, and so speak of him at random;
and may as soon speak out themselves, as Christ: for that is the only reason
and cause that men's judgments of Christ do so often alter. It is just in this
case, as it is with some men that understand the nature of Foreign Countries
by a Globe, or secondary declarations: and that is the cause men give such
sundry descriptions of one and the same place: But he that has been at those
places, and understands them not at the second, but first hand; he only is
able to give a right description of places, and things. So it is with those men
that have no understanding of Christ, but what they fetch in by the strength of
natural parts, from external declarations; and not from internal enjoyments:
they are not any ways able to give a right description, or hold forth a true
discovery of Jesus Christ so, but that they may, and do discover more of self,
then Christ: But those that so understand Christ from an enjoyment of Christ,
John 5.57. Gal. 2.19, 20.
that they actually and really live in what they know of Christ; John 17.21,
22, 23, 26.
they are only able to discover that love, and lovelynesse that is in Christ:
But I may say of the other sort of men, as the Apostle says, in the 1 Timothy
1.7. Some preach the Law, but they know not what they say, nor whereof they
affirm: But (says the Apostle) We know etc. From thence you may observe thus
much; That they, and they only can preach the Law, Romans 3, 19. to 31.
that understand the Law in Christ, or by Christ; and if the Law, then
unquestionably the Gospel.

The Reasons to prove that they, and they only are fit to declare Christ, who
understand Christ from enjoyment, are these:

First, 1 John 5.19, 20.
They only are fit to declare Christ, who rightly understand Christ: But no
soul does truly understand Christ without, 1 John 2.20.27,
till he enjoys Christ within: All the external actings of Christ presented
to us, they are but external declarations of a hidden glory, which none knows
till he does enjoy: And then, Romans 6.3: 4, 5, 6, 8.
when a soul enjoys a crucified Christ within, killing, and exalting: dying,
and rising: Gal. 2.20. and 5.24. and 6, 14.
then do we come to understand that hidden Manna, and enjoy that white stone,
Col. 3. 1 Rev, 2, 17
with a new name written in it, which none knows but he that does enjoy it;
and none can declare it, but he that knows it.

Secondly, Gal. 2.20. 1 Cor, 2.1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 3 Cor. 12.5
whose Spirit is so crucified by the power of Truth, that in his
acknowledgement of Truth, he does it singly for Truth, and not for self: Psalm.
71.16. I will go on in the strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of
thy righteousness, even of thine only. But self in no soul is so laid down
by the power of Truth, Gal. 5.17.
till that soul is actually possessed with Truth; for till then, it is not
Christ, but self that reigns.

Thirdly, 1 Cor. 2.1, 2, etc. Iam. 1.22, 23.
He, and he only is fit to declare Truth, whose Reason does not master notions
of Truth, but his Reason is a servant to the power of truth, being overcome and
made silent by the authority of truth: But no soul is so overcome and made
silent by the authority of truth, but he that enjoys truth: Therefore he, and
he only is fit to declare Truth.

The first use is of Information, men whose spirits dwell with Christ, and are
always from thence beholding the glorious objects in Christ; Gal. 2.20.
and while they are thus beholding, Acts 18.5.
their spirits are swallowed up in what they behold; they are those that can
discover to you, as the displayings of the loves of Christ without; so the
expostulations of loves within; and as they can discover what it is to be owned
by Christ without, so they can discover also what it is to be owned by a Christ
within.

And as for others that only know Christ without, and are not able to unfold
that mystery of glory, 1 Timothy 3.16.
which is Christ manifested in the flesh; they are not able to declare Christ,
in a way that is suitable to Christ.

Secondly, This may inform us what the privilege of the saints is, in
declaring Christ. Their privilege consists in these things.

First, In the easiness of their declaring Truth, that enjoy Truth; It is no
labor nor burden to a soul that enjoys Truth, to declare Truth; for as he
does not by the labor of natural parts fetch in Truth, so he does not by the
strength of natural parts give out Truth: But Truth in him is alone the power,
and life of him, to declare Truth by him, that so in all his discoveries of
Truth, he is so far from carrying notions of Truth, that Truth does carry him;
and he can and may say as Paul says, Gal. 2.20. Not I, but Christ lives in
me. And I may say in this case as S. John said in another case. Revel. 14.13.
They rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

Secondly, Their privilege appears in this, that in all the displayings of
the love of Christ to others, in that, and at that time they sweetly enjoy the
love of Christ in themselves; and so enjoy it, that they sweetly live in it,
and are sweetly refreshed by the influences of it; so that it is enough to such
a soul to declare Truth; for he stands not in need of external things to draw
him, but the enjoyment of Truth constrains him. 2 Cor. 5.14.

The second Use is, Truth, Act, 5.28, 29.
from declaring Truth: They do what in them lies to stop the mouth of the
Spirit of Truth; and that is the meaning of the Apostle, 2 These. 5.19.20.
Quench not the Spirit; despise not Prophecy. So that the dispising of
Prophecy, is a quenching the Spirit; not in our selves, but in others. Now
Prophecy is not for men to preach a Sermon, from fetching in Notions of Truth,
from the strength of Natural parts; But it is for a man to speak forth Truth
from the edicts of it self; And that is it which St John means, when he
says The testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy; Rev. 19.10. Therefore
let such men, who endeavor by power and policy to oppose them, take heed what
they do.

The third Use is,

If you say you are willing,

What of that? which was declared by Christ himself, Luke 21.16.17. Mark
13.12, 13.
And ye shall be betrayed both by parents and brethren, and kinsfolks, and
friends, and some of you shall they cause to be put to death: And ye shall be
hated of all men for my Names sake. The like you may see spoken of, Cant. 1.6.

But if it be objected,

I answer,

And therefore the sum of all is this, That it is better to please Christ, Acts
4.19.5.29.42.
then men: and therefore you which enjoy Christ, Cease not, but at all
opportunities, declare what you know of Christ, that so others may enjoy what
you enjoy. But I shall say no more of this Use, nor of this Conclusion.

The second thing in the Declaration, 2. The matter declared.
is the matter declared: And in that there is something included, besides what
is expressed; And that which is included is in this word Garden; In which word
is employed the Church of Christ: From whence observe this conclusion,

That Christ's Church is Christ's Garden.

For the better understanding of this Conclusion, I shall unfold these things,
First, What I mean by the Church of Christ. Secondly, How Christ's Church may
fitly be called a Garden. Thirdly, How it is said to be Christ's Garden.


For the first, What I mean by the Church of Christ.

I Answer, I do not intend in that, 1. What is meant by the Church of Christ.
to speak any thing of the Church invisible; but visible.

And in that, Consider, First, What I do not mean by the Church of Christ; And
in the first place, I do not mean a National Church: And by that word
National I mean, That a Nation, considered as a Nation, cannot be a Church of
Christ: My reasons are these,

First, Because if a Church were considered, National, then a Natural birth
would interest a man into a Spiritual privilege.

Secondly, The holy Ghost no where considers Church members under a Natural
relation, but under a spiritual, considering them as Saints. 1 Cor. 1.2.
Ephesians. 1.1.

Secondly, I do not mean by a Church, a Parochial Church; that is the same
in nature with a National Church, though not in measure; and what may be said
against one, may be said against the other.

But by a Church, I mean a company of souls, Ioh. 14.17, 20.
who through the commings in of Christ, are made able so to believe in Christ,
that they are through that believing, made able freely, and voluntarily to give
themselves up to Christ, Romans 6.17.
to walk in the acknowledgement of Christ, Acts 24.14.
in, or according to his word.

And from the terms of this description, we may observe these three or four
consectaries, and by them you will the better understand what I mean;

The first is, 1. consectary.
That the Church of Christ, are believers in Christ.

Secondly, 2. consect.
That the Church of Christ are such as are sweetly overcome, or fetched in to
Christ, by the commings in of Christ.

Thirdly That the Church of Christ, 3. consect.
must worship Christ.

Fourthly, That the word of Christ, 4. consect.
is the Rule of the worship of Christ.

For the first, 1. consect.
That the Church of Christ, are believers in Christ. This is clear from these
scriptures: 1 Cor. 1.2. and 2 These. 1. chap. 1.2.3. verses, with many other
places.

If you ask me,

I Answer, I will tell you first,

For the first, I do not mean a bare professor of Truth, and Faith; for if all



But by a believer I mean, A soul who from the enjoyment of a Christ within, is
made able to believe a Christ without: For believing according to Truth is, for
a soul from the power of Truth, being overcome by it, and swallowed up in it,
is from thence made able as to assent and give credit to it; so to assent and
submit to all things presented in it, and required by it; as that they are made
able to live to the glory of Truth, in every particular act.

If you ask me,

I Answer, Such ought not to be admitted;

First, If we walk in the light as he is in the light, then shall we have
fellowship one with another. From thence it is clear, that an one-nesse in the
mystery of Truth, is alone the ground of Communion and fellowship suitable to
Truth.

Secondly, Phil. 1, 25.
as they may have ground to believe will continue with them; 1 John 2.19, 20,
24, 27.
but there is no ground to believe that they will continue with them, unless
they can or do make out a right understanding of a Christ enjoyed within; as
well as an apprehension of a Christ without.

Thirdly, 1 John 1.^.7.
ought to endeavor to keep and continue that which is the glory and life of
union and Communion, which is not a bare enjoying of each other in an external
Ordinance; but a sweet refreshing of each other, by giving out to each other,
their internal enjoyments; for it is not a bare breaking of bread together, to
make out a crucified Christ without, that is the life and refreshing of Saints;
but it is the sweet unfoldings, in the givings out of their experiences each to
other; in which they do sweetly unfold and give out that love, which is the
life of Saints: And in the giving out of each others experiences, there is a
sweet building up, and refreshing of each other; As face answers face in a
glass; so does the experience of one Saint answer another; and in their so
answering, there is a sweet wraping up of each others spirit, in each others
enjoyment: And as this is, and ought to be the ground of Love; So it is that
which is the continuation of love; but this cannot be enjoyed by admitting of
members that only know a Christ without, and do not know and enjoy a Christ
within.

Fourthly,

The major is clear: And for the minor I prove thus; That which the Devil may
do, a man of the world may do in matter of believing; But the Devils did
believe, and know a Christ without, Jam. 2.19. and yet did not enjoy a Christ
within: Therefore a wicked man, or a man of the world may do the same: And
therefore that is not a sufficient ground to admit one into Church Fellowship.

Fifthly, As the Apostles owned men, flesh he means all external acts of
righteousness; which he calls flesh in Phil. 3.4. Therefore (I conceive) the
Apostle means, they know no man after the flesh; that is, according to their
external actings; but according to their internal enjoyments: And so ought we.

Sixthly,

If you ask me,

I Answer,

First, Distract. 1.
A continued fear that men will, or may fall off from them: For if men hold
themselves in the profession of Truth, 1 Ioh. 2.19.
and are not held in by the power of Truth; then they will at first or last
fall off from Truth.

Secondly, Distract. 2.
This is that which opens the mouths of some that are not yet in external
fellowship, not only to speak against it; but it makes them also afraid to
submit to it, because they fear that we center, and put too much in outward
Ordinances, and too little in inward enjoyments; This makes them fear that
they shall not enjoy that amongst them that profess outward Ordinances, which
they do enjoy amongst others.

Thirdly, It is a grief, and trouble, Distract. 3.
and sadness to the spirits of them that are already in fellowship; For
instead of being built up with the exchanges of experiences; they (meeting many
times with some who are admitted upon confession, and profession of a Christ
without, when they do not so enjoy Christ within, as to see an interest in him,
and have a sensible communion with him) instead of the exchanges of
experiences, that may refresh the souls of each other, they give out nothing
but external declarations about external administrations; which is so far from
refreshing, that it does exceedingly damp the heart of a soul that lives with
God: And it is no better then pouring cold water upon a warmed spirit; For
though external Ordinances are very good in reference to the will of God; yet
it is not an outward Ordinance, but God in the Ordinance, that is the life of a
Saint.

Seventhly, Ioh. ^.15.14.6.
so as to enjoy life by him: Gal. 2.20, 1 Ioh. 1.7.
And until men can declare that they see an interest in Christ, and sensibly
enjoy Christ, there is no ground for us to believe, that they do so believe, as
to admit them into Church Fellowship.

And so much concerning the first consectarie; That the Church of Christ are
believers in Christ.

The second consectary is, Consect. 2.
That the Church of Christ are such as are sweetly overcome, and fetched in to
Christ, by the commings in of Christ.

By those expressions, my meaning is: First, That that heart that is truly
possessed with Christ, is sweetly overcome by the sweet love and lovelynesse of
Christ, so that he has nothing to say against him, or any thing that is
required by him, but does sweetly submit to him.

Secondly, He is fetched in; by that I mean, not only a fetching into an
external Ordinance, but to the enjoyment of an internal glory: he is not barely
fetched in from a seeming power of death, to live under the shadow of life: but
he is really fetched from the power of death, into the glory of life: In a
word, he is fetched into the bosom of God, to live in him, so that he is
sweetly wrapped up in the mystery of that glory which is involved in the bosom
of God. And so much for that consectarie.

The third consectarie is, Consect. 3.
That the Church of Christ must worship Christ. And that this is their duty, is
clear from these Scriptures; 2 Kings 17.36. 1 Chronicles. 16.29. Psalm. 29.2. and
96.9. John 4.23, 24. Acts 24.14. Romans 12.1. Phil. 3.3. And had I time, I should
speak something of the word Worship: for Worship in Scripture is taken either
for Moral, or Instituted Worship; but I shall say nothing of that: Only in a
word, the people of God are to acknowledge God in all things, both external,
and internal, that are required of them by God. But I shall not (at this time)
speak any more of this consectary.

The fourth consectary is, Consect. 4.
That the word of Christ, is the Rule of the worship of Christ. Esai. 8.20.
Every King must, and does rule by a Law suitable to himself: Kings that govern,
and rule in civil things, are to govern and rule by a civil Law; but Christ
who is a King spiritual, rules and regulateth his Church by a spiritual Law;
civil Laws cannot reach Christ's government; Neither has Christ centred any
power in the civil authority, to regulate men's spirits in the worship of
Christ; Genesis 49.10.
though that was formerly in the Church of the Jews, which was a type of
Christ; it is now ended by Christ; and all power in matter of worship is called
home to him, Esa. 9.6.7.
and resides in him: Mat. 11.27.
and those men that endeavor by the power of a civil Law to constrain men to a
spiritual worship, Ioh. 3.35.
they take upon them the authority and prerogative of Jesus Christ: Nay in a
word, they in that act deny Christ come in the flesh; and it is not only
sinful; but poor and beggarly: for they would have all men see with their eyes;
and all men's spirits in nature and measure suitable to their Law; and if they
see more, they must be fetched back by the power of it; and if they see less,
the must be fetched up to it by that power and authority in it; and in so
doing, they take upon them the sole work of God himself. But I shall say no
more of that thing, nor of the first term in the Proposition; What I mean by
the Church of Christ.

2. Why the Church is called a Garden.
The second thing to be unfolded is, Why the Church of Christ is called a
Garden; Or wherein it may fitly be compared to a Garden?

I answer, The Church of Christ may fitly be compared to a Garden in these
things:

First, In that it is enclosed: common fields have common fences, 1. Christ's
Church may fitly be called a Garden, Because it is enclosed.
but no special enclosure: In a special manner to be enclosed is the property
of a Garden; and therein may the Church of Christ fitly be called a Garden,
Cant. 4.12. A Garden enclosed is my sister, my Spouse: and so Isa, 5. I had a
Vineyard, and I set a Wall about it, (says Christ) and I hedged it. etc. All
this discovers thus much, That the Church of Christ, which is Christ's Garden;
is specially enclosed; and this enclosure is not a bare external discipline, to
separate them from the World; Romans 8.35.
But it is also the special love, John 14.21.15.12, 13.17.15.
and power, and sweetness of Christ, to secure them from the evil that is in
the world.

2. Because there is more fruit there, then elsewhere.
Secondly, The Church of Christ may fitly be called a Garden, Because there is
more special fruit there then elsewhere: In common fields and roadwaies there
may be common fruits; but your special and choice fruits are in your enclosed
Gardens; so it is in the Church of Christ; In the men of the world there may be
some common gifts to declare Christ; and some civil and legal conformity to
Christ; and also a love to Christ, from a supposed good by Christ, when they
can love themselves, in loveing of Christ: and the same we may say of sorrow
for sin; and joy in duty: etc. But if you look for a choice love, and a choice
light, Ephesians. 3.29.5.19.
you must look for it where it is, Mat. 11.27.
and that is either in the heart of Christ, the Gardener; 1 John 2.20.27.
or else in the saints, who are the Garden. Every stream looks like its own
Fountain; and every beam like its own Body from whence it flows; Therefore if
you desire to see a choice love, 2 Cor. 7.11.
and a choice light, a choice joy, and a choice sorrow, you must view it only
and alone in the heart of saints; They who are possessed with Christ, and so
live with Christ, that all living acts flow from Christ, they are not carried
out to love from an apprehension of good without them, presented to them; But
they love from a power of good, seated in them: They do not love to gain life;
but they so love from a power of life, that it is a gain to them to love: That
love that is in the heart of Saints to God, flows from no less then the very
heart of God: It looks like him, it is owned by him, it wraps up, and involves
the spirit, loving in the glory of him: these are the choice fruits and spices
Christ speaks of in the CANTICLES.

And so we are to understand the words of Christ, Mat. 5.47.
where he says, What is in you, more then in another? implying that there is
some singular thing in the heart of Saints, that is not else where: You may
find light, and love, and sorrow, and joy in the heart of men, yet
unacquainted truly with God: But if you will find these Purely, and Truly;
Singly, and Transcendently, you must expect it no where, but where Christ
dwells with a Soul, and a Soul with Christ. And therefore under that second
consideration, The Church of Christ may fitly be called a Garden.

3. Because there is more care taken of it.
Thirdly, The Church of Christ may fitly be called a Garden, Because there is
more Care taken of it, and more special watching over it then of other places.

Where the Lord says, Esa. 27.3.
I watered it, and watched it night and day, that none should burt it. Men take
a common care of their common fields; But they take a special care of their
enclosed Gardens; So it is with God himself, Psalm. 145.9.
Whose mercy is over all his works; But his choycest Loves, Light, John 14,
21.23.
and Life is displayed in the heart of Saints: and they are not only under a
common Providence, but a Fatherly and Friendly care.

I might here speak something of the White. stone; and also of the choice
ownings, and imbracings betwixt Christ and his Saints. But I shall leave that
to the experience of them that do enjoy it.

4. Because Christ takes satisfaction and delight in it.
Fourthly, The Church of Christ may fitly be compared to a Garden in referrence
to the sweet Refreshings, Satisfaction, and Content Christ takes in it; Which
content and satisfaction of Christ does appear, and is made manifest by these
things.

First, In Christ's sweet discoveries, and friendly manifestations in a secret
way to them; John 14.21.
It is here betwixt Christ and his Church, as it is betwixt friends, If men
desire to have a friendly discourse with a friend, they commonly go (not into
the common fields, but) into enclosed Gardens, where they may discover their
minds, as privately, so freely, and friendly; So it is betwixt Christ and his
Church, who when he has any choice matter to discover, from the heart of his
Father, He presently retires to the heart of Saints, John 15.15.
where he does, and can speak as fully, so freely; And in his discovery of
himself, and his Father to them, he takes great delight. And herein the
content and satisfaction of Christ in the Saints does appear.

Secondly, The content and satisfaction of Christ does appear, in that Christ
is pleased, not only to carry them by a common hand of Providence, but he
carries them in his Bosom; Esa. 40.11.
He delights for them to ly in his heart, and for Him to live in them.

Thirdly, Not only so, But the content of Christ appears in diverse
expressions which he takes up to express himself in, and declare himself by,
to his Churches; Hag. 2.23.
Sometimes he calls them the Signet upon his finger: Sometimes he desires to
be Set as a seal upon their heart: Cant. ^.6.
Sometimes he cries out and says, Turn away thine eyes from me, Cant. 6.5.
for they have overcome me: And sometimes he cries out, Show me thy
Countenance, Let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, Cant. ^.14.
and thy Countenance comely. It is here with Christ, as it is with one that
delights not only in a Garden, but in the variety of fruits in that Garden; So
Christ is pleased by the sweet and glorious situation, and indwelling of
himself in the soul, to cause the soul to bring forth choice fruits unto
himself, and Christ loves to view the fruits of his own love, and the Beams
of his own Beauty; And it is impossible for any Gardener to take so much
delight in any Garden, as Christ takes in the heart of Saints; For Christ is
not carried up by them, but he carries up them to Himself: The Spirit of
Christ is not revived by any stream in a Saint, besides Himself; but all the
refreshment of a Saint, and of himself, flows from himself as the only
Fountain. And these ways (and many other) does the content that Christ takes
in his Church appear. And so you see how the Church of Christ may fitly be
compared to a Garden.

And for the Third thing, 3. Why the Church of Christ is called Christ's Garden,
Why the Church of Christ is called Christ's Garden.

I Answer, It may fitly be called Christ's Garden upon these grounds,

First, Because it was planted by Him.

Secondly, It is enclosed in Him.

Thridly, It is made fruitful through the enjoyments of Him.

Fourthly, It looks like him.

1. Of the first, 1. Because it is planted by him
It is planted by Him: It is the same thing that Christ says, Esa. 5.2. He
planted it with a choice Vine. Every one may lay claim to the workmanship of
his own hand: There is nothing in the heart of a Saint considered spiritual
and heavenly, but it was planted there by Jesus Christ: and thus consider the
hearts of Saints centred and placed in any divine enjoyment, they are placed
and seated there, as with, so by Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 2.

Look upon all the Loves, Joys, Desires and Longings of a Saint: If you ask
me Whose they are? I tell you they belong to him that planted them, and that is
the Lord Christ: All the outgoings of the heart of Saints to God in Christ,
they are but the reflections of the Divine beam of eternal glory, the head
and fountain of which is in God himself.

If you look upon any Divine enjoyment where a Saint is planted or placed: If
you ask me Who brought up a low Spirit to those high enjoyments? I Answer, It
is the work of Christ, who at one and the same time lives with God in the
height of his glory, and with poor creatures that are here below; bringing
down Gods highness to their weakness, and bringing up their weakness to Gods
highness. So then in this first sense, they may well be called the Garden of
Christ; because in all their plantings, they are planted by Christ.

Secondly, 2. Because it is enclosed in him.
As they are planted by him, so they are enclosed in him; Every Garden has a
particular enclosure; But Christ's Garden more high and glorious; They are not
only enclosed by a common Providence to protect and secure them; but they are
enclosed within the choice limits of Christ's Loves: They are carried in his
bosom, Esa. 40.11.
they are borne up in his arms: Was there ever a place more secret, high and
glorious in the heart of Christ, then where a Saint lives? He should be drawn
up to a higher enjoyment then yet he has, or shall have. But the truth is the
Lord Christ locks up, and incloseth his Garden in his choicest closset; and
that is in no less then in the heart: Of what? Even of himself, Nay of his
Father; and they are so enclosed in the heart of him, that there they live in
the midst of all his Loves: They are comprehended within the Divine beams of
his eternal delights, love and content. And this is the second ground, 3.
Because they are made fruitful through the enjoyments of him.
why they may be called Christ's Garden: because as they are planted by him, so
they are enclosed in him.

Thirdly, They are made fruitful through the enjoyments of him; The thoughts
of which, does exceedingly transport my spirit in the viewing of it, that we
who are low, should be advanced into the highness of Gods presence, who have
not only admittance to, but interest in the heart of Jesus: This with much
more, is our privilege: And for our fruitfullnesse toward our God, in the
acknowledgement of these high privileges we enjoy by God: From whence flow
they? Is our privilege gained by the strength of our duty? Or Is our duty
produced by the power of our privileges? It is that we dwell with Christ, Col.
3.1.
or rather, that Christ dwells with us, which is the only cause of our bearing
fruit to Christ: Ephesians. 3.17.
And what the sweet distillings of that eternal dew, and spiritual watering
is: no soul knows, but he that does enjoy it: See what Christ says, Esa.
27.3. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I
will keep it night and day. This watering the heart of Saints, it is by the
sweet displayings, and glorious unfoldings of the Fathers good will to the
Saints; through which beams there is power and life begot in them; through
which life and power there is duties performed by them; So that all the duties
Saints bring to the heart of Jes;us Christ, it is but the returns of his own
streams, and the reflection of his own beams. Col. 3.3.
How hard, dead, and unsencible is a Saint when Eclipsed by Christ? How high,
how spiritual, how Evangelicall is a Saint in his actings to Christ, when he
acts from an enjoyment of Christ? See but what Christ says, John 15.1.2. I am
the Vine, and ye are the branches. This does not only show the choice relation
that is betwixt Christ and his Spouse, but also shows the sweet conveyance of
life from himself to his Spouse: for as the branch in a Vine cannot bring
forth fruit, but as it receives sap from the root; neither can a Saint who
is made one with Christ, bring forth fruit unless he has in-comes from
Christ: Therefore he says, (verse 15.) Without me ye can do nothing. And so
much of this third thing, They are made fruitful through the enjoyments of him.

Fourthly, They look like him: 4. Because they look like him.
Adam begot a Son like unto himself: This second Adam who is from Heaven,
and therefore Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.45, 47.48.49.
all the Saints that are made one with him, who are involved in him, Ephesians. 1.4.
who are made fruitful by him; they look like him, 1 John 4.17. As he is, so
are we in this world. Look, you that have experience of the enjoyments of
Christ; You I say, who are wont to sit down amongst the Loves of Christ,
viewing and beholding the heart of Jesus: Do but behold the heart of a Saint,
and there is a sweet sutablenesse, or likeness each to other.

If you ask me, From whence comes this? I tell you it is, because whatsoever
is considered in the heart of a Saint, as a Saint, it is really one with
Christ, it really flows from Christ. I told you before, that every beam is
like its own Body; So it is here; that Love that is in a saint to Christ, it is
but a Son, 1 Ioh. 4.9.10.
it is but a fruit of the Love that is in Christ to us: The love that is in a
saint, is not only begot by him, but it really flows from him, as one with
him. And what you may say of Love, you may say of all that is considered in the
heart of a saint, as a saint, Insomuch that if you should call the love that is
in a saint to Christ, Choice Love; you could neither wrong a saint, nor Christ
in that thing.

Dearest friends, Behold in this a great wonder, Christ in the givings out of
himself to us, requires returns of himself in an acknowledgement of so great
a privilege: But behold all the returns in us to Christ, flows from Christ,
as the original Fountain, and Wellhead of all those streams. And so much of
this fourth thing, They look like him. And now I have done with unfolding the
terms of the second Doctrine to you; which was, that Christ's Church is Christ's
Garden.

Use of Information.
The first Use is a Use of Information, to inform us of many Truths, which I
shall draw from the Proposition or Conclusion; and that shall be in drawing
several Consectaries from the particulars in every term; Only the first
term, viz. what I meant by the Church of Christ, I have at large handled it
already, and therefore I shall speak no more of that at this time.

But I shall come to draw Consectaries from the second and third things.

First, From the second, Why the Church of Christ is called a Garden. And I
gave you four Reasons why it may fitly be called a Garden.

First, Because it is enclosed.

Secondly, Because there is more special fruit there, then else where.

Thirdly, Because there is more care taken of it, and watchfullnesse over it.

Fourthly, Because Christ takes more Content and Delight in it, then elsewhere.

From thence observe these four Consectaries.

First, From the first thing, Consect. 1.
That Christ's Church may fitly be called a Garden, Because it is enclosed;
From thence observe this Consectarie, That Christ's Church is not a scattered
confused, but an enclosed Company; It is the property of idle shepherds to let
their sheep go scattered up and down, not knowing them, nor them knowing
him: But the Lord Christ takes care to enclose his Garden within the limits of
that Light, Life and Glory that makes known himself to them, and them to
himself; Ioh. 10.14.
that wheresoever a Saint is, he is still enclosed by Christ; he is not
without the Pale, but he is still within the borders of the limits of that
strong wall, Esa. 26.5. And therefore we may say here as Christ says, Cant.
4.12. A Garden enclosed, is my sister, my spouse.

What this enclosure is in the fellowship of the Saints in any sense, at this
time I shall not speak, having spoke so largely to this before; But this I am
sure of, That Christ's Church is an enclosed Garden.

We might in the way of Use of this Consectarie come a little to parralell the
Church of England with the Church of Christ; which opposes and endeavors to
destroy the Church of Christ, the Lillies of Christ; then any ways looks with
a face like Christ himself.

And what we may say of a National Church, we may say the same of a Parochial
Church: But I shall say no more of that thing, but only this, That Christ's
Church is an enclosed Garden.

The Second Consectarie is drawn from the second thing, Consect. 2.
which was this, That the Church of Christ may fitly be called a Garden,
because there is more special fruit there, then elsewhere; Thence observe
this Consectarie, That the fruits in a Saint placed thereby Jesus Christ, They
are choice fruits: The highest title that Christ can give them, he gives to
them: There is no excellent spices, no wines, no fruits, but Christ takes up to
express the glory, and excellency, and beauty of those fruits that grow and
live in a Saint; I say here (as I said before) There is common fruits in common
fields; but your choice fruits are in your Gardens: Men go to refresh their
spirits with a sight of Lillies, and Roses, and other choice fruits in enclosed
Gardens; Behold if you would look upon the choice Lillies of Love, The Rose of
Sharan, Look what is planted and placed in the heart of saints; there is the
Rose of Sharan; there dwells the Lilly of the Valleys, Cant. 2.1.
even Christ in them: Ioh. 14.17.20.
And all the fruit of love, thankfulness, or acknowledgement in Praying, or
speaking to, or of Jesus Christ, it flows from Christ, as dwelling in them,
and therefore must needs be a choice fruit.

Truly it sads my spirit to see that in these days when there is so much
light, Copper should go for the purest Gold; My meaning is, That common,
borrowed Religions should be owned as the Religion that Christ himself ownes:
But I shall not at this time largely express my self in this thing; Only
thus much take notice of, That there is a Religion considered only in
reference to Reason. A Religion in reference to a Law without, and not a Law
and Love within. A Religion in reference to a Letter, when men endeavor by the
strength of Religion to find out the spirit; and there Religion is not
produced by being found out by the spirit it self; and that causes all the
confusion that is now-a-dayes in the world, for if reason goes to trade with
law, and letter, it converts both law and letter into no higher glory then into
the light of it self; and all the fruit that is in such a man's spirit,
considered in every act of Religion, it is poor, it is beggarly, it is low, it
is legal, it is but a Religion in the letter, and not in the spirit.

If you ask me, Why I call this a Religion?

I Answer, I call it so in reference to man,

If you ask me what I mean by a Religion in reference to Reason, Law,

What Religion in referrence to Reason is.
In a word I Answer thus, first, For that Religion which is in reference to
Reason, It is when Reason is the highest Light that a man enjoys, and that
Reason is put forth as in directing men, so in convicting, when men vary from
that direction, through the power of which there is wrought a certain
conformity to the light of it self: And this is that which some men look
upon as Religion, which is mere Civilitie.

2. What Religion in referrence to a Law without, and not within is.
Secondly, for that Religion which is in referrence to a Law without, and not
answering to a Law and a power of Love within, It is when men have not only
the light of Reason, but convictions from the light of a Law, which sets men at
work, not rightly understanding this Law without, from the power and spirit of
a Law within; Romans 3.2.
they in conforming to it, to seek good by it, they only work in a low
legal way, seeking life by working, and not to acknowledge life in their
working: This is such a Religion that men who live in it, may fall from it. But
those Saints who act in Religious acts suitable to Christ, the Law is written in
them, that is a Rule for them; and the Law that regulates them in an act, is
the Spirit, and Life, and Power of the act; and so Christ is All in all.

3. What Religion in referrence to a Letter is.
Thirdly, For that Religion which is in referrence to a Letter, It is only when
men by the strength of Reason, trade with the Letter, to find out the spirit;
and the Spirit does not trade with their spirits: And the truth is, this kind
of way of eyeing Truth, admits of strange constructions that vary from Truth;
and that is the cause why one man is Legal, and another man seems to be
Evangelicall, but it is only in the notion, and not in the power.

If you ask me then,

Answer is, That Saints understand the Letter from the Spirit; John 14.26.
But the other go about to apprehend the Spirit, only from the Letter; And in
so acting they act in a Region below that Divine glory that lives in the mind
of the Spirit. Romans 8.27
And herein does the privilege of the Saints transcend the apprehension of all
men that do not enjoy it: the saints are comprehended in the Spiritualitie of
the Letter, while they understand the Letter: The Spirit preaches Divinity
within, and that makes them understand Divinity without. But no man knows
this, but he that does enjoy it.

What then shall we think of those men that say, No man can declare the mind
of God, but he that knows the Original?

If by the Original they mean the Original in the Letter; Wade as far as
you can in that Fountain, you are but still in the Letter. But if you speak
truly of the Original, I say, No man can preach or declare God, till he
knows the Original: But then we must know what the Original of the Letter
is, It is the Spirit.

If you ask me,

I tell you,

If you Object,

I Answer,

Only in the way of Use,

But Behold a wonder, The fruits in a saint, and acts of Religion here upon the
earth, the head of them is as high as Heaven; The Original of the
apprehensions of saints, is as high, as spiritual, as glorious as the Heart of
Christ. And so much of this thing.

Only one word of Use more from the Consectarie,

The third Consectarie arises from the third thing, Consect. 3.
which was this, That the church of Christ may fitly be called a garden,
because there is more special care taken of them, and watchfulnes over them,
then of other places, as you may see Esa. 27. From thence observe this
Consectary, That you that are Christ's, you are under his special protection.
All in a sense may be said to stand by him, and receive good from him: But you
in a more especial manner; His eye is over you; His heart is with you, His
thoughts of good run out for you; there is nothing that does befall you, that
can take you from under the care of Christ; All afflictions in words, in
actions from the men of the world are ordered by Christ, as a potion; in which
potion there are the sweet ingredients of his own Loves.

This should teach us, First,

Truly friends, Care in the use of means, and not caring for the success,
but leaving that to God, takes away the burden and Labor of all undertakings;
oh how may a Saint live? His life is without Care: I mean not the care in use
of means; but in the success of means, which alone belongs to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, to fear the secret and cunning plottings and contrivings of all
wild Boars and Foxes, who endeavor to undermine and weary the flock of
Christ; Know this, Christ's care is for you, his eye is over you, Cant. 8.3.
his Arm of love is under you; he takes care so as to undertake for you, to
engage with you, so as to get the victory (Nay, 1 Cor. 15.57.
its got already) for you; therefore we are said to be more then Conquerours:
Romans 8.37.
Oh! What need a Saint fear, who stands by a conquering strength, whose
strength is an eternal Christ?

Thirdly, a King. 6.16.
for he that is with us, is more then they that are against us.

Oh friends, Endeavor not to work out your safety by policy neglecting duty,
but leave all your safety to him who is your life, being resolute in your duty:
What if men oppose? If God command, let us go on. What if men contrive? If
Christ take care, let us not draw back: You are Christ's Garden, he watches
over you night and day; There may some Foxes rise up; but see what Christ
says, Cant. 2.15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the Vines,
for our Vines have tender grapes. But I say no more of that thing.

The fourth Consectarie is raised from the last thing wherein Christ's Church
may fitly be called a Garden; Consect. 4.
which was, That Christ takes great delight in it, and content in the enjoyment
of it: From thence observe this Consectarie, That Christ's delight, or the
delight of Christ is in and with the heart of Saints: This same is not a new
thing, but that which of old was declared concerning Christ, Prove. 8.31.
Rejoicing in the habitable part of the earth, and my delights were with the
sons of men. What Christ says of himself before we were, he expresses
several times since we are by him brought home to him: Christ loves us, and
delights so to do: Christ lives in us, its his content to be there: Christ
carries out our spirits in love to answer love: Christ delights to see the
returns of his own Beams, the fruits of his own love, the effects of his own
power: It is the joy of a Saint to dwell with Christ; and it is no less but
the joy and content of Christ to live with a saint: Where a saint is, John
17.22.
Christ must be, for they are one: Where Christ is, the saint must be, that
they may behold his glory: Christ came down to make out his highness, through
the lowness of the flesh, ^ Cor. 8.9.
that he might draw us up above the flesh, into the glory of the spirit: This
was the work of Christ to which he was designed by God the Father, and thus to
do was his meat and drink: He takes such delight in them, that he will not,
nor cannot withold any good from them: what God gives to Christ, Christ gives
to a saint, as a fruit of his love, to them in whom his soul delights.

The Use of this may be, streams grow dry: What if outward relation fail,
and external accomodations cease? Christ lives, and in that he lives, you
shall live also, Joh. 14.19.

Truly friends, There is more in a pound, then can be in a penny; more in a
pearl then can be in both, why then should you be cast down? Though the
creatures frown, Christ smiles: Its not much trouble to a woman espoused to a
man, though other men withdraw themselves, if her husbands love continue: Oh
that it could be so amongst the Saints.

Secondly, we fall, as to comfort us when we stand.

Thirdly,

Oh you that are thus made high by him, My desire is, That you would willingly
be made low for him: Me thinks the still streams of Christ's smiles should
carry us cheerfully through the worlds frowns. But I shall say no more of
this Use, nor of this Consectarie.

The other Consectaries do arise from the third particular, and that was, How
Christ's Church appears to be Christ's Garden: And that appears from these
four Considerations,

First, It is planted by him. Consect. 1.


Secondly, It is enclosed in him.

Thirdly, It is made fruitful through the enjoyments of him.

Fourthly, It looks like him.

First, It is planted by him: From thence observe this Consectarie, That
Christ's Church is Christ's plant. And that this is a truth I have proved
already. But the Uses that we are to make of this truth, are these,

First, the Kingly power of Christ; whose office alone it is to plant his
Chruch.

In the second place, Psalm. 105.15.
Touch not mine anointed; this is also intended, as well as immediate
oppositions against Christ; for a saint is Gods anointed as well as Christ. 2
Cor. 1.21.


In the third place, of persecution without looks upon you? the Son of
righteousness lives in you, Malec. 4.2.
which brings healings for you. But I shall say no more of this thing.

The next Consectarie does arise from the second thing, Consect. 2.
Why the Church of Christ is called Christ's Garden; which was, Because they
are enclosed in him. From thence observe this Consectarie, That it is the
privilege of the Saints not only to be of, but actually and really to live in
Jesus Christ. This I have spoken largely of already. But that which we may
learn from this, is,

First To teach us what the reason is, John 14.6.
their life is caused by Christ, their life is hid with God in Christ: Col. 3.3.
All this shows that it is a high and glorious mystery: Therefore this should
teach you not to wonder though men speak so darkely of it, and have so little
affection to it: It cannot be that the Earthly, as Earthly, should own the
Heavenly: It cannot be that those that are in the flesh, as in the flesh,
should own the spirit: But when I speak thus of the flesh, I do not only
mean that which men commonly call the flesh; but that which the Apostle
intends by flesh, when he says, We knew Christ after the flesh, but now know
we him so no more. ^ Cor. 5.16.


Now (Dearest friends) What need you care or be troubled though they that are
after the flesh, persecute you that are after the spirit? See what the Apostle
says, Gal. 4.29. For as then he that was after the flesh persecuted him that
was after the Spirit, even so it is now. But I shall say no more of that thing,
but only this, In the midst of all trouble consider that you are wrapped up above
all trouble, in the enclosure of him who is your life.

The third Consectary does arise from the third particular, Consect. 3.
why the Church of Christ is called Christ's Garden, which was, because they
bring forth fruit through the enjoyments of him. From whence observe this
Consectary, That in-comes from Christ, is the cause of our bringing forth fruit
to Christ; Every effect is produced by a cause suitable to it self; All our
loves, longings, desirings and gaspings after Jesus Christ, is not a Cause, but
a fruit of Christ as the only cause.

The Use of this is,

And therefore what shall we think of those men who without Christ, seek in
their prayings, lovings and longings, to gain a Christ? Dear Soul know,
Christ is taken with nothing, but what looks like himself; and nothing looks
like him, but what is produced by him.

Secondly, in us, that flows from himself; And so ought we.

Thirdly, Ioh. 15.4.
as of our privileges in him, so also of all the duty we perform to him,
Gal. 5.22.
being but fruits of in-comes from him.

Fourthly, Ephesians. 1.5, 6.
first There is a certain acceptance with him, for he cannot choose but love,
and like the returns of his own love. Besides it is a privilege in this,
That we are not to carry the power of duty, Luke 4.32.36.
but the power of duty carries us to it self; How easy must that command be
when the party commanding, is the party performing? By this not only you, but
all may see how sweetly, how Evangelically, how heavenly those Souls act, that
act from an enjoyment of Christ: Ephesians. 1.19, 3.20.
they do not only act to, but in the power of Christ; they do not only act to
heaven, but from the power of heaven.

In the last place, when the time is of a saints fruitfullnesse, and of a
saints barrenness: If Christ withold his displayings of love, life, and
glory in us, so far there is a cessation of heavenly actings by us; and this
is a Saints barren time. And when Christ is pleased to bring down the
discoveries of the hidden mysteries of Divine glory, to raise up a poor spirit
into the glory of it self, It no sooner sees, but it does conceive; it no
sooner looks, but it presently loves; and as it loves, so it longs for a
perfection of enjoyment of the thing beloved. But I say no more of this Use,
nor of this Consectarie.

The last Consectarie does arise from the last thing, Consect. 4.
Why the Church of Christ is called Christ's Garden; which was, Because they
look like him. From thence observe this Consectarie, That a saint as a saint,
as he is of, 1 Ioh. 4.17.
so also he looks like Jesus Christ. Would you see the face (not of the
earthly Adam, but) of him that is from heaven? Would you see his heart? Would
you see the glorious earnings of the eternal bowels of love and sweetness?
You may read this in the heart of a saint, who is sprinkled, enriched, and
garnished with these sweet beams of these Divine loves, even the heart of
Jesus.

The Use of this may be, ^ Cor. 3.26.
but not in the spirit: if thou do not love the spirit of saints: God gave
down the highness of his glory, ^ Ioh. 4.7.8.
and the mystery of his love in the coming of Christ to us: the image and
likeness of his glory was given to the saints by the commings in of Christ in
them: You may read the first Adam in the heart of every carnal man; you may
read also the second Adam in the heart of the spiritual man: VVast thou ever
wrapped up into those hidden treasures, I mean the Bosom of Christ? Did thou
there read his Name and Nature? Look and behold, Is not the like in a saint?
How can you slight, condemn, and judge him that loves, and looks like Christ?

The second Use of this, it of you I speak, that look like Christ? As your
heart does represent Christ spiritually in the spirit, Phil. 1.27.
1 Pet. 1.15.2.11.
so let your actions present Christ glorious and lovely ourwardly amongst men.

It is the duty of saints not to cover but uncover Christ in all their
performances; and had I time, I might tell you what the Apostle means, when
he says, A man should not pray with his head covered: 1 Cor. 11.4.
But I shall say no more, but (as he says) The head of every man is Jesus
Christ; verse. 3.
and therefore not only in your Praying, but in your practicing Cover not, but
uncover the glory of Christ, by a saint-like walking amongst men. But I shall
say no more of this Consectarie.

I should now speak something of some other Uses that I might draw from the
whole conclusion, That Christ's Church is Christ's Garden.

But I have a desire, though I do not enlarge my self upon, yet to name the
rest of the Conclusions that ly in the text, and leave them to your thoughts,
having not time to declare my self, by reason of the disturbance of those that
are now come about the house.

But to name the Conclusions to you, Let us read the words again, Thou that
dwell in the Gardens the Companions hearken to thy voice: Cause me to hear
it.

Wherein you may remember, I told you, there is two things considerable,
First, A sweet acknowledgement or declaration.

Secondly, A sweet desire or thirsting.

From the first, The sweet acknowledgement or declaration, you may remember I
told you there is three things considerable.

First the party acknowledging. Secondly, The matter acknowledged. Thirdly, The
manner of the acknowledgment.
The first, which is the party acknowledging, I have finished.

And for the second, The matter acknowledged; I have given you several
observations from it: And the rest that are behind, I shall only name to you,
which are these,

One is from this word, Thou that dwell in the Gardens; Observe,

That Christ in a special manner dwells with his own. Or thus, 1 Cor 16.16.
John 14.23


Christ's residence is in his Church.

And then again from this word, Thou that dwell in the Gardens, the
Companions hearken to thy voice: Thence observe these two Conclusions,

First, Ioh. 15.14.15.
Secondly, That it is as the property, Ioh. 10.3.

But I shall not at this time speak any thing of these things, And so I pass
over as the party acknowledging, so the matter acknowledged.

And now I should come to speak something of the manner of the acknowledgment;
3 The manner of the acknowledgement
Of the free and friendly spirit that did appear in the Spouse whilst she
acknowledges Christ. But I pass that over.

And so I come to the second thing in the words, which is, The sweet desire, 2
The desire or thirsting.
or thirsting of the Spouse in these words, Cause me to hear it. Wherein you
may observe these things,

First, The party Longing, That is a soul possessed with Christ: from thence
observe,

That it is the property of a soul that knows Christ, Psalm. 9.10.


Secondly, From that which lies in the conjunction between the
acknowledgment, and the desire, in these words, The Companions hearken to thy
voice; Cause me to hear it. Observe this Conclusion.

That so far as a soul knows Christ,

Thirdly, You may consider the matter desired; and that is in these words,
Cause me to hear it. Wherein there is something included, as well as what is
here expressed: And that which is included is in these words, Cause me;
Implying that they could not spiritually hearken to Christ, unless they were
spiritually caused by Christ. From thence observe this Conclusion,

That to make a soul hearken to Christ,

And then from that which is expressed in these words, Cause me to hear it.
From thence observe,

First, That to hearken to Christ is a matter worth desiring.

Secondly, That no soul does rightly understand what it is to hearken to
Christ, but knows,

I might make diverse Uses of these Conclusions: But (Dear friends) I hope you
that enjoy Christ within, and have Truth preached to you from it self, are and
will be made able to make use of Truth suitable to it self.

And seeing our time is short, and oppositions increase, 1 Cor. 7.29.
we not knowing how soon we may be called to suffer for Truth; I shall
therefore leave you all to Truth; John 14.6.65.5.
Desiring that Truth may dwell in you, and you in Truth; so that in all things,
Truth may be honored by you, may be owned and not denied in any action done by
you.

FINIS.
WISDOM Justified of her CHILDREN.
MATTHEW 11. the last part of the 19. verse. Wisdom is justified of her
Children.


IN the 16. verse Christ comes to discover the generation of the Scribes and
Pharisees, where he compares them to children that call to each other, saying,
We have piped, and ye have not danced: we have mourned, and ye have not
lamented, verse 17. and so he comes in the 18. and 19. verses, to make
application of these dark expressions wherein he does discover the cross
disposition of the Scribes and Pharisees, saying, verse 18. John came neither
eating nor drinking, and they said that he had a devil; but Christ comes, and
presents himself in an other form; he comes eating and drinking, but
presently they cry out, he is a friend of Publicans and sinners: before they
seem to dislike John, upon this ground that he did neither eat nor drink, and
Christ's actions seem to speak out thus much; Do you object against John,
because he does not eat? I will eat: But the Scribes and Pharisees were so
opposite in their spirits to Truth, that they could not fancy any form where
Christ was presented, so as to affect Truth. Now these words that I have read
unto you, are a conclusion of Christ, upholding of them, wherein he says,
(verse 19.) But wisdom is justified of her Children: which words is an
affirmation of grace, brought forth in opposition to corrupt nature: the words
are excluding, as well as including; excluding the world, and including Saints:
The world as accusing and condemning Christ; Saints as owning and justifying
Christ: that which does exclude the world, lies in this word, [ But] Thence
observe this Conclusion, before I come to the words themselves.

Though all outward occasions be taken away by truth, Luke 7.32.33.
yet still the spirit of the world will not justify but condomne Truth. Mat.
10, 12.


John comes neither eating nor drinking, they have something against him,
crying out he has a devil: Christ comes another way, and takes away that
occasion, for he comes eating and drinking, but that will not cause them to
affect Truth, but as they accuse the one, so they accuse the other: as Christ
said then, we may say now, The spirit of Saints are always too high, 16 or.
11.15.
or too low, in the judgment of the world: Acts 2.13.
If Saints rejoice in their soul refreshings they enjoy by Christ, then they
are drunk with new wine, or they say of them, as they said of John (in another
case) he has a devil; or if they groan under sin, then the world cries out
they are foolish or mad: and thus the spirit of the world will still except
against Truth, and they will seem to take offense at some external acting, to
rail against the internal glory of wisdom, saying, I was not against such
men and women as they were Godly (though the truth is, that is their chiefest
ground) but one cries out, I cannot love such a man or woman because they are
Presbyterians; others cries out they cannot affect such and such, because they
are Independents: this bitterness the Devil has cast in amongst men, and men
would seem to cover it, by laying the difference on the external form,
rather then in that spiritual difference that is betwixt them and Christ; but
the truth is, were all outward occasions in external forms removed, yet the
world cannot love, Mat. 10.22.
but must condemn Truth. Mark 13 13.


The first Reason is, Romans 8. 5.6, 7, 8, 9.
and the spirit of Saints: the one is the spirit of Christ, the other is the
spirit of the Devil: and this antipathy is expressed by God himself, Genesis
13.15. where he says, I have put enmity between the seed of the woman, and
the seed of the serpent; the seed of the serpent is the spirit of the world;
and the seed of the woman is Jesus Christ: The spirit of the world as it is
the worlds spirit, and the spirit of Christ, cannot close; therefore we may
take up those expression whom God has joined together none can separate; and
those spirits that God have separated none can join together.

Secondly, John 8.23.
they will hate that which is unlike themselves. Romans 8.5.


The third Reason which will further demonstrate the thing, is this, world, the
world will love them; but if Godly, the world will hate them, and the reason
is, because they are not of the world, Ioh. 15.19.

The first Use is to inform us, John because he eats not? Christ takes away
this occasion, and comes eating, yet their hatred is the same: If this be so:
then this shows the folly of those men that think because of an uniformity
without, they shall have peace with the spirits of the world: this clearly
discovers that these men understand not where the difference lies; it is not
in the form without, but in the spirit within.

This shows also the folly of those professors who thinketo gain the love of
the world, by changing their forms, which is impossible, if they appear
Godly; for if they appear Godly, either in a Presbyteriall or Independent
form, the world will hate you, or in the denial of either of them, you shall
enjoy no better: therefore for a conclusion, If any lire Godly in Christ Jesus,
they must suffer persecution. 2. Tim. 3.12.

The second Use is of Exhortation, Ioh. 15.18.20.
is truth hated in the Fountain, Mat. 10.24.25.
and do you think it shall be loved in the streams? it is impossible; does
the world hate Christ? and do the Saints think to be beloved of the world;
that is a contradiction; therefore this should also comfort those, who suffer
not as evildoers, but only for holding forth the truth of Christ; Let such
remember what a naturalist said in an other cause: It is the Crown of a wise
man to be hated of a fool, for speaking wisely; and I am sure the ground why
the world hates Saints, is because saints in their words and actions speak
forth the goodness and wisdom of God amongst men: God is pleased to work
great things in them, and great things by them; and we may say, when the world
scorns and imprisons Saints, as Christ said in another case, for which of the
good works that God has done in them do they imprison them? But they are
apt to excuse themselves, as the Jews did to Christ, saying, It is not for thy
good works, but because thou blasphemest: so they are apt to say, we do not
oppose or imprison you for any good wrought in you, or done by you; but because
you take upon you to declare the mind of God, and walk in this or that kind
of form in your professing God, as a Presbyteriam, or an Independent form: the
truth is, the world cannot bear the weight and worth of a Saints spirit,
though(poor souls) they think to cover themselves and their practices, Esa.
66.5.
with the aforementioned things, Luke 20.19, 20, 21.22.
yet God will one day uncover them: Mat. 10. 26.
but let this comfort Saints in the consideration, that though the world
condemns, yet Wisdom is justified of her children.

And so I come to the words of the text, which is a sweet affirmation; and we
may observe something from the party affirming, and the matter afterward, and
the manner of the affirming; with the occasion and the end of it: but we shall
draw up all into one conclusion, and that is this,

It is the property of the sons of wisdom, Luke 7.35.


For the better understanding of this conclusion, I shall observe this method,

First, To show you what is meant by wisdom.

Secondly, What is meant by justifying.

Thirdly, What is meant by wisdoms Children.

Fourthly, The Reasons why none but wisedoms children can justify wisdom.

Fifthly, The Use, and applycations.

First, Of the first, What is meant by wisdom, and in that we shall observe
two things,

First, Who it is, that is so called.

Secondly, The ground why he is so called.

First, Who it is, that is so called; It is the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
son of God, the elect of God, Esa. 42.1.
the delight of God, the express image of the Father, and he that calls
himself Wisdom, Proverbs 8. and is so called Proverbs 9.

The Reasons why he is so called are these.

First,

Secondly, John 14.6.
No man knovves the Father; but him to whom the son reveals him, Mat. 11.27.
and what ever the Father reveals to him, that he reveals to you, Ioh. 15.15.

Thirdly, looking upon him as in a glass, 2 Cor. 5.19. we savv God in Christ,
when once a soul is made wise by Christ, the object of his wisdom, is to
understand the mystery of the Father, in Christ; for no other way is God as a
father to be understood; and the truth is, when once the soul is enlightened
by Christ, he is so employed in the understanding of that mystery in Christ,
that all things besides Christ is clouded and out-gloryed by it: and so Christ
is wisdom as he is the object of wisdom.

Fourthly, He is wisdom, Not I, but Christ lives in me: for when once Christ
has enlightened a soul, he is then the life of that light, Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19.
employing that soul in the understanding of Divine Love: And so much for the
first thing: what is meant by wisdom.

The second thing is, what is meant by Justification: And in that consider two
things,

First, How we are not to understand Justification.

Secondly, How we are to understand it.

How we are not to understand it; the word Justify is taken many ways in
scripture.

First, Sometimes to make a thing just that was not so, and so God is said to
justify the ungodly, Romans 4.5. so wisdoms Children cannot justify wisdom.

Secondly, Sometimes to present men and actions just, when they are not so, and
this is the property of a wicked man, Prove. 17.15. who goes about to condemn
the righteous, and justify the wicked; Esa. 5.23.
neither of these ways can wisdoms Children justify wisdom. Luke 16.15.


Thirdly, But Justifying in this place, is to acknowledge a thing Just, that is
so; and so wisdoms Children are said to justify wisdom, by acknowledging
that in him, which is proper to him: and so also wisedoms Children by
conforming to him, do Justify or acknowledge the authority of the command
given out by him, and by their speaking or declaring him, they do acknowledge
or justify the excellency of the nature of him, or divine sweetness in him;
and thus wisdoms Children do justify wisdom; not by adding anything to
him, but by acknowledging what there is in him, or approving and owning what
there is done by him: and so much of the second thing.

The third thing is, what is meant by wisdoms Children.

According to Scripture we are to understand them these two ways.

First, Improperly, and so Relatively. Secondly, Properly, and so Really.
First, Improperly, and so Relatively, so all men and women that are brought
over to believe in him, are called sons and daughters, and so they are sons
and daughters adopted, and that which gives them the denomination of Christians
or Sons, is because they are elected in the election of Gods electing Christ,
or Christianizing by Christ, that which makes Christ a Christ, makes Christians
to be Christians, Christ signifies anointed, so that unction or anointing of
Christ, gives Christ that denomination of being called Christ, so the name of
Christ has relation to, and flows from the anointing, and so that which
gives a man or woman to be called a Christian, is the unction or anointing
they receive from the holy one, 1 John 2.20. Christ being one with the Deity,
is the natural Son; Pet. 1.1, 4.
we partaking of the Deity by him, Gal. 4.5.
are adopted sons.

But that which is properly the son of wisdom, or the son of Christ, is the
anointing unction, or spirit which is within, which is not only caused by
Christ, but is one with Christ; it is not another spirit, but the same spirit,
Romans 8.9.1 Joh. 4.13. and may properly be called wisdoms child, for these
reasons,

First, It is conceived in the womb of him.

Secondly, It is brought forth by him.

Thirdly, It is one with him.

Fourthly, It lives by influences of him.

Fifthly, It looks like him.

For the first, It is conceived in the womb of him, which expression is
metaphorically and not to be understood carnally, but spiritually, and I do
express my self thus, because that all light, love, life and anointing, that
is in time brought home to saints and revealed in saints was before time by
God, Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
conserved and laid up in Christ for saints, 2 Timothy 1.9.10.

Secondly, It is brought forth by Christ; and so Christ is not only the
fountain in which good is retained for us, but is also the way to communicate
good to us; therefore he calls himself the way, Ioh. 14.6. he is the way to
bring down the Father, and what is in the Father to us, and also to bring us
up through himself to the Father, by his spirit, which knows God, and is
known of God.

Thirdly, It is one with Christ: Psalm. 133.^.
The annointment which was poured out upon Aarons head, and ran down to the
skirts of his garments, held forth the anointing of Christ and Christians; the
anointing that was upon the garments, was one with that which was upon the
head, so that unction or anointing which is in us, Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
is one with that unction or anointing of Christ: Christ is the public
person elected by God, and all that are elected, are elected in his Elections;
so Christ is the public person anointed by God; and all that are anointed,
are anointed by Christ, and from the anointing of Christ, and not only as a
thing caused by it, but as that which is one with it.

Fourthly, it lives by influences and incomes of him: Every effect is
maintained by the in-comes of the first cause; that which is caused by a heat
or light natural, cannot be maintained and carried on by a heat or light
artificial: So that life in Saints which is produced by a sublime cause, or the
springing forth of the Father through the Son, cannot be maintained and carried
on by a sublunary and transitory thing; for that soul which Christ has spread
his skirt of love over, and revealed his Son in, is of a more noble life, then
for the glory and smiles of creatures to maintain: Does creatures frown, if
Christ smiles the heart lives: Psalm. 4.6.7. and 17.14, 12
Does creature oppress Saints with Thorns, and Christ deck them with crowns:
a Saints spirit cannot die; the reason is, because Saints though they live in
the world, yet they live by influences of that love and light, which the world
is not capable of, 1 Cor. 2, 11, 14.
nor by all their opposition can cause an obstruction in. Ioh. 16.33.
Habacuk 3.16, 17.

Fifthly, It looks like him, Adam begat a son like unto himself; so that child
or son of Wisdom which is in the heart of Saints, looks like Jesus Christ; and
as Christ is the Image of the Father, Hebr. 1.2.
this is the Image of the Son: 1 Cor. 15.49.
and thus Saints are said not only to bear the Image of the Earthly, but
likewise of the Heavenly: this is the cause why Christ delights to behold the
face of Saints, Cant. 2.14. and a Saint loves to behold the face of Christ;
Can. 6, 12.
Christ beautifies a Saint with his own beauty, Ezekiel. 16.14. and then he loves
to behold his own beauty in a Saints spirit; every thing loves its like; this
is the cause of so much soul-feasting in a Saints spirit; even this, they are
beheld by Christ, and are employed in the beholding of Christ, and so much of
this thing, what is meant by wisdoms children.

Now the reason why none but wisdoms children can justify wisdom, are these.

First, Ioh. 15.21.
but none understand wisdom but wisdoms sons, 1 John 3.1.
therefore none but wisdoms sons can justify wisdom.

Its true, that many may from the outward teaching of Christ; declare something
of Christ; but they alone truly understand him, that live in him, and truly and
really understand that excellency and divine sweetness that is proper to him;
therefore they only can truly justify him.

Secondly, to acknowledge; and that is the cause why the men of the world are
so far from justifying, that they condemn Christ, though not under the notion
of his name, yet it is his name both in himself and saints that the world
condemns.

Thirdly, All other spirits beside the spirit of Saints, is so far from being
capable of justifying, that they are altogether condemners of that Light which
is come into the World: John 3.19.
Darkness cannot justify Light; nor evil will not justify good; no more can
the spirit of wicked men justify Christ; its true that light takes advantage
by darkness for the further displaying of its own glory, but this is to
honor it self by it, and not to receive honor from it; so Jesus Christ in the
glorious displayings of life and love, takes an advantage even of wicked men,
leaving of them without excuse, but its only proper to them that know, and
have power from, and are one with wisdom, to justify wisdom; and so much for
the reasons.

The Use is of Information, be drawn from the particular terms in the
conclusion, and I shall draw them forth by way of brief conclusions or
consectaries; every particular admitting of a particular consectarie; as thus:

First, I told you what wisdom was, It Is Christ: And why he is called Wisdom;
He may be so called under these considerations.

First, He is the Fountain retaining:

Secondly, He is the way causing.

Thirdly, He is the Object employing.

Fourthly, He is wisdom essentially, as the life of a Saints light: From which
four reasons we may observe these four consectaries, or conclusions.

First, Consect. 1.
There is no wisdom in Saints, but what was first in Christ for them Ioh. 1.9.16
.

Secondly, Consect. 2.
None can truly understand the mystery of the Father, Mat. 11.27.
but by the Son. John. 15.15.
Or thus,

The understanding of the Father, John 14.5.
is the work of the Son.

Thirdly, Consect 3.
That soul that is made wise by Christ, Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19.
is employed in the understanding of the mystery of the Father in Christ: Gal.
2.20.
Or thus, Christ is the object of a Saints wisdom.

Fourthly, Consect. 4. ohn 1.4. oh. 14.19.
That light in saints which truly flows from Christ as Christ, the life of
that light is Christ.

I shall make use of these four conclusions-together: as thus, Coloss. 2.9.
That Christ is all in all to a saints spirit; Colos. 3.11.
What have thou which thou have not received? and what way receivest thou but
by Christ? and if so, 1 Cor. 4.7.
then give the sole and whole glory of that thy wisdom to Christ: John 14.6.
There is no such ingratitude as this, for men not to return an acknowledgement
to him from whence all flows: to glory in our own, as Christ, is a great sin
against Christ; but to make that to be ours which is proper to Christ, so as to
give the glory of that good to our selves, Ezekiel. 16.15, 16, 17.
or to any thing else besides Christ, is, and will be taken unkindly by him.

The second Use is of singular comfort to all saints; John 14.7.
is the object of thy eye; This is that which out-gloryeth all glory below it
self; This supplies thee with all good, when all things depart from thee but it
self: Those streams can never grow dry, whose fountain always flows forth to
fill them; That heart can never be at alosse, who is always employed amongst,
and in the enjoyment of eternal gains: This should therefore in an eminent
sense comfort all Saints: It should also comfort you against all the
oppositions you meet with in the world; Do men labor to interrupt the
conveyance of light? Who can do it, if Christ causes, as the beginnings, so the
increase of light in them? What if men darken expressions, and do what they can
to cloud the Truth? Ezekiel. 34.15, 16.
If Christ be the convayer of Truth, who can let? Therein rejoice.

The next Use is an Use of Reproof to those who glory much in enjoying light
from Christ, Beholdings of, and in affection to the Lord Jesus; but rather use
their parts as a way to cloud Christ, Ezekiel. 34.3, 4, 5.
and scorn Christians; then honor Christ, and inform Christians, These men
are not yet come to that mountain that makes the earth silent; they are not
come to that glory, wisdom, and light, that is peaceable, meek, and teachable;
Iam. 3.1^.
but rather are possessed with the rough streams of their own fancy, which
endeavors to condemn all that suits not with, and are not conformable to the
will of themselves; far from the mind of Paul, who says, If any man be
otherwise minded, God will reveal it to him in due time: Phil, 3.15. But they
endeavor rather with clubs and staves to make men conformable without light;
then with meekness of Spirit to give forth light, and by that light to produce
conformity. But no more of that thing.

The next consectary arises from the second particular, Consect.
what is meant by Justifying? I told you it was not to add any thing to Christ,
or to present Christ in any way of glory or beauty that was not proper to him,
and real in him: but it is to acknowledge that in him, which is proper to him;
Thence observe, that Christ receives no additional glory by saints
acknowledgements, Job 22.2, 3. and 35.7.
though Christ calls it a glory to him, when the glory in himself by saints is
acknowledged, yet it adds nothing to him, but only does acknowledge what
before was in him.

If so, cannot be exalted, Coloss. 3.4.
but a saint is exalted too; 1 John 3.^.
but it is the very exaltation of Christ, that is a Saints exaltation, and
nothing else; Therefore let this teach us, while we exalt him, to lie low
before him, knowing that we give nothing to him, Ephesians. 3.7, 8.
but what is his due; and do nothing before him, but what is our duty; which
becomes a saint.

Secondly, justifying wisdom, that they condemn wisdom, by setting up some
power either above him, or else with him, that is not proper to him: this is
the practice of most men in our days, who center the authority of Christ in
the power of creatures; and are so far from Justifying saints when they conform
to Christ, that they censure saints in their conformity, by the name of
Heretics, and Schismatics: But its no new thing, the Popish Bishops in Queen
Maryes time, censured other ministers and Bishops that were more purely minded,
and when those Bishops that suffered got power, they did the same to them that
were more pure reformers: and what if those that were more pure Reformers then
their persecutors, should get power, and persecute them that endeavor to walk
more exactly then themselves? think it not strange, but remember that Wisdom is
justified only of her children.

The third Use is of Exhortation, justify wisdom is only to acknowledge that
in him, which is proper to him? Let this exhort all those that profess
themselves sons of Wisdom, to acknowledge that in Christ, which is proper to
Christ; 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.
and let this acknowledgement be both in your speaking and doing; John 15.14.
speaking of him, and acknowledging what is in him; by conforming to him, to
show the authority of him. What if men shall oppose, and powers resist? The sun
gains most glory, when it meets with the darkest cloud: Christ never is
advanced more by saints, then when men persecute and oppose saints for
professing of him, light is most glorious in the darkest night, the purest gold
shines most glorious amongst the filthiest dross, Cant. 2.^.
the Lilly is most lovely when among Thorns; therefore saints should be so far
from covering themselves, and clouding Christ in times of adversity, that they
should rather profess him much the more, knowing its their duty to justify,
and this is to justify, to acknowledge him, which they do by their declaring
of him, Mat. 10.27.
and conforming to him, and so much of that thing.

The third thing I named to you was, what is meant by wisdoms children? I told
you it is either taken Relatively, and so improperly; or Really, and so
properly: Relatively, 1 John 3.2.
and so all men and women possessed with Christ, and elected in Christ, Romans
3.14.
and called by Christ; in relation to that election, calling, and enjoyment,
are called sons and daughters: But that which is properly the son of wisdom,
and gives them the denomination of sons and daughters, is that unction, or
spirit, or anointing within, which they receive from the holy one 1 John 2.27.
For as the anointing of Christ gives him the title of being called Christ, so
saints being possessed with the unction, and spirit, and anointing of Christ,
that gives them the title of being called Christians; Christ being one with the
Deity, is the natural Son, we through him partaking of the Deity, are the
adopted sons; our sonship is in relation to, and flows from this spirit and
unction that is in us: and I told you this may be called wisdoms child, or
son, for these reasons.

First, Its conceived in the womb of him.

Secondly, Its brought forth by him.

Thirdly, Its one with him.

Fourthly, It lives by influences of him.

Lastly, It looks like him.

From these five, observe these five consectaries.

First, That the womb of Christ is a magazine of grace and glory; Consect. 1.
I told you the word is a metaphorical expression, and must not be understood
carnally, but spiritually; by the womb of Christ, I mean the bosom of the son,
2 Timothy 1, 9.
in which the father conceives all good for saints: Mat. 3.17.
and I call it a magazine, John 1.16.
because all flows from him; and all must, and is to be returned to him; a
magazine, because there is not only a few, Col. 1.19.
but varieties of all glories, and treasures for the sons of men, as power,
wisdom, strength, love, and light, and all other desirable good.

If this be so, the use is first, hidden Treasure: streams may be measured, 1
Ioh. 2, ^.
but fountains cannot be comprehended: Col. 3.3.
beams may be limited, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22:
but the body is incomprehensible: This is the portion of all saints, not only
to have a handful, but even a magazine of all good: and this should comfort us
in these things.

First, in this, That we can never draw our portion dry; its a Magazine: and a
magazine of grace and glory: what is there wanting to saints, but there is in
Christ enough to supply it? what storms or clouds soever arise over us, there
is enough strength in the beautiful beams of the glorious son to expel it: not
only a supply for some, but for all; for Christ is a magazine. And secondly,
this should comfort us, not only at sometimes, but at all times: a Magazine
that stands open; That is so far from being gamed by entreaties, that he
entreats and allures us, Zech. 13.1.
and in those allurings he gains us to himself: 2 Cor. 5.20.
methinks saints that are thus enriched, should never be sad: what can thou
desire more then varieties of all things? what portion is better then that,
where there is a want of nothing?

If this be so, let the next Use be an Use of Exhortation, first to saints, and
then to the world.

First to saints, David, Psalm. 118.11. They compass me about like Bees, but in
the Name of the Lord will I destroy them.

It also serves to exhort the world, to desert their foolish practice in
endeavoring to draw the spirits of saints dry, or cause the hearts of saints
to be daunted: should you see men go about to dry up a fountain, or overturn
mountains, you would think they were mad: the same we may say of your
proceedings against saints, wherein you think by your endeavors to crush, Acts
4.18.
and so overcome the practice and cheerful proceedings of saints, Acts 5.18, 28.
in the acknowledgment of Christ, you are much mistaken: when did the
Israelites increase more, then when they were most oppressed? when does the sun
appear more glorious, then when it is surrounded with many clouds? The Kingdom
of God (says Christ) suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. Mat.
11.12.

Let me speak to some of these men thus, did the Bishops that persecuted them
that were stricter then themselves in reforming, gain by it, or were they lost
in it? when the Church of Jerusalem was most persecuted, the Gospel most
flourished: and what think you, will truth appear less or more glorious by your
opposings? sin rises most violent, when most bound up by a law; what then will
virtue do, which cannot be destroyed by any power or law, but are maintained
and fed by a power and law suitable to it self? cease therefore your opposings,
remembering that it is in vain to kick against the pricks. Acts 9.4, 5.
And so much of this consectary.

The second consectary is drawn from the second thing, Consect. 2.
Its brought forth by him; Thence observe, That all good that is in saints, was
not only conceived in Christ before time, but is brought forth by him in time;
Christ is the way, John 14.6. The way to bring down God to us, and to make
returns of us to God; God has no way nor Conduit to convay life, light, and
love to the sons of men, but by his Son.

If so, to God, by the worlds oppositions; Its a vain conception, Romans ^.38, 39.
who can intercept the Father, who works in the Son.

Secondly, other ways I name them not, only speak a word to your ignorant
legalists, who seek consolation and refreshment of spirit by some other way
then Christ, which they do, when they expect joy from doing, and do not expect
their doing to flow from joy: They expect qualifications of good, and so to
believe, and then go to Christ, but do not expect believing and all
qualifications to flow from Christ: Take heed of such conceits, this is to
kindle a fire, Isa. ^0.10, 11.
and compass your selves about with sparks: God ownes no way but his Son,
Therefore joy in him, and power to conform to him, you must expect only to
flow from him. And so much of this thing.

The next consectary arises from the third thing, Consect. 5.
Its one with him; From hence observe, That the Spirit, and Unction in Saints,
and the Spirit and Unction in Christ, is not two, but One Spirit; Rom 8.9.1
John 4.13. That anointing that was poured upon Aarons head, Psalm. 133.2.
was one with that anointing that was upon the skirts of his garment, it was
produced by one cause, it flowed from one sountain, it was of one nature.

If so, undaunted be arts, and unspotted lives: with undaunted hearts,
remembering the words of the Apostle, Who can harm you? If God justified, who
shall condenin you? Romans 8.34. Its the property of a low spirit to be daunted
at the threats of fools, and the property of a beggarly spirit to stand in
dread of every inferior power, so as to hinder them in their actings to the
Lord Jesus Christ; Though saints are to own (and its their duty so to do) all
power and authority that is of God, Romans 13.1.
and because it is of God, as all civil power in civil things is; and therefore
I speak not for the Saints dis-owning of it, but all honoring of it in civil
things: but my meaning is, when any power of men, or things, should come in a
daring way to daunt the spirits of saints, for saints to be daunted thereby in
their proceedings toward Christ, Mat. 10.28.
is beggarly: Acts 4.19.
does Christ our beloved, come leaping over the hills, and skipping over the
mountains? and shall saints stumble at a straw? Its not commendable.

And as in your undaunted spirits, so in your unspotted lives, as saints ought
not to bow down to powers sinful, 1 John 2.1.
so in no way to close with the power of sin, 2 Cor. 7.1.
being it clouds their spirits; Methinks those that are Saints, Romans 6.1.2.
should be employed in a higher enjoyment, and things of a more noble nature,
then in transgressing the law of their God. The Apostle says, How shall we that
are dead to sin, live any longer therein? And their being dead to sin, was
through Grace abounding: Romans 6.2.
and shall the grace abounding toward us, and in us, not kill sin, but rather
give us liberty to sin? God forbid:let it never be said, there is a man of
liberty by Christ, and yet walks loosly before Christ; Gal. 5.13.
I know it cannot be; for liberty by him rightly enjoyed, is the strongest law
and tie conforming us to him.

This also should teach the world to cease their under-valuing of the saints
spirits, knowing that its one with the spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ; and
Christ says, He that despises you, despises me: Luke 10.16. Were the world
well skilled in the weight and worth of a saints spirit, they would never
slight it; and were they well skilled in the understanding of the nobleness and
heroickness in the spirits of saints, they would never seek to daunt it: As oil
feeds the flames, so does opposition cause grace to advance it self:
Oppositions are so far from taking away the glory of saints, that saints gain
advantage by those oppositions to appear more beautiful: Therefore (oh poor
men) remember that saints are men of a noble spirit, Dan. 3.16.17.
more noble then to be daunted by you; Dan. 6.10.
more heroic then to be hindered in their proceedings toward Christ by any
scorns and derisions given out by you, Acts 4.20.
and so much of that conclusion.

The next consectarie arises from the fourth thing, Consect. 4.
It lives by influences of him. John 15.5.
Thence observe, That all souls made one with Christ, John 14.1^.
lives alone by in-comes of Christ. Every thing is maintained by the in-comes
of the first cause producing; That life that is caused by natural heat, if
natural heat deserts, an artificial heat will not maintain: Christ was the
first cause communicating life to saints, Influences of his glory, light, and
love, is that alone that can preserve the life of saints. By incoms, I mean
those secret distillings of divine loves, which are distilled by Gods secret
expostulations with saints spirits.

But in this I pray give me leave to tell you, that there are some secret ways
of deceit, even in this thing, as thus, men may have some great refreshing in
duties, ordinances, and opportunities, their spirits being lifted up, and
employed in rejoicing in some thing which they conceive is Jesus Christ, and
that it flows from secret incoms of Christ, which is nothing less: And this is
that which makes people to be so full of joy, as those that heard the Doctrine
of John, John 5.35. and afterward lose all, and are nothing at all.

But for the better unfolding of my self, let me a little discover what I mean
by those secret incoms that refresh men's spirits, that seem to be true, and yet
are false; I shall present to you these three.

First, The apprehension in a man's spirit, apprehending a sutableness betwixt
an Act, Mat. 19.20.
and a Rule; This is proper only to Legalists, Luke 18.31, 12.
who have rejoyceing, but it does arise from, and consists in their
apprehending of a sutableness betwixt an act and a rule.

If you ask me whether or no we may not rejoice when we conform to the will of
Christ?

I answer, Its one thing to rejoice in an act, and another thing to draw our
joy from an act: Its one thing to rejoice in our suitable walking up to a Rule,
and another thing to draw our joy and refreshing from the apprehension of a
sutableness betwixt the act and the rule: men may pray and mourn for sin, or
perform any other particular duty, and have much joy in that opportunity, and
yet not draw their joy from it, but only their joy is distilled by a secret
incom of Christ, which carries them above it, while they are acted in it: but
these poor souls they only are joyful when they see they act suitable to a
Rule, and they draw their joy from that sutableness, which appears in this,
that if their sutableness flagg, their joy is destroyed: I do not say but that
every sin ought to produce sorrow in us, but its one thing to mourn for sin,
enjoying Faith, with Peace: and another thing to mourn for sin to confirm
Faith, and to beget Peace; But I say no more of that.

Secondly, another corrupt of false income that seems to betrue, is in men that
may profess themselves to be possessed with a higher light, even the light of
the mystery of the Father in the Son, and the riches and treasure of the
Gospel: They in their apprehensions may have much refreshing and joy; and yet
false; and the corruptness lies here, they only have refreshings from
understanding the largeness of their apprehensions, Glorying in their own
wisdom. Ior. 9.23.
and not from the thing apprehended; They only have gained light in knowing
truth, as they conceive, and therein rejoice: but their joy is in their bare
apprehending, and not in their living in the glory of what is apprehended;
These men's condition is more desperate then the former, for the higher men grow
up in their own thoughts knowing Truth, and yet do not purely live in the real
enjoyment of Truth, which is the matter known, but barely in the largeness of
their knowing; This comes near to the refreshings of saints, which they enjoy
from the incoms of Christ purely: for they enjoy refreshing and influences by
Beholding, and in the act of beholding; but it is not from their apprehension,
but it flows from the thing apprehended; and that is the reason why they are
fools when they are most employed in the beholdings of the wisdom of the Father
in the Son. But so much of that thing.

Thirdly, Men may have false incoms not only from the apprehensions of a
sutableness betwixt an act and a rule, and from their apprehensions, and not
the thing apprehended; But they may also have false incoms from the thing
apprehended; when they do not only rejoice in, and draw their joy from their
apprehension, but also the object apprehended; as thus, when they rejoice only
in the Newness of the Object, and not the excellency of the nature of it: Many
men rejoiced not only in their apprehending Christ when he came into the
world, but in the matter apprehended; But it was the Newness of the Object, and
not the excellency of the Nature thereof that they rejoiced in; And these are
they which the Lord speaks of Ezekiel. 33.32. where he tells Ezekiel, Thou art unto
them as one that can sing well, and they delight to hear thee. While he was
new, he was matter of joy: and so was John to the Jews: Now then herein is a
great deceit in the heart of men, John 5.35.
they may be wrapped up and ravished with, not only the largenest of their
apprehensions, but the newness of the thing apprehended, and yet both false:
But a saints refreshment flows from the excellency and glory of what he
apprehends; and that is the cause why a saint never grows weary of viewing,
and never flaggs in his delight and joy in his Beholding, but runs more sure at
last, then at first: like a bowl that is cast out of a man's hand, though it
runs violently at first, yet afterward more soberly, and a great deal more
sure: So saints may be carried on with a great deal of violence at first,
because they are carried on, as from the excellency of the Nature of, so from
the Newness of the Object apprehended; but the apprehension of the Nevvness in
a sense does cease: but the excellency of the Nature of the thing apprehended
and enjoyed, does not cease, but increase daily. Now therefore consider (dear
friends) Have ye refreshings and soul revivings, are they false or true? are
they such as are proper only to saints? or to men that are yet unacquainted
with Jesus Christ? Consider, does not your Joy flow from one of these three
things, either the sutableness apprehended betwixt an Act and a Rule; or the
largeness of your apprehensions, and not the thing apprehended; Or from the
newness of the Object, and not the glorious nature of it? If it do, it will one
day fail. But if it be purely from Christ; leading out your soul in all
conformity, to live above all upon Christ, it will never cease.

If you ask me what signs or symptoms there may be to discover this pure, and
true in-comes of Christ, which is the cause of refreshments in saints from all
other. I answer, These in-comes where they are, try all things, and cannot be
made manifest by any thing without it self: though it does show it self in
things, yet those things does not manifest it to us, or to the spirit where it
dwells: though it self manifests it self by those things to others: But to us
it does manifest the truth of it self, and the truth of those things that flow
from it: though its true that all souls that enjoy such in-comes, are always
carried out to lie low before God, with sweet heart endeerings to God, and with
a sweet upright walking before God; yet they do not know these in-comes by
first knowing the truth of these effects, but they know the truth of both from
it self: In a word, whosoever enjoyes these refreshings, finds this thing that
I now speak of: wheresoever Christ comes in, self goes out, though self appears
more then ever, and stirs with more motion then ever; yet the soul is
confounded in himself for being selfish, and lies low in that understanding
before God; All filling refreshments, empties the soul of all self fullness. But
I say no more, Only the Lord give us to understand this, That souls possessed
with Christ, only live by influences of Christ.

The Use is to inform us of the folly of men, they have bread that you know
not of; Remember that Christ communicates light and life in a hidden way; There
are secret distillings of Christ's love, that is full of power, which produces
more life, then your threatenings and scorns can produce death: Their bottle of
oil, and their barrel of meal in the use of it increases daily: endeavor ye (o
men) to detract from it; it is Christ's way to communicate to it; If you
endeavor to empty, and Christ fill, who (think you) will be weary first? and
betwixt both who is he that gains? It Is a poor soul that lives by Christ,
nay lives in Christ, Col. 3.3.
he is one with Christ, Romans 8.33.34.
and cannot be destroyed, if Christ be maintained. And so much of that
Consectary.

In the last place the Consectary is drawn from the last particular, Consect. 5.
It looks like him: Adam begot a son like unto himself; The Unction and
Spirit in Saints is of Christ, Its one with Christ, It lives by Christ, It
looks like Christ: And that is the cause why Saints love to behold Christ, and
Christ loves to behold them: The soul cries out (Cant. 5.) Where is he whom my
soul loves? and Christ calls out (Cant. 2.) Let me hear thy voice, Let me see
thy Countenance, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance comely.

If this be so, then consider the condition of Saints, Cant. 2.14. and 6.13.
and the condition of the world; The condition of Saints, Christ loves to
behold them, and they love to behold Christ, They are like each other: The
condition of the world, who think one day to delight in the beholdings of
Christ, and are now oppressed in the beholdings holdings of Saints: does the
beams oppress you, and will the body refresh you? Is the streams a scorn, and
shall the fountain be a delight? It Is a strange thing, John says (1 Ioh. 4.20.
( He that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God,
whom he has not seen? But I say no more.

I should now draw something from the reasons, and also make use of the point
in general; But I shall say only thus much, Wisdom is justified of her
Children: Let Saints expect that Christ should be justified by no other: Let
them not think it strange, ^ Pet. 4.12.
if they be condemned by all others: The Pharisees cannot own Truth, neither
in John nor in Christ: Do you think the world should now affect Truth? It Is
also impossible; Therefore for Conclusion of all, remember that Wisdom is
justified of her Children.

FINIS.

