THE VALLEY OF VISION, OR A clear sight of sundry sacred Truths.
Delivered in Twenty-one Sermons; by that Learned and Reverend Divine, RICHARD
HOLSVVORTH, Dr. in Divinity, sometimes Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, Master of
Emanuel College, and late Preacher at Peter's Poor in LONDON.

The particular Titles and Texts are set down in the next lease.

1 Samuel 3.1. And the word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no
open Vision.

Habakkuk 2.2. Write the Vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that he may
run that reads it.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. and are to be sold by R. Tomlins at the Sun and Bible
in Pye-Corner; and Rob. Littlebury at the Unicorn in Little-Britaine. 1651.

The particular Titles and Texts in the ensuing work.
The Peoples happiness. One Sermon on Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that people,
that is in such a Case, yea happy is that people whose God is the Lord. The
Penitents Pattern. Six Sermons on Hosea 14.2. Take with you words, and turn
to the Lord, say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously:
so will we render the calves of our lips. The Sufferers Crown. Four Sermons
on Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is tried
he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him. The Saints Heritage. One Sermon on Psalm. 119.111. Thy testimonies
have I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart.
David's Devotion. One Sermon on Psalm. 119.48. My hands also will I lift up unto
thy Commandments, which I have loved, and will meditate on thy Statutes. The
Vigilant Servant. Two Sermons on Psalm. 123.2. Behold, as the eyes of servants
look unto the hand of their Masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand
of her Mistress: so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have
mercy upon us. The Saints Progress. Two Sermons on Psalm. 84.7. They go from
strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appears before God. The
Guest-Chamber. Two Sermons on Luke 23.11.12. And ye shall say unto the good man
of the house, the Master says unto thee, Where is the Guest-Chamber, where I
shall eat the Passover with my Disciples.

And he shall show you a large upper room furnished, there make ready.

Angels Inspection. Two Sermons on 1 Pet. 1.1 2. Which things the Angels desire
to look into.
TO THE READER.
HOw eminent an instrument the Author of this Treatise was, of Gods glory, and
the Churches good, is unknown to none, who in the least degree were acquainted
with his person, and profitable pains. They knew him to be composed of a
learned Head, a gracious heart, a bountiful hand, and (what must not be
omitted) a patient back, comfortably, and cheerfully to endure such heavy
afflictions as were laid upon him.

The more pity therefore it was that so worthy a man should dye issulesse,
without leaving any Books behind him, for the benefit of Learning and Religion.
Considering what might be the cause thereof, it cannot be imputed to any envy
in him as grudging us the profit of his pains (one so open handed of his
Alms, could not be close fisted of his labors, for a general good) Rather it
proceeded, partly from his modesty, having the highest parts in himself, and
the lowest opinion of himself; Partly from his judicious observation, that the
world now a days surfets with Printed Sermons, 1 Kin. 10.21.
which like Silver in the reign of Solomon, are not respected by some they are
so plentiful, whilst they are abused by others, who lazily imp their wings
with other ^ens plum^ wherewith they soar high in common esteem; yet have not
the ingenuity with that son of the Prophet to confess; 2 Kin. 6.5.
Alas! it was borrowed.

As for the private notes which he left behind him, as Aristotle told Alexander
of his physics, that he had written them as if he had not written them;
meaning that the language was so dark and obscure, that few could understand
it: so, his hand was only legible to himself, and almost useless for a^ her.

Yet that the world might not totally be deprived of his worthy endeavors, I
trust, his pains will meet with commendations in most, with just censure in
none, who being exquisite in the Art of Short-Writing (the only way to
retre^ve winged words, and fix them to stay amongst us) has with all possible
accuratenesse first taken, and now set them forth (by the permission (as I am
credibly informed) of the Authors best friends) to public view. I say possible
accuratenesse, seeing a candid Reader knows how to make his charitable
allowances, in things of this nature.

It is said of Demosthenes, that the best part of his Orations were wanting
when they were read; because the Orator when uttering them, enlivened each
sentence, word, and syllable with a true tone, and proper accent in his
pronunciation. Two best parts then may be said to be wanting in Dr. Holsworths
Sermons. One, because read, and not spoken by him; the other, because not
transcribed from his own copy, but taken from his mouth when he preached them,
as well as Art and industry can perform.

Indeed, when the Mother looked upon the Babe which was laid by her, 1 Kin.
3.21.
Behold it was not the Son which she did bear. But should this glorious Saint
take a review of these Sermons as now set forth; as he would probably wonder at
the alteration of the clothes, and dressing thereof not so fine and
fashionable: yea, perchance m^^^t wonder at the complexion, and color thereof,
not so lively, sprightfull and vigorous as he left it: yet notwithstanding he
would acknowledge an identity of feature and favor, and his natural sympathy
would challenge a true relation in the same, and own it for a true offspring
of his own, a weak child, but no changling.

How ever, it is a happiness, when s^rviving Authors, see their own works
set forth to their (...) contentment. Various were the proceedings in Divine
providence to two honorable Families, the one in Ireland, the other in Wales,
The Family of St. Laurence of Hoath by Dublin, Camdens Brit. in the County of
Dublin.
has for some hundreds of years been observed, never to have an Orphan, or
Minor, the Son always being of full age before the Fathers death; Whereas
amongst the ancient Earls of Pembrook for five descents together, the Son
never saw the Father. The felicity of the former, Idem in Pembrook-Shire.
is applyable to those who behold their own Books perfected, and finished in
their life times: Whilst I read the sad success of the latter, in such whose
posthume books appear in this world after their Authors are gone into a
better. To such books that want Fathers, I wish good guardians, as I hope this
has not light on the worst of them.

What remains, but that we wish the Reader all profit by the ensuing Treatise
of so worthy an Author, equalled by few, exceeded by none in our age. It is
sadly recorded of Paul and Barnabas, the contention was so sharp betwixt them,
that they departed one from another. Whose difference is thus moralized by
some, who observed Saint Paul a great Doctor, a Controversall divine, Saint
Barnabas, a good man, and comfortable Preacher (therefore called the Son of
consolation) that skill in Schoole-Divinity, and practical profitable
preaching, seldom agree in the same person. But if ever they were reconciled
to the height in any of our Nation, it was in the worthy Author of these
works; by which that thou may reap benefit is the hearty desire and prayer
of

Thy servant in Christ Jesus, THO. FULLER.

The Peoples Happiness. A SERMON PREACHED IN St. MARY'S IN CAMBRIDGE, Upon
Sunday the 27 of March, being the day of His MAJESTY'S happy Inauguration: By
RI. HOLDSVVORTH D. D. Master of Emanuel College in Cambridge, Vicechancellour
of the Universitie, and one of His MAJESTY'S Chaplains.

Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the University of Cambridge, Anno Dom.
1642.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
I Had not adventured to bring these unpolished meditations into the public
light, much less to have set them before the Sun, but that Your Majesty was
pleased to becken them to Your self, and to draw them as by Your own beams, so
under Your own shade into Your Royal Presence, that being first animated with
the gentleness of Your beams, they might not be dazzled with the splendor.
Neither is this the least of Your Princely excellencies, Matthew. 8.1.
that You please as Christ in the Gospel, to come down from the Mount, for the
more free access of Your people; and know, with Moses, to put the vail of
Goodness over the shinings of Majesty, so that the meanest of Your subjects
may be refresht with the light of Your countenance notwithstanding the luster,
and draw livelihood from the splendor, through the serenitie, finding the
medium of their happiness as well as the object to be, under God, in Your
Self. It is not to be expected at this present, that the irradiations of this
light should be so vigorous in a cloudy Region: we now see to our grief what a
misery it is to have the Royal influence intercepted as of late it has been,
and still is, by those disastrous obstructions, which at first had only the
appearance of Elia's cloud, 1. Kings 18.44.
like the hand of a man; but are since grown to that vastness, as they
threaten to the whole Kingdom such ruin as our sins call for: Yet in the
midst of these sad distractions, it is Your Majesty's comfort, that as their
occasions are from below, so their disposal is from above, both for the
exercise of Your Princely clemency and patience, and for the trial of the
sincerest loyalty of Your subjects; yea, and religious hearts, through all
these clouds, can discern, and do with thankfulness acknowledge the saying of
Solomon to be most true, Prove. 16.15.
In the light of the Kings countenance there is life: the life of the whole
State, that it may happily rise to the former glory, wherein it so long
flourished: the life of the Church, that it may recover out of this sad
languishing condition into which it is brought: the life of the Universities,
that they may fruitfully spread forth their numerous branches to all parts of
the Land: Lastly, the life of this small inconsiderable Tractate in as many
degrees, as Nature has bestowed it upon man; in that Your Majesty vouchsafed,
first to require a copy in writing, then to command it to the Press, then to
afford it Your Patronage, whilst it presents to the world some little
portion of that great happiness, which this eighteen years we have enjoyed,
under your blessed government. I wish the Argument had had a better workman,
but what is defective in the Sermon, shall be supplied by my prayers, That the
happiness hereafter spoken of, howsoever it be now eclipsed, may again shine
forth in full strength, through Your Majesty's great prudence; whose Royal
beams as they are powerful for the fostering of piety, so I hope they shall be
powerful also for the dispelling of all foggie vapors, that may hazard either
to prejudice the welfare of Your people, or to pervert their alleigance. Which
as it has been hitherto untainted, to the envy of other Nations and honor of
our own: So, that it may be always inviolably preserved, is the daily prayer of

Your Majesty's humblest subject and servant, Ri. Holdsworth.

PSALM 144.15. Happy is that people that is in such a case: yea, happy is that
people whose God is the LORD.


THe Genius of this Scripture, as it is very graceful and pleasing in it self,
so it is also very suitable to the respects of this day, on which we are met
together. It presents unto us what we all partake of, if we be so well disposed
as to see it, F^licitie or Happiness. And if a single happiness be too
little, behold it is conveyed in two streams; the silver stream, and the
golden. It is reached forth, as it were, in both the hands of Providence. There
is the happiness of the left hand, which is Civil, in the first clause of the
words; and the happiness of the right, which is Divine and Religious, in the
second. Answerable to these are the two welcome aspects of this day: the Civil
aspect or reference, which arises from the annual revolution, as it is Dies
Principis, a day of solemnity for the honor of the King: and the Religious
aspect from the weekly revolution, as it is Dies Dominica, a day of devotion
for the worship of God. In these there is so evident a correspondence, that I
cannot but congratulate, both the day to the text, and the text to the day, in
regard of their mutual complications. For we have, on the one side, both
clauses of the text in the day: and on the other, both references of the day in
the text. Happiness is the language of all: and, that which adds to the
contentment, it is Happiness with an Echo, or ingemination; Happy and Happy.
From this ingemination arise the parts of the text; the same which are the
parts both of the greater world and the less. As the heaven and earth in the
one, and the body and the soul in the other: so are the passages of this
Scripture in the two veins of Happiness. We may range them as Isaac does the
two parts of his blessing, Genesis 27. The vein of civil happiness, Genesis 27.28.
in the fatness of the earth: and the vein of Divine happiness, in the dew of
heaven. Or (if you will have it out of the Gospel) here is Marthaes portion in
the many things of the body: Luke 10.41, 42.
and Mary's better part in the Vnum necessarium of the soul. To give it yet
more concisely, here is the path of Prosperity in Outward comforts; Happy is the
people that is in such a caset and the path of Piety in comforts Spiritual;
Yea, happy is that people which have the LORD for their God.

In the handling of the first, without any further subdivision, I will only
show what it is the Psalmist treats of: and that shall be, by way of Gradation,
in these three particulars. It is De FELICITATE; De Felicitate POPULI; De HAC
felicitate populi: Of happiness; Of the peoples happiness; Of the peoples
happiness, as in such a case.

Happiness is the general, and the first: a noble argument, and worthy of an
inspired pen, especially the Psalmists. Of all other there can be none better
to speak of popular happiness, then such a King: nor of celestial, then such
a Prophet. Yet I mean not to discourse of it in the full latitude, but only as
it has a peculiar positure in this Psalm, very various and different from the
order of other psalms. In this Psalm it is reserved to the end, as the close
of the foregoing meditations: In other Psalms it is set in the front, or first
place of all; as in the 32, in the 112, in the 119, and in the 128. Again, in
this the Psalmist ends with our blessedness, and begins with God's; BLESSED BE
THE LORD MY STRENGTH. In the 41 Psalm, contrary, he makes his exordium from
man's; BLESSED IS HE THAT CONSIDERS THE POOR: his conclusion with God's;
BLESSED BE THE LORD GOD OF ISRAEL. I therefore observe these variations,
because they are helpful to the understanding both of the essence, and
splendor of true happiness. To the knowledge of the essence they help,
because they demonstrate how our own happiness is enfolded in the glory of
God, and subordinate unto it. As we cannot begin with Beatus, unless we end
with Benedictus: so we must begin with Benedictus, that we may end with Beatus.
The reason is this, Because the glory of God it is as well the consummation, as
the introduction to a Christians happiness. Therefore as in the other Psalm he
begins below, and ends upwards: so in this, having begun from above with that
which is principal, Blessed be the Lord; he fixes his second thoughts upon
the subordinate, Blessed, or happy are the people. He could not proceed in a
better order: he first looks up to Gods kingdom, then reflects upon his own;
as not meaning to take blessedness before he had given it. There is no man can
think, but this is the best method. It is the method of Saints, as we see 1.
Sam. 25.32, 33. and 2. Chron. 31.8. First, Blessed be the God of Israel; then,
Blessed be the people of Israel. Nay, it is the method of Angels: Luke 2.14.
they first sing, Glory to God; then, Good will toward men. It must also be
the method of every Christian, whenever we are about the wishing of
blessedness, either to our selves or others, to begin from heaven, and ascribe
it first to the LORD. That we may receive, we must give: give what we have, and
give what we mean to have. To give is the way to get: both to get the thing,
and to get the greater degree. It is an undeniable consequence, If beatitude be
the ultimate end of man, and the glory of God the ultimate end of our very
beatification; then it follows necessarily, That by giving more glory to God
we gain more of beatitude to our selves, because more of the supreme and
beatificall end. So that he who will attain to the Psalmist's comfort, must
observe also the Psalmist's order: that he may end assuredly with BEATUS, he
must learn to begin with BENEDICTUS. That Is the first considerable thing in the
order as touching the essence of true happiness. The other is concerning the
splendor, which flows from the other part of the variation: in that the
Psalmist does end this psalm, as he begins diverse of the rest, with Happy or
Blessed; to represent, as it were, unto us utramquesplendoris paginam, the two
great excellencies of blessedness by the double situation of it. Happiness is
both the bonum Primum, and the bonum Vltimum, of a Christian: the spring of all
good things, and the crown: the spire, and the basis: the first and the last of
things to be desired; the first for eminence, the last for fruition. In the
descents of Christianity the first, because we move from it to inferior ends:
happiness gives law to all our actions; we move from it, that we may in time
come to the possession of it. In the order of ascent it is the last: for having
climbed once thither, we go no further, but set up our rest. It has this
resemblance with God himself, who is the Donour of it, That it is both the
beginning and the end, before which nothing should be loved, and after which
nothing can be desired. Answerable to these two respects are the positures of
happiness in the Psalms. As in military affairs, it is the custom of
Emperors to promise the Donative to their soldiers when they go forth to
war, that they may encourage them; but not to give it till the war be
ended, that they may reward them for their service: In like manner (says S.
Ambrose) does the Psalmist: velut praeco magni Imperatoris, he disposes of
beatitude both ways: he prefixeth it to the beginning of some Psalms, that
thereby we might be invited to piety; he annexeth it to the end of others, to
teach us not to look for it before our work be done. So even by this we may
learn how to order and dispose of our selves to happiness. Since it has the
double reference, it must have also the double honor, and the double esteem,
yea and our double endeavors for the attaining of it. Then we give it the
double, when we set it in both places, make it both our first and our last, the
prime of our life, and the perseverance. We must look through all things upon
happiness, and through happiness upon all: through all upon it, as not
resting in any thing else; and through it upon all, as seasoning every act of
our life with the thought of happiness. Otherwise, if we think to give it our
last respects without our first, pretend what we will, there is no hope to
overtake it. Thus far even worldly men will go: they are willing enough to
hear that they must make it their last work, and they fulfill it in a sort to
the letter, but not to the meaning. The love, the hope, the care of their own
happiness, they put them off all to the last: A very preposterous course for a
man to begin where and when he should have ended, and to defer his first of
motion to his last of rest. It is too late for the foolish Virgins to cry,
Matthew. 25.10, 11.
Lord open when the door is shut: and a vain thing to expect happiness as our
end, unless we make it our beginning, and give it the same place in our hearts
and actions, which holy David affords it in his meditations: the first place in
other Psalms, as the best introduction to all other discourses; the last in
this, as a delightful farewell to be always fresh in remembrance. That shall
serve for the first step of the Gradation, the general part of the argument
handled: It is De FELICITATE.

The second is more special: it is defelicitate Populi; HAPPY, or, BLESSED ARE
THE PEOPLE. In the former part of the Psalm he speaks of such things as
concern his own happiness; Blessed be the Lord MY strength, verse. 1. Send down
from above, and save ME out of the great waters, verse. 7. Rid ME and deliver ME
from the hand of strange children, verse. 11. And he might as easily have
continued the same strain in the clauses following, That MY sons may grow up
as the young plants, MY daughters may be as the polished corners of the temple,
MY sheep fruitful, MY oxen strong, MY garners full and plenteous: and
accordingly he might have concluded it also, Happy shall I be, if I be in such
a case. This, I say, he might have done, nay, this he would have done, if his
desires had reflected only upon himself. But being of a diffusive heart, and
knowing what belonged to the neighbourhoods of piety, as loath to enjoy this
happiness alone, he alters his style, and (being in the height of wellwishes
to himself) he turns the singular into a plural, Our sheep, Our oxen, Our
garners, Our sons and daughters; that he might compendiate all in this, Happy
are the people. Here Is a true testimony both of a religious and generous mind,
who knew in his most retired thoughts to look out of himself, and to be
mindful of the public welfare in his privatest meditations. S. Ambrose
observes it as a clear character of a noble spirit, to do what tends to the
public good, though to his own disadvantage: And Salvian, in his first
Deprovidentia, does recon this as the principal thing which made the Fabii and
the Fabricii, and other Roman Worthies so renowned in their times, That they
were content to expose themselves to want and danger for the prosperity and
safety of the public. But (alas!) there are few such spirits in our time: It
is a rare thing to find a private man, who cordially devoteth himself to the
good of the Community. It was the complaint of Plato in his time, That every
man was impetuously carried (...) and of Thucydides the Historian in his,
Vnusquisque rem suam urget: and of Tacitus in his, Privatacuique stimulatio,
and vile decus publicum. S. Paul himself was driven to this complaint, Phil.
2.21. All seek their own. Where he left we may take it up: Our own settling,
our own security, our own wealth, our own advancement, is all we generally
look after. There is hardly any man to be found, whose bent is not toward
himself: Whereas the public is the private infinitely multiplied; and so much
the more of nearer concernment, as it is of larger extension: whereas again man
is only a world in a figurative sense of speaking, and that but a microcosme
or little world, that is in effect, a small part of the great; yet, as in some
other things, so in this also it falls out, The Allegory devoures the letter,
the private eats up the public, the part the whole, the overweaning respect to
the little world does every where almost overturn the greater. I know there are
many which make fair shows, goodly pretenses, great ostentation of the
contrary: You shall have them often crying out, The Public, the Public; and
as fast as the Jews did, The Temple, the Temple: but it is with the like
insincerity; for their aim is wholly for themselves. So we show our selves
hypocrites even in things civil, as well as in religion. Each godly man is of
another temper. His word is that of S. Ambrose, Mihi parcior, foris totus: or
that of the Orator in Salust, Adsum en Caius Cotta, voveo, dedoque me pro
Republica. It was a brave resolution in a Heathen: but it concerns us
Christians more. For he was only a part of one Community: we, each of us have
a share in two; being members of the Church, as well as the State. So there is
a double tie upon us: and that we should daily remember it, it is insinuated in
the Lord's prayer: in which as there is one express petition for the public;
so there is a respect had to it in all. There is nothing singular, not an I,
nor a Me, nor a Mine; but all plural, We, Us, Our: noting that it is every
man's duty, even in his prayers, to be zealous for the Community. But the text
will not allow me that scope, to speak of this zeal to the public as it is the
duty of private men, but as it is an excellency of Kings and Princes. It Is
true, I might call it a duty even in them also; God requires it of them as a
duty: but it becomes us to repute it an excellency, both because the benefit
is ours which redounds from thence, and likewise because it is more eminent and
illustrious in them, then in other men. In others it is limited and
ministerial, in a Prince supreme and universal. He is the influxive head, who
both governs the whole body, and every member which is any way serviceable to
the body: The glorious Sun that gives light both to the world, and to the
stars themselves, which in their several stations are useful to the world.
Here Is enough to define it an excellency, to have the care and trust of the
whole in himself. Yea but further, to tender it as himself, and to set the weal
of the public in equipage with his own happiness, and to fold them up
together, his own in the public and the public in his own; is so high an
ascent of goodness, that it were a great wrong to such virtue, to style it by
any less name then an excellency. In this particular I might easily be large:
but it requires not so much proofs, as acknowledgements and retributions.
Therefore I will briefly proceed both ways: and first give you a few examples
for proofs; and then, I am sure, there is no man so unworthy, but will think
himself obliged to retributions. The first example shall be taken from Moses:
whom Philo reckons among Kings; and so does the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 33.5. For
howsoever he had not the name, he had the power and authority: yet even in
that power he was not more Regal, then in his tenderness over the people. At
one time his tenderness was so great toward them, that because he could not do
them so much good as he desired, he besought the Lord to take away his life;
Numb. 11.15. At another time he was so perplexed with the fear of their
destruction, that he requested of God, either to keep them still in the land of
the living, or to blot him out of the book of life; Exodus 32.32. hereby showing
himself not only the miracle of Nature, as Philo calls him, but of Grace too,
in pledging for them that which was more worth then his life, his very
salvation. It was a rare example of Castor and Pollux, so highly magnified by
Authors, That being twins, and (as the Poets feigned) one born mortal, the
other immortal, Pollux (to show his love to his brother) yielded so far, as
to take to himself a part of his brothers mortality, and to lend him as much
of his own immortality: being better pleased to enjoy a half immortality with
the good of his brother, then a whole one alone by himself. It is known by all
to be a fiction: yet if it were true, it is far short of this proffer of
Moses. He knew full well what belonged to immortality, and to the ^avour of
God: yet in effect he beseeches God, either to take them into his favor, or
to put him out of it; as content to hazard not half his immortality, but all,
out of his love to the Israelites, notwithstanding they were a people
ungrateful both toward him and toward God. After this of Moses I know no
example so tran^cending as that of the Prophet David: who (besides that he
urges it almost in every Psalm, The peace of Jerusalem, The salvation of
Israel, The felicity of Gods chosen, The blessing of the people) in one place
he argues for it even to his own destruction: You have it, 1. Chron. 21.16, 17.
It is there recorded, that seeing the angel of the Lord with his sword drawn
over Jerusalem to destroy it, he thus reasons with God for the safeguard of the
public: Me, me; adsum qui feci; IT IS I, EVEN I IT IS THAT HAVE SINNED: In me
convertito ferrum; LET THY HAND BE AGAINST ME, AND AGAINST MY FATHERS HOUSE,
NOT ON THY PEOPLE: FOR THESE SHEEP WHAT HAVE THEY DONE? He that considers
these words will hardly be able to tell what most to wonder at; the
condescending of his love, or the overflowing. He declared here, says S.
Chrysostom, a depth of love (...), an affection more spacious for love, then
the sea for water; and for tenderness softer not only then water, but then
oil. To lay down, as it were, his own royal neck under the sword of the
Angel, when he saw it hanging over him by a less third, then that of
Damocles: To open his own religious breast, to receive the blow, that he might
ward it from the people: To value the peoples safety so far above his own, as
to interpose himself betwixt the sword and the slaughter: O how far does he
here renounce himself, and recede, not only from royalty, but from life it
self! It is much which is mentioned in the text, that he should name the people
first to the happiness: more, that he should offer himself first to the
punishment: very much, that he should put the people betwixt himself and the
blessing: far more, that he should place himself betwixt the people and the
curse. He made himself in this SPECULUM PRINCIPUM, the mirror of Princes: a
mirror, into which (as we may well presume) our Gracious Sovereigne King
CHARLES has made frequent and useful inspections: for it is manifest by many
passages of his reign and happy government, that the tenderness of his love
toward his people, if it does not fully reach, yet it comes close up to the
recessions of David. It is the more remarkable, for that he has this virtue as
it were in proper and by himself, he is almost the sole possessour of it. The
most of ordinary men, as living more by will then reason, are all for holding:
so stiff and inflexible, so tenacious and unyielding, even in matters of small
moment; that they will not stir a hair-breadth. Entreat them, persuade them,
convince them; still they keep to this principle (and it is none of the best)
O^tein all, Yield nothing. It is a nobler spirit that resides in the breast of
our Sovereign, as appears by his manifold yieldings and recessions. Of such
recessions we have many instances in the course of his Majesty's government. I
might go as far back as his first coming to the Crown: when he receded from
his own profit, in taking upon him the payment of his Fathers debts, which were
great, and but small supplies to be expected from an empty Exchequer: yet the
love of justice and his peoples emolument overswayed him, and armed him with
Epaminondas his resolution, Totius orbis divitias despicere, prae patriae
charitate. Having but glanced at that, I might draw a little nearer to the
third of his reign: when, in that Parliament of Tertio, he was pleased to sign
the, so much desired, Petition of Right: a Title which, I confess, takes me
much: both because it speaks the dutifulness of the subject, in petitioning,
although for right; and the great goodness of a Gracious Prince, who knows how
to recede from power, and in some case even from prerogative, when besought by
prayers; and rejoices, not to sell his favors, but to give them. For I have
heard some wise men say, That that single grant was equivalent to twenty
subsidies. But the time will not give me leave to dwell, as I should, upon
particulars: therefore I will call you nearer to the transient remembrance (and
but the transient, for it is no pleasure to revive it) of the commotions in the
North. The eyes of the whole world were upon that action, and they all are
witnesses what pains and travel were taken, what clemency and indulgence was
used, what yieldings and condescentions, both in point of honor and power, to
purchase, as it were; by a price paid out of himself, the peace and
tranquillity of both kingdoms. Whereby he made all men understand, how much
more pleasing it was to his Princely disposition, with Cyrus in Xenophon, (...)
and to conquer, not by might, but by clemency. By clemency, I say, the word
which I named before, and I cannot name it too often. It is the virtue God most
delights in, to exercise himself; and it is the copy also which he sets us to
write after: It is the virtue which draws both eyes and hearts unto it; in that
it makes Royalty it self, which is so far above, to become beneficial and
sovereign: It corrects the brightness of Majesty, calmes the strictness of
Justice, lightens the weight of Power, attemperates whatsoever might cause
terror to our mind and liking. If we never had known it before, yet the only
time of this Parliament would teach us sufficiently how much we ow to the
King's clemency. The laws and statutes which have been made this last year,
are lasting and speaking monuments of thief royal recessions, as well to
posterity, as to our selves. Surely if the true picture and resemblance of a
Prince be in his laws; it cannot be denied, that in the acts, for trienniall
Parliaments, for the continuation of the Parliament now being, for the
regulating of impositions, pressing of soldiers, courts of Judicature, and
others not a few of the like nature, are the lineaments, and expressions to the
life, of the perfect pourtraiture of a Benign and Gracious Prince, who seems
resolved of a new way, and hitherto unheard of, by wholesome laws to enlarge
his subjects, and to confine himself. Yet it may be said, It is not his only
hand which is in these laws: the proposal of them is from others, although the
ratification be in him. Be it so: But the ratification is ten-fold to the
proposal; nay, it is the life and essence of a law. So we ow the laws
themselves to his goodness. Nay, and if it be granted, that the proposal of
such laws comes from others; let us then look to the many gracious messages,
which occasionally have been sent, at several times, to that great Assembly.
In these he speaks only by himself; and in so gracious a manner, that to read
some passages, would ravish a loyal heart, as well as endear it. In some of
them we may see, how he puts the happiness of his people into the same
proximitie with his own: in others, how he neglects his own for our
accommodation. In that of January the 20, you have these golden words: That he
will rather lay by any particular respect of his Own dignity, then lose time
for the Public good: That, out of his Fatherly care of his people, he will be
ready, both to equal, and to exceed the greatest examples of the most
Indulgent Princes, in their Acts of Grace and Favor to their people. Again, in
that of the 28 of January there is yet more tenderness. He calls God to
witness (and with him the attestation of that sacred name is very religious)
that the preservation of the public peace, the law and the liberty of the
subject, is and shall always be as much his care and industry, as the safety
of his own life, or the lives of his dearest children. Lastly, in the other of
the 15 of March there is more then yieldings and concessions; a gracious
prevention of our desires: for he is pleased to excite and call upon that Great
Council, even the second time, to prepare with all speed such Acts, as shall
be for the establishment of their privileges, the free and quiet enjoying
their estates and fortunes, the liberties of their persons, the security of
the true Religion now professed in the Church of England. What now shall we say
to these things? Is not that of Solomon made good unto us (Prove. 16.10.) A
Divine sentence is in the lips of the King? Have we not good cause to take up
Ezra's benediction (Ezr. 7.27.) Blessed be the Lord which has put such things
as these into the Kings heart? Such things as these we were not so ambitious as
to hope for: I trust we shall not be so unworthy as to forget. For my self, I
could wish that, according to the duty of this day, I could set them forth as
they deserve. But they need no varnish of Oratorie: neither was it my
intendment to use them further, then for the proof of the proposition in hand;
to show you how this highest excellency of Princes, in the care of their
peoples happiness, is radiant in our Gracious Sovereign. Yet you may remember
also that I told you, The point needs not so much proofs, as retributions. It
calls aloud upon us for all dutiful returns, of honor, love, obedience,
loyalty, and thankful acknowledgements, into that Royal bosom, the first
mover and original under God of our happiness. In the sphere of Nature there
is none of us ignorant, how willing the members are to make return to the head,
for the government and influence they receive from thence: they will undergo
hardship, expose themselves to danger, recede from things convenient, nay
necessary; they will not grudge at any plenty or honor which is bestowed upon
the head; knowing by instinct that from the head the benefit of all redounds to
them. It is likewise obvious in the Regiment of families, which are as States
epitomized; that both honor and duty belong to the Paterfamilias, not only
for the right he has in the house, but for the provision and support and
comfort which all receive from him. Now Kings, by way of excellency, are
Fathers, who look upon all their subjects as so many children, and (with that
noble Emperor) account equally as daughters Rempublicam and Juliam. The very
Heathen, which saw only the outside or Civil part, reputed them as Fathers:
but the Prophet Isaiah, when he speaks of the Church, goes further, and calls
them Nursing Fathers: Isa^. 49.23.
a word which in propriety of speech might seem incongruous; because they have
no more of the nurse, then the bosom; nothing at all of the breasts, if what
is wanting in the sex were not supplied by their tenderness. Benignity, and
clemency, and sweetness of disposition, and facility of access, and
compassion toward the distressed, these are their breasts, more breasts then
two; the same both their breasts and their bowels, which day by day they open
to thousands severally, and to all at once, for the suckling and fostering of
the public. Therefore it behooves us to think of returns. By this word Christ
read us the lesson, Matthew. 22.21. Render, or Return unto Caesar the things which
are Cesars, or the things which are from Caesar. The protection of lives, and
fortunes, and worldly comforts; let him have these back again in the honor,
love, fear, obedience, supplies which belong to the Sovereigne Head and Parent
of a beloved people: that his throne may be established by your loyalty, his
reign still prosperous by your prayers and blessings, his life lenghthened by
years taken forth of your own: that so he may long rejoice to say with David,
Happy are the people. So I have done with the second step of the Gradation, the
special part of the argument here handled; It is De felicitate Populi.

The third is yet more special: It is not only De felicitate Populi, but De
felicitate Populari, that is, De Hac felicitate Populi, or De hoc Genere
felicitatis: Beatus cui SIC, Happy they who are in SUCH A CASE, or CONDITION.
What that condition is, you may see in the former words; in which there are
several blessings mentioned, and all of them temporal. Plenty is one, in
those words, That our garners may be filled with all manner of store; our oxen
strong to labor; our sheep bring forth thousands. Peace is another, in these
words, That there be no leading into captivity, no complaining in our streets.
Multitude of people, especially such as are virtuous, a third, in those, That
our sons may grow up as the young plants, our daughters may be as the
polished corners of the temple. The safety and prosperity of David their
King, a fourth (or rather a first, for it is first mentioned) He gives
salvation, or victory to Kings, and delivers David his servant from the
peril of the sword. Of all these civil threeds the Psalmist twists this wreath
of Happiness; Happy they who are in such a case. Now hence arises the
scruple; Why David, a man of so heavenly a temper, and of so good a judgment
in things which concern salvation, that he is said to be A man after Gods own
heart, 1 Samuel 13.14.
should place felicity in these temporalls. Devout S. Paul, who of all others
came nearest to David's spirit, had these outward things in no better esteem,
then as dross, Phil. 3.8.
or dung: and our blessed Savior, in his first Sermon, Matthew. 5.
thought good to begin the chain of happiness from poverty, and to second it
from hunger, and to continue it from suffering persecution. Non dixit, BEATL
DIVITES, sed, BEATI PA^PERES, as S. Ambrose observes. In this, I say, is the
scruple, That Christ should begin bless^dnesse from poverty, and David place
it in abundance: that things earthly should be as dross to Paul, and as
happiness to David. This scruple wrought so far with some Interpreters, that
they conceived it to be a defective or imperfect sentence, and that the
Psalmist uttered it in the person of a worldly man: like that of Solomon,
Eccles. 2.24. There is nothing better for a man, then to eat and drink, etc.
Therefore, to take off the suspicion of a paradox, they interpose Dixerunt:
BEATUM [ dixerunt] POPULUM CUI HAEC SUNT, Men usually say, HAPPY ARE THE PEOPLE
IN SUCH A CASE. But we need not flee to this refuge: It is neither a defective
nor a paradox; but a full and true proposition, agreeable both to the tenor of
other Scriptures, and also to the analogy of faith. For first, the Psalmist
speaks not here, as in other places, of the happiness of a man, but of the
happiness of a people: it is not Beatus homo, but, Beatus populus. In some
other places, where he treats of the happiness of a man, he circumscribes it
always with things spiritual: a Psalm. 32.2.
Blessed is the man unto whom the LORD imputes no sin, and in whose spirit
there is no guile: b Psalm. I 12.1.
Blessed is the man that fears the LORD: c Psalm 40.4.
Blessed is that man that makes the Lord his trust: and the d Psalm. 65.4. and
84.5. and 128.1.
like. Here otherwise, seeing he speaks of the happiness of a people, he might
use more liberty to take in these out wardaccomplishments, as having a nearer
relation to the happiness of a Nation or Kingdom, then abstractively of a
Christian. Howsoever Aristotle affirms, in the 7th of his Politics, that there
is the same happiness (...), of a single man and of a whole city: Yet there
is a great deal of difference, which he, being not instructed in Christianity,
could not observe. Look as on the one side, the being of a State or Nation, as
a collective body, is not so ordered to immortality, nor by consequence to
happiness, as the being of a man: so on the other, the concurrence of
temporal good things is in no wise so essential or requisite to the
happiness of a man, as to the being and w^ll-being, and so to the happiness
of a State or people. Experience tells us that a man may be happy without
children; a State cannot be so without people: a private man may keep his hold
of happiness, though poor and afflicted in the world; a State is only then
happy, when it is flourishing and prosperous, abounding with peace, plenty,
people, and other civil accessions. Men are the walls for strength, women the
nurseries for increase, children the pledges of perpetuity, money as the vital
breath, peace as the natural heat, plenty as the radical moisture, religious
and just government as the form or soul of a body politic. Upon this ground
the Psalmist well knowing how conducing these outward things are to popular
happiness, he casts them all into the definition; his present argument being
the happiness of a people. In the second place, admit he had spoke here of the
happiness of a man, or a Christian: yet he mentions not these temporalls,
either as the all, or the only, or the chief of happiness; but as the
concomitants and accessories. They have not an essential influx or ingredience
into it: but a secondarie and accidental respect they have in these two
considerations. First they are ornamenta, as garnishings, which give a gloss
and luster to virtue, and make it more splendid. The Moralists say well, that
they are as shadows to a picture, or garments to a comely personage. Now as in
these, the shadowing makes not the color of a picture truly better, but only
seem better, and appear more fresh and orient; and as garments do indeed adorn
the body now in the state of corruption, whereas, if man had stood in his
integrity, they had been useless for ornament, as well as for necessity: So
likewise these outward things, although in themselves they have nothing of true
happiness, yet because they render it more beauteous and graceful, as the
state of virtue now stands in respect of our converse with men, we may well
reckon them without prejudice to virtue inter ornamenta. Then secondly, they
are adminicula also, helps and adjuments, as handmaids to piety, without
which virtue is impotent. Were a man all soul, virtue alone were sufficient; it
is enough by it self for the happiness of the mind: but being partly body,
and enjoying corporal society with others, he stands in need of things
corporal, to keep virtue in exercise. Want clippes the wings of virtue, that a
man cannot feed the hungry, or cloth the naked, or enlarge himself to the good
of others: on the other side, this (...), as the Philosophers term it, sets
virtue at liberty, and gives it scope to be operative. As fire, the more air
and fuel you give it, the more it diffuseth it self: so the more health,
peace, plenty, friends, or authority we have; the more power, freedom and
advantage we have to do virtuously. Put now all these together, and the reason
is evident, why the Prophet David here places this happiness in the things
which are worse; because they are serviceable to the things which are
better. Howsoever he reserves the mention of the better till afterward; Yet
he would give us to understand, that even these inferior things are the good
blenssigs of God, and such blessings, as being put together, make up one part
of the happiness of a people. It is true of popular happiness, as well as
personal, It is not one single good, but the aggregation or affluence of many.
In the twenty eighth of Deuteronomie, where Moses describes the blessedness
promised to the Israelites, he reckons up all sorts of outward blessings: and
agreeable to those is the conflux of these in this Psalm: The blessing of the
house, and of the city; That there be no leading into captivity, and no
complaining in the streets: The blessings of the basket, and of the store; That
the garners may be filled with plenty: The blessings of the fruit of the
body; That the children may be as young plants: The blessings of the field,
That the sheep may bring forth thousands, and the oxen be strong to labor: The
blessings of going out and coming in; That they may be delivered from the hand
of strange children, and saved out of great waters. Here is briefly the
compound of the many simples which make up this case or condition of a peoples
happiness. And surely if by these particulars it be defined, we may boldly
say, The condition is our own, and men may pronounce of us, as truly as of any
Nation, that we have been for a long time a happy people. Our deliverances from
strange children have been great and miraculous, and our land it has been a
Goshen, a lightsome land; whereas the darkness of discomfort has rested upon
other Nations. The blessings of the city and field, of the basket and of the
store have grown upon us in such abundance, that many men have surfetted of
plenty: Our land has been as an Eden and garden of the Lord for
fruitfulness, as a Salem for peace; whereas other kingdoms do yet groan under
the pressures of sword and famine. Besides these, if there be any blessing
which the Scripture mentions in other places, Peace in the walls, Plenty in
the palaces, Traffic in the ports, or Salvation in the gates; if any part of
happiness which it speaks of in this Psalm, for plantings, or buildings, or
reapings, or storings, or peoplings; we have had them all in as much fullness
as any part of the world, and in more then most: only there is one particular
may be questioned, or rather cannot be denied That amidst the very throng of
all these blessings there are some murmurings and complainings in our streets.
But it need not seem strange to us, because it is not new in the world. In the
stories of all ages we meet with it, That men used to complain of their times
to be evil, when indeed themselves made them so. I may be bold to say, There
was cause in respect of sin then, as well as now, especially with godly men,
who are so good themselves, that it is no marvel if they thought times a
little evil to be extremely bad: as always sin swells to the eye of grace.
But if we speak of outward pressures and calamities, I am certain there is not
cause now as then: for the riches of the Kingdom were never so great, the
peace of the Kingdom never so constant, the state of it for all things never
so prosperous. Only we must give leave to the world to be like it self: As
long as ambition or covetousness are in the world, men of such spirits will
cry out, The times are bad, even when they are best; because they (in their own
bad sense) still desire to be better. As nothing is enough, so nothing is
pleasing to a restless mind. An insatiable appetite is always impatient; and,
because impatient, querulous. Yet this is not the sole reason: for besides this
humor of appetite, the very corruption of our nature leads us hereunto, To be
weary of the present. It is the joint observation both of Divines and Moralists
(as of Salvian, Quintilian, Tacitus, and others, who agree as near almost in
words as in opinion) Quod usitatum est mentis humanae vitium, illa magis semper
velle qua desunt; and, vetera quidem in laud, praesentiain fastidio ponere.
Our own experience will tell us as much, if we will take pains to observe it,
How, through the pravity of our own dispositions, whatsoever is present proves
burdensome, whether it be good or bad. Salvian, in his third De Gubernatione,
sets forth this humor to the life: That men of all times were displeased with
all times: Si aestus est, (says he) de ariditate causamur; si fluvia, de
inundatione conquerimur: si infoecundior annus est, accusamus sterilitatem; si
foecundior, vilitatem. So winter and summer are both alike distasteful to
impatient men: In scarcity things are too dear, in plenty too cheap: poverty
pincheth, and abundance nauseates. If there be a little too much drought, they
cry out of a famine; if a shower or two extraordinary, they are afraid of a
deluge. You shall hear in good times, Quid nobis cum Davide? and in bad,
Antigonum effodio: as we read of the Israelites, That even when God himself
was pleased to order their civil affairs, they were not contented; but still
repined, as well when they had manna, as when they wanted it. The reason is (as
the Greek Historian notes) (...). But I hope we Christians are of a better
temper. It beseems not us of all others to be so injurious to God, who has
singled us out to be a happy people: It beseems us not to be so unthankful to
our Sovereigne, under whom we enjoy these blessings. Howsoever it ought to be
in the first place acknowledged, that the original of all our happiness is
from heaven: yet it must be confessed withal, that the crystal pipe through
which blessings are conveyed unto us, is his government: Our peace is from his
wisdom; our plenty from our peace; our prosperity from our plenty; our
safety, our very life, our whatsoever good of this nature, it is by Gods
providence wrapped up in his welfare, whose precious life (as the Orator speaks)
is Vita quaedam publica, the very breath of our nostrils perfumed with
multitude of comforts. ^ma. 4.20.
What then remains, but that our thankfulness should result from all, to make
our happiness complete? that so both receiving what we desire, and retributing
what we ow, we may give cause unto all Kingdoms to lengthen this acclamation,
and to say, Happy both Prince and people which are in such a case. So I have
done with the first general part of the text, the path of Prosperity,
answerable to the civil respect of the day.

I now proceed to the second, the path of Piety, answerable to the Religious
respect; Yea, happy. It Is the best wine to the last, though all men be not of
this opinion. You shall hardly bring a worldly man to think so. The world is
willing enough to misconster the order of the words, and to give the prioritie
to Civil happiness, as if it were first in dignity, because it is first
named: they like it better to hear of the Cui sic, then the Cui Dominus. To
prevent this folly, the Psalmist interposeth a caution in this corrective
particle, Yea, Happy. It has the force of a revocation, whereby he seems to
retract what went before, not simply and absolutely, but in a certain degree,
lest worldly men should wrest it to a misinterpretation. It is not an absolute
revocation, but a comparative; it does not simply deny that there is some part
of popular happiness in these outward things, but it preferres the spiritualls
before them: Yea, that is, Yea more, or, Yea rather: like that of Christ in the
Gospel, When one in the company blessed the womb that bare him, Lek. 11.28.
he presently replies, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the word of God
and keep it. In like manner the Prophet David, having first premised the
inferior part and outside of an happy condition; fearing lest any should of
purpose mistake his meaning, and hearing the first proposition, should either
there set up their rest, and not at all take in the second; or if take it in,
yet do it preposterously, and give it the precedence before the second,
according to the worlds order, virtus post nummos: In this respect he puts in
the clause of revocation; whereby he shows, that these outward things, though
named first, yet they are not to be reputed first. The particle Yea removes
them to the second place: it tacitly transposeth the order; and the path of
piety, which was locally after, it places virtually before. It Is as if he had
said, Did I call them happy, who are in such a case? Nay, miserable are they,
if they be only in such a case: The temporal part cannot make them so without
the spiritual. Admit the windows of the visible heaven were opened, and all
outward blessings powered down upon us; admit we did perfectly enjoy whatsoever
the vastness of the earth contains in it: tell me, What will it profit to gain
all, and to lose God? If the earth be bestowed upon us, and not heaven; or the
material heaven be opened, and not the beatificall; or the whole world made
ours, and God not ours: we do not arrive at happiness. All that is in the
first proposition is nothing, unless this be added, Yea, happy are the people
which have the LORD for their God. You see in this part there is aliquid quod
eminet, something which is transcendent: Therefore I will enquire into two
particulars; see both what it is that transcends, and what is the manner of
propounding of it.

The manner of propounding it, is, as I said, corrective, or by way of
revocation: the sum whereof is thus much, That temporalls without
spiritualls, in what abundance soever we possess them, cannot make us truly
happy. They cannot make happy, because they cannot make good. They may
denominate a man to be rich, or great, or honorable; but not to be virtuous.
Nay, Seneca carries it a little further, Non modo non faciunt bonum, fed nec
divitem; They are so far from making a man good, that they make him not truly
rich; because they increase desire, and riches consist in contentation. Not he
that has little, but he that desires more is poor: nor he that has much, but
he that wants nothing is rich. Yea, and we may go further then Seneca; They are
so far from making good, that they often make evil, if they be not
sanctified: they possess the heart with vile affections, fill it full of
carnal and sinful desires. Whereas there are four good mothers which bring
forth ill daughters, prosperity is one. Truth begets hatred, security danger,
familiarity contempt, prosperity pride and forgetfulness of God. In this I
might well make a stop; but there is one degree more: They are so far from
making good, that they do not bring good, but many evils and inconveniences.
They bring not the good of contentment, but infinite distractions: they are
aureae compedes, as S. Bernard speaks, fetters or manicles which entangle the
soul, that it cannot attend upon better things: Nor the good of freedom: they
do enthrall the soul to that which is worse then it self; and it cannot be
apprehended how a thing worse then our selves can make us happy. Lastly, not
the good of safety: for they oftentimes expose us to dangers, Multos sua
felicitas stravit, as Gregory speaks. Many men their lives had been longer, if
their riches had been less: their happiness made them miserable; and
consolationes factae sunt desolationes, as S. Bernard again. Upon these grounds
the Psalmist had very good reason to sequester them from true happiness, and,
by this corrective particle, to reduce them to the second place, though he set
them in the first. He knew very well that they are burdens, shares, impediments
to piety, as often as furtherances. He knew them to be vain and transitory
things, Prove. 23.5.
that we cannot hold. They make themselves wings, as Solomon speaks. They are
only the movables of happiness, Bractealis felicitas, as Seneca; (...), as
Nazianzen. What Is that? S. Austin seems to translate it, felicitas fallax, a
fabulous and personate felicity: Nay, not only fallax, but falsa, fictitious,
spurious, deceitful, which leaves the soul empty when it most fills it: that
being most true which the same Father adds, felicitas fallax, major
infelicitas; and falsa felicitas, vera miseria. Therefore, that I may shut up
this point, let this be the use of it. We must learn from hence to regulate our
judgments according to the wisdom of the Spirit revealed in the word: And
that we may do, if we keep to Gods method, and set every thing in the due
place, where God has seated it. Now the Scripture constantly does give the
inferior place to these temporal things. If to come after, be inferior; it
sets them there: Seek first the kingdom of God, etc. Matthew. 6.33. If to be
below, be inferior, it places them there: Set your affection on things above,
etc. Coloss. 3.2. Even gold and silver, the best of these things, they are
seated under the feet of men, and the whole world under the feet of a
Christian, Rev. 12.1. to teach us to despise it. Lastly, if to be on the left
hand, be inferior; the Scripture reckons them there too: they are called the
blessings of the left hand, to teach us to give them the same place in our
affections. In one sense, we may put them on the right, by using them to God's
glory: but in love and esteem they must be on the left. S. Hierome illustrates
it by this similitude: As flax when it is on the distaffe, it is on the left
hand; but when it is spunne into yarn, and put on the spindle, it is on the
right: so temporal things in themselves, when first we receive them, they are
as flax on the distaffe, all this while on the left hand; but spinne them
forth, and use them to God's glory, they are as yarn on the spindle,
transposed to the right. Thus we must learn to order them: to the right hand
only for use, to the left for valuation. Otherwise, if we pervert God's order,
and put them on the right; it is to be feared they will set us on the left at
the day of judgment: if we elevate them above, they will keep us below; and
make us come after, if we set them before. The highest place they can have, is
to be seconds to piety: here holy David places them though he mentions piety
last, yet he gives it the precedence in this word of revocation, Yea, happy;
that is, Yea first, yea more, yea more truly happy. That shall serve for the
first particular, the manner of propounding this truth unto us.

The second is the thing it self which transcends, in these words, whose God is
the LORD, or, who have the LORD for their God. In the general it is an
ordinary, as well as transcendent. An ordinary, because all partake of this
privilege. Whereupon S. Austin asks the question, Cujus non est Deus? But S.
Hierome resolves it; Natura Deus omnium, voluntate paucorum: In a community
the God of all, even to the sparrow on the house top, and grass of the field;
but the God of the righteous after a peculiar manner. To come to the meaning;
we must let go the general, this ordo communis providentiae, as he is Dominus
omnium, the Lord of all creatures: this brings not happiness along with it:
God's ordinary and general providence intitles not to that supreme
blessedness, which is in himself. The special references are only intended:
and those we may reduce to these two heads. The first is ordo specialis
influxus, on God's part, the respect of his being gracious to us. Then the Lord
is our God, when he shows himself benign and propitious, when he manifests his
mercy and goodness in the ways of grace and means of salvation. It is so
expounded Psalm 65.4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest: and Psalm 33.12.
Blessed is the nation, whose God is the LORD, and the people whom he has
chosen for his own inheritance. Being thus taken, it affords us this
meditation, That there is no true happiness, but in the favor of God, and
light of his countenance; that is, in God himself: both because happiness is
only from him, he is the only author of it: Non facit beatum hominem, nisi
qui fecit hominem; -- Qui dedit ut homines simus, solus dat ut beati simus; He
only makes Saints who makes men: it is S. Austin's elegant expression. Then
again, as it is only from God, so it is only in God. As the soul, says
Austin, is vita carnis; so God is the beata vita hominis, so fully, that a man
cannot be happy either way, nec absque Deo, nec extra Deum: not without God,
because he is the Doner; not out of God, because he is the thing it self, and
all which belongs to it. As S. Ambrose of the four beatitudes in S. Luke
compared with the eight in S. Matthew; In istis octo illae quatuor sunt, and in
istis quatuor illae octo: and as King Porus, when Alexander asked him how he
would be used, answered in one word, (...), that is, like a King. Alexander
again replying, Do you desire nothing else? No, says he: all things are in
(...), So in this which we are now about it holds much more: both the four,
and the eight, and all beatitudes, they are in God, so that he who has God,
must needs have all things, because God is all things. There is no notion under
which we can couch beatitude, but we may find it in God by way of eminency: if
as a state of joy, or glory, or wealth, or tranquillity, or security, God is
all these: if as a state of perfection, salvation, retribution; God is all
these: not only the giver of the reward, but the rewardit self; both our
bonum, and our summum. A Christian is never truly happy, till he can find
himself and all things in God. The fruition of God, it is (...)(as Pelusiota
speaks) the very top of the spire or pinnacle of beatitude both here and in
heaven. In hoc uno summitas beatitudinis eliquatur, to use Tertullians words.
Were a man in paradise, were he in heaven it self, and had not God; he could
not be happy. Were he on Job's dunghill, in Daniels den, in the belly of hell
with Jonah, nay in the infernal hell with Dives, and yet had God; he could not
be miserable: for heaven is wheresoever God is, because his influxive presence
makes heaven. That Is the Ordo influxus I mentioned, for which he is said to be
our God. Besides this, there is ordo Divini cultus, on our part, The respect of
our being serviceable to him: when we love him, and fear him, and honor him,
and adhere unto him as we ought. To all these there is blessedness pronounced
in several Psalms: to those that fear him, Psalm. 128.1. to those that keep
his testimonies, Psalm. 119.2. to those that trust in him, Psalm. 84.12. If we
take it thus, the point is this in sum, There is no true happiness, but in
the worship and service of God: Felices sunt qui Deo vivunt, that is S.
Bernards: Servire Deo est regnare, that is S. Ambrose his expression: As much as
this, The godly man is only the true happy man. Yet we must understand it
aright: It is not to serve him only in outward profession, which either makes
us his, or him ours. There are many who pretend to serve him, who cannot
challenge this interest: for they serve him but with their lips; in act,
themselves and their own pleasures: in this both hypocrites and idolaters, that
under the show of one God set up many to themselves. The Epicure he makes his
belly his God, the lascivious man his lust, the voluptuous man his pleasure,
the factious man his humor, the covetous man his mammon. I name this last. It
is the observation of S. Austin, in his 7 book De Civitate Dei, and of
Lactantius in his second De Origin Erroris, That avarice gives laws to
religion, whilst generally sub obtentu Numinis cupiditas colitur. Yea, and S.
Paul expresses it more punctually, That covetousness is idolatry, Col. 3.5.
And the covetous man an idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. For he does the same to his gold,
that the heathen did to their idols: he makes his gold his God; his God,
because his joy, and his care, and his confidence: Those pictures he worships,
though otherwise he abhorres idols; to these he offers his service, he gives
them his heart, he extols them, ascribes unto them the glory of his happiness:
These are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: this
money got thee such a preferment, procured such a deliverance, prevailed in
such a suite. It Is the secret idolatry which runs through the world. But
such men as these, they are as far from God as from his service, and as far
from happiness as from God. Whosoever will make sure of the Lord to be his
God, he must put the idols out of his heart, he must go out of himself, he
must not willingly harbor any sin. Sin separates from God, excludes from
happiness, cuts off both privileges, of God's being ours, and our being
God's. Yet there is one thing more; with which I will conclude: Since it is so,
that happiness is seated in these mutual intercurrences, of calling the Lord
our God, and our selves his people; and seeing religion is the Vinculum
unionis, which makes these mutual interests intercurrent, and couples them
together; it follows as the upshot of all, That the chief and choicest part of
National happiness consists in the purity of God's worship, in the enjoying
of God's ordinances, in the free passage of the Gospel; that is, in the truth
and integrity of religion. In this alone there are all sweets, all beauties,
all blisses, all glories. It is as the ark of God to Israel, and as the golden
candlestick to the Churches, the elevating principle which advances a
Christian Nation above the heathen, and the reformed Churches above other
Christian Nations, and this Island in which we live (I may say without
arrogancy) above all. There is no Nation in the world, which has had the
condition of religion so pure and prosperous, as we, for almost these hundred
years. It Is true, if God calls us to account, we cannot say that we have
answered our opportunities: we find not wherein to boast of our righteousness;
for we are a sinful people, whose lives (for the most part of us) are as
much worse, as our means and professions better then in other places. It is
true also, that of later years the love of religion in most has grown cold,
and the purity by some has been stained and corrupted: and I will not now
discuss where the fault has been; the rather, because it is every man's
endeavor to remove it from himself. Only I will add thus much, That
wheresoever the fault is, there is no man has showed himself more forward to
reform it then the King himself. But Princes cannot always attain their ends
according to their liking, because they see with other eyes, and execute with
other hands then their own. And if we should cast the faults of men upon
authority, we should do wrong (I fear) to those who do not deserve it: for
even this very year, notwithstanding the reformation of corruptions has been
with so much zeal and diligence endeavored, yet the end is not attained: Nay,
in some respects, it is so far set back that, to my understanding, the state
of religion has never been worse since the first reformation, then this
present year: in respect, first, of the greatness of our distractions, which
have divided us all one from another: then, of the multitude of sects and
sectaries which cry indeed, as the Jews before them, Templum Domini; but with a
worse addition, ut Templum Domini diruatur. Lastly, in respect of the many
dishonours done to the service of God, with so much scorn and scandal to
religion, that in foreign parts they question, whether all this time we had any.
No doubt all this is come upon us for our sins: let us remove them, and then
God will bless our study of reformation. But yet in the mean time let us
remember that message, which the good Bishop sent to Epiphanius, Domine, sol ad
occasum descendit. Our sunshine is but yet declining; it may come to set, if
we now begin to disgust this greatest blessing of religion, which God has
bestowed upon us. Let us learn to regard it more, to love it better, to bless
God for it, and for his government who upholds it: a Prince so devout and
religious in his own person, that if all were like him, we should have a
Kingdom of Saints. In this respect, we may use Velleius his words of his
Majesty, Cum sit imperio Maximus, exemplo Major est: The luster of his piety
surpasses the luster of his empire. If therefore that of Synesius be true,
That men generally affect to write after the copies which are set by their
Princes; it behooves us all, both to take out the lesson, and to bless God for
the copy. And moreover, as this day puts us in mind, let us all send up our
most affectionate prayers, that his Throne may be established by
Righteousness, his Crown exalted with Honor, his Scepter be for power like
Moses rod, for flourishing like Aaron's; that his happy reign may in himself
outlive us all, and in his posterity be perpetuated to all generations; that
succeeding ages may confess, Surely God has been favorable unto this land,
and has not dealt so with any Nation. O how happy are the people that are in
such a case! Yea, how happy are the people which have the Lord for their God!

FINIS.
SERMON I.
Hosea. 14.2. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, take
away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of
our lips.


THis Text is able to make a dumb man eloquent, to set open the door of
utterance, to the most illiterate tongue. If there be any one among us that
labors of Moses imperfection, (who confessed of himself, that he was slow of
Tongue, and impotent for eloquence) let him read this Text, and it will teach
him to speak: If there be any among us that have put on David's resolution, to
keep silence even from good words, let him read again this Scripture only,
and he shall find a way to the passage of Speech.

The Prophet here in this place takes on him the Office, and function of a
Schoolmasters: having learned the Art of speaking, the heavenly art of speech
himself, he labors to train up others to the knowledge of the same Art: and I
shall not think much to be his scholar at this time, and to press these words
a little further then the Prophet intended them. He gives them only as a rule
of direction to the people, how to pray to God, but they may serve as a rule of
direction to Ministers how to speak to the people: and indeed, if this go
before the other will the better a great deal follow. That you may with speed
turn to God, it becomes us to turn to you; we must call upon you, that you
would please to call upon him; we must first open our mouths to you, that you
would open yours before the Throne of grace.

And indeed I must needs confess, that I have been too long silent from this
Theme of repentance, considering what the times are. Our dangers are great,
and our carelesnes is as great no man goes about to labor to meet God. I can
hold no longer; and when I look upon this Scripture, methinkes I may take
Elihu's speech into my mouth. Behold I am full of matter, and the Spirit within
me constrains me: My belly is as new wine, which has no vent, it is ready to
burst like new bottles. I will now speak and keep silence no longer. Me
thinks I hear the Prophet behind me, calling upon me as Moses to Aaron, Up,
have thee, get thee to the congregation, the plague is begun, and they are all
asleep, and there is no man that spreads his Arms, and no man that lifts up
his voice to God. Speak to them, and speak to the purpose, I, speak home,
call upon them, to Take to themselves words, and to return to the Lord, and
say thus, and thus to him.

And that I may do it now to purpose, I will take the words in pieces; so they
present to us these two particulars.

There is a rule of excitement.

And there is a rule of direction.

The form of excitement, that is in these words, Take to you words, and turn
to the Lord, and say to him.

The form of direction, that is in the other words, Take away all iniquity,
and receive us graciously.

In the former of these parts, there are two things observeable; a double
excitement; an excitement to duty of action, Turn to the Lord; an excitement
to the duty of elocution, Take to you words, and say to him.

In the latter, there are these two parts also.

One direction is for grace, that is to be given from above; Take away all our
iniquities, and receive us gatiously.

The other direction is for return of thanks, for the mercies of God from
below, So will we give the calves of our lips.

I begin with the first; and that is, the rule or form of excitement, and that
is double, for two duties. And the first excitement is to a duty of action,
Turn to the Lord: it is not the first thing specified in the order of the
words; but it is the first that I will take in, in the order of handling them:
so, it will go well if we read it thus, Turn to the Lord, and take with you
words and say. Thus,

The first thing is for turning to the Lord; the duty to which they were
exhorted in the former verse, yet the Prophet does it here again: He saw their
backwardnes was great, and therefore he pricks them twice forward. He knew it
was a duty of importance, that was to be done often, and daily, Et nunquam nimis
dicitur, quod nunquam nimis discitur. It can never be spoken too often, that can
never be learned too often: it can never be pressed too much, that can never be
learned and understood too much: as they were to do it daily, so he calls upon
them daily in the former verse, and in this verse. This is so evident, that I
need not stand further on it, I shall not need therefore to speak of it; nor
yet of the occasion of these words, that is seen by the coherence of the Text.

The Prophet in the spirit of prophecy foresaw the great misery that was
ready to fall upon them, he foresaw the great captivity that God would bring
on them, therefore nowso long before, he calls upon them to prevent those
miseries; yet there was opportunity to avert the captivity: he speaks to
them therefore, that they would bethink themselves; that God might turn his
purpose of the captivity, that they would turn now the course of their sins,
that they would Turn from their evil ways to the Lord.

The only things I will observe here in the first Phrase, are these two.

The meaning of the Phrase.

And the Propositions that may be drawn from it.

For the meaning of the phrase: it is a phrase that we often meet with, therefore
it will be worth our looking to see what duty that is here, to which the
Prophet exhorts them: for to one of these two, it must needs be referred;
either to prayer, or to repentance, and yet it is doubtful to which of these.

For if we say to prayer; it is to repentance as well as that: for repentance
is a turning to God as well as prayer. And if we say he exhorts them to the
duty of repentance, it seems: otherwise for conversion is but half the work
of repentance. Repentance consists of two acts, there are two parts of it.

The first part of it is contrition, or humiliation, that is the penal, or
passive part of repentance.

The second part only is conversion or reforming of our ways, and that is the
active part: it seems therefore it is not meant of repentance, because that is
but half.

Again if we say, he exhorts to conversion, that implies but half repentance:
for conversion it implies a turning from sin, before we can turn to God.
Therefore the best course will be to take in all these; humiliation as the
first thing in repentance; and aversion from sin, as that that always
accompanies true humiliation; and turning to God by prayer, and supplication,
as that part of repentance, which is the last in act, but the first in intent:
We may well take them in all, for the Scripture allows us this liberty: the
Scripture sets forth to us the whole work of repentance in all the parts of
it, by this one phrase of turning to the Lord, and there is no phrase used in
Scripture to set out the work of repentance ofter then this, Turn to the
Lord. Therefore we may take in both the duties, prayer, and repentance, and
humiliation. So it is thus much in effect, Turn to the Lord, humble your
selves before God; lament your sins, renounce all those transgressions you
have provoked him by; cast them from you, least they cast you from him, cut
them off, least they cut you off: leaving your transgressions, you may come
with comfort and boldness, to the Throne of grace, you may call on him, and pray
to him. Both then are to be taken in; the duty of prayer, and the duty of
repentance. And there is good reason for it.

They both agree to the scope of the place: for the words are either the
excitement of a profane heart, to the work of devotion, or of a hard,
impenitent heart to the work of contrition, and remorse: and the next words
show so much. Ashur, and your own arm cannot save you, he is the Father of
the Fatherless; as if he he had said, Turn to the Lord, or pray that he would
deliver you: for, Ashur, and your own arm cannot save you: and turn to the
Lord by repentance, that he would pardon you, For in him the Fatherless sinde
mercy; they agree with the scope of place.

And they agree with the coherence, Take to you words, words are as necessary
to be taken to the duty of repentance, as to the duty of prayer; necessary to
both.

The penitent man, when he comes before God, he takes words, they are bitter,
mournful words, whereby he enlageth and opens his heartto God: and the
devout man he takes words, they are words of zeal and fervencie, moving,
persuasive words, that God would be reconciled: both the penitent unloads
himself this way, and the devout heart he enlarg eth himself, both take
words. It agrees to the coherence.

Lastly, all of them agree to the metaphor, it is called turning to God:
repentance is a turning, as well as prayer, and prayer as well as repentance;
so that the difference be observed in the application of this word unto them
both.

irst, repentance is a diametricall turning, a turning from the greatest evil,
to the greatest good, from sin to God. Prayer is not a diametricall turning,
but a collateral turning, it is not from the greatest evil to the greatest
good, but from a less good to a greater good; from the works of our calling,
from the exercise of lesser things, to an holy duty.

Secondly, repentance is a final turning, never to come back to sin more; it
is always a purpose to go forwards to God, and never to look back to the
point it is turned from. Prayer is not a final turning, it is a temporary
turning; we leave secular works to have recourse to God; but when prayer is
ended, God allows, and gives us leave to manage the affairs of our calling,
so it be in a decent fashion; it is not a final turning; yet both are turnings.

Prayer is a turning as Damscaene defines it, Elevatio cordis ad deum, a
lifting up of the heart to God: in that it is an elevation of the heart, a
turning of the heart, wherein the devout soul flies above the thoughts and
meditations of all earthly things, and goes out of it self for the fruition
and enjoyment of the comforts of Gods spirit, that it may lay open its wants
before God; it is a turning of the heart and of the voice, and of every outward
part of a man: in prayer, there the eye is turned, by looking up, the hands are
turned by spreading before God, the Knees are turned by bowing before his
footestoole, and the heart is turned by going out of it self.

Prayer leaves the world, Transoendit mundum, as St. Ambrose speaks, it goes
above the world, above the Clouds, it rests not till it come to God; prayer is
a turning.

But more particularly repentance is a turning.

A Universal.

A Total.

A Final turning or change that is wrought in the mind, in the actions of the
body, in the whole man; Repentance works a change in the whole man; not in
the substance of flesh, as Ambrose speaks; not a corporal, visible change
wrought in the substance of the soul or flesh, or in the quantity, or
dimensions of it. Though repentance bring a change in that sometimes, when it
brings the body to meagernes and pyning: but the change is wrought in the
qualities of the mind, and the actions of the body.

There is a perfect change.

First, it is a general, universal turning In respect of the subject; it
works a perfect change in every part, a dark understanding before, is turned
to light; a servile will is now turned to liberty; rebellious affections are
turned now to obedience; a hard heart is turned to softness and meekness: and
so in the body, the eye of wantonness is turned to an eye of chastity; the
uncircumcised ear is turned to an ear of obedience; the rough hands, as
Esaus, are turned to the hands of Jacob; in every thing there is a change. This
is the first thing.

Wherein a true Christian differs from a formal; a formal Christian is changed,
and turned, but not universally in every part. He turns from some sin that he
begins to loath by infirmity of nature; or because his purse will not hold out
to maintain it; or the shame of the world cries him down, or for some
sinister respects: but he keeps his darling bosom sin, O, his beloved sin
he will not part with. He will hear in many things gladly, and reform, as
Herod; he will take a half turn with Agrippa; when Paul preached, says he,
almost, almost; he was wambling; he could find in his heart to turn, but he
was loath to leave his sins. But it is otherwise with a true penitent; as he
turns in earnest, so he labors to make the change discernable in all parts;
he casts off all the rags of old Adam, he casts out all sin, he leaves not a
horn or a hoof behind. Repentance is such a grace, that it scrapes off all
Leviathans skales. It is a laver that washes away all the Lepers spots, it
makes of an Ethiopian, an Israelite; it works not only a palpable, but an
universal change. That is the first thing.

Secondly, as it is universal in respect of the subject; so it is total in
respect of the act. Repentance is such a turning as goes to the contrary point:
it is such a turning as keeps still a direct opposition.

And herein a true convert differs from a formal Christian: the formal
Christian he turns side-wayes; when he begins to have some detestation of
sin wrought in him, he seems to turn a little. As a man that has his back
upon the North-point; if he turn his back to the South, he stands in direct
opposition to that point he looked to before: but if he turn his face to the
East, or West, he may look to the North or South at the same time; he turns
but half, but side ways, if he turn from the North to the East: So a formal
convert, he turns, but he keeps a learing eye upon sin: he looks to sin,
and to God at the same time; when he is in secret he looks to sin: but when
he is in company he looks to God: he looks to Babylon, and Jerusalem at the
same time, he will have his back, not upon the North, but East or West, that
he may look both ways. But a true Convert turns point blank from the point
he was in before to the contrary; because there is no communion between grace
and sin; there is no standing between them both. Newtrall, hovering hearts,
luke warm hearts, that partake of both tempers, such hearts God abhors more
then cold, profane hearts: The godly man will not do so; he knows that grace
and repentance stand in opposition, and contrariety, and repugnancie with sin;
he gets clear to the other point. Sin turns our back upon God, repentance
sets our face to God: sin is a madness or distemper, the frenzy of the
soul; repentance brings a man to his right mind, it brings him to himself:
Sin is an aberration from the mark (so some words in Scripture signify)
repentance on the contrary, it takes the point of the heart, which is the
arrow that we shoot up to Heaven in the sacrifice of Prayer and repentance, and
it turns it just upon the mark again; it sets it right, to aim only at the
glory of God; that we may glorisie God in the latter part of our life, as we
have dishonored him in the former: repentance is a directing to the right
mark.

Lastly, Sin is a deviation, a turning out of the path of obedience, and from
the commandments: repentance (and so the word is here used) is a turning to
the right way, a bringing of our feet to that path, that God has chalked to
us. Repentance, as it is a general turning, in respect of the subject, so it
is total in respect of the act. That is the second thing.

Thirdly, as it is total in respect of the act; so it is final in respect of
the time. True repentance leaves sin: so as that it takes a long farewell, it
takes its great, and last adieu of sin, it says with the Spouse in the
Canticles, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my
feet, how shall I now defile them? I have found the smart of sin, I have put
off the garment of the old man: the Serpents skin is now gone, I am made
partaker of the fleece of the Lamb: there is another garment of the robe of
Christ's righteousness is drawn over me; shall I take my old rags again?
shall I take that which I have put off? I have bathed my feet, my affections; I
have washed my hands in innocence; I have washed my heart in the laver of
epentance, with that laver that begot repentance, the blood of shall I defile
my self any more in the ways and works of sin? this is the language of
repentance, it leaves sin, to turn no more to it.

Here in a true convert differs from a formal Christian; he will turn for a
time, when Gods hand presses him; when he is driven to an exigent, and
etremitie, he will leave his sin, but as a man puts off his garments at
night, when he goes to bed, to take them when he awakes. He leaves sin in the
night of affliction, and tribulation, but when the storm's over, he takes it
again to himself. Such Christ speaks of in the Gospel; they are compared to
dogs and to swine, to dogs that return to their vomit, and to swine, that
return to wallow in the mire, scuh as the Apostle says, that having escaped
the intanglements of the world, are defiled again the second time. Such a one
was Lots Wife that turned from Sodom, but looked back again: such a one was
Demas, that left the fellowship of the world, and embraced the fellowship of
the Apostle, but his resolution held not out, after, he left the fellowship of
the Apostle, and betook himself to communion with the World.

But on the other side, a true penitent does not so, after he has tasted once
of the sweetness of grace, after he has gotten assurance of the pardon of
sin, it begets in him such a detestation and hatred, that though he fall into
any of those sins that cost him the plowing up of his fallow ground, and the
breaking of his heart, he would not change the comfort of his estate, for the
pleasures of all sins, though they were not for a season, but for eternity:
repentance is a final change, so we see the phrase cleared; repentance, and
prayer is a turning.

The Prophet says, Turn to the Lord, that is, turn your lips to him, offer
the sacrifice of praise; and turn your hearts to him too, offer the sacrifice
of a contrite spirit: so much for the meaning of the phrase.

I come to the second, that is, the Propositions that arise from this duty of
action. The propositions are two that arise clearly.

The first Proposition is this, that

In public calamities that are threatened, or sent upon a Land, there is no
hope of having the judgment or punishment removed, except there be a turning
to God by prayer. The Prophet saw the judgment, and their misery, and he
chalks out the means to prevent it.

The first means is this, the turning to the Lord, that is the sum of all;
there is no hope of removing the punishment, except we turn te God by prayer.
That is the first, and that is the way that the Scripture chalks out to us in
diverse places after a diverse manner.

It shows it us sometimes, by virtue of the precept God has commanded us,
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee: when trouble is
nigh at hand, when any affliction perplexeth thee, when thou groanest under any
calamity, lo God himself shows thee the way, and that is this, Call upon me
in the day of trouble, that is, pray to me, turn to me by prayer: that which
he calls there Call upon me is here Turn to the Lord; they are both phrases
equivalent.

It is not only by precept, but it is set out by promise, the Scripture chalks
out this by promise, take one for all 2 Chren. 7. That will suit with our
occasion, and this Scripture. There God makes this promise, If I shut heaven,
that there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the Land, or if
I send the pestilence that it break forth: If yet they shall turn to me, and
seek my face, and pray to me, and forsake their evil ways, I will hear from
Heaven, and pardon their sins, and heal their Land. There could not be a more
gracious promise, nor a more ample promise, it is not only in general, if that
my judgments shall break forth on them: for then, it may be, they would have
wanted understanding to have applied it in particular judgments: therefore God
instances in such, and such judgments; they may stand for all; in time of
famine, and drought, if there be no rain; and if because there be no rain,
there is no plenty; if they be not only in famine, but pestilence, he sets the
means, whereby he will be induced to withdraw these judgments, If they seek
my face and turn to me, and call upon my name, and forsake their evil ways.
There are all the particulars of duty. Then there are all the particulars of
deliverance, I will hear from Heaven, and pardon their sins, and heal their
Land: that is, I will remove the judgments, and not only so; but take them to
grace and favor, so, it is chalked out by promise as well as by precept.

Nay, not only by promise, but it is chalked out, by Testimony and experience:
take David's experience for all, for David was one that showed more experience
of the knowledge of Gods ways then any other.

First, there is the experience of his own person, 2 Samuel 22. When I was in
distress, I called upon the Lord, I cried to God, and he heard me out of his
holy Temple, and my cry entered into his ears. See, David in distress called
upon the Lord, and he heard him.

If we will not believe his experience for himself, let us see it for others.
That he sets down in diverse psalines in general words, that The righteous
cry and the Lord hears them, and delivers them from all their troubles. The
order is this, when the righteous are in trouble, they cry to the Lord, and he
hears them, and his hearing is his answer, and his answer is deliverance out
of trouble.

See yet, if the general will not serve; if David's experience will not serve,
see it in particular Saints, Psalm. 34. This poor man cried to the Lord. It is
worth observing, that David breaks out into such an abruption of phrase; he
named none before, if he had spoken before of one of exceeding piety, and
predicated this of him, This pooro man, we might say as the Eunuch to Philip,
Does the Prophet speak this of himself, or of some other man? but it is a
phrase ordinary in the Psalms, therefore take notice of it; it is in another
Psalm, Her foundations are upon the holic hill; a man would wonder who he
speaks of; but he knew we must needs understand it of the Church: therefore
as in an holy rapture, and speaking of Gods government of it, he says Her
foundations, ye know whom I speak of. So in another Psalm, the Lord hear
thee in the day of trouble; one would have thought he had spoken of some body
before, the Lord hear thee, thee afflicted poor soul, whosoever, In the day of
trouble, the Lord hear thee: so, This poor man. I know some interpret it in
reference to Christ, therefore they make it a prophecy of Gods hearing of
Christ's prayer upon the cross, and in the garden; some of the ancients
interpret it so: but yet it runs more directly concerning righteous men,
according to the phrase of Scripture, This poor man; that is, any poor man,
any righteous man: it is as much, as The righteous cry, and the Lord hears
them: This psore man cried, and the Lord heard him; that is, whosoever is in
distress, and perplexity, if he seek to God, God will hear him, and deliver
him. We see it by experience.

And we may see it by example too. The examples are many in Scripture, I will
instance only in three; that this has always been the course that the Saints of
God, nay, that even wicked men have took in the time of calamity, and
distress to fly to the Throne of grrace, and to turn to God by prayer.
Moses, when God said he had a purpose to destroy the congregation of Israel,
and consume them in a moment, presently he betakes himself to his knees, and
he speaks to God, O Lord this people have committed a great sin: it was the
course that David took too, when he saw the Angel of the Lord with his sword
drawn over Jerusalem, ready to destroy it, It is I that have sinned; it was
the course that Hezekiah took, when he had a Message of death brought to him,
He turned to the wall, says the Text, and said to God, O Lord remember how I
have walked before thee with a perfect heart: he turned to the Wall, that is,
he sequestered himself from earthly occasions that he might Turn to the Lord,
with more liberty of Spirit, and largeness of heart. It was the course that
Manasses took, that filled Jerusalem with blood, when he was in chains, and
captivity, and affliction, he turned to the Lord, and called upon him, and
humbled himself greatly: it was the course that the Prodigal took in the new
Testament, when he had not bread to eat, he says, I will go to my Father,
that is, I will turn to my Father, and say, Father I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee: we see it confirmed by example, there cannot be more
said.

To confirm it by reason: for this is the most easy, and the most equal, and
the most successful, and most possible course of diverting any ill we are
in, or in danger of. It is the most equal and reasonable course, because God
is the person that is provoked by us: he is the Judge that sends the
punishment, it is his Law that is broken, his name that is dishonored: to whom
should we go but to him that we have provoked by our sins?

It is not possible, that the turning away of judgment should be by any other
way, Vain is the help of man: it is not in the Arm of flesh, to save any one
from that judgment that God sends. There is no care, no providence, no
foresight of man can divert judgment: we must have recourse to God.

And it is the most successful way of all other; no man can instance in any
example of any soul that ever turned to God by prayer, in the time of
distress, but if God saw it needful in his wisdom to turn away plague or
famine, he turned it away. Prayer is the most ready, and the most equal way.

And Prayer is the most easy way: can any man desire to have a blessing upon
easier terms, then to ask and have? to turn to God, and to have him turn to
us? to turn to God, and have his judgments turned from us? that is the first
Proposition; there is no hope of turning away calamities over us, but by
turning to God by Prayer.

Secondly, there is no hope of diverting judgments, but by turning to God by
repentance; that is the second, Turn to God by prayer, and turn to God by
repentance, or else prayer will not serve without repentance, If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord wll not hear my prayer. The prayer of sinners
is often times accepted, but it is of penitent sinners; but the prayer of sin
never: the hands of the blasphemer, and the eyes of the Adulterer, that look
to Heaven, God looks with indignation upon such hands, and eyes, and hearts;
we must purge our hearts from wickedness, if we will turn to God.

These two cannot stand together, God and sin, as on the other side, pardon
and impenitencie cannot stand together, because pardon belongs to repentance:
so sin and repentance cannot stand together, the one takes away the other:
sin removes repentance, and repentance removes sin; sin makes a
separation between God and us, repentance knits us again, the one destroys
the other; sin makes God turn from the purpose of of mercy; Your sins
have withheld good things from you: this I did to you, and would have done
more, but for your transgressions: sin makes God turn from the purpose of
mercy; on the other side, repentance makes God turn from the purpose of
judgment.

Lastly, Sin never meets with pardon, that is, impenitencie; though sin
meet with pardon, impenitencie does not: it sets a man further from God then
sin, when its first committed. It is worse to go on in sin, then to commit
it: But repentance always has pardon.

First, repentance never misseth of forgiveness; if we turn to God, he is
always ready to turn to us. See in that place of the Psalm. The Lord is nigh
to all that call upon him, to those that are of a broken heart, and he saves
them that be of a contrite Spirt. Yet plainer in 2. Chron. 3. If ye will turn
to the Lord, the Lord will not turn his face from you: yet again, Amos 5.
Hate the evil, and seek the good, it may be the Lord will be gracious to the
remnant of Joseph, that is, peradventure he will.

Some may say, here is some hope, some comfort, but here is no assurance: there
is no assurance in this place The Lord is nigh; he may be nigh, he is nigh to
all, he may be nigh to me, but yet it may be he will not turn to me in mercy:
it may be he may be too near me, as when he sends judgments, what comfort
have I by that promise, the Lord is nigh? I have less comfort by that, It may
be he will turn. Is salvation promised with it may be? It may be God will be
gracious? There is but little comfort in that, Turn from your evil ways, and
God will not turn away his face. He has turned away his face already, I
would have him turn again; he will not turn from me, but will he turn
again? I, but if those places will not do it, we will find those places that
shall do it to purpose, for though in the Psalm he says the Lord is nigh,
yet in Isa. 55. Let the wicked man forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
evil thoughts, well, and then forward, For he is ready to forgive, and will
abundantly pardon. He will not only come nigh us, but forgive us, he will not
only pardon us, but abundantly pardon. There is not only a little turning
toward us, but a turning to us, and a turning in mercy, and in much mercy.

And again, where it is said, God will not turn his face from them, and in
Jerem. 18. it is said more plainly, he will not only, not turn from them, but
he will directly to them. If I pronounce judgment against a Nation, if they
turn from their evil ways, and turn to me, I will repent of the evil I
thought to bring upon them: God condiscends not only to return, but in our
language he condiscends; he calls upon us to repent, and he promises to repent:
it is impossible he should repent properly, because he cannot change, but his
repenting is answerable to ours; if we return wicked man forsake he will
turn from the evil of punishment, if we repent of our actions, he will repent
of his purpose, if they turn to me, I will return to them; there is more then
not to turn from them.

Lastly, where it is said in Amos, It may be the Lord will be merciful: in
Ezekiel. 18. it is a certainty, God will certainly be merciful; If the wicked man
forsake his wicked ways, he shall surely live, and not dye. I will spare his
life, he shall live and not dye: so you see plainly, God has promised to
turn, and to turn abundantly, and in mercy to the penitent heart that turns
to him. Thereupon those Phrases are so often in Scripture, Zech. 1. Mall. 3.
Turn to me, and I will turn to you: God conditions, I will come as far to
meet you, as you shall to meet me, I will take as much pains to save you, as
you shall to save your selves, nay I will prevent you, I will turn to you
first, and make you return to me, turn to me that I may save you; God
capitulates, as if it were an arbitration; how long will ye stand upon terms?
I will condescend, let us meet one another half way, Turn to me: it is not
for my good that I expect it, but for yours; turn to me, and I will turn to
you.

And for your better encouragement, you see plainly that repentance always
meets with pardon of sin, and reversion of judgments: the impenitent never
meets with pardon, when a man continues in sin: in Ezekiel. 18. The righteous
man if he forsake his righteousness, and betake himself to a course of sin;
as a wicked man when he converts, he shall live, and not dye: so a righteous
man when he turns to sin, he shall dye and not live; and The Lord will
break the hairie scalp off him that goes on in sin; that is, the Lord will
pour judgments, heavy judgments, that shall fetch off hair and head, and
all; he will strike him in his vitals: the Lord will break the scalpe of him,
not that commits, but that goes on in sin, that is, of impenitent men: it is
impenitencie that brings judgments upon men, or Kingdoms; for a man to think
that he may continue in sin, and yet God will turn away his judgments, it
is presumption: that is to make God a Liar; it is to make God a breaker of his
own truth, and rule. We read that God turned, and had mercy, but they still
turned to him. For, that of Ahab, we read that God said concerning Ahab, that
he would not bring the evil in Ahabs days, as he had threatened: but the Text
says, that Ahab humbled himself. There is hope, it may be, says Amos, and
Ahab found it was so, he humbled himself, and God turned from his judgment.
We read the same of Niniveh, when God denounced judgment against it, yet
Forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed, yet after, God gave them a longer
time, forty days, and forty days, and forty years, even after his own word
was gone out: but withal, we read that Niniveh turned from their sins, and
repented in sackcloath and Ashes: so we read of Israel, Judge. 10. after God
had denounced judgment, it is said there, That God was grieved at the heart,
because of their oppression; he began to repent, as when a man repents, there
is grief of heart joined with repentance: so God, He was grieved at the heart,
because of Israel: but we read that They put away their strange gods, and
confessed of themselves that they had done wickedly.

There is an instance, 2 Chronicles. 12. of Rehoboam, God says concerning him, and
the Princes of Judah that he would not bring those judgments, that he
threatened against them, and that he would deliver them, and give them success;
but we read withal, that they confessed their sins before God, and said,
The Lord is righteous: still where there is removing of judgment, there is
leaving of sin, and there is humiliation, and repentance. Therefore we cannot
gather, that because God is merciful to the penitent, he will to the
impenitent; it is presumption.

Secondly, it is a vain thing, as well as a presumptuous, to think that God
will cease correcting, if we do not cease committing, to think that God should
change, that is not capable of change, that he should change his purpose of
judgment, that is immutable, and we not change our purpose of sin, and going
on in sin, that are made of change. Tell me if itstand not with reason that
man should change, that is made changeable, rather then we should hope, that
God should change, that is not capable of change? but then he is said to
change, when he changes us, and makes us better; when men are under
affliction, and he sends them prosperity; when men are under the weight of
sin before, and he sends them salvation; when he works this change, God is
said to change: therefore the change must be on our part.

The consideration of this makes me think, that this poisoned arrow, that
destroys by night, and kills by day, this arrow of the pestilence, that runs
through our streets, and Cities, and Towns, that takes so great a flight from
the mother Cities, to the Daughter Cities, that flies in a moment, not only a
few miles, but many, and picks out this City, and that Town, and that
Country, and this street in a Cicie, and this house in a street. It makes me
think that that sword will be made more sharp before God put it up, and that
arrow head will be poisoned more before God call it back: why? because there is
no thought of repenting: so far are we from turning, that we have not yet
learned to play the Hypocrites; we are not come so far as the Pharisees; we
are not come so far as to dissigure our faces. There is no man almost turns
his countenance, that turns his eye to the ground. We are smitten, but we are
not sensible, Gods hand presses us, but we are not humbled: the Fan is sent
out, but we are not winnowed: we are a corrupt floor, and a corrupt
generation that go on still. We are out of the way, we, and our Princes, and
Nobles, and as our fathers before us: so we have done evil, as Daniel says,
still we are a rebellious people.

I may ask Chrisostomes question, that he asked the people of Antioch; who is
there among us all that his heart smites him? who is there among us all that
once grieves for sin? that once smites on his Thigh, that makes his hand
smite upon his breast, to recall himself to turn to the Lord? Nay, we may
say, as the Prophet of the people of Israel, Jer. 3. I called, but they would
not turn, and in Jer. 8. I hearkened and heard, to see if there were any that
would leave their wicked ways; but behold there was no man, they all went on
in the imaginations of their own hearts, and none said, what have I done? Or
as the house of Judah. Jerem. 18. I called to them for the forsaking of their
sins, but they gave me this answer, Nay, but as for us, we will walk in the
devises if our hearts, and do that which is delightful in our own eyes, and
according to the imaginations of our own Spirits. It is the answer that we
return generally to God, though we say it not with our lips, we resolve to
walk according to the devises of our own hearts: and what are those? the
devises of pride and vanity, of fraud and iniquity, and of lying, and
reviling one another: and these are the devices of our own hearts, not the
devises of Gods Spirit, and of his law; and these are the answers that we
return, Nay, but we will walk according to the devises of our own hearts.

I cannot tell into what principle I shall resolve, what should be the cause of
so much impenitencie and hardness. Were it so that God had set us hard
conditions, I should cease to wonder, but the conditions are easy, it is but
Turn to me. Were it that we were not sensible of these things, and heard not
these doctrines in our ears, I should not wonder: but we hear them, and
harden our heart. It can be nothing but the Spirit of security, and
drowsinesse, that Isaiah speaks of, that possesses us, The Spirit of slumber
is on them, and they have closed the eyes of their understanding. We sleep,
and promise our selves good days, when God pronounces evil. It were well if
it were no more but a Spirit of slumber, there might be hope that we should
awake, but it is as a Spirit of derision, of scorn, like Job's horse, that
laughs at destruction, we laugh when our fear comes: and as his horse is
described there; so men go on in sin, they rush into the battle, though they
be to encounter with God, as if they were able to meet with judgments.

I have often wondered, that upon all those inducements to seek heaven, and
salvation, that men should neglect it so much, and I see the reason is, because
men love life temporal, better then eternal: earth is heaven, this world is
better then the other, yet that is some reason, because this life has some what
sensible, and we are lead by sense; it must be a heart of faith that looks
after the other life, sensible men will look to this life.

But this I wonder at, that men should not only love temporal life better then
eternal, but that men should love sin better then life. There is nothing
that a man has in this world better then life, he will part with skin for
skin, arm after arm, thousands after thousands, with eye, and skin, and arm,
and all to save his life; shall we be willing to part with those, and not with
sin after sin? were it once said, and all that a man had committed, would
he give for his life, it were something, if we would part with sin after
sin; no, but we love sin beter then life, and that is the reason, though
we be in danger, we go on in sin. Remember the voice of him that calls,
God could not propound to you a more gracious way, turn by prayer and
repentance. There are many bonds that will put us upon it.

The bond of nature calls upon us: all creatures turn to God, the insensible
creatures; the Ravens, and Lions, they turn to God, and seek their meat of
him; shall we be more insensible then they?

There is not only the bond of nature, but of obedience, God calls upon us to
turn, we owe so much obedience to his command: we owe it in duty, it is a
duty, God will make us come in by the lure of judgment whether we will, or no.

The bond of thankfulness calls upon us: whatsoever we have is from God; the
blessings of this life, and the hopes of a better, our health, and strength,
and means, and countenance, our wits and comforts, the hope of salvation, and
the hope of the pardon of sin, all is from God: by the bond of
thankfulness, let us turn to him that gives us all, that is the fountain of
all blessings, we have none but from him.

Further, there is the bond of necessity, that if we turn not to God, we can
turn no where; if he take away his countenance, we are consumed into our first
dust: and it were well if we were resolved into that, but we are turned into
Hell, when God takes away the light of his countenance; Hell is where God is
not; O! whether shall I turn says Bernard, that I may turn to the Lord,
whither shall I go but to thee? say the Disciples, Thou have the words of
eternal life: whom have I in heaven but thee, or what in earth in comparison
of (...)? whether shall we fly from God? if we cannot fly ^^rom him, there is
a bond of necessity that we return to him. If there were no love necessity
should constrain us to turn to God.

Again, there is the bond of congruitie: God turns to us, and he turns
first; and he turns woing, and beseeching, and entreating, that we would
return to him, and love our selves: if we will not love God, yet let us love
our selves, and conform to Gods gracious affection, that supreme Majesty,
that is pleased to descend from that high Throne, to turn to sinful man, and
to call upon him; and he turns to us now when he speaks to us, and he turns
to us ever in granting our Prayers, and in exercising his long-suffering daily;
that bond of congruitie, should make us turn. Yet that is not all.

There is the bond of experience in our selves, that when we have turned to him
heretofore, he has turned to us in mercy; when we have been in trouble, we
have prayed, and he has heard us, we have confessed our sins, and he has
given us pardon, things have succeeded well.

Nay, there is the bond of example, see it in many holy, and wicked men, there
was never any that returned, to God, Rehoboam, Manasses, who not? the
Prodigal, the Publican when he returned; no sooner he thought of turning to
God, but God turned to him. We have that bond of encouragement to move us.

There is the bond also of hope; hope is grounded on the promise of God; he
has promised to turn if we turn.

Lastly, there is the bond of fear to prevail, if love will not, fear may
prevail: let that bond move us; that is a great obligation; we are in danger,
if we turn not, he has Whet (...) sword, and bent his bow, he has prepared
the instruments of death: he still hovers to see if we will return, and he
forbeares; and though we have been desperate in committing sin, let us not be
desperate in impenitencie; and though we have been unhappie in sinning, let us
be happy in returning.

For simply speaking, sin is not so damnable, as going on in sin, it is
not so fatal and mortal to sin, as to continue and go on in sin. As it is
with health and physic, a man were better want health, then want physic, if
a man want health, there is hope of recoverie if he have physic; but if he
want physic, there is no hope of recoverie. So, repentance is the physic,
sin is the disease, it is not so much danger to sin, as to be impenitent:
repentance that is the physic; if a man sin, there is a way to pardon, but if
he be impenitent, there is no pardon; impenitencie excludes pardon. Therefore
fear should make us turn to God.

Impenitencie is that only sin, that is damnable, and mortal: impenitency is
that that shuts the pits mouth: impenitency is that that settles us on our
lees, that hardens our hearts, and makes God absent himself for ever, it makes
judgments irrevokeable; impenitencie seals up the den of the Lions, it rols
the stone to the door, of the Sepulcher, it leaves no possibility of
forgiveness; it makes sin infinite, and uncureable. Therefore let us not
drown our selves in that estate, that will shut us out from all hope, not only
of having judgment diverted, but of having sin pardoned. O! it is a theme
that we should always think of, and never end speaking of: it is the sum of
the Law, and of the Gospel; the effect of Gods grace, and of his punishments,
it is that that God expects at all times, from the best men, from the most
wicked men.

Therefore to shut up all with that excellent speech of Zephanie, Zeph. 1.
Gather your selves together, O Nation not desired. It suits well with us thus
far, gather your selves together, O Nation not desired. We are a Nation not
desired, as the case stands: What then? Forsake your evil ways, leave your
sins, turn from your iniquities, and seek Gods face, it may be you shall be
hid in the day of the Lords anger.

There is another, It may be, like that of Amos, it may be you shall be hid, it
is true now, it is but it may be. It may be the day is past, the day of
returning. Time was when there was more then probability; it is to be feared
now God is gone too far, he has wrestled so long, that he will not be now
entreated; yet for all that, yet it may be, peradventure God will turn; we
know not, he is rich in mercy, let us not be wanting to our selves; if that
succeed not that he return from this plague, yet he will turn from his wrath,
to those that fear him.

Let it be done with one consent; all the people as one man, with one mind, and
voice, turn from sin, if there be any profane, let him turn from
blaspheming Gods name, if there be any Drunkards of Ephraim, let them turn
from their revelling; and not only Drunkards, but Sippers, that tipple, and
wast their time and credit, and dream over the pot; those are worse then
Drunkards; for they do but wast that estate they have before men, but the
other wast that precious time, that they should get salvation in, their hearts
are after wine: if there be any that neigh after their neighbors wives, any
adulterous seed, any that have hands of blood and oppression, those that grind
the faces of the poor, those that have fingers of coveteousnesse; men that have
fraudulent hands, that practice the mysteries of their Trade, let them turn
from their evil ways, Gather your selves together, O Nation not desired;
forsake your sins, and come to the Lord, It may be you shall be hid in the
day of the Lords anger. That is the sum of this exhortation to this first
duty that the Prophet gives in these words; Turn to the Lord, and in turning,
Take to you words.

SERMON II.
Hosea. 14.2. Take to you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, take away
all iniquity, etc.


THERE is no commendable virtue, but it is beset with extremes on both hands,
one on the right hand, and another on the left. For moral virtues it is
evident; and for natural habits, whether they be outward, or inward, we may
instance but in one for all; that is, The gift of speech, it has extremes
that hedge it in both ways: There is one extreme in the defect, that is,
Silence; and of that it is that the Prophet accuses the Shepherds of Israel
that they did betray the salvation of the people by their silence, they were as
dumb Dogs that could not bark. And the other extreme is, in excess, and that
is called much speaking, and of that Solomon tells us in the Proverbs, in
multiloquio, etc. In the multitude of words there never wants sin: It is so in
natural language, and in civil kind of speech; and it is so also in the
spiritual language, and in the conference we have with God. Prayer is the
language of the heart, and it has extremes on both hands: For the extreme
that is in excess, Christ touches it in the Gospel, he tells us of the
Pharisees, that thought they should be heard for their long prayers, and much
babbling; that is one fault. And for the extremity in the defect, we have it in
Job 21. and Job 32. where he complains of profane persons, those that God was
not in their thoughts, and so not in their tongue, to speak of him with
reverence, Who is the Almighty that we should serve him? or what help is there
in the Lord that we should pray to him? The Children of Israel were guilty of
both these extremes, and that kept them that they could not hit the
mediocrity, to observe a good decorum in prayer to God: For the multitude of
their words, the Prophet Malachy sets it down, Chap. 3. they were come to that
height, they durst reason with God: Ye have robbed me, says God: They reply,
Wherein have we robbed thee? Ye have spoken stoutly, says God: They reply,
Wherein? They had words whereby to dishonor God, and none to please, or to
pacify him. And for the defect of speech in the grace of prayer, the Prophet
Isaiah tells us, Chap. 64. that he looked about and found none, that did apply
themselves to call upon God, or to lay hold of him.

It is not usual for a man to be guilty of both extremes in the same kind of
sin; because that extremes are contrary one to another; yet they had a double
guilt upon themselves, they were full of words in worldly matters, but
altogether silent and dumb toward salvation. To speak against God, so they
abounded with words, and yet to speak to him to pacify him, so they wanted
them. Therefore it is this infirmity the Prophet Hosea here labors to cure in
this people. He observed their defect, he saw how they turned aside; but they
would not lay hold on the means of pacification; therefore now he directs them
to see the right way, whence they should take their beginning to work
atonement, and reconciliation with God. He speaks Ephata, he puts his finger
(as it were) to their mouths to open them, to unbowell their hearts with the
acknowledgement of their sins, with the in larging of their petitions to God;
and thus he counsels them, Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, and
say, thus and thus.

You may remember how I divided the words, they contain two things:

The form of an excitement:

And a form of direction.

The form of excitement in the first part, that is to two duties.

One to the duty of action, Turn to the Lord.

Another to the duty of elocution, Take to you words, and speak to him.

Of the former I spoke in the Forenoone, reading the words so, Turn to the
Lord, and in turning, take to you words: And there I showed you what was the
occasion of this exhortation; what was the reason he presses the exhortation
twice upon them, of turning to the Lord, what are the duties he aims at: To
stir them up to the work of prayer, that is one kind of turning; to stir
them up to the work of repentance, that is another kind of turning to the
Lord: An universal turning in respect of the subject, a total turning in
respect of the act; a final turning in respect of the time, never to look on
sin again. What the propositions were that arose hence, That there is no
diversion of judgments without turning to God by prayer, and turning to God by
repentance; there is no true repentance without casting away sin. This is the
sum of that I delivered in the forenoone.

Now I go on, that is, to the second excitement, to which here the Prophet
would provoke and stir them, and that is, to the duty of elocution: In the
former he showed them the way, what course they must take to God, Turn to him:
In this he shows them the way, what course they must take for repentance, Take
words to themselves.

Take to you words. There is no difficulty in the meaning of the phrase, there
can be nothing more familer to us then that phrase, which entreats of speech,
and taking of words, which is only proper to man: Yet I find that
Interpreters make a little difference in the exposition of them.

For some will have this to be the meaning that the Prophet here excites them
to a duty of obedience, Take to you words: Here me now when I speak to you in
these words: That is the exposition of Mercer and Zanche, listen to my words
when I exhort you to repent and turn to the Lord; that is the meaning of that
phrase: But others better, that the Prophet excites them here to a duty of
expression of their repentance, that that would kindle in them the flame of all
good desires, by getting a wholesome form of speech to come before God: So the
meaning is, Take to you words; humble your selves before God, fly to him by
prayer, seek reconciliation at his hands; but take heed that you come not
unprepared, unprovided; fit your selves well before, and study how to speak to
him, Take words, and then go to him, and turn: This I take to be the more
proper exposition, more genuine: For if we insist in the other, the phrase of
speech will not bear it, it offers violence to the Text; it is not only
diverse, but repugnant; for if that were the meaning, Take to you words, that
is, hear my words; the Prophet would not have exhorted them to have gotten
lips, but ears, not words, but attention: He does not here exhort them so much
to listen to him, as to open their own mouths to God. Therefore of necessity
we must take it as the words lie, for the procurement of the language of prayer
and repentance, which will be most fit for the expression of their repentance
to God: So taking this thus, there are these two things to be considered in
this part.

One is the getting of words.

Another is for the uttering and expressing of them.

The first, in those words, Take to you words.

The second, in the other, And say to God.

And I shall only speak of the former at this time; that is, of the words they
should take to themselves.

Take to you words. It has respect to the former duty I spoke of in both the
acceptions, Turn to the Lord, turn by prayer, turn by repentance, both ways
it looks: When you pray to God, then get words, when you repent of your sins,
then get words: It is the observation both of Cyrill, and Chrysostom, he
stirs them up that they should bring with them, Non aurum, non argentum, non
oblationes, sed preces; he calls to them not to bring their Gold, or Silver to
Gods Treasury, not to bring their Sheep, or Oxen to his Altar; God was weary of
those Sacrifices, he looked for repentance, it was only to bring words of
prayer in humbling themselves and seeking mercy, and words of repentance in
acknowledging their sins; this was the scope the Prophet aimed at: So, I will
consider in it two things.

The motives that induced the Prophet to make this exhortation, he calls upon
them for words, get you words.

And the scope he propounded to himself in it, what is the duty he would
excite them to.

First, the motive that induced the Prophet to make this exhortation here, for
we have not the parallel to it in Scripture, Take to you words: It should seem
they were brought to a very low ebb for piety, that they knew not the first
elements and principles; that they could not go so far as wicked Israel that
would flatter God with their mouth: that they were so far from true
contrition, that they could not so much as bring words of confession to
acknowledge their sins, though it were but from the teeth outward.

We know they were a people of another temper, the Psalmist describes them,
they were a people given too much to words, the Israelites: In Psalm. 10. Their
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, mischeife and vanity is under their
tongue. Psalm. 59. the Psalmist says, they used to belch out their words
against God, Swords were in their mouths; that is, they had all kind of words
but those that they should have, words of cruelty, Swords were in their
tongues; words of deceit, the poison of Aspes was under their lips; words of
mischeife, words of rebellion against God, and yet for words of devotion, and
words of repentance, there their hearts were barren. It was their backwardness
to this duty the Prophet observed, and that made him frame this exhortation;
they were backward to the work of repentance, they hardly knew what it meant;
some general hints they had, that God was displeased, and was to be pacified,
but they had forsaken the Fountain of living water: They knew how to bring
words to Ashtaroth, but not to come with words of repentance to the true God.
There were many impediments that kept them from using words in prayer.

Partly, they were afraid by reason of their sins.

Partly, they were ignorant, they knew not how to endite their prayers, to
frame their bill, when they should prefer their suits to God.

Partly, their hearts were hardened, they were not touched within; out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Where there is not repentance
within, there are no words without: The Prophet observed all these defects,
their backwardness to this duty, that made him frame this exhortation, Take to
you words.

That this was their case, before, and after, and then, we may see it out of
diverse places of Scripture. Before the time of this Prophet, see it in Job,
see it in David: After the time of this Prophet we may see it in Jeremiah,
Chap. 8. I hearkened and heard, but there was none that turned to the Lord: He
took a Candle to look about him, and could not find a man that knew how to
pray to God: That it was so in the time of this Prophet, see it in Isaiah,
Chap. 64. he lived in the same time with Hosea, There is none that calls upon
God, there is none that lays hold on him by prayer: The Prophet observed this
well, that here was their error and defect; he might have said of them, as
Job says concerning his Friends, I waited and expected if they would speak to
God, but I found they were all silent: The Prophet had long expected to see, if
after all those excitements they would yet turn, if they would yet learn to
make but one form of prayer, to humble themselves but in the eyes of men; but
afterward finding that yet they would not return of themselves, he could hold
no longer, but provokes them to the practice of the duty of repentance, that
they might now show the language of repentance and prayer, Take to you words:
It is as much as if he had said, How long will ye absent your selves? Are ye
not yet sensible? Neither the judgments that are insticted, nor the evils
threatened, will not they yet move you? If yet they cannot stir you up in your
minds to seek God, because he is gracious, yet look to your selves, seek to
him for your selves, because you are miserable: If you cannot come to him of
your selves, come to me, I will learn you; if it be fear that keeps you back,
I will embolden and encourage you; though your sins be many, God is gracious;
though they be great, God is merciful; if ignorance keep you back, come,
hearken to me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord: Little Children, I will
teach you to pray, and set you a form of confession; though you cannot bring
repentance in perfection, bring it in the principles; though the name of tears
be yet unpleasant to you, yet the name of words is acceptable; what more easy
then this? I call not now for the plowing up of your fallow ground, and the
rending of your hearts, though God expect that, that you may come to that in
time: All that I now require is, that you take words, and speak to the Lord in
this form, Take to you words.

So now in this part we may see there are two things commendable in this
carriage of the Prophet.

The first thing that is commendable is this, that he watches over them in
their deficiencies, he has an eye upon them, he studied where their
imperfections lay, that he might apply himself to cure them, that he might
lay on the salves: A Physician who knows not the cause, and the nature of the
disease, cannot apply a remedy. The Prophet searches, and diggs for hardness
of heart in Israel, and having found it, he applies the remedy; he watches
over them in their ignorance and back-slyding. See Jeremiah, he took a Candle
to see if there were a man; I hearkened and heard, says he. It was the course
that the Apostles took: See Paul, Heb. 5. how he studies the condition of the
Churches he wrote to. Some were strong, and he propounds the Oracles of God to
them; some were weaker, and those he comes to in elements, and principles of
Christian Doctrine: He comes to the Hebrews bringing the Milk of principles,
and teaching them again which were the first elements of Faith: It is the
course that every good Minister takes; we shall never know the state of our
people, unless we study their imperfections, and watch over them: How shall we
know what Doctrines to deliver to you? It is a thing you desire, to walk in
clouds that we might not observe you in your imperfections; but that you may be
raised out of sin, give us leave to pry into them, to be diligent to watch over
our Flocks and Herds, to watch which way they walk, and how they thrive, and
live, that we may know which is diseased, which is wandering, and which is
sound, and which keeps in the Fold: That is the first thing in the Prophet.

The second thing commendable is, he does not only watch over their weakness,
but condescend to their infirmities, he applies himself to their temper: So
the Apostle Paul dealt with the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 3. And I brethren, when I
came to you, I could not come to you as spiritual, but as carnal; babes in
Christ: therefore I brought not strong meat, but milk, because you were not
able to bear meat, nor are not yet: The Apostle condiscends to their capacity,
he saw the state of their stomach what meat they could bear, and what they
could not digest, and he comes to them accordingly: So Hosea here, he observed
that the people were not able to bear this strong Doctrine of the depth of
repentance; therefore he comes to them in the first principles, he reads to
them the Alphabet of repentance; he would first teach them to spell repentance:
For tears, and sighs, and groans, and rending of the heart, and beating in
pieces of the spirit, he knew these things were requisite to repentance, but
these were harsh symptoms, he propounds not these now, but only that thy
bring words. It is not now, take to you tears, but words. That is the second
thing commendable in the Prophet; and that shall serve for the motive that
induced him to make this excitement.

The second thing, is the excitement it self, Take to you words, words of
repentance, and words of prayer. He would instruct them in two languages at
once: For every grace of the spirit has a peculiar language; Faith has its
language, and charity has her language, repentance has her language, Prayer
has language for all the rest: The Prophet at once would instruct them in the
language of repentance and of prayer.

First, in the language of repentance, and that is confession of sin; that is
the tongue of repentance: Take to you words of turning, turning words, words
that beseem converts, words of remorse, words of contrition, words of
humiliation; take to you words that you may lay open your sins before God: So,
he shows them two things concerning the duty of confession of sin.

One is the necessity of the confession of sin to the duty of repentance, no
repentance without confession of sin, nor no pardon where there is no
repentance.

The other concerns the form of this confession, what manner of confession
men must bring to God: Take to you these words, and turn.

The first is concerning the necessity of the grace; Take to you words,
confess your sins to God; that is the effect of it, because the Prophet would
draw them into a course of diversion of Gods judgments; there is no diversion
of judgment without the pardon of sin, and there is no pardon without
confession, therefore he presses this duty: It is the interpretation that all
take in. Confess your sins to God, and so turn to him; because without
confession there is no pardon, no forgiveness. Solomon sets it down so, Prove.
17. He that covers his sins shall not prosper; that is, he that would hide
them from God; he that will not open them by confession shall not prosper, as
not in other courses of his life, so especially, he shall not prosper toward
God, and Heaven, toward spiritual comfort; to have any comfort of pardon of
sin; for God has set this condition, if we will have him cover our sins, we
must open them; if we will have him cover them, we must discover them: if we
will have him shut his eyes on them, we must open our eyes upon them, and lay
them open to God that knows them; there is no repentance, and no forgiveness
without confession.

On the other side, where there is an humble acknowledgement, and confession of
sin to God, there pardon still follows: See it in the Thesis, He that covers
his sins shall not prosper, says Solomon, but he that confesses, and forsakes
them shall find mercy: So in the Thesis: See it in the Hypothesis in David, I
said I will confess my sins, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Psalm.
32. It was not only so in the time of the Law, but in the Gospel; in David's
time, and in John's time, 1 John 2. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins: If we confess them, he is faithful and just, he
is not only merciful, but faithful: A man would have thought it should have
run thus, If we confess our sins he is gracious, and full of loving kindness
to forgive them; no, but he is just: Why? Because God has promised pardon to
the confession of sin; it is not only grounded upon his mercy, but upon his
truth, and therefore upon justice: God were not just if he should not pardon
sin to Penitents: If we confess our sins, he is not only gracious and
merciful, but faithful and just to forgive sin: He has bound himself, that
he that makes a humble confession to God in Christ, and comes with a penitent
heart by Faith in Christ, he is faithful and just to forgive sin. We see upon
the hiding of our sins, pardon is excluded, upon the opening of our sins,
pardon is assured. So it stands, says Tertullian, both ways, Cum accusat
excusat, cum condemnat absolvit, etc. When we accuse ourselves, God acquits us,
when we condemn our selves, God absolves us: Here is the ready way to get
absolution, for a man to cast down himself. He that takes no glory to
himself, but all shame, and gives glory to God, God will give grace to such a
soul; otherwise, let us never think that God will pardon those that we labor
to hide from him, Si faves tu peccato, etc. says Austin sweetly; if thou take
upon thee to be the advocate of thy sins, to plead for them, how shall God be
the acquitter, and absolver? Therefore that God may free thee from them,
condemn thy self, lay the bond, and obligation and weight of thy sins upon
thine own conscience; that is the way to have God to ease them, that is the
way the Prophet prescribes.

Beloved, we need not be discouraged at this Doctrine, it is not in the wit of
man; and it were too bold a word to say that God himself could not invent a
more easy way, we know not how far God can go, but we cannot see that God
could have found a more facile way then for men to confess and find mercy,
confess, and have mercy: The true confession of the lips, out of contrition of
spirit by Faith in Christ is most sure to meet with pardon and forgiveness.
Let any tell me whether there be a more compendious way to remission then this:
It is but an easy way that is prescribed in the other word, Turn to the Lord,
and the Lord assures the removing of judgments upon that. But confession of
sin is more easy, it is that that is concurrent with the other, it is that
that waits on it; nay, it is that that goes before; and if there be this
humble acknowledgement made, if it be not out of dissimulation, and hypocrisy,
God has assured pardon to it: So different are the conditions of the Covenant
at the first, and now; the precept that God gave to Adam was harder, Thou shall
not commit sin, but the commandment he gives us is easy, If thou sin,
confess thy sins to God, and he will have mercy: Confession is the salve; as
God alone is the Physician, so here he prescribes by the Prophet the salve for
sin. Nazienzen calls it so sweetly: It is the Potion that the soul takes, it
is the Plaster that is to be applied to the sore of sin. Chrysostom enlarges
it, by making the proportion in the other part: Sin, that is the disease and
ulcer; and repentance, confession of sin, and the renouncing of our sin, that
is the remedy: The remedy, says Gregory well, because it is the opening of the
wound: Says Origin, it is as the Vomit that is taken into the stomach, that
cleanses the stomach; so repentance unloads the conscience; confession, and
casting out sin by the mouth, it is the Vomit of the soul, says he well.
Confession it is the physic, that healing Medicine that God has prescribed to
us: Austin sums up many virtues in a short compendium of words, speaking of
this excellent grace of confession of sin to God. Confession of sin to God, is
that which is the hope of Believers, the glory of sinners, the expeller of all
vice, and all iniquity; the Tether to keep a man in compass of due obedience,
the sweet bond to the soul; it is that that shuts the pit of Hell, it is that
that opens the gate of Paradise, because it opens the way to the mercy of God;
confession of sin is the language of repentance.

That when I consider, I cannot but wonder that men that are sensible of sin,
and of Gods displeasure, should be so backward to this work, not only of
repentance, but of acknowledgement of sin. It is a common fault we all labor
of. First, we commit a sin, and then with Adam we hide our selves, and get
Fig Leaves, not only to hide our selves from men, but from God. It is true, I
cannot but wonder that men are loath to make their sins known to God; there is
impious shame that keeps men from confessing their sins to men, because unless
we tell them there are corner sins of darkness that men cannot find out; but
is it shame to confess them to God? God knows them all before, why should men
go about to hide that which he knows before it is committed? Why should I
hide them from thee, O Lord, says Austin, since thou know mine own heart
better then I my self? Yet so vain we are, we think if no earthly eye see us
in the commission of sin, neither does the eye of Heaven look upon us: When we
see not our selves, we think God sees us not; we desire to walk in Mists and
Clouds, it is the case of every man: Tertullian sets it down well, concerning
this duty of confession.

Every may has forehead enough for the committing of sin, their foreheads
are harder then an Adamant to commit sin, but then they have no forehead to
confess: It is shame that keeps them from men, and it is shame that keeps them
from God. Et sic, etc. says he, no marvel if they perish with that ill shame,
and pudor, since they are more mindful of shamefastness then salvation; for
if there be any shame in confessing sins to God, there is a great deal more in
hiding them. But it is so far from shame, that it is the only grace, it is
the first fruits of repentance, confession. Children when they are first borne,
cry; it is the first expression of life, crying; and he that is borne and
begotten to God again, that is, a newborn babe, the first manifestation of
life is from the mouth, by confession of sin.

O Beloved, let us not be so inured to hide our sins from God that must only
pardon them, not to hide them from him, that will call us to account: If we
hide them now, the time will be that he will lay them open. Christ says in the
Gospel, that that is done in secret shall be published on the house top: that
that is now done in corners shall then be laid open, when all flesh shall be
laid open before Gods tribunal: If now it be a little shame, what will it be
then? If there be shame in sin now, what confusion will there be when it shall
be the forerunner of damnation and Hell? If any thing in the World will move a
man to lay open his heart, to d^vide his heart, and make all naked before God,
it is this consideration that all must be laid open after, the secrets of all
hearts must be disclosed: And in the mean time if he would have any comfort of
the pardon of sin, now, he must repent of them, and confess them. We need
not be ashamed to come to God; I showed before, he has annexed pardon to
confession: See it in instances and examples, the Publican he comes with the
language of confession, they were not many words, it was but a breife
confession of sin, O God be merciful to me a sinner. There is the petition in
the first part of the words, and confession in the next, I am a sinner,
therefore O Lord be merciful; see the issue, He went away justified, says
Christ; he said little, Peter said less, Peter went out, and wept bitterly:
Lego, etc. says Ambrose, I read that Peter wept, but not that he spoke any
words of confession; there was the confession of the heart; and though we read
not of it, yet no doubt the voice of the mouth went with the cry of the eye;
Peter wept, and confessed his sin: And mark, Peter was received again to
favor, and to the honor of Apostleship, yet we read not of the words that he
spoke. Every man supposes, that he that comes to confess sin, brings words
with him, yet we see not his words.

If not that example, see David, Nathan comes to him, he makes a Parable, and
then comes with a compendium, Thou art the man; David multiplies not words
again; there are but three in our language, there is but one in the Latin,
and in the Original; Peccavi, I have sinned: before the word was out of David's
mouth, Nathan from God gives him a publication of pardon, that he had pardoned
his sin: It could not be a shower confession then that that is made in one
word, he could not speak more compendiously: Yes, we see in Psalm. 32. he makes
a shorter confession, he had but a thought, a purpose of confession, and God
pardoned him, I said I will confess: God saved him a labor of further
expression, because he saw the integrity of his heart; before he said, I have
sinned, I said I will confess, upon the resolution of repentance, there is a
resolution of forgiveness: So gracious is God, not only to meet us, but to
prevent us: It was a sincere acknowledgement and confession that he made, and
it was in that very purpose of confession.

Nay, go further; for the Children of Israel went not thus far as to come to
a purpose of repentance, yet God was pleased to pardon them as far as
concerned outward punishment, Psalm. 78. as strong a place as I know in the
Scripture; David reckons up their rebellions, then after many mercies that God
had showed them, he says, They flattered God with their lips, and lied with
their tongues; they made a confession, but it was an hypocritical confession,
it was out of dissimulation, they flattered God with their tongues: They said,
because of the necessity of punishment, We have sinned, but their hearts were
not touched with their sins, They flattered God with their tongues, and lied to
him with their lips: And it follows, Out of the abundance of his loving
kindness he pardoned their sins, and destroyed them not: Not that God is
pleased with such confessions; it is such a confession as never prevails:
Hypocrisy sets a man further from pardon, because it is a double sin, yet at
that time when they would not be brought to a formal confession, God forbeares
to punish, to encourage them after, he forbeares the punishing of them for a
time. As Ahab for his counterfeit humiliation, God diverts the judgment to
encourage us to true humiliation. So Jehoahaz a wicked King, he continued in
the sins of Jeroboam, yet when he was affticted and humbled himself before
God, although it were a counterfeit humiliation, he diverted the judgment: If
he show mercy to the confessions of Hypocrites that are full of hypocrisy and
dissimulation, what will he do to those that do it sincerely; I say, God
loves not hypocrisy, and hypocrisy is farthest from pardon; though it be, yet
because they were so far from true repentance that they would not be brought
to an outward form, when they brought that form, God encouraged them to go
on further that he remitted the judgment temporal upon their fained, forced,
humiliation.

Is it not then a great encouragement for us to repent, and confess our sins?
Confession is a grace that shines in all Christian virtues: There is no virtue
that can be practiced without confession of sin; whether a man does well or
ill, confession comes in, as Austin says sweetly, If I be ill, this is to
confess to the glory of God that my sin is of my self, if I do good, this is
to confess to the glory of God that all grace is from him. In evil, there we
bring confession, that is, the confession of our miquities: In good we bring
confession, the confession to Gods praise, and of Gods grace; so every way
confession is necessary, In bono fact a tuo, etc. If we do any thing well God
must have the glory, because he works it; if we do any thing ill, then we
must confess to take shame, because all our confusion and shame is from the
iniquity of our own heart. That is the first thing the Prophet would have them
bring, the language of repentance; the language of repentance is the confession
of sin, by acknowledging them to God,

That is the first thing, Take with you words of repentance, confess your sins
to God, he shows the necessity of confession.

The second thing he shows not only the necessity of the duty, but he gives
them direction; they are sweetly couched here, Take with you words, and go,
and confess, that is, Take such words as become Converts, and Penitents. What
are those words the Prophet bids them take, concerning the duty of confession?
We will reduce them to four heads.

First, Humble words, pride will not stand with repentance, I gat me to God
right humbly. Look upon all the confessions of prayer or sin in Scripture,
they were all seasoned with the grace of humility; I am less then the least of
thy mercies, says Jacob, I am unworthy that thou should come under my
roof, was the confession of the Centurion; I am less then the least of
Saints, because I persecuted the Church, says Paul. Look upon the confessions
of the Old Testament, how they are seasoned with humility. Ezra, Ezra 9. he
confesses in the name of the people, and he begins it so, O Lord I am ashamed,
and blush to come before thee, etc. It is the very same words that Nehemiah
takes, in confessing the peoples sin when he was the mouth of the people,
Nehem. 9. We lie under shame upon the ground, confusion covers our faces, we
and our Princes, and Priests, and our Fathers, have all been rebellious against
thee: It is the form of words that Daniel uses too in the confession of sin
that he makes for the people, O Lord, to thee belongs righteousness, but to
us confusion. Here is then the humble strain of repentance and confession of
sin, to give glory to God, and to take shame to our selves. Here is the proper
dialect, the true Idiome of the language of repentance: Those are the first
words he bids them take, take humble words; the confession of pride, a
Pharisaicall confession will not do it.

Secondly, They must be mournful words: Tears are the lav^r in which
confession of sin bathes it self. When a man is to frame the words of
confession of sin to God, the eye gives Ink, and the heart gives accents;
tears are the oil in which the words of confession are steeped, and sighs and
groans are the compass, and point, whereby the line of confession is drawn
to God, they must be mournful words; the cry of the eye, and the voice must
go together. If the heart melt, the eye will weep; if the voice houle, the eye
will have sympathy; that was the form of David's confession, I roar through
disquiet, I go mourning all the day long. So we see the confession of Aaron
that he made before Moses, Alas my Lord; there is not only a word of
humiliation, but a word of lamentation, Alas my Lord, for I have sinned, and
done foolishly: And the Children of Israel, 1 Samuel 7. that they might express
their humble confession of sin in such language, it is said that they were
ashamed at Mizpeh; and what did they, they wept, and drew water, and poured it
on the ground, and then they confessed to God that they had sinned. A man would
wonder at such a ceremony, the pouring of water on the ground: What is of less
moment then water spilt upon the ground? The Scripture uses that phrase to
express a thing of no esteem; and they were ashamed for that purpose, to show
that they could not weep enough themselves, they would by this, express the
desire of their souls, that if they could, they would pour out Pailes and
Rivers of tears: they wished that their heads were Rivers of waters; because
they could not shed tears enough, they bring Buckets, and pour them out to the
Lord. Take to you humble, and mournful words, that is the second.

Thirdly, Take with you, simple, naked words, the words of integrity and
simplicity a man must bring when he comes before God in the naming of his sin:
It is not enough to confess them in general, because God knows them in
particular; but God looks that we should search into our hearts, and dive
into our souls, and fetch up all, and leave no dreggs of sin under, but
evacuate all; if there be but the least behind, it will turn to poison: We
must not come before God with a heart and a heart, and a tongue and a tongue,
as we must bring simplicity of heart, so simplicity of speech: So we find the
forms of all confessions in Scripture run thus. They contented not themselves
to say they had sinned, Pharaoh, and Saul, and Judas could go so far, I have
sinnod, they could not speak less, if they said any thing, yet they that said
less found it made good from the heart, David said no more; but they had not
true repentance, because they had one tongue in their hearts, and another in
their tongue; God looks to the language of the heart. As we must bring naked
open hearts, so we must bring simplicity of speech: All the confessions in
Scripture run thus, with naming the sins, not in general only, but in
particular. So the Israelites, Numb. 21. We have sinned in that we have spoken
against the Lord, and his servant Moses; they name their sin: So in 1 Samuel 12.
when Samuel presses them home, and lays to their heart all the sins that they
had committed, then they make confession, in naked simple words, We have
sinned, and added this to all our sins, to ask a King: They did not only
confess in general, we have sinned; but in particular, this is that sin that
we have provoked God by. As David's heart smote him when he had numbered the
people, presently he tells God he had sinned in this sin of numbering the
people; while his heart was hott, and the sin lay upon him, he opens it to
God in simple, naked words. That is the third sort.

Last of all, There is another, bring with you forcible words, weighty words,
aggravating words; such words as may exagerate your sins against your selves,
such words: Lay them not only open, but make them more if it were possible;
though it be a sin to lie to God, but though a man say with Paul, Of whom I
am chief, it is far from dissimulation; he that knows his own heart, is
able to say, he is the chief of sinners, though the World be able to lay
nothing against him, because every man knows the sin of his own heart:
Therefore he that comes to confess will not bring cold words, but aggravating
words: So run all the forms in Scripture, because when we aggravate, God
extenuates, and when we make more, God makes less; but we cannot make them
more, but aggravate our sins in confession. Look to that in Nehemiah, how he
aggravates with words after words, We have dealt proudly and stoutly with the
Lord. So says Ezra, We have hardened our hearts, and refused to obey; we have
not hearkened to his Commandments, we have rebelled against him, we and our
Kings, our Princes, our Priests, and our Fathers. And Daniel in his confession
adds, The men of Judah, and the people of Israel. There are all aggravations
against the persons, and against the sins, We have dealt proudly, we have
hardened our hearts, we have not hearkened to Gods Law, we have rebelled against
him. And such were the confessions that David made, one we have in Psalm. 106.
We have sinned, and dealt wickedly, and committed iniquity; as if he wanted
words to express himself, and it is the very same words with Daniel, and
Ezra, in their confessions. David in Psalm. 51. My iniquities are gone over my
head, and are as a burden too heavy to bear: See, how could he exagerate
more? they are over my head, above my reach, I cannot compass them; as the
flood that overwhelmes a man in the bottom of the water, and he sees nothing
but destruction; so my sins are gone over my head, I cannot look to the top, or
bottom, or reach them; and they are too heavy a burden, I cannot bear them;
thou alone must ease me of them. Daniel and Ezra, aggravate sin in the same
words, Our sins are increased up to Heaven; here was a high pitch he took to
himself; not only in the knowledge of them (so every sin grows up to Heaven,
because God knows them) but for multitude and increase, we have piled sin upon
sin. As the Giants of old, set Pelion upon Ossa, and Parnassis upon both; so we
have set one sin upon another, that they are heaped up to Heaven, the Earth is
weary with bearing of them, they reach to Heaven: So, here is the form of
words, bring naked, simple, humble, forcible, aggravating words.

And after all this, when we look upon all these forms of confession, and
see the practice of the Saints of old, and see the burden of sin, and of the
commands, are we not all stirred up? are we not all ready to burst? Is it
possible to hold, but to cast off such shame almost, and in the midst of much
people to acknowledge we have sinned. Lord, we have sinned, and for our
iniquities and transgressions these troubles are come upon us: If we want
words of our own, let us borrow of those confessions in Scripture. We have
need to take all helps, sin lies close, all helps of discovery, of removal,
and of comfort; so we shall be able to express our selves, when we see those
forms that they expressed themselves in, that was the end, when the Prophet bids
them take words, that is, get the language of repentance, go humble your
selves and your souls to God, take words, and go, and confess to him; that
is the first thing.

I see the time is spent, and the weather is hot, yet points that are depending
one upon another, are best applied when the heart is warm; and sometimes the
dependence adds so much grace to a point, that the grace of it is lost, if the
season be not taken.

Take to you words. The language of confession and the language of prayer, Take
words to you, when you turn to the Lord by repentance, then take words; and
when you turn to the Lord by prayer, then take words. These two go together,
confession and prayer. In Nehem. 1. there they be joined, I prayed before thee
for the Children of Israel, and confessed to thee the sins of the Children of
Israel. And in Dan. 9. I prayed to my God, and made my confession before him.
There must be no prayer made to God, where there is no confession of sin; for
if we multiply our prayers, and pray every hour, yet there goes sin between,
and though it be a sin repented of, and though it be a sin that is pardoned
before, yet David confessed his sin after it was pardoned: nothing moves so
much to confession, as the knowledge of pardon. Prayer will not avail without
confession, therefore I first spoke of the other: Prayer without confession,
says Chrysostom, it is as if a Bird should have her wings at liberty, and her
feet be tied: Confession is as the feet, and prayer as the wings; if a Bird
have the wings free, and the feet in a snare, it cannot get up: so, though the
heart pray, yet if the foot of confession be in a snare, there is no hope that
the heart should fly to God, it is as a Bird that has the wings at liberty,
and the foot is in a snare; therefore these must go together, take to you
words of confession and prayer. I must be breife, therefore I will reduce them
to three heads.

There are three things the Prophet aims at in this exhortation, Take to you
words of prayer.

He shows the necessity of vocal prayer, Take to you words.

He shows the necessity of preparation to prayer, Take words: It is not only
use words and pray, but take them, think before hand.

Thirdly, He shows what kind of words the humble soul brings before God in
prayer.

These three things I will briefly touch.

First, The necessity of vocal prayer, Take to you words. Think it not enough
to turn your hearts to God: It is true, importunity of affection moves God
more then importunity of speech, for he looks to the heart and reins, and
requires truth in the inward parts: But though the heart be principal in the
sacrifice, yet it is not the sole agent. All prayer is not included in
conceived prayer: God will have honor of the lips, as well as of the heart; he
did not make man all soul and spirit: as he made him part body, and part
soul, so he will have honor of both. Honor him in the heart, that is the
chief, else the other will not prevail, when we draw near him with our lips,
if our hearts be far from him: But the heart is not the only thing, though it
be the chief; get words to your selves, get a good expression. For this
purpose, God has given man the use of speech, not only that he should
converse with Men, but wi^h God; he converseth with men by intercourse of
speech, with God by prayer: Prayer is the language of the heart, God is
delighted with that; God is delighted with the language of prayer, or else he
would not have set us so many forms in Scripture, and all those dictates. God
could work grace in the heart without Preaching, but he uses outward means,
because men have bodies and souls, and God can accept the prayer of the heart;
but God will have both parts. Seek to God with the inward man and with the
outward man. David calls his tongue his glory, for that end; for the tongue is
the interpreter of the heart, the tongue is the Secretary of the mind, it is
that Ambassador that every poor contrite soul sends to God.

Those words that fly to Heaven, and pass the Clouds, are delivered and
dictated by the tongue: Therefore it is that God has made some part of the
body the interpreter to all the duties of piety. Mourning is one part of
repentance; the interpreter of that affection of sorrow, is the eye; if the
heart mourn, the eye will weep: Humiliation and dejection of spirit, the
casting down of the soul, that is another grace, within, and there is another
interpreter without, the knee is the interpreter of that grace; if the heart be
cast down, the body will, the knee will bow. Charity is another grace of the
heart within; the interpreter without is the hand; if the heart be enlarged to
wish well, the hand will be enlarged to give to the poor: And if the heart be
enlarged with devotion, the hands will spread; the hand and eye move as the
heart dictates, and the knees bow as the heart dictates, every part of the body
is the interpreter of the soul.

Lastly, Prayer it is a grace of the heart, but it has an interpreter without,
the tongue is the interpreter; it is the Angel or Messenger of the
understanding. Clemens Alexandrinus calls it the Trumpet of the soul: The
tongue, it is not only the interpreter, but the solicitor: The tongue is the
solicitor that the heart sends to Heaven; God requires not the prayer of the
lips, because he cannot hear the prayer of the heart, God forbid we should
think so, he knows our thoughts before they are. A man's silence is a cry to
God; he heard Moses when he said nothing; he hears the silence of prayer, as
well as the voice. Tertullian well expresses it, he is not only the beholder
of the heart, but the hearer of the heart: The heart has its language, and
every part of the body has its language; the eyes language is weeping, and the
hands language is lifting up, and the knees language, it is bowing, and all
comes from the language of the heart: God understands the language of each
part; if the heart speak, though the tongue be silent, he understands that.
When a man lies upon his deathbed, and his speech is gone, the hands are
lifted up, God hears that: A man may pray with his eyes, with his hands, with
his knees, but he must not confine his prayer to these; he may pray with his
heart, but he must not confine prayer to the heart: God will not only have us
say we pray within, we pray to God, and we wish well, and never consider that
God is over our heads, we send up ejaculations; but take to you words; where is
the witness of your mental prayer? Take to you words.

The point is this, I will but name it: Vocal Prayer is a great help to the
ejaculations of the mind.

It has great advantage, in public, and in private prayer.

In public prayer it is simply necessary; there cannot be a combination of
affections, except there be vocal prayer: we cannot read the language of the
heart one of another. There cannot be union of affections, except there be one
voice for all: Nothing commends prayer more to God, then unity, if it be the
prayer of unity; the harmony of prayer cannot be preserved in a Congregation
without vocal prayer, except it be expressed by words, and forms, they are
necessary, that I shall show after. There must be vocal prayer used, that the
Congregation may be joined together: Therefore we pray in the last prayer, We
make our common supplications. I take occasion, because people take occasion to
mistake, it is not common, because they are ordinary supplications, but thus,
common supplications that concern us all.

It is needful also in private prayer, it has these three advantages.

First, Prayer of the tongue, it makes prayer a perfect burnt Sacrifice, when
the tongue joins in words: Prayer is a dart, zeal points it, and words
feather it; when it is poynted by zeal, and feathered by words, it flies home;
when the inward and the outward man agree together, when the strings of the
heart, and the language of the tongue speak one thing, then there is a perfect
Sacrifice offered to God. Pray to him with the heart, and with the lips.

Secondly, The language of prayer is needful to be expressed by the lips;
because words are as bellows to the affections, they are a means to kindle
good affections. Words restrain affections that they shall not rove; they
confine the affections to holy and heavenly desires, they not only confine,
but as I said, they kindle affections. They are as bellows. Prayer is as
Incense, zeal puts to the fire in prayer, and words are the bellows that blow
it up to make it flame; they make this Incense not only sum but flame. If
words be wanting, prayer will cool of it self; it is impossible that a man
should continue and persevere in prayer, except he use words; because the
affections will rove: The heart is able to express pious ejaculations; but to
persevere in prayer, without consining to formed words, or where there is a
habit of prayer without words, it is impossible to continue.

Thirdly, It is the means to glorify God more: In prayer we glorify God in
body and soul: It is not enough that we glorify God within, we may do it
within, but who knows it? Then it is only to our selves; but when it is with
the lips, we do it to others: Even the Saints in Heaven use language in the
glorifying of God; they sing to the glory of God, Halelujah, that song of
praise to God, and express it by words, because there may be a common
participation, that they may make an echo: Therefore David though he were a
man that had a mental gift of prayer, yet he confined not himself to it: I
called to God with my voice, and he heard my prayer; I will sing of thy
kindness for ever, and with my mouth I will declare it: Mark, I will sing of
it, and declare it with my mouth, and call to God with my voice: Therefore
because there is a necessity of Vocal prayer to glorify God, that is the
first reason the Prophet says, Take words, that is the first duty.

Secondly, He shows the necessity of preparation: It is not only use words;
the Heathen that think to be heard for much babbling, they use words, but they
take not words. What is that? To study, to single, and cull out words before,
to cast about where to get words. Look into the closet of your heart, and see
what things you want; see what acceptable forms the Saints used, then come,
and humble your selves before God, but take to you words: The necessity of
preparation in the duty of prayer is briefly laid down by Solomon, in Eccles.
5. Be not rash to utter a thing before God, for he is in Heaven. That is, Rush
not upon prayer, go not into Gods presence before thou be fitted, there must
be holy preparation, not only before public, but private prayer. Beloved, we
come to pray, and the reason why our petitions are denied, is, because our
hearts rove. He will never come into Gods presence with reverence one day, that
prepares not somewhat the day before, that sets not worldly things aside the
day before. As in public, so in private prayer, prepare before you come to
Church, and after: How ever some would scare Christians out of piety, they
shall not scare Christians from their duty. They say, it is superstition for a
man to humble himself before God when he comes to the Church, and
Congregation: they say, he must join with the Congregation, there must not be
a sequestration, though it be never so short to fit himself: It is true, a man
humbles and prepares himself before, but now he comes to the performance of
it. I humble my self before, but now I come to the performance, give me such a
heart as I may join with thy Servants to confess our sins, and to make known
our wants: And this must be superstition in their interpretation, because we
do not join with the Congregation: They make no conscience of it, if they
did, they would not keep their own posture at the Creed, they to sit, and
others stand: I will be bold to say, it is fancy. The hearts of Christians
must not be troubled, whereby there comes a great deal of offense; they run
out of the Church if a Minister humble himself before God in the Pulpit, what
they please must be superstition. No, when we come before God, there must be
preparation. David prayed before he prayed, Let the lifting up of my hands be
as Incense. Micah studied before he prayed, Wherewith shall I come before the
Lord, and make my supplication? What gesture shall I use? and what preparation
shall I make? So should every good Christian; and the reason is good, prayer is
weighty, the tongue is slippery, and the affections roving; a man had need to
hedge in his heart with all preparation: If a man speak to men, as I come to
speak to you, yet I dare not come without due preparation, and yet I speak to
men, as my self; much more when a man comes before God. If a man when he
speaks to men, labors to shun Shelves and Solicismes of speech, and to
ingratiate his person, and press it home upon the hearts of his hearers, how
much more when he speaks before God, that reads the language of the heart, who
is a God that hears prayer, to whose presence all flesh comes. Moses, when he
was to speak to Pharaoh, durst not go, because he wanted words, and was a man
of flow speech, and so Jeremie; yet they were but to speak to men. If any man
say there was a necessity, because they went on Gods errand; that was not the
reason, look back to humane orators, Demosthenes, Tullie, see what
preparation they made to speak before humane auditorie; yet they would correct
their errors, and set every word in due place; they would get words, pick up
phrases, if any tittle of pronunciation were more advangious then other; they
would get that, merely to prevail in civil causes for men; how much more
when we come to God in prayer, and not only be orators, but petitioners, and
for the best of his mercies, for grace, the richest jewel in all his
Storehouse; and God that searches the heart, and sees if the heart and Spirit
be answerable to the tongue, and hand; a man had need to be prepared
beforehand: Therefore Abraham, a man that had heavenly acquaintance with God,
he fitted himself before he would come in prayer; see how many prefaces he
uses, six times he prays, and every prayer has a preface, Let not my Lord be
angry, and I will speak. Behold I have taken upon me to speak, that am but
dust and ashes. He uses those holy prefaces to ingratiate himself with God:
knowing how great an honor it is, for God to vouchsafe a mortal creature to
speak to him: so will we, if we consider the greatness of Gods majesty, we
will pray, that we may pray, search, and examine, and see what blessings God
has bestowed, and then we shall know what to give thanks for, see what evil
we have committed, and then we shall know what to mourn for; see what
judgments and temptations God has removed, and then we shall know how to
bless him, what sins we are prone to, that we may know what to pray against
and see what temporal things we need, and then we may know what to beg; this
the Prophet would have, Take words, study words before you come, take not
perfunctorie words, use not such as come first to hand; deal not so boldly,
and familiarly with the glorious presence of God: speak to God as if you did
speak to men, nay as if you were to speak before the judge of all men.

Lastly, here he gives a direction what words to use in prayer. The language of
prayer is of a great extent: look how many our wants are, so many several
forms and dialects our prayer has; and look how various men's hearts are, so
various is prayer, but for our direction, confine it to these particulars.

First, Take to you words, that is, holy, and heavenly words, such as becomes
that glorious Majesty: therefore our blessed Savior has taught us to pray to
Our Father in Heaven, intimating that when we come to God, we must not only
bring heavenly affections, but heavenly word: what are those? words that relish
of heaven; words that have the coin and stamp of the Spirit of God on them, he
that brings a earthly heart and carnal, earthly words to God, cannot speed:
Prayer has a dialect proper to it self: bring words; that is, heavenly words.

Secondly, bring with you words; that is, forcible, fervent, powerful words;
(come not to God with a cold temper) they are such words that must prevail:
for there is a language that specially prevails with God; that is, bring such
words as may importune God. It is not a cold muttering of a form of prayer
that is acceptable to God; no, but pray with the heart, not only speak but
call, nor call but cry, ask, and seek, and knock; if asking will not serve,
seek, if that will not do, knock. There is a delight in God, to be not only
spoken to, but forced, the violent take heaven, and there is no violence, but
of faith, and prayer; faith by one violence, and prayer by another. The prayer
of the fervent heart breaks through the Clouds; no impediment can keep it from
Gods throne, take fervent words, woo God, entreat him, importune him, to see
if he will be entreated to turn from his wrath.

Thirdly, take intelligent words, understand your selves what you speak, use
not such words as do not express your mind. It is a mocking of God to come to
God in an unknown language. That is the great delusion of our adversaries of
Rome, the great manner of cogging to delude the people, to keep them in
ignorance, from knowing the word of God, and what they speak to God; that as
they believe by an implicit faith, so they must pray by an implicit devotion,
that if the Priest that sets them the form of prayer, or if the Church should
go about to deceive them (as they do too too much, they might set a form of
cursing as well as praying, and how can they understand it? and they must take
it upon trust. These are not intelligible words, but I cannot proceed further.

SERMON III.
Hosea. 14.2. Take to you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, take away
all iniquity, and receive us graciously, etc.


IT was well said by Saint Austin, that Art perfects nature, he found the
proof thereof in himself; for it had perfected him: For minerals and
vegetatives, you all know, that it is mechanic, and inferior Arts that
perfect them. Nature gives gold, and Art purifies it; nature gives Stones that
are precious, and Art makes them more precious; nature gives simples, and Art
makes them confections. And for man that is the most excellent of inferior
creatures, they are the ingenious and the spiritual Arts that perfect man. And
every several Art has a kind of special interest in some several persons:
For memory, they are the rules of method that perfect memory. And the rules of
invention, perfect parts: the rules of disputation, perfect reason, the rules
of oratorie, perfect speech; and generally whether we look upon the body, or
whether we look upon the soul, if there be any thing in either that is
defective, art either restores, or helps it, if there be any thing luxurious,
art pollisheth it; if any thing disorderly, art corrects it; that the
Philosopher had good reason to say, Art perfects nature: for he could do
nothing but by Art: now if Art give such perfection to nature, that is so lame
in it self, what perfection do Christians draw from that that is the Art of
all other Arts, the art of Gods book, those heavenly rules of direction
containd in the word of God? there is no part of man, but it perfects, for it
not only perfects but changes, it changes our nature, not only to some
degree, but to a total and complete estate. It converts the soul, it
rejoices the heart, it delights the eye, for our actions, it teaches us to
live, for our thoughts, it teaches us to, meditate for our speech, it teaches
to discourse godly. If there were no more Scriptures, yet this one Text that I
have read, shows the proof of it.

Its the Prophets intendment by this Scripture to work a change in the people
of the Jews to whom he preached, to work an alteration, to a better knowing
of this by experience, that the word it corrects, and reformes, and there is in
every part of it, a several reformation, that may be wrought, if the heart be
hardened, here this Scripture teaches to humble them, Turn to the Lord, if
the arms be infolded, this Scripture teaches to spread them, if the lips be
sowed up, if the tongue stammer, that we know not how to express our selves
before the heavenly majesty, this Scripture teaches to open them, Take with
you words, etc. So, that which was intended by him when he spoke them first, is
the same that I intend when I handle them now.

The parts you know are two.

A rule of excitement, and A rule of direction.
The rule of excitement to two duties, one to the duty of action, Turn to the
Lord, of that I spoke.

Another to the duty of elocution, and that is twofold. There is an excitement
to a general duty of prayer. The manner of prayer, Take with you words, and
go to God. What words I showed the last time, the words of prayer, and of
confession, those are the words; and what were the kinds of both, and the
necessity of both, so far I went.

Another is this particular form, Take words and say to him. This part I am to
go on with.

And say to him. That is, and say thus unto him, in hunc modum, in haec verba,
after this manner in these words. The Prophets intendment is to give them a
help for their infirmities in the work of prayer, he pens a form for them, he
sets this as an example, and pattern of prayer, whereby they should make their
prayers; a form to use when they came before God.

He prevents an objection, Take with you words, and turn to the Lord. I, feign
we would take words, but where shall we get them? what words are fit? we are
ignorant, we are not acquainted with the language, that duty has been a
stranger to us; who will teach us and instruct us, Wherewith shall we come
before the Lord? what words shall we use when we come before him? He prevents
the objection in these words, And say to him; I will lend you words, if ye be
ignorant I will instruct you; these are the words you shall use. Like a good
instructor, he not only teaches them the duty, that they are to do, but
shows them the manner of the performance; he excites them to prayer, and
repentance, and shows to them a pattern of prayer, he gives them this form of
confession.

You see beloved, that forms of prayer are not now taken up only: it is not a
thing so new, as that so many disgraces should be put upon set forms,
especially those that concern the whole people, a Church, and Congregation,
they are as ancient as Paul's time. Paul is pleased to tie himself to a form;
and not only when he preached (I do not say he did so always, for then there
was a greater necessity) but even when he wrote. A man when he writes, has
liberty of time for variety, especially Paul having the gifts of the Spirit,
yet he ties himself to a set prayer in all his Epistles, and makes it a token
whereby it may be known, Thus I write, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
and so he shuts up all.

Not only Paul, but our blessed Savior, he that is the wisdom of the Father,
he by whose Spirit we learn to pray; he that commenceth our suits to God; he
that has the fullness of all knowledge, therefore all variety of heavenly
expressions; when he prayed before God, and in his last prayer that he made in
the garden; thrice he prayed, Matthew. 26. and all those times he uses the same
form, he speaks the same words; he went, and prayed first, Father if it be
possible: and then in verse. 22. he prays again and says the same words: and
then in verse 24. he prays and says the same words, he could have had
variety to have expressed that notion, that is, to beg assistance of his father
which he needed then as man; he expressed it in that form: we have his example,
it is as old as Christ's time.

Nay, before Christ came, in the time of the Prophets, it is as old as Moses,
and that is as far as we can go. For Hezekiahs time it is plain, 2 Chronicles.
29. he calls to the Priests to sing to the Lord in the words of David, and
Asaph: there are many particulars.

And therefore they are much to blame, that will bring an ill report on a good
thing, that go about to stumble the consciences of the weak, as though it
were an impediment for the Church of God in public to keep themselves to a set
form. They might remember that there be examples, and What was written
aforetime, is written for our learning.

But we have more then examples; we have Christ's direction, When ye pray, pray
thus, Our Father.

Besides, we read of the happy success that those prayers had; and God
approved of the same, when they used and kept themselves to forms; he that
approved it in other Saints, will not disdain it in us; if it were piety in
them, it cannot be ill in us.

As for those flouts that they give it, that it is a stinting of the Spirit, a
confining of the grace of God: that it is to keep people to walk upon
crutches; and making people swim upon bladders; they are empty, vain, windy
words, that become such empty Spirits: they are not the words of the Spirit of
God; they are not words that savor of piety, nay not of reason.

For yet, if they be scandalized at the forms that we make, will they at the
forms of Christ, and of the Prophets? will they say that Christ that conformed
to a form, and to the Prophets, that it was a walking upon crutches, and a
swimming with bladders; if they lay such imputations upon the forms that we
have, they will not spare to lay the same upon that of Christ, they quarrel as
much against it, as at our prayers, that now superstition it must be, or I know
not what vain tautalogie, to have the use of the Lords prayer in public
assemblies. Why did Christ give it? It is the form that he would have his
Apostles, and his Church use to the worlds end; and as one says well, for a
man to pray otherwise then Christ would have him to pray, it is to be imputed
ignorance, and folly, and sin. Our blessed Savior had a special intendment
of piety, when he set that form to his Disciples, and to the Church of God;
and if therefore they find fault with that, we may well think they will be too
scrupulous to find fault with those forms that the Church has set.

But let them not say, that preparation to prayer is a stinting of the Spirit:
no, it is not a stinting of the Spirit of God; but a restraining of our own
wandering Spirits: Preparation is not so much a confining of the Spirit, as want
of preparation is an abandoning of the Spirit of God.

It is true, it is acknowledged, and cannot be denied, that conceived prayer,
is an admirable grace, where it pleases God to give the faculty, and power,
but yet for public prayer, though the gift were had by one, it is not by all.

There are special uses, and reasons, that in public prayers forms are to
be had.

They are special helps to the weakness of those that are not able to send
up their own suits. They are special helps of devotion, where the people
know not what those things are, that they are to beg of God. They are a
special means, to keep in the heart, and affections within good compass,
and bounds, to hedge it in that it rove not. They are special helps to
community, and unanimitie of prayer. That which commends public prayer is
one heart, and voice, sent to God; how can that be, by so many persons as meet
in this congregation, if they have not one form? if there be not uniformitie
kept in that?

Besides, ordinarily, people do not so much excel in this gift, as fitly to
express themselves in conceived prayer, and often those that are great ones are
wanting, We know not how to pray as we ought. The Poet said, if men follow
their own desires, they seduce them: for what prayers make they?

One Poet tells us that they would beg of God that they might have opportunity
to deceive; give me grace that I may be accounted a holy, and righteous man:
we may make such prayers as these, sometimes unlawful, sometimes hurtful,
sometimes sinful things we should pray for; and so more sinful we should be,
if we utter before God without due meditation, what we thought on before.
Therefore these forms are put to us, we have mention upon record of the prayers
of Abraham, of Jacob, of Moses, of David, of Hezekiah; of the Prophet Jeremiah,
Daniel, Habakkuk, Nehemiah, Ezra, all theirs with many others are set down
upon record. To what purpose? but that we might thereby learn to fit our
selves with words to attain a habit of prayer, by studying of these forms.

And it is a great encouragement to know the forms that the Saints prevailed
with of old; that God accepted such prayers at their hand: he that accepted
them then, if we send them by the same Spirit will accept them now.

Therefore in the course of Scripture, for all Christian duties, for all duties
of piety there were forms s^t, in the old Testament; for the blessing of the
people th^^e is a form so that Numb. 6. they were to bless them thus, saying
The Lord bless you. When the Arc removed there was a form for that, the
form then was, Arise O Lord in thy resting place, among the many thousands of
Israel. When the Arc stood still, Return O Lord to the many thousands of
Israel. For the work of purification, when any place was to be cleansed from
the guilt of blood, that lay at the door of the City, thus they were to say,
Lord be merciful to thy people, and lay not guiltines of blood to us. In the
time of repentance and humiliation; the Prophet then sets a form for them,
Joel 2. Let the Priests, the Lords remembrancers stand between the porch, and
the Altar, and say, spare thy people O Lord. And here Hosea seeing the
necessity in regard of the great defects, and many wants of the people, he
calls on them to call upon God: and that their prayer might be accepted, as one
that ministered to their infirmities, and helped their necessities, therefore he
gives them this form: he gave it to them, and the Spirit of God commends it to
us, by leaving it in Scripture as an example for us to make our prayers by: as
a warrant upon occasion, especially in public, to use such a form, Take to
you these words, that I prescribe, and say thus to him.

The Chaldee paraphrase so descants upon it, and some other Rabbis; use either
these, or the like words as these, Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously.

So, I have done with the preparative, that is, the rule of exhortation.

Now, Secondly, the rule of direction, and that has two parts.

One is precatorie, take away all sin.

The other part is promissorie, So will we render the calves of our lips.

I begin with the first of these, that is, the part precatorie, and therein are
two things.

The parts of which the prayer consists.

And the order of the parts.

The parts of which the prayer consists are two.

One is, Take away all ill.

The other is,

Show us good, receiveus graciously.

The first part is for the taking away of all ill, and the worst ill, the ill
of sin. It is but short, but it is very pithie.

There are three words in it, and they all have their emphasis; it is not
called sin, but iniquity; it is not this, or that sin but all: it is not
only, lay it aside for a time, but take it away, remove it. So, these three
make three parts.

There is first the thing deprecated, and prayed against, that is, iniquity,
and sin.

Secondly, the extent of it, how far the deprecation reaches, not to a few,
not to some, but all, take all iniquity away, and leave none behind.

Then thirdly, the manner of the removing of it, a word that is very full, Take
it away. We shall see the meaning of that when we come to it.

The first is the thing deprecated, sin. The Prophet labors hereby, by
setting this form, to draw them to the acknowledgement of their sin; and not
only to an acknowledgement, but to an aggravation.

To an acknowledgement, in that he wishes them to pray thus, Take away
iniquity. Says Tertullian well, there is in all Petitions of mercy, a secret
confession of sin, he that begs pardon, acknowledges sin. He would not only
draw them to an acknowledgement, but to an aggravation: Therefore he uses not
the common word, take away sin, but take away iniquity, iniquity has a
greater stroke says Austin, it is plain that sin is common, iniquity is
extraordinary. There are none of us all but acknowledge our selves sinners,
and we do not think much to be so called: but men will blush, and be ashamed,
and loath to be accounted those that are impious, that have iniquity. Austin
shows by it, that there is more in iniquity, then in sin: therefore the
Prophet uses that phrase, to teach us what is the greatest ill, against which
we are to bend all our prayers, what was the great evil against which they
were to millitate with their prayers? sin and iniquity. All a Christians
labors, all his examinations, all his prayers and devotion are to look this
way, to the taking away of iniquity. It is the most frequent Prayer that we
are to put up; it is that daily prayer, that we are to put up; what ever we
do, and what ever we stand in need of: there is no blessing that we are to
beg of God, but this must go in, ask in the first place pardon of sin. If a
man be to sit down at his Table to eat meat, first beg pardon of sin,
because sin will be a means to curse it to him; it cannot be good without
Gods blessing; sin may hinder the natural work of the creature; if a man be
to go a journey, and beg Gods protection, let him first ask pardon of sin;
for that will expose him to danger: there is no keeping of sin in the house,
and in the heart, first beg for the removing of that. If a man go about his
work, he begs Gods blessing upon his labor, but first let him ask
reconciliation and pardon of sin: for sin will make a man's labor
unfruitful, and unprofitable, and bring a curse upon his labor. If a man come
to the House of God, to hear the word of God, and to join in prayer with the
people of God, O let him, though he mean to ask a blessing, that it may
edisie, yet let him first beg pardon; for sin stops the ears of a man in
hearing, and stops the ears of God in hearing. When God speaks to us, if
sin be not purged out of our hearts, we shall not benefit by the word, and we
shall have no benefit by our prayers, If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear my prayer. Therefore, this is the reason the Prophet would
have them bend the Forces of their endeavors, and prayers against sin. It is
not, take away our punishment, or take away thy plague, they were in misery
now, the Prophet teaches them, not so much to pray for that in general, but
that that they should stand upon is, Take away iniquity.

And that is the reason, why, of all other prayers, the Devil most opposes a
man, both in making of this Petition, and in the comfort by it. He contradicts
this prayer especially, because it is a choice fruit of Gods Spirit: and it is
that prayer that ruins his Kingdom; reconciliation pulls it down, therefore he
opposes that.

One way whereby he opposes it, is, by keeping men from seeing their sins.
He that sees not his sins begs not pardon: if we be blind, we shall be dumb
in that sense.

If he cannot hinder from the sight, he will hinder from the sense; a man will
never ask pardon of that that he feels not burdensome.

If he prevail not with that, then he will keep them from the hope of pardon,
and make them believe that their sins are unpardonable, what should I beg for
pardon of sins, my time is past?

If not that, then he labors to keep them from enjoying the comfort of
pardon, he labors to blind their eyes if they have pardon, that they may not
see that comfort.

If not that, he tempts them to presumption, if he cannot hinder them of the
comfort, he labors to draw them to a presumptuous opinion of their
righteousness, that they have no sin to beg pardon, you are not such a
sinner, etc. It were well, if there were no sin but is that a Cockatrice egg,
that they should think they need not to ask pardon of sin at the h^nds of
God.

It was one of the opinions in the primitive times, but this time far
outstrips that, because worse opinions attend upon it: there were some that
were gotten in unawares, I wonder whence this opinion should grow, that
Christians should ever come to this height of impiety, to think it unlawful
to beg pardon of sin: therefore it comes from another, because God sees no
sin in his Children. But whence comes this, here is an ill bird, and an ill
egg, yet it has a dam that is older still, that is as damnable as either,
that is, that Christians are not tied to any obedience of the moral law,
because they are brought under the obedience of Christ: see how they hang like
Samsons foxes, that were tied after a disorderly manner. First the Devil
possesses their hearts, that there is no obedience to the law of God, and
thereby he stops up the fountain of al piety. If there be no obedience to the
Law, it must needs follow that there can be no sin, for there is no sin
without the transgression of the law, and then there no sin for God to see,
and then they need not after they are in the state of justification, beg
remission they need not use this prayer, Take away iniquity, nor that of
Christ, forgive us our trespasses.

There is not any of all these opinions, but they are as I conceive sprung from
the misunderstanding of some orthodox point in divinity, that people not well
understanding themselves, do wrest.

As the point of justification only by faith, that point is only for our
comfort: we must exclude works in justification, our works have no part in the
justification of a sinner; but it does not follow, because faith only justifies
that thereupon they conclude; what have we to do with works, and obedience of
the law? That is a mistake; for God, though he justify us without works, he
requires obedience as a fruit of justification, and as a special pledge of
that grace that he works in the heart. There is the mistake of that.

The other, and a second branch comes from the mistake of another point that is
comfortable, and has its foundation in the book of God, that he that is truly
in the state of sonship cannot fall finally; that is a fundamental point, and
of great consequence: and that is clear, because else Gods promise should not
be true, if God were mutable, and should bring us into a state of adoption one
day, and after cast us out. This is a point of great pretty: But from wresting
of this comes the other point, that because they cannot fall totally, that
therefore they cannot fall at all; that because a man cannot sin finally,
that justification makes him totally gracious that he cannot sin. For though
God keep them from final sinning, yet the best Saints fall. In many things we
sin all: And he that says he is not a sinner, is a liar, even of those that
are converted. We tread awry every day, and there are many slips, and
sometimes foul, gross falls; but it pleases God to raise us again, but it
is by repentance and faith in Christ, the same way that we rose at the first.

So, for the third point, that men need not beg pardon, it is from a corrupt
original. It is a good heavenly point, that there is a certainty of salvation
granted to many Saints; that certainty may be had, though it be not had by all,
every one comes not to the same degree of assurance. From the mistake of this,
comes the third; because we may be assured that we are in a state of salvation,
and grace, and that sin is pardoned, we need not beg pardon: So, they run to
popery another way. Popery is a thing that they disclaim, and while they would
run from popery, they fall into another extreme, and run to popery another way.
Compare them a little; A Saint may come to perfection, and keep all the moral
law, say the Papists; a Christian may come to that perfection, that he need not
keep it say they. Some sins are of so easy a weight, they are not to be
accounted, God accounts them no sins, the first motions. God sees not these in
his Children as sins say the Papists. God sees no sin in his children say they:
here is their error. Say the Papists, if assurance may be had, why do we beg
for forgiveness? It is fond to beg pardon, if we have assurance: So they,
because the child of God has assurance, he needs not beg pardon. Thus they run
by eschewing the contrary, into the same error, in a worse manner then they.
For of all other, these are most damnable. There is never an opinion that the
Devil has stirred up, that has a worse savor and intendment in it then
these. It overthrows the foundation of the Gospel, and of Christianity, and
piety. It takes away Christ, and take him away, take away prayer, and
repentance, and all at one blow.

O, when there are such fundamental errors as these, shall we wonder if God
send the plague to purge his floor, when these shall start up, and are not
smothered? And those that should smother them do not awake authority. No man
cares which way Religion goes, and how it thrives: God will purge this leaven,
from the authors of these opinions, and those that should suppress it. God
will not have every man preach what he will, and hold, and do what he will. And
if humane Laws be offended, there is severity enough in correcting; Gods law
is broken daily, and no man looks after it. Of all others, that one gross
point that Christians are come to, think it unnecessary, nay needless, nay
sinful, to beg remission of sins; then farewell Gospel, and Religion, and all.

St. Austin had some in his time that were of that opinion, therefore he has
diverse passages against it. They had no sin. The form that Christ gave, it
agrees to every Christian, it is a form that all Christians must use to the
worlds end; they must still pray, forgive us our trespasses as long as they
live, and breath. Not only all other Christians, but the Apostles, the masters
of the Flock, those that were the bell-weathers, the greater sort of sheep,
that Christ committed the sheep to; yet the Apostles, when they were on the
cross, in suffering, or under the axe, yet still they must pray, forgive us
our sins.

And in another place says he, There was never any Saint in the world, or
shall be, but must make this prayer, forgive us our trespasses: Only that
Sanctum-sanctorum, Jesus Christ, he is excepted: he gave the form, he needed
it not.

Yet further, and that is a sweet speech, the whole Church of God says it, and
he is a reprobate that says it not, that he is in that condition, of all other
there is no greater sign then this, it is to be feared he is in a state of
reprobation that will not say, Lord forgive us our trespasses, pardon our sins:
Therefore there was good reason why the Prophet made them make their prayer
against this iniquity, that is the transgression of the law, iniquity that
makes shipwreck of conscience, and exposes to judgment, and deprives of all
comfort, and iniquity that condemns to hell; therefore there they must settle
this first petition, Take away iniquity.

Secondly, The extent, All iniquity; there is some reason why he adds that.
All is a word of universality, an indefinite word; here is no iniquity
mentioned, no fin mentioned, but all wound up in a clew, all in a lump
propounded. Take away all. It is not take away our iniquity, that is meant: It
is not take away this, or that; pardon our Idolatry, or our rebellion, pardon
our profaneness, or the adulterers that neigh after their neighbors wives:
there be drunkards of Ephraim, pardon these sins; no, pardon all. There is some
reason why the Prophet would have it thus; pardon all, take away all: I
conceive these three reasons.

First, he would draw them to a general acknowledgment of sin; for however
we are tied to a particular mention, and confession of those sins that our
consciences are privy to, upon due search, and in our acknowledgment and
humiliation to name them to God. This I have done, and this thou have done,
deliver me from blood-guiltinesse O God. So, for those sins that are past our
memory; as there are many, those we wind up in a general, implicit
confession; as that Publican, O God be merciful to me a sinner: as here the
Prophet teaches them to say, Take away all. He would have them thereby
acknowledge their aggravation of sin. All, that is, many, exceeding many: nay,
all, that is, all that can be said. Take away all the iniquities that we can
name, and all that the Prophet can name, or that thou can lay to our charge.
Lord, our sins are great; as skarlet for die, as sands for number: but one wipe
with the sponge of thy mercy will take away all: they are more then we can
express, and number, there is an all of them: It is warrantable by the example
of the Saints in Scripture: And that is one of the errors of auricular
confession that the Church of Rome fastens on men, because they tie men to
reckon every sin, that is impossible; so they lay burdens on the consciences
of men.

It is true, it is the glory of Christians to honor God by confession, and he
that studies his heart most, knows his life most: but those that we cannot
reckon, it is an honor to God to reckon them up in general phrases, that we
may give God the glory of aggravation. I confess against my self whatsoever I
know I have done, and I confess what I have forgotten. There are sins of my
sleep that I cannot remember, and of my dreams, I confess them. There are
sins of my cradle, I confess to thee. There are sins that I took no notice
of, before I had knowledge, pardon all my iniquities. The Prophet would draw
them to an acknowledgement of all. Every man has an All.

And if he knew them to have an all, O what an all is that with which we are
oppressed now? He that goes to reckon up the particulars of our general, the
many species, and kinds in this age: it is an all that fills the world, that
fills heaven, that fills the ears of God: our sins we confess to thee, of
thought, and word, and deed, of ignorance, of knowledge, of presumption, of
infirmity, our secret sins, our open sins, against thee, against our
neighbors, against our selves. Thus a Christian goes on to aggravate against
himself all these, and what ever else can be said. He that goes about to
reckon our drunkenness, our adultery, our backeslidings, the several degrees
of our profaneness; the shedding of innocent blood, how it increases: there
has been more blood shed since the sickness began, more duels about the
City then I have heard of in two or three years before. As if we would
aggravate sin, when God comes to reckon with us. If a man should reckon the
degrees of fraud that is continually practiced in shops, and trades; the
profaning of the Sabbath: and sin is come to that, that it is uncontrollable,
that all the Magistrates in this City are not able to control a few boys,
and disorderly men, that wrestle in the fields. So boys give laws to men, and
so sin runs on. The sin that every man commits, if that be so infinite, the sin
that the whole commits, how infinite is it? We have an all, He would bring them
to an acknowledgement, that is the first reason.

Secondly, he would bring them to a detestation, and protestation against all.
They come not to distinguish when they make confession before God: take away
our mortal sins, but let our venial sins alone; our greater sins wipe away;
for our less, we will shift as well as we can: True repentance knows no such
distinction. Though there be a difference of sins, yet in repentance,
repentance makes none; not the distinction so as to exclude any. It makes
distinction to mourn more for shipwracking sins that burden conscience, and
force, and streine our tears; it mourns most for them, but it acknowledges
all. If it be but as a grain of sand, that it acknowledges, an idle word, an
exorbitant thought, an irreligious gesture, indiscretion, and folly, they are
fruits of the first sin: and these, and every of these are opposite to the law.
If it be a transgression of the law, it provokes the Divine Majesty, and is an
obliquity from him, and incurs his justice, if God should be extreme.
Therefore when a Christian asks pardon, he distinguishes not; here is the
sin that I will lay aside; and this is the sin that I will ask pardon of, no;
he repents of none, that repents not of all. He distinguishes not the
profitable, and the unprofitable sins: here is a sin I am crucified to, says
the old man, I will ask God pardon of that: but covetousness sticks to my
fingers ends, I will not ask pardon of that. So, when nature is weak in a
drunkard, he will then acknowledge, I have offended God, and sinned against the
creatures in the intemperate use of them; now he dares not, for his
consumption, or he must not, for his dropsy. It is not repentance that
crucisies this sin, but nature: but his gam^ng, and intemperance, these he will
keep. A true convert makes no distinction of pleasant or unpleasant sins: no,
here is my Dalilah, begin with that first, all iniquity is to be relinquished;
he that expects pardon of all, must renounce all.

Thirdly, there is another reason; that thereby he might draw them to an
acknowledgment of the great goodness of God, that he was able to pardon all.
Take away all iniquity, all summed up together. By saying all, they acknowledge
that God could and would remit all, if they repent of all, and leave all. Note,
that there is no burden of sin so great, but God can pardon it, and take it
away. There is a greater all of Gods mercy, then of our sins; and of Christ's
merits, then of our sins; for all the sins of the world put together, they
are finite, he is an infinite Majesty: but in themselves God can number them,
for they are written in his book. The alsufficiency of that merit and
sacrifice that Christ laid down, and the price of that inestimable blood, that
is infinite. There can be no number made of the virtue of those drops of blood
which Christ shed: there can be no number made of that mercy, the drops of
which God comprehends us with, therefore mercy and merit is greater then sin.
If we can confess all, God can pardon all. Look as in nature, the Philosopher
observed, that infinite is of that extent, that no finite can be
proportionable: as an infinite number, though there can be none, because
another number may be added: but an infinite number, ten thousand millions, it
is as far off of infinite as ten, because there is no proportion, because it
may be multiplied, and multiplied. So, though sins be many, as millions, it
has no proportion to the merits of Christ, why? because they are infinite:
that blood is of excellent virtue, it can wash white; because it is infinite,
it has sufficiency to pardon all sin, and do it easily.

So it is, as if he had said: O Lord we are ready to confess all, take all
away; what we can, we alleadg against our selves; we beseech thee show mercy.
We know thy mercy is greater then our sins; as we confess all, pardon thou
all.

The Scripture sets it out by an all too, the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
us from all sin. God has made his promise so: At what time soever a sinner
repents, I will blot out all his wickedness. That thereby they might be
drawn to acknowledge his gooodnesse and mercy, to exclude their sins;
therefore the Prophet expresses it by this all. Their sins were innumerable,
but Gods mercy is more innumerable: their sins were great, but Gods mercy is
greater; if they will have God to pardon all, they must confess all, let this
be the form you will use: that is the second, the extent. Now, the third is the
mayn, the manner of the removal they pray for, Take away: But I see the time
is past, therefore I will break off.

SERMON IIII.
Hosea. 14.2. Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, etc.


AS every Nation in the world has some peculiar language, whereby they do
converse mutually one with another: so it is true also of all the graces of God
which the Apostle calls the fruit of the Spirit; every grace of the spirit it
has a peculiar tongue, or language, a form of speech, whereby Christians
converse with God.

There is one language of faith, another of repentance, another of prayer,
another of zeal, another of thankfulness. Each of these, they have several
words, several kinds of dialects whereby they express themselves. The words
of faith are victorious words; the words of thankfulness are glad, and
cheerful words: the words of zeal are fiery, the words of prayer are winged,
the words of repentance, bitter, and heavy words.

Each of these languages, and all sorts of words, they have their particular
tones, and acccents, whereby they express themselves, whereby pronunciation is
made. For faith forces out her words, thankfulness poures out her words,
repentance drops them out, zeal flames them out, and prayer darts them out.
There is none of all these languages, but we have a model of them in this
short Scripture. The language of repentance, that is in those words, Turn to
the Lord. The language of prayer in those, Take away all iniquity. The language
of faith in those, Receive us graciously. Of thankfulness in those, we will
give the calves of our lips. And lest any of these should be wanting, we may
find the fifth too, the language of zeal, that is in the Prophet that excited
the people to these duties: Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, or
turn to the Lord; and in turning, take words and say, etc.

Some of these words I have spoken of already: you may remember I divided the
whole into two parts, A rule of excitement, and a rule of direction. The
excitement to two duties; the duty of action, Turn to the Lord, and the duty
of elocution. In general, take to you words: and in particular it has
reference to this form, say thus to him, make your prayers after this; if you
cannot do that, use this prayer, that was the excitement.

The rule of direction, or form of prayer, and thankfulness that he gives
them, follows. That consists of two parts.

One part is for the donation of grace, Take away all iniquity.

The other is promissorie for the returning of grace, the grace of
thankfulness. So will we give the calves of our lips.

I am yet in the former of these, and that consists of two parts, the precatory.

One part is deprecatory, for the removal of ill, Take away all iniquity.

The other is supplicatory, that is, for the pouring out, or the effusion of
good, the best good, the good of grace, receive us graciously.

I am yet in the former part, I considered three parts, according to the three
words, for they have all their phasis.

It is not, take away sin, but take away iniquity, it is a word of weight.

It is not take away our iniquities, or this, or that iniquity, but all, the
reason of that I gave also, the extent of it for the removing of all, you heard
it.

The manner of removal that the people must beg, that is in this [Take away]
all, a word that is very full, of a large signification. It is more then
forgive. Compare it strictly with the nature of the word, and it is more then
crucify.

The forgiveness of sins, that properly concerns culpa. Sin may be committed
where it is forgiven, according to the essence of it; it is not always wholly
crucified, and taken away. It is more then subdue, and mortify, and keep under
sin. Sin may be mortified, though the dregs, and lees, and seeds of it are
still behind, it shall never be put out wholly, out of any vessel of election
in this life. But this word in the prayer extends to both: Take away, both the
stain, take away the corruption, take away the guilt, take away the
defilement: Take it out of thy sight, that it accuse us not, that it condemn
us not, that it destroy us not, and expose us to thy judgments: and take it
from us too, that it defile not, that it corrupt not, that it spread not. It is
as much as those two words in Psalm. 103. that forgives, and heales, and those
two in two, pardon; and cleanse, it includes both, this taking away. Take it
away from us, and take it away from thee; let it have no more residence in our
hearts, no more appearance in thine eyes, from below, from above, both take it
away.

Nay yet further, if we shall gather together all those phrases, and forms of
speech in Scripture, to express the pardon, and forgiveness, and removing of
sin, all comes within the compass of this one phrase. Not to observe sin,
not to impute it, not to remember it; to remove it, to cover it, to pardon it,
to cast it behind his back, to shut his eyes upon it, to cast it into the
bottom of the sea; in a word, to purify, to purge, to cleanse us from it;
there is as much in this one word, to take it away.

It is a word so weighty, that that frivolous distinction that is used by the
Church of Rome for the defense of their doctrine of satisfaction. I will not
stand upon it, the distinction is this; that when sin is pardoned, the pardon
of sin it extends in part to the guilt; but it does not extend for the removal
of all punishment, because there is the penal part of satisfaction after to be
performed in purgatory. A distinction that will not stand before this word; to
Take away: for if there be some punishment that God exacts still, sin is not
taken away. It is a frivolous distinction that stands not with sense; for that
that is taken away is not; that that has no entity has no guilt, that that
has no being, obliges not to punishment.

Besides, it is not only in it self frivolous, but injurious to the
satisfaction of Christ, as if his blessed merits, and intercession were able to
quench the greater fire, and not to put out the less, as if it were able to
free from eternal death, and not from temporal, not a death, but a dying.

Besides, if God have pardoned, or taken away sin for the merits of Christ,
then it were unjust for God to exact it; A man that forgives a debt once, it is
unjust to demand it. If God have pardoned it, (and if he has taken away sin,
he has pardoned it; if he have pardoned it,) how shall he be satisfied in
punishing again? He that is gracious in pardoning, will he not be true in
keeping his promise? Nay, he that is just in pardoning, as the Apostle says,
he is just and faithful to forgive sin; will he be unjust in exacting that
punishment that he has remitted?

It is true, the question is not about the pouring out of temporal punishments
in this life; for so often times God does, even when he has pardoned sin, he
punishes it in his dearest servants: but those are not punishments, but
chastisements, and instructions. So David's, it was not says Saint Austin a
punishment, but a plaster that God laid to David to cure his sin, it was not
a punishment inflicted for sin. That is not the question about punishment
continuing in this life, because they have not the nature of punishments. But
the question is about punishment properly so called after this life, whether it
stand with Gods justice and truth, or Christ's merit, that there should be any
part of satisfaction, after God has pardoned, and taken away sin.

It is a doctrine that will not stand before any of those words whereby pardon
of sin is set forth in Scripture. In Isa. 38. God says, he will cast their
sins behind his back; that is a full word. In Isa. 44. he says, he will
remove them as a cloud; that is another full word. In Mich. 7. he will cast
them into the bottom of the Sea; another full word. In Jerem. 31. he says, he
will not remember them, he will forget, and forgive them. And here, and in
other places he will take them away. Their doctrine will not endure the trial
of these places, they cannot stand together. For if God punish, how does he
remove it? and if God revenge sin, how does he cast it out of his presence? how
does he forget it? for to punish is not only to remember it, but sharply to
remember it, if the pains of purgatory be so sharp as they say.

But if we look to the phrases, see how God expresses the contrary, I will
cast them Behind my back. How is that? I will not look upon them; that that
is behind God is not before; that that is not before, is not seen, is not
taken knowledge of. God takes no knowledge of them, therefore he punishes not.
And so, I will remove them as a cloud. A cloud, when the water is drawn forth
of it, there is no more footsteps, or appearance of it: so God promised to
make their sins, they shall be so far from sending out vapors of provocation,
that they shall be as a cloud, they shall vanish. Again says he, I will drown
them in the bottom of the Sea. It is true, Gods eye pierces to the bottom of
the Sea, and further; he looks to hell it self: but he speaks after the manner
of men, that that is at the bottom of the deep, is not able to be fetched
back by any creature, or by man; no man can go to the bottom of the Sea to
search for any thing that is there, that is laid up sure, that man cannot come
near it: so God will hide sin. That that is in the bottom of the Sea is more
safe, then that that is at the bottom of the greatest mountain; for Art may
dig there; but Art cannot come at the bottom of the Sea: even as that that is
at the bottom of the Sea is taken out of man's sight, so will I wipe your
sins out of my sight. Farther, I will not remember them; that which God
covers, he calls not to account for; that that God remembers not, he will not
revenge; that that God casts behind him, he will not cast his eye upon; that
that God takes away, he will not examine. If sin come to this pass, that God
pronounce it to be taken away, it shall never appear more; that that is
buried, he has taken it away, it is eternally hid. Saint Austin understood
this well, when he made that excellent gradation in one of his Sermons; says
he, if God once cover sin, then it is plain that he would not see it; if he
will not see it; he will not censure; if he will not censure, he will not
punish; if he will not punish, he will pardon. Nay, he has pardoned; that that
he says to take away, is to pardon; to pardon, is to blot out of the book of
his remembrance, that it never rise for accusing, or condemning. We see that
distinction of theirs will not stand before this word, Take away our
iniquities. So, now the points hence are these two: The reasons why the Prophet
chooses this word, for he might have had great variety: not pardon thou, that
is as much, not pardon, or forgive iniquity: but here is a fuller in regard of
the effect. Take away. It is for these two reasons.

First, he would draw them to acknowledge that sin was burdensome, that they
did detest, and loath it: For no man will have that taken away, that he
delights in. It is plain, the Prophet would have them express such affections,
that it might appear that their sins were odious and abominable, and they
delighted not in them: no men would have that removed that they take pleasure
in. While sin is but the pastime of the impenitent heart, no man desires it
should be taken away: but the prayer of a wicked man's heart is contrary, Lord,
that I may fulfill my lusts, that my sins may thrive, and go on. Where sin
is sweet, and delightful, that man cannot wish that it should be taken away,
these are repugnant. But where a man wishes it to be taken away, and pardoned,
it is plain there it appears a burden, and heavy. Look, in any thing
natural, and civil: A servant, a man desires not to put him away, while he is
profitable, but if he be unserviceable. You cast not away a garment while it is
useful; but when you have done with it: when they will serve for your wearing,
you will keep them; no man will cast a way that that he has profit, or
pleasure by: It is either somewhat that is hurtful, or unusefull that men cast
away. So is the nature of sin; sin only is unprofitable: what fruit have
you in those things, says the Apostle. Sin is that which is only hurtful,
it exposes men to great danger: therefore if a man would truly prepare, and
fit his heart, that he may speak with enlarged affections for the pardon of
sin, let him learn first to come to the sense of it, to know that sin in
its nature is a burden. David calls it so; my iniquities are gone over my
head: A heavy burden, greater then Aetna, greater then all the mountains
pyled one upon another: but while sin is pleasing to the soul, so long it is
not a burden. Water, in its place does not gravitare. If a man be at the
bottom of the Sea, and all the waves be on him, he feels no weight; If he be
out of the sea, a paile of water is heavy. Why? in the Sea it is in its place.
Sin, when men delight in it, is in its place, it has no weight: he that
truly desires to have it taken away, he must find it burthensom. A man that is
in danger of drowning, he will cry with fervency for help: a man that sees the
danger of sin, it will make him cry and roar. The reason why we do not cry
with such fervency for the removing of sin, is, because we feel not the sting,
and sharpness of it: Therefore a good Christian makes this a part of his
study, that he may bring himself to find sin burdensome: And that may be
done by these means.

If he often represent the purity of that law that sin transgresses, the law of
God.

The glory of that Majesty that sin provokes, the Lord of Hosts.

The blood of that Savior that sin crucifies, the Lord of life.

The honor of that profession that sin disgraceth, the profession of
Christianity.

The loss of that happiness that sin endamageth, the loss of heaven.

The bitterness of that place to which sin exposes, eternal condemnation.

The comfort of that conscience that sin makes shipwreck of; that is, the
conscience that is within a man, that shall either be a vessel of comfort, or
woe. He that lays all these together, will begin to apprehend that sin is
burdensome, that sin has weight on it: and that the Prophet provokes them
to by this word. The word signifies to take a burden from a man that is over-
weary: So the same word is that that John uses concerning Christ, The Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the world. The weight of sin lay on the
world, Christ comes, and takes it away; he takes it upon himself, that he
might take it from us: That they might understand thus much, therefore he
chooses this word of weight. That is the first reason to bring them to this
acknowledgment that their sin was distasteful, and burdensome, because they
could desire God to take them away.

Secondly, another thing it implies, is, he would hereby bring them to the
acknowledgment of the author of pardon of sin. He would hereby let them
understand who alone is both able, and willing to take away sin. That is not in
the power of any creature, or man himself, or any Angel, or Prophet, or
Apostle, or Saint whatsoever. Here is the second thing requisite in every true
convert.

First, he must find sin burdensome.

Secondly, that he acknowledge God to be the author of the pardon of it. It is
in vain to come before God, and not to know this. He that comes to God, must
believe that he is. He that comes to God to remove his sin, must believe that
God must remove it.

Shall we come to God, and believe, and trust the merits of others to remove
sin? It is to mock God. Let our adversaries of Rome look to this; though they
pretend God to be the author of pardon, yet let them see how it will stand with
those points. One concerning the doctrine of merit: and the other concerning
free will. For if the Saints by the merit of their intercession, can procure
pardon; or if those, to whom the power of the keys is committed, can properly,
virtually, efficaciously, and directly remove, and take away sin: it is
plain, they that hold these, cannot acknowledge God to be the sole author of
pardon.

But the Scripture runs in another phrase: God expresses it so, and testifies
of himself, that none else can do it. Isa. 43. I the Lord blot out your
iniquities. The Prophet acknowledges so much: To thee O Lord belongs mercy
and forgiveness. As mercy and forgiveness belong to God; so the taking away
of sin, that is to thee alone, It has the force of an exclusive, because the
depth of mercy belongs to him: therefore forgiveness.

And we are happy that it belongs to him, God knows what success we should
have, if it were trusted to men that are so unmercifull. Nay, if it were in the
hands of Angels, though they be charitably, and well-affected to us, that are
their fellow members; yet there is a great deal of difference; the bowels of
Angels would be strait if they were the dispensers of it. No, it must be a
fountain that cannot be drawn dry; it must b^ an infinite has that must wash
the sou^e, and that cannot be done but by the bath that is taken from Christ,
and the mercy of God.

The Jews that were ignorant, and knew nothing in the time of Christ; they
knew that, who can forgive sins but God? Though they misapplyed it, yet it is
was true in the thesis, and in the general, who can forgine sins out God?
And Christ, unless he had been God, could not have forgiven sins; who can
forgive sins but God? Cyr^l well upon the place, gives the reason, it must
needs be so, because God is the Lawgiver, and the Judge; says he, to whom can
it possibly belong to pardon, and pass by, and wipe away the transgressions of
the law, but to him that is the giver of the law? Therefore none of the
Prophets or Apostles durst ever arrogate this privilege. Nathan when he was
sent to David, though he had a commission from God, durst not speak in his own
name, but the Lord has pardoned. And if there were no Prophet or Apostle durst
assume so much, shall we that are men, far inferior in place, and piety, and
those special intercourses of the love, and knowledge of God?

It is true, there is a power given to Ministers declaratorie, to publish, and
pronounce pardon to the truly repentant: but the power of absolution properly
so called, and the power of taking away, and pardoning, that only God keeps in
his own custody. Says Ambrose well, the Minister of God does that that
belongs to his duty, when he declares, and publishes pardon to the repentant;
but he exercises not any power and authority, it is but Ministerial.
Therefore Saint Austin observes well, that when Christ gave this power to his
Apostles, and Disciples, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted: he first
premiseth, he breathed on them, and said, receive ye the holy Ghost. Says he,
first they received the holy Ghost, and then whose sins yeremit, they are
remitted: For it is the holy Ghost that puts away sin, and not you: It is
Austin's observation.

And we may further observe, that Christ, when he healed any, commonly he
pronounced forgiveness of sins: but the Apostles, though they healed many,
yet we never read that they used this word. To note, that Christ gave the power
of healing to them, but he kept the power of pardoning to himself: Further
then it is ministerial, he kept the power of putting away of sin to
himself; for it is an act of Majesty, it cannot be so to others. God may make
Angels to declare it, or men, but the power is proper to him. Christ gave the
power of healing to the Apostles, but he kept the power of pardoning to
himself. Saint Austin presses it against the Donatists sweetly, who would
feign have got the power to themselves. Austin asks the question, tell me the
virtue of whose name takes away sin? He speaks of himself; is it the name of
Austin? is it the name of Donatus? it is neither the name of Paul nor Peter:
who is Austin? who is Donatus? And the Apostle presses it, who is Paul? and
who is Apollo? but the Ministers of CHRIST? But who is it that takes away
sins? GOD Himself.

This is the second thing the Prophet would bring them to know and acknowledge
in this word; O Lord to thee belongs mercy and forgiveness; thou art the
Father of mercy: we can feel the smart of sin, but cannot remove it; thou
must either take it away, or else it will not be taken away, therefore show
mercy, and come among us; either take it from us, or else it will take us from
thee; remove it from us, and remove it from thee: Take away sin, and receive
us graciously. I have done with the first part, the precatory part, which
concerns Malum tollendum, the evil to be removed, the evil of sin.

The second is, bonum largiendum, in these words, ^^ke away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously. It is in the Original, and show us good. Yet in the
Original a little further, Take away iniquity, and receive good. Like that
phrase in the Psalm, He received gifts for men; that is, he gave gifts to men.
Receive good; that is, show good: show thy grace; that is, as it is well
interpreted in English, receive us graciously.

Two things are to be considered in it.

One that I propounded in the forenoon, though I came not to it; that is the
connection of this part to the other.

The other is the order of this part with the other, why it is joined, or added
to the other clause, and why it follows it; I shall hardly speak of all.

But let us look upon the connection; why is this clause added to the other? Is
not this enough; take away all iniquity? It seems this is superfluous: for
wherever sin is pardoned, grace is conveyed: where GOD takes away sin, he
discovers grace: and where he crucifies the old man, he stamps the image of
the new: where he frees from death, he gives interest to life; where sin is
pardoned, salvation is stated upon the soul; what need this follow? this one
word, take away all iniquity, is all the expression that need to be used.

But the Prophet would bring them to a greater enlargement, and it is added for
special reasons, I will bring them to these three.

First, it is added as a clause of illustration, Take away all iniquity, so
show thy self gracious and favorable. Noting this, that there is nothing does
more magnify the goodness and glory of God, then the pardon of sin; nothing
does more show his grace then that: As if he had said, thou art the Father of
mercy, and we have need of mercy, thou have mercy for thousands; and we are
thousands that beg it, we pray thee to pardon our sins, and manifest thy mercy
in pardoning, by receiving us graciously: show us grace in the pardoning our
sins. It is the greatest evidence of the mercy of God in the pardoning of
sins; it is that that glorifies God most. It is well said by the Psalmist,
that his mercy is over all his works: and we may say of the grace of
pardoning, that it is over all his other mercies. There are other mercies that
God shows us, that concern our temporal estate; O, these come not within
compare. Nay, spiritual mercies, if he preserve any, it is the grace of
custody. If he deliver any from danger, it is the grace of liberty: If he
accept our prayers, and receive them at our hands, that is a testimony of
mercy, the grace of acceptance: but if he pardon sin, that has all in it;
that is Gods tender mercy, in that he shows bowels of mercy. He opens his
casket of mercy in all favors; but he opens his own bowels when he pardons
sin; that includes all mercies; that David calls his tender mercies: Over all
our works it is, even over the worst works of ours, which is sin: Over all
Gods works it is, even over all the best of Gods works besides, in creating,
preserving, and keeping. It is that that shines, and breaks forth, and
surpasses all other his attributes; it is that that glorifies God most, that
honors him: yea, that God himself hrnours most. His grace and goodness
appeared in the creation of the world; that was a great mercy, mercy budded
out then, but that was not so great a mercy as the pardon of sin. For
nullitie, though it be far off from God, yet it is nearer God then sin and
iniquity is, because that is more repugnant, and contrary to his nature: it is
more to pardon a sinner, then to create a world; it is more to pardon one
sinner, then to make a million of men.

It is over his works of power, over his works of justice. Justice is seen in
punishing of sin, God shows his power in that: but there is a greater power
seen in the pardoning of sin, it is plain: His power in executing of justice,
it is as the strong man; but his power in magnifying his mercy is as the
stronger man, for it binds the hands of justice; the stronger man comes and
binds the strong man. Grace and mercy are the stronger attributes, stronger
then justice; though both be the same in God; yet in manifestation it
prevails, and exalts it self against justice. If Gods power be seen in
punishing, much more in pardoning, because mercy conquers justice.

Besides, see it in our selves; for a man that punishes another, it argues he
has power over another: but he that pardons him that deserves to be punished,
shows (...) ^ee not only has power over another, but over himself, because
pardon is both an evidence of that power that should have been in punishing,
and of a further power in sparing. So the force of mercy is double to that of
justice, it magnifies Gods power more, it is the last act of divine justice,
the pardon of sin.

Therefore in Scripture, mercy has the prerogative above all other attributes
in many respects.

Of antiquity, it is older, (in regard of manifestation, we speak still) for
mercy and love budded out in the creation of the world (we speak of the
effects of it) but justice was not manifested till man had transgressed. It was
one day older in the manifestation then judgment was; then judgment took
place, when Adam transgressed, mercy was before.

It has the prerogative of alliance; for though the justice of God be
himself, as well as his mercy: as all is but one act in God, his justice, and
wisdom, and power, and merci^, all are himself; yet mercy is his more proper
work: Therefore in Scripture, judgment is called his strang^ work, I will bring
a strange work; that is, I will execute justice. He calls it a strange work,
as hetrogenicall, and contrary to his nature; he is forced to execute
judgment, our sins compel him: If it were not for sin, he would not
manifest judgments. Though both be natural, yet mercy is more natural in
regard of the effect of it: It is nearer.

Thirdly, It has the prerogative of latitude, it has a greater extent: he
executes justice seldom, and upon some few; all men taste of his mercy. There
is no judgment that God executes, but mercy is mingled with it. Go over any
that were executed since the beginning of the world, still there was mercy in
it: but there is mercy often manifested, when there is no judgment in it.
Here is the difference, judgment is never entire, but there is some mercy in
it; mercy is always entire, and there is no mixture of judgment in it. See the
effects in regard of extent, God says he will punish to the third and fourth
Generation, the Fathers upon the Children: that is a long time, but it is
nothing to his mercy, I will show mercy to thousands of generations. A
thousand Generations is longer then the world shall last; For there were but
42. generations from the Creation to Christ: a hundred generations is like to
be longer then the world shall last; yet God will be merciful to thousands of
Generations, if it last so long; or if not, he will be so for ever, a large
periphrasis, Mercy has the prerogative of extent.

It has the prerogative of honor, it honors God more, and God honors it
more. He makes mention by his spirit in Scripture; when he mentions judgment
and mercy, mercy goes first. My song shall be of mercy and judgment: Mercy
and truth are met together, still mercy is first, God gives it the
prerogative. Nay usually he mentions mer^^twice, for once righteous: Gracious
and merciful is God, and righteous. And at the last day, when these two
attributes shall be placed at the two hands of God, we shall see which
attribute has pre-eminence, that has the highest honor to stand at Gods
right hand: judgment shall stand at his left hand among the vessels of wrath,
mercy at his right hand among the sheep, and the elect.

Last of all, it has the prerogative of duration; for though condemnation
(speaking of eternal condemnation, and eternal life,) though condemnation be
a line of as great length as eternal life that lasts for ever: yet speaking of
temporal punishment, compared with the mercy of God; so we see mercy
out-lives justice in all the expressions of it, and that by a great
disproportion.

It is a great disproportion between years and months. In Rev. 11. The holy
City shall be trodden down 42. months, but they shall reign with me for a
thousand years. Though months be not months in that place, I come not now to
examine the meaning of months: but see the comparison; there is mercy for a
thousand years, there is judgment for 42. months: they shall be trodden under
foot, but they shall reign a thousand years.

It is a greater disproportion that is betwixt weeks and years: see that in
Dan. 9. Seventy weeks are determined for the transgression of my people, that
I may compass them with everlasting kindness. Seventy weeks are determined
for transgression: God measures judgments by weeks, but he reckons the
continuance of his mercy by many years, by ages, by everlasting duration,
there shall be everlasting righteousness.

Yet further, there is a greater disproportion between years and days: yet in
Isa. 63. The day of revenge is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemer is
come. Here is the day of revenge, the year of redemption: The day of revenge
is in mine heart. There days are years, and years are days: but in the
expression of them God exalts mercy that we may see it has a larger sphere
to move in.

Yet further, there is a greater disproportion between a moment and a year,
nay, between that and eternity. For a small moment have I corrected thee, but
with everlasting mercy I will receive thee, as it is in Isaiah. God threatens
to punish for a small moment, but his mercy endures for eternity.

Now, to sum it up, the Prophet would make them understand thus much, that
nothing magnifies Gods grace and goodness more then the pardon of sin: that
they might profess it, that they might make it public to his glory; his
glory it is to pass by transgressions, it is a great glory to pass by many
transgressions, if it be his peculiar glory to pass by any. Where sin has
abounded, grace abounds; where grace abounds, glory abounds, where much sin
is pardoned, He calls them to acknowledge his mercy, and makes it an
illustration of the former: Take away our transgressions, and receive us
graciously. That is the first, it is a clause of illustration.

Secondly, observe it as a clause of inducement, a motive and argument to
persuade God to forgive them. So, it stands thus, Take away iniquity, because
thou art gracious, because thou usest to receive favorably, therefore take
away iniquity. They beg for grace in the name of grace, and mercy in the name
of mercy; show mercy, because thou art merciful, take away iniquity, because
thou art gracious and favorable, therefore take away iniquity. It is the
strongest motive of all others, to press God from himself to pardon sin. The
point is this,

He that comes before God to beg for mercy, must bring no other motive but
mercy. There is no such strong prevalent motive with God to show mercy, as
mercy; Mercy is the thing we sue for, and mercy must make God show it. He
expresses it so, I will pardon for my name sake, in one place: For mine own
sake, in another place: For my own sake will I do this to the House of
Israel. For my promise sake, in another place; For my mercy sake, in another
place. Here are four, and they are all alike, to show that mercy comes from it
self, it has a reciprocation, it moves circularly, it begins in mercy and it
ends there. For mine own sake, that is, for himself, and his mercy is
himself. For my name sake, that is, as much as for my mercy: Thy name is as
Oil powered out, and it appears that his name is as Oil, by his mercy, for
mercy is that Oil that Swims over all liquors, it appears over all other
works it is manifest to all: For my promise sake, that is as much as for his
mercy, for Gods Promises are Promises of mercy. So all agree in this, for my
name sake, it is a name of mercy; for my Promise sake; they are Promises of
mercy; for mine own sake, he is a God of mercy.

But yet more plain, when God speaks of showing mercy, he makes it come
round, to show that mercy is the thing that he will give, and the ground why he
gives it, In Exodus 33. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. See how it
runs, it is thus, I will have mercy on whom I will, that is, because I will so,
if we press God for mercy, do it thus. Lord be gracious, that thou may be
gracious, and be merciful, because thou art merciful: Pardon because thou art
gracious, thy mercy has an everlasting Duration. The Psalmist presses it so,
Have mercy on me according to thy great goodness, and according to the
multitude of thy mercies take away mine offenses; See how sweetly he presses
it, Have mercy according to thy goodness, he makes it come to it self; Pardon
me according to thy goodness, be merciful because thou art merciful: he had
no other motive. In another place he has the same Reciprocation, Do good for
thy name sake, because thou art good deliver me, because thou art good, do
good, and deliver me. It is the same reciprocation that Isaiah makes, Isa. 63.
He has been good to the House of Israel, for his goodness, and because his
mercies are everlasting. He has been good for his goodness. To instance no
more places, in the new Testament there is the same reciprocation that John
makes, John 1. Of his fulness we all receive grace for grace: mercy for
mercy, it is not only grace after grace, which is a good interpretation, the
first grace, and the second grace, the grace of Acceptance, and the grace of
Strengthening; the grace of pardoning, and the grace of reviving and quickening,
all grace is from God. But it has a fuller signification, Grace for grace:
Grace because he is gracious, because he is merciful he shows favor, he
turns it to himself. So, now the Lession is this: that, When we come to sue
for pardon of sin before the Throne of Grace, we have no name to come in but
the name of Christ.

The name of Christ is a name of mercy, that is Gods own name; he that comes
to plead his own merit, comes in his own name. He that comes to plead the
Merits of any other, pleads in a Strangers name. If merit and satisfaction had
been that way, then were mercy no more mercy, and grace no more grace, then all
the Saints of God were out of the way, for they all went in this path: Mercy
was the City of refuge to which they went, and the path by which they went.
Mercy was the Water in the Well, and the Paile they drew it with; they sued for
mercy in the name of mercy. The Publican, David, Peter; St. Austin says of
Peter well, I read of Peter's Tears, but no man ever read of Peter's
satisfaction, Peter could not go in that name. Our blessed Savior has taught
us therefore so to pray, Forgive us our Trespasses, he taught us not to pray as
the Servant in the Gospel, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all,
Lord be favorable a little longer, lend me a little life, and I will make thee
satisfaction. No, that is not the Prayer, he that goes that way misseth; but
here is the Prayer, Pardon and forgive for thy name sake, and for thy mercy
sake; Take away iniquity, and receive us favorably, receive us to grace, and
Pardon for thy mercy sake.

This is the Form that Penitent, faith full souls look to God in: No Creature
is capable of merits, therefore let men never trouble themselves with the
discussion of that, it is so repugnant that the Angels, though they never
sinned, cannot merit, they do but their duty. Adam in integrity could not
merit, if innocence cannot merit, sin cannot, if the State of Angels cannot
merit, humane cannot. Nay, the Saints that are called out of darkness, and
sanctified by grace, those Saints, though it were possible they should never
sin, not so much as in the circumstances of any good Act; that they should not
be touched with venial sins (as they call them) with no ill thought, or idle
word, or unprofitable gesture, if they were borne, and sanctified from the
womb, as John Baptist, and Jeremiah, and should continue in a course of
sanctification, without any treading awry, they could not merit, when they had
done all, they must say, They were unprofitable Servants. He that does his duty
cannot merit; ye are but Servants when you have done all you can, nay, when you
have done all you should (if it were possible) that is more then all you can:
For that grace that God gives us, though it be a good evidence of his spirit,
and of justification in our hearts; yet that grace of sanctification is
imperfect, and no man makes a perfect improvement of Gods gifts, no man lives
according to the measure of grace that God bestows. Therefore when we have
done all we can, we come short of what we ought. Nay, if we had done all we
should, all that God requires, say, you cannot merit, you are unprofitable
Servants, you have done but your duty, you have done but what God requires. If
the state of restitution cannot merit, sin and impiety cannot merit. There is
in the best action that we perform, in the work of Preaching, and praying, and
alms, and charity, and deeds of piety, so much Leaven, so many infirmities,
that he that knows the nature of sin, and the latitude, and small extent of
piety, in his heart, when he Prays he prays not only for the pardon of his
sins, but of his Prayers. And when he preaches, he prays not only for pardon
of his silence, and neglect, but of his performance; if there be infirmities in
the best, there is no plea of merit. Our work is only this, to fly to the
Throne of grace, in the name of grace, that is it that is a prevaling, forcible
word with God, to plead for mercy, and beg for pardon, because he is gracious.
It is a word that so prevails, that it carries always mercy with it from
Heaven, it is that word that God delights in; it is that word about which
prayer clucks, as the Wings of the Cherubims, about the Mercy-Seate: The Wings
of Prayer must flutter about the Mercy-seate, about mercy. That is the second
thing, to show what the foundation of the pardon of sin is; none but mercy, it
is founded in grace, therefore he adds it to the former, Take away all iniquity
and receive us graciously, as an inducement to persuade God to take away all
iniquity. That is the second, I will but touch the third.

The Third is, he adds it as a clause of perfection, that makes up the perfect
enumeration of the graces, Take away all iniquity and receive us graciously.
There is nothing that a Christian can beg in this World, but it may be brought
in the compass of one of these two. These two words are as the two Tables of
Prayer, like the two Tables of the Law, in these two, there are all kind of
Petitions, all the evil that is to be removed, is in that, Take away all
iniquity, and all good that is to be conveyed in that, Receive us graciously.
So, that he might make a Perfect Prayer for them, yet very short and
compendious, and yet full. Take away all iniquity and receive us graciously,
this is a Prayer that the Prophet studied, this was the Prayer that the Spirit
guided him to make for them. Here are the two hands of Prayer, Take away
iniquity, and receive us graciously.

If we divide Prayer, as the Apostle does, into four sorts, that are rather
parts then kinds of Prayer, 1. Tim. 2. I beseech that Prayer, and intercession,
and giving of thanks, be made to God for all men, they are all in this form
that the Prophet prescribes them: Here is the deprecatory part for the removing
of ill; Take away all iniquity, here is the supplicatory part; for the pouring
out of all good, Receive us graciously. Here is the gratulatory part, We will
give the Calves of our lips.

Take the division of Prayer, according to that scantling that David makes,
Psalm. 34. For obedience gives the Law to Prayer, he refers the duty of a
Christian to two heads, Eschew evil, and do good, upon that hangs all the
Law, and the Prophets: according to these two are the parts of Prayer, one for
the removal of evil, another for the infusion of grace; here are both, the
removal of the greatest evil, take away iniquity, and power the choicest of
thy mercies on us; that is mercy, Receive us graciously. One part of the Prayer
is for expelling of darkness, Take away iniquity, the other for the showing of
the light of his Countenance, Receive us graciously.

Lastly, if we divide it, as David divides prayer, Psalm. 25. there he makes his
Prayer, Remember Lord, and remember not; these are the two heads, an
affirmative, and a negative, remember not my sins, but remember me: He desires
God, both to remember, and yet to forget; here are both these, here is one part
of the Prayer, that God would be mindful, receive us graciously: Another that
he would not be mindful, Take away iniquity, remove it out of thy sight,
forget our sins, Here is one part, that God would open his eyes, and another
that he would shut them, shut them upon our sins, open them upon our persons.
The one part of the Prayer fits the sin, the other the sinner: For sin, they
pray that God would put it from them, and remove it; for themselves, they pray
that God would take them to him, and receive them to mercy.

Men, when they punish sin, they cut off the Sinner; but they cannot take away
the sin: God is otherwise in his proceeding, he takes away the sin, and spares
the Sinner. To make up the perfect part of Prayer, here is the evil to be
removed, and the grace to be bestowed, Take away iniquity, and receive us
graciously, here is that that concerns the time past, Lord take away iniquity,
what we have done thou know, here is that that concerns the time to come,
that we fall no more, strengthen us by thy spirit, receive us graciously. As
Cyprian speaks in another place, it is the breviary of the whole Gospel; as
Tertullian says, it is the Compendium of all Heavenly Doctrine. This text here
is all the Gospel, and all that is good in the Law, it is the sum of the
Gospel, it is like the Lords Prayer; here are six words in it answerable to
the six Petitions. Take away iniquity and receive us graciously, as Christ
divides that Prayer, he refers all to two heads, one for deprecation of ill.
Forgive us our Trespasses, and lead us not into temptation, deliver us from
evil. The other for the pouring out of all good, Hallowed be thy name, thy
Kingdom come, thy will be done, and give us daily bread. So here is for the
removal of evil, and the strengthening to grace, take away iniquity and
receive us graciously.

Here is a Pattern for us, one half of his Prayer is spent for the pardon of
sin, the other half for the pouring out of grace. For a man to neglect to beg
pardon, that is to be unmindfull of the time past, he that begs not grace, is
unmindfull of the time to come. By pardon we return, and by grace we stand. He
that has the consideration of Hell, that will stir him up to beg pardon, and
he that sees the joys of Heaven will beg grace; for that is the path that
leads thither: to make a perfect prayer, join both. The Prophet to give them a
full form, he joins these, though briefly. None of them could plead, that
they were not able to learn it, he joins these, that we might learn to join
them in our Prayers. They are the things that God joins, therefore he joines
them. They are the things that the promises of God join, therefore he joins
them. They are the things that other Saints joined, therefore he joins them.

God, when he speaks of himself he joins these, The Lord, the Lord,
gracious, and merciful, pardoning iniquity, etc. They go together in God, can
a man make a better prayer to God, or more perfect, then that that is taken
from those Attributes, and terms that are most emynent in God? The Spirit of
God joins these together in God, we may well join them in Prayer. As Cyprian
says of the Lords Prayer, it is good to come to the Lord in his own words,
though there be no virtue in the words without the Spirit, God will accept the
words of his own Son, when we come in the name and words of Christ. So here,
it is the Spirit of God that commenceth, and makes our Suites, it is the Spirit
of God that frames our Bill, that Dictates our Prayers: He is the Counselor of
the Father, he knows what the Father will grant. Shall we neglect to make such
Prayers as the Spirit dictates? Can you have, says St. Austin, a better to
Copy your Prayers, then the Spirit of God? Then, here the Spirit of God joins
the grace and mercy of God, we must join them in our Prayers, God will
acknowledge the words of his Holy Spirit, if we come to Christ in his own
words.

As they are the words that God joins, so they are the words that are joined
in the Promise: I will be merciful to their Transgressions, and I will pardon
their Sins. In many of the Promises of God these two still meet; Prayer builds
upon a Promise, when Prayer gets a promise, it builds, it goes up to Heaven
upon promises, there is the Ladder of promises. It is impossible Prayer should
miscarry, that takes the direction of the promise; God has promised to pardon,
therefore prayer sues for it, God has promised to be gracious, therefore
prayer begs it. These two are joined in the promise, therefore they should in
our Prayers.

Thirdly, they are the two that the Saints join, God be merciful to us and
bless us, and be merciful unto us; he delights to put these two, God be
merciful, and merciful, God take away our sins, and receive us graciously; be
merciful in pardoning, and be merciful in pouring out, and diffusing the
light of thy Countenance. O! when the Saints set before us the Patterns of such
Prayers, it is comfortable to us; such Patterns as they sped with, when they
were in our condition. It is a great encouragement and comfort, and assurance
to a Christian, when I come with the Prayer of David, of the Prophets and
Apostles: O! It is a comfort when a soul can enlarge it self in those
Heavenly words that the Spirit of God wrought in the hearts of the Saints in
former times. For this very purpose, the Prophet records this Prayer, that they
might learn it then, and we treasure it up now, for it is full of the Jewels
of Heavenly grace. That shall serve, to have spoken of that, Take away
iniquity, and receive us graciously, the reason why he adds this clause to the
other. There is one thing behind, the Order, but that I must reserve for
another time.

SERMON V.
Hosea. 14.2. Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: So will we
render thee, the Calves of our lips.


GOOD and evil, are the two bounds that are set to all obedience. That they
are the hounds of obedience, the Prophet David shows in Psa. 37. where he
reduces all the duty of man to those two heads, in shunning of evil, and
following that that is good, Eschew evil, and do good, and dwell for ever.
That they are the bounds of the grace of repentance, the Prophet Ezekiell shows
us, Chap. 38. Cast away from you all your Transgressions, make you a new heart,
and a new Spirit. As the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4. Put of the old man with the
deeds thereof, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind. That they are the
bounds of Prayer, our blessed Savior shows in those two parts, Pray that you
enter not into temptation; there is the one, Seek first the Kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof, there is the other part. Lastly, that they are
the bounds of the duty of thankfulness, the Psalmist shows again in Psalm.
103. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy
name, that forgiveth all thine iniquities, that Crowns thee with mercy and
loving-kindenesse.

All the Saints of God, they well know this, that piety is excercised about
these two; these two are the hinges upon which the Door of piety turns, both
backward and forward: upon these it is, that obedience turns, in the shunning
of evil, and pursuing of good; upon these it is that Prayer turns, in
deprecating evil, and petitioning for good. Lastly upon these two, the work
of thankfulness turns too, in giving God praise for the diverting of evil,
and for the effusion of good.

And according to these limits we may see all these duties plainly set out in
the text by the several bounds of them. Here is the work of Repentance, with
the bounds thereof, in that clause, Turn to the Lord, to set out to us, as I
showed before, both the term from which we must turn, the aversion of ill;
and the term of happiness to which we must turn, that is, the conversion to
that that is good. Put away your sins from you, turn from them, and then turn
to the Lord. There are the bounds of repentance.

For the duty of Prayer, with the bounds of that, we have it in the next words,
Take away all iniquity, there is the deprecation of that that is evil, and
receive us graciously, there is the Petition we make for that that is good.

Lastly, for the duty of thankfulness, we have that in the last words, with
the bounds thereof, So will we render, If thou will take away sin, we will
render the praise of that work, and if thou will show, us thy Salvation, we
will render the praise of that work.

Of the first of these we spoke already, and of the last I am to speak
afterward; and in the second I am conversant at this time: The form of Prayer
the Prophet sets to the people, according to the bounds of it, in which I
considered before, these two parts. There are the parts of the Prayer, and the
order of the parts.

The parts of the Prayer in those two.

First, for the removal of sin, Take away all iniquity, I showed you the
reasons why he directs his prayer against sin; why he would have them direct it
against all sin; why he Prays against sin, for the taking of it away.

The 2. part of the prayer is, for the pouring down of the grace they stood in
need of, receive us mercifully, favorably, receive us to thy grace, In that, I
showed you the reasons why it is annexed to the former part, as a clause of
Illustration, show thy self Gracious by pardoning our sins.

As a clause of inducement, we entreat thee for the goodness of thy grace and
mercy to show thy self so in pardoning our sins; we come to God for grace, in
the name of Grace, and for Mercy in the name of Mercy.

Thirdly, as a clause that makes up a perfect Ennumeration of all wants that
are comprised under these two heads. Take away iniquity, and receive us
graciously. Thus sarr I went.

That that remains in the second part, is only the Order of these two
particulars: For there is some reason why the Prophet sets them in this Order.
Why not first, receive us graciously, and then Take away iniquity? for all
other blessings are Originated in the love and favor of God: It is from his
love and grace, that he grants pardon to us of our Transgressions; there is no
pardon of sin, where there is not grace, and favor, and love. Therefore the
Psalmist Psalm. 85. he sets them in another Order, O Lord thou have been
gracious to the Land. And then follows in Verse. 2. Thou have forgiven the
iniquities of thy People. First God is gracious, and then he forgives iniquity,
the pardon of sin must flow from his grace, and favor.

It is true, the love of God must of necessity go before, (in the order of
nature) all the effects of his love, and favor whatsoever: the cause must be
before the effect, and the Fountain before the Stream in nature. But yet the
Scripture uses some difference of setting down these particulars: for
sometimes it sets the one before, and sometimes the other.

The reason is, because they are mutually infolded, and so close knit, that one
cannot be without the other: There is no greater demonstration of Gods grace
and favor, then the pardon of sin; if there be grace and favor, there will be
forgiveness, where there is forgiveness, there is an evident testimony that
God has showed the riches of his grace; therefore though the Prophet set it
here in another order, then sometimes, it is in Scripture, there is good reason
for it; besides that; there may be three things said, for the justification of
this order, there are three reasons of it.

Either as they contain in them a Petition for the enlargement of the
continuance of grace.

Or for the enlargment of the Evidence and demonstration of grace.

Or a Petition for the enlargment of the communication of his grace to them. In
all these 3. senses the order is every way justifiable.

First, in putting these two together, there is a Petition for the inlargment
of the continuance of Gods grace, Take away iniquity, and receive us
graciously: In these two he prays for the giving of grace, and the duration
and perpetuation of it. So the order is thus, Grace cannot be continued, till
it be bestowed and given: In the first word he prays for the giving of it,
that God would receive them to a state of reconciliation. In the second, that
he would continue them, and keep them in that estate. Show thy self first
gracious in pardoning our sins, and show thy self again gracious in keeping
us from committing sin. What profits it, though our former sins be pardoned, if
we continue in them? Therefore the Prophet teaches them to beg, not only for
forgiveness of sins, but for strengthening of grace to continue in it. To
show, that apenitent faithful soul stands in need of God, after his sins are
pardoned. We have not done with God when our sins are pardoned, we need a
further enlargment of grace to keep us in that estate, lest we relaps.
Therefore the beleiving soul makes up his Prayer of these two, Lord, thou have
been gracious, and I rely upon thee for the time to come, that thou will still.
The Point is this: that, The faithful soul after it has had a taste of the
goodness of God, in the pardon of sin, it rests not there, but goes on still
to beg more grace.

A greater enlargement of favor; it must needs be so in the order of our
desires. Grace is of a ravishing nature, when it possesses the heart, it
inflames it. Even in Heaven, where grace is full, there is an Apetite of
complacency for desire of the continuance of that grace, and favor: though
there cannot be a desire of more, where the Vessel is full. But in Earth,
where grace is powered in by drops, there is an Appetite of desire, because
there is want continually. And we never have grace, but that we see we want
more, then a man loves grace more, when God powers in more, and he thinks he
wants more.

It is the order in Gods proceeding, he lays this method, he gives his spirit
for this purpose, not only to cleanse us from sin, but to strengthen us for
new obedience, not only to Seal to us our reconciliation for the present, but
to keep us for the time to come. And both these are the free gift, and work of
Gods Spirit; it is his spirit that seals to us pardon, and it is his spirit
that strengthens us, that we may walk by the strength of that grace.

And the order of our necessity is such: For otherwise how should we do? It is
by grace we stand, and rise, and go on, and persevere. A Christian stands in
need of God in all the passages of his life, every minute, and every moment of
time, for temporalls, for spiritualls, for naturalls.

If we look to those things of nature that we need. First, it is the goodness
of God that must give a man meat for his body: And aftermear, it is a second
grace to give him a Stomach: And after that, it is a third good to give him
digestion: And after that, it is a fourth manifestation of goodness, to turn
it to blood and spirits, that it may be healthful.

So for temporalls, it is one Testimony of goodness, that he keeps us from
danger. It is a second that he keeps us in the right way: And it is a third
that he brings us safe to the end of our journey.

In spiritual things much more; if God should first prevent us with grace, and
then leave us to our selves, what security could we have? Our latter end would
be worse then our beginning. We are not able to subsist of our selves one
moment of time, Gods grace must have the glory and honor of all; that it may
have the honor, the Prophet here teaches them thus to pray for the first
grace, and the second grace, for the beginning, and for the continuance of
grace, to work the will and the Deed, that he would perfect the work. First,
Take away iniquity, show thy self gracious in pardoning; and then continue
that grace, keep us from sinning againo. That is the first justification, if we
consider the enlargement of the continuance, so the order is good.

Secondly, if we consider it as a Petition for the enlargement of the evidence
and manifestation of grace, so it is good. For grace cannot be manifested till
it be given, there can be no demonstration of the pardon of sin, till pardon be
wrought, and the greatest demonstration of the pardon of sin is this, when Gods
spirit is powerful to subdue and crucify sin. Then it is this demonstration
they beg in the second place, pardon our iniquities, and give us evidence that
our sins are pardoned, that thy spirit affist us continually to crucify and
subdue our sins: bestow upon us grace and favor and make us know that we have
it. For as our happiness consists in the pardon of our sins, so the comfort
consists in the enjoying of it. It is true, that grace and pardon of sin may be
had, where it is not at all times seen and felt, and perceived; but yet it
cannot be enjoyed, unless it be seen and felt; we may have the thing, but
want the comfort sometimes. He that wants the comfort, for the time he wants
the thing to himself, and his apprehension. Therefore when God has pardoned,
and has showed grace, the faithful soul stays not there, it is a Heaven upon
Earth to have the comfort, and assurance, and evidence of grace; that is the
point: that, After the pardon of sin is had, the faithful soul stays not
there, but begs for assurance, and after that, for more assurances, and still
for more assurance.

Because, there may be enlargement of assurance still, as long as we are in
these days of misery. However it please our adversaries of Rome to make a mock
of the certeinty of Salvation, the assurance of grace, they pin many scorns
upon it in their writings, though they be the Learned of them; let them enjoy
their consolation, it is to be feared that they will want the comfort, that
thus deride it. The Saints in Scripture did not so, they directed their prayers
often times, not only for the thing, but for the comfort and assurance of it;
and as they rejoiced in the thing, so much more in the assurance, for the
present. Look over those in the Old Testament, and in the New. Hear the
triumph of Job, wherein he wonderously delights and refreshes himself. I know
that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see him with these eyes. There is no
word of greater assurance then this, I know. Let their Thomas Aquinas speak
his mind of that word, upon those words. I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.
says he, in this word, I know, there is a certainty and assurance of hope,
that hope that makes us not confounded: there is a certainty in this word, I
know, I know that my redeemer lives. Therefore David, Psalm. 51. he prays not
only God to cleanse, and pardon, and purify his sins, but then follows, Make
me to hear the voice of joy and gladness: Cleanse me, and make me understand
that thou have cleansed me, make me have the comfort of it. Thou have told me
already, that my sins are pardoned, I have the assurance of it by the Message
sent by Nathan, but there wants comfort, and joy, in the evident demonstration
of it. O make me to hear the voice of joy and gladness, that the bones that
thou have broken may rejoice: that I may have the evidence of thy spirit
speaking to my heart.

Look to the New Testament, it is that particular, in which the Holy Apostle
John delights, and refreshes himself, not only in the thing, but in the
comfort to demonstrate the certainty, 1 John 3. We know, there is Paul's, and
Jobs word again, We know that we are translated from death to life, it is God
that has pardoned our sins, and wrought this gracious change. There is a
translation of the Old man to the New, we are translated, and we know it by the
fruit and effect, because we love the Brethren. And in another place, We know
his spirit abides in us. He not only comes, and goes, but dwells, he has
taken up his Habitation, it continues with us, we know it, even by the Spirit;
there is the evidence from the effect, because we love the Brethren, we know it
by that; and from the cause we know it, because we have the Spirit. What is
more then we know? And what greater assurance then the Spirit? Paul makes that
the great evidence, Romans 8. We know that he has given us of his spirit: And
that Spirit witnesses, what? That our sins are pardoned, that we are the
Children of God, that we are in the state of Adoption, and Reconciliation. The
Spirit witnesses to our Spirits. Our spirits have the Testimony, and the
spirit adds a Testimony to that, that by the mouth of two Witnesses every word
of God might be established to the soul. There is the evidnce of grace, and
the testimony of our spirit, and of the spirit of God. The Apostle Paul is very
freequent in setting words of weight to evince the certeinty I am persuaded
that neither life nor death, nor Angels, nor Principallities, nor powers, nor
any thing shall be able to separate us from the love of God. I am persuaded, it
is a word of great assurance, I am confident, it is as much as we know, I am
assured that neither life, nor death, that nothing can separate this bond of
union, or cut this bond assunder. There is no Sword that can cut between the
beleiving soul, and the spirit of God. It is so near a union, that the love
of God makes, that nothing can come between, I am confident, I am assured that
neither principallities, nor powers, nor any thing shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, he had the evidence, and he shows that it might
therefore be had.

Yet another place, and that is that that before I named, 2 Timothy 1. I know whom
I have believed. It is not only put in 2 Cor. 5. in the Singular, but in the
Plur all, least men should have thought that Paul had it by illumination from
God, it was revealed to him from Heaven; He knew whom he had believed, and that
none could separate him; but shall we expect to have that assurance given us?
Therefore in the Corinths he takes in them, We know, he names some besides
himself, that is, I, and you Corinthians, all beleivers, or at least those
that are eminent Beleivers, if not at all times, yet at some time, if not at
every time for the particular, yet for the general. We know that when this
earthly house of this Tabernacle shall be dissolved, there is a House made
without hands reserved in the Heavens. He speaks of the translation from the
Houses of Clay, these bodies that we carry about us, to those Houses that are
clothed on with immortality. God has provided a house, and we know it, and
are assured of it. The Apostles, and Saints of both Testaments they laid a
great deal of their comfort in this assurance, therefore they gave Testimony
to it.

And so the Saints in all times, those that had most experience in the working
of Gods grace, the holy Fathers of the first times, they triumphed much in
assurance. Bazill, he shows how assurance of the pardon of sin and the favor
of God may be had: He brings one making the Question. O Sir, tell me how I may
get it? I will tell you, says he, if there be that spirit in you, that was in
him that said, I have hated all wicked ways, you have it. For if there be the
work of the spirit of God in crucifying of sin, there is certainly before, the
comprehending grace in the pardoning of sin. Chrysostom he moves the question
in another manner then Basile, upon handling those words Romans 8. The spirit
witnesses to our spirits, look, says Chrysostom, after all this, what cause
will there be of ambiguity, of doubting? Who is there that can doubt when he
has the testimony and witness of the spirit? If the evidence of the spirit
show not it self always in the same measure, we must have recourse to those
evidences that God gives sometimes. And Cyprian goes on, though before him, and
prosecutes the same Question, Quis locus erit ambiguitatis, etc. What place
will there be for doubting and ambiguity, who can be sorrowful and fearful
after these evidences it has pleased God to communicate to us? let him standin
fear of death, that is afraid to go with Christ, that is not willing to go
with Christ, let him be unwilling to go with Christ that knows not yet that
he has begun to Reign with Christ, there is no man can be doubtful, says he.

Men, they will not deny but this oertainty may be had, except they be devoyd
of all experience of the working of grace. Therefore upon this weighty Pillar,
Hillarie lays the Foundation of justifying faith, how shall faith justify, if
faith be doubtful? He speaks not of faith in every particular, but of the
certainty of faith in the general, if there may not be a certainty in the
general, how shall it justify? I will add that place only of St. Austin,
where he solaceth himself, by gathering together all those grounds, and
evidences of certainty God has promised, he has spoken nay he has sworn,
Hoc est promissum, etc. This is that that God has sealed with his word, nay,
with his Oath, that now there should be no place left to the Children of God,
to make any doubt of Gods goodness in the pardon of their sins, when they have
those evidences of Sealing it by the fruit.

We see it here, not only by the consent of the Saints in Scripture, but of
the Saints in after times, that certainty may be had, and that the comfort of a
man's Conscience does much consist in this certainty. Though faith in the time
of Temptation will hold beyond the evidence of these things, and though it be
not always to be had, yet it may be had, there is a certainty, and it is much
comfort. Therefore Christians will pray still, when they have had Experience of
the sweetness of Gods grace, all that they pray for, is, the enlargement of
their evidence. They pray that he would give peace, and that he would speak
it; that he would give Salvation, and the earnest of Salvation; that he would
give the Spirit, and the earnest of it. Here is the second thing they pray for.
First, that God would pardon, and then make it evident that he had pardoned in
the continuance of his grace. That is the second thing.

Thirdly, as begging the enlargment of the evidence of the thing; so begging
enlargment in respect of the communication of grace, so the order is
justifiable. For in putting these two together, they pray for these two things,
for the pardon of sin, and for the removing of punishment. So the order stands
good: For sin is first to be prayed against, before punishment: and the first
suite that we are to make to God, is for pardon of sin, and then for removing
of Judgment; and this method the Prophet teaches them, Take away our sins that
press us, and thy hand that presses us; pardon us, and spare us, remove thy
wrath in pardoning our sins, and then show thy self gracious in removing thy
judgments. So the Point is this: that, A true Saint of God, though he be beset
with calamities, and fear of punishments, and judgments on every side, yet
that is not it that takes up his first thoughts, they are taken up for the
removing of his sins.

There he makes his first Prayer, there he states the fervency of his soul;
because he knows the sting of sin is sharper a great deal, then the sting of
punishment, and that the displeasure of God is more heavy then any judgment.
There is no judgment that is a judgment, if the wrath and displeasure of God
go not with it: For when Gods love goes with it, it is a Chastisement, and not
a judgment.

If we compare spiritualls with spiritualls, then we shall see it plain and
evident. The flame of sin scorcheth more, then the very flames of Hell, and
more galls the Consciences. And the fire of Hell is not so terrible as the
displeasure of God. Again, the fire of Hell is not so terrible, as the having
of pardon of sin, is comfortable; misery is not so evil, as the enjoying of
God is good.

But if we compare spiritualls, and temporalls, then the disproportion will
easily be seen? There is no proportion between temporal and spiritual
mercies: therefore the Children of God pray for spiritualls before temporalls.

Again, there is no proportion between temporal, and spiritual judgments,
therefore they pray against spiritualls judgments strst. First, against sin,
Take away iniquity and then receive us to favor. Here is the order, and method
that Christians set in Prayer. First, they look to spiritualls, to pray for
them, to spiritual evils, to pray against them.

Though Christ in the Lords Prayer have taught us another method; first to pray
for Daily bread, and then for pardon of sin. He did it to condescend to our
weakness, to draw us to the consideration of that that is less known, by
that that is better known. We see our daily bread, and the want of temporalls
is discovered to us by sense, therefore these things are more familiar, and
better known, but the weight of sin we know by the demonstration of the
Spirit, and the inward man, therefore that is not so well known; therefore,
that he might give us encouragement to rest on him for all estates, he would
first draw us on, Give us our daily bread, and then forgive us our trespasses.
Not that there is more necessity of the former, but he condescends to lead us
from the lesser, to the greater, and from the experience of Gods mercy in
temporalls, to rest on him for pardon of sin, not because the former is better.

Therefore, this is one true trial, a part of that touchstone whereby a
Christian may examine himself, and the truth of his grace, if it beget
indignation against sin, that he prays against that first; that he find sin
more burden then punishment, and grace more sweet then all temporalls in the
World. For even wicked men will go so far as to cry out of judgment, then
Ahab will humble himself, O, but a godly man, a beleiving soul cries out of
sin. My punishment is greater then I can bear, that was the voice of Caine. My
sin is greater then I can bear, Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are
as a heavy burden, that was the voice of holy David.

It is true, it is lawful, and God allows us to pray against temporal
punishments, and judgments, but we must keep the due order. It is a
preposterous course to pray against that first, before we pray for the pardon
and removing of sin, because sin is the cause of punishment. He that would have
judgment removed, must strike at the Root, the root is sin, from that bitter
root it is, that punishment springs: cut up the root, and the Tree will not
stand long. If the wound be once healed, the Plaster of punishment will fall
off of it self. If sin be taken away by repentance, and turning to the Lord,
then there is no such Antidote against the plague as the pardon of sin, then
whatsoever the punishment is, it will drop off of it self.

It is not only preposterous, but sacrilegious to observe that method, when we
pray more for the removal of temporal judgments, then for pardon of sin, it
is a sign that we love our selves, and fear for our selves, and not God,
because we hate the punishment, that is displeasing to us, more then sin that
is displeasing to God. If we rest on God for the pardon of sin, our affections
will be suitable; to hate that most that God hates, that is sin: and if we hate
it, we need not be entreated in the first place to pray for the removal of it.
Yet many of us are so sensible of these outward things, that we continue in a
preposterous course, we more fear the shadow of judgment, then the body of
sin, the name of punishment is more terrible a great deal to us then the
commission of sin. We tremble if we do but hear the report of one judgment,
yet we are not afraid to go on in a multitude of sins. Like distempered
Patients that hate their Physic, and love their Disease, we love the Disease
of sin, yet we hate that Physic that God sends to cure us.

Beloved, we have not so learned Christ; if the stamp of Christ be set on our
hearts, here a Christian bends his forces. Piety keeps due order, devotion will
in all the Prayers it makes. There is no affection, no word, no ejaculation
that a godly man would willingly have out of order; he looks to all within him,
he will not have his joy out of order, to bestow his joy, first upon the World,
and then upon God; nor his sorrow out of order, to bestow it first upon
temporal callamities, and then upon sin; nor his fear out of order, first on
judgments, and then on God. No, but he sets all his affections right. First,
he fears God, and the first fruits of his sorrow he bestows on sin.

It is true, now indeed we begin to be sencible of the hand of judgment that
presses us, O let us remember that there is a greater burden lies upon us,
that must be removed: The Arrows of sin are more sharp then the Arrow of the
Pestilence, and if we pull off the head of the Arrow of sin, the other shall be
put up in the Quiver. It is true, now the Arrow is pointed near us: God has
his mark, and as those that are skillfull in that kind, they shoot, sometimes
nearer, sometimes further, as Jonathan shot, when he gave warning to David; so
God shoots to give us warning, he comes nearer in the Mark he propounds, he
moves near by Parishes, and by Streets, and then nearer by Houses. Punishment
is near, but sin is nearer, we carry it about us, we must make sin far off,
before punishment, that is the order the Prophet teaches them to keep. First,
to Pray for the removal of sin, and then of punishment.

So I have done with the Petition. Take away all iniquity and receive us
graciously. The parts, and the Order of the parts.

I now come to the last part, that is, the promissory part of the Text.

So will we give thee the Calves of our Lips. In the former part, the Prophet
excites them to get Lips, and here to give lips; there it is, Take to you
words, here, power out your words. So we will give the Calves of our Lips.

There are 3. things I will observe in it.

First, the duty the Prophet excites them to here, that they make this vow and
promise of, to God, it is the duty of praise and thankfulness, So will we
give thee the Calves of our lips. That is, so will we bless thee, and magnify
thy name, and sing to thy glory, we will speak of thy praise all the day long.

Secondly, the metaphor under which this duty is conveyed, We will give thee
the Calves of our lips, why he uses that phrase.

Thirdly, the connection, and coherence with the former, So will we give thee. A
man would think it were an ill condition, and a duty that were misplaced,
would they not give the Calves of their Lips to God, except he would take away
their iniquity, and remove his judgments?

The first thing, which I will only speak of now, is this, to find out what
is the duty (that is plain of it self) to which he excites them in these
words. So I will read it thus in the litterall sense, Take away iniquity, so we
will bless and praise thee. So, there are six things the Prophet would put
them in mind of, by adding this clause.

Two things in general.

And four in particular; all concerning thankfulness,

The two things in general, he puts them in mind of, are these.

De vovendo, of making a vow and promise to God, We will give thee.

And De solvendo, of paying that vow; he labors to bring them not only to an
acknowledgement of thankfulness, as due, but to a holy engagement, that they
will certainly render praise for this mercy.

Resolution, it is one work that advances every duty, every civil duty, much
more duties that are spiritual. There is no work that a man goes on cheerfully
in, except he prepare and fit himself by resolution. Therefore it is, that
many Saints of God in Scripture took this course, to bind themselves by vows
to obedience; though there be bonds already lie at our door, the bond of
obedience, yet when we vow as David did, to walk holily before God, this adds
another vow. He that without vows, transgresses the Commandments of God,
breaks Gods word, but he that transgresses in a vow, breaks Gods word, and his
own too. The word that God has given, and the word that he has given.
Therefore it is a special means to keep men in the Pale of obedience, when
they hedge themselves in with holy resolutions

I know Cardinal Bellarmine, and he more remarkably then any other of the
Romish Writers, is very large and peremptory in declaring that that which is
within the compass of precept, cannot fall within the compass of a vow, that
no necessary duty can fall within the compass of a vow. But if there were not
Testimony of the Saints in Scripture, the Testimony of their own Writers are
sufficient evidence against it, besides the truth it self, Alphonsus, Picus,
Cajetane, Valencia, these four they are bold all of them to express
themselves to be of another opinion; that properly and directly that that we
are tied to, by the necessity of precept, most properly falls within the
compass of a vow, and it is most safe; for one may safely vow, that that he is
tied to do, and the vowing and resolving of it, adds a second obligation, it
is an awaking. Therefore David took this course, he bound himself by vow, and
promise, and oath. I have sworn that I will perform thy righteous judgments.
He excites himself by these Obligations, to every duty of piety, he set
himself those Lessons of piety, he tasked himself to such duties; sometimes
to repentance. To thee will I confess. Sometimes to obedience, I will walk in
thy Commandments. Sometimes to prayer, At morning, noone, and evening, I will
call on thee. Sometimes to thankfulness, Seven times in a day I will praise
thee. He tasked himself to these duties, thereby to keep, and hidge in his
obedience. So will every Christian, that he may keep himself in the path of
Piety, he will often consider how he walks, and consider his purposes and
resolutions, and strengthen himself in holy purposes, it is a great means to
arm our selves. A heart will not easily be overcome with temptations, that is
armed with good purposes; good purposes incite to Prayer, and practice, you
take away perseverance, you take away practice and performance, you take away
endeavor, if you take away resolution. Therefore if you will learn to keep
your selves in the ways of Gods Commandments, learn often to resolve, to
purpose.

We shall tread awry when we have done the best, but if there be a good purpose
God takes that for performance, if we arm our selves with good resolutions.
Let us not take this help from our selves, since we come short of performance,
let us have endeavors, and purposes. This the Prophet teaches them when they
come to perform their thanks, they must have purposes, We will give thee.
Those are the two first things he minds them of in general.

There are other things he minds them of, in particular, and they are these
four.

The first is this, That Thankfulness is due to God for all his mercies.

It is due, by right of Lordship, because God is Lord and owner of all we have,
he is Lord of our life and being, there is the Fountain of all goodness.
Whither should the streams run but back to the Fountain, to the Sea? says
Bernard, let the streams of thankfulness run back to the Head, they are
drawn from grace, they come from God, the grace of pardon, and grace must
return to God, the grace of thankfulness.

And it is by right of Debt his, we owe it him; it is a Debt to any man that
does us a courtesy, no less requital can be made for the least good turn
then thankfulness, yet those that they do, are small, and they are tied by
the bond of Charity, and by the Law of God, and they sin if they do it not:
and those that they do, God does by their hands, he inclines them to it. Then,
if we account it a misery, if we be unthankful to men, we owe much more of
this duty of thankfulness to God, by another bond, because from him we have
all mercy, and the choicest mercies. What hand soever reaches us a Blessing,
God is the Author, God gives it. And can we give him any thing less then
thanks? We can give him nothing else. He gives it us when we give him thanks,
and praise, we pay him with his own, we give not his mercy back in the kind,
but vertually in the strength. He that gives glory to God, he gives the mercy
back in strength. But we can give nothing to God, that he has not before in a
more eminent manner, whether it be praise or glory, or blessing, or reverence,
or worship. His name is glorious, though we give it not; his name is admirable,
he will make his glory appear, though we dishonor him. But he so interprets
it in mercy, we are said to give it, when we acknowledge it. He is not capable
of our gift, but when we testify that he has it, we are said to give it. The
Knee when it bows before him, worships him, and the heart when it is ravished
with admiration gives him reverence, and the tongue when it speaks of his
praise, gives him thankfulness; if God take these as gifts at our hands, that
we owe, and can add no addition by it, we can do no less then acknowledge
that thankfulness is due to God for all his mercies. That is the first thing.

A second thing, he would teach them to acknowledge, that thankfulness is
especially due for the pardon of sin: when sin is pardoned, the first bud of
new righteousness in the heart, O, it is thankfulness to God. Bless the Lord
O my soul, and all that is within me; and then follows, That forgiveth all
thine iniquities. We owe God praise, and glory, for all his mercy, and
goodness, but for none more then the pardon of sin; for here is the Stock upon
which other graces are grafted, when once sin is pardoned, all temporal things
prove comfortable. Therefore when they beg for the Pardon of sin, say they, We
will give thee the Calves of our lips.

There is thankfulness due to God, especially for spiritual mercies, and of
them, for the grace of reconciliation, the forgiveness of sins. A Christian
will be methodicall in his thankfulness as well as in his Prayer. I showed
before that devotion keeps good order, it prays for spiritualls before
temporalls, and against spiritualls before temporalls. And thankfulness keeps
a good order, it gives thanks for the best mercies first, and most. Though all
the mercies of God be good, yet there is a difference, there is a difference
between spiritual mercies, and temporal. For temporal mercies. Liberty is
better then Wealth, and life then liberty, and grace then all. As God has set
an order in mercies, so thankfulness observes an order; he does not thank
God so much for temporal mercies, as for pardon of sin, that swallows up the
heart, and takes up the whole latitude of the affections. There is
thankfulness due for establishing us in our civil Callings, but more for
calling us to the acknowledgement of the truth. There is blessing due for
keeping us in this World, but more for the hope of life in another world. Many
thanks are due for Creation, but more for redemption, for in Creating us, he
made us once, but in redeeming us, he made us again, and in giving us the hope
of life everlasting, he makes us for ever. There is great thanks due for
removing temporal Plagues, but more for the removing of his wrath and our
sins. Therefore the Prophet would have them understand, that as they prayed,
first, Take away iniquity, so they should give thanks in that order, when their
iniquities were taken away, then they should thank God for the pardon of their
sins: first for spiritual, then for temporalls.

Reason shows this order; for in our Prayers we Pray for temporal things with
conditions, but for spiritualls without conditions, as we pray for them more
fervently, so we should be thankful for them with more enlarged hearts. So in
taking away temporal things, we give thanks as Job did, but in spiritual
things, we give thanks when God gives them, but none gives thanks for the
taking them away.

It is true, when God withholds grace, he can make grace grow out of that
separation from himself, but that is by accident, that the want of grace
should be a means of the propagating of grace, but properly and directly none
can rejoice in the taking away of grace. We give thanks for temporalls, when we
want them, but for spiritualls only, when we have them. That is the second
thing.

Thirdly, another thing he would instruct them in, by adding this clause, is
this, that thankfulness must be joined with Prayer: first, he teaches them
to pray, Take away iniquity, but he closes the Prayer with thankfulness.
These must go together, they are Sister-duties; and in a large sense speaking,
thankfulness is a part of Prayer; therefore as Prayer inlargeth it self in
expressing of wants, so thankfulness, in expressing it self in Gods
goodness. It is a defect we find in the Missalls of the Romish Church, where
we find many Prayers made to Saints, but not one form of thankfulness. If it
be lawful to pray to them, it is lawful to thank them for favors received
by them. What a gross error is it in them, to make Prayers, and not to thank
them? Those are more rare, they set them at the end of their Books. Glory and
praise be to the Virgin Mary; but for the particular, since they make so many
Prayers to the Saints, why do they not thank them? As in the one, they are
injurious to God in praying to Saints: so in the other they are injurious to
the Saints, in not thanking them, for so many mercies they receive, for the
rule is firm, whom we pray to, we must give thanks to: for the mercies we may
pray, we may give thanks. As Elisha spread himself upon the Child, hand upon
hand, and face upon face, so in these two duties, the hands must be spread to
God, and hands, and eyes must be fixed and fastened on God in giving thanks
when we receive mercies, as they are fixed in begging, and the hands must be
spread as wide in blessing God, as ever they were in praying to him, and the
Knees must bow as low, and the voice of the lips must be lifted as loud in
giving thanks for mercies, as ever they were extended in praying for mercies.
It is a sign of an ungrateful heart, to be fervent in begging mercies, and to
be unmindfull of thankfulness. Therefore the Prophet bids them join
thankfulness to Prayer.

That is the third thing he minds them of, that thankfulness is due for all
mercies, and for spiritual mercies, and that thankfulness must go along
with prayer.

The Fourth is this, that thankfulness is to be the close of Prayer, here the
Prayer ends. So will we give thee the Calves of our lips. Prayer is one of
those duties that I said had a Language, there are two Letters that make up the
Language: Confession of sin, that is the Alpha, and thankfulness to God, that
is the Omega of it.

All Prayer opens with confession of sin, all Prayer shuts with thanksgiving;
that is the end of Prayer. Prayer it self is the Key that opens to all duty,
and thankfulness is the Key that locks up prayer.

O! How sweet will the order be observed, when Prayer makes the Way, and
Thankfulness closes it; Where these two are joined, when a man is conversant
in that work, be it Morning, or Evening Sacrifice, both Sacrifices meet in
this; in Confession of sin there is the Dawning of the DAY, and in giving
Thanks there is the Evening Sacrifice, the Latter end, and Close of Prayer.

Christ taught us this in the Lords prayer, after he had set down six
Petitions: For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the glory, to show that
Prayer must be shut up with thanksgiving.

The Apostle Paul shows it, in 1. Tim. 2. Texhort that Prayers, and
Supplications be made for all, with thanksgiving. In Phillipians 4. Therefore
let your Suites and Requests in all things, be made known to God by Prayer,
and Supplication, and giving of thanks. In both places giving of thanks comes
in the last place. With Prayer, and Supplication, and giving of Thanks. Why
does he set it in the last place? To show, that thanksgiving must close up
Prayer. So will we give the Calves of our lips. That is the fourth thing.

And how well do all these, if they be put together concur in the preparation
we are to make this day for the Sacrament? Look back to the first point
delivered, and see if there be not a concurrence of all these. Remember the
three enlargements of the order of them, remember these six things, in joining
these to them. So will we render the Calves of our lips.

When we come here, we pray to God for his grace, and for the continuance and
enlargement of his grace, therefore it is that he instituted the Sacrament,
that it might be an instrument for the confirming and conveying of grace, it is
the instrument that God uses. Thereupon it is, that diverse of the Fathers are
bold to call it, the preservative against everlasting death, the conservative
to everlasting life; the salve of imortallity. We come here to beg grace, and
the continuance of it, we come to beg grace, and the evidence of grace too, by
the confirming, and assuring of it: For that purpose the Sacrament was
instituted to confirm our faith, that we might not want a memorial of all
those great things that Christ wrought for us. In this respect the Fathers call
the Lords Supper, the pledge of eternity, the defense of faith, the hope of the
Resurrection, because here grace is enlarged, it pleases God to enlarge and
confirm it this way. For those that want certainty, here they may get
assurance, those that have it may get an addition.

Thirdly, here we beg pardon of sin, and we give thanks for it, and we come to
have that sure to us, and make acknowledgement of it, by thankfulness.

Lastly, here we acknowledge thankfulness to God for mercies, and make new
purposes, and resolutions of obedience,, we arm our selves with new vows.

Now this calls all those notions back to your mind, that I delivered before.
It is called therefore the Eucharist, because all Gods mercies, are here summed
up in the memorial of them, in this blessed Sacrament. And here we give God
thanks, not for one mercy, but for all, and for the Fountain and Foundation of
all. Therefore the Apostle calls it, the Cup of blessing: that is, the Cup of
Thankfulness. Our blessed Savior gave that ground to the Eucharist, for you
know that he did break the bread with giving of Thanks; to show to us, says
Chrysostom, how we should carry our selves, how we should behave and demean
our selves in receiving these blessed mysteries, how we should receive these
Mysteries from the hand of that gracious goodness, that fountain of mercy,
that gives them with thankfulness receive them so as Christ gave them: he
gave them with thankfulness.

And here we have occasion of excitement for blessing God for the pardon of
sin, and of blessing God, for giving Christ, for giving not only Christ to be
with us, but to die for us, and not only so, but giving us this memorial of
it, in which is the summing up of all mercy.

So you see here is the summing up of all. Therefore let us join all these
together, and when we come to the Lords Table, remember this Prayer. Take away
all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we render the Calves of our
Lips. So much of the first consideration: We look upon the duty of
thankfulness, as it is set down in literal terms. So much for this time.

SERMON VI.
Hosea. 14.2. So will we render the Calves of our lips.
THE Word of God, as it is well stored with variety of figures, and elegancy of
Speech, so it does not abound with any more then with metaphors. For a metaphor
is as a Glass in which we see by reflection, that duty which in the literal
precept comes to our understanding in a more familiar manner. So, while we have
any precept commended to us in both forms of Speech, there is a double benefit
to us. In the literal form, God shows us the duty, and in the metaphorical
form he shows us the beauties and delight, that is to be found in those
precepts that he gives us. Therefore you may observe that there is hardly any
duty of piety in all the Scripture, but in one place, or other, it is commended
to us in metaphorical words.

For the grace of faith, the Apostle St. John tells us in Revel. 3. I counsel
thee (says Christ to the Church of Laodicea) that thou buy of me Gold tried in
the fire: faith is set out in that metaphor.

For the grace of meekness, and innocence, St. Peter shows us the way. 1 Pet.
2. As newborn Babes desire the sincere Milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby. Simplicity and innocence is commended to us in that metaphor.

For the grace of perseverance, St. Paul tells us in Heb. 12. Let us run with
patience the race that is set before us. Perseverance goes on till it come to
the end of the race, it is commended to us in that metaphor.

For the grace of repentance, the Prophet Joel sets it down, Rend your hearts
and not your Garments.

For Prayer, David, Let it come before thee as incense.

And for the work, and duty of Thankfulness, the Prophet Hosea in this place,
which is one of the harshest metaphors that we meet with in all the Scriptures.
As for Prayer, to be resembled to incense, there is a great deal of reason,
that is obvious to any eye; there is a Holy breath, a Celestial smoke, that
goes out of fervent Prayer, as incense from the Altar that ascends up to God.
Prayer has an ascending faculty as incense has. But for the work of praise,
and thanksgiving, to be set out under the metaphor of the Calves of the lips;
it may seem at the first view, a metaphor far fetched, but that there is no
title in the Word of God, but that it is added upon special worth, and reason.
Therefore it will be worth our labor, as before I showed the nature of the
duty of thankfulness, as far as it concerns the literal part, so now to
look upon it, in the Glass of this metaphor. We will give the Calves of our
lips. I told you there were 3. things that I would consider in this last part
of this Scripture.

First, what the Duty is, that the Prophet aims at, to which he would excite
them, when he adds this to the former Prayer. Take away iniquity, and receive
us graciously, so will we give the Calves of our lips. That is, so will we
bless, and praise, and magnify thy name. According to this acception, I spoke
of it in the Fore-noone, I told you this duty was added, the memorial of it,
to commend to them the remembrance of somewhat in general: to mind them, De
vovendo.
De solvendo.
Of the Vowing, of Thankfulness.
Of the Payment, of Thankfulness.


The prophet hereby would engage them, he makes them to give a pledge, a
Hostage to God, that if he would be gracious to them, they would not be
unmindfull of their Covenant again, but return praise and thanks.

The things he would remember them of in particular, are these.

First, That Thankfulness is due to God for all his mercies.

Secondly, that it is due to God, especially for spiritual mercies, for pardon
of sin. Take away iniquity, and then we will praise thee.

Thirdly, that thanks and praise must go hand in hand together. There is no
Prayer that we offer to God that must exclude Thankfulness. First he teaches
them to pray, Take away iniquity; and then to add, so will we give thee praise
and glory.

Then Lastly, that thankfulness is the best close of Prayer. Prayer is that
that opens to all other duties, and thankfulness is that that shuts up
prayer. These were the things observed in the first part in the Forenoone.

Now the second thing that I considered in it, was to look upon this duty of
thankfulness, as it is expressed in this metaphor.

And in the third place to come to the connection, in this Particle, So, or
Then. These are the two things I am now to speak of.

The first is to look upon the metaphor: for there is a great deal of matter
couched in that if I mistake not my self. Therefore I will examine it in these
two things.

What is the ground, the foundation, upon which this metaphor is pitched, that
he should rather choose this, then any other.

Secondly, what is the reason why the Prophet rather expresses the duty of
Thankfulness in a metaphor, then in literal terms.

The first is this, what are the grounds, upon which this metaphor is built, or
whence is it derived? The Calves of our lips. There are two words, it might
have been varied either way. For the first, Boves and capras, the Goats, or
the Lambs of our lips; no, it is the Calves of our lips. And for the second
word, it is not the Calves of our Stalls, but of our selves: and in our selves,
not the Calves of our hearts. A man would have thought that that should have
carried the sway, and turned the Balance; no, the Calves of our lips. There
are reasons as I conceive, to be given of all this.

The first is, for the first word, why he instanceth in this creature, rather
then any other, for there were other Creatures that were offered in sacrifice.
The Turtles of our lips, or the Lambs of our lips. What do we think should be
the reason why he makes choice of this creature, which if we compare Creature
with Creature, seems the most gross of all other to express the duty of
thankfulness? We cannot say, it was only in allusion to Sacrifice, for other
Creatures were used in Sacrifice, as well as Calves and Heifers. We cannot say,
it was because this Creature was a Type of Christ. So it was. Luke 15. when the
Prodigal came home to his Father, who is every penitent sinner, and the Father
there is our Heavenly Father, that receives sinners when they come to him. And
there it is said for his entertainment, that he made ready the Fatted Calfe,
and Garments, and Rings: these are to explain to us the fruits of Christ's
death, and Sacrifice of himself, and the Garment of his righteousness put
upon us. As Chrysostom well says, the Fatted Calfe is Christ, Sacrificed for
our sins. Therefore compared to the Calfe, Quia immaculatus, etc. Because he
gave himself a Sacrifice of redemption for sin. And the Fatted Calfe, because
of the excellency of his Merit, and the All Sufficiency of it. Yet this is not
a sufficient reason, for though Christ were typified in the Calfe, he was so in
the Lamb, it is so expressed by John Baptist himself, Behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the World. Therefore if that were the only
reason, because it was a Type of Christ, it should run as well the Lambs of our
lips, as the Calves of our lips: therefore I conceive, this reason may further
be added. There is never a tittle of this Prayer, that the Prophet composed for
the People, but was well pondered in the Balance of his spirit; and as I
showed in the rest, that he brought them to some consideration in every tittle,
and word, so he would bring them to consideration by this phrase. In Jerem. 31.
the People of Israel are compared to an untamed Heifer. In Hosea 4. they are
called a Backsliding Heifer. Their rebellions were so great, that they are set
down by this metaphor, even Israel was an untamed Calfe, or Heifer.

Further, this Creature that they are compared to for their rebellions, it was
the Creature whereby they provoked God in the Desert, they made a calfe, and
worshipped it. After in Jeroboams time, there were 2. set up, one in Dan, and
another in Bethell, and they worshipped them, and now in the Prophets time,
they said to the works of their hands, ye are our Gods. It is likely those
Creatures continued in the same resemblance. They turned the similitude of God,
to the likeness of a Creature that eats hay. By this phrase it is likely the
Prophet would bring them to the consideration of their sins. Take away iniquity
and receive us graciously, so will we render the Calves of our lips. As it is
observed of the Egyptians, and the Israelites, the Israelites Sacrificed to
the true God, those that the Egyptians made their Gods. The Prophet would have
them sacrifice themselves to God in that resemblance, whereby the Spirit of
God, had set out their rebellion. As if they had said, we confess we have
rebelled from the womb, as an untamed Heifer, we have dealt unfaithfully in the
Covenant; we have made to our selves Gods of Gold, we will now bring our selves
under the yoke, not only our necks, but our lips also. We will offer our
selves in that very resemblance, whereby we have dishonored thee. In that
creature we have dishonored thy name and in that very resemblance, for the
acknowledgement of our sins we come to thee. So will we render the Calves of
our lips. Yet, there is somewhat more in it, why he instanceth not only in this
creature, but in this condition of the creature. The Calves of our lips, it is
not Ox or Heifer. It may seem this, they were novices in Religion, Vitulus is
the first part; they were not acquainted to give the Sacrifice of prais; now
they were brought to the sight of themselves, they would give the Sacrifice of
new praise. They were inured to dishonor God, now we will sing Psalms of
thanks giving, and praise thee with songs of glory, and blessing. Here was a
new change, it was the first fruits, the beginning of their offering, and
obedience, therefore a calfe. It was not only a new part, but they acknowledge
that this sacrifice of praise was imperfect, it was not yet come to any
maturity, and strength, and ripeness, they did but bleat out praises yet, they
could not come to sing songs of praise that were perfectly set, as other of the
Saints had done before. We cannot give thee a Sacrifice acceptable for
persection, but as well as we can, we give thee a Sacrifice that thou art
pleased to accept for the present, there is the Calves of our lips: that is the
first, why Calves?

2ly Why the Calves of the lips? There is a double opposition, why not the
Calves of our herds? Why not the calves that we take out of our Stalls? But
the calves of our lips? I conceive why the Prophet sets it in this order; there
are these three reasons.

First, he would draw them hereby from all opinion of the ^pas oceratum, of
their Sacrifice: they were too prone to think well of their sacrifice: therefore
hereby by turning the word with this metaphorical, the Calves of our lips, he
would draw them to consider that God was not delighted with the offering of the
sacrifices they gave, if they kept back their hearts and themselves. The
Sacrifices that God expected was praise and obedience, spiritual Sacrifices,
that they should not make their boast what Hecatombs they had offered, how many
Calves or Lambs, these God delights not in, he expresses himself so, Psalm.
50. I will take no Bullocks out of thy house. He cares not for their sacrifice,
if they withdraw themselves; no, he expects a sacrifice, I will not take it out
of thy house but out of thy heart, not out of thy fold, but out of thy self.
The prophet would hereby lead them to this consideration, that they should give
spiritual sacrifice, and look in their ceremonial Sacrifice to that that was
moral, that God expected. The Sacrifice that God looked for, was praise, the
lips to be the offering, the tongue the knife, the heart the Altar; both the
Priest that offered the Sacrifice, and the Sacrifice, and the Altar, all, God
would have from themselves. That is the first reason why the Prophet says not,
the Calves of the Stalls: David says in one place, Then will we offer young
Bullocks upon thine Altar; no, says the Prophet, the young Bullocks of our
lips. That is one thing.

Secondly, Another thing, why it is not said the Calves of our stalls, but the
Calves of our lips, it was for their encouragement that they might not be
backward in returning, and making retaliation to God. It is not a costly,
sumptuous Sacrifice, that God expects. There is nothing more cheap then words,
and words of praise, that come from a sincere heart, these God calls for. Every
man has words ready, it is a Sacrifice as easy, as the moving of the lips; he
would not burden them; I require it not out of thy House, or out of thy Fold;
they need not go to Arabia for Spices, they need not go as Abraham's Servant,
to the Field for a Calfe; no, they had it in themselves, there was the fruit of
the lips, the fruit of obedience, and praise, within themselves.

Had it been propounded so, it is likely that Worldly men would have been
ready to have kept back. As many of us, we are readier to give God the Calves
of our lips, then of our Stalls; we love not to Sacrifice to God, of that that
costs us somewhat, it should be the least and the worst, if we were to make
choice of it. The Prophet would prevent them here, in their Worldly
mindedness, that no man should have excuse: the Poor man could not plead, I
have not wherewith to offer, he shows that God accepts any thing that comes
from a good heart; the Widows myte, the cup of cold water, the words, the
Sacrifice of praise. As Lycurgus, sometimes when he set Laws to the People of
Sparta, whereby they should Worship their false Gods, and they were poor,
cheap Sacrifices, and one asking him the reason why? Says he, that there may
never be a Cessation. If I should charge them with costly Sacrifices, they
would not continue to Sacrifice. So God, because he would not overcharge them
with Sacrifices, he seeing the Worldliness of their minds, he says, not the
Calves of your Folds, but the Calves of your lips. That is the second thing.

Thirdly, the Prophet would show hereby that God expects the choice Sacrifice
of praise, the most pure, and innocent Sacrifice, as Ambrose says well,
Vitulus was the Calfe that was reputed an unspotted Sacrifice. To show that he
that comes to praise God must bring pure, clean, and undefiled lips. He that
regards iniquity in his heart, or brings it in his lips, he offers the Calves
of his lips, but God will not be pleased with a Sacrifice from that man's mouth,
whose mouth is polluted with Blasphemy and profaneness, and obscene Language.
A profane man cannot please God with the Calves of his lips, he has
blasphemous lips. The lips that are given to filthiness, cannot give God a
Sacrifice, they are polluted. The lips that are given to lying, and fraud, they
cannot give God a Sacrifice they are deceitful lips. They are pure, and chaste
lips, that must be Sacrificed to God: Our lips must be of the same die, and
temper, with our hearts, sincere hearts, and sincere lips, holy affections God
looks for, and holy words, and holy breathings. That is the third thing, he
calls them the Calves of the lips, that is, choice, extraordinary lips. He
would have such lips as he would have Calves upon the Altar, he would not have
Calves that were lame and defiled; so, bring such lips as are acquainted with
the praise of God; these are the lips that God expects. Again, there is
somewhat further, why not the Calves of our hearts, which is the chief thing
in all Sacrifices, but the Calves of our lips? The lips, if the heart be
absent, are not acceptable to God; he abhors the Prayer and praise that is
given with the lips, when the heart blasphemes him, and the life prophanes him.
A man would think it were better, we will give thee the Calves of our lives,
then of our lips, or at least of our spirits and hearts. For David sets out the
Sacrifice of God so, to be a humble, broken heart. It is the heart that God
looks to, in all these, it is neither the eyes lift up in prayer, or the hands
spread, or the Knee bowing, that is accepted to God, if the heart be wanting;
the heart is the life of all these. Out of the abundance of the mouth, the
heart speaks, and out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks, and
the eyes are lifted up, and the Knees bow, and if there be an Absence of that,
nothing is pleasing but the lips themselves are abominable, yet he says, the
Calves of our lips. There are two reasons of that.

One is this, though he mention not the heart, yet the heart is supposed, he
need not mention it, it was taken in, The Calves of our lips, that is, of such
lips as proceed from a clean, pure, honest heart, because it is taken in, it
is therefore not expressed. That was a thing to be supposed, that if they gave
the outward man, they would give the inward: but the Prophet calls them here,
because of their negligence in the expression of their thankfulness in the
Outwaod man. To show them, That though mental praise be the chief thing that
God looks to, when the heart is there, yet it is not the only thing; God will
not only be glorified in the soul, but in the body, he will not only have
the praise of the heart, but of the lips. We think to put off God, if we send
up an Ejaculation, and give God a spiritual Sacrifice, it is all within. The
Hypocrite is all for without, and the timorous Christian is all within: though
he bow in the Temple of Baal, yet if he give God his heart, he thinks it is a
good Sacrifice. But God will have praise both of the inward man, and of the
outward man, because he made both, he sanctifies both, and will save both; he
calls them therefore to vocal praise, with the Calves of their lips: they were
grown so, that they knew not how to do this, therefore says David, I will
praise thee with a song, and magnify thy name with unfeigned lips. God looks
for vocal praise, as well as mental, we must as well Praise him with our
Lips, as with our Heart.

Secondly, the heart is included, for the Calves of our lips is the Sacrifice
of our selves: he that gives God a gift, must give the whole, the lips are put
for the whole, because they express the whole, therefore he instanceth in this
part, that is put for the whole man. It is that the Apostle sets down. Romans
12. I beseech you by the mercies of God, that you offer your selves a living
Sacrifice to God, which is your reasonable serving of him. Then a man gives
himself, when he gives the Strength of the faculties of his mind, and of the
parts of his body, when he gives the glory of all his actions and intentions,
when he learnes to deny himself. He that Sacrifices, he parts with that which
he Sacrifices; and he that Sacrifices himself, parts with himself, and
denies himself. He that will come after me let him deny himself. A man that
gives himself in sacrifice, goes out of himself, and keeps nothing back, when
a man brings carnal reason, and opens his affections, and will, to be Subject
to God, when he brings all those sins which he was addicted to by nature, or
has contracted by custom, when he brings all to the obedience of Christ, and
lays them upon the Altar of a penitent, contrite heart, such a man offers
himself to God. It is a thing most precious with men themselves, and it is a
thing most precious with God too. There is nothing of that value, that we can
give to God, as our selves, he that gives his whole self, gives all the duties
that can be performed by man: He gives the Sacrifice of praise and Prayer, his
hands are Dedicated to God in works of Charity, his eyes in Chastity, his heart
in repentance, every faculty of his mind, all his whole self is consecrated to
God. That is to make a true devotion says St. Austin, O si quis been, etc. If
any man will make a perfect vow, and Sacrifice to God, let him make a
dedication of himself, Hoc est quod debetur, imago, this is that that God
demands, this is that that we owe, the Image of Caesar, to return to Caesar,
and the Image of God to God, God made man for himself, therefore we should
give our selves. See how far we do it, Christ he gave not any thing of
himself, but himself for us, his whole self, we must make such a
retalliation to give to God again, not any thing of ours, but our selves, that
God requires. If we give any thing to the World, we give not our selves to God,
if any thing to the pleasures of sin, if any thing of our selves to our selves,
we give not our selves to God. The way to keep our selves, is to give our
selves to God. A man never keeps himself till he loose himself, then he is
kept sure when he is laid in Gods arms. The presumptuous man gives not
himself to God, he gives not God his fear. The doubtful, dispairing
Christian, he gives not himself to God, he gives not God his hope. The
covetous man gives the World his desire, the World has his love, and his joy.
He that consecrates himself to sin, let him see to whom he gives himself, not
to God, who is one hat abhors iniquity, and transgression: You know who was the
first author of sin; he that dedicates himself to sin, gives himself to him
that is the Author of it, I abhor to name it, to whom we consecrate our selves,
Christians Baptize themselves into the name of Satan, they give themselves in
Sacrifice to the Devil: To consecrate our selves to sin, is to do so, it is
plain, the Prophet puts not in the heart here, because the whole man is
included; therefore he says not, We will give thee the Calves of our hearts,
but We will give thee the Calves of our lips. This for the meaning of it.

Now look in the second place, why the Prophet makes choice of it, for there
was a large Field of expressions that he could have used. David has this work
set down in much variety of Language, so we will praise and glorify thee, and
give laud to thy name, so will we sing to thy praise, and honor thee in our
actions, any of these would have served, yet he chooses this, we will give the
Sacrifice of our selves. The reasons that make it full, for the understanding
of it, are these three, why he passes by literal phrases, and expressions,
and instanceth in a Metaphorical, So will we render the Calves of our lips.

First, to show them, and to teach to us, that thanksgiving, and praise, is a
Sacrifice. Every duty of Christianity in which a man consecrates himself to
God, is called a Sacrifice. Righteousness, that is a Sacrifice, Psalm. 4. Offer
to God the Sacrifice of righteousness. Prayer, that is a Sacrifice or
oblation. Psalm. 141. Let my Prayer be as incense. So the Apostle says, Christ
offered up Prayers in the days of his flesh.

Thirdly, repentance is a Sacrifice, Psalm. 51. The Sacrifice of God is a humble
contrite heart. It is not only one Sacrifice, but the Sacrifice, the eminent
Sacrifice that God delights in, a humble heart.

Fourthly, Almsdeeds, that is a Sacrifice, Heb. 13. To do good, and
distribute forget not; for with such Sacrifice God is well pleased.

Again, praise is called a Sacrifice, By him, that is, by Jesus Christ, let us
offer the Sacrifice of praise.

Lastly, thanksgiving, that is a Sacrifice, Psalm. 116. and diverse others. I
will offer the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and pay my vows to the Lord. Nay,
and the Apostle St. Peter, 1. Pet. 2. he sets down all Christian duties under
this metaphor, we are made a holy Priesthood, in him we should offer the duties
of Christianity there set down, to make an oblation of them; they are every
duty called there, a Sacrifice or oblation. The Prophet therefore would draw
them to this Consideration, that whereas they were much busied and employed in
offering legal Sacrifices, that they would look to the spiritual Sacrifices.
Here are the Sacrifices that are perpetual, the other vanish, these continue
under Christianity: And these are not only not taken away, but perfected in
the time of the Gospel. The spiritual Sacrifices are Sacrifices that continue
still: but they are spiritual ones that we offer to God. Every Christian duty
is as a Sacrifice, nay, as a several Sacrifice. We may parallel it, Repentance
is as a Trespasse-offring; Zeal is as a Burnt-offring, and praise is as a
Free-will-offring: and thank fulness, that is as the offering of the
first fruits. He that brings sincerity to God, there is the oblation of
unleavened bread. The Apostle sets it out 2 Cor. 5. The unleavened bread of
sincerity. He that honors God in the works of Charity, gives the two young
Turtles, his hands are as Turtles; mercy is as the young turtles offered to
God. I might instance in other perticulars. The incense of prayer, the Calves
of praise, here the Lamb of a humble heart. There is no Christian duty but has
some proportion to some Sacrifice, it is that in truth, and effect that the
Sacrifice typified. Therefore the Prophet to draw them from looking on their
Sacrifices with a carnal eye, he instanceth in this, to teach them that every
duty, and in particular, the duty of praise is a Sacrifice to God. That is the
first thing.

Secondly, he would not only teach them that thankfulness was a Sacrifice,
but that it was a better Sacrifice, as I showed out of the Scriptures, that it
is reputed a Sacrifice, so I shall show out of the same Scriptures, that it is
a better Sacrifice, every one of them. For righteousness, says Solomon, ^o
do judgment is more acceptable then Sacrifice: righteousness is a better
Sacrifice. For mercy, the Prophet Hosea tells us, I desire mercy, and not
Sacrifice, and the works of piety more then Burnt offerings. Mercy is there
preferred before Sacrifice. For obedience, Samuel tells us in 1 Samuel 15. I will
have obedience, and not Sacrifice, and the knowledge of God is more then the
fat of Rams. There is the knowledge of God more then Burnt offerings, more then
the fat of Rams, that is, it is better. For repentance, David says, Thou
delightest not in burnt Offerings, thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I
give it thee, thou delightest not in Burnt offerings. Then follows, The
Sacrifice of God is a contrite heart, it is far beyond Burnt offerings.

Lastly, for the duty of thank fulness, the Psalmist says, Psalm. 69. there
it is plain, that the work of thankfulness is more acceptable to God, it is
better then Sacrifice, I will praise the name of the Lord with a song, and
magnify him with thanksgiving: this also shall please the Lord better then a
Bullock that has horns, and hoofs. The Calves of their Stall, and of their
Fold, were not so acceptable to God, as the praising of God with Songs, the
Sacrifice of thanksgiving. The Prophet would teach them this, that thank
fulness was not only a Sacrifice, but a better Sacrifice.

The use I will make of this, is that that St. Jerome makes of it. Let all the
Jews give ear to this, their legal Sacrifices are vanished, they are not able
to stand before the spiritual Sacrifices; all the Sacrifices of obedience are
better. The reasons are weighty.

First, he that offers a Bullock, offers somewhat out of himself, he that
gives obedience, gives himself, says Gregory, in the Sacrifice, there is the
flesh of Beasts offered, but in obedience, and in praise, there is our own
will, our own rebellious will, the untamed Heifer of our own stubborn
hearts, they are offered to God. It is better in that respect.

Secondly, it is better in this respect also, all those that they offered in
the time of the Law, they were dead Sacrifices, if we speak according to the
Letter, and dying according to the institution. They were always to vanish,
they were always Mortalia, now they are Mortifera; they were to die in time,
and now they are deadly: then they were abrogable, now they are abominable.
But he that offers duties of piety, gives God a living Sacrifice, he that
offers himself. I beseech you Brethren give up your selves a holy living
Sacrifice, Romans 12. There is a great deal of odds, therefore let the Jews give
ear to this, God looks not to the Sacrifice, but it is the Offerers that God
looks to, not to the Offering, not to the Sacrifice that is offered. It is
recorded by some Interpreters, that there is no place of Scripture that the
Jews mistake, more then this that I have in hand. For they hold that this part
of the Prophecy was a prediction, not only of the Babilonish captivity, the
misery that did befall them then, but of their dispersion, that does befall
them now, and has continued ever since the time of Christ, because now they
are in this great misery of their dispersion, they hold this to be the meaning
of the place, We will give the Calves of our lips; when they meet in their
Synagogues to this day; they read always the Law of Moses, and perticularly
those rytes of Sacrifice: and because they have not a Temple now to offer
Sacrifice in, they read the Law; and they think that God accepts that for a full
offering of Sacrifice, because of this, We will give the Calves of our lips,
because they read the rytes of Sacrifice; mistaking this place, that is
intended by the Prophet for spiritual Sacrifices. The Sacrifice that God
accepts, consists not in reading, but in praising, Take away iniquity, and we
will praise thee. It is not reading of words of praise, but pouring out the
Spirit of praise, that God accepts: that is it that David calls the
Free-will-offering of his mouth. Therefore to convince the Jews, that their
Sacrifices should end in time, the Prophet shows by this, that they should be
abrogated. They boast of their Sacrifices, and even now God accepts spiritual
Sacrifices, far beyond them, and in time he will not look on them at all,
therefore bring God the Calves of your lips.

Secondly, let Christians give ear to this, as here is the Jews conviction, so
here is the Christians enlargement, the Christians happiness. Here we see the
virtue, and strength of the Law continues, when the letter of the Law is
killed, the morallity of the Sacrifice continues, though the ceremony be taken
away. Let no man say he will not offer spiritual Sacrifices to God, lest he
should seem judaicall; nay, we must judaise in this particular. But how? In a
spiritual sense, we must offer God the Sacrifice of the inward man, these
Christian Sacrifices, unbloody, spiritual Sacrifices. Do not think that we
are acceptable to God in outward performances, in things of ceremony, and
things of rytes, it is the substantial duties that he looks to, to give him
not unleavened bread, but sincerity and simplicity of heart; not Doves, but
innocence, not the LAMBS of our Fold, but simplicity and humility and
meekness, not the Sacrifice, of Beasts, but of obedience. God expects not the
dividing of the Creatures, but of our hearts. In a word, not the Calves of our
Folds, but of praise and thanksgiving, that is the second reason why the
Prophet instanceth in this phrase. He would teach them; First, that
thanksgiving is a Sacrifice. Secondly, that it is a better Sacrifice.

Thirdly, there is another reason yet, he would teach them that thanksgiving is
a daily Sacrifice by this metaphor, The Calves of the lips. For Calves were
such oblations as were taken in to all kind of Sacrifices. At the Consecration
of their Priests, Exodus 29. they offered Calves, for the Burnt-offering this
Creature was taken in, Levit. 1. This Creature was taken in for the
Trespasse-offering. Levit. 4. For the Peace Offering, Levit. 9. At the
solemnity of their Purification this Creature was Offered, Numb. 19. Then put
it together, they used daily to Offer the Calves of their Stalls, and of their
Folds: to show them therefore that more frequently they must give God praise,
and thanks, that it must be a daily Sacrifice, he instanceth in this, The
Calves of our lips; to show, that thanksgiving must be taken in to all the
spiritual Sacrifices we offer. If a man humble his soul in repentance,
thankfulness must come in, that God gives him a heart to repent. If a man
distribute his goods to the poor, thank fulness must be taken in, that God
has enabled him to give. If a man pray to God, thank fulness must go along,
that God has given him a Spirit of Prayer. In hearing of the word,
thankfulness must go up as a Sacrifice, that God has given us his
Ordinance; if we look upon the Sun, upon our Friends, upon our lives; look any
way, before us, behind us, still there is occasion of thankfulness, because
Gods mercies are continued.

Thankfulness must not only daily, but howrely, nay, every minute it must be
offered, it has that advantage of other Sacrifices. We must offer praise when
God preserves us, and delivers us, and feeds us, and keeps us, and clothes us;
nay, when he corrects us; when we rise, when we lie down, when we eat, when we
fast, when we go forth, when we return, in every passage of our lives, there
is occasion of the Sacrifice of thankfulness; that as they took in the
oblation of Calves to all kind of Sacrifices, so he would have them take
thankfulness in every duty, when they professed to turn to God in
repentance; when they prayed to God Take away iniquity, and we will give thee
the Calves of our lips, that he might stir them up to offer the daily Sacrifice
of praise. So David makes it a daily and hourly Sacrifice, Seven times a day
I will praise thee. That is, often, on every occasion, he would excite them to
the practice of this duty. This is the third reason. So much of the phrase,
both the ground of it, and the reason why the Prophet chose it.

But one word more briefly, and that is of the connection, and then I have done
with this Text, and shall pick out some other suitable to the times; and there
lies a great deal of weight in the connection. Weak understandings will be too
prone to wrest it, So will we give thee, Mark it, Take away iniquity and
receive us graciously, so will we give the Calves of our lips. That is, forgive
our sins, remove thy judgments, and then we will praise thee. Shall we think
the Prophet taught them to condition with God, if thou will take away our
punishment then we will praise thee, or else not? I could recite some such
Stories out of the blindness of Popery (but because they are out of the
Legend, I think them not worthy the rehearsing) of those that have cast their
Images into the Water, because they did not keep them from storms, shall we
think that they do condition with God? No, the pious heart brings his
Sacrifice in his hand, if thou will save me, I will bless thee, if thou will
not, I will bless thee; though thou pardon not our sins, we will bless thee
for the continuance of our lives, what ever thou do, we will bless thee.
That cannot be the meaning of it. St. Austin presses it well, God forbid,
says he, that a Christian should reason thus. None of you would take it well
at your Childrens, or at your Wives hands, to adhere to you in prosperity, and
leave you in adversity, to say, I will live with you in plenty, but when plenty
cease, then Farewell. Says Austin well, look, thou would be loved of thy
Wife, though there be no desert in thee, though there be nothing to persuade
her, because of the conjugall bond, and would thou love God, for any thing
out of himself? For by-respects? Thou would think much if thy Wife should
love thee for by-respects, and not for thy self, and wilt not thou do it for
God? It is like that phrase where Jacob seems to stipulate with God in the same
nature. If God will be with me, and bless me in my journey, and give me bread
to eat, and clothes to put on, that I return to my Fathers house in peace,
then God shall be my God. Shall we think that Jacob so humble a man, would
contract with God to bring him home in safety, and then he would serve him, or
else not?

No, often times the Hebrew Particle is only a consequent, not a condition, and
it is thus much, after, or when God has brought me home, I will serve him more
conscionably, and devoutly, I will declare it to all the World, and set up
Altars to his praise, then God shall be my God. So here, Take away iniquity,
and receive us graciously; when thou have done that, then we will enlarge our
hearts to power out the Sacrifice of praise, we will multiply thanksgivings, we
will do it now, yet, though there be cause now, then there will be more to do
it. So, three ways it may be justified; it has respect to three things.

First, as it has respect to that that the People did, so it justifies the
connection of the phrase. They had sinned, it has respect to that phrase, Take
away iniquity, and then we shall have cause, that is not all, but we shall have
boldness, and encouragement to praise thee. As if they had said, as long as
sin presses us, and our iniquities stand in thy presence, so long we cannot
bless thee, thou will not accept the praise of sinful lips; therefore first
remove our iniquities, that we may give thee a pure Sacrifice of praise. We
dare not look up to Heaven now our sins are on us; but receive us graciously,
and pardon our iniquities, that we may bring thee a holy Sacrifice, then it
will be acceptable. So it is justifiable that way, as it has respect to the
work of sin. So the Point is this.

He that will give a true Sacrifice to God, must first lay aside his sins.
There is no oblation of thankfulness, if sin be in the way; Praise is not
seemly out of the mouth of a sinner, that is, it is not acceptable, it is a
reproof to him that offers it, and a dishonor to him that should accept it.
It is not honor to God to take a Sacrifice from polluted lips, those lips that
he has made for himself. Therefore he has made man's tongue, his glory, when
we with one breath blasphemes that sacred name, and then perfunctorily bless
him. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayers, nor
accept my praise. In Psalm. 50. he expresses himself so, he brings in God
reproving a Sinner that calls upon his name, and does not forsake his sins.
What have thou to do to take my name, or my word into thy mouth, since thou
hate to be reformed? It is well observed of Origin, when he was to make an
Extempore Sermon to the people at Jerusalem, that because he was an Eloquent
man, he would speak so, he let his Book fall open to choose his Text, and it
opened upon this place, What have thou to do to take my words into thy mouth;
his heart struck him, because he had put incense to an Idol, and he sat down,
and wept. His heart struck him, because he knew he was conscious of the sin. O
that our hearts would do so; we come to hear the word, and to Preach, and to
sing to his praise, and we bring our sins with us, we make obstacles to the
ascent of our Prayers by bringing our sins. O Cast away sin first. If thou come
to the Table of the Lord, that is the Eucharist, there thou come to offer
the Sacrifice of thanksgiving. If thou come to the House of God to offer
Prayer. If thou come to offer obedience, attention in hearing the word, cast
away sin, it will poison all, it will make the word unprofitable, it will make
our Prayers that they shall not ascend, nor our praises in a spiritual,
acceptable vapor into Gods ears. That is the first thing. There was a
necessity that he should put in this phrase; so will we praise thee, for
unless sin be taken away, it is imposible to please God.

Secondly, as it has respect to the work of the People, so to the work of God:
there are two things in that.

To the work of punishment; and

To the work of Gods grace.

To the work of punishment, for all these three are in the former, Take away
iniquity, remove thy judgment, and give us grace, take away iniquity, and then
we shall boldly come to the Throne of Grace.

Now, Secondly, remove thy punishment, and then we will praise thee. It has
respect to Gods work of punishment. Not, as if we should not praise God, when
his hand is upon us. A good Servant of God will praise God, not only when he
smiles, but when he corrects him, not only when all is prosperous, but in the
midst of his callamities and sufferings. If he shut him up in his House, he
will praise him; if he makes all his storms to rise against him, he will still
bless him; as Job, he blessed God when he had taken away all, The Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. But yet
there is reason of it, take away thy punishment, and then we will bless thee:
that is, then we shall have opportunity to bless thee. While thy hand is on
us, our hearts are dejected: Praise is grafted on a cheerful spirit; and while
our hearts are cast down, we cannot praise thee, thou must enlarge our hearts
by removing thy punishment, and then we shall have opportunity to bless thee:
that as Hezekiah says, The living, the living, shall praise thee. And as David
says, Shall thy faithfulness be seen in the Grave? Or thy loving kindness
in destruction? Will thou cut us off by judgments, and can we praise thee
then? The dead remember thee not, if thou cut us of by thy plagues and storms,
how shall we praise thee then? Then our lips will be sealed up, and our hands
will be benumbed. O take away thy judgments, and then we shall have
opportunity to praise thee. The Point is this.

The true Child of God, though he will bless God in all estates, yet then he
is most disposed to Praise God, when God removes his Hand; when he makes his
Rod, not to fall upon him. Because a dull dejected Spirit is not fit for
praise; Praise must be grafted upon joy. It is a word of Exhortation to those
of dejected spirits, that they chide themselves out of their Melancholy
passion, since they have assurance of Gods favor, that they rob not God of
thankfulness. A man of a dejected spirit, he thinks God does all as an Enemy
for the worse; he robs God, he cannot praise him. Labor for a cheerful
spirit, that thou may praise God, for it is the elevated Spirit that
praises God. Remove thy judgments, and then we shall have opportunity to
praise thee.

Thirdly, and lastly, it has respect, not only to the works of God without,
but to the work of God inward, and spiritual, to the work of grace. It has
respect to the work of sin and punishment, and now to the work of grace. So the
meaning is this, Receive us graciously, and then we shall have enablement to
bless thee. See how they hang: first, Take away iniquity, and then we shall
have boldness to bless thee, remove thy judgments, and then we shall have
opportunity to praise thee, power thy grace on us, and then we shall be enabled
to praise thee. Thou must put words of praise into our mouths, or else we
cannot praise thee, we can do nothing of our selves. Can we give the Calves of
our lips, unless thou give them to us? The Calves of our herds we have them
from thee, but the Calves of our selves are harder to give. We would feign
bless thee, but our lips are uncircumcised lips, they are tied, Lord do thou
hallow them, sanctify them, do thou give us words, Take to you words. Where
shall we get them? Do thou open our lips, and thou shall have the glory of our
lips, put the words of praise into us, and then we will praise the; we shall
then have enablement to praise thee. The Point is this: The Child of God, as he
depends on God for acceptance of his Sacrifice of Prayer, and performances; so
he depends upon God for Enablement, that God may have praise.

There is no duty of piety, grows upon man's own heart, there must the Spirit
of God move in the heart. If it be the work of praise or Prayer, or Charity,
they are all fruits of the Spirit; that is, those fruits that flow from the
inhabitation, and powerful operation of the Spirit of God. They are the fruits
of Gods Spirit, that we may all cry, Not unto us, but unto thy name give the
glory; the glory of forgiving of sins, the glory of any degree of grace,
belongs to thee.

The consideration of this will excite us to thankfulness, when we consider
where the Fountain is, whence we draw, that it is above, that it is not our
own arm that supports us, that it is not our own Spirit that Santifies us,
or our own Spirit that suggests the words of Prayer, of praise, and
thankfulness. The consideration of this, will excite us to Prayer, as well as
to thankfulness. When we consider that every God gift is from above. As the
Apostle says of wisdom. If any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God. It is
true of other graces: If any man want repentance, let him ask it of God, if any
man want thankfulness, and charity, and meekness, let him ask it of God.

Here we see the way paved out to us, to go to God for the beginning and
enlargement of all grace whatsoever. If any want an understanding heart, it is
God that enlightens the heart. If any want a contrite heart, it is God that
melts it: If any want a sincere heart, it is God that strengthens it: If it be
the want of a zealous heart, it is God that enflames it; if a humble heart, it
is God that bows it; if of a thank full heart, it is God that enlarges it: all
is of God, all our sufficiency. Therefore the Prophet teaches them, that the
grace of Thankfulness was not powered out by the strength of their own piety,
but they must have recourse to God.

The sum of all is this, Take away our iniquities, and then we will praise
thee. That is, take away our iniquity, and we will give thee the Sacrifice of
righteousness; Take away our iniquity of cruelty, and we will give the
Sacrifice of mercy; take away our iniquity of falsehood, and we will give thee
the Sacrifice of truth: take away our iniquity of ingratitude, and we will give
thee the Sacrifice of Thankfulness. Power thy grace on us, and then we will
bless thee, and bless thee in a plentiful manner, we will pay thee of thine
own, give us thy grace, and we will give it thee again. It is thy grace, and
not ours, let it be thine in giving, and receiving.

O Beloved! In these times of unthank fulness and profaneness, we have lips
to curse God, not to bless him. O the sins that the stones of every Street cry
against in this City, that there is never a Foot of any Wall free, but there
is an Oath scrabled and dawbed on it; it is that that defiles the dust you
tread on, and the Air you breath in; it is impossible there should be a pure
air, where there comes so much pollution, from so many blasphemies in every
corner of the Streets; every day millions of Oaths, and execrations. Shall we
think that God will not be avenged on such a people as we are, that neither
Law, nor Conscience, nor fear of Hell, nor plague, can yet keep us back from
going on in that unprofitable sin that brings no advantage to us? It becomes us
to look to God in this particular, that he would reform us in this, because
the Sacrifice of praise must come from him. We live in an unthankful age
besides; none looks to God to give him retribution for his mercies. How has he
dealt with us graciously in the last sickness? Have we given him the Calves of
our lips since? Have we been so zealous in offering the Sacrifice of praise?
No, no, it may be this second sickness is to punish our ingratitude for that.

O yet return! As prayer will turn away judgments, so will thankfulness;
let us offer him now the Sacrifice of that glory that belongs to him for that
judgment; it may be he will deliver us; if not, we shall bless him in Heaven,
if he do, we shall bless him here, and say with them in the Prophet, O take
away iniquity, and receive us graciously, remove our sins, and remove thy
judgments; remove our sins that we may have access to the Throne of grace;
remove our iniquities, and then we will give thee the Calves of our lips.

THE Sufferers Crown. DELIVERED In Four Sermons, on James 1.12. BY That
Learned, and Reverend Divine, RICHARD HOLSWORTH, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes
Vice Chancellor of Cambridge; Master of Emmanuell College, and late Preacher
at PETER'S POOR in LONDON.

James 5.11. Behold we count them happy which endure, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons in Aldersgate Street. 1650.

SERMON I.
James 1.12. Blessed is the man that indureth temptation: for when he is tried
he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him.


WHAT the scope is of these words, you will very well understand by reading of
them. The Argument of them is concerning temptation, an useful argument to be
known, of what kind of temptation soever we speak, though it be the
temptation of Seducement. A Christian is no where safe, but as St. Ambrose
well, Temptations haunt us daily, in what place, or in what Action soever we
are conversant.

If we speak here of the Temptations of Afflictions, these times will very
well call for this Argument. We are now under Gods own hand, he has brought
us under a State of suffering, we had need therefore to furnish our selves
every way, because we know not how these sufferings may yet be seconded, for
they yet continue.

It is a useful Argument, and being so useful, that is the reason that the
Apostle James here gives it a full handling and Explication. And indeed we may
call it his peculiar argument, for none of the holy Penmen wrote or spoke so
entirely, or largely of this Argument, as this Apostle, which is observable in
all the Apostles, that however it is true of each of them, what was said of
Tullyes Oratory, that they were able, being endued with the Spirit from above,
to speak of every point of Doctrine that does appertain unto Salvation, and
left none untouched that was necessary to be known; yet there was none of them
but had some particular Argument that was peculiar almost to himself, in which
he did excel.

St. Paul went thorough the whole Doctrine of Divinity, yet there is one
Argument in particular, that is peculiar to him; the Doctrine of Justification,
that he handles above the rest.

St. John has one Argument that he was peculiar in, the Doctrine of Love.

St. Peter of Judgment.

St. Jude of Apostasy.

St. James of Temptation.

That you may see it is his peculiar Argument in this narrow compass of words
I have read, he name the word at least six times, he sets it down in all the
several parts, he defines what it is that is called Tentation, he divides it
into the several Branches.

The Temptation of Seduction, The Temptation of Probation,
Or trial of these several kinds, he gives the several Amplifications.

Of the Temptations of Chastisement, he shows the end that they are sent to us
for, to try us, and when that trial is wrought, though the premises be very
sharp, yet they always end in a blessed Conclusion, in blessedness, and in
the Crown of life.

For the Temptations of seduction, he shows the Original of them, both,

Negative, they are not from God, God cannot be tempted, nor tempts he any
man.

Affirmative, they are from our own corrupt lusts, and noisome concupisence,
Every man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own lusts and enticed.
There is the sum of the words; so that in short it is a Compendium of the
Doctrine of Temptation, set down in three Theological forms or elauses.

A word of Support, A word of Prevension, A word of Information,
And all these of special use for Edification.

First, because when God does afflict, and correct us, we are most of us too
prone to think his hand is heavy on us, and complain of hard usage to think
our afflictions sharp and irk some, therefore for this the Apostle uses a word
of Support, and encouragement to establish our hearts that we do not think
them long, bitter, and sharp, because they are only sent for trial, and in
the end rewarded with a Crown, and that Crown, the Crown of life.

In the second place, because we are unacquainted, and Ignorant of the dealing
of God toward us, and too prone to charge him foolishly, as if he were the
Author of seducing temptations, because he is the Author of afflicting,
therefore for this end he lends us a word of prevention, and anticipation to
keep us off from entering into such considerations and thoughts. Let no man
when he is tempted, say he is tempted of God.

In the last place, because in both these kinds we are too forward to excuse
our selves, and to put off all the blame from our selves with a Non feci, or
Non taliter feci, or Invitus feci, either with Sarah to deny, and say I did it
not, or with Eve to excuse it, and say, the Serpent gave me, and beguiled me,
and I was foreed to it; therefore there is for this a word of information, to
teach us to resolve all to the right principle, and to lay the blame, as we do
deserve, upon our selves. Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his
own lust, and enticed. Here are now the parts.

The thing I am now to speak of and begin first with is this word of support
and encouragement, and it may well be called a Support, because nothing can
more uphold a man (either in the one kind of temptation or in the other) then
to remember the Heavenly reward, the Crown of glory that is stated and assured
to the enduring of tribulation, therefore with this now I begin with the word
of Support in these words.

Blessed is the man that indureth temptation, for when he is tried, he shall
receive the Crown of life. And to bring it to a brief, there are four
descriptions here laid down, all which concern Tribulation.

First, a description of the person to whom the promise is made, The man that
indureth temptation.

And then a description of the Reward, the excellency of the retribution, it is
blessedness, and the Crown of life.

Then the description of the assurance of this Crown, or blessedness thus
promised, it is the Crown of life, that the Lord has promised, or assured to
them that love him.

Then the description of the manner of the retribution, the time when it shall
be, when he is tried, when he is fully tried, then he shall receive the Crown
of life.

The first is the description of the Person, that is the Mark at whom the
Arrows of Temptations and Tribulation are shot, in whom these Darts are
fastened, the description of the Person to whom the promise is made, the man
that indureth Temptation. There are two words it consists of.

There is a personal word, Beatus vir, blessed is the man.

And then there is a passive qualification, it is such a man as indureth
Temptation.

The personal word that is the Substratum, upon which all the rest depends,
and it is very remarkable here, because it is not (...) but (...), it is not
Beatus homo, but Beatus vir, there is a great deal of difference between
these. Homo is a word of nature, Vir is a word that betokens virtue: Homo
signifies a man of Mortality; Vir a man of Spirit. The difference is very
obvious, and that you may see it distinctly, it is received and observed in all
sorts of Authors. In profane Authors, that of Plato will serve very well to
this purpose.

Whatsoever comes near, and touches upon virtue, is Masculine, and Xenophon
gives the reason of it, because says he, by nature both the body and the mind
of man, are so framed, as to be better enabled to endure labor, and pain, and
travel and torment, then the weaker Sex.

Then if we look to Ecclesiastical Writers, it is frequent in the Fathers.
Take that of Lactantius for all, he observes that Vir and Virtus come both from
the same. Therefore it is observed in the three Learned Languages, that the
same word signifies Valor and Manhood, and Fontitude, the same word signifies
to be a Man, and to be Valiant.

Then if we come to the witness of the Scripture, there is frequent use of the
word to call a valiant, stout, godly, zealous man, indefinitely by the name of
a man, Jer. 5.1. when God bids them run up and down the Streets of Jerusalem.
See if you can find a man. It is not meant simply, if you can find Hominem, but
Virum, a man, a godly man, one that executes judgment, and righteousness,
there was a multitude of hominum, abundance of men, but there was a great
paucity virorum, of virtuous men. It was so in the New Testament, St. Paul in
1. Cor. 16. joins them sweetly, Quit yourselves like men, be strong, to show,
that the Strength, especially Strength of the Spirit, and Fortitude, is a
Masculine, and manly virtue, especially if we bring it to the Touchstone of
Tribulation, and Temptation. The Spirit of a man, that is, of a righteous and
religious man, is seen in nothing more, then in enduring Tribulation.
Therefore that, that the Comedian said in another case, Homo homini, etc. If
you alter it, it will serve here, Vir homini. What is the difference between a
Man and a Man? much every way, there is a Man by nature, Vir saeculi, there is
a man by Grace, Vir dei, a man of God, St. Paul has it often. Thou O man of
God flee these things. And that the man of God may be perfect, 2. Tim. 3. The
same that is here indefinitly by St. James called a Man, is by St. Paul called
a man of God. Reason defines a man of nature, but grace and virtue defines a
man in Christianity, he is the most man, that is the most Christian. St. Jerome
therefore in Tribulation and Temptation, observing the difference very well, in
his Epistle to Polybius, has this passage, for a man not to be sensible of
affliction, and Tribulation, it is above the reach, above the nature of man,
above a man of mortality: but for a man not to bear his affliction, it is
beneath the Spirit of a man, beneath a man that should have courage and
fortitude; for this present Argument we may so apply it, there is Proprium
hominis and proprium viri, to have Tribulation, is Proprium hominis, to bear
Tribulation with a stout courage, that is Proprium viri, proper both ways.

It is the property of a man of mortality, to be subject to Tribulation,
because our life is a warfare full of fears, and sorrows, and outcries, and
Tribulations. Man is borne to trouble (as Eliphaz in Job, Chap. 5.7. speaks)
as the sparks fly upward. It is natural to a man of mortality to be in
Tribulation.

Then there is another property withal, Proprium viri, the property of a man
that is such by virtue and grace, to endure Tribulation, to endure as a Man,
that is, as a Christian. Blessed is the man, that is, blessed is the Christian.

This word has three significations in Scripture; you may please to take
notice of them, for it is, A word of Sex, A word of Age, A word of Dignity,


A word of Sex, 1. Cor. 11.4. Every MAN praying, or Prophesying with his head
covered, dishonors his head.

It is a word of Age, 1. Cor. 13. When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, but
when I was a MAN I put away Childish things.

It is a word of Dignity, So in Jam. 3. He that offends not in word, is a
perfect MAN. That is, truly a man, a man indeed, a man of dignity.

Now for this particular in this place, as it is here set down, we must not
take the word any way, to distinguish Age or Sex, not as if it did betoken
distinction of Age, because God did put Spirit, and virtue, and courage, into
the mouths and hearts of Babes, and Sucklings, he raises such sometimes to be
Confessors, and Martyrs, (as St. Austin speaks) before they have Age to judge
of Sufferings; they have a Masculine, and manly spirit given them to endure
suffering. Ireneus gives the reason well, Christ took the Succession of all
ages upon him, to Sanctify all ages. Manhood to Sanctify Manhood, infancy
to Sanctify it; none is a Child that God inableth.

We must not take it, as though he excluded younger years from enduring
tentation, and glorifying God that way, he that puts Praise into the mouth of
Babes, may put fortitude; we must not exclude that Age, but any Age that
indures temptation is a blessed man.

And then it notes not a distinction of Sex, because we read of feminine
patience of those that were more then femenine, of Agatho, and Apollonia, in
the Primitive Church, of the Mother of the Machabees, what excellent Heroic
spirits had they? They went beyond the courage of men, in enduring Persecution
for the name of Christ.

Therefore under this one name, both Sexes are meant, because God gets glory to
himself both ways: therefore St. Ambrose moves the Question, and answers well
upon those words, Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man that has not walked in the
Counsel of the ungodly. St. Ambrose hereupon makes the Question, Number quid a
consortio beatitudinis exclusit mulieres quia virum solum beatum nuncupavit?
Does he exclude the other Sex from the fellowship and society of bliss and
beatitude, because he says, Blessed is the man? He answers well, God forbid we
should have such an Opinion, they are both equally called to grace, they have
both equaly title to glory, ubi labor est equalis, etc. where there is equality
of grace and piety, we must not make inequality of glory and distinction of
Crowns. They have both the same grace, breath after the same hope, walk in
the path of the same pilgrimage, endure tribulation alike and glorify God
alike therefore both have a like title to the Crown.

It is not a word that betokens distinction of Sex but it is set down by this
word, blessed is the man, to let us see that the enduring of tribulation
requires a high courage and a manly spirit not a womannish nature, nor as Saint
Paul in another case, he must not be a young scholar, a novice in
Christianity that comes once to encounter temptation, nothing will so much try
the spirit of a man as persecution and tribulation, of what nature soever it
be. Admit they be temptations of Suggestion that are the Temptations of
Satan, when a man is to wrestle with Principallities and powers and to
encounter with spiritual wickednesses in high places, had he not need to
have a great deal of grace, to have the spirit of a man, that is the spirit of
a Christian.

Admit it be the temptation of Tribulation from God, when a man (as Saint Paul
says he fought with beasts at Ephesus) is to deal with unreasonable men, to
encounter with poverty in estate, with contempt and despite, he had need to
pluck up his heart, to double his spirit, to get spirit, virtue, and grace; he
had need to have the distillation of manhood to bear tribulation.

It is impossible for a man to bear tribulation without virtue, so the heathen
could say; we must carry it further. Virtue that is spritualized grace, moral
virtue will do something and has done much in others; but grace is the form
of a spiritual man the anima animae it is of Grace, that enlivens, animates,
and inables. Seneca observed well that single virtue is not enough to endure
tribulation and affliction; there is in the enduring tribulation a great
concurrence of all virtue.

First prudence, in an eminent degree, when a man uses wisdom to encounter
with those dangers, that he is not able to decline nor were honorable to
avoyde.

Besides this, Constancy, which makes a man stand firm, that he is not cast
down by any encounter. Constancy in a high degree.

Besides these, Patience and Fortitude, thus far he goes.

We must carry it further to those virtues he never dreamed off for there is
requisite to the enduring of temptation, besides Faith, Hope, Love, contempt of
the world, a humble opinion of a man's self; there is no grace that is not need
full to make up this concurrence in the man that indures Tribulation, and will
be entitled this blessed man here. Therefore Apuleius observes of Ulysses, that
he went through as many dangers, as Hercules did labors; he that will go
through his labors, had need be more then a man. He observes of Ulysses, that
in all those dangers he was carried through, and supported by virtue. He went
into the Cyclopus Den, and was not kept there, virtue brought him out, he went
into the Poetical Hell, virtue brought him out, he sailed through Scylla and
Charibdis; he drank of the Cyrcean Cups, and was not transformed, nor changed,
virtue kept him upon his Legs.

Turn this upon any of the Apostles, Prophets, or Martyrs of former time, see
what carried them through so many Persecutions, with an undaunted spirit; look
upon St. Paul and Job, St. Paul had as many labors as Hercules, as many
dangers as Ulysses, St. Paul was night and day in the Sea, and was not drowned,
he suffered Bonds and imprisonment, but the word of God was not bound. St. Paul
was a Freeman in bonds, the Sea could not swallow him, what brought him forth?
Faith, and grace, and virtue, the Spirit of a man, that is grace wrought in St.
Paul. Look upon holy Job, he sits on the Dunghill, as Chrysostom speaks, the
Dunghill was as a Theater or Stage, on which Job as a Champion was set, as a
Spectacle to God, to Angels, to men, to all the World. And what was that that
carried Job through so many bad Messages, so many tart and sharp encounters?
That virtue and grace, that is infused into the Spirit of a man a Christian,
that made him so undaunted in bearing it, that he was as St. Chrysostom
speaks, a man of Adamant, of flint, impenetrable, not to be moved, as a
military Bullwarke, impregnable. All this Grace did. Grace gives spirit and
strength, whereby we are able to endure, and to wrestle with temptations, and
are capable of this Blessedness here.

Therefore to wind it up, that which Dionysius that was sometime a King, but
after he was dispossessed of his Kingdom, was addicted much to Platoes
Philosophy, that which he answered seasonably, when he was put besides all his
glory and pomp, and one said to him; What good has Platoes Philosophy done
you? Very much (says he) for by that I learn to endure with an equal mind,
as a man, these changes up and down.

Much is it with grace, and the Spirit of God, Grace it is infinitely better
then Platoes Philosophy; besides all other benefits from grace, the word of
Gods grace, it both shows what we are, Homines, men of mortality, and inableth
us to be what we should be; Vir, men of virtue, strong and stout, prepared for
the enduring of Tribulation. Here now is this word of the Apostle, with an
Emphasis set upon it, he sets it down vir, not homo, Blessed is the man that
indureth tentation. Here is the first thing.

The next we are to look on, is the passive qualification; the man that
endures temptation, or Tribulation; Temptation is the word, but tribulation is
the meaning; it is not here to be understood of spiritual temptations, but of
corporal temptations.

Of the spiritual temptations he speaks afterward, in the words that follow,
but here, of the temptations of trial, not of seduction; yet the Apostle would
rather express it thus, he would use this word, he calls Tribulation,
temptation, as showing a holy Conquest he had gotten of it already, he
expresses it by an easy word, as St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. he has one word
peculiar to him, that he calls tribulations, weaknesses, infirmities, St. Paul
fillips them off with an easy, slight word, though he suffered so much, they
were but infirmities, as St. Paul has that word proper to himself, of
infirmities and weaknesses; so St. James has this word almost peculiar to him,
to call Tribulations, temptations and trials.

Of the temptations of ^seduction, it is not generally true, that there is
blessedness and happiness for the man that endures them, a man is not to
endure them but to repel them.

If they be suggestions that arise either as it is a man's first happiness not
to have them, and his 2. to overcome them; so it is a man's first misery to have
them, and his 2. misery to yield unto them. Those Temptations are not to be
endured, but disdained, and abhorred, and cast out of our hearts, it is not
blessed is the man that endures these, but blessed is the man that Suppresseth
them.

And if we speak of injected temptations from Satan, it does not hold in the
universal, blessedness does not always belong to the enduring of them; it is
true, if God send a Messenger of Satan to buffet us, and we do not yield, he
that endures patiently, shall not want the Crown promised; but the first care
a Christian must take it to resist these, resist the Devil and he will flee,
if a man out of faintness of Spirit yield to these temptations, he brings not
a blessing, but a curse.

So it is not to be understood of those temptations, there is not blessedness
to the enduring of them, but to the repelling of them. But let them go,
because it is understood here of the temptations of troubles, and afflictions,
and chastisements. It is well they are called temptations.

In two regards they are called Temptations.

One is in regard of the good effect they should produce. The good effect is
this, to be trials of that grace, and virtue, that God has bestowed upon us;
for all Tribulation is Gods sacred Furnace, his holy, celestial touchstone,
whereby God takes a trial of those virtues that are in us, they are sent for
the proof and trial of virtue, therefore they are called Temptations; because
as temptations try of what spirit a man is, whither he be able to resist the
suggestion; so affliction makes trial of a man, nothing more proves a man's
Spirit of what mettle he is made then Tribulation, when the Sun shines fair,
all is well with us, a little virtue will go far, but in the hour of
Temptation, the day of affliction, and chastisement, and tribulation, then it
is seen what is in man, there needs a greater measure of grace, and if it be
there, it will show it self. It is called Temptation, because of the good
effect it should produce.

And then because of the evil effect it may produce, there are none of all
these Chastisements that God sends, but if they be not sanctified they prove
Temptations, poverty, pain of body, disgrace in the World, whatsoever ordinary
way men take to ease themselves, ordinarily the effect is, they drive them to
repine, and murmur, to ill means of supply; a Worldly man is no sooner
afflicted but presently he bethinks himself what way soever he may get out of
Tribulation, thus they may prove Temptations, because they may sometimes
occasion Temptations to make men profane the name of God, to make men deny
God, and disobey his will, and lead them out of the way of piety, thus they
prove Temptations if they be not sanctified, if grace comes not between, grace
comes between, and keeps them from proving Temptations, when they be
sanctified, that we be not seduced, therefore they are called Temptations, and
the words are used equivalently in diverse places; that that St. Paul calls
rejoicing in Tribulations, St. James calls, rejoicing in temptations. My
Brethren account it exceeding great joy, when you fall into diverse Temptations.

And that that our Savior calls suffering of persecution, Blessed are they
that suffer persecution, St. James calls here, suffering of tentation, Blessed
is the man that endures Tentation.

This is the passive quality, that is the Arrow that is here shot against this
man of virtue, the subject of this Crown to whom this promise is made.

But then there is the other, the entertainment that is to be given in that
word, Endure tentations, it is not the having of Temptations that brings
blessedness, but the right bearing of it, the word is short, but it is
significant.

In the Negative, Sense. In the Affirmative, Sense.
First, blessedness is not pronounced to him that anoyds Temptation, it is
true, no man is to draw it necessarily upon himself, but there are men that
think themselves happy if they can withdraw their heads, and shift away out of
Tribulation, though with the shipwreck of faith and conscience, and the
prejudice of piety that shall never have blessedness.

Then secondly, it is not pronounced to the despising of temptation, there are
too many of that spirit, that slight the Messenger of chastisement, and
correction that God sends, their hearts are hardened, as Pharoahs, and Ahabs,
they are smitten, and do not greive, as God complains in Scripture, this is
one of the worse tempers of all. It is not patience, but stupidity, as St.
Bernard speaks, here is a patience would make a man impatient, worthy of
impatience, a State worthy of reproof, no, it is the enduring of Temptation,
and Tribulation, that has the blessing.

What Enduring?

Not all kind of enduring, there may be a bearing of Temptation, when there is
murmuring, repineing, and discontent, that is not patience, that is not to
bear, and endure; but take it then,

First, speaking in general, the enduring of tentation here mentioned, is
patience, and patience is a virtue of a great extent, as St. Cyprian speaks,
it is a grace that has a great latitude, you may bring it to these four
variations, to know what it is to endure tribulation.

First, to endure, that is, stoutly, courageously, not to faint in Tribulation,
a man that faints, more dishonors piety by that, then he brought honor.
It is not a faint patience, that is magnified, patience is a magnanimous, a
heroic virtue, it must be a magnanimous patience that indures Tribulation,
that is not discouraged with enduring, but animated, and encouraged; dangers
are so far from daunting the Spirit of a true patient mind, as they do, but so
much the more excite it to further enduring: that is the first, it must be
endured stoutly.

Secondly, to endure, that is, humbly, and meekly, for otherwise courage and
fortitude, if it be not tempered with meekness vapors forth into fury. There
are Malefactors often, when they are upon the wheel, and the rack, they will
spit defiance, and seem very resolute. And many men when they are under Gods
hand, in any great callamity, in any great Tribulation, you shall have them so
impatient, that they vomit out blasphemy against Heaven, which is not grace,
the effect of a valiant spirit, but of a desperate spirit. Patience as it is a
stout grace, so it is a humble grace, full of meekness, that is true patience,
that is callme and gentle, not furious not fierce. That is the second, there
must be, as the spirit of a Lion, so the spirit of a Dove, mingled in patience,
for the enduring of Tribulation, not only to endure it stoutly, but meekly.

Thirdly, to endure a right, that is, chearefully, for many men can endure
calmly enough, and give a still patience, it is not a still patience, that is
enough, but a cheerful patience, a patience that has alacrity, a still
patience is ofttimes but a smothering patience. Men ofttimes bite in
impatience, they speak no discontented words, they show no discontented
gesture or look, but yet they are sullen and dejected, and thoughtfull, and
cast down, it shows they are not pleased with Gods trial, and exercise that
he sends: that that makes true enduring is alacrity; a Christian is not only
content, but willing to endure Tribulation, he labors after St. Paul's flight,
he breaths after that excellent spirit to glory, and to rejoice in Tribulation,
he takes it, not only patiently, but thankfully, knowing that as in works of
charity, God loves a cheerful giver, so in Tribulation God loves a cheerful
endurer. That is the third, to endure with Chearfullnesse.

Lastly, that is not enough, but for a right enduring, there must be
constancy, to endure with perseverance, not to give over.

And what is it to endure with constancy? to make patience to run to the end
of her race, to draw the thread of patience to the greatest length, for
constancy is nothing but the length of patience; patience in her perfect worth
is constancy, they are near of kin, patience is a short constancy, and
constancy is a protracted patience, were it but an hour of temptation, short
tribulation, constancy were not requisite, but mere patience would serve the
the turn, but Christ tells us, and the Scripture repeates it often, David tells
us, and the Apostles tell us, that Many are the troubles of the righteous, and
through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God; that the end
of one suffering is but a preparative a beginning to a second, God arms us,
and brings us to experience of sufferings, by the first, and so to the second,
and to the third, and so to many times, that he may not get glory only by us,
but much glory, seeing there are many great and long tribulations, we know
what we deserve, not what we shall suffer; therefore there must be constancy
to patience, that we may carry away the blessing to make patience to run out
to the length, He that endures unto the end, it is he that has title unto the
Crown.

Here are now these several ways that make up this enduring here spoken of;
put these together, and you have the meaning of the Apostles words, what it is
to endure tribulation.

Yet there is one more to be added to all these, not one that is diverse from
these four, but that runns through all, though all these be joined together,
to endure constantly, cheerfully, meekly, stoutly.

Yet if it be not in the cause of righteousness and piety, all these are
nothing, this is that must be mingled withal, it must either be for, or in the
cause of piety, if it be true Christian enduring, the case of martyrdom, that
is for piety, the cause of innocence, that is the case of piety, either of
these causes, are the cause of God, if these go along withal the other
properties then it is right.

Though the word here be not supplied, it is understood and supplied in other
places. Happy is the man that endures tentation, says St. James
indefinitely; but St. Peter gives the supplyment, If you suffer for
righteousness sake, happy are ye.

It is not every man that endures tribulation, that is happy, but he that
endures for righteousness sake is happy, here, Blessed is the man that indureth
tentation, but least you should mistake, there is a supplement, Christ tells us
what is that, for righteousness sake, so supply it here. Blessed is the man
that indureth tribulation or tentation for righteousness sake, in and for
righteousness, after a righteous manner, he it is that has a true title to
blessedness, this is the other property not distinct, but that that goes
through all.

It is true, though a man suffer for evil, and as a malefactor, whether from
God immediately, or by men, he is tied to suffer patiently, even when it is for
evil doing.

But there is a great deal of difference between these two.

The suffering patiently for evil doing, and the suffering for righteousness
sake with patience, there is a great deal of difference.

A man that suffers for sin, and suffers the just reward of his evil, his
reward is a debt he owes to Justice, therefore in that case patienee is not an
act of virtue properly, but an adjunct of guilt.

But when a man suffers for righteousness sake, this suffering dedicates the
devout man to God, there patience is not only an act of virtue, but a
Sacrifice. The Apostle Peter, 1.2. makes these plain, when he tells us of
suffering as evil doers, and as Christians. If any man suffer as an evil
doer, what great matter is it, but if as a Christian, that is praise worthy, he
lets us understand, that patient suffering in evil doing is no great matter.
That we are now strictly, by nature tied to do, and by Law, and bond of
justice.

Or if it be commendable as well as the other, there is a great deal of
difference, the one is commendable in an inferior manner, the other in an
eminent way, the one only is an act of conformity, the other of victory, to
suffer patiently, and for righteousness sake: Put these together, and you have
the meaning of the words.

To shut up all, what is the use we may make? briefly thus much.

To lead us to the right understanding of the nature of Temptations, and
Tribulations, that you may see there is a great deal of comfort, and a great
deal of honor and contentment in the right enduring of them, and that it is a
grace to be labored for, that we may attain. And that we may attain the right
enduring of tentation: One grace above all is to be learned.

Labor for patience under the Cross, for patience in affliction and
Tribulation, labor for that grace, it is that excellent grace that has a
mixture in every grace. It is Custos, the keeper of all other virtues, of
faith, hope, and Charity, and every other grace, they all come to their end by
the preservation of patience, they would faint all were it not for patience;
Patience lends support to every grace, as Gregory speaks well. It is the root
of all those flowers in the wreath of Christian virtues, the root of all those
graces. Patience, who can tell the usefullnesse of it? it is useful to a man
in all conditions, if his li^e be prosperous, he has need to stir up patience
against the day of distress. If his life be afflicted, he needs a treasure of
patience, because he has present use of it.

Besides, it is the grace that God honors in many places with his approbation,
he promises a reward to no grace more frequently, then to this.

Nay, it is the grace that God honors, with the name he takes to himself, and
set us an example even from himself, he condiscends to set us an Example of
longanimity. Mercy it self does not more extol Gods goodness, then his
patience does, for patience is more then mercy, for patience is multiplied,
renewed mercy, he could show no mercy, but for patience. Therefore he takes the
name, as the God of judgment, so of patience, he sets us the example of
himself, that we might learn to get this grace.

Besides, patience is the proper mark of a Christian, if the Cross of Christ
be the badge, the bearing of the the Cross, the cognizance of a Christian, a
Christian is not known by any thing more, then by suffering, and therefore is
to be defined by no grace more then patience the grace of suffering. In one of
the first words Christ spoke in the Gospel, he calls to the Cross. Whosoever
will come after me, let him take up his Cross, by the same word he called us
to patience, therefore it is one of the first graces that Christ forces, it is
the very mark of a Christian.

And it is that grace that carries a man through all encounters, that sweetens
all afflictions whatsoever; admit a man endure poverty, if he have contentation
he does not feel it, it is all one not to have the world, and not to want it;
he that wants not, has abundance; contentation is abundance in the midst of
want: And so for afflictions, it is all one not to have affliction, and to bear
it, if there be patience; patience never feels it, no affliction can be
weighty, if Patience be there it bears all.

Impatience turns every thing contrary: If a man have fullness, yet if a man
have an impatient spirit, he is in affliction, in happiness and abundance: as
covetousness makes a man always want, so impatience make a man always
afflicted.

Take it by a familiar instance; if a bird taken in a lime-twig sit still; if
she have a little patience, there may be hopes of recovery: but while she
flutters her wings, she is more fast taken; by stirring she brings her self
into greater afflictions: So a man, if he be wounded, if he be of a fiery
nature, and fret within, if he be of a fretting spirit, it makes the wound
worse, and not better: So if a man be in bonds and in fetters, and he begin to
be impatient, and to stir much, and to strive with the bonds, the bonds will
make him lame; but if he would endure them with quietness, the bonds are no
bonds, he feels them not after they are once settled: So in a fever, if a man
keep himself in a calm temper, and do not stir and toss up and down, by
toleration the fervor of the fever diminishes; if he be unquiet, it
increases the fever. So it is with all afflictions that God lays upon us; if
we have impatient spirits, the more we stir and fret, and vex our selves,
the more we increase our own tribulation, patience is only that that sweetens
and seasons all.

Therefore, if we will rightly come to suffer and endure tribulation: get the
grace of Patience, it is worth our labor by prayer and meditation, and by
whatsoever good means we may have a happy supply of it.

Yet that is not all; for there must be the other graces joined to patience:
Constancy, for patience will not come to victory, except constancy carry it to
the end of the race, therefore the blessing is not joined to patience, but it
is joined to constancy. Be thou faithful to death, and I will give thee the
crown of life. And henceforth is laid up a caowne of righteousness, but I
must finish my course. A man may expect the crown when he has run his race,
not before; there is immortal glory but to those that continue in well-doing:
so that it is not to those that are patient, but that continue to endure as
long as God continues to try; he that is carried to the end with constancy,
has a title to the blessing, otherwise as St. Ambrose says of faith, it is
not faith that is received, but faith that is kept, that preserves a man to
Gods Kingdom: so it is not patience that is not gotten, but patience that is
preserved and kept by constancy; it is not patience that is fading, but that is
lasting. A man may go on far by the help of patience: but if constancy be
wanting, that he go not out to the very end: if he leave before he come to
the very last step, he may chance come near heaven, but constancy brings a man
to it: So it was that grace that carried all the Martyrs and Saints through
their pilgrimage and suffering; they had no other scaling-ladder to clim^ to
heaven by, but constancy, every step till they came to the top of that ladder.
It is the ladder that carried our Savior through his course and pilgrimag As he
was man upon earth, he was to us both an example, as S. Bernard says, he was
obedient to death; he left not off the obedience to death, he walked along to
the last, to the end. We must follow our blessed Lord if we will show our selves
his true Disciples. Says St. Bernard, thou, whosoever thou art O Christian,
set not up thy staff any where else but where Christ has set up his: Christ
sets not up his staff, his rest, until he come unto the end of his race; he
obeyed to the death, even to the death of the Cross: so we must not set up our
staff till we be at the end of all that God will bring us to, and then when a
man is tried, he is blessed, and shall have the crown of life.

These things put together, let us see what it is to endure Tribulation. So
much for the first point, the description of the Person to whom the promise is
made, the man that endures temptation: so much for this time.

SERMON II.
James 1.12, 13. Blessed is the man that indureth temptation: for when (...)
shall receive the Crow^^ of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him.


THESE words I divided into four particulars;

One, of the person to whom the promise is made, The man that endures
temptation.

The other of the reward that is assured to him, Blessedness, and the Crown
of life.

The third, it is the assurance of this reward, the crown that is promised to
them that love God.

And the last is the manner, and the time of retribution, he shall receive it
when he is tried.

And of the first of these I spoke in the fore-noon, and that is the
description of the person to whom the promise is made.

And now I am to proceed unto the second branch, that is, of the reward or
retribution it self, it is in these words, Blessed shall he be, and he shall
receive the crown of life.

They are the words that hover over the other, the description of the person,
as the opening of the heavens did over Stephen when he was stoned. Here is
Stephens agony, the man that endures tribulation: and then comes in his
blessedness, the crown of life, as the opening of the heavens to encourage
every Christian the better for the enduring the conflict. It follows upon the
first in a very good order: for there is nothing that will stir us up more to
endure tribulation with patience and submission of spirit, then the thought of
the reward. It is the resolution that every man propounds to himself in any
undertaking, whether it be of action or passion, quid habebo, what shall I
have, if I do, or suffer? These are the voices of all men, both good and bad,
worldly men and others. Even Judas himself when he went about that evil work
of betraying Christ, he encouraged himself by this word, what will you give
me, and I will betray him to you? Nay, and the Disciples themselves in a
matter of greater moment, a thing that concerned heaven (as the discourse does
that we are now about) they propound it to our blessed Savior; S. Peter moves
him with this, Lord, we have left all and followed thee, what shall we receive?
And it was the custom of Princes, when they they set about any great
achievement or undertaking, to encourage the undertakers to come to the work,
they propounded wages, and prizes, and rewards, that they might draw them to it.

Generals, when they go to fight, to encourage their Soldiers to fight, they
use to make promises of Donatives, to make them more resolute, and valiant. The
same course here, the blessed Apostle Saint James takes in the description of
the great work he was about. As a heavenly crier, he was to make publication
here, of a great undertaking, the enduring of tribulation: and because he
would not miss of his aim, but encourage many to come to the cheerful
undertaking here propounded; he propounds to them the greatness of the reward,
that he may allay the sharpness of the suffering. He lends the poor man that
is in tribulation here, a staff to rest on; it is not only one staff, but
two, Blessedness is the one, and the Crown of life is the other. These are
good props: a thorn was in the first word, the enduring of tribulation; but
here is that that recompenceth it, here is a Crown and Blessedness in these
other words that I am now to speak of.

It is not blessedness deferred; the Apostle in a great deal of wisdom
begins with blessedness; he does not name tribulation without blessedness.
When blessedness is named, a man may safely name tribulation. It takes in all,
what God will give, blessedness, and what the man that endures temptation is
to receive from Gods hand, that we cannot apprehend the glory of the crown of
life.

These are the two things:

The one of them is the general description of the reward.

The other the particular.

The general description of the reward in this word.

Blessed is the man. It is blessedness, that is the sum of all comfort, and
the retribution that is promised to the enduring of Tribulation. And what shall
I now say to you of that? It is the thing that is in all your hearts, and in
the hopes and aims of every man, more or less, even by the light of nature.
Though it be in all our hearts, it is not in our understandings: Paul can
resolve us for that, whereas other things that are good, are subject to the
eye, we must not look to have it in this respect, Eye has not seen. Of other
things, the comforts of Gods spirit, we may tell how they are described in
Scripture, and you receive them by the ear; but of blessedness Celestial, no
tongue of Angels can speak sufficiently, Ear has not heard it. Yet the
things that ear has not heard, it is possible for the heart to imagine, we
may indeed in representation, but we cannot in the fulness, It has not
entered into the heart of man to conceive. How great that good is, that is
comprised in this small compendium, Blessedness, take it thus.

There are two things acknowledged by all, even by those that have little
insight into it.

The first, that Beatitude it is the highest and the greatest of all good
things, that can be expected, that nothing can be imagined above this. It is
the fruition of God, it is whatsoever is set forth to us in Scripture, to make
us understand that glory.

It is not only summam, but the most spacious, it comprehends in it all good
things whatsoever; Beatitude is so great a good, that as St. Austin observes,
every man would be partaker of Beatitude, not only the good, but even bad men,
that will not conform to the rules of piety, that lead to blessedness, they
would feign have blessedness, though they care not for piety. And there is no
man that hears me now, that is never so much affrighted with the name of
Tribulation, but would be glad to embrace blessedness, they love the end but
not the way. It must needs be a great good that all, out of that small glimpse
of light that they have, yet with so much earnestness desire. It is so great a
good, that it comprehends in it all good things whatsoever. It is, as St.
Austin says, the accumulation of all good, it must needs be the accumulation
of all good, because it is the reward of every good action, if it be the reward
of every good action, it must needs include every good comfort.

There is no number can express those several blessednesses of the eight
beatitudes, that Christ speaks of in one place, and four in another; St.
Ambrose wittily moves the Question why, when Matthew reckons eight Beatitudes,
St. Luke reckons but four? He answers thus, the four are in the eight, and
the eight in the four, the eight are no more then the four, and the four are
no less then the eight. So here, though it be but once named, yet that one is
as much, as the twelve, the eight, and the four, put together. It Is the
accumulation of all good, therefore it is set forth in Scripture by all words
that express not ions that are desirable, Rest, Joy, Peace, Glory, and
contentment, and immortality, all is blessedness. It is a word of that
sweetness, that the Prophets, and Apostles, they still had it in their mouths;
they seldom make mention of any duty, but still blessedness, though it be the
end of all, is set in the beginning of those duties they enforce. Moses, and
Christ, the Apostles, and Prophets, they all urge it expressly, and put us in
mind of it, though in several expressions. Take the difference.

Moses, when he propounds it as the reward of obedience, he sets it down in
the future, Beatus erit, if thou walk in my Commandments, Blessed shall thou
be in thy Basket, and in thy store, in the City, and abroad in thy going out,
and thy coming in. On the other fide, David when he mentions it, he puts it
indeed in the present, but he sets it in the Negative, Psalm. 1. Blessed is the
man that has not walked in the Counsel of the ungodly, nor stood in the way
of sinners, nor sat in the seat of the scornful. In the third place, our
blessed Savior when he comes to mention it, he has another variation, it is
not in the future, as Moses, it is not in the negative as the Prophet David,
but he propounds it in the plural, Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed
are the meek, blessed are they that hunger and thirst, and so the rest are all
plural, when Christ propounds the purchase of beatitude, for all that suffer.
Here yet it is different from them all in the pronunciation of St. James, it is
not in the future as Moses, but in the present; it is not negative as David,
but affirmative; it is not plural as our blessed Savior, but singular. Not as
if there were different publications, but only because he would raise it to
the upshot, and improve it to the best advantage: for all the rest are in this
Expression. Moses spoke not all when he propounded it in the future, Blessed
shall thou be, he does not express all. It is not all that is given to the
Saints of God to have hope of blessedness, they are not only blessed in hope,
but in act; they have not only a future heaven, but a present. Not in
possession? Yes, in possession, but not in full fruition; but they have some
possession. The Harvest is not now, that is at the end of the World, the first
fruits, that is a part of that blessedness, as grace is the beginning of
glory. The first fruits they have here, and because they have the first fruits
here, therefore they have not blessedness only in hope and expectation, but
in actual possession, as a part of it; and not only, blessed shall thou be,
but a godly man is blessed already: therefore the Apostle improves the future
to the present, not only blessed shall, but blessed is the man, that is one.

As Moses said not all in the future; so next David said not all, when he
expresses it in the negative, Blessed is the man that has not walked in the
Counsel of the ungodly. This expresses it not to the full. It is true,
blessing is propounded to the avoiding and shunning of sin, but the greatest
blessing belongs to the following, and prosecution of piety, not to do evil,
is good, but to do good, is much better: it is not enough that we be not
profane, nor impure, nor Blasphemers, nor Drunkards, nor Murderers, nor
Liers, nor Swearers, that is not enough, yet there is part of the blessing in
that, Blessed is the man that has not walked in the Counsel of the ungodly.
There is David's beatus, but it is much more that God expects of us, the doing
of good; that we be holy, and pure, and beleiving, fruitful in good works, and
in every good work, that is it that carries the greater blessing, the
affirmative, doing, and fullfilling Gods Commandments, and walking in those
ways that he has appointed, that gets the greatest blessing. Therefore that
is the reason the Apostle corrects it here, and improves it to David's negative.
It is not Beatus qui non, but Beatus qui sit, Blessed is the man that indureth,
that is the second, but that is not all.

As David said not all in the negative, so our blessed Savior expresses not
all in the plural, Blessed are the poor in spirit, and blessed are the meek.
It is more to have it in the Singular, that brings it home to every man's heart,
to every man's apprehension, and application, yet both put together make it
full; blessedness is propounded in the Plural to all, and in the singular to
every man that walks in the way of virtue.

What is the reason?

It belongs as much to every one in particular, as to all in general; the
thing that all expect, is no more then blessedness, the thing that every man
may look for, is no less then blessedness. Blessedness is that that will
satisfy all, and blessedness is that that will enrich every particular man.
Therefore the Apostle brings it lower then the plural, that every man may have
a special portion of comfort for one of these two reasons.

One reason may be this, he sets it in the singular, not in the plural,
blessed is the man; as partly despairing, that there would not be many that
would embrace this doctrine of the cross, it would hardly come to a plurality.
Every man with-draws his neck from tribulation. Though there be the Crown set
at the end of all those propositions of suffering; yet we had rather hazard the
loss of the Crown, then submit our necks to bear the yoke of afflictions.
The Apostle could not think there would be many, hardly a number, he could
hardly say beati, but shuts it up beatus, blessed is the man, one of a City,
and two of a Tribe, a few gleanings, a small gathering, and therefore he sets
it in the singular.

Another reason is, to let us see that in particular blessedness is every man's
comfort: Though every man excel not in all graces, no not the Saints of God,
yet each of them excells in blessedness. To one is given the gift of faith by
the same spirit, to another repentance; he is more eminent in that: to another
charity. Here are several graces and gifts; as there are several gifts, so
there shall be several rewards: The reward is but one blessedness for all:
Therefore in Scripture it is propounded as the retribution of every grace: As
the reward of faith, Blessed is the man that trusts in him: As the reward of
obedience, Blessed are they that keep his Testimonies: As the reward of
purity, Blessed are the undefiled in the way. Why should I name more? the
Scripture is full. But take this as the close of all, it is the reward
propounded to the enduring and suffering of tribulation: Blessed is the man
that endures tribulation. It is true, of all other, a man would have thought,
it might best have been spared here; for that it is the reward of faith, that
a man that believes, and his hope rests in God, that he shall be blessed, these
are comfortable: but that a man in the furnace of affliction, and
all-besme^red, lying loathsomely among the pots as the Psalmist speaks; that
Job on the dunghill, that Daniel in the Den, that Eliah in the Cave, in his
flight should be blessed. A man would think there were nothing of blessedness
in the state of an afflicted soul.

Worldly men are of another opinion, they think not that blessedness can
consist with tribulation and persecution: They think that blessedness consists
with ease, and rest, with pleasures and profits, and honor, and applause, and
the enjoyment of good things in the world: here is that they set up their rest
in, here they place their blessedness. See the different voice of the world,
and of Christ; of secular men, and the Apostles: Blessed are they that suffer
says Christ: O miserable are they that suffer says the world. Blessed are
they that endure tribulation says the Apostle: nay blessed are they that never
knew tribulation says the world.

Search but your own hearts now, whether most of us have not thus much of
Atheism in our hearts, as to think blessedness to be in the good things of
this world; the heaven that we look for, and the happiness that we long for,
Christ and his Apostles otherwise: the spirit of God that spoke by the
Prophets, and in them, otherwise; which word shall we give credit too? what
voice shall we hearken too? the voice of the world, or the voice of Christ? to
the voice of wicked men that are ^gnorant, or to the voice of the Apostles.

In all other things you take the judgment of the most learned; those that have
best experience, that have most knowledge, their judgment goes for current.
Well then, shall we trust worldly men's judgment in the definition of
blessedness? we do so, so blind we are; it is all one as for a man to judge
of colors that is blind, or for an aguish palate to give his opinion of taste.
Can worldly men that relish nothing of Heaven, judge of heavenly things? and
those that only walk in the ways of misery, and look for nothing else, judge
of happiness and blessedness? Then take the judgment of the Apostles, rest
in that; what is their judgment? whom can you trust better in the definition
of blessedness then they that now inherit it, the Apostles and Prophets that
set it down to us? whom can we better trust then those that were guided by the
spirit of God that forms and frames that blessedness? What is the judgment
of the Apostles? you have it here of one, and in other places of oothers: it is
their constant opinion that these delights and profits, and pleasures of the
world, as Nazianzen says, are a fabulous happiness, a false felicity, such a
felicity as is not beatitude, more of it is in misery then beatitude. The
consolations of the world, as Basile says well, are desolate: there is nothing
more unblest then such a blessedness, here is the opinion of the Apostles.

If you will have a better judgment, in whose judgment will you rest, but in
Gods? in whose, but in Christ's? Who is so ^it to tell what happiness is, as he
that gives it? It is Christ only that gives blessedness, cannot he tell what
it is? who is so fit a judge of blessedness as he that is blessedness it self,
God blessed for ever? the blessed and only Potentate; not blessed, but
blessedness, in the vision of whose blessed face there is blessedness? who can
tell better then Christ? who can better tell what is the state of sufferers,
and the reward that belongs to them, then he that suffered for our sakes? you
know, he himself, because he would break the way, lead the rank; that he
might lead us along cheerfully, to endure Tribulation, he has tasted the Cup
first. There is no drop in the Cup of Tribulation, that Christ did not first
taste of. The contempt of the World, disgrace upon the Cross, he had obloquie
and reproach of a Publican, and Sinner. If torments be another drop of the Cup
of Tribulation, he sustained them first; his back he laid open to the Smiters,
he was stripped, and bound, and buffetted, these were the things that he
sustained. If death it self be the last drop of the Cup of Tribulation, he
tasted of it first. He that is the Physician, tasted the potion first, he did
not only taste it, but drink it first. As St. Gregory well; the Physician he
drank first, that we that are Patients, might drink it cheerfully. Who can
judge of sufferings, and rewards, better then he that suffered first? that is
Christ? What says Christ? He tells us of woes, and he tells us of blessings.
The woes, what are they? Woe to you that are poor? No, woe to you that are rich.
Woe to you that mourn? No, woe to you that laugh. Woe to you that are empty? No,
woe to you that are full. Here are the woes, see the blessings. How begin the
blessings in Matthew? Blessed are the rich? No, Blessed are the poor. So he
begins, how ends he the blessings there? Blessed are those that avoid
persecution? No, Blessed are they that suffer persecution. Here is Christ's
description of blessedness.

Then here is the sum of all, that the suffering of Tribulation, it is a state
makes truly blessed; the right enduring of Tribulation, and affliction, is a
State that makes truly blessed, not only in hope, but in act, for the
present. Is there any thing of greater comfort, then that a man, when he is
accounted the offscouring of the World, cast out as the Dung of the Earth,
when he is vile in the eyes of all men, forsaken of all, and desolate, yet in
regard of God, that poor distressed Creature that has no comfort, that is
like Lazarus in the Gospel, at that very time, shall have the comfort, and
assurance of the fruition of blessedness, and the beginnings of it in
himself? Here is a great deal of happiness in the suffering of tribulation,
it is a state so far from being repugnant to beatitude, that it is consistent
with it at the same time. And beatitude is so far from being abhorrent, or from
being different from suffering tribulation, that it assures it to us. These two
are still joined in Scripture, the cross, and the blessing; Tribulation, and
happiness. Seeing the Scripture joins them, take heed that we do not sever
them. There are two only ways whereby we may sever them.

First, do not sever Tribulation from blessedness, that is one, take heed
that we do not that.

How is that?

A man then severs Tribulation from the blessing, when he would feign be
partaker of the beatitude, but not endure the Tribulation. As there be many men
that are very good in their judgment of blessedness, and think beatitude is
the best estate, yet they are loath to have the Cross along; half their
judgment is good, and half naught. Remember God has joined them, he has
made Tribulation walk before. If we will reign with Christ, we must suffer
with him. If we look to live with Christ, we must also endure with him; if we
will have the reward, we must look to the condition. Look over all the
Scripture and you shall find that no Saint of God was ever exempted from
Tribulation, Et labor and dolor, etc. as one says, from the very first man
that came into the World, to the end, godly men have still thorns in their
way, persecution, and trouble, and suffering. The whole World is as a great
Furnace, or as a great Ship that carries a great many souls, that are in
jeopardie of the flood still: So the World is to men, it is more then so to a
Christian; the Marks at which the Arrows of Tribulation are shot, are
especially the whitest marks, the fairest marks; those that are pure, and
undefiled in the way. The Scriptures do no where promise the blessing, without
the Tribulation, Nemo, etc. says a Father, let no man flatter himself, and
promise himself, that that the Scripture does not promise: The Scripture no
where promises blessing, to the course of the impenitent, no where to them
that decline the Cross, but to them that take it up. If the blessing be joined
to Tribulation, let us join them, and not sever them: that is the first.

Secondly, as we must not sever tribulation from blessedness, so we must not
sever blessedness from Tribulation.

How is that done?

Men sever blessedness from Tribulation, when they pronounce godly men
miserable, because they endure tribulation in the World. The World accounts
them miserable, that God accounts happy; those whom God has made happy, it is
very vain and rash judgment for men to pronounce them miserable. Generally we
think so, we think them miserable men, though they be holy, and righteous, if
they be oppressed with Tribulation, we measure all for the present. We must not
sever blessedness from tribulation. It is just as people that are ignorant,
when they see the Sun Eclipsed, they think the Sun has no light, because for
the time it is darkened, they think there is no Sun, because it is cloudy, or
that the Sun is lost, because he is so to sense. Worldly men are Creatures of
sense, they cannot judge of spiritual things, they see the discomforts of
godly men, they cannot see their comforts. The discomforts are without, the
comforts are within, the one is discerned by the carnal, the other by the
spiritual eye. Therefore they conclude they are miserable, because they see
not their happiness; just as St. Austin says, as if a man should conclude
that the Sea were not deep, because there are shallows toward the shore; or
that the whole Earth were not fruitful, because there are some Deserts barren;
or that the frame of it were not round, because there are Mountainous places;
so it is with these temporal afflictions. The Mountains and Hills carry no
proportion to so great a body, to hinder the perfect roundnesse of the Earth.
Blessedness is that that belongs to godly men, afflictions and Tribulations as
mole^hills, and un-even places cannot hinder their happiness. In their own
sight it may sometimes, it may be, there are shallows in Tribulation, but
glory, the Sea is deep for all that, there is deep glory, and comfort
reserved for them. Hear the pronunciation of the Spirit of God ofter then
once, Behold we account them happy that suffer, says the Apostle; you account
them miserable, but we account them happy: and I think we have the spirit of
God, he might have said so, the spirit of God taught them all these truths, we
account them happy, blessed is the man that endures temptation.

Well, what is the sum and the use? Seeing that it is thus pronounced to those
that endure Tribulation; we all are in love with blessedness, we all desire
that; if we be desirers of happiness, let us do wisely, take that course that
may bring us thither, labor to be found in that number that it is promised to;
if we be found out of that number, we must not look for blessedness. Every
man that shall inherit blessedness, must be in the compass of those
quallified persons that it is promised to; labor to be of that number. I tell
you blessedness is promised to holiness, Blessed are the pure in heart. He
that gets purity of heart, has assurance of blessedness. blessedness is
promised to the meek, to the poor in spirit, to those that fear God, and trust
in him, let us be qualified, according to the condition of these persons, and
we have assurance of blessedness. Come to the Text, here is a promise, To whom
is it? To those that are at ease in Zion? Or to those that Crown themselves
with Rose-buds? That let no pleasures pass, those that stretch themselves upon
beds of Ivory, that chant to the sound of the Organ? Those that make their
Heaven, Earth, and make their happiness, pleasures, is the promise to them? No,
it is woe that is threatened to them; those that eat Gods people as bread, it
is not blessing, but a woe to them, and the woe sleeps not. To whom is the
promise here? Briefly, besides all the other promises in Scripture, here is one
of the principal, Blessed is the man that endures temptation. If we be of
that number, here is blessedness. That is the first part, the reward promised,
it is a great, and full reward, blessedness.

Now I come from the general proposition of the reward to the particular. That
is, to go from good to better, though there be nothing better then
blessedness, yet in our apprehension, something may make it more lively in our
apprehension, to our capacity. That is in the otherword, the man that endures
Tribulation, shall receive the Crown of life: that is the particular reward.
Blessedness is the general, the Crown of life is the particular. And in these
words, as St. Crysostome says well, there is great Emphasis, they are both
emphaticall, for life is the best of all natural things, and a Crown is the
best of all things civil. Here is the best, and the best. O then what a
blessing, and a good, is a Crown, and life, both joined together, and these in
a spiritual sense. The Crown of life.

The Apostle might have spared these words, for indeed, as I said before, there
is nothing to be added to blessedness, he that names blessedness, names all.
But for our further satisfaction, he adds these two words, and puts them with a
For, FOR he shall receive the Crown of life. Either as a proof of the former
part, or as an explication. Take them argumentatively, or exegetically.

If you take them argumentatively, so it is good, least any should think, St.
James making the former proposition, that it was a Parodox, as worldly men are
prone to do, when he said, Blessed are they that endure tribulation, he
strengthens it with an undeniable reason, only by this, FOR he shall receive
the Crown of life. It stands thus, where ever there is immortality, there is
blessedness, and where ever there is the Crown of life, there is immortallity;
it is therefore called the Crown of life, because it is the Crown of eternal
life, that is, of immortallity, that blessedness he proves by this medium, they
are blessed: FOR they shall receive the Crown of life.

Secondly, if you take it exegetically too, it is upon good reason why this
word is added, it is an explication of the former. Lest any should mistake the
Apostle when he pronounced blessedness to tribulation, and have thought that
blessedness might be attained in this World, he puts it off with this
explication, it is blessedness, but you must not think to have that portion
here, it is blessedness that is to be had, where the Crown of life is. It is
the blessedness of life, but not of this, but of eternal life. You cannot
have the Crowns here, those are the blessings that all Christians cannot look
for, Empires, and Crowns here; but this is eternal, there they expect
blessedness, where there is the Crown. They are blessed in the beginnings now,
and shall be fully after; but it is there, where the Crown of life shall be
put upon them. In the World (says Christ) ye shall have tribulation, the
Crown of life is in the other World, says St. Gregory, this life is the life
of conflict, that of Crowns, and Wreaths.

It is true, a godly man has his Crown here, Paul had one, but that was an
Apostolical Crown, when he spoke to the Phillippians, my joy and my Crown,
that is not every man's: but every godly man has a Crown here. I will tell you
one Crown every good conscience has, the same that is a continual feast, the
same is a Crown. Nay further, every Believer, his faith, and profession, is
his Crown. It is not my interpretation, Rev. 3. To the Church of Philadelphia,
Hold fast that thou have, that none take away thy Crown. It is our glory, and
our Crown, our faith, and profession. Such a Crown we have in this World; but
that is not the Crown. Nay, besides, there is another Crown that every man
has, that endures tribulation, his very suffering is the Crown. As he said
of the Martyrs, as many sufferings as they have, they are Crowns that God sets
on us. What Crown says Peluciota? A most glorious Crown, a Crown of
Thorns: a Crown of Thorns is more glorious then a Crown of Gold, because it
makes Christ have fellowship in our death. Crowns they have here, but speaking
of that Crown of immortal life, that is not to be had here, here it is a
Crown laid up, From henceforth is laid up a Crown, but there it is a Crown
set on. That was the Motto of the Emperor, when he had one Crown upon the
Sword, and the other Crown was on his head, Tertiam in Caelis. The Saints may
have the Crown of Tribulation here, but the other Crown, the Crown of life,
that is for another World. As one that had three Crowns, my hope (says he)
shall be in the everlasting Crown: So the Saints have, they have one, or more
here, but their hope is in the Crown of life. It is called the Crown of life,
because it is given not in this life, but that Crown is set on in the life to
come, which is the true life. Therefore it is so called: So you see the reason
of the word.

And it is not the only name that is given to blessedness in Scripture, there
are other names, the White lilly, the Robe of righteousness, the hidden
Manna, the Supper of the Lamb, the Feast, and Banquet of Christ; it is called
the Kingdom of God, the Crown of immortallity; as well as the Crown of life.
Even under the notion of a Crown it has many names, The Crown of
righteousness, in one place, A Crown of STARS, in another; the Crown of
immortallity, in a third: The Crown of glory, in the Revelations. And in this
place, St. James anticipates, the first from whom this word fell was from St.
James, The Crown of life. A word that a man would never have thought of; there
may be a Crown given in life, but what is the Crown, when life is the Crown,
the place, the bliss, and all comforts? It dropped first from St. James his
blessed Pen, guided by the spirit, he adds this name. There are variety of
names, and it must needs be so, that there must be variety of names.

One reason is this, because the glory of Heaven is so great, that no one
similitude, nor two, nor ten, nor a thousand, can express it to the full.

Another reason is, because men are of various desires, all desire not one
thing. God will satisfy every man's desire, after a spiritual manner. Some
desire pleasures, and delicacies, God will answer that, you shall have
delicacies; Heaven is the River of life, the hidden Manna, the Tree of life,
are not these delicacies? Others desire gorgeous Apparel; others, quiet, and
ease; others, Authority, God will fit all; Heaven is every thing. You shall
find rest to your souls, there is ease, Enter into thy Masters joy; he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. It is joy^ and comfort, the white Lilly,
the righteousness of the Saints, gorgeous Apparel, it is the Kingdom of
God, the Kingdom of glory, the Kingdom of our Father. It is honor, and
Crowns, and glory, it is every thing, Heaven, look what you want, you may get
there. Pursue but things celestial with the same zeal as you do things
temporal, if it be honors, or profits, or pleasures, or glory, you may have
them there. What honor above this, the Kingdom of God, the Crown of life?
Here are the names the Spirit gives to bliss, to set an edge upon our
affections; he would whet our desires to the pursuit of it. To sum up the
point, there is an Emphasis in both words. The crown of life. Take them
together, it is thus much.

First, the crown of life, that is, there is true honor in Heaven. There is a
shadow of honor, and fading glory in Earth; there is none, but that which is
solid, and substantial there, here it is but as the cracking of thorns, as
holy Job says of the joy of the Hypocrite, the glory is short, it is but for a
moment, it is but a shadow, in the best interpretation; it is substantial,
solid, glory and honor, in Heaven. That you may see it is substantial, it is
called a crown, as if it were massy, and ponderous, it is massy,
substantial glory. That you may see it is massy and substantial, what a word
does the Apostle use! The weight of glory, the exceeding, eternal weight of
glory. It is a Crown: that is one.

Secondly, the Crown of life, Honor maximus, etc. It is the greatest honor,
there is nothing higher in the estimation, and in the admiration of men, then a
crown: it is the highest appendant of Majesty, Kings are supreme; those that
are Gods Deputies, only accountable to God, and next to God. The glory of a
King is so great, that men have hardly eyes that are great enough, but they are
dazelled to look on them. Yet the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them
are but dark and powerless in respect of the Crowns of Heaven. There is no
Crown this World, but has a cross upon it, there are Thorns in every
Crown, cares go along with the Crown; all is not pure glory, they watch, and
are troubled in the government of them that are committed to their charge. But
these are Crowns of glory, and honor, of Kings without disturbance.

There may be crosses here in tribulations; but tribulation ends all here, how?
Sweetly, in a Crown, all the Saints of God are Kings, there is a Kingdom
prepared for you; and they are not Kings, without the glory of Kings, here is
the Crown added to the Kingdom. The Crown of a King, it is the highest
honor.

Thirdly, a Crown is the honor of those that strive, those that are put into
the lists. Crowns were the rewards, always of Conquerours, as St. Gregory
says very well, the Crown is the reward of victory.

It is true, all the Saints have the Crown promised, but above all, those that
endure Tribulation, have the promise of it more properly; because they are
brought to the strife, to the fight of faith. It is drawn from the custom of
the Heathens, they in all their Olympicks, the great Spectacles they made in
the view of all the world, still there were cups, and garments, and Crowns,
that were the rewards of the Conquerours. And yet so poor they were, that if a
Horse did but run a race, and won, he had a crown, or a cup. And thereupon
Theocritus says, see what poor things the World glories in, that bruit-
Beasts are taken with; their Conquerours are Crowned, so are their Horses. But
see what Crowns these are, not Crowns of Ivy, and Laurel, but made out of
the Tree of life, not a cup of Gold, but of Salvation. It is the wreath of
Laurel that never withers, the Crown that never fades, the Crown of life.

The Apostle might have as easily expressed it, and said, for when he is tried he
shall reap Heaven, he shall be taken into heaven, here had been a round and
proper expression. No, it is not so proper, because he had mentioned
tribulation before, he suits it with a word answerable, therefore having spoken
of Strivers, he adds the reward, blessed are they that endure tribulation, they
shall have the Crown.

Fourthly, the Crown of life is an honor, a lasting honor, for the Crown of
life, is as much as a Living Crown. Who ever saw a living Crown? They be in
Heaven, living Crowns, that is, lasting Crowns, that shall not be set upon
the head, but the heart. Crowns are for the head in the World, it is the
highest place, and therefore being the highest place, is most conspicuous. But
the Crown of life, it is set on the heart, the seat of life. What is that
Crown, that is not set on the head, but on the Soul, and on the whole man? O
her Crowns are but Ornaments for the head, this for all the body, it shall be
all Crowns, whatsoever is upon the body glorified, or the soul, it shall be
all glorious, it shall be all glory, and glory and bliss, is but the Crown.
The same that the beatitude is, that is the Crown, but as it is here, it is a
living Crown.

It is true, in Revel. 4. St. John tells us, that upon the Elders heads he saw
Crowns of Gold. One special reason is, because Gold is a thing all desire,
and long after: he meets with men in their own desires, because every man
desires Gold and Crowns, he tells us where we shall have Gold, and Crowns
both, but it is in Heaven. But on the other side, least we should think that he
spoke properly, and that there were any thing in Heaven so poor, and so base,
as Gold, that which he there calls Crowns of Gold, he calls in Chap. 2. the
Crown of life, I, that is spiritual, to let us see that they are Crowns of
Gold, but in a spiritual manner: for the same that is the Crown of
immortality, the Crown of Stars, the Crown of righteousness, is the Crown
of life.

In this that it is said to be the Crown of life, it has not the luster of
one Crown, but the glory of all Stars, and righteousness, and immortality,
all are in the Crown of life, you see now, what a rise here is; these are the
rises when God raises. Who is more on the Dunghill then an afflicted Creature?
What a rise is here, for dust and ashes to be raised to the glory of Heaven?
For a man in tribulation to be raised to the state of a King, the glory of a
Crown? As the Apostles, and Disciples said, Did not our hearts burn? Do not
your hearts leap to think of a Crown? How impossible is it for any man that
is ambitious, to reach honor of less matters then a Crown, but it is for
those that it belongs to, and that God has appointed? And yet how easily may
we attain a Crown that is more glorious in Heaven?

Is not this a great excitement, and encouragement for men patiently to suffer
tribulation?

Admit the tribulation be sharp, here is that that will allay it, the
tribulation is sharp, but the crown is glorious, Fear not, though the
tribulation be bitter, Dum passio, etc. as Gregory says well, while the
tribulation is sifting, and winnowing, the Crown is preparing, and God is
sending. There is nothing that is excellent, but it comes with difficulty; if
then we be content to take things that are excellent in this World, with
labor, and pains, and cost, and difficulty, shall we not bestow a little
pains to go through difficulty for Heaven? It is but small straits that we
are to go through for Heaven; it is but a little tribulation that is prepared
before it be sent, and fitted when it is sent, if it be sharp, the Crown is
glorious.

In the second place, admit the afflictions be many, as they be sharp, as the
sufferings are many, so the rewards, and Crowns are many: Every particular
suffering has a Crown; every particular grace has the promise of a Crown,
if there be several Crowns, a Crown of righteousness, and a Crown of
Stars, a Crown of glory, a Crown of immortality, a Crown of life; then
fear not, but God is able to make the Crowns answerable to the number of your
passions. And by how much men's sufferings have been greater, as Chrysostom
says well, by so much the more, the Crown shall be more bright, and
splendent, as St. Austin says well, every Saint that God the more buffets, and
conflicts he has endured, the greater shall be his reward, and more ample of
glory. This for the multitude of tribulations, if they be many.

Admit in the last place, that tribulations and sufferings be long, though
there be nothing long in this World, there is nothing long, that comes to a
period: for there is nothing long that is temporary. All tribulations, and
sufferings, are temporary: That is too much to say, they are temporary, they
are all momentary, that is less. St. Paul says so, that which is momentary,
cannot be long. What is shorter then a moment? St. Paul was able to judge, he
endured many, and long tribulations. But our life is but a moment to eternity,
our life is but as yesterday, says the Psalmist, they can last but this life,
and that may no^ last to the next moment. They are temporary, nay, they are
momentary, admit they were not, yet that Crown will recompense it, the Crown
of life is immortal, here is that that will recompense it. You know the
sufferings of this world are but momentaine (as I said) and yet worldly men
take a great deal of pains to decline them. On the other side, the pleasures
of the world are momentaine, and what pains do worldly men take to enjoy them?
how much trouble is there? and what care do they take to heal a finger, if it
be out of frame, or out of joint? or for the curing of any part of the body, if
there be but any passion upon that? nay further, not only the care of the
flesh, but what a great deal of care do worldly men take, to fulfill their
lusts? How much will wicked men suffer to enjoy their lusts? what will they not
suffer? then, as Demosthenes stirred up himself to follow his study the more
earnestly, by the example of a Smith that was at his work before he was at his
study; it is a shame for me says he, to be in bed, and the Smith to be at
work; this was Demosthenes argument, so it may for Christians, shall wicked men
endure so much to fulfill the pleasures of sin, and shall not we endure
something to attain the Crown of life, and immortallity, for the attaining of
heaven? Si tanta, etc. If the soul, says St. Austin, he content to suffer so
much, to enjoy things that are made to perish, how much should we be content to
suffer for that that cannot perish? If men will suffer so much for the flesh,
what should we suffer for the immortality of the soul? for the gaining of
Heaven? for the crown? It was the argument of the devout Hermit, when he saw a
Harlot spend some hours in attiring of her self, he fell bitterly on weeping;
being asked what was the reason? Says he, because I cannot bestow so earnest
pains in adoring my soul, as that creature does, in decking of her body; that
was his argument. And St. Paul he gives such an argument, whereas worldly men
strive for a corruptible Crown, shall not we strive for that which is
incorruptible? Shall not the children of light be as zealous for Heaven, as the
children of the world are for pleasures? Shall not spiritual men be as zealous
to attain glory, as carnal men are in momentaine things, the pleasures of sin
that endure but for a season? O listen, listen to St. Paul, he pus all these
together; I told you of the levity, and shortness, and paucity of tribulations,
he sums them up well, and concludes thus, These light afflictions that are but
for a moment, they work out a far exceeding eternal weight of glory. It is
worthy all to be written in Letters of gold, there is never a word but it is
full of emphasis, there were never words almost that dropped from any man's mouth,
so full of excellency, as these words. For, first if you mark it, he moderates
the quantity with the quality, these light afflictions. Then again he
moderates the quality with the quantity, they are short afflictions, if they be
great, and many, they are short, and momentaine: then he moderates both with
the comparisons that follow, light afflictions, but a weight of glory;
momentaine afflictions, but an eternal weight of glory. And this eternal
weight of glory exceeding in quality, and quantity, St Paul would not have us
think his afflictions long, and sharp, and great, and many, they are nothing so
that God sends, but if they were so, shall we not endure them? If God should
afflict us all our life, if we should live as long as the Patriarcks, he
mingles them with comforts, though there were no comfort, a thousand years
tribulation were nothing to the glory that shall never come to an end. Jacob
thought 7. years service a short time, that he might enjoy Rachel; when his eye
was upon Rachell his Pearl, then he thought 7. years, and 7. to them, but a
small time. Did Jacob account so many years a small time, and shall not we
account 7. days, 7. hours short? Admit it be more, it is but tribulation for
a short time, if we have Rachell, if we have Heaven in our eye: fix our eyes
upon immortallity, upon heaven, and then all tribulation will seem not only
light, but nothing, and not only short, but as if they had never been: but as
yesterday are 10000 years to eternity. The world gives nothing but what is
corruptible, God gives that which is eternal, all desire long life, God offers
not only long life, but eternal life, not only long life, but a glorious
life, expressed by the best words, though stated upon contemptible persons,
those that suffer tribulation. First, they are blessed, that is the general,
and then in particular, they shall receive the Crown of life.

SERMON III.
JAMES 1.12. Blessed is the man that indureth temptation: for when he is tried
he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him.


HAVING done with the two principal parts, I am now to come to those parts
that are access^ry: The special are the two descriptions I told you of before.
The description of the persons, that the promis^ is made unto, all under the
notification of one, The man, that i^, every man that endures tentation. And
the description of the reward it self, that is the other set down under two
notions.

There is the general notion which comprehends all other terms, it is
blessedness.

And there is the particular notion which is subordinate to it, the thing that
is promised is a Crown, and that Crown has the best appendix set unto it, it
is the Crown of life, the Crown immortal, of these I spoke.

Now, these other two parts that follow in this verse, they are added as an
appendix, or supplement. The one a supply, De gratia dispensationis, of the
cour^e and dispensation: the course that God takes in dispensing this reward
under both these notions; When he is tried, then he shall receive.

The other is of the fellowship of participation, and communion that all Saints
have in the Crown. The man that endures temptation first; enlarged after, to
all that love him. These are the parts I am to speak of, these two supplements
of the two former.

And the first in order is that that concerns the course and dispensation of
God, in those words, when he is tried he shall receive.

In that there are two things.

Modus. Tempus.
The manner of the exhibition, he shall receive.

Then there is the time of reception; when he is tried, when he is fully
tried, then he shall receive.

The manner of the exhibition is very well expressed here by a receiving: He
shall receive. Now recipere is a relative word; and being a relative, it must
have a correlative that belongs to it; and what the correlative is of
receiving, we all know. Giving, that has reference to receiving: there can be
no receiving, where there is no giving. The Philosopher says well, dari
accipere. It is true, speaking of passages between man and man, receiving does
not always necessary imply freeness of gift: there may be receiving, where
there is not freeness of donation. Wages, when they are paid; debts, when
they are discharged; pledges, when they are restored; commodities, when they
are bought, they are truly received, yet there is no gift goes before. But yet
when we speak of passages between God, and man, there is never receiving on
man^ part, but it is the free gift of God; because man cannot deserve of his
Creator and Maker: Therefore it comes to pass, that whatsoever thing it is
that we receive, the very foundation and principles of Christianity does
suppose it to be of the freeness of God, that is the Scriptures reception. St.
Paul shows it very well, 1 Cor. 4. What bast thou that thou have not received?
That question it is equivalent to an universal negative; there is nothing that
we enjoy, or have in the world, but we receive, and receive how? we receive it
as Gods free bounty, as a gift, or donative. If it be so in lesser things, much
more in greater; if it be so in temporals, much more in spirituals, much more
yet in eternals; the eternal of all, eternal life cannot come to us but by
Gods gift. So, these three things this word affords.

First, it is a word of benignity, of free donation: he shall receive from the
hands of God. The receiving here is without addition; but the addition is to be
made up. Beatitude, immortality, the joy and bliss of heaven, with all things
that belong to it, of all other is Gods most free, and bountiful gift. So, it
is still in Scripture under what similitude soever you find it. There are
diverse similitudes, and all glorious; still there is gift added.

You have it set forth under the similitude of hidden manna; but of gift: To
him that overcomes will I give of the hidden manna, I will give it. You have it
set out under the similitude of the tree of life, but giving is added: To him
that overcommeth will I give to eat of the tree of life which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God. It is set out under the similitude of a
Kingdom, but still of gift. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers will
to give you a Kingdom. It is set out under the similitude of a Crown, the
Crown of life, but of gift still: Be faithful to the death, and I will give
thee the crown of life.

It must needs be so, that the grand, great blessing is of gift; for all
inferior blessings that have reference to it, they are all of gift, both the
root, and the boughs, and the branches, and the leaves, and the fruit of the
tree of life, they are all of gift; Glory, and what ever belongs to glory. The
Gospel of the Kingdom, which points out to us this Crown that is given to u^,
and of grace. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God.
Christ, that is the substance of the Gospel, he is the great gift that God
gave freely to the world: God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son. Faith, that lays hold of Christ, and applies his merits, that
is the gift of God. To you it is given to believe, and to suffer. The holy
Ghost, that begets faith in the heart, even he is a gift, it is one of his
names, Donum dei, he is the gift of God, it is one of the names that he takes;
he will give to us his holy spirit. Take all in a word, both grace and glory are
equally of gift. St. Paul coucheth them both in many several places: The grace
that is given to us, says he in one place: The gift of God is eternoll life,
says Saint Paul in another, all is gift.

It is true, there is another name by which it is styled sometimes, that seems
a little to derogate from the liberty, and freeness of gift: It is called
wages received; it is called the reward that is given. But this word of gift
regulates all, it lets us understand, that however we consider it, whether we
consider it as it is, mercis laborantium, the wages of them that labor, and
work in the vineyard; Or premium vincentium, the reward of them that overcome,
and fight in the lists; Or repromissio credentium, the promise made to them
that believe, and so being a promise, is a kind of debt and stipulation; yet in
all considerations, of reward, and wages, and promise, in all it is to be taken
so, to be taken as a gift.

That we may learn all hence that that Moses said to the people of temporal
Canaan, it is true much more of the ^^^est all^ God has brought you ^o that
good land, not for your righteousness: so, God has translated us all^ he will
if we walk in his Commandments, in time he will translate us ^ to that good
way to that better way, that best of all not for our righteousness, not for any
merits of ours, but for his goodness, out of his bounty, because he would be
pleased to give it; it is mere mercy and gift. That we may learn I say with the
Elders in the Revelation: we may well learn of the Saints in heaven, and learn
humiliation, and acknowledgment of them that are in possession. They had
Crowns on their heads, Rev. 4. and what then? They cast down their Crowns:
they take off their Crowns, and cast them down before the Throne of God and
the Lamb; for what purpose? St. Gregory gives a good gloss: they therefore
cast down their Crowns, as acknowledging that they were not theirs, not of
their own deserving; but they were of the purchase of Christ, and of Gods
bestowing, they cast them down before the throne of God. If they cast down the
Crowns they have in act, we may well cast down those we have in hope, and
acknowledge our own unworthiness: and we cannot acknowledge our own
unworthiness, unless we acknowledge that we have received them, and received
them of gift.

What speak I of Elders? look but to the heathen, they had but a glimps of
that bliss, and glory, but a small insight of an imaginary beatitude; yet that
very imaginary felicity that they dreamed of, they could not apprehend it
otherwise then only the gift of God. As Lucius, no man can come to felicity
without Gods gift. (...)says Aeseulus, another of them, happiness and bliss
is the gift of God: as if he had spoken the same language with St. Paul, the
gift of God is eternal life. Even they, I say, made these acknowledgments: but
we that have the dictates of the spirit, shining in the word by so many
illustrations; we that have the experience and knowldg in our selves, what, and
where to seek for it, how to seek it as beggars at the throne of grace. When
we receive of God, how do we receive? as Gods alms, a very little blessing is
Gods alms: and every greater blessing, especially the greatest of all is Gods
largess and bounty: So you may see life it self, not only temporal, but
eternal, the Crown of life, it is called the penny in the Gospel: Call the
laborers, and give them their penny. We stand at the door of grace, and knock
for an alms, and God gives us an alms, that belongs to beggars, a penny; but
that penny is more worth then the world: the same that is the penny there, is
the Crown of life here, to let us see that it is Gods gift. That is the first
thing, when we are said to receive; therefore we receive on our part, because
it is given on Gods part, they are relatives. It is a word that signifies
benignity, and donation.

Secondly, as it is a word of benignity, so it is a word of assurance, and
certainty; recipiet, he shall receive. It is in the future, and the future is
not so certain as the present; not with us that have not the power of the next
minute, there is nothing more uncertain to us then the future. I, but there is
nothing more certain to God, and there is nothing more certain to us, then
Gods future. To let us see that the future is as certain as the present, when
God promises; his futures are expressed usually by the time past, and present,
as though we might as well conclude of it as if it were present. There is no
blessing promised, but it is as sure in Gods hands, as if we had it in our own.

Certain it is, this Crown of life to them to whom it is promised, the persons
thus qualified; it is certain I say, quia ipse dixit, Christ has said it,
whose word is faithful, and true. He that has promised, he will perform,
because his promise is as good as payments and performances.

Certain it is, quia pise preparavit, Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you before the beginning of the world. And, I go to prepare a
place for you. Christ went not to heaven in vain, he went to prepare, to
furnish heaven to give us entertainment; as though it were not fit for us, or
we for it, till he had prepared it; the preparing was both ways, I prepare it
for you, by preparing you for it; he that has prepared, will translate; he
that has begun the work will finish it. He does not prepare heaven for us, nor
us for it that we should not meet together, but that we should meet in the time
that God has appointed.

Certain it is, because the Saints that are gone before us enjoy the Crown of
life, they are in the fruition: he that has made good the promise to one, will
to another, he has to thousands that are gone before; there is but a small
remnant to come after, and the day shall be accomplished, because they without
us cannot be made perfect.

Certain it is, because we have part in possession already, the first fruits,
God has given us the earnest; we are in Albo, we are brought into the list,
the roll, the catalogue of those that do go, and are to inherit heaven: He
that gath given the earnest, will give the inheritance; if there be the first
fruits for the present, the harvest, the reaping shall come in the time that
God has appointed.

Last of all, certain it is, because Christ our head is there. It cannot be,
that if the head be glorified, but that the members should be glorified too:
Because Christ as mediator, even his glory is not perfect without ours: the
glory of the head cannot be perfected without the members. Christ's glory as
mediator should not be perfect, unless he should translate his members and
servants to reign with him, then it is complete. In all these considerations it
is certain: Therefore we are not to take this word as an ordinary future, he
shall receive, as a neutrall word, a word of doubting, as ours are, but as Gods
future, and he is faithful that has promised. If God say it, it shall be, he
speaks it by the spirit of God, the holy instrument of that holy Arm, he shall
receive. That is the second signification of the word, it notes assurance and
certainty.

Thirdly, there is yet one more, recipiet, it is a word of restitution,
recipere is re accipere, to receive again, properly speaking; recipere is to
receive, to get something that a man had before, that he has lost. As it was a
famous answer of the Roman Consul concerning the winning again of Tarrentum;
unless you had first lost that City, I had never received it: receiving
implies a thing that has been lost. It is true of the Celestial City, the new
Jerusalem, the Crown of life: Nisi Adamus, etc. Unless Adam had lost it, we
had never come to the comfort of this word of receiving. Of having we might, of
receiving we could not: This Crown of life was in Adam, but he lost it; but we
may say faelix, etc. (in that sense, as sometime it was spoken) happy fall,
that brought forth a better effect, a better Crown, a better immortality, a
better bliss. The immortality that Adam lost was a doubtful immortality:
Christ restores us to a certain immortality, to an immortality that shall not
be alterable, that is not capable of temptation to thrust us out of it, nor any
stepping awry any moment of time, to lose any the least participation of it.
The Crown that Adam lost, was a Crown of innocence; the Crown that Christ
restores is a Crown of righteousness, and the same is the Crown of life. Adam
lost the Crown by yiedling to the temptation of suggestion; and we again come
to receive the Crown by enduring the temptation of trial, the man that
endures temptation, he shall receive it.

What a blessed reparation now is here, see, as we lost a silver immortality,
we have gotten a golden one, and at so little expense. To say nothing of those
other disbursements required in other places of Scripture, see the expense
here; what is the expense? Were the expense great, there is no man but would be
content to be at great expense for such a reception, the Crown of life, and
immortality; if the expense were liberty, we should part with that; if it were
means, we should loose them, or credit, or life it self. The afflictions of
this present life are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed. What is
the expense to the receiving? It is the expense only of a little temporal
suffering, which is the worst expense we can make in the world, and that
expense too, hastens us to heaven, and works toward it. It is the expense of a
little suffering for the receiving of a Cowne. Now wise men would do so; there
is no man, but when he compares his expenses with his receipts; if his receipts
exceed his expenses, he thinks himself in a good condition, his estate is
sound. After the disbursment of a little suffering, when we come to look on our
receipts, what they are, or shall be, we cannot but think our selves rich, and
in a good condition, whatsoever our tribulations and sufferings are. Here is
the great receipt, the restitution, the repair that is made after the first
loss, and the present expense; he shall receive the Crown of life. It is a
word of Retribution; that is the third thing:

So I have done with the first, here is the Modus, the manner of dispensation,
Gods free gift on our sufferings.

The next is the Tempus, the time of this reception.

When he is tried. Then he shall receive, when he is tried. The word is well
interposed, there are in it two things.

There is a liquid suppositum, something supposed.

There is a liquid positum, something expressed.

The thing supposed is this, the end of temptation, and tribulation is for
trial. When he is tried, when he has endured tribulation, when he is tried.
Tribulation is sent for proof, and trial. Therefore though it be tribulation
and affliction that is spoken of, it is called tentation. We may well give the
reason out of St. Chrysostom: Tribulation is well called temptation, because
it is for the trial of our Philosophy, for the trial of the graces that God
has given us, the very word temptation betokens trial; therefore it is that
the Schoolmen give that definition of it. Temptation is nothing else but,
Exploratio per experientiam, as Parisiensis, temptation is a taking trial by
experience, they are Aquinas words, because the best knowledge is that that
comes by experience, and the best experience is that upon taking of trial.
Experience that is upon trial, as Gallen speaks, is the best way of cognizance
that we can have for the nature of any thing whatsoever. Therefore because all
temptation aims at discovery and knowledge, and knowledge is taken by trial,
therefore this word of trial is called temptation, though it be the
temptations of suggestion, or of proving, there are diverse kinds of either of
these sorts.

Of ill Temptations of Suggestion, there are three.

Men tempt men.

Men tempt God.

Satan tempts men.

Of the good there are two.

Men tempt, and prove themselves.

God tempts and proves men by sending afflictions.

And the end of all these whither good, or bad, it is still trial, trial is
the end of all.

If we speak of ill temptations; if one man tempt another, the suggestions and
allurements that are used, are first by feeling his disposition, how he is
inclined, which way he may be moved, by taking measure of the foot of his
affections, seeing which way his affections work that he may draw him. Trial
is the end of that temptation.

If it be the temptations of Satan, he never tempts, but for trial, if he knew
what were in us, he would not tempt, he would convey it without temptation,
there needed no suggestion: But because he knows not what is in man (though he
can give a shrewd guess by the working of the mind, and fancy, and senses,)
therefore he makes trial, he offers temptations to the fancy, and to the
senses, to see how they stand affected to such suggestions, as he will
insinuate.

And his ways of trial are many, he has his several ways of experimental
trialls, for every action that we are conversant about, and for every
condition. If a man abound with the blessings of God, he has ways of
temptation for that, to try whither he can bring him to pride.

If he be in poverty, he has temptations for that, (and they are for trial
still he proves him to bring him to diffidence, and murmuring, and repining.

If it be any good that we do, he tries whither our hearts be of such a
temper, that we may be brought to think it is of our selves. If it be any ill,
he tries if he can gain force upon our hearts, that we may go on in
impenitency. His temptations are like the wind that is spoken of in Job, that
beat the house of Jobs Children in all the four quarters of it; he can set
upon the heart in all the quarters of it. Sometimes he will convey himself
into the Cabinet and Closet of our affections; sometimes he knocks at the Gate
of the Senses; Sometimes he will feel the pulse of the Fancy: Sometimes he
is above to tempt to pride, sometimes he is below, to tempt to despair. If he
be before us, it is to hinder us in the good we are about; if behind us, it is
to pull us back again by relapsing into sins that we have forsaken, and
repented of. If he be on the right hand, or on the left, still he has trialls
for both, to turn us out of the way: and the end of all his temptations is
still trial. First, he tries how our constitution and temper stands; and then
when he has got that, then he tries how we will take the bait again. Even the
Devils temptations are for trial.

Then, if we speak of those wherewith men are said to tempt God. Men are said
to tempt God many ways, when they murmur, and repine at his dealing. When they
doubt and distrust God for any attribute, his power, or wisdom, or goodness,
or mercy. When out of curiosity they labor to search, whither he be so just,
and powerful, and gracious, as the Scripture tells us. Men will be curious,
and busy to pry into Gods attributes; and still when they labor and search
to satisfy themselves by tempting of God these ways, it is for trial, that
we may prove whither he be so, or no. As the Pharisees tempted Christ, because
they did not know that he was the Son of God. Satan himself tempted him,
because he did but suspect then that he was the Son of God, it was for trial;
evil temptations are for trial.

And so are good too, there are good temptations of proof, whereby men prove
themselves. St. Paul calls that by the name of temptation. Prove, or try, or
tempt your selves, whither you be in the faith, or no: know you not your own
selves, etc. When a man makes inspection into his own heart, to find out how
his estate stands, how he thrives in grace, whither he decline, or no, when he
proves every grace, and brings it to the Touch stone; here he proves, and tries
his own heart, he makes trial of his obedience, of his faith, of his
patience, of his love to God, of his meekness, of his repentance, of his
growth in all. These temptations to good, are trialls.

Last of all, to bring it to the point, the good trials wherewith God is said
to tempt men, God tempts, and tries to see whither we will love him with all
our hearts, or no, God is said to tempt men principally by tribulations, they
are therefore called trialls. But he has many other ways of prooving; every
way whereby he reveals himself, is a way of trial. He has as many ways of
trial, as he has ways of revealing himself. If he give us his word, it is
for trial to prove whither we will bring forth fruit. If he take away his
word, it is for trial, to see how we will walk in the graces that he has
given us. If he multiply blessings, it is for trial, to see how thankful we
will be, and whither we will be drawn by the fair way of invitation, by
mercies: If he take away his blessings, and multiply his afflictions, it is for
trial still, to see how we will bear our selves, under the Cross, and take
his chastisement. Every way that he reveals himself, whither he send
afflictions or remove afflictions, whither he send blessing, or take away
blessings, all are for trial. Sometimes for the trial of one grace, sometimes
for the trial of another. Sometimes for the trial of obedience. Exodus 26. The
Lord your God proved, and tempted you, to see whither you would walk in his
Commandments, or no. Sometimes for the trial of our love, Exodus 16. The Lord
your God prooved you, to see whither you would love him withal your hearts.
And so for all, for every grace he sends a trial.

But we must understand, that God does not so prove for trial, as men do. We
take a trial of things, because we are ignorant, we do not know them
sufficiently; God therefore tries us, because he knows us; not that he may
have better knowledge of us, as we take trial. No, God will take trial of that
he knows already, or that he knows fully. With men every trial is taken either
for the gaining, or for the bettering of knowledge. God, that knows all
things, and that Searches the heart, sees what is in us, he discernes our
thoughts long before. There is not a word in our tongues, not the least motion
in our hearts, but he knows it, he needs not take a trial for his
satisfaction, to gain knowledge, or to better his knowledge; he knows us
better then our selves. But there are two reasons why God makes these trialls.

One reason is given by St. Jerome.

The other by St. Austin.

One reason of his trialls is, as St. Jerome says, not that he may know what
is in us, but that he may make others know; otherwise the luster, and light of
that grace that God has given, if God should not make it shine out by taking a
trial, it could not bring glory to God, if it were not exemplary to men, the
trial of grace makes it shine. He deals with us as Rupurtus says, as a
Merchant of Small-wares, a Pedlar does with his Pack: He knows all that is in
his Pack, but when he comes where Chapmen are, he rifles, and lays out all;
not that he may know, but that others may know, and be invited to buy. So God
knows the furnishing of the heart, the graces that are there, but he rifles
them, and lays them open by tribulation, that others may see the distinction
between this grace, and that, that they seeing it, may give God the glory. Not
that he may know, but that others may know. That is one reason.

Another Reason why he tempts, and prooves, and makes trial, Non ut ipse, etc.
not that he may find what is in man, but that man may find what is in himself;
we are all strangers to our selves. No man knows the things of a man, but the
Spirit that is in man, says the Apostle. Nay, we may go a little further. The
things of a man knows not man himself. It is not all that is in man that can
go to the windings, and turnings, and Labyrinthes of the heart, there are so
many partitions, and starting-holes, that man himself cannot find them. We
know not the weight of our graces, nor the depth of our infirmities and
Errors, God it is that must discover them; and how does he lay them open? By
trials, and temptations, and tribulations; there he lets us see our
infirmities, and sinfullnesse; it is as a Glass to let us see our infirmities
on the one side, and as a glass to see the weight of grace, on the other side.

We could not know the measure of our graces, but for trialls how much patience
we have, and how much faith, and how much love, and how much thankfulness,
nor any grace, a man would never be able to take the true weight of it, unless
it were thus discovered to him, and by these trialls. Therefore he tries us,
that he may discover our hearts to our selves, to make us see what he has done
for us; to make us see what we were, what we are, and what we may be, all this
is by trial.

As a Father deals thus with his Child, he takes the Child's finger and puts it
to the flame of the Candle, or the flame of the fire, and bids him prove if it
be hot. Not but that the Father knows, but that the Child is ignorant, that he
may learn to shun it. So God deals in these Trialls, he suffers us to be
brought under the flame of Tribulation, to be put into the Furnace of
afflictions, he puts our finger into the flame, that we may learn to know that
the fire is hot, and how hot the fire is that we deserve, and had had if Christ
had not come, he brings us that he may make us know it.

So, sum it up now, and then you have the end of all kind of temptations,
especially these of tribulation, they are for trial. If that be the end, there
is no reason we should be out of love with Gods chastisements. Were the end
evil, we had cause to fear, and to murmur at tribulations; but the end is for
good, and the best good of all, to bring us nearer to Heaven, to indeare us
more to God, to weane us more from the World, to make us better to understand
God, and our selves, fort he pollishment of those graces that God has given
us, for the attaining of those graces that yet we want, and for the perfecting
of all. For the pollishing of grace, and refining it, that is one end.

Were it so, that we were all grace, and all spirit, there would be no trial
then. There are two conditions of mettalls in which there needs not any trial
of the fire. One is, if it be all gold, another is, if it be all dross. If it
be all gold, it needs no purifying, if it be all dross, it will not endure it,
it is not worthy the fire. So it is with Christians, were we in the World all
gold, or all dross; there would be no trial, if we were all pure metal, all
Gold. Tribulation, and trialls are superfluous in Heaven, where the Saints
enjoy happiness, and are all pure Gold, there is no trial there, there is no
suffering, all is Gold in Heaven. On the other side, were we all dross that
there were no spirit at all, nothing of grace, then there would not be the
refining trial: for chafe, and stubble, and dross, are not purified by the
fire, but consumed, annihillate, and brought to nothing. But since our estate
is so, (as we are all in this condition of mortality) that we are part Gold,
and part Clay; Flesh, as well as Spirit, and there is a mixture of both,
thereupon for the purging away of the flesh, and for the strengthening of the
spirit, that must be brought to the Touchstone, by the fiery trial of
tribulation, that the graces may be tried, and the dross consumed, and burnt
up. Therefore let this be the conclusion.

You that so much love the pleasures of the World, that are so afraid to hear
of any day of tribulation; remember that he that has called us to the Crown,
has called us to the Cross; and the first lesson that he reads to us, is to
take grace with all disadvantages. Never look that God will give us grace, but
make sure of affliction. He gives not grace for nothing; would you have him
give grace, and not get the glory of it? How should he get the glory of it, but
by trial? How should he have the glory of patience, but for affliction? Or the
glory of thankfulness, or of pure love, but when his Servants love him most,
when his countenance is most clouded toward them? Their love, and
thankfulness, and obedience, and patience, when is it seen? In tribulation.
Therefore as our blessed Savior said, concerning the Cross that Christians
when they are called, must look for. They shall receive in this life an
hundred fold with tribulation. Be pleased to mark the place, He that forsakes
Father, or Mother, or House, or Land, shall receive an hundred fold in this
life. How? That cannot be in temporalls, it must be in spiritualls, because one
dram of grace is a hundred fold, to the World, and temporalls. Shall we receive
an hundred fold, that is, spiritual abundance? What follows? With
tribulation, with afflictions, and trials. If God give a hundred fold in
spiritualls, it is with trials. No man puts Armor upon another, but for
fight; the graces of the spirit are the Armor of Christians. Take unto you the
Armor of God, What? The shield of faith, the Helmet of Salvation, the
Breast Plate of righteousness, the Sword of the Spirit. All grace is Armor, if
God put spiritual Armor on Christians, they must look for a combat when
their Armor is on. Grace is Armor, we must look for the trial of it; for the
end of all tribulation is trial, and the end of all grace that God gives. Be
content with grace upon any seeming disadvantage, it will bring abundance of
advantage after. That is the first, the thing supposed here, When he is tried,
he must look to be tried. The end why God sends tribulations, and temptations,
is for trial, that is the first.

The next is the thing here expounded or expressed and plainly set down, that is
the time; when he is tried, then he shall receive. The Apostle adds this to
prevent a Question, having made mention of that that makes all hearts leap
after the fruition of it, the Crown of life. If any man should ask, as the
Disciples did of Christ, O Lord when shall these things be? Blessed Apostle,
when shall this Crown of life be?

For this Question it had been a sufficient answer, In due season you shall
reap if you faint not: In due season you shall have it; the time shall come,
think it not long; but that is too general. Then he draws it down more
perticularly a little: Would you know when? I will tell you, when tribulation
is ended, when the trial is fully taken; when God has sufficiently refined
you, and fitted you for Heaven, and made you as he would have you to be, when
you are tried. But tell us more perticularly, when shall this be? After one
tribulation? It may be not. It is with many of us, as Florus says of the
Gauls at the first brunt they would be stout, and play the men more then men,
at the second they would grow feeble. So many Christians it may be will endure
one course of tribulation, and temptation, and endure stou^ly; but when they
meet with another course that shakes them, and makes them hang down the head,
then they deject themselves. Therefore we must not think to have it always after
one tribulation; one tribulation is but a degree, or preparative to another;
when God has fitted us for one, we must look for more. When then, at the
second, or third, or fourth, or more? No, the Apostle sets it indefinitly,
because he would not go about to limit God, the holy one of Israel, you
cannot tell, whither at two, or three, or four, but in Gods best time, when he
thinks fittest, when the trial is done, when the trial is fully made. So this
word now, it is a word simple here set down but it stands for a defective
word, as the Scripture uses such words often times. When he is tried, that is
thus much, when he is thoroughly tried, when he is approvably tried. The word is
(...); when he has endured tribulation so, as to get Gods testimony, and
approbation: When with Gods approbation he has endured tribulation, and is
thus thoroughly tried, then he shall receive the Crown. That is in brief thus
much, then he shall receive the Crown when he can say with our blessed
Savior, I have done the work that thou gave me to do, Father, glorify me
with thine own self; then, when he can say with St. Paul, I have fought the
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth is
laid up for me the Crown of righteousness. When a man is once come to this
^pshot, he may look for the Crown, not till he have done his work, and gone
through the labor, till then it stands not with reason that he should receive
the Crown, which way soever we take it.

Whither we consider the sufferings,

Or the reward.

If we consider the sufferings, admit that sufferings be, as they are as
Physic to the soul, it is not fit the Plaster should be removed till the
wound be healed; when the wound is healed, the Plaster will fall off. God
takes not away the Physic of tribulation, till he has wrought the cure, and
done the work perfectly.

Again, if we take these temptations, and tribulations as trialls, before he
have given sufficient proof, he takes not away the trial: there are other
graces of God justifiable, as wisdom, so patience, and the rest must be
justified. It is not fit that the fire of tribulation should be removed till
the Gold be purified; then he will quench the Furnace, and take away the fire.
When the Trial is wrought, he will take away the affliction. So it is, if we
look to the suffering.

Then if we consider the reward, there is good reason considering the reward;
Either,

As the reward of Conquerours,

Or the wages of Laborers.

Does any Captain give donatives till the warfare be ended? When the Conquest
is gotten, then the rewards are given. Does any Master pay his Servants or
Laborers till the work be done? When the work is done, then Call the
Laborers, and give every man his wages; every man a penny. Will you have the
wages before the work be done? What is the work?

The work of Action, The work of Suffering,
Till these be done, that we can say with our blessed Savior, I have done the
work thou gave me to do; the work of Action and passion, look not for the
wages. Christ shows it in Mat. 12. When even was come, then call the
Laborers. What is the even? Take it either way, for, The even of the World,
The even of man's Life,


If you take the even for the even of the World, as St. Paul does, Which the
Lord shall give me at that day. And our blessed Savior in another place in the
Gospel, The Harvest is the end of the World; then the righteous shall shine as
the Sun in the Firmament. Then, when the end of the World comes. It is true
that way.

Or take it for the end of life, it is true that way, look not for the Crown
of immortallity till this life be ended: while we are in this World, we are
still subject to sin and suffering, but he that is capable, and fitly
quallified for that estate, must neither be in a state peaceable, nor
sufferable; not sufferable, or subject to passion, he that is fit for the
Crown: Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; that is, in the
state of immortallity, then flesh and blood must be laid aside. When is that?
When corruption has put on incorruption, when the mortallity and sinfullnesse
of flesh and blood, is laid aside. Flesh and blood shall inherit, but it must
be purified, and sanctified, and fitted: Flesh and blood clothed with
immortallity, and incorruption. When is that? In part at the end of life, and
in whole at the end of the World, there shall be the whole Crown, the
possession of life at the end of the World; the half Crown, the Coronet is
set upon the soul when the work is done, when we have finished our course, not
till then, and then we may be sure of it, then we shall come to hear that word
of approbation, after all the trial is taken, Well done good and faithful
Servant. That word is the Crown, that word is as much worth as Heaven; there
needs no other Crown but Gods approbation, what Crown needs there more then
the golden approbation of God? It is true, that word will not be spoken till
then; to that St. James alludes, when he tells us of the time to stop our
stomachs, They shall receive the Crown of life, then when they are wholly, and
thoroughly, and approvably tried. So much for that part, the first appendix that
is made to these words concerning the course of Gods dispensing the Crown of
life, Then, when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life.

SERMON IIII.
James 1.12. Which the Lord has promised to them that love him.


IN the handling of these words I shall fall upon my last days argument, The
Crown of life, but with new variety, with other Meditations, I shall present
it again; but as our blessed Savior appeared to the two Disciples in another
form, and other considerations then before. Before I let you see it as a
Crown of possession, now, as a Crown of promise: I then set it before you as
the Apostle does in the former words, as Corona praeliantium, the Crown of
Conquest, of those that fight; and now I must present it to you as Corona
amantium, the Crown of those that love. The variety arises from the diversity
of the words as they are here set down by the Apostle; for here are three
gradations of the description of this Crown of glory.

Communis Propria Magis propria
First, it is set down to us in a general word, which comprehends all the
several branches and excellencies of that glory, by the name of blessedness,
Blessed is the man.

Then there is a special word of that general, when it is called, the Crown
of life.

Then last of all, there is another special, a more special of that special,
when it is referred to the grace of love; the Crown of life which God has
promised to them that love him. So this is the part that I am now to speak of,
which is the close of the verse. And there are two things that are observeable
in it.

One on Gods part, it is Corona promissa, the Crown promised.

Another on our part, it is Corona amantium, the Crown of them that love him.

These are the two things I am to speak of.

I begin with the first of these, the first branch of this last part of the
description, that has respect to him that gives the glory, Corona repromissa,
the Crown that is promised. The Apostle adds these words out of a great deal
of wisdom, and foresight. He lets us see by this word that he adds here, both
who is the Donor, and what is the conveyance of this excellent glory.

If you ask about the Donor, the same is he that performs, that promises,
that is God. He that gives us our first being, it is he only that gives us our
well being. The being of nature is from him, and so is the being of glory. Nam
ille solus, etc. (as St. Austin says very well) he only can make man happy,
that made man at the first. It is that that we all shall know one day, if we be
so happy as to inherit it, when God translates us thither, that it is Christ's
glorious hand that sets on this Crown. I but God will have us know it now
before we come to it; therefore least any man should be ignorant, he does not
reserve the knowledge, as long as he does the thing, the thing shall be given
then, it is promised now, in the mean time, it is God that has promised it,
it is God that gives it. That is the first thing that the Apostle implies.

Then if we look to the manner of the conveyance, it is in this word, it is by
promise, it comes to us by deed, by good deed, good assurance. There is no
better deed then that that is written by the Finger of God, and sealed to us by
the blood of Christ. The promise depends both upon the merit of Christ, and
upon the truth of God. He lets us see therefore the conveyance in this word,
that though we cannot yet come to see the glory of the crown in the thing, we
may see it in the conveyance and promise. As he that is the Heir apparent to
any great matter, but is not come to the possession, though he cannot behold
the inheritance as his own with the eye of sense, he may with the eye of
reason; if he cannot read it where it is Situated, he may in his deeds and
conveyances. It is all that the Saints had to show for Heaven, when they were
on Earth, they could see Heaven in the promise, they could see and read it in
the conveyance. Abraham did see Christ's day, and he that sees Christ's day of
his first appearing, by faith can see his second appearing. The Apostle tells
us Heb. 11. of all the Saints in the Old Testament, though they inherited not
the possession of the promises, they saw them a far off in the tenure of the
promises. God deals with us, as he did with Moses, because he would not bring
him to the Land of Canaan, he carries him to the Mount, and shows it him there;
he shows it in a Vision, in the Vision, and glass of the promises, before he
translates us, he shows us what Heaven is. Indeed when we come to Heaven, there
we shall see from the Mount of Vision, but here we may look from the Valley of
Vision; that we may know what the conveyance is, whence it comes, the Apostle
adds this word, The Crown of life, the Crown promised.

Yet he tells us not where it is promised, nor in what place of Scripture. The
Apostles were full of quotations, yet sometimes they did forbear them too. It
had been but an easy labor, but yet it was needless, being a promise of a
thing so precious, as indeed all the promises are precious promises, as the
Apostle speaks: being a promise so precious, he supposed that every man that
was conversant in the word of God, would be sure to treasure up these
Scriptures, of all Scripture, promises, and of all promises, those that
concern Heaven are most precious. A man that accounts the Book of God a
Jewel, the most precious of all the Jewels, are these promises that concern
Heaven. He supposed that every man would pluck these, and treasure, and lay
them up in the Storehouse of his heart, that he may pick comfort from them in
the time of need; he names them not therefore that every man might get these.

It was needless in another respect too; there is hardly any Book in the
whole Bible, in which there are not promises of ^alvation. It is the sum of
both Testaments, there are promises of the Crown of life every where. In the
Psalms often times; With thee is the Well of life. In thy presence, is fulness
of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. When I awake I
shall behold thy face in righteousness. You have it in the Book of the Proverbs
often repeated, Length of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand
riches and glory. You have it in the Prophets often. Those that are just shall
shine as the stars of the Firmament, in glory. It dropped often from the mouth of
Christ, and often from the mouths and pens of the Apostles. What need was there
to point out any place where the promise was made, when it is made in every
place? A man cannot open the Bible almost but he shall hit on it. God would
plant this foundation of faith in every part; any man that is not conversant in
reading the whole, let him cast his eye on any part, he shall meet with this:
there are frequent iterations of it, it was renewed daily, being the grand
promise of the rest, it was fit it should have many repetitions, and many
renovations.

There was no way it could be conveyed to us by any assurance, but by promise,
even the least blessings; there is no blessing that we look for in act, but it
is conveyed by promise. If it be comfort to a distressed man, that is often
repeated. Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease
you. If it be the promise of support and strength in sickness, that is
repeated. He shall make all his bed in his sickness. What say I more? If there
be promises of less blessings, there must needs be of the greatest, that that
comprehends all in it, the promise of glory, the Crown of life, it is the
course that God observes in Scripture, he gives all by promise, he gives it
twice, because he would be sure to give Heaven to us, he gives Heaven in the
PROMISE; that is, Heaven in hope, and then in act, that is in possession and
fruition.

There is a great deal of reason, if we look on our selves, or on God.

First, look on God, it was fit he should give it by promise.

Partly, for the better testification of his truth, that he might appear to be
Deus verax, a God of his word. The truth of God could not appear, unless
there were a word to make good, and fulfill his gift, and that could not be,
but by promise; this glorious Attribute would fall to the ground but for that;
there might be some suppositions of him to be a God of infinite goodness, and
purity, but we had not had experience of it but by promise.

And then for the demonstration of his wisdom, that he would not give Heaven,
without advise and deliberation and not as we give, rashly. He took counsel,
the gift of glory is a work of counsel: a work of counsel in the first
ordaining, Ephesians. 1. We are predestinate according to the Counsel and purpose
of his will. God does all advisedly, as he begins with counsel, so he carries
it along with counsel: there is no better testimony of his wisdom, then to
give it first by promise, he disposes it by degrees, that he may appear to be
a wise God, he gives it by deliberation, and therefore by promise.

Lastly, for the better demonstration of his goodness, that he might appear
to be Deus bonus. Promise is a kind of debt; he that gives a promise, makes
himself a Debtor. Whereas we are all Debtors to God, debtors to his justice,
in regard of our sins; debtors to his love, for our selves, and all that we
have, see his goodness, that whereas we are debtors to him, he condiscends to
make himself by promise, and stipulation, debtors to us, as St. Austin very
well, Vt sicut, etc. That as we should praise God as the Donor of all the good
we have, so we should depend upon him as the holy debtor of all the good we
look for, to testify this great goodness, he gives it, first ^y promise, and
that because it is a long time before we come to possession: God stays our
stomachs by a promise, as a bit before the heavenly supper: When that Supper
comes, then we have fruition, and because we may have desires hot toward
Heaven, and our stomachs sharp, God stays them, and gives us a little of the
first fruits, and these are in the promises.

And then there is good reason, if we consider our selves. The reason that we
are so frail, and weak in faith, and have so much trouble, and conflicts, and
agonies in our spirits, is because we do not converse with the promises, we
treasure not up these. The promises are a great support of three graces.

First, they are the great support of faith, faith would sinck, and lag,
unless it were for the promises. The promises are to faith, as Aaron, and Hur,
were to Moses. Moses hands were feeble, and then Aaron, and Hur, bring a stone,
and set it under. When Moses had the stone under, and Aaron and Hur supported
his hands, then Israel prevailed, Moses was strengthened. The promise is as
that stone, it brings the Rock Christ, it makes us look to the Rock that is
higher then our selves: It brings the Rock and sets it not only above us, but
under us. The promise undersets faith, and keeps the building from tottering.
Nothing can support it more then the promise. For in that the promise supports
it, God supports it, and all in all his attributes. There is somewhat of all the
attributes of God in the promise of his wisdom, of his truth, of the power,
and justice of God, all these support says. A man has enough if he have but
one Attribute to support him in any exigent: How strong is he that has all
these in the promise? Because God is fai^hfull, and just, and true, the promise
it is the support of faith.

As it is the support of faith, so it is of hope, and of patience. There is no
grace that has so great correspondency with the promise, as hope, and patience.

The promise teaches hope to live by Providence, whereas every man can live by
the present, the promise supports hope, and makes it live by the future, by
reversion, it instructs hope to live by providence, not only in temporalls,
but spiritualls.

And as it instructs hope, so it does patience, it is a great cherisher of
patience. Patience is the grace that waits, and so does hope; hope is patience
Sister, or if you will, Patience is the Daughter of hope, and the promise is
the supporter of both. The promise will teach hope, and patience to depend upon
God, not only for the thing he gives, but for the time, there is a great deal
of comfort in the time, it will make it submit to Gods order, and method. What
is Gods method? This, before he gives possession, he gives reversion, the
promise is the reversion, the promise is the support of hope, and patience,
there is a great deal of comfort comes to a Christian this way.

A worldly man is all for the present, he cares not for the future, if he can
be happy for the present, that is the pitch he goes to. A worldly man desires
to take (if it be possible) his wages before hand, he cares not for taking any
thing at the last day. He is nothing for reversion, he would take all, as much
as he could before. That is the reason he is left void of comfort at the hour
of death, because he took up all, he knows not where to take up more, as
Christ says, He has his reward, he has his portion in this life: he has no
more to take, unless it be that, Son, remember thou in thy lifetime
receivedst pleasure, and likewise Lazarus pain, now he is comforted, and thou
art tormented, he cannot take it, and expect it. A godly man contrary, he
desires not to work for present payment, but he works to a day, he knows that
God is a good Play Master, he would not have all for the present; he knows the
less he has now, the more he shall have after, because he lives by the
promise, he lives by hope, and hope makes him patient, and the promise supports
them both.

It is the grace of hope that sets a man in Heaven, when he is on Earth, and
the promise sets hope in Heaven: Hope cannot go to Heaven, but by the promise.
A Christian could not go to Heaven on Earth, and take a spiritual flight, but
for hope. The promise brings down Heaven to the heart; it inverts that Speech
of St. Paul, he says, While we are present in the body, we are absent from the
Lord. But hope turns it, and makes it while we are in the body, it teaches us
how to be present in Heaven. Here is the benefit of hope, and because of hope,
therefore of the promise.

Therefore if we would look for comfort, let us look to the treasuring up of
the promises, the promises support. There is no condition that befalls a
Christian in this life, but there is a promise for it, there is some promise
for it; whither it be of prosperity or adversity, of life, or of death, of
falling, of want, there are promises for all, and the promise will still keep
the head above water, what ever the affliction be, it will still keep life and
soul together. If there be no b^ame of comfort appear, yet the promise will
support in the midst of all distress. If a man grasp but a promise, he is
well enough. If the soul be in perplexity, and doubting, it will settle it; if
it be in affliction, the promise will comfort it; if it be in any distress,
the promise will afford consolation, therefore make much of the promises. If
salvation be promised to believers, it is hope that presently grasps, and lays
hold of it, it does it by the promise. If forgiveness be promised to the
penitent, hope looks after it, and lays hold of it, and it does that by the
promise. If it be the Crown to ^erseverance, hope looks after that too, and
lays hold of it, it does it still by the promise. Hope is the Watchman, or
the Sentinel, among the graces, as a Watchman upon a Tower will discover
before all others that are below, when day breaks; if there be but the breaking
of any day light, any beam of comfort to be seen, hope will discover it, and
pick it up.

Though every grace be as an eye, and hereupon the Apostle says that the
Saints in the Revelations, are full of eyes before and behind. It is not only
true of the state of glory, but of grace, every grace is an eye, devotion, and
prayer, that is as an eye, by which the devout soul looks up to God. And faith
that is an eye by which a beleiving soul spies God; patience, that is as an eye
to look after comfort in affliction. Every grace is as an eye, but hope that is
an eye that sees for all; the sight of hope is serviceable to all other graces,
whatsoever they are. It is the same to the soul, that an Anchor is to the Ship,
the promise is the same to hope, as hope, is to the soul; the promise is the
Anchor of hope, as hope is the Anchor of the soul. It is better then other
Anchors, for in other Anchors the ship is above the Anchor, that is let down
below, it takes hold upon the Earth in the Bottom. But here the contrary, the
ship of the soul that is below, but the Anchor is above, the Anchor is in
Heaven, there a man has his hold, hope is that Anchor; hope is in Heaven,
because the promise is in Heaven, Hope and the Promise cannot be Severed, hope
is therefore an Anchor in Heaven, because the promise is seated there. There
being so much comfort to be drawn from the promise, so much support to faith,
and hope, and patience, so many discoveries of the goodness, and wisdom, and
truth of God, that all these might appear together, and all be couched under
one word, hereupon after he had told us of the Crown of life, he adds this
word, so full of comfort, and enjoyment for the present, as well as for the
future; therefore he says, that God has promised. That is the consideration
in respect of God. Now I go on to another consideration on our part^ there is
another clause, the Crown that is promised to them that love God. Here is that
that is required on our part, to get our title, and interest in the promise. A
man would think that the Apostle should rather have varied it in this clause,
though love be an excellent grace, and as much interressed in the promise, as
any other, yet it was not so pertinent one would think to mention the love of
God in this, after he had spoken of suffering, if it had run ordinarily, and
regularly, it should have run thus, Blessed is the man that endures
temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life, which God
has promised to those that suffer for him. Having made mention of tribulation
before, a man would have thought he would have continued in the course of
speaking, to those that suffer for him. As Christ does, Blessed are those that
suffer for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Or if the
Apostle would have set it larger, yet he might have annexed it to other graces
that are comprehensive as well as love, as the Crown that is promised,
Timentibus, to those that fear him. Or Vincentibus, to them that overcome and
persevere. Or Credentibus, to those that believe. Or Colentibus to those that
serve him; all these have interest in the Crown of life: But he could not set
it better, it is set by the spirit of God, but we may see good reason that the
Crown is promised to those that love him.

It is not Improper, It is not Strait, It is not Exclusive,
It is not improper, having begun to speak of suffering, blessed are they that
endure, and suffer tribulation, and tentation, he ends with love why so? there
is good reason: nothing enables a man more to suffer for the name of god, then
love. God never thinks we suffer for him, if we do not love him. There is no
burden so light, but it is heavy if love be wanting; and there is no burden
so heavy, but it is light where love is. As Bernard says, there is nothing
that love cannot make easy, and light, every yoke, Solus amor, etc. As St.
Austin says well, love is only that that finds no difficulty, it leaps over
every impediment, and obstacle, there is nothing can stand in the way of love,
to keep it from Christ. Nothing is hard to love, God cannot give a Command so
severe to the eye of flesh, and blood, he cannot lay so much weight of
suffering, but love will bear it, it makes all things easy. The Apostle St.
John, he tells us in 1 John 1. of keeping the Commandments by Love; and then
follows, This is love to keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are
not grievious. Why are they not grevious? Love accounts every thing easy.
Therefore, because he would show the way how we are to suffer, and to come to
the Crown, he says he has reserved it, For them that love him, because love
will endure, and bear all things, love will endure any thing for God. There is
good reason, and it was very proper, that the Apostle should place it so.

Secondly, it is not exclusive, it does not exclude other graces that are not
mentioned. The Crown is promised in other places, to other virtues. There is
no virtue but has the promise of the Crown made to it in some place.

See the wisdom of the spirit of God, he so gives honor to one grace, that he
passes not by another. As you have it concerning the Saints in the Old
Testament, there is an honor done to every Saint, sometimes to one, sometimes
to another. Sometimes Job is memorable for patience, sometimes Abraham for
faith, David for repentance: There is no Saint of God in Scripture, but has
some remarkable note of commendation; God so honors one, that he does not
forget the rest, every one in his way and kind. So it is with graces, they are
all amiable, and lovely, and have commendation from Heaven, but not all at the
same time. Every one interresseth in the Crown, but sometime one has the
promise, sometimes another, to encourage us to all. That we may be encouraged
to patience, there is the promise to that, that we may be stirred up to purity,
it is promised to that. Again, to faith, the promise is made to that, and so
of the rest, every grace has the promise: therefore because in other places
the promise is made to fear, and faith, and patience, and purity, the Apostle
here singles out the Mistress grace, and settles the promise on her, on love,
they are not excluded though they be not named.

Lastly, it is not a strait, narrow expression, but very full, so full that it
comprehends all other expressions. Tell me what grace you would have, cannot I
find it in love? Because love is the Bond of perfection; in that it is made to
love, it is made to all; there is none wanting, where love is, Love is the
fullfilling of the Law, it is all the Commandments, in that it is all the
Commandments, it is all duties, all duties are in love; in that it is all
duties, it is all graces; if love be named, all is named. As there is no grace
that is in grain, that has the true stamp, if love be wanting, and there is
no grace that shall ever carry the Crown, where love is not. St. Paul makes it
clear, 1 Cor. 13. Knowledge, faith, Alms^deeds, suffering afflictionss are all
nothing without love. Though I have all knowledge, and all faith, that I could
remove Mountains; though I spoke with the tongue of men and Angels, though I
should give my body to be burned, and feed the poor with my goods, and have
not love, all is nothing. There is no grace, if love be wanting, that c^n have
interest in the Crown, because there can be no truth of grace, there can be no
truth of faith, no truth of obedience to God, where love is wanting. As all is
wanting, if love be wanting, so ^very grace is present, if love be present;
therefore in that the promise is made here to love, it is made to all; there is
good reason of the variation. That you may see the reason of it, the Apostle
St. Paul in 1 Cor. 2. when he quotes that place out of Isaiah 46. he varies the
word, being guided by the Spirit of God: the word in Isaiah is, Eye has not
seen, nor ^are has heard, the things that God has prepared for them that
wait on him. The Apostle quotes the place, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
the things that God has prepared for them that love him. Implying, that where
there is love, there is waiting, where there is love, there is all. So, though
suffering be not mentioned, suffering is there, and every grace, it is a larg
expression.

Therefore that we may see it is large, the number is varied, there is an
alteration of the number, as well as of the grace. He begins the Proposition in
the Singular number, Blessed is the man. See the wisdom of the Apostle, it
should according to the tenure of the same number, run thus, He shall receive
the Crown of life which God has promised to him that loves him. No, he varies
the number, and says, That God has promised to them that love him. Least any
that are not called to suffering should doubt of the Crown, they are blessed,
and shall receive the Crown of life that suffer, but God has not called me to
afflictions; he sets a gap open of comfort for them here, it is for them, and
for all that love him.

It is ordinary in Scripture to enlarge the promise, Christ inlargeth the
precept, That which I say to one, I say to all, watch. As he there inlargeth
the precept, so in another place he inlargeth the promise, I pray not for these
alone, but for all that shall believe in my name to the end of the World. St.
Paul follows it, 2 Timothy 4. The Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day. I, Paul shall have it, but none
else? Yes, not only to me, but to all that love him. So St. James here varies
in a heavenly strain, he pronounces, Blessed is the man that endures
tribulation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life. I, he
shall, but none else? yes, not only he, but it is promised to all that love
him. It is no strait expression.

To draw all to a head, you see the sum of it is thus much. It sets down the
qualification of the person that shall be capable of the Crown of glory, here
is the qualification, he must be one that loves God. It sets down again the
qualification of that person that will stoutly, and valiantly endure
tribulations, he must get abundance of the love of God in his heart. If we
suffer not, if God lay it on us, we shall never reign, and if we love not, we
will never suffer.

There is no promise of God, but has a qualification going along with it. It
is a great error among us, we are ready to catch at the promise, but never to
take notice of the qualification. There is never a promise made, but the person
must be so and so qualified, there is a condition goes along with the promise.
The condition is the qualification. As if it be the promise of forgiveness,
the qualification of the person is, it is to those that are penitent, that
repent, God never gave forgiveness, where there was not the work of
repentance. If it be the promise of Salvation, there is the qualification of
the person, he must be a Beleiver, faith comes in: God never gives Salvation,
where he does not first work faith, to lay hold of it. If it be the promise of
glory, there is a qualification too, perseverance, To those that continue in
well doing, there shall be glory, and honor, and immortality; there shall be
eternal life to them.

God never gave the Crown of glory, nor never will, but where he gives the
grace of perseverance to hold out, here is the qualification. If it be this
Crown that is here spoken of; here is the qualification, those that suffer
tentation, there is one; those that love God, there is the great qualification.

If therefore we look to have a true infallible interest in the promise, let us
look to get the propriety of the qualification. If we be not persons qualified,
we have no interest in the promise. Many men go on in sin, and still flatter
themselves with hope in the promise, presumptuous men talk of forgiveness as
familiarly as if it were written by the hand of God. Impenitent men that
forsake not sin, talk of glory, and Heaven, and of inheriting the Crown, and
hope for that; it is a poor hope, there is no qualification, God never gave
them a promise. There can be no hope of Heaven, where there is not a promise;
there can be no interest where there is not a promise; God never gave a promise
of forgiveness to the impenitent, to men that go on in sin, but that forsake
them; he never promised Heaven to the presumptuous man, but to him that lays
hold of it by faith. If we will have interest in the promise, we must get the
qualification.

On the other side, where there is this condition, and qualification, though
our names be not written upon the promise, yet the names of all that are so
qualified, are as good as written. There is no promise, but has the names of
all the persons that are so qualified, graven on it, not expressly, but
virtually. If the promise be made to faith, every beleiver is in that promise.
If it be a promise to repentance, every penitents name is written there, as if
it were set there, he has an interest: where there is a qualification, there
cannot be a missing of the promise. Look for the qualification, and for this
qualification of love, Those that love God.

It is true, there are no limits, or bounds set down, that is our great
comfort; it is not said those that love God much, nor those that love God most,
but simply to those that love him, to let us see, that as much love shall have
a great reward, so any love if it be but little, shall have some; God will not
quench the smoking flax, if it be but a spark of love, he will cherrish that.
If it be less then a spark, a smoke of love, he will cherrish that. Yet
labor to get abundance, it must not be a weak remiss love that is bestowed on
God, the object is infinite, the act must answer the object. We must make our
love, we cannot make it infinite, we must extend it as near infinite, as we
can come. It must not be Amor remissus, or Intermissus, but perfectus, and
assiduus. True love observe; no mean, it keeps no measure; no bounds can be
set to true love, the love of God will enlarge, and break out more and more. We
should love him wholly, and solely, we should love him so, as to love nothing
besides, we should love him so, as to love all things in him, and for him, and
without him nothing. We should love him with all our heart, and soul, and mind,
and strength; there are four things; that is, to love him with every faculty,
and with the strength of every faculty. If I had four souls (as some
Philosophers dreamed that we had 3.) all those four were too little; were a
man all soul, all love, all that were too little to be bestowed on God. It is a
high reach, it is true indeed, but we need not despair, though it be a high
reach, it is attainable by us, because it has been attained by others. The
Saints before, are magnified in Scripture, for their love of God. We have the
same means, the same helps, and motives, and the same encouragements. If love
be wanting (as it is very much in the World) the reason is, because men do not
labor to thrive, and grow in the love of God. God deprives us of the comfort
of the love of himself, because we have no more love one to another. But yet
if we will apply our selves to the means, love is recoverable, it is not all
dead, nor all the sparks of love, it may be blown to a greater flame. The
means are various.

One way whereby we may profit in the love of God, is this, to empty our
hearts of all carnal love, whither it be the love of the World, or of our
selves. There is nothing that stands more between the love of God, and the
heart, then carnal, Worldly love, and above all, this doting love of our
selves. Every man is for himself, we all seek our selves, and not the things
that are Christ's, says the Apostle, and we all love our selves, and not the
things that belong to God, it is very rare to be found, the love of God, in
sincerity. The reason is, the love of our selves, is so ingrafted, and Printed
in our hearts, that it cannot be gotten out. As he that will take his hand full
of Corn, must first empty his hand, if it be full of Sand, or Earth, or
Gravel. So, if we will replenish our hearts with the love of God, there must
first be an evacuation, an emptying, an expulsing, and carrying out of carnal
love, the love of the great World about us, and the love of the little World,
the love of our selves. If any man be a lover of the World, the love of the
Father is not in him, says St. John. The love of the World, and the love of
God cannot consist together. That is the first step to be taken, to love God,
to put the World out of our hearts, and to go out of our selves. Christ
therefore gives that rule, He that will come after me, let him deny himselve.
He that will love God must unlove himself. We dote upon our selves, we are all
for our selves, therefore we are nothing for God.

That is one step, to love God.

When we have emptied our hearts of all carnal self-love, and Worldly love,
then there is another means, to consider with our selves often, to call
ourselves to those meditations, what those motives are, that make God so
amiable; how much beauty, and goodness there is in God. So much beauty, that
all the beauty of the creatures, even of the Angels, further then there is
something of God in them, is deformity to the excellency of God; all the glory
of Heaven, further then it is a reflection of Gods glory it is nothing to Gods
beauty.

And the goodness of God, how great it is, and how great to us, to love us,
and to love us when we were Enemies, and in so great a measure to love us, as
to give his Son to die for us; to love us so much as to prepare a place for us.
If his love reflect upon our hearts, it will beget love again; if we come once
to think how much God loves us, how will it reflect love back? One reason we
love him so little is, we do not consider how he has loved us, and how
Beautiful, and Amiable his presence is.

When we have brought our selves to these meditations, another step is to be
frequent, and conversant in the word of God, it is the lively picture of the
love of God. There are veins, and passages of Gods love, and incentives to
love him in every part; we shall not meet with any piece of Scripture, but it
will kindle some part of love to God. He that would Print love, let him Print
the Bible in his heart; if we converse with the word of God, that gives
documents everywhere of the love of God.

That is another step.

Then the fourth, that is the step, and ascent of prayer. A man cannot love God
without divine prayer. He that loves God, will knock at the gate of love, love
is not to be had, but from the God of love. Says St. Austin, pray if you will
get the love of God, that he would open the door. Prayer will fetch every
grace, so prayer will fetch love; for prayer is an argument of love. We cannot
have recourse to God in prayer, but there will be the flight and ascent of
love, when any Love-suite is sent to God, it is not lost, he that begs love,
begs all; Lord that I may love thee: How much love will this prayer fetch? That
is another step to attain the love of God.

Then, when we have made this step, there is one more, the often inquisition,
that we make into our own hearts, and blame our selves that we love him so
little. O when a man is offended with himself for any thing that is contrary,
it makes him diligent to attain it. A Christian that knows what belongs to
the love of God, how does he blame, and condemn himself, that he loves God so
little? That he began to love him so late? How does he grudg that any thing
should carry any part of his heart, or of his love from God? He thinks the love
lost that is cast upon the Creature, he thinks himself a thief that he should
steal any love from God, that we should rob God of our love, and obedience, we
rob him then of all, there is nothing that God desires, but our love, therefore
in this regard it is, that the Apostle sets here the qualification, Those that
love him.

If we take love single, then the promise is made to love, to love first of all
graces, love has the first promise, it has pre-eminence in the graces, and
pre-eminence in the Crown, it has the first portion.

Then take it as it is joined, and is in concatination with other graces, it
has not only the chief place in the promise, but all, because it is all, it
includes all graces, and gifts, being accepted of God, as all; the Apostle sets
it down, to stir us up above all things to take care to have our hearts filled
and replenished with the love of God: the promise is made to love, They shall
inherit, and receive the Crown of life, which God has promised to them that
love him. *

THE SAINTS HERITAGE: DELIVERED IN ONE SERMON, BY That Learned, and reverend
Divine, RICHARD HOLSWORTH, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Vice Chancellor of
Cambridge; Master of Emmanuell College, and late Preacher at PETER'S POOR in
LONDON.

Psalm. 16.6. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, yea, I have a
goodly Heritage.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons in Alders-gate-streete. 1650.

PSALM. 119.111. Thy testimonies have I taken as a Heritage for ever; for they
are the rejoicing of my heart.


THIS Psalm it is penned in the same strain that Solomon's Book of Proverbs
is, it is not enlarged by production, but by coaugmentation. As in that Book,
so in this Psalm, there are many passages (even all) that are very precious
but they have no great dependence one part on another. There is in this Psalm
as many several ejaculations, as there are Sentences there, but yet there is
no good documentall dependence between them.

The passages of this Psalm are rather the ebolitions of a devout ^oul, then
any continued narration: A kind of dependence there is, but it is like that
that was between the links of those Rings that St. Austin speaks of, that were
touched with a Lodestone. The parts they do hang one upon another, not by
rules of Art, but by the touch of the Spirit. And yet that is set forth with
that variety, that a man that reads the Psalm will think that the Prophet
David was in all the several kinds, and sorts of Divine tempers. In some
passages you have him transported with the rapture of admiration; in another
breaking forth into humble devout supplication; then again, into penitential
confession; then into holy purposes and resolutions; and then again, making of
serious, and solemn protestations to walk in the Commandments of God; and to
this head we are to refer this Verse that now I have read to you.

It is a holy protestation that the Psalmist makes, by way of Remonstrance; or
declaration, to testify the great esteem that he had of the Commandments of
God, and the comfort he received by them.

Therefore I have now made choice of it, to follow the Scripture which I last
handled, as a supply of that which was not there expressed. That Scripture showed
to us how a Christian may draw comfort to himself in the time of Tribulation,
from the consideration of the future Crown of glory, that is referred to the
other life. And here now we have a Foundation of comfort laid down to us for
the present, to be had, and only to be had in the word of God, in the
testimonies that are divine, which were the rejoicing of David's heart, and so
of all others in the same condition.

It is set forth to us in this excellent example, the person of him that penned
the Psalm, whose heart was more deeply stricken with the wound of love toward
the Commandments of God, then any creature that ever breathed upon the Earth,
and better versed in them. By making inquiry into that that was his practice,
we shall the better learn what should be our own. For that purpose I will
divide the words only into these two parts There is David's Profession, There
is David's Motive,


The Profession in these words, Thy testimonies have I taken for a heritage for
ever.

The motive in these, For they are the rejoicing of my heart.

The profession is one of those many, that he makes in this Psalm, but more
complete, and full then any, if not then all of the rest. He says in other
places of the Psalm, of Gods Commandments, that he had them in esteem above
gold, above fine Gold, above all riches; he comes more near home to the point
in this testification here, and it is more full, when he says he esteemed them
as his Heritage, as his lot, and portion, he makes them both, as Lands, as
goods, as all; above all temporal things whatsoever. That we may see it now
more fully, let us,

First consider what it is, that the Psalmist here speaks of.

Then what it is that he testifies of it.

The thing here spoken of, is the word of God, couched under that name. The
testimonies of the Lord. Thy testimonies. It is a relative name given to the
word of God, as indeed most of the names whereby it is called in Scripture (if
not all) are relative.

Some in reference to God, Some in reference to Man, Some in reference to Both,
In regard of God himself, the word is called Voluntas domini, the will of the
Lord, because it contains in it the declaration of his will and pleasure to be
wrought by us. It is called, Verbum domini, the word of the Lord, because it
was published by himself, Viva voce, at the first, when he gave the
Commandments, and voce spiritus, by the secret voice of the Spirit after, when
he inspired the Prophets, and Apostles to pen it. Then it is called, Statuta
Domini, the Statutes of the Lord, because he has stablished, and ratified it
to be the rule of truth, and life, and Salvation for ever.

Then in regard of man, it is called Lex Domini, the Law of the Lord, Quia
ligat, it binds him to perform, and to obey, and Timor Domini, the fear of
the Lord, because it begets in every one that is acquainted with it, a holy
ravishing, and fear, both of the nature, and power, and judgments of God.

Then in regard of both, it is sometimes called Mandata domini, the Commands of
the Lord to be performed by us, and Judicia domini, because it contains the
judgments of the Lord, to be executed upon us, if we break it. And Testimonia
Domini, the Testimonies of the Lord. The Testification, (as one says) between
God and his people; both that they receive this Law, and engage themselves to
obedience, and conformity to it. So now this linck of words and names has
brought us to the name here used. A name more frequent then many of the rest,
and more often used, when the Speech is, not only of the word of God it self,
but of any thing that has reference to it.

First, the Tables of the Law, that contain the Commandments, they have this
word on them, they are called the Tables of testimony. Then the Ark that
contained these Tables, that has this word, it is called, the Ark of the
testimony. Then the Tabernacle that held the Ark, had this word stamped on it,
it is called, The Tabernacle of Testimony. Here they hang, the Tabernacle held
the ARK, the Ark held the Tables, the Tables held the Law; it transmitted, by
the power of it, this name to all that had reference to it. And it is fitly
called testimonies.

Respectu Sui, Respectu Dei, Respectu Nostri,
In regard of it self. First, because it was a Law given at first by many
solemn testifications, as one observes. Lex and evangelium, etc. The Law, and
the Gospel, were given under testimony.

Besides, therefore the testimony, because it is the testification of all
Divine sacred truths, of all things that concern Salvation. The Scriptures
only give witness to themselves, there is no truth does so, besides Divine
truths, and the Commands of God. And Salvian gives the reason very well, it
must needs be, Incorruptum testimonium, an incorrupt testimony that is given by
the pure, incorrupt Spirit of God, that was the Inspirer of it.

Then again, it is a testimony in respect of us.

Actively, Passively,
Actively, because it is the testimony to be believed by us. Hence it is, that
we confirm all truths Non est processio, etc. we can have no proof of any
thing in Christianity, but out of the holy Scriptures. As St. Chrysostom well,
Sine his testibus, etc. without these sacred witnesses our inventions have no
validity, they are of no force. Therefore because it is a witness to the
truth, it is called Gods testimony: hence we are to draw the testimony of
confirmation.

Then passively too, therefore the testimony in regard of our selves, because
it testifies against us, if we do not observe and keep it.

It is true of the Old, Testament. It is true of the New, Testament.
Of the Old, God himself speaks, he Commands Moses to put the Tables in the
Ark, that they might be a Witness, and Testimony against them. And our blessed
Savior speaks of the new in the Gospel, The words that I speak shall judge
you, shall witness against you at the last day. They are testimonies of
comfort, as St. Austin says well, if we keep them, and testimonies of
conviction, if we transgress them.

That no man may think he can sin without a witness, there are many Books of
witness will be produced. The Book of the creatures, the Book of Conscience,
and the Book of Gods prescience, and the Book of the Scriptures too. Every
Chapter that we read, every Text that we hear at any time Expounded, will
either be Pro or Contra, a testimony, a witness, either for us, for our
comfort, and assurance, or else against us for our conviction, therefore in
respect of us, it is called a testimony.

Last of all, in respect of God himself, both because it does give a testimony
to him, it makes God known to us; it gives a testimony of all those attributes
that are himself, of his Wisdom, of his power, of his justice, of his
goodness, of his truth. The Declaration of these, we have them all in the Book
of the Scriptures: there is never a Book, but there is a testification of
these. In the Book of Genesis we have there a testimony of his power, in making
the World. A testimony of his justice in drowning the World. Of his goodness
in saving Noah. In the Book of Exodus we have a testimony of his providence, in
leading the People of Israel through the Red Sea; in bringing them out of
Egypt. We have a testimony of his wisdom in giving them his Law. What should
I name more? In the New Testament, in the Gospel all is testimony. As the Old
gave testimony to God, so the New to Christ, To him give all the Prophets
witness; not only the Old, but the New, These are they that testify of me.
Every where there is testimony of Christ, of his humility in taking our Nature;
of his power in working of Miracles; of his wisdom in the Parables that he
spoke; of his patience, and love in the torments that he suffered for us. Both
Law, and Gospel, the whole Book of Scripture, and every part of it, in these
regards is fitly called, The testimonies of the Lord. And the holy Psalmist
makes choice of this name, when he was to speak to the honor, and glory of
it, because it was that name from which he sucked a great deal of comfort, in
that it was the testimony of Gods truth, and goodness, and wisdom, and power,
to him, thereupon he makes so precious esteem of it, as to account it his
heritage. This is the first thing, what the Psalmist speaks of; the word of
God, under this name, The testimonies of the Lord.

Now from that we may go on to the next, to see what it is that he thus
predicates, and testifies of them; and it is an honorable Elogium, I have
taken, or as some read it, I have chosen, or as others, I have claimed them as
my heritage, and a heritage for ever. In all these variations we may see
abundance of Heavenly affection in the Psalmist at this time,

Considering that the word of God it was that great blessing that God bestows
upon the Church, and has entitled and interessed all his Servants in it,
therefore David makes advantage of the premises, he challenges his title, and
interest, as being one (...), one of the Servants of God, I have claimed (...)
an Heritage for ever.

Considering again, that the word of God is that great gift, that God reaches
out himself, the greatest gift that ever he bestowed upon the World, but the
gift of his Son, and the gift of the holy Ghost, next them, the word of God,
that is the great gift, and God reaching out this great gift, now David, as it
were, spies Gods hand extended toward him, therefore he meets him in this
work; and God having a hand to give, he has a hand to take, I have taken them
as my heritage for ever.

Yet again, remembering that they were of more worth, and esteem then all
Earthly things whatsoever, more precious then gold, then fine gold, and all
spoils and riches, he is here put to his choice, which way he will take, and
what he would make choice of, the glory of the World, of which he had plenty,
the royalty of it, or that that was more dear to his Soul, the testimonies of
the Lord. What does he? With Mary, he makes choice of the better part, here he
pitcheth, and fixes his election, I have chosen thy testimonies as a Heritage
for ever. Any of these ways it is full of affection.

And what is it now that David takes, and chooses, and claims? The
testimonies of God.

For an Heritage. An Heritage, it is a word that is precious, and a word that
is useful. In sum, it is nothing else but this, the Lot, or portion that
discends upon every man here in this World, the share, or dimensum that is
allotted to him, whither it descend by succession, or be demised by gift, that
is a man's Heritage in a large sense. Thereupon it is, that it is translated
from temporalls, to spiritualls; because God is so gracious, he gives to his
Servants, Bona sui, of his own good, as every thing is Gods in the World, but
more especially things celestial, Divine, super- supreme blessings, these
things celestial, are the good things of God, he gives to his Servants of his
own good.

Hereupon it is, that Heaven is called the inheritance of the Country. And
grace which leads to Heaven, and the word of God that begets grace, is called
the inheritance of the way. And indeed for Heaven i^selfe, there is good reason
why it should be called by this name of inheritance or heritage. It is that
portion that God has prepared for his Servants, before the Foundation of the
World, it is that that Christ has purchased by his own blood, he has
bequeathed it to them by will; it is demised to them by gift; Heaven it may
well be called their inheritance, for they are borne to it. The Saints of God
are borne to a Kingdom; they are borne, not by the birth which is natural,
but by the second birth which is spiritual. It descends upon them by lineall
succession, as inheritances do. It descends from Saint, to Saint, from the
beginning of the World, and from the Head Christ, to all the Members, there is
a spiritual succession. There is good reason therefore, why Heaven should be
called an inheritance, they are begotten, and borne to it, Begotten by him to
an inheritance immortal, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 1. And because
inheritances descend not upon all, but only upon the first borne, God
therefore gives all his Servants a right of Primo-geniture, that they may be
capable to inherit, all are firstborn, and all are first-begotten, as the
Apostle speaks to the Hebrews, they are all Primo geniti, there is good reason
then that Heaven should be called an Inheritance. But why the word of God, why
the testimonies divine, should be called by the Psalmist an inheritance, why he
brings them within the compass of this notion, may seem not a thing so easily
understood; the word of God points out the inheritance, it is not the
inheritance it self.

Yes, there is good reason to be given of it, were there no more but this, that
we consider the inestimable comfort, and Heavenly treasure that is to be found
in the word of God; it is a rich Mine of all celestial treasure, it is a
Storehouse of all good things, of all saving knowledge. All privileges
whatsoever they are that we can expect in Earth, or Heaven, they are all
contained in the word of God; here is ground enough why it is called an
inheritance, he has a good Heritage that has all these.

Yet there is a better reason then this, for if it be so that Heaven is our
inheritance, then the word of God is, because it is the word that points out
Heaven, that gives the assurance of Heaven: We have in the word of God all the
evidences of Heaven. Whatsoever title any Saint has to Heaven, he has it in,
and out of the word of God. There are the evidences in the word of God. Both
the evidence of discovery, it is a holy terrior of the celestial Canaan. And
the evidence of assurance, it is as a sacred Deed, or Indenture, between God
and his Creature, St. Gregory said wittily, when he called it Gods Epistle that
he sent to man, for the declaration of his will, and pleasure; he might as well
have called it, it is Gods pactionary Record, or Deed, whereby he makes over,
and conveyes to us all those hopes that we look for in Heaven. Whatsoever
interest we have in God, in Christ, whatsoever hope of bliss, and glory,
whatsoever comfort of the Spirit, whatsoever proportion of grace, all are made
over to us in the promises of the Gospel, in the word of God.

Now put this together, look as in humane affairs, evidences, though they be
not properly the inheritance it self, yet they are called the inheritance, and
are the inheritance, though not actually, yet virtually, because all the title
we have to an inheritance, is in the Deeds, and Evidences; therefore evidences
are precious things, though it be but a piece of paper, or parchment full of
dust, and worme-eaten, yet it is as much worth sometimes, as a Country, as
much worth, as all a man's possessions besides. So likewise it is with the Book
of the Scriptures, they are not actually, and properly the inheritance it
self, they are Via, the way to the Kingdom, it is called The Gospel of the
Kingdom, nay more, the Kingdom it self, The Kingdom of God is come among
you, or to you. Why the Kingdom? Why the Inheritance? By the same reason,
both, because here we have the conveyance, here we have the Deed, here we have
the assurance of whatsoever title, or claim we make to Heaven. So, here is the
reason of the appellation, why the Psalmist gives them this word, he makes them
his inheritance, both because they point out the Inheritance, we had never had
a portion in Heaven, but by the Scriptures; they convert the soul, we had never
known of such an inheritance in Heaven, but by the Scriptures.

The Heathens that have not the knowledge of the Scriptures, they have not the
knowledge of God, or of Heaven, because they bring to the knowledge, nay, they
bring to the thing it self. In keeping of them, there is great reward; that
great reward is Heaven. And St. Paul sets it down thus, Act. 20. to the Elders
of Ephesus, We commend you to God, and the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you inheritance among them that are sanctified. Here
is the ground of the appellation. Holy David seeing that Heaven was his
inheritance, he was begotten to an inheritance immortal, and incorrupt, he
therefore makes the word of God his heritage, because it lead^ to Heaven. Seeing
God was his portion, Thou art my portion Lord, and my hope, in the Land of the
living, he makes therefore the Scriptures his portion, because they bring to
the knowledge of God, he calls them his Heritage, Thy testimonies have I taken
as a Heritage. Because he thought them a rich possession, he thought he was
abundantly rich, if he had nothing besides, when he was owner of the comforts
in the word of God. An Heritage, as if it were a holy depositum committed to
his trust; and indeed so it is, it is a depositum, or trust, that God puts into
all our hands, a Tallent, to improve to his glory, and our comfort, not only
to be preserved, but to be observed by us. An Heritage, as if it were to
descend by lineall succession; so it does, there is a continuance of the
Scriptures through all ages, to the Church, therefore he adds here, they are an
Heritage for ever; for ever, as noting the perpetuity. Mary has chosen the
better part, that shall not be taken from her. He makes it such an Heritage as
he will not part with; he that sells all to get Heaven, will not part with
Heaven to get all. For ever, that makes us have interest. If it were so in
David's time, it is in ours, now to us still an inheritance. That we may see we
have interest in it as well as David, the Apostle tells us God has called us
to it as an inheritance, Colos. 4. He has called us to the inheritance of the
Saints in light. He does not say the inheritance of the Saints in Heaven,
because he would let us see that the wrrd is an inheritance. Heaven is an
inheritance in light, in the light of glory, and in the light of grace, in the
light of the testimonies, the word here. Here is the scope of the word used by
David, to show his high esteem of the word, he calls it his inheritance.

What is the use of it?

First, Of comfort, that seeing God has given it to his Servants as a
Heritage, if at any time there be a Famine of the word of the Lord, either in
our hearts, or in the Church, upon this ground we may lay claim to it; as long
as God continues a Church, he will continue the Scriptures; so long as there is
any to be gathered into the fold, he will have his word whereby they may be
converted; as long as there are any Saints on Earth, he will lend them this
their portion.

Then it is a Use of contentation, being that is our Heritage, whatsoever
portion we have besides, make this the chief, if we have none, yet we are
those that are richly endowed. There is no man but may take comfort, and
contentment now, in this frame of the Psalmist, if he can bring his heart to
David's temper. Rich men that have possessions on Earth, here is one possession
that will be better to them then all. Poor men that have no inheritance, that
it may be, as Stephen says of Abraham, Act. 7. that have not so much as a foot
in the world; not one foot to live in, though they have seven foot when they
are once dead; but though his inheritance be not so much as one foot here,
here is that that makes amends for all, the heritage of comfort that is in the
word of God here, and of glory afterward. He may say of it, as the Psalmist
says in another Psalm, My Lot is fallen in a fair ground, I have a goodly
heritage. He that has this portion, this ground of comfort to himself, he is
abundantly rich, and rich with the riches of Heaven.

3. There is a Use of excitement, to stir us to frame, and work our hearts to
this temper of the Psalmist. Labor to get that esteem of the word of God that
he had. If there were nothing else to move us to it, this name, and appellation
that is given, it were enough. There are none of us all so much mortified to
the World, and so much withdrawn from the pleasures, and profits of it, but we
are ready to startle, and to rouse up our selves at the name of an inheritance.
If a man hear that an inheritance is befallen him, what pains will he take to
go and see it? As him in the Gospel? If any of us be allied to a rich man
that has no Children, what means, and course will we not take to be thought
worthy to be his heir? To succeed him in his inheritance? And this is but in
temporal things. The man in the Gospel comes to Christ, and thought to have
drawn this benefit from him, Master, bid my Brother divide the inheritance. He
comes to Christ to suck out temporalls, he might have had spiritualls, he comes
for half an inheritance, he might have had a whole one. We are like the
Children of Israel that would take their portion on this side Jordan, earnest
we are for temporalls, Heavenly things we relish not. It occasioned that Speech
that was used of old, and will be used, rich men though they have no Children,
never want Heirs, there will still be those that pretend Heire-ship to their
inheritance. Shall not we have that apprehension of things celestial, that
worldly men have of things temporal? God is richer then all; he comes to us
with offers of riches, laden with all riches, riches of the spirit, and sets
open that treasury to us, in his own Son, whom he has sent into the World,
and made known what riches is in Christ by the word of God; though we see such
abundance of indeficient riches, yet we are so stupid, and insensible, that we
are not at all affected with it; there are very few that look after the
spiritual inheritance, or the comfort of it. And if we get it, we are not so
choice to part with it, as men are of temporalls. Naboth thought it unlawful
to part with his inheritance, though it were to a King, God forbid that I
should sell the inheritance of my Fathers. There is no Christian, but if he
understand himself aright, in the way of Heaven, will be of Naboths
resolution, and Naboths temper, he will never rest till he have gotten interest
in the comfort of this inheritance, that is both in the word of God, and leads
to Heaven, and when he has got it, he will not part with it for all the World
besides. That he may truly value Heaven, he will set a valuation upon the word
of God, and work himself to David's temper; here is his profession of himself.
Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever. That is the first
general part, David's profession.

The next is, David's Motive; therefore I call it his Motive, because it induced
him to be of this Opinion, because, They are the joy, and rejoicing of my heart.

Nothing will induce a man sooner to have a good Opinion of any thing, then to
have joy, and comfort by it; we value, and prize every thing that affords
rejoicing; if it afford true joy, it affords all. For joy is the flower that
springs from every good, and is as the Crown, and contentation of all,
therefore it was his motive. It runs thus, if we take it in due order. Thy
testimonies have been the rejoicing of my heart, therefore I have taken them
as an heritage for ever. It was David's motive, and it was a good motive.
However worldly men think it is but a sour, distasteful work to be always
Poreing in the word of God, they think Christians are but Melancholy
Creatures, and the continual exercise and study of the Scriptures, to be but
a dry, and distasteful work; yet the Saints of God that have comfort from it,
they know how precious that exercise is, how much joy it brings, that the life
of a Christian is a life of joy, and that his rejoicing is to be picked out of
the word of God; and that will appear to us by three Propositions that are
here contained.

The first is this, that a Christian in this world has his rejoicing; he has
his rejoicing here, his life, even while it is a life of sorrow, is a life of
rejoicing. Though they be creatures of mortification, though they be Creatures
daily excercised in repentance, though they be daily tried by afflictions, and
tribulations, yet Christianity is such an excellent estate, that in the midst
of tribulation, they find comfort; in the midst of mortification it
administers rejoicing. St. Paul found it, not only in tribulation, but in
other failings, therefore he says of all, godly sorrow causes rejoicing. It
must needs be, that there must be rejoicing in godly sorrow, for godly sorrow
produces, and raises joy: therefore he sets it down in another place. As
sorrowing, but yet always rejoicing. He sets it down with advantage; he gives
sorrow, but a Si^ut, as sorrowing. As if the sorrow of a Christian in the
world, were not worthy the name of sorrow. It is Sicut, but Vera gaudenti,
always rejoicing, True rejoicing.

It is a slander, and an evil report that men bring on Piety, to think it
makes men sullen, and discontented, always in an afflicted estate. There is
nothing makes the heart more cheerful, then a good Conscience, there is
nothing brings a good conscience so much, as the favor of God, a constant
walking in the ways of Gods Commandments, a keeping to the rules, and ways
of piety. Christianity is not so stoicall as to grudge us of our joy. A
Christian is so far from being deprived of joy, that he is the only Creature
indeed, that has the true title to it. It does not take away this affection,
it takes away none, it improves none more then this, Non lollit, etc. It does
not take it away, but rightly tempers it, it teaches us to place it on the
right object, to keep the due bounds, the right compass. That we may see that
it does not sequester, or exclude the comfort, or joy of the heart, the
Scripture calls upon them most of all, and gives them Commands, and in
junctions of rejoicing; and it does it by reduplication, Rejoice in the Lord, O
ye righteous, and least they should not be ready to take the first admonition,
Again I say rejoice, there is an injunction from that. St. Austin observes
well, the Saints in the World are tied to rejoice, to rejoice in the Lord, Si
non, etc. If we do not make use of this affection to Gods glory, and our own
comfort, we should repugne the Command of God, and more then a single Command
too, there is a reduplication. And St. Basile observes from that that the word
is doubled, Rejoice, and again rejoice, it notes the increase, and
augmentation of their joy; they should not only rejoice a little, but much,
not once, but often, they should make it a continual work.

There is good reason to stir us up to joy; all the bliss of Heaven is set
down by joy, Enter into thy Masters joy. And not only glory, but the first
fruits in this World are called by that name, the joy in the holy Ghost. To
this purpose, God encourages us to it, by the best examples, the example of
the Prophets, and Apostles; and if that be too little, by the example of
Angels, and if that be too little, by the example of God himself. There is
joy in Heaven, joy among the Angels of God; when it is said that there is joy
in Heaven for one sinner that is converted, there is joy with God. Joy, it is
the affection that God honors, because he will be sure to Invite us to take
our fill of joy, if it be right, and spiritual joy. There are none of all the
Saints (if we look to them) but they had their time of rejoicing, even those
that were most depressed, and afflicted. Holy David, Abraham, Job, Paul, all
these had their times of rejoicing. Christianity, it is a state of rejoicing,
and the Saints of God have their times to rejoice in this world. That is the
first Proposition.

Secondly, there is another that arises from this, as they have a true title
to joy, so they have the only title to true joy; it is not superficial joy
that they are affected with, it is substantial joy; substantial joy is that
that is upon true grounds, and when joy is rightly seated. The right Seat,
where is it? The Spirit, the heart of a man. It is joy of heart, they are the
rejoicing of my heart. Otherwise joy is not substantial, if it be out of its
place, from the Teeth outward, in the outward man; it is not true joy, unless
it be inward. If it be outward only, it may be mirth, as Tully says, yet not
true joy, joy is that that is in the heart, and springs from the heart. Even
carnal men will be full of mirth, they will have all the expressions of joy
that are possible in the outward thing, but it is only superficial,
dissembled joy, it is not that joy that is truly within. For in the midst of
that mirth, the heart is sorry. The joy of the Hypocrite is short, for a
moment, as holy Job says. It is as the crackling of Thorns. In the midst of
that mirth there is the Worm of Conscience, that damps all; that is as the
Handwriting upon the Wall to Bellshazzar, when it came to be read, it filled
him full of horror, and anguish, and discomfort, and vexation; there are none
of these outward things that can breed cordial substantial joy.

On the other side, a godly man in the midst of sorrow, can preserve joy of
heart. It is true, a godly man is not always as the wicked, Jocund, and joviall,
they are not loud in their mirth, it may be, they laugh not much, but a godly
man is still joyful, when he laughs not; for there is the true mirth, and joy,
that is within. As the Poet said of the running of Nilus, the running of Nilus
is very still, yet it is very swift, though it make not any appearance of
motion; the excellency, says he, of the River, is in this, that it seems
little to move, and yet it moves apace. So it is with the joy of a godly man,
the joy of a Christian moves not outwardly, there is no revelling, he does not
make boast of his joy, but then within he has it; he has the Feast of a good
Conscience, and there is the voice of the Bridegroom, and of the Bride. The
voice of the Bridegroom must needs be there, when the voice of Christ is
there, when the voice of the Spirit is there. There is the pipeing, and
dancing, in a spiritual sense, and all those concommitants of mirth that
attend the Feast of a good conscience. A godly man only has true joy, he
only has cause to be so, therefore David expresses it in Psalm. 4. Thou have
put more gladness in my heart, then when their Corn, and Wine, and Oil
increased. God puts gladness in the heart, the world puts gladness in a man's
lips, and countenance; God stablisheth the heart, where it shall be durable,
where it is substantial joy. In that it is said to be in the heart, he
expresses it to the full, it is enough to have joy there. That is the second
Proposition; the joy of a Christian is true, and substantial, and right seated
joy. They are the rojoycing of my heart.

There is a third Proposition from both these. This true substantial joy it
does not spring from any other head, it comes not any other way, then by the
word of God, there we must find it. We shall never find joy in Heaven, unless
we first find it in the Scriptures, here joy begins the glorious joy. The grace
of God, as the Apostle says, being begun here, must be perfected after; it
cannot be perfected unless there be preparations, and beginnings; these
preparations are those that are wrought by the Word of God, and here they are
contained. In worldly things we cannot find these, and a Christian man does not
make temporal things his joy. Rejoice not in this, that the Spirits are
subject to you. That is, rejoice not in Miraculous gifts, But rather rejoice
that your names are written in Heaven, in the Book of Life; and if it be there,
it is written upon the promises, it is written in the Book of the Scriptures,
as Hilarie speaks well. A Christian knows not what belongs to other joy, to
secular joy, he cannot fetch his joy from any other Fountain, or Spring, but
from hence. If at any time he rejoice in temporal things, it is in a
subordinate reference to spiritual: i^ he rejoice in them, it is but when he
forgets himself, it may be, sometimes they may affect his heart, but in the
end, temporal things leave us in the lurch, they cannot continue that joy to
us; we cannot carry that joy of the World to Heaven. A godly man should be so
far from rejoicing in, that he is to be mortified to the World, he Sacrifices
himself to the pleasures of it, do you think he will take a pride to delight
in it? no, the joy that he sucks to himself, he draws from the promises of
salvation, contained in these testifications, these testimonies of the Lord he
draws them from the Scriptures. So here, the word of God only affords true
joy; so it does in all the references, and considerations of it. If it be the
word preached, it affords joy, Act. 8. it is said of those of Samaria, There
was a great deal of joy in that City, because of the Preaching of the word.
If it be the word practiced, It is the joy of the righteous to do good, as
wise Solomon speaks; if it be the revolving of it by meditation, the meditation
of it begets joy. The word of God, as it multiplies notions, so it multiplies
rejoicing, so here is the way to true comfort, and joy: if any go about to
find it in the World, there is nothing that we can take delight, and joy in. If
any man would have this Water of Life, he must with the Woman of Samaria, carry
his Paile to Jacobs Well. Here is the Balm of Cilead, for every Wounded
Samaritan, as St. Chrysostom speaks; the Scriptures have Physic, and
Medecines to heal all the Wounds of the Soul; it is so profitable, that David
says, Except thy Law had been my Delight, I had perished in mine afflictions.
He was in afflictions, but he had a Cordial, he made Gods Law his delight, and
that kept him from Sinking, and from being Overwhelmed, with sorrow.

They are the Waters of comfort, the still Waters of comfort, of which the
Psalmist speaks in another place, they are to be found in the word of God. Here
is the Treasury, and Storehouse of all joy, and comfort; if we will fetch it
from any place, we must come hither, and here we are sure to find it.

It is true, joy of it self is a natural affection, but spiritual joy is not
natural; it is not from nature to know what belongs to spiritual joy; it is
only the Word of God that can teach us what it is, and what belongs to it.
Seneea himself had some glimps of it. Whereas every man (says he) thinks it
is an easy thing to be Merry, what more easy? No, it is a hard thing to be
joyful, though it be easy to be Merry. Joy is not so wanton a thing, as the
World takes it; joy is a severe thing, in true joy there is severity, and
gravity, it is an excellent virtue that way. Therefore in his Epistle to
Lucelius, above all, if thou would make thy life happy, learn how to joy
aright; it is a Lesson hard to be learned. Aristotle in his Ethics, lays it
as a Foundation, and ground of a good life; there is no greater argument of
proficiency, then this, for a man to rejoice as he ought, and in what things he
ought. He has gotten a great mastery of himself, and a great victory over the
World, and is come to a high pitch of knowledge, and to a high pitch of the
practice of Piety, that knows how, and in what to rejoice aright. If we will
learn that, we must learn it from the word of God; it is our joy, and
teaches us to rejoice aright, that is, not to rejoice in the things of the
World, not to rejoice in the pleasures of sin. Hear what devout Prosper says
of them, although it be a great good to rejoice, yet to rejoice amiss in the
things of the World, is a great evil that seperates the heart from Heaven. If
not in the things of the world, then not in the pleasures of sin, as now a
days many take pleasure in nothing but only in doing mischief, whereas
Charity rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. Piety rejoices
not in sin, nor in the World, but what does she rejoice in? In God, and in
Christ, in the hope of Heaven, and in making use of the word of God. It
rejoices in this, that piety is her practice, and Heaven her hope, and Christ
her Savior, and the Holy Ghost her Comforter, and the word of God her
perpetual Companion.

If we will learn to rejoice in these things, we must labor to get holy
David's temper, David was a man as much perplexed with sorrow as any man in the
World, he had his Tribulations, but as he was a man of sorrow, so at the same
time he was a man of rejoicing, a man of joy, and those joys he still had, out
of the meditation of Gods testimonies; so great joy, that in one place he
says, Thy Statutes have been my song in the house of my Pilgrimage, and here
he says, they are my rejoicing, and the rejoicing of my heart. Thy testimonies
have I claimed as an Heritage for ever; for they are the rejoicing of my heart.

DAVID'S DEVOTION: DELIVERED IN ONE SERMON, BY That Learned, and reverend
Divine, RICHARD HOLSWORTH, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Vice Chancellor of
Cambridge; Master of Emmanuel College, and late Preacher at PETER'S POOR in
LONDON.

Psalm. 19.8. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons in Alders-gate-streete. 1650.

PSALM. 119.48. My hands also will I lift up to thy Commandments which I have
loved, and I will meditate in thy Statutes.


THE handling of this Scripture may seem Abortive, it does not come before the
time, but after. It is Abortive in St. Paul's signification; because the
handling, and Exposition of it comes now out of season, and after the time. It
is the Elder Sister to the Text I spoke of in the forenoone, and has a place
in the Psalm many degrees before it, there are above sixty Verses passes
between them; yet I have reserved it to the second place for better your
Edification; that compared with the other, I may let you see how a Christian is
never to set up his rest here in this World, whatsoever pitch of piety he has
attained to, but is still to go forward, to strengthen himself with new
resolution, after he has attained some.

Here is a good example propounded to us, for the manifestation of it; the
Prophet David he does in this Psalm intermingle professions with resolutions,
and resolutions again with professions; sometimes least he should seem to
decay in practice, he quickens himself by new resolutions: Sometimes again,
least he should seem to resolve to no purpose, he makes testification of his
practice; so these two follow one another through the Psalm. A module of a
Testification I gave in the forenoone, in those words, Thy Statutes have I
chosen as an Heritage for ever; and here now he arms himself with other
resolutions, that he may advance in practice. My hands also will I lift up to
thy Commandments which I have loved, and I will meditate in thy Statutes.

So, in brief the words are nothing else but thus much, here is another
Protestation, by way of remonstrance, or Declaration, of the Vows and
determinations, that holy David imposed upon himself, for the keeping, and
meditating in Gods Statutes, and according to these, two parts I will consider
in them.

There is one part a testification of what he had done, they are thy
Commandments that I have loved.

The other it is a profession of what he would do, and that is enlarged by two
concident (but distinguishable) resolutions.

The one in the first part of the Verse, I will lift up my hands to thy
Commandments.

The other in the last, I will meditate in thy Statutes.

In this manner I mean to speak of the words, and begin with the middle words
of the Verse; and that is, a declaration of David's practice for the time past,
the testification of that he had done.

I have loved thy Commandments. I rather take this in the first place, because
I wou^d begin where I ended the last day; you may remember then I spoke to you
of the love of God, the promises that are made to those that are enflamed with
that Heavenly affection, The Crown of life, which he has promised to them
that love him: Now after the love of God, what argument is fittest to be spoken
of, than the love of his commandments; if a man would walk through the
several descents of love, all men will acknowledge that the first, and chief
object of love is God; but yet they hardly agree upon the second, what is to
have the next flight, and degree of the affection of our love, after God. This
general principle will serve to regulate it, after God, that is most to be
loved, that has most of God in it, where there is the liveliest stamp, and
Print of God, there most of our love must be bestowed, after God himself. Now
there is nothing in the World but has something of God, there are Vestigia in
creaturis, the darkest, and most obscure Print; in the inferior Creatures there
is the Print of Gods wisdom, and power, and goodness: in the superior, in
man, there is a more lively representation, there is Imago, similitudo, the
Image, and similitude after which he was Created. In a Saint God is more
lively, especially Saints glorified, there is a renewing of that Image, to the
degree of the first perfection; so a man would think here he should terminate
his love, after God, on the blessed Saints, and Angels, All my delight is in
the Saints on Earth, and those that excel in virtue, says David, but yet it
is not so, there is something will go before these, there is not in all the
Creatures so lively an impression of God, as in the word of God, there is more
then Imago, similitudo, and more then Aliquid dei, there is a representation of
all the Attributes, a lively Print of the Spirit of God, the mouth of God, the
finger of God, the wisdom of God, the will of God; therefore here will be the
decision of the Question, that after the love of God, the greatest of love is
to fall upon his Commandments, and will upon his Commandments, for they lead
not only to the knowledge of God, but to the very fruition of God. Our blessed
Savior, and John the beloved Disciple, lays it down as an axiom, This is
love to keep his Commandments, the greatest testification of our love to God,
is the love we show to his Commandments, in observing of them; this order
David sets down himself, he was a man stricken, and touched in his heart with
the love of God here: as if he had labored for arguments, and expressions to
manifest it to his own her at, and to others; he makes this as the first, and
most proper effect, and proose of his love to God, that he loved his
Commandments; that he might justify the first, he tells God, I have loved thy
Commandments, so here is the thing he testifies of himself.

And he does not only make the testification to men, for men may be ignorant,
there is no man that can make inspection into the affections, and the heart, to
see what love is there, but he tells it to God, it is a holy ejaculation that
is sent up to God, for the inlargment, and testification of his affections, I
have loved thy Commandments, it is a modest expression.

He does it not, first, that he may put God in mind, or make him understand,
and know any thing of which he was ignorant, for he searches the heart, he
knew what David's love was, better then himself, yet he beats much upon it by
many repetitions, Consider how I love thy testimonies, O how I love thy Law, I
love it above gold, yea much fine gold. There are many variations of this one
expression, and all presented to God, not to put him in mind, only appealing
to God, he speaks these words as Peter to our Blessed Savior, when Christ
asked him the Question, Simon love thou me? (says he) Lord thou know all
things, thou know that I love thee. Or as Hezekiah in his holy Devotion,
Remember Lord how I have served thee with a perfect heart. So David here; here
were the interchangable conferences between David's soul, and his Maker, and
here is one of those great expressions that he makes to him, the first, and
principal testification, I have loved thy Commandments.

In the second place, it was not an arrogant expression, he does it not as
thinking highly of his graces, not esteeming himself better then other me^,
(...) he had got the flight before them, as the Pharisee in the Gospel, Lord I
thank thee that I am not as other men. It is true, he knew how to make his
Boast of God, My soul shall make her boast of God. That is a holy arrogance to
make our boast, and triumph of God, but only it was for the inlargment of his
affections, to set us an example, to draw others after him by his holy example;
it was not Ost^^tation, but a humble acknowledgement made to God, not all
penitential: Penitential acknowledgements always come in another form. I
have not loved thy Commandments, but there is an acknowledgement of
thankfulness, as well as of repentance. The acknowledgement of repentance is,
Lord I have broken thy Commandments; Repentance takes shame to it self. The
acknowledgement of thankfulness is, Lord I have endeavored to keep them.
Thankfulness gives the glory to God, of his own graces, repentance cries, I
have broken them altogether; thankfulness cries, I have labored to keep them
in part; though my practice have failed, yet my heart is toward them, I have
loved thy Commandments, it is a modest expression of his love to God, in
loving his Commandments. To take it in brief, it is set down here in a
double advantage.

One advantage is in the Emphasis, I have loved thy Commandments, by
Commandments he understands the word of God, yet it is more powerful then so;
it is not, I have loved thy word; but I have loved that part of thy word that
is thy Commandments, the mandatory part. There are some parts of the will, and
word of God, that even ungodly men will be content to love, there is the
promisory part; all men gather and catch at the promises, and show love to
these. The reason is clear, there is pleasure, and profit, and gain, and
advantage in the promises: but a pious soul does not only look to the
promises, but to the Commands, the mandatory part as well as the promissory:
Piety looks on Christ as a Lawgiver, as well as a Savior, and not only on him
as a Mediator, but as a Lord, and Master, it does not only live by faith, but
it lives by rule, it makes indeed the promises, the stay, and staff of a
Christians life, but it makes the Commandments of God the level. A pious
heart knows in every promise there is some implicit command; in the
qualification, and condition of every promise, there is an implicit Command
contained; it knows that for the fullfilling of the promises, they belong to
God, but the fullfilling of the Commands they belong to us, therefore it looks
so, upon the enjoying of that that is promised, that it first will do that
that is commanded, there is no hope of attaining comfort in the promise, but in
keeping of the precept, therefore he pitcheth the Emphasis, I have loved thy
word, that is true, and all thy word, and this part the mandatory part, I have
loved thy Commandments; here is love to God, to love God when he Commands,
that is the first advantage.

Then the other is in the notation of the number, thy Commandments, it is
plural, that is, all thy Commandments without exception, otherwise even
ungodly men will be content to love some Commands, if they may choose them to
themselves.

There is no man that is set so much upon the breaking of one, but it may be he
has something in him, whereby he can incline to love some other; if it touch
not his bosom, his darling sin. Herod himself heard John in many things
gladly; it is the ordinary practice of Hypocrites, I, and of Profane men too,
they divide the Tables between them, if they adhere to the first Table, as
Hypocrites, it is with neglect of the second; if they adhere to the second, as
profane men, it is with contempt of the first: it is not so with true piety,
piety gives not obedience out of humor, but out of duty, it does not obey out
of choice, but it obeys out of obligation.

It is true of obedience, what Divines very well observe of faith, and it is an
excellent rule; faith never singles out his object, but lays hold of any
object; if there be any truth to be believed, and assented to, faith does not
chose this, or that truth, I will believe this truth, and not the other: if it
be a case of exigence, where ^aith has to do, it does not say I will trust
God in this case, but not in ano her, it chooses not its object, it knows
that he is all powerful, to deliver out of all dangers; it knows that he is
all true; as faith does not choose its object, so true obedience singles not
out its command, it chooses not his commands, I will serve God in this
Command, and not in the other; that is not to serve God, but our selves; it
looks equally upon every command.

Epictetus, I am sorry almost that it was his, yet it is a shame to us that it
was his; it is impossible almost to come out of the mouth of any but a
Christian) If it be thy will O Lord Command me what thou will, send me whither
thou will, I will not withdraw my self from any thing that seem^ good to thee.
Epictetus was a Heathen, but we may match him, and exceed him by parallel
places, that dropped out of the mouths of Saints. David, I have respect to all
thy Commandments. Cornelius, We are present before God to hear whatsoever
shall be Commanded us of God. Non eligit mandata, he does not pick, and choose.
So here, if a man would attain to this ability, to set himself to the
general obedience of all Gods Commandments, he must get the love of all.

Nothing will so tnable a man to keep them as love; love makes every weight (as
I told you the last day) light, says Austin, love never finds difficulties,
the reason why men object difficulties is, because they love not: therefore if
a command please them, it is Bonus sermo, it is a good saying, they are willing
to embrace it, if it be contrary to their custom, and natural inclination;
Durus sermo, it is a hard saying, who can bear it; there is a Lion in the way,
an Adder in the Path, because they love not. Love facilitates obedience,
obedience will never go through the Commandments, except it be rooted, and
grounded in love, we may well say love enables to keep them, for it does keep
them, it is the keeping of all; he that loves all, keeps all, David resolves to
keep all, therefore he says he loves all. If we will get his resolution to
keep them, we must get it to love them, here is the first thing, what he had
done for the time past, I have loved, it is but transient, and occasional,
therefore I will not stand longer on it.

The second is not only a testification of what he had done, but of what he
would do, set down by two resolutions.

First, in the first part of the words, My hands will I lift up to thy
Commandments which I have loved, here is love, the Lodestone, and the hands
though they be feeble, will follow after love: the Proverb is now altered, it
is not, Vbi amor, ibi oculus, I will lift up mine eyes, but my hands, his heart
was enlarged, and his hands were lift up; he shows his love in the outward
parts, as well as in his affections, I will lift up my hands to thy
Commandments which I have loved. A new expression, and has not a parallel,
that I know of, in all the Scripture; therefore it will not be so easy to give
the proper and true grounded meaning of it, why it is set in this form, I will
lift up my hands to thy Commandments.

There are other ways it might have been varied, and then the meaning would
be easy, if it had been thus, I will lift up my eyes to thy Commandments, to
lift our eyes to Gods Commandments, is to apply our selves to the reading, and
learning of them, and to study of the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Or if it had run thus, I will lift up my heart to thy Commandments, there are
many parallel places for it, To thee O Lord will I lift up my soul; he that
sets his heart upon God, sets his heart upon Gods Commandments, the heart will
be lift up; though it move not in the body, it can go up to Heaven, and ascend
to the place from which the Commandments come to the ^hrone of God: but it is
not so, I lift mine heart, or I lift mine eyes; if it had run thus, I will
stretch forth my hands to thy Commandments, there might have been a fair
account to stretch out our hands to thy Commandments, to apply our selves to
practice, for a man to employ himself to, and embrace it, and delight in it.
The (...) Land shall stretch forth their hands to God, that (...) a phrase
parallel in that sense, but it is no^ (...)

Lastly, if it had run thus the sense had been easy, I will lift up mine hands
unto thee, we lift up our hands to God in prayer, and the proper gesture of
Prayer is to spread, and lift up our hands, even Aristotle himself foresaw so
much, and it was the practice of the Heathens, as appears in Homer, Horace,
Virgill, and other Poets: but Aristotle, hear him for all; when we go about
to make our Prayers, we stretch forth our hands to Heaven, or lift them up; the
proper gesture of prayer is to lift up the hands, Paul shows it, 1 Timothy 2. I
will that men pray in every place lifting up pure hands. The lifting up of the
hands is put in Scripture for Prayer, but it will not bear it so, it is not
good sense, I will lift my hands in prayer to thy Commandments. The
Commandments are not the object for prayer to be directed to, but God. I will
pray to thy Commandments, we cannot do so unless it be by insinuation, we
may take it so, as a gesture of prayer. I will lift up my hands to thy
Commandments, that is, to thee in thy Commandments, in the custody of thy
Commandments. Obedience is a forcible Prayer, to God it self. A man that
comes to God in Prayer, must bring obedience, and so lift up his hands to the
Commandments.

Or else thus, I will lift up my hands to thee, for the keeping of thy
Commandments, no man can keep the Commandments but by Prayer, it is grace
that must come from God, and be fetched by Prayer, by insinuation. We may take
it as a gesture, but that is not the proper meaning; in all these variations
the meaning had been easy, but there is an Emphasis in both words, I will lift
up, and I will lift up my hands to thy Commandments, both words are remarkable.

Sometimes the lifting up of the hands does not betoken supplication, sometimes
it betokens admiration, the lifting up of the hands when men are astonished
and ravished, with an object it might be so: well, there was no man's soul more
taken and ravished then David's, when he was in contemplation of Gods commands,
I will lift up my hands, admiring the excellency of the commandments.

We lift up our hands sometimes when we betake our selves to refuge, and David
might well consider it as his refuge; he looked over all outward helps; he was
in affliction and distress; he leaves all inferior helps, and has recourse
to God, and he goes the right way, in the way of his commandments.

The hands are lift up sometimes for comprehension, when men lay hold of a
thing; that is the meaning, I have lift up my haands to thy commandments, for
the laying hold and practicing of them, both words have an Emphasis.

First, upon the word Elevabo, I will lift up; it implies thus much; the
commandments of God are sublime. A man lifts up his hand to that that is above
him; they are of a sublime nature, they are sublime commandments, they are all
above us, they are sublime and high in many respects.

Sublime in respect of the original, they come down from God: The doctrine of
John Baptist, it was from heaven; all the commandments, they were given from
the mount, they are higher then so; they are given from heaven, from God
himself, they are sublime in the Original.

Sublime in the matter of them; heavenly oracles, dictats of divine wisdom.

And sublime in regard of the difficulty in keeping of them, they exceed humane
strength too; nature cannot reach them; nay nor grace according to that small
proportion we receive in this world: grace is infirm, but nature is altogether
impotent.

Lastly, in respect of the situation of the commandments. In truth and in
deed we have them in the book of God, but they are written also in heaven.
Lord (says David) thy word endures for ever in heaven. Moses, Deuteronomy. 30. he
tells the people the commandment is not far, it is not in heaven, but in
thee, in thy heart, and in thy mouth, not as if it were excluded from heaven,
for that is the proper place of it: but he speaks by way of dispensation,
because God made it near to men when he gave it: so he says it is not in
heaven; or else it is properly in heaven, because it is the Idea of the divine
mind, will, and counsel of God; it is in heaven, because it is imprinted and
graven perfectly in the hearts of the Saints and Angels: it is not only
perfectly written there, but perfectly kept there, all the essential parts of
the commandments, as worship, praise, obedience, adoration, they are all
performed in heaven by the Saints and Angels; it is in heaven, the
commandments put them together: since the commandment was in heaven, David
looks after it there, he knew there was but an imperfect custody of it in
earth; It is that that we pray for daily, thy will be done on earth, as it is
in heaven. When we look to the commandments, let us look to heaven, there they
are perfect. Holy David, when he stretched out his hands to the commandments,
he reached not forward, but upward: and since they were in heaven he directs
his affection, and the strength of his resolution thither, there is the reason
of the first word, the verb is set with an Emphasis, elevabo, I will lift up.

But there is another emphasis upon the other, my hands; take it figuratively,
my hands, that is, my heart: the hand is put for the affections, because they
are the instruments whereby the heart and affections work; love is seen in the
hand, as well as in other parts, he might very well put them for the whole man:
My hands will I lift up; that is, my self, my heart.

Or take it properly; he therefore mentions his hands as the excitements, or
sign, or testimony of lifting up his heart, because the heart that works in
the outward man: Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, the eye
sees, and the hand works, to show that his heart was lift up to Gods
commandments; he says, he will lift up his hands: so here is now the sum,
it is nothing but thus much, the expression of the welcome, the great welcome
and dutiful entertainment that he gives to the commandments of God; he
presents God to his heart here, as publishing the commandments, offering them
as a gift, and he reaches out his hand to accept and take them, as Galen
says well; the hand is not only the instrument of invention, but of
assumption: we take all by the hand, he would take it of God a great gift, that
he would bestow his commandments. God offers, and David accepts; the dutiful
welcome that he gives to the commandments of God may be paralleled, Heb. 12.
Lift up the feeble knees, and the hands that hang down, and so make straight
steps to your paths. Take all those parts in a spiritual sense, the soul has
hands and feet as well as the body; the feet of the soul are the affections;
the hands of the soul is reason; the same that is the eye is the hand. Holy
David pursues it in the same impression, he rouzeth up himself, and
strengthens himself to keep Gods commandments, he quickens every part after
in other parts of the Psalm, he has taken order for other parts: He takes
order for his eyes: Open mine eyes and I shall see wonders in thy law. He takes
order for his feet: I remembered my ways, and turned my feet to thy
testimonies: That he might show that there was a dedication of his whole self
to God, he passes by the strength of no part; he served him with all his
soul, with all his heart, and with all his strength; he gives God the strength
of every part, he sets down his hands, not my eyes, or my heart only; it is not
only the ordering of his feet and affections, but the strength of the whole
man: I will lift up my hands to thy commandments which I have loved; here is
the sum and pattern that David sets forth, it is a good pattern for us to
imitate, and in what should we imitate him?

Immitate David in resolution; the reason we come so short in piety, is,
because we are not armed with resolution, we go weakly and carelessly about the
work of God; we do the work of salvation that concerns our souls, negligently:
nothing will keep the soul in a better temper, and keep a man more out of the
way of sin, then often to fortify and strengthen the heart with resolution,
and what resolutions shall we take? the same that David takes, what is that? I
will lift up my hands; how does he lift up his hands to Gods commandments? To
lift up our hands to Gods commandments, is to apply our selves to the keeping
and exercise of them: the hands are the instruments of action, and exercise
not, but that it must be done by the heart, and every part: but therefore he
refers it to the hand, because action is the life of Christianity, that to keep
the commandments of God there must be action, and the hands are the
instruments of action.

Origin well; we lift up our hands, when we lift up the works of our hands to
the commandments of God: and when do we lift up the works of our hands?
says he, when we walk worthy of God, and live according to his prescripts and
rules, this is to lift up our hands to Gods commandments.

I but our hands are feeble, our hands are weak as Moses were, Exodus 17. We
read that Moses hands were heavy, he could not hold them up; so it is with many
of us, when we would walk in the ways of Gods commandments, our feet are dull
and feeble; when we would work the works of God, our hands are feeble, heavy
hands, and in worse case then Moses: his hands were heavy through corporal
infirmity, ours through spiritual: the palsy hand through the decay of
faith, the withered hand by the declining of love, and the hands manacled and
pinioned, and clogged with the lusts of the flesh, and the enticements of sin,
how then shall we do to lift up our hands? we must say as David in another
place, pray to God to strengthen us: I will run the ways of thy commandments
when thou have set my heart at liberty. I will labor to keep thy
commandments, to lift up my hands when thou shall release me and enlarge me: I
will wash my hands in innocence; because our hands are clogged with sin, we
must wash them in innocence, bring clean and pure hands, they are the only
hands we can lift up; we must not come with hands defiled with sin. Here is
the resolution of David, when he speaks of his hands, they are to be understood
by way of Idea: that is, pure hands, clean hands holy hands, charitable hands;
these were the hands that he would hold up to God. I have done with the first
part of his resolution: I will lift up my hands to thy commandments; the other
that is behind in the last words.

I will meditate in thy statutes. This is his second resolution, the second
branch, and it is partly the same in effect with the former, but it is varied,
and otherwise expressed. Here is another name given to the word of God then in
the former part; there it was the Commandments, here it is the Statutes.
Statute is more then precept: the second name he gives not for variety, but as
a word that is more emphatical, it serves better for the expression of his
purpose. The commandments of God are called Statutes, because they are
immovable, they cannot be altered and changed; thereupon it is that you have
this Epithet anexed often in Scripture, they are sure, and steadfast, and
faithful. The statutes of the Lord are sure, Psalm. 19. A more sure word of
prophecy says Peter. Steadfast promises, Romans 4. Sure and steadfast
commandments, Heb. 2. It is an epithet still given to show the surenesse,
they are called Statutes, the Latin word signifies stability; the Hebrew
signifies visitation, that God visits for breaking them; yet this is proper
they are called Statutes, because they are ratified, they are firm, the things
that God has established: Every thing is said to be ratified that stands. My
counsel shall stand, says God in Isa, and out of the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word shall be established: therefore we stand to it, it is the
rule and sum of our faith, that cannot be abolished, it is a thing ratified,
thy Statutes. Statutes is more then precepts, they are unabrogable precepts,
they are Statutes, Sanctions, Decrees, Constitutions. If I would enlarge my
self, from this particular, I could show that hence there is an obligation
laid to observe Gods laws because they are Statutes: that that God by his
decree has established, we cannot nullify them by our transgressions; we
nullify Gods commandments as much as lies in us, as often as we break them: to
transgress the commandments is as much as in us is to cancel that that God
has confirmed, and to nullify that that God has ratified: it is not only to
break it by sin, but to break it in the validity. There is no man that
transgresses, but he wishes there were no commandments, no rule of obedience
and piety.

It is not so with other creatures; all other creatures have a law, and it is a
statute law, because it is a law that they have not broken; they all keep
those Statutes that God has given them, and they have nothing but the instinct
of nature; not only animate, but inanimate creatures; the Stars keep their
courses, and the Earth and the Sea keeps it is course and motion of ebbing and
flowing, as the impression was first made in them when they were created: it is
a firmer law that is given to man; not only that law, but the law of Gods
commandments: He has given him that law that shall stand more firm; for that
law of nature shall be abrogated when there shall be a dissolution of all.
Heaven and earth shall pass: the law of nature, the law of the creatures shall
cease, then there shall be a cessation of that: but though heaven and earth
pass, not one jot or tittle: not one jot of Christ's word shall pass, it is
Austins observation: jod is the least of all letters, and the affix is the
little dash of it: Our blessed Savior says there shall not an iota, not an
affix pass, but the least part of Gods commandments shall be kept. Then, if
other creatures keep their law, shall not we much more labor to observe that
that God has given us? If we labor not to keep them as statutes, we shall as
judgments: if they be not done a nobis, they shall be executed de nobis: if
they be not done by us, they shall be executed upon us, but I will not
prosecute the word; that that he calls before commandments, he calls here
statutes. A stationary exercise, he uses a stationary object: I will dwell, or
stand upon the exercise of thy Statutes.

The first was for the exercise, this for the meditation; he contents not
himself with one resolution, or with the second: this whole Psalm is nothing
but a multitude of holy resolutions and ejaculations; take but this one part of
the Psalm, this one division that my Text is out of, see how resolutions come
one on the neck of another. In verse. 46. there is one; I will speak of thy
testimonies before Kings. In the 47th there is another; I will delight my self
in thy commandments. After that he is not content, he gives a third; I will
lift up my hands to thy commandments which I have loved: And in the latter
part he closes with a fourth, I will meditate in thy Statutes. He arms
himself with resolutions, and these two resolutions are subservient one to
another; the preparatorie act to meditation in Gods statutes, I will lift up my
hands to thy commandments.

He first prepares before he falls to meditate; he does not rush upon the
sudden as we do in prayer, uncivily, when we come into the house of God: he
fits and tunes his heart, he sets the parts in order before he goes to
meditate: he composeth himself, his eyes, his hands, his heart, all the whole
man, before he goes to meditate. I will first lift up my hands to thy
commandments, and then meditate on thy statutes, as it is in Psalm. 51. Before
he will sing, he will tune, Awake my Lute and Harp, awake, my glory and my
self will awake right early. David would not sing before he was prepared, he
tunes before he sings, Psalm. 45. My heart is enditing of a good matter: I
speak of the things which I have made touching the King. He prepares his heart
that he may get Gods approbation: so here, before he sets seriously to
meditation, he puts every affection in a right key and tune: and then when he
had set all right, after he had composed his very gesture, his eyes fixed to
heaven, his hands lifted to Gods throne, then I will meditate in thy statutes.
He sets the most heavenly act on an heavenly object: there is no object fitter
for meditation then the Commandments: there is no act fitter for the
commandments then meditation.

Meditation is the improving of all other exercises spiritual: whatsoever
meditation is an Angelical exercise: the only exercise or the chief that we
know of that, the Angels exercise in heaven is the meditating of Gods will, and
ways, and works: If we would conform our selves, nay if we would attain to the
height of Angels, it must be by meditation; yet we generally, the most of us
are very negligent and backward in this duty; few men know what belongs to
meditation, or what is the comfort of it: those that profess they love God,
and delight in his commandments, though they read sometime, and hear
sometime, they labor not to improve that that they read and hear by
meditation: meditation is come to be the scorn of the world; I account
meditation is scorned, because conference about holy things and repetition is a
thing in reproach in the world.

It is true, I know those things may be done sometimes (as they are) out of
faction, and under pretense of repetition, often times conventicles are made; but
a modest humble soul will not do things for applause, or offense: but if we
look to benefit our selves by the word of God, we will take all helps to
remember what we hear, and apply it to our selves, and we cannot do it without
meditation, and repetition is a great help; he will not profit by the word of
God that calls not himself to account for his memory and his life, and lays
them according to the level of the things he hears.

The world is full of imagination: meditation is scarce; it is a wonder to see
how men weary themselves with imagination, and suffer their hearts to run after
every vanity, they think imagination is meditation when their hearts have wild
roving thoughts, sometimes sinful, always vain, that is not meditation but
vanity; meditation is that act whereby the heart pours it self forth to God,
and is fixed on heavenly things, and makes an impression of that heavenly act
whatsoever it is upon; upon it self by a reflection of the soul upon it self,
in the exercise of those duties that are meditated.

Therefore if we will benefit by reading and hearing of the word, let us often
times call our selves to account by meditation; If we would be well acquainted
with God, and conversant in heaven, it must be done by meditation. Meditation
is that that makes the seed of the word take root in the heart, that ^^gests
and incorporates it, and turns all to blood and spirits: we can never profit
and edify by Sermons; unless by meditation, and rumination we chew the cudd
after: Admit it be but a weak Sermon that we hear, some will say, what, should
I meditate on that? though it be a weak one, there is matter still of
meditation. A man that has love to another man, will love every thing that
belong to him; if we have a love to the word of God, there will be a love of
all that belongs to it. A love of that place where the Ordinances are handled;
a love of the time when the Ordinances are handled; a love of the weak hand,
the earthen vessel that dispenses it, though through much infirmities and
weakness. Gregory Nazianzen observes of St. Bazile, they loved him ^o much in
his time, they reverenced his virtues so much, that they would imitate him in
his infirmities: it is true, there are no infirmities or errors in the word of
God to be loved there; but if we have true love to the word of God, we will
embrace it from an infirm hand, though it be dispensed in a weak manner.
Always something may be gotten to edification, and the application of it must
be made by meditation; it is that that is an excellent supply of privacy, it is
the sole companion of a retired heart. A man addicted to meditation, can leave
earth and go up to heaven, and walk, and converse with God, with all the
commandments of God; he needs no book, he needs no teacher, that can addict
himself to meditation.

Meditation is that heavenly exercise that is the improvement of every grace;
if we would thrive in all, we must addict our selves to it; that was David's
order; he was conversant in reading and hearing too: but meditation is the act
that he resolves on to improve both: and as he would give God his outward man,
so he will his inward: The testification of the outward man is in these words,
I will lift up my hands to thy commandments which I have loved: And then
because neither tongue, nor hand, nor feet, nor eye, can be acceptable to God
without the heart, the inward man: he seconds his first resolution with
another, as, I will lift up my hands to thy commandments, so I will meditate
in thy statutes.

THE Saints Progress. DELIVERED IN TWO SERMONS, BY That Learned, and reverend
Divine RICHARD HOLSWORTH, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Vice Chancellor of
Cambridge; Master of Emmanuel College, and late Preacher at PETER'S POOR in
LONDON.

2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons in Alders-gate-streete. 1650.

SERMON I.
PSALM. 84.7. They go from strength to strength, (until,) and every one of
them appear before God in Zion.


THEY go from Company to company, from Mansion to Mansion; so some
Translations read it; as alluding to the solemn journeys of the Children of
Israel to the Land of Promise. Or to the annual Travel of the Jews, to
appear before God for the worship of his name in Jerusalem.

And if I should read the words so now to you, it would be a fair, and proper
Lesson to us to learn, that we are now in the state of Pilgrims, We have here
no abiding City. As the Patriarchs of old, we still look for a Country. There
is removing, and Mansions, and going from Country to Country.

It would very well fit my self too, and be a good entrance to this new
removing from Mansion to Mansion, from Company to Company. But I will not read
the words so, but take them as they are expressed in the Text, From strength to
strength. So, it is a short, but an accurate model of the spiritual growth of
a Christian in this world, from one degree of righteousness to another, so
breathing after perfection, and it is a part of that excellent Psalm that the
Prophet David made, to let us understand the great comfort, and benefit, and
privilege that comes to us by our frequent repairing to the House of God. One
great privilege is this, that here it is that we get spiritual strength. Here
we not only had our initiation to Christ, and the first seeds of Piety sown,
and the first Foundation laid, but we get growth, and go on, and make
progress in piety.

There are many excellent passages in the Psalm, yet this is one of the most
remarkable, for there is something in it more then in the whole Psalm it self.
The Psalm it self is none of those that are called the Psalms of degrees,
yet this is a Text, or Verse of Degrees. And those degrees are not such as
relate to the steps of the material Tabernacle, but show the steps of our
ascension, the ascent that we make up to Heaven. There are two passages in the
Psalm that point at it. One in Verse. 5. In whose heart are thy ways; or as
some read it thy ascentions, the degrees of proficiency whereby Christians come
to stature, or great growth of piety, are Gods ascentions, Gods ascentions
because they lead to him, and ours because they carry us up to God.

Another place that points to these degrees, or ascentions, is in the Title of
the Psalm: it is one of those Psalms that is ascribed To him that excels,
or to the End, showing, that the only way to excel, is to hold out to the
end, and he that holds out to the end, of all others will be the most
excellent, and both these are stamped, and graved upon this Verse. One part is
to him that excels, They grow from strength to strength. Another part that
is to the End, Till every one appear before God in Zion. According to these
two there are two parts.

There is the motion of Christianity.

And the rest.

The rest, that is God, in the last words, Every one of them appears before
God in Zion.

The motion is in the first part of the words, and there are three things in
that: There is, Qualitas motus, and Meta, and Continuatio motus.


The quality of the motion, they go on, they grow up.

And the mark to which it is directed, to strength.

And the perpetuation of the motion, From degree to degree, from Virtue, to
virtue, From strength to strength.

But before I speak of these perticulars, there is one little particle in the
front of the words, that sets out to us the condition of the persons (though it
be indeffinitely here expressed) that makes this goodly progress, this fair and
lovely growth in piety. The word is indeffinite, They go, or They grow,
therefore it refers to two Verses before, the fourth, and fifth, there you read
who are these, they, that are here spoken of, Elessed is the man in whose heart
are thy ways. Blessed is the man whose strength the Lord is. Blessed are they
that dwell in thy house. It is Plural in the one, and Singular in the other.
It is Singular in Verse. 5. Blessed is the man whose strength the Lord is, and
according to that course and Exposition of the word, a man would have thought
it should have run thus, He will grow from strength to strength. But the
Psalmist purposely in a great deal of wisdom varies the word, and sets down
both expressions. In the Singular, to let us see that there are not many that
have these assentions of God in their hearts, or lives; there are not many that
grow to a high pitch, that Grow from strength to strength, that is, to a great
measure. Yet he sets it down in the Plural, to let us see that there are some
of those, some, the same that he pointed at before; those that make God their
strength, that have the fear of God before their eyes, and Gods ways in their
hearts. That is, brie^y, godly men, those that mind piety, and Heaven, they
will be growing, they will not stand at a stay, or as wicked men, go downward,
and grow worse, and worse, as the Apostle speaks, and as David says, From one
wickedness to another. Every godly man on the contrary, the first thing he
minds is to get grace: the next thing that he aims at, is to grow in grace, and
that he may grow swiftly, and perfectly, They grow from strength to strength.
So much of the Persons. Now I come to the other.

First, the quality of the motion, They go. It is a corporeal word, but it
has a spiritual signification; it is a spiritual motion that is represented
under this corporeal expression. Now, of corporeal, natural motions, there
are two frequent.

The Local, Motion. The Vital, Motion.
Of local motions the principal, and most noble is the progressive motion,
going forward: Of vital, the motion of augmentation. Now according to both,
the word will carry both here, They go on, or they grow; their going is their
growth. We may refer it to both, both as it sets out the increase of grace by
the similitude of a local motion, and as it is expressed by the similitude of a
vital motion.

First, take it as it is set out to us under the similitude of a local motion,
They GO from strength to strength. It lets us see what is the perseverance of
Christianity. It is strength by which a Christian walks, but it is perseverance
that makes him go on still, and gain new ground, and draw nearer to Heaven.
Therefore there are many frequent places of Scripture that give us charg, and
put us in mind still to go on, and proceed; there are none that command us to
sit still. The life of Christianity consists in motion, not in session, session
is reserved for Heaven; it is a going forward, not a standing still. Station is
for those that are come to their journeys end; when men have done their work,
then they shall stand, and sit at the right hand of God, then they shall sit
upon thrones. But now in the way, in our Pilgremage, there is work to be done,
there is a great deal of way to be r^d, and a progress to be made, we must
still proceed, and go on, that is perseverance that make us go on, and hold
out.

Indeed it is true, there are some precepts for standing, none for sitting,
Watch ye, stand fast, qu^t your selves like men. But that station is not an
impediment to motion. A Christian at the same time, spiritually speaking, he
both stand, if he go forward, and move. That standing is not an impediment,
but an advantage to motion. So, standing in nature, it is a maxim of
Philosophy, nothing moves, but there must be a Basis, a center that supports
it, that is unmovable, that gives it ability to move. So it is with Trees, the
surer they are set, the better they grow. Man the firmer footing he makes, the
more steadfastly, and better he walks. In Christianity, the more we are
stablished in grace (which is the standing that the Apostle speaks of) the
better we walk. The life of a Christian is both in motion, and standing; in
regard of that grace that he has received, that he may keep it, he is exhorted
to stand; in regard of that grace that he looks to, and advances to, that he
may get it, and that he wants, he is called on to move still, and go on. So we
see the life of a Christian is a life in motion, he is so far from declining,
and going back, that a Christian does not at any time take up his rest, he
would not willingly make any stay; with so much firmness, and eagerness does
he breath forward, to the state of perfection, that may be attained here, and
the glorious Crown that shall be set on every man's head after. And
perseverance is that grace that enlivens us to motion, it is one of the
Excellencies of perseverance, it keeps a man still in motion. There are three
excellencies that we may note in the grace of perseverance; all accommodate to
this purpose, but the last is best.

One is, it is perseverance that sublimates all graces. It is not a particular
distinct grace of it self, but that golden Thread that goes through every
grace, and carries them to their pitch, and perfection. Perseverance is not
faith, but the continuance, and steadfastness of faith. Perseverance is not
repentance, but the habitual perpetuaion of repentance: The pitch of faith,
the highest flight of love, the fulness of repentance, the lengthening of the
line of patience, to the greatest extent and longitude: all these are nothing
but perseverance. It is not any one virtue, but the Crown of all; it is the
grace Laurel, the wreath that carries every grace, and virtue, to the height.
That is once excellency.

Another excellency is, that it is the grace that borders next upon Heaven, the
next grace to Heaven is Perseverance; there is but half a step between
Perseveranee, and glory. There is no grace that will carry us to Heaven of it
self, without perseverance; not faith, if it faint; not love, if it decline,
and wax cold, not obedience, if it give over; not repentance, or humility, or
patience, or meekness, if they have not their perfect work. Faith, that will
hold, but that it holds out, it is from perseverance. Love will take its
flight, and mount up, but that it mounts up to the highest, to Heaven, it must
be from perseverance. Obedience will follow after Christ, but to hold to the
end in obedience, to be carried to the full length, it is from perseverance. So
every grace has that that is the accomplishment of it, from the grace of
perseverance. Without it, as St. Bernard says very well, neither he that
fights can hope to overcome at all; or if he overcome, and conquer a little, he
cannot look for the Crown, unless he conquer still, and go on. There is the
second excellency of perseverance.

The third, and principal excellency of perseverance, that that more expressly
touches upon the Text, it is the continuation of the motion of a Christian,
that that keeps a man still going. And motion is excellent in every Creature;
the Creature, the more excellent it is, the more excellent it is in its motion.
The Earth, that is the lowest Element, and the basest, moves not at all. The
Water that is next above the Earth, moves, but not so fast as the Air that is
above the Water; and the Air, though it move faster, and more constantly then
the Water, yet it moves not so nobly, and constantly, and so fast as the
Heavens, the celestial bodies, and the Star^ of Heaven. Take but one instance,
the Moon has two motions, which she dispatcheth at once, with a great deal
of swiftness, and constancy. Let men that are below blaspheme, and curse, let
Dogs bark, let the Winds blow, let storms bluster, and the Clouds frown, the
Moon goes on to finish her course. So a Christian if he be of a heavenly
temper, there will be the motion of the Heavens, perpetuity of motion:
Perseverance makes the motion perpetual, it gives perennity to the motion of a
Christian, that though a Christian meet with many disc^uragements in the way of
piety, temptations, and tribulations, and persecutions; yet for all this, as
the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, he keeps on his motion; though wicked men oppose
themselves, though St. Paul's Dogs do more then bark; though the storms of
temptation bluster, and the winds of persecution gather themselves together,
though Heaven, and Earth oppose, yet perseverance will carry a Christian strait
on his way, through all impediments, and make him leap over all
discouragements, it will bring his motion to the end, that is the excellency of
perseverance. That is the first thing, if we take the phrase under the
similitude of local motion, They go on.

Secondly, consider it under the similitude of Vital motion, for as I said,
their going on, is their growing on. Growth is a vital motion; for properly
nothing is said to grow but that that has life. Therefore Scaliger observes,
there is a great deal of difference betwixt those two words, augmentation, and
extention, things inanimate that want life, may receive extention, and
dimension, but they are not properly said to grow, but things that have life,
Plants, and Trees, and living Creatures. Growth therefore properly is a vital
motion, and that vital motion is remarkable in Christianity, in a spiritual
sense; there are many words whereby (...) Scripture sets out these advances of
Piety. When it considers us in the way of piety, it is called proceeding; when
it respects the emulations of piety, it is called excellency; when it respects
the operations of piety, it is called abounding; when it respects our progress
in piety, it is called persev^ring; when to the state of piety, it is called
growth. And all these, there is good reason to be given of them, in respect of
the several relations a Christian has in this World. We are viatores in this
World, we must proceed, and go on. We are Workmen in the Vinyard of the Lord,
we must persevere. We are lights in the World, lights must excel, that is
their commendation. We are Rivers, as David makes the similitude, Rivers of
God, they must swell, and abound. Christians they are the Babes in Christ, that
are to come to the stature of spiritual Manhood; being Babes, they must grow.
Of all other expressions those two are remarkable, when it is called abounding,
and growing. David uses both these, the word of abounding or excelling, All my
delight is in those that abound, or excel in virtue, Psalm. 16. The other word
of growth is in Psalm. 92. speaking of the righteous man, He shall grow up as a
^edar in thine house. St. Paul makes use of both those words too, sometimes he
exhorts to grow in grace, sometimes to abound, and excel. Strive that you may
excel to the edifying of the Church. Always abound in the work of the Lord.

The phrase, or word of abounding, is a metaphor taken from Rivers, Rivers that
get increase by running. A man would think a River in continual motion should
do nothing but spend it self, and not get, but lose; but the longer it runs,
the more access of water flows to it, and the further its progress, the
greater it is. It is little at the head, but it is great at the foot, the
longer it goes on. So should a Christian be like Ezekiells waters, that at the
first were but up to the Ancles, and then ascended till they came to the Neck,
till at last they covered the whole man; such is the swelling Spiritual, the
excelling, and abounding in grace.

The other word, of growing is a metaphor taken almost from all sorts of
vitalls. It is taken sometimes in Scripture from building; as a building from a
small beginning grows to a great vastness, and magnitude; so a Christian
being built on the Foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, our blessed Lord
being the Corner stone, he grows up to a holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.
Sometimes it is taken from the similitude of Plants, and Trees, Hosea 14. They
shall grow up as the Lilly, and as the Vine, their Root shall be like Lebanon.
Sometimes again, it is taken from the similitude of other Creatures, in Mal.
4. speaking of righteous men, he says, They shall grow as the Calves of the
stall. Sometimes it is taken from our selves, from the similitude of the growth
of the body, corporal growth. So in Ephesians. 4. he speaks of Growing up to the
fulness of stature, to a perfect man in Christ. As the body first has seed,
and then life, and then supply of nourishment, and then by it it comes to
height, and stature. So it is in the state of grace, there is first the
seminall being of a Christian in regeneration, or the new birth; then after
come the supplies of nourishment, by the influence of grace, and receiving the
sincere milk of the word; after these supplies of nourishment, comes this
spiritual growth.

That you may understand it better, St. Paul sometimes calls it a growing up to
strength, Romans 15. Sometimes a growing to full age, Collos. 2. Sometimes a
growing up to a perfect man. You may please to take notice, for the better
understanding of it; in every place St. Paul speaks of a double man, the
outward man, and the inward man; the inward man is the same in Paul's language,
that the hidden man of the heart, is in Peter's; the Soul, the inner man. There
is not only two parts, the Philosophers could go no further, they made two
essential parts: the Scripture inlargeth more, and makes two men, the outward
man, and the inward man.

The soul alone is called by the name of the whole man, because it has the
pre-eminence; the body, it is but as the Organ, the instrument, it is the mind
that is the man, What shall it profit a man to gain the World, and lose
himself? Says one Evangelist, And lose his soul, says another. His soul is
himself, it is the inner man. The reason is, because in the soul there are all
the perfections of the body, not only originally, but by resemblance: there is
all in the soul spiritually, that makes the spiritual man. The soul has a
spiritual mouth, and spiritual lips, says Ambrose, whereby it converseth
with God. And what are the spiritual lips of the mind? The desires of the
Christian heart, and the breathings, and openings of the heart to God; here are
the lips, and mouth of the soul, whereby it talks with God. And the soul has
her spiritual nostrills, that is, the judiciary faculty, whereby she resents,
and discernes between good, and evil, because there is nothing more noisome to
the soul then sin, and nothing more fragrant then Piety; the judiciary part is
the Nostrill of the mind. Then it has its eyes too, as Paul says, Ephesians. 1.
That the eyes of your understanding being enlightened; there is the lightness,
and the darkness of the eye of the mind. And then she has spiritual hands,
and knees, as Paul speaks Heb. 12. Lift up the hands that hang down, and the
feeble knees, that is, cast off all dullness, and indisposition to Piety,
quicken your selves to the work. Put these together, and here is enough to make
a spiritual man, and if there be a spiritual man, there must be growth.

As in the outward man we are borne Children, yet that infancy comes by growth;
much less come we to manhood without growth. If we would attain this that the
Apostle calls the spiritual man, the perfect man, there must be growth, a
going forward, and proceeding.

The soul is capable of growth, as well as the body, though it grow not as the
body does; the body grows by augmentation of substance, and quantity, that is
by extention of dimensions, the soul grows not so, there are no dimensions,
therefore there can be no extention, but it grows in habits, and qualities,
habits of all kinds, natural, moral, intellectual, spiritual, habits of all
kinds, this is the more noble growth a great deal.

This we are all to take notice of, if we be grafted into Christ, there will be
growing up in him; if the new Creature be formed in the heart of a Christian,
there will be growing up in grace. Thereupon, grace is compared to light, to
leaven, to seed; those of all things else are most multiplying, and of a
diffussive, growing nature. If grace be in the heart as light, it will shine
more an more. Pro. 4. If it be in the heart as Leaven, it will never leave till
it work it self to a greater lump. If it be in the heart as seed, it will
fructify, and multiply, from ten to thirty, and to sixty, and to a hundred
fold. Let none deceive himself, it is one of the best trialls whereby a
Christian may prove his esta^e, prove himself, whether he be in the faith, or
no. Would thou prove thy self? There is no way so ready, and sure for the
general, whereby a man may understand the condition of his soul, how his
estate stands, how it is between God and his soul, whither he be in Christ, or
no. If there be a growing, if there be a declining, if there be not a growth,
if he wax worse, if there be but a standing still, it is a shrewd suspicion
that there was no true insition. Whereas men think it enough to get into
Christ; it is true, if a man get into Christ, it is enough, he cuts off none
that are in that Vine, he casts off none, but take this withal, take heed thou
deceive not thy self, to think thy self ingrafted into him, when thou art
not. If there be true insition, there will be living in Christ, and if so,
there will be a growing up in him. It is so essential a sign of our true
being in Christ, that unless there be this growth, we have little cause to
presume that we are in him.

Therefore it is laid down by Divines well, and by all Writers, as an Axiom
in Christianity, that not to go forward is to go backward. Christ lays the
foundation of it, He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers
not with me scatters; and Leo magnus well Paraphraseth upon it: there is no
medium between these two in Christianity; he that does not profit something
daily, it is a shrewd sign, it is a true argument that he is dificient in
Christ: if he go not forward, he goes backward, if he get not something, he
loses. St. Chrysostom expresses it by a sweet similitude. The state of a
Christian is as a Ship sailing with the wind against the stream, now the state
of that Ship is such, if the wind be stronger then the stream, it is carried
against the stream, but if the wind slack, it stands not still, but goes
backwa^d if it go not forward; if it g^ine not ground, it loses:r So it is
with the state of a Christian here, Vbi incipis, etc. says Bernard, where a
man has once set up a resolution to go no further, without doubt he declines,
and when he does not labor to grow better, certaily he grows worse. Because
grace if it be in the soul, will be active; if there be a new man formed, there
will be motion, and the excellentest motion, growth. So, here is the sum of the
phrase, under the second consideration, they go on, or they grow on. So, I
have done with the first, the quality of the motion.

The next I told you was the mark to which this motion is directed; for he that
walks or moves, has still some mark, something that he aims at; that is here
set down to be strength, or virtue. They go on to virtue or strength. Both
ways it is right, there is not much difference, they come to the same; because
virtue and strength, especially in spiritual things, they are taken for one
and the same. Virtue, and strength, in Scripture they are used as words
equivalent. When the Scripture speaks of God, it is one of his glorious names
that he is Dominus Vir^ute, it is Translated Lord of power, but take the
Original, it is Lord of virtue. In Mark it is said He is sat down at the
right hand of God, and in Matthew it is said At the right hand of power;
because power, and Omnipotency is proper to God, he is called in the abstract
power: The other is by addition, the Lord of strength, or of power, the God of
virtue. In like manner, when the Scripture speaks of the holy Angels, this is
one name that is given to them, they are called Virtutes, though the name be
taken from strength, we Translate it virtues or powers; because they excel in
virtue; though not in inferiors that we call moral, yet in those of a higher
strain. Likewise when the Scripture speaks of Men, of Christians, it uses
these two for equivalent words, those that excel in strength, and those that
excel in virtue.

The reason is, because as Plato well defines it, virtue, it has a
corroborating quality in it, the consolidation, and corroboration, or
strengthening of the mind, it is from virtue. Therefore virtue and strength are
used as words equivalent; so, either way we may read it. If thus, They go on
to virtue, so it carries a very fair construction, it lets us see that virtue
is at a distance. A man that will overtake virtue must make have. Virtue is out
of our reach by nature, it must be gotten by exercise, and action, and
proceeding. It is pretty moral of Symonides, when he would describe the House
of Virtue, he makes it not seated pleasantly, but among Rocks, and Thorns,
because it is hard to find. Though the fruit of virtue be sweet, the way of
virtue is full of difficulties. And the like moral Plato alludes to, when he
would set forth that emblem that he would have before the Door of virtue, a
Picture drawn, always sweating, standing before the Door of virtue. Clemens
Allexandrinus says the same. Because it is not an ordinary motion that we are
to use for virtue, it is not going, or walking, but running, there must be
making great have, a great contention of the whole man, for a man to overtake
virtue. Therefore they go on to virtue: there is a journey to be taken.

Or else, they go on to virtue, to let us see, that, A spiritual man has
virtue always in his eye.

There is the mark he aims at; next to God, his mind is on virtue, and
therefore on virtue, that he may come to God. There is nothing, next to God,
and Christ, that a godly man prizeth more then grace; which is a thing that is
not only the consolidation of the mind, but the beauty, O how amiable are thy
Tabernacles! Thou art all fair to draw us after thee. Tullie would set it
down by three words of the same signification. There is nothing more amiable,
and sweet, therefore there is an inviting, attracting force in virtue. To let
us see, that virtue is attractive, when a man stands at a distance, it draws
him forward.

But I will not read the words so, but take them in the second construction.

They grow up to strength. Strength is a word frequently used in Scripture, to
express the enablement of grace. Sometimes we meet with the strength of
confidence, whereby we are able to rely upon God. So David touches upon that,
The Lord is my strength, Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his strength.
To make God our strength, is to put confidence in him. There is the strength of
confidence. Then there is the strength of consolation, the cure of sorrow. St.
Paul calls it Strong consolation. And the Prophet David when he breathed after
it, he expresses it, I am a man of no strength, that is, of no comfort. And in
another place, The Lord is my strength, and my portion for ever. The Lord
should be his Comforter: there is the strength of comfort. Then, there is the
strength of grace, that is the enablement to go on in virtue, and piety. It is
a spiritual word drawn from a corporal signification. The first
signification of it, corporal strength is, the consolidation of the whole
body, or of particular parts, whereby it is enabled to execute the use of it.
Vigor, and consolidation is the strength of the body. So in a spiritual
sense, the vigor, and vivacity of the mind, whereby it is enabled to do good,
and to shun the contrary, to ^eare that which is inflicted, this enabling grace
is called the strength of the mind. So take this construction, They go on to
strength, because strength is gotten by motion, especially if it be moderate.

That is the difference between corporal, and spiritual motion, corporal
motion adds not, but takes away from, unless it be moderate, if there be over
much labor, and motion. But in a spiritual sense, there is no motion so
great, and fast, and full of labor, but it adds strength; the faster we move,
the more strength we get; therefore they go on to strength, for the very
strength is increased by motion.

Then take the other, they grow up by strength. Strength is gotten by growth:
men come not to strength in an instant; we are not men, and strong at once. No
more is it in Christianity, no man is borne, and made strong at the same time,
but we are first Babes in Christ, and then men. Indeed in the Primitive times,
when grace was infused immediately, then God set examples of those that were
strong in Christ, and begotten to him at the same time, Babes and men. Paul in
his Conversion, at the same time was a Babe, and a man; and others that had the
infusion of the Spirit, though miraculously. But it is not so now, there are
many spaces between these two, a Babe in Christ, and a strong man, there must
be the ages of growth must be gone through. So now, to grow to strength, is to
grow to stature, for stature is the basis of strength, and age is the way to
stature. So, here now is the thing, they grow up to strength, that is, to
spiritual stature, to manhood, to these great enablements. Here is that we
are to take notice of.

It is not enough to grow, but to grow up sensibly to that state and strength
as whereby we may be more enabled to do God more service. To do more work,
and to dispatch it with chearfullnesse. It is that aim, that is laid in all
sorts of conditions, and things: in civil things it holds, a man is not
content to be of a Trade, but he would thrive in it. In natural things it
holds, in Plants, first there is seed, and then it is sown, and then it takes
root, and then it springs, and spreads, and flowers, and grows up till it come
to seed again, and yields increase. So, these steps and degrees there are in
Christianity, there is being, and life, and strength, and stature. These
degrees hang one upon another; there cannot be strength, unless there be
stature, nor that without growth, nor that without life, nor that without being
in Christ. So, being is the first step, and strength is the pitch: because it
is, either perfection it self, or the next step to perfection.

So, here is the Use that we are to make of this point, to labor to understand
our need of strength, we are those that must set this aim of getting
spiritual strength, and so we would if we understood our selves: for we are
most of us in a condition of weakness; and those that are of a stronger
growth, yet they are as a man of a good constitution, subject many times to
infirmities: stronger Christians have many weaknesses, and infirmities. There
is no weakness, or infirmity, that is pleasing to a Christian, or that can be
pleasing to God. Paul tells us of infirmities, and he gloried in them, but they
tended not to sin, but were those that the World accounted infirmities,
tribulations whereby he brought glory to God; but if they be infirmities of
sin, if we did know the danger of making shipwreck, it would make us love
strength, to overcome these infirmities. As Maximus Terens says, every thing
would have commendations if the use of it were known; if we did know the use,
and benefit by spiritual strength, how near it brings us to God, and
stablisheth our hearts in his fear, it would make us endeavor, and groan
after it to attain it To sum up those Uses, they are briefly these two, they
are accomodate to two sorts of Christians.

The first state is Travelers, we are Viatores, we have a journey to take, and
as the Angel said to Elias, it is a long Journey that brings to Everlasting
life, it is a long Journey from Earth to Heaven; but that God has shortened
the way to grace, though it seem long to sense, and be extreme long to nature;
and for ought we know, we have but a little time to dispatch that long Journey
in, we know not how short our life is. It is not only a long Journey, but full
of difficulties. It is not only a long journey, but the way lies upward, it is
hard to get forward, there must not only be moving, but climbing. It is
Jerusalem that is above, there is our Country. A man that goes to an upper
Room, he goes by steps, and stairs. There are these spiritual stairs that
are the ascensions of God. In whose heart are thy ways, or thy ascensions.
There must be breathing of our selves, by ascending and climbing up. It being
so long a Journey, and lying upward, and so many difficulties, we have need of
strength; Strength is needful to Travelers, or else they will faint by the
way. David understood it well, therefore as in one Psalm, he b^moanes himself
for the want of strength in his Journey, He has brought down my strength in
my Journey: So in another he Prays for strength in his Journey. Spare a
little, that I may recover my strength, for the going on in my Journey. What
are the encumbrances of those that are much in Travells? Many fears, and
dangers, meet us often in the way, hunger, and thirst, and heat, and cold, many
encumbrances. Paul sets them down when he speaks of his spiritual journey, 2
Cor. 11. he was In hunger, and thirst, and cold, and nakedness, in peril of
Robbers: in perils every where. A man that would encounter all these had need
have strength; as Plutarch says of the Scythians, they boasted that they did
fight against men. Good Soldiers are so well disciplined, that they can fight,
not only against men, but against hunger, and cold, and thirst, against all
Enemies. So, a Christian that he may be enabled so to do, he must get
spiritual strength, that he may fight, not only with Beasts, after the manner
of men at Ephesus, but with hunger, and thirst, and cold, and impediments in
his Journey, because we are Viatores, we must have strength to accommodate us
to that journey.

Then, another estate we are in here, we are not only as Travelers, but
Soldiers; and our Enemies are many, not only Companies, but Armies; as many
as there are Tribulations, and Afflictions, to be endured in the World, as many
as there are Temptations to seduce us to sin, as many as there are several
sins to be committed; for these are the great Enemies; as many as there are
Spirits in the Air, and Devils in Hell; and these are great, and many
Enemies. To let us see, that they are strong Enemies, they are called
Principallities, and Powers, and to show that they are many, they are called
Legions.

Besides these, the multitude of sins that a man must take heed of, that are
like the Hydra's heads, cut off one, and another starts up. Cyprian well
describes it; says he, if a man be so happy as to cut off one Hidra's head,
Coveteousnesse, another will come in the room of it, if he take not heed,
there will come Lust, and Wantonness, and if he cut off that, if he take not
heed, there will come malice, and pride, and ambition, and if he cut off these,
if he take not heed, there will come up more; all these are to be encountered
with spiritual strength.

Besides these, there are many Tribulations in the World, and which is the
worst affliction in the World, the many delights, and pleasures, and vanities
of the World, which we account not Enemies, but friends, yet these are to be
overcome. There is more danger in these then in the hardness, and Tribulations
of the World. We have more cause to fear the baits of the World then the
threatenings, the allurements, then the discouragements of the World. It deals
with us both ways. If the World plant Thorns in our way, the danger is not
great because it is seen, but if it strew flowers, it is not observed, it is
more dangerous. It takes hold of both; the Devil lays both to keep us from
piety. Sometimes the World lets fall a golden Apple. Sometimes it lays Snares,
and sets pits in the way. Sometimes it persues a man with clamours. Sometimes
it sings a Syrenean Song, that lulls him a sleep in security; here is the
greatest danger, but there is danger in both, and we have need of strength to
overcome both, as Cyrill says well, he had need be a strong Christian that
must overcome the rough hewne way; but I tell you he had need be a stronger
Christian that will overcome the pleasures, and delights, and enticements of
the World; strength is specially required for that.

Put it together, having so many Enemies, so strong, and so busy, we have need
not only of store of spiritual wisdom, but of strength, and that strengh
comes by growth.

Having now put all these together, I hope I need not use any Exhortation to
make you in love with that which is the improvement of all other graces,
Perseverance. I told you before, strength enableth to persevere, and that we
may persevere we must get strength, the one enableth to the other; by
perseverance we get strength, and by strength we persevere. Thou therefore my
Son be strong in the grace that is in Jesus Christ. We had need to labor to
get strength, we know not what evil days hasten upon us, and every Christian
that is expoposed to Temptation, has the fear of an evil time upon him.

We know not what Monsters God may call us to encounter with, Principallities,
and powers. O now we have time, let us store up strength while we have
opportunity to come to the house of God. The end of our coming here, besides
giving glory to God, and calling upon his name, and worshipping of him, is to
get strength. This house it is Beth-lehem, the house of spiritual bread. Bread
is that that strengthens man. It is the house where the mysteries of Salvation
are dispensed, that we may get spiritual enablement, as Basile says, it is
the School-house of the knowledge of God. Let us make this end, and use of it,
propound this end to our selves in coming hither, make this use of it, to
store up, and get this strength.

And as the house it self, so the Table of the Lord, is the Table of
spiritual refreshing, the Table of spiritual strength. The other Sacrament
gives us initiation, into CHRIST, our growth in Christ, and our strength is by
repairing to the Table of the Lord. Therefore it was instituted by Christ, that
by this spiritual Banquet and refection we might grow up in strength. Then let
us labor to make this use of the Word, and Sacraments, that we may be built,
and grow up to a perfect man, that we may draw spiritual strength daily from
both. And when we have gotten some strength, not to stay there, but to get
more, and then more, never to stay.

That is the next point, not only to grow in strength, but still to excel in
motion, and perpetuation, They go on from strength to strength, in the
reduplication of the word. But thus much for this time.

SERMON II.
PSALM. 84.7. They go from strength to strength, (until,) and every one of
them appear before God in Zion.


FROM strength, to strength is the way of the Text, and it must be my way of
handling it, to lead you along as it were, by steps, and paces, till we come to
the full understanding of it. And indeed so it is, that some Translators read
the words, whereas we read, From strength to strength, they, From Doctrine to
Doctrine; they go from Doctrine, to Doctrine, that is, from Edification to
Edification. It very well agrees with the Context, for but two Verses before,
there you have the Psalmist pronouncing a blessing to those that dwell in Gods
house, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, and the House of God is Domus
Doctrinae, the House of Doctrine, or Edification. So, from strength to
strength, is as much as our second Assembly, from Meeting, to Meeting. It is
that very House in which we are now met together. Therefore seeing I have
showed you the first Doctrines, contained in the former part, the quality of
the motion, they go on to strength. You will give me now leave to proceed to
the other Doctrines, that follow in the second part, that is, the continuation
of the motion; it is, From strength to strength.

And for the understanding of that. First, I will let you see briefly the
nature, and property of the phrase, what signification, and extent it has; and
I cannot do that better then by parallel places, and there are not many of
this nature that I meet with in Scripture. There is one in 2 Cor. 3. We are
changed into the Image of God, (says the Apostle,) from glory to glory. That
is, as St. Austin very well Expounds it, from a less glory, to a greater, and
so to a greater g^ory, and so to the fullness, which is in Heaven. Or, from
glory to glory, that is, from the first glory of the Creation, to the second,
greater glory of justification; from the glory that we have, to the glory that
we look for, from the glory of faith, to the glory of Vision. That is one
place.

Then you have another which is given us by the same Apostle in Romans 1. From
faith to faith. The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith. That
is, either as Theophilact very well glosseth upon it, from one degree of faith
to another; because faith is first in Semine, and after grows up to a greater
state, from faith, to faith; that is, from the beginning of faith, to the
perfection, and accomplishment of it. Or else as St. Austin further enlarges
it, from the faith that is of things present, to the faith of things to come;
or from a less measure of faith that the Fathers had under the Law (that also
believed in Christ) to the greater measure communicated to us in the time of
the Gospel; from faith to faith. It is all one with that of the Psalmist, From
Generation to Generation; that is, to all Generations. Now from these three
reduplications we may well understand the meaning of the Text. As in one place
it is said, We are changed from glory to glory; that is, from all ascents to
glory, till we come to fulness. And in another, the revelation of the
knowledge of God, is from faith to faith, that is, through all the degrees of
faith, till we come to the pitch. In the third, the name of God is said to be
magnified from Generation to Generation, that is, through all generations to
the Worlds end. So, here the Saints are said to grow from strength to strength,
that is, to pass through all degrees of strength, till they come to be perfect
men, and as near as they can attain in this World, to the pitch, and period
of perfection. Here you have the meaning of the word, what it is, From strength
to strength. There is something limited, something unlimitted, to both we must
have reference, it is definite in the phrase, it is indefinite in the
signification. For though there be but two words used, they have reference to
so many thousands. If any man ask, I have attained some strength what shall I
do now? Go further, and yet further. As in our life, from hour to hour,
from day, to day, from age, to age: so there must be a growth from one pitch of
perfection to another, till as near as we can we come to the utmost.

But having done with the meaning of the phrase let us see what is the extent,
and Doctrinall substance of the words themselves; and the Scope of the Psalmist
in these. For, as I told you before, from strength to strength, is as much as
from virtue, to virtue. Or if you join both words, from the strength of
virtue, to the strength of greater virtue. And virtue is considerable one of
these way There is virtue in the Habit, There is virtue in the Act, There is
virtue in the Degree.


According to these three, there are three extents, or latitudes of the word,
or rather four, that will give us now the full signification of it.

The first is the latitude, or extent of the word in respect of the habits of
grace. From strength to strength, that is, from one habit of grace, to another
habit of grace, that when we have attained the pitch, if it were possible, of
any grace, we should not content our selves with that, there are other graces
to be attained. That as a man that will learn perfectly to read, must go
through the whole list, and Alphabet of Letters, and none are to be excepted:
So he that will come to take out the whole lesson of Christianity, must set out
the whole lesson, Sentences, and Sillables, the whole quire of grace, and
labor to come to a competent measure, and perfection of habits in all. When he
has got one, he must not rest there, but go on from the habit of one grace to
another. Because all grace upon occasion brings glory to God. And a Christian
has need in this World of every grace. And every grace leads alike to the same
excellency of glory, and the same Blessing, and Reward is stated upon it.

How ever it is true, as Gregory Nazianzen says well, some particular graces,
are more proper to some particular estates, and ages of men. Repentance is a
grace more proper to them that are fallen, and perseverance is a grace more
proper to them that stand. A man that is down cannot be called to persevere,
he is not yet raised; but a man that is up, his proper grace, that has his
footing already set in Christianity, is to exhort him to persevere, and to
exhort the other to rise. So Alms-deeds, it is a grace that is more proper to
him that is Rich, and contentation to the Poor. Call to a poor man for Alms,
he has the Alms of Prayer, not of releife, it is not a grace so proper.

To carry it further, Modesty, and Sobriety, they are graces proper to them
that are young; wisdom and gravity, and discretion, are graces proper to them
that are in years, that are old. Thankfulness is a proper grace for him that
abounds in prosperity; and Patience is a proper grace for him that is in
adversity. So Nazienzen says well, there are graces more proper, and peculiar,
to certain conditions of men. But this hinders not, but that every grace is
needful, and necessary to all. Because every man, may be set in every estate;
he that stands now, may fall; he that has plentifully, and therefore may give
Alms, he may want, and be called to contentation. There is no Christian, but
he has need of every grace, because he may be set in every condition, and
estate; therefore it is not enough to attain some one grace, and to neglect
the other, to mortify some one Vice, and fall into another, that stands not
with the nature of repentance, to attain to some one virtue with the contempt
of another, it stands not with the state of breathing after perfection. For a
man to subdue pride, and keep covetousness, or to subdue covetousness, and
keep envy, and malice, each of these make him equally abominable to God. For
a man to attain to the habit of charity, and not to study the grace of
repentance, or to attain to the grace of repentance, and not to give
accomplishment to it by the works of righteousness, and obedience, or to
attain to some degree of obedience, and to neglect the graces of patience, and
meekness, or the rest, he will not at all come on to many degrees of strength.
There must be a connection of all the habites of grace, we must glorify God by
Charity, as well as by faith, by repentan^^ as well as by charity, and by
obedience as well as by repentance, and by humbleness of mind, and patience,
as well as by obedience.

The graces are all l^^cked together, they make up one body, or rather, one
soul of grace. As the Apostle speaks of the mystical ody of Christ. Ephesians. 4.
Collos. 1. In whom the body fitly compact together, so it grows up. As all the
several Members of Christ, knit by the same faith, make one solid m^sticall
body, so all the graces together make up one quire. There is one chain of
graces, that are so necessarily lincked, that as in the parts of the body, take
away one, and you deforme the whole; so, break one grace, you mar the whole
chain. Therefore the Scripture calls ever and anon, that we be fruitful in
every good work; to labor, to please God in all things we do. Whatsoever
things are just; what! Must I stay there? No, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely. Here is from strength to strength. We must go from justice to purity,
and from thence to honesty, and so to loveliness, and that is a good decorum
in a Christians conversation.

The Apostle Peter expressly tells us of these junctures, Add to knowledge
temperance, to temperance patience, to patience godliness, to godliness
brotherly kindness, to brotherly kindness, love. Here are now the several
paces, and steps; these are the habits of virtues; it is all one, as if he had
said in the words of the Psalmist, Add strength to strength, virtue to virtue,
habit to habit. He names them severally, to show, that if it were possible to
attain the perfection of some one, we must not stay there, from habit to
habit, that is, from strength to strength: That is the first latitude.

Next, to proceed from the habites to the acts of virtue, habites are dry, and
cold, if they show not themselves in acts, they may glorify God within, but
they cannot without, further then they manifest themselves in action. Therefore
the next, from strength to strength, is, from the habit, to the act. Admit a
man attain all the habites of grace named, if those graces be perfect in
respect of him, they are not in respect of God; action is the activity of those
graces that glorifies God, and brings the knowledge and improvement of them.
St. Austin observes in one place against the Heathens, that Christian virtues
far excel the m^rall virtues of the Heathen, even by the very name they are
called; says he, you call your virtues habits, we call ours gifts, you ascribe
it to your selves, and therefore you call them habits because you have them,
but we call them gifts, because we receive them from God, Every good gift is
from above. And indeed it was a very good argument that St. Austin used; yet
there is a third word may be taken that is better then both; that is, Practice.
For whither we consider them as habits, or gifts, they are not perfect till
they come to action. It is not the having, but the husbanding of a grace, that
brings glory to God, for a man to have the habit, and not to put it in
practice, it is all one as a Talent in a Napkin. Therefore the Scripture in
several places, uses those two words promiscuously. To him that has, shall
be given, and he shall have abundance. Having is using, for the unfaithful
Servant had a Talent, but he did not use it; And then follows, But from him
that has not shall be taken that that he has. How can that be taken away that
he has not? He is said not to have it, because he did not use it. It is the
same, from him that has not used it shall be taken away that he has. So the
Scripture runs still. God gives the grace, and he must have the glory of his
grace, and that is gotten by action. Otherwise, as Pliny observes well of
Phydeus the famous Painter, that had the habit of the Art, above all of his
time: says he, that great Art, and skill that Phideus had, it was to no
purpose, unless he had excercised, and practiced it upon some Table. So it is
with the graces, and virtues of a Christian, if he apply them not, and
accommodate them to use, and occasion, that God may get glory, it is all one,
as a Candle under a ^ushell, there is no glory to God, no light to others. What
profit is there in gold it self, that is so precious if it be still in the
Mine? The Mine may be rich, there may be gold in the Mine, but it is not a
Treasure. It is of use when it is out of the Mine, and when it is in the hands
of men, and accommodated to use, then it brings good to others, and to it
self, it gets luster, and glory. So it is with all graces, they are virtues
and graces while they are in the Mine, in the habit, in the inner man, before
they come to use and action, yet they are not profitable. What profit at all
is there in faith, if it do not fructify? Or in charity, if it do not work?
Or in repentance, if we do not humble our selves? Or in obedience, it cannot
be called obedience, for that is full of action, but what is obedience, if
there be no exercise, and practice of obedience? Here is the second latitude,
when we have got the habit, we are not come to perfection, there must action
follow. Knowledge availes not, without practice, we must go therefore from
strength to strength, from knowledge to practice, from possession to use, from
habit to act; that is, from strength to strength.

Besides this, there is a third, and I will add a fourth, and put them
together. Besides habits, and acts, there is a consideration of degrees, and
multiplying of acts; so the third, and fourth consideration, is from one action
of Piety to another; stay not in one, or two, or three, but still go on. That
is to be fruitful, and when we have attained one, or two degrees, if grace
stay not, but go further, that is to climb up. That is the rule the Apostle
sets in Phillip. 3. He pressed forward to the mark. St. Paul got a great
mastery, and conquest over Error, and sin, and made a great progress in the
way of Piety, none ever came nearer perfection, then St. Paul; and at that
time, when he wrote, he was still in motion, and action, yet still he did go
forward, step, after step, he was content with no mediocrity, I press toward
the mark, I labor for the end of the race. There is the same in Heb. 6. he
bids them go on to perfection; there must be a proceeding. It is well
expressed in Revel. 22. He that is holy, let him be holy still, he that is
righteous, let him be righteous still. What! shall we think it is only meant
of perseverance, to keep at the same stay, in the same proportion of holiness,
and righteousness? That is not it, but it adds the degrees, the multiplied
acts, he that is holy, let him be more holy, and he that is righteous, let him
be more righteous. These are the degrees of grace, by which we must ascend to
Heaven.

If any ask me how many, and what those Degrees are?

That Question cannot be resolved by any, who can tell the dust of Jacob? I
will not say as it is in one place of Scripture, you may as well number the
dust of the earth, for there is nothing of Earth in grace, but I say as God
said to Jacob, See if thou can tell the Stars in the sky; we may as easily
number the Stars of Heaven, as number the degrees of the ascents of grace, that
carries up to it. For if they be not so great, and so many, the degrees of
grace; yet thus far, who can tell the steps of Jacobs Ladder? There is a Ladder
spiritual, better then that that he saw, the several steps that lead to
Heaven, it is as hard to number them as the steps of that. It is true, some of
the Fathers have gone about for our better direction, to give us an account of
some numbers of degrees. St. Gregory in one or two places names fifteen
degrees of ascent to perfection, in the scale of perfection, answerable to the
fifteen degrees that carried up to the Sanctuary. But they are far more,
therefore Johannes Climachus doubles the number, he makes the degrees thirty,
but infinitely short: for there are a greater number of graces, and virtues, and
there are twice as many degrees of every grace. St. Bernard reckons seven
degrees of humility, that is but one grace of the quire, what do you think are
the multitudes of degrees of the rest? And the degrees that he names, are the
degrees that he conceives have been attained, who can tell the degrees that
have not been attained? Therefore stay this question, the degrees are not to be
numbered, but go on, it is an indefinite, as I told you.

But what encouragement is there? If there be no period that is an endless
work, and that that is endless affords no comfort.

No, it is not endless as Statius says of an Old man that was busy in
planting, when one asked the reason why Old men should plant, they plant Trees
in the earth, whither themselves are going, they are never like to eat of the
fruit: And who plants a Vineyard and does not eat of the fruit of it? O but
says he, they do good for succession, they plant Trees that may profit
another age. So, a Christian, admit he do not come to the top, to the highest
degree in this World, we plant grace that may bring us to another age, that may
bring comfort, and glory in Heaven. We do not look to reap the fruit of our
labors here, admit the pitch of all, be not attained to here, it is reserved
for Heaven; here we dig, that there we may reap the fruit. But God of purpose
has set perfection out of our reach, that we may still be proficients, and go
on forward, and labor after it.

It is not with the growth of the mind, as it is with the body; in the growth
of the body there is a peculiar stature set, a height, and pitch of every
Creature, there is no Creature that is capable of growth, but has a pitch. In
the life of man there are those three states of growing, keeping, and loosing.
First, we grow till we come to a pitch, and then we do not presently decline,
but there is a time to keep that we have got; that expired, we come to decline,
and lose. So it is in all Creatures, plants, and living Creatures, and man,
there is a stature set. Only the Naturalists observe, that the Crokadile has
no pitch; they say of that, it grows as long as it lives: therefore some of
them come to an incredible magnitude; but all other Creatures have a stature
set. It is not so in the growth of the mind, there is no stature, or period,
but when a man has gotten the greatest fulness as he conceives, there is
still some piece of work to do, there is an Vltra, something to be added
further. When he has gotten never so much knowledge, there is somewhat of
learning, and knowledge that is not perfect till he come to Heaven, when he
has the highest pitch. As we know in part, so faith is in part, it is weak
faith, the strongest faith it is capable of some addition, and increase. There
is an Vltra in faith, and repentance, and obedience, and every grace, if there
be an Ultra of excellency, there mnst be of growth; if there be an excellency
of somewhat that we have not, we must advance to that that we have not. There
was no Apostle, or Prophet (and they were the Creatures that came nearest the
perfection of grace in the World) that ever attained to such a pitch, but still
they would climb higher, and come further; and they each of them had their
Vltra. As Gregory Nicene says well, every man has something that he may yet
amend, and repair his decays; there is somewhat more to be gotten.

Here is the issue of the Point, since there be no particular degree we can set
to our selves, the Scripture calls on us still to grow, and go forward, and
climb higher, from strength to strength, from one act of righteousness to
another, and so to another; here is from strength to strength. Here is the last
latitude.

But indeed it is a Doctrine we are not much acquainted with; in the Theorie we
are, for we can hardly be ignorant of it: but in exercise, to look for growth,
or to care to advance to these pitches of strength, few men look after it. The
growth of Christians in the World is very small, shall we not think it an
injury done to these times, and to this age of the Church? Though something may
be pleaded, put those pleas, and see whither it be not an evident thing now in
the latter times of the world, the charity, and zeal of men are cold, and
small, and there is little care to Grow from strength to strength.

First, one plea that may be alleged, is this, surely there is a great pitch,
and stature of virtue, and grace, among men now, because they equalize the
stature of former times.

No, that is not so, as Jacob said to Pharaoh, I have not attained to the age
of my Fathers. In these declining times of the Church, we do not attain to
the stature of our Fathers. There are not those Masculine heroic Saints, there
is not the faith of Abraham, nor the patience of Job, nor the humbleness of
mind of Paul, nor the repentance of David.

I will not urge it there, it may be you think that you are not to expect to
come so high, to come to their stastature, they were Giants, men of great
stature.

Nay, we have not attained the stature of inferior Saints, that have been but
a little before us; there is less conscience by far, and less uprightness,
and integrity, and less justice, and more love of our selves, and more love of
the World by far, then in the age that is but in our memory.

Whereas Historians make a great question concerning the stature of men, and it
is disputed both ways, whither the stature of men now, be not less then in
former times; though something be said both ways, yet it is the general
Opinion of the Ancients, Pliny, and Angelius, and he quotes Homer that in his
time the stature of men was not so great as in former times. Be it so, or no,
concerning the corporal stature, I am sure it is so concerning our spiritual
stature; we come far short of that strength, and luster of piety, we do not
bring so much glory to God, though our means be better then any time of the
Church, we do not come near any degree of them; we are dwarfs in grace, in
respect of them, we come far short. That plea will not serve, and that is not
greatly material.

But, though we attain not the stature of others, yet we have a competent
stature of our selves.

Not so neither, men do not look to stature, they do not delight to excel;
if they get a little formallity, and semblance of some grace, to be accounted
such, and such in the World, this is the greatest pitch that men look after;
here is the Worlds perfection, as Lucetius says of Diaphantes, he was so
little a man, that he says he was borne of Attoms. Such is our stature, that
we may justly think that we are made of Attoms. Yet that may be celestial, as
Publius said of the Family of the Lentuli, every Generation was less, till at
last they came to Decrescit genus Christianorum. We decline, the World is not
so old, as the Church seems to be, and Piety is as decrepit as the corporal
strength of most men. There are great shows of stature sometimes, and of zeal,
but as Pliny said of Publius Emmeus, he was a little man, and he set up for
himself a great Statue. So, we set up great Statues, and Trophies, but our
stature is small, like Zacheus, there is little faith, little piety, we are of
such low stature that we can hardly reach to the sight of Christ. Therefore
that will not serve, we have hardly any competence of stature in our selves, so
short are we of those that are gone before. But in the third place, our means
of growth are not so great, if men have not convenient nourishment, and those
opportunities that may further stature, it cannot be expected. Nay, that will
not serve neither, our means of growth are many; there is far more Preaching
of the word now, then has been in former times. We have our weekly repair at
least to the House of God, our monthly repair to the Table of the Lord, in
both these there is spiritual refection, and opportunity of strength. We come
often, Six or Seven times in the Year, to the one, and may come often in the
Week to the other. Were our condition so with our bodies, we would think that
we were in a desperate estate, that we should feed hard, and have plenty of
nourishment, and great opportunities, and Cordialls, and the like, and yet no
strength, nor growth, certainly we would conclude that that man were in a
Consumption. It is so with us, we have opportunity, and means to thrive, and
yet as I said before, we are Dwarfs to them that were before us, and yet we
stand upon their Shoulders. A Dwarf that stands upon a Giants shoulders, may
see further then the Giant can, we stand upon their Shoulders, and yet we see
not half so far as they; notwithstanding all the means of grace, we come to
nothing in growth and perfection.

But lastly, though our nourishment be plentiful, our temper, and constitution
is not so good; God has not given it to us, as he did to them.

Nay, our stomachs are as sharp, and as great. I will make it plain in other
things; here we are forward, and zealous of growing in worldly things, there we
have appetite enough, but misplaced: Who puts a pitch, or period to his
ambitious thoughts? They would grow still in honor, and preferment. Ambition
many times looks after honor, and never looks behind it. Men complain then,
that they are not Elephants, and Co^^^h's, their stature is nothing. In Worldly
things they (...) be Collossa's. The covetous man for Riches has Appetite
enough, he would grow on from Riches to Riches, there are no bounds that he
sets ^o himself. As he in Plato, he was called Grando, because he would have
every thing great; he would have a great Hat, and great Shoes, and great
Garments; so we would have every thing great but grace, there any pittance
contents us, any modicum is enough; nay, it may be too much. In other things we
are insatiable, in plenty; in grace, and virtue we are insensible, in w^nt:
Poverty does not pinch us in grace, and plenty does not satisfy us in worldly
things, therefore it is plain, we do not want Appetite, if we had the same
Appetite to grace, as we have to the World, there would be growth. But the
true reason is, we care not for growing; we set not our minds on it, if we did,
we would do those things that men that labor after stature do. Men that
would be of high stature, they feed hard, and often, and take measure of their
stature how they grow, and if a man find after convenient nourishment, that he
does not batten, he thinks there is some impediment, and labors to remove it.
We should do so with our souls, if we did take measure, and see how we have
profited since the last Sermon, or since the last year, or the last receiving
of the Mysteries, then we would find since our spiritual growth is so little,
that there is some distemper, our meat goes through us, it stays not with us,
it does not turn to spiritual nourishment.

If we did take account of our stature it might be had, it is not harder in
grace, nay, it is easier; for we cannot add a Cubit to our corporal man, but
we may add more in our spiritual. But it is carelessnesse, here is the true
reason.

Here is ground for Exhortation, where there is defect, there is ground for
Exhortation; let this be it, make it the work, the good, and benefit of this
days service, lay up this resolution to look after growth in strength. An
Exhortation a man would think might be spared; as the Orator well observes in
another case. There are somethings beyond Exhortation, they need it not, things
that are by the instinct of nature, that men do of themselves, who needs to be
Exhorted to be willing to live long, or to be strong, and in Health? Every man
naturally enclines to it, every man is willing to have a comely stature:
therefore it is a wonder that we should stand in need of these Exhortations in
point of grace, yet we are so dead, and lumpish, and insensible, that
Exhortations will not work upon us. Let this be the Exhortation, that we may
remember this one, and it is a duty that conteins all; because I cannot stand
on it, there are but these two motives that I will use.

It is necessary for us to grow; necessary in regard of it self, and necessary
in regard of God.

In regard of God, he has given us all things that lead to perfection, and
growth, he would have us walk in the practice of every grace, to bring forth
fruit in the practice of every virtue, he would have us yield obedience to the
Commands he gives, those many Commands in the Book of God, that should make us
produce these several graces, and come to these several degrees. We had need
to grow, when we look upon the work we have to do in the World, that God will
call us to account for, after.

Then it is necessary also, in regard of the state, and pitch that God has set
us. Take it in it self, or comparatively.

In it self, it is the state of perfection, we are called to be perfect, to
labor after perfection: Now how should a a man labor to grow, that has the
state of perfection set him? It is true, our perfection here is in proficiency,
and acknowledging our imperfection, and advancing to perfection: But this is
the greatest perfection, because this is an inducement to grow, perfection is
set, that is far from us.

Then comparatively, the stature that is set us is the state of Angels, and of
Heaven, we pray to do Gods will, as the Angels, and Saints in Heaven. If we
pray we must practice, and labor to do it. O! How had he need to grow that
must come to the perfection of Angels? How high must he grow, that must grow
as high as Heaven? The Poets when they would set things high, they do it by an
Hyperbole, as high as Heaven. So every one of us, as in our affections, and
desires of virtue, must grow as high as Heaven, or else we shall never come
there. This should not discourage us, a low stature may reach Heaven, if we
cannot come to it, it will come to us, in every grace there is somewhat of
Heaven.

But there is a higher pitch then Heaven set us, The increase of God, and The
stature of Christ. How high must men grow that must grow (according to our
proportion, to the similitude of God, Be perfect as your Heavenly Father is
perfect, be merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful.) How should a man
grow, that will grow to be merciful as God is? We cannot come to that pitch,
yet we may in similitude, though not in equallity, though not in his
proportion, yet in ours, we may come to be perfect men, according to the
measure of the stature of Christ. You know what an infinite height of wisdom
there was in the stature of Christ, as man* In him is all the fulness of
wisdom, and the treasures of knowledge, full of grace and truth, all grace was
full, and perfect. Therefore as Christ had the most absolute pitch and stature
that is possible for Angels to conceive; so Christians that make the mystical
stature of Christ, must labor to grow to a high pitch, that they may not seem
unworthy Members of so glorious, and excellent a body. It is necessary
therefore that we grow, and a great deal of need, because of these pitches
that are set us.

Then, it is not only a necessary, but an honorable thing. It is observed of
the Ancients for corporal stature, and it is a good Opinion of them, Homer
always brought in his Heroes, his worthies, he presented them in tall, high
stature. Hector, and Ulysses, and Agamemnon, these that were Prin^es, men of
renoune, he made them come in tall stature. Pliny says that tall stature used
to be a portment fit for Princes. Therefore Augustus is commended for that, and
Cornelius for the same, and Procopius concerning Beresebius. And the Scripture
gives the same commendation of Joseph, Genesis 39. Joseph was a goodly person. And
Saul was higher then all the people, from the Shoulders upward. And Herodotus
observes, that the Ethiopians use to choose their Kings of the highest stature.
And in Plutarch it is observed, that the Lacedaemonians set a Mulct upon one,
because he had married a little wife, because they thought it would be a
disparagement of the Princes that should be brought forth. If they had so good
respect to the stature of the outward man, how goodly is it to be so
spiritually to God. For corporal stature sometimes is not an Ornament; for if
the mind be not answerable it is rather a disgrace; and it may be beyond those
proportions that are required in Decency of stature. But we cannot exceed in
the spiritual, no measure can exceed. Therefore if it be a thing so
honorable, and so lovely, with men, and of God, he that is so, comes near the
similitude of Christ, and of God, and is nearest the state of Tryumphants, and
most out of the millitant state, he is most in Heaven, and has most of God in
him. Then I will shut up this point with the Exhortation of St. Jerome, in one
of his Epistles, that we all take care, as we grow in days, and years, so to
grow in the knowledge of God, in grace, and virtue, in the strength of virtue
that it may be said of us, as Paul says of the Thessalonians, that their faith
did grow exceedingly, and their love one toward another abounded. That is to
grow from strength to strength.

I have done with that.

There is a piece behind, another general part, almost half the Text; but it
will not now bear a general handling. It is the rest of all, it takes away
the objection, From strength to strength, but when shall we rest? When we
appear before God in Zion. There is the time of remuneration, and rest.

There are three passages remarkable, I will but mention them.

The glorious place, Zion.

And a glorious presence there, They appear before God in Zion.

And then Every one of them appear.

I will but touch them briefly, for there is a double signification of all
these three.

First, Zion has a double signification in Scripture.

There is Zion in the Mount, There is Zion in the Valley,
Though the low Zion be called Mount Zion in Scripture, it is but a Valley to
Heaven: but there is spiritual Zion, that is mystical, that in the proper
ordinary acception, signifies the House of God below: but in a more sublime
acception, the Church of God above, the place of bliss. The Lamb upon Mount
Zion. Revel. 14. and Heb. 12. We are come to an innumerable company of Angels,
to the Church of the first borne in Heaven, to Mount Zion. Mount Zion is taken
for Heaven it self.

Then answerable to these two acceptions of Zion; there is a double appearing
before God mentioned.

The appearing before God in glory. And the appearing in the Courts of his
presence, in the House of his worship below. The appearing before God in the
Mount of Vision, when we shall see Face to face, when we shall see as we are
seen; and know as we are known. And the appearing before God in the Valley of
Vision, the Valley of tears, the Church below. That so often as we present holy
performances, more especially when we come into his Courts, and enter into the
Gates of his presence. The Church of God is the Chamber of his presence, there
we make our appearing. St. Paul tells us of our appearing before God, in the
Mount of vision above; not only in that place, We shall all apeare before the
judgment seat of Christ; but in Collos. 3. When Christ who is our life shall
appear, we shall appear with him in glory. The fruition of glory is called
our appearing before God in glory.

Of the other David speaks, when he complains, O when shall I come, and
appear before God! It is the Speech of an Exile. David was a banished man from
the House of God, he had not free access to repair thither, therefore that
made his great complaint, When shall I appear? That is, when shall I enter
into thy presence, and tread in thy ^ourts? It is worthy our consideration,
that we come to the Church especially to appear before God; we should take
this consideration, to make us come with reverence, and preparedness, because
we come into a glorious presence. It should make us take heed how we behave our
selves here, in these places of Divine service, because we are in the presence
of God. If we be conv^rsant in Prayer, we appear in a special manner before
God; fall low before his Footstool. If we hear the word of God, we appear
before his presence. When we come to hear the word read, or Preached, we are
at the foot of the Mount, as the People received the Law. When we repair to
the Table of the Lord, we come in a special manner into Gods presence, we
appear before him, because Christ is present there, he gives himself for
food, and God is present, for he accepts us in Christ. Therefore if we so fit
our selves to come into the presence of a man that is better then our selves,
that we may come with sobriety, and acceptance; how should we fit our selves
to come before God, in these inferior places of our appearing? It is true, we
are always present to him, and he to us; but his eye, though it be always upon
us, ours is not always upon him; but then our eyes are directed to him, when
we come into his Courts; it is called therefore appearing before God.

Lastly, there is the illation that knits both together, in those two words,
Every one. That is, then every one.

There is one word that is a word of connection, and Then, what time? Then, when
we are grown to stature, when we have gotten from one degree of strength to
another. We must not offer to come into Gods presence unless we bring the
Wedding Garment, some stature, this clothing of Virtue, and grace. When we
come to appear before him, there will be an account taken of each man's
strength, how he has profitted by each of these several Ordinances of grace:
God will look that we give account of our proficiency, by all the means of
Salvation. When we come to the House of God, and to the Table of the Lord, we
should bethink our selves, what strength we bring, what stature we come with.
Much more when we appear before God in Heaven; there shall be no appearing
before God in Heaven, unless there there be a perfection of competency. Heaven
is made for the perfect. Paul dares not think of Heaven, till he have finished
his course; and Christ calls to God to glorify him, when he had done his work.
I have done the work that thou gave me to do, glorify thy Son. We must not
look to appear before God in glory, unless we go through these degrees of
grace, then we shall appear before God, when we are come from strength to
strength.

Then, there is a word of distribution, it is not all of them, but every one.
The universal collective would have done it: Paul says, We shall all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ. But it is more emphaticall, Every one,
each man in the whole, and each one for himself. Every one comes, and appears
before God. In these Courts of his House, though it be in a Crowd, God observes
every man's carriage, and proficiency: God takes special notice when there are
thousands, as if there were but one, but all here are present before God. Much
more when we come into his presence of glory, then every one shall appear, God
will take account of every one, what Oil he has in his Lamp, what improvement
he has made of his Tallents. Then there shall be notice of each man's state,
and measure, of every man's height, what growth he is come to, and according to
his stature, shall be his reward, and Crown. The higher stature, the higher
measure of glory; to him that has gained five Talents shall be given five
Cities; to him that has gained two, two Cities; to him that has gone
through many degrees of virtue, and strength, and has glorified God by an
habitual practice of piety, there shall be a high reward, to them that have
gone From strength to strength, there shall be an addition of glory to glory.

THE Vigilant Servant. DELIVERED IN TWO SERMONS, BY That Learned, and reverend
Divine RICHARD HOLSWORTH, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Vice Chancellor of
Cambridge; Master of Emmanuel College, and late Preacher at PETER'S POOR in
LONDON.

2 Chronicles. 20.12. We know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons in Alders-gate-streete. 1650.

SERMON I.
PSALM. 123.2. Behold, as the eyes of Servants look unto the hand of their
Masters, and as the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress: So our
eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us.


FOR the satisfying of your expectations I have therefore made choice of this
Text at this time; as being very agreeable, whither I look to the parts of the
Auditory, or the whole, or to the time, or to what circumstance soever. For the
lower part, Servants may learn their duty. For the upper, Masters may have the
understanding of theirs. And for all, your conditions are such, that you are
those that have been held a long time between hope, and fear, with doubtful
news, and ambiguous, and neutrall expectations. And I may well presume it of
you, because I measure you by my self: I my self that am wavering, have been
wearied and tortured both with good, and bad tidings, as desirous as you to
reap the comfort if they be good, or at least to know the certainty if they be
bad. I have for several days gone through Texts for both parts of the day,
because I was resolved to proportion my Meditations to the times, however
things fall out; but at length, finding no true ground to proceed by, no
certainty in this World, of any thing almost, we are not certain of our
selves; therefore I did resolve, and pitch upon this Scripture, that I might
yet at least raise your expectations a little higher, and bring you from these
neutrall thoughts, to settled thoughts of Heaven; that I might bring you from
these carnal dependencies upon man by the ear, to a sweet, and comfortable
resting, and settling, and fixing, and waiting with your eyes upon God.

And that cannot be done better then by this Scripture that I have read to you.
It was penned for this very purpose, for the sustaining of the Church in
doubtful exigents, or any great extremity. That this is the intendment of the
words, appears by the very scope of the Psalm, which is nothing but this, a
Psalm of confidence for the Church of God, when she should be in any state of
affliction. And if the scope of the Psalm were silent, yet the very time would
speak how it corresponds; it is the fourth of the fifteen that are called
Psalms of Degrees; because they were sung upon the fifteen ascents that were
to go to the Temple; and so many ascents I have had in doubtful expectation;
it is now fifteen days since the first heavy tidings came to our ears, and
yet we are not certain. Therefore now since we cannot find any part of truth
on Earth, let us have recourse to Heaven, we shall be sure to find them there.
And the whole Book of God is nothing else but tidings brought from Heaven to
Earth, from God to his Creature, Evangelion, the good tidings.

That was the course of the Saints in all exigents, still to have recourse to
God by praying to him; so we shall be sure to understand the end of these
thing; if we wait upon God for the issue, he will send it in good time; if we
follow the example of the Prophet David here, as good Servants, to abide his
leisure till he have mercy upon us. I shall handle the other clauses (but I
shall dwell upon the last) because I shall have opportunity to remember your of
that duty, that otherwise I had not spoken of, but that the Text (...) on it.

That this is the drift at which the words (...) Verse demonstrates, for there
is somewhat in every Verse. In the first two Verses there is somewhat of our
comfort, or lifting up our eyes to God, the waiting upon God in Prayer. In the
last two Verses th^re is somewhat of our affliction, We are filled with
contempt, in Verse. 3. Our soul is filled with the scornful reproach of the
proud. Verse. 4. Is not this our case? If not your souls have not your ears
been filled, at least some of you, with the scornful reproaches of the proud?
that have asked, where is now your hope? And your help? Give them leave to
enjoy themselves, but remember it is not so much for them to boast in a state
flying, as those that are in hope of pursuit. But let them support their
tottering ruinous cause, by insolent Questions; the Psalmist has taught us,
both what to do, and what to answer: Our hope and help stands in the name of
the Lord. There is our answer. As the eyes of Servants are to the hands of
their Masters, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God. There is our refuge.

To this holy resolution if I can bring you by handling these words, I shall
think my labor very well bestowed; and think it a happy turn that you have
had these doubtful thoughts, to set you upon the Rack of torture all this
while. And that I may do it the better, look upon the words in particular, and
I will consider in them now these four things only. There is The Covenant,
The Copy, The Parallel, The Date, or Duration,


There is the Covenant, in the which all Christians do enter here in the
person of David, and that is to give God the delight of their eyes, the
strength of every part, the glory of that most excellent sense, to be
excercised in that act of Religion, of lifting up their eyes to God.

Then, there is the Copy out of which we draw this Covenant, or this duty;
that is in these words, As the eyes of Servants look to the hands of their
Masters, and the eyes of a Maiden upon the hands of her Mistress.

Then there is the parallel wherewith we match this Copy, in those words. So
do our eyes wait upon the Lord our God.

Then, the Date, or duration of the whole, it is, Till he have mercy upon us.
These are the four parts. The Duty, the Direction. The proficiency. The
perpetuation. And all these are presented unto your view by an awaking particle
set in the front.

Behold. An ordinary word, but here it has an extraordinary positure.
Ordinarily, it is a term of attention, used for the awakening of men, to stir
up their admiration, and audience: but here it is a word not only prefixed for
the exciting of men, but of God himself. David is speaking to God in his
Meditations. Behold, says he. As we take it with respect to God, so it is a
precatory particle: he beseeches God to look down upon him, while he looks up
unto God; look on us, as we look to thee, Behold Lord, as the eyes of
Servants, etc.

If we take it as it has respect to man, so it is an exemplary particle, to
stir them up to do the like. Behold, what we do, and do likewise; let your
eyes be like ours. Behold, as the eyes of Servants are to the hand of their
Masters, so are our eyes to the Lord our God. Let yours have the same fixing.
So it is a word that draws all eyes after it to imitation. I hope it will be a
word that will draw your ears after it to attention in the several
perticulars, as I speak of them in order.

I begin with the first of these, that is, the duty here set down, the duty
insisted in, the basis of the whole, the lifting up the eyes to God. We may
take it, either by way of declaration, as a thing that was done; or by way of
Covenant, as a thing that they promised to do. It is either a protestation of
what they would do, or an attestation of what they did. Well, couch it under
both notions, it has a double force, Our eyes are upon the Lord our God, and
our eyes shall be upon the Lord our God. We have it expressed in all variety in
other places of the Psalms.

In all variety of Tenses, In all variety of Objects, In all variety of
Instruments.
For the Tenses, in one Psalm it is set down in the Present. Unto thee do I
lift up mine eyes O thou that dwell in the Heavens. In another Psalm in the
Future; I will lift up m^ne eyes to the Hills from whence comes my help.
These two make up the perfect frame of a man's life; he that does for the
present, and promises for the future, he gives God both services in sincerity
in the one, and in constancy in the other; without either of these,
Christianity is lame. It is not enough to say, I do, unless we add, I will;
and it is not enough to say, I will, unless we for the present do, I do,
without I will, is inconstancy, and I will, without I do, is Hypocrisy;
therefore it is se^ down in both forms, we do, and we will lift up our ey^^.
There are both Tenses.

There is the variety of all kind of objects expressed, that concerns God, it is
expressed in great variety of objects. In one Psalm, I will lift up mine eyes to
thy holy Oracles. In another, I will lift up mine eyes to the Hills. In a
third, I will lift up mine eyes to Heaven. In many, I will lift up m^ne eyes to
the Lord. These all have mutual dependence one upon another; for God gives the
glory to all these. He that lifts up his eyes to God, lifts them to Heaven,
because it is Gods Throne; he that lifts up his eyes to Heaven, lifts them to
the Hills. The Heavens are those Mountains of Spices, those hills of
excellency, Hills transparent for substance, beyond all apprehension, for
altitude. And he that lifts up his eyes to the hills, lifts them to Gods
Oracles; it is from those hills that are both more holy, and more high, then
Sinai, that the Oracles of wisdom are derived from God himself; there are all
variety of objects.

And it is set down also, with all variety of instruments, for expression. To
thee will I lift up mine eyes, in one Psalm. To thee will I lift up my hands,
in another Psalm. To thee will I lift up my voice, in another Psalm. To thee
will I lift up my soul, in a fourth Psalm. Here is a mutual dependence
again. Now the whole soul offers her self to God as a Handmaid, but she
goes attended with the Virgins that are her Companions, as the Psalmist speaks.
For the Tongue, and Eyes, and Hands, depend upon the soul, and are serviceable
to it. If the soul have an intendment to lift up the heart to God, then the
hands will be ready to express her affections, and the Tongue will be ready to
express her notions, and the Eye will be ready to share in the beatificall,
excellent Vision; here is variety in regard of Instruments. So that now we may
take it either way, or both ways, when David speaks of lifting up his eyes, we
may understand it, both of the eyes of the body, and the eyes of the mind, for
the eyes of the mind, they quicken, and direct, the eyes of the body; and the
eyes of the body, they testify the devotion, and ejaculations of the mind, the
one serves the other.

For the eyes of the body, it is their proper duty to look up to God, God has
made them for that purpose, he set them, and gave them that positure, he has
set them in the head aloft, that they might be conversant still in beholding,
as Gregory Nycene speaks; their Original, and creation that is derived from
above, that with them man might behold him that gave him being, that he might
look up to Heaven. There are no creatures besides, that have their eyes set so
lofty as man, and man for this purpose.

For the eyes of the mind too, God has endued the mind with grace, and reason,
and for what end? That while he is upon Earth, he should know which way to have
his converse in Heaven, which cannot otherwise be done, but by the mind, that
now while he is in the body, he might make himself present with the Lord: he
cannot do it, but by lifting up of the heart. So it is both these eyes that
are meant here, I lift up mine eyes to thee. And to show that both are meant,
the Plural is used: the word is used four times in these two Verses, and it
is Plural in all. Once in the first Verse, and thrice in this Verse. Unto thee
I lift mine eyes, and the eyes of a Servant, and the eyes of a Handmaid: So
do our eyes. David runs upon it often, to point out that it should be done
always; or to show the diversity of eyes that are in us. There are but two of
the body, but there are many more of the mind. That that is said of the Saints
glorified, of the living Creatures, Revel. 4. That they were full of eyes,
before, and behind. There is good reason to be given of that, why they should
be full of eyes, before, and behind; because they were to receive happiness in
every part. Seeing beatificall happiness consists in Vision, they must be all
eye, that they may be all blessed, that they may be full of vision, they are
full of eyes, before, and behind; there is good reason that the glorified
Saints should be full of eyes. And there is good reason that the Saints
millitant should be full of eyes too: The eyes that they have, have both
positures, to look back to the promises fullfilled, and to look forward to the
promises that are to be fulfilled; and to look down upon Earth, but not except
it be to the contempt of it, and to look up to Heaven with a desire after it,
they have eyes within, and eyes without, that both may be directed to God. They
are full of eyes. There is the eye of devotion, that is lift up in Prayer. In
the morning will I direct my Prayer to thee, and will look up. Where ever
there is Prayer, there is looking up. Prayer is the Messenger that we send up,
and the eye is a second Messenger that we send after it, for Conduct; the eye
carries the Candle to our Prayers, to lead them the way to Heaven, it goes
before them, to point them the way, there is the eye of Devotion in Prayer, and
there is the eye of contemplation, that is lift up in meditation, and the eye
of faith that is lift up to God in trust, and beleiving. There is the eye of
patience in hope, and the eye of attendance in giving obedience to God. Look
how many heavenly duties there are, so many eyes there are. Because there is no
duty or work can be done without the light of the eye, it is that that is the
Guide, and light. So now, the sum of all is this, that it is a special act of
Religion to lift up our eyes to God. It is an act of Religion, not only for
the mind, but to lift up the eyes of the body. It shall appear to be an act of
Religion, easily, an act of piety by the contrary. The Scripture uses the
other, the contrary, as an act of superstition, and Idolatry. In Ezekiel. 18. God
blames them there and threatens them, because they lifted up their eyes to the
Idols of the House of Israel, they lift up their eyes, that is, they
Worshipped them; it was an act of Religion, it was religious worship they gave
them, when they lifted up their eyes. When we lift up our eyes to God, it is an
Act of piety, it is so, and we must make it so. There is good reason why we
should make it so. We owe God the strength of our bodies, as well as of our
souls. He that says, we shall worship God withal our soul, says we shall
worship God with all our strength. If we owe God the strength of our bodies, we
owe him no part more then the eye. The eyes are the glory of the body, those
Lamps have more of Heaven, then any part of the body, there is no part of the
body that pertakes so much of Heaven, as the eye. There is no part that God
bestowed so much cost on in the creation, as on the eye. Therefore the strength
of the eye must return upon him, the curiosity of the eye is such, that all
the Jewels, and precious stones in the World, are not able to match the
excellency of the eye. The next reason is, because when the soul is lifted up,
if the eye go with it, it makes a perfect Elevation. There is the soul for
all within, and the eye carries all without, there is a perfect elevation of
the whole man.

Then the third reason is, because the soul cannot be lifted up without the
eye; for there is no part that the soul shows it self so much in, as in the
eye. What ever the affection of the heart be, it will appear in the eye. If it
be sorrow, it will appear in the eye, the eye will be dejected. If it be
anger, the eye will sparkle. If it be devotion, the eye will be lift up. It is
the very beams, the strength of the beams of the eye, when they are enlivened
by faith, that pierce Heaven, as well as our words pierce Heaven with
ejaculations. God reads the very notions, and thoughts of our hearts, in our
eyes: though he need not these ways to know them, for he reads them in the
heart it self, but when the eye testifies them, it is a testimony of that we
think, given by our eye. There are many testimonies in the lifting up the eyes
to Heaven.

First, it is a testimony of a beleiving, humble heart. Infidelity will never
carry a man above the Earth. Pride can carry a man no higher then the Earth
neither. The proud man looks aloft, his eyes are high, yet they are below, they
are upon the Earth still; the loftiness is the lowness; there is nothing
lower then pride. The humble man's eye is aloft, though it be below, and the
proud man's eye is low, though it be aloft; infidelity, and pride, will not
carry above the Earth; but faith carries to Heaven, to the Throne of God, and
looks on him as a helper, as a rewarder, and a Judge. It is a testimony of a
beleiving heart.

And the lifting up of the eye, it is a testimony of an obedient heart. A man
that lifts up his eye to God, he acknowledges thus much, Lord, I am thy
Servant, he acknowledges that he has all from him, his body, and his soul;
his body is not his own, his eyes are not his own, but for Gods service; he
acknowledges that he will dedicate to God both soul, and body, that he will
subject both to his will, and appointment. It is a testimony of an obedient
heart.

And it is a testimony thirdly, of a thankful heart. A man that lifts up his
eyes to Heaven, acknowledges that he receives every good blessing, every
perfect gift from above, that he receives all from the hand of God. It is a
testimony of a thankful heart.

Then, it is a testimony of a Heavenly heart, he that lifts up his eyes to
Heaven, acknowledges that he is weary of the Earth, his heart is not there,
his hope, and desire is above. A man will cast his eye where his wishes are; he
will often cast his eyes where his heart is. Either we are all Hypocrites, or our
hearts are in Heaven. If we constantly lift our eyes to Heaven, and have our
hearts on Earth, we play the egregious Hypocrites with God. If we lift our eyes
up to Heaven, and our hearts are not there, judge what you do. God looks upon
that heart, that sends up those eyes, and sees whither the heart be there; for
the lifting up of the eyes, is a testimony of a Heavenly heart. If we lift not
up the heart when we lift up the eye, we tell a lie to God with our eyes. It is
a testimony of a heavenly heart.

It is a testimony of a devout heart, there is no part of the body besides the
Tongue that is so great an Agent in Prayer, as the eye. The Tongue is the
greatest in vocal prayer, but the eye must be next the Tongue, nay in one
thing above the Tongue; for in Prayer the eye is the Interpreter of the heart,
together with the Tongue. Nay, and further, it is not only the hearts
Interpreter, but the hearts intelligencer, which the Tongue is not; for as a
man takes order for his way, he spies, and discernes what he can discover, if
there be any danger; the eye is the light of all the body: So a man that
humbles himself in Prayer, he lifts up his eyes to Heaven, he looks and spies
whence Salvation comes, where he shall have help, and whence he receives
comfort; the soul looks up, and the eye spies out in what distress soever we
are: If we be disconsolate, the eye looks up for comfort: If we be in
persecution, the eye looks about for rest: If we be burdened, the eye looks
for ease; if we be in want, the eye looks for supply, in every affliction, the
eye spies out the comfort for all; the eye is the souls Intelligencer,
therefore the lifting up of the eyes is the argument of a devout heart. Because
all these good things come from above, from God, therefore the soul is lifted
up, and whenever the soul goes to be lifted up, the eye as a good Servant
waits on it, it never goes alone.

Therefore we must labor, and exercise our selves to give God the glory of our
eyes, as well as the glory of our Lips, and then we give him the glory of our
eyes, when we lift up our eyes, and lift up such eyes as God requires. What
eyes are those?

Let us take heed what eyes we lift up. There are adulterous eyes, there are
proud, and haughty eyes, take heed of bringing these to God, close them, close
them rather, wink when you come to God, open not those eyes.

First, therefore bring eyes that are chaste, they are Doves eyes that must look
up to that God of purity. Then, they must be humble eyes that must look to that
Throne of Majesty, they must not be eyes that are fastidious, and lustful.
Then, they must be innocent eyes, not bloud-shot, not revengefull eyes, that
must look up to that God of mercy, and goodness. O how pure had a man need to
make his eyes, that will look up to God? How pure should his heart be, and his
eyes be? He must be purified in every part. The eye is the purest part.

If a man do but look upon the Sun, he cannot look with his own eyes, but he
must borrow eyes of others, both pure, and strong eyes. Now the eyes of the
mind are the strongest, if the heart be kept innocent, and upright, and in
purity, let us bring these eyes to God, look up to him with these eyes.

I must cut off my self in my Meditations, the time runs on with swifter Wings
then Speech.

I go to the next point. Thus much of the duty, that is, the Basis of the
whole. Now the other is more special, the second is the pattern, the Copy
that he propounds to himself to write by.

As the eyes of Servants look to the hands of their Masters, and the eyes of a
Maiden to the hands of her Mistress. There is the Copy, it is set down with
the best advantage, if we consider the persons here meant. There are three
things observable in the form of Penning this part.

First, it is not said, simply, as Servants look to their Masters, and a Maiden
to her mistress, but as the eyes of Servants are toward their Masters, and
the eyes of a Maiden to her Mistress. What is the reason of this phrase? There
is good reason.

Because there is a Service that is to be done to those Masters that are set
over us below, even with the eye. Not with eye-service, that is, not with
eye-service alone, says the Apostle. But there is a service that is to be done
with the eye. A man may show obedience, and observance, and reverence with his
eye; a man may give a shrewd, untoward answer with his eye, as well as with his
Tongue. A Servant may testify his cheerful, and diligent attendance on his
Master, with his eye; if there be obedience, it will appear in the eye.

Again, it should be so general a respect, and good demeanor that Servants
should carry toward their Masters, that even their eyes should testify it;
their eyes should be acquainted with their Masters will, as Plau^us speaks
well, a good Servant is so acquainted with his Masters affairs, that his very
eye knows what his Master would have; you may read it in his forehead, though
his Master speak not. And look as it is with Masters, it is Hillaries
Observation. A Master may give Commands as well with his eye, as with his
voice, Non solum ore, etc. A Master will Command not only with his voice, but
with his hand, and with his eye: so a Servant may obey, and express his
behavior, and respect, and carriage toward his Master, he may testify his
obedience, not only in action, or Speech, or Tongue, but with his very eye,
Non ore, etc. he eyes, and obeys with his eye, as well as with his voice.
Therefore it is, As the eyes of Servants are toward their Masters. The Servant
is so careful to content his Master, that he will not offend him so much as
with his eye. There is the first Observation for the phrase. It is not simply
said, as Servants, but the eyes of Servants.

Secondly, it is not said simply, as the eyes of Servants are toward their
Masters, but as the eyes of Servants are toward the hands of their Masters,
and the eyes of a Maiden to the hands of her Mistress. Why is this word added?
Was it not enough to say as the eyes of Servants are to their Masters? Why to
the hands of their Masters, and to the hands of her Mistress?

Yes, for very good reason. First, it is said to the hands of their Masters,
and the hands of her Mistress, as a testimony of their submission, and
subjection; because it is the hand by which they govern, it is the hand by
which they correct, therefore still the Servant keeps his eye upon the hand of
his Master. As Plantus says well, it is by the hand that the Master orders,
and governes, therefore the Servant has his eye upon his hand. It is a
testimony of all reverence, and a testimony of subjection, and submission, and
humiliation. A dutiful Servant dares not presume to look his Master in the
face, he keeps his eye only upon his hands below.

Then, it is a testimony of his hope, it is a bountiful hand that the Master
rewards with, he keeps his eyes upon his hands, thence he receives his reward.

Last of all, it is a testimony of his obedience, he looks to his hands; he
looks not that his Master should speak to him always; if it be but the pointing
of the finger, but the wagging of the hand, if he know his Masters will he
accounts that a Command. A Servant must not always stay so long till his Master
give him a Command, but any expression of his Master will serve the turn, it
stands for a Command, for an injunction. Therefore it is well observed by one
of the Heathens, and by another, backward, and forward, that as Masters should
be to their Servants, so Servants to their Masters. The S^rvant must be to his
Masters occasions, and the Master to the Servants, as Monosillables. What meant
he by it. That if he be a good Servant he should not need to have many
persuasions, and entreaties, but he should be as a Monosillable, one word
should be enough. See it in higher matters, that God might show himself Lord
of Lords, the supreme Master, though he gave some expressions of his will in
larger Commands, yet he gives the rest in a Monosillable Love, it is the whole
duty of a Christian; we must be as Monosillables especially to God. The
Centurion said to his Servants, to one go, and to another come, both
Monosillables in our Language. The Master should be a Monosillable to the
Servant, and the Servant to the Master. One syllable is enough to a good
Servant, nay, a nod, or an accent is enough; if it be but the beckning of the
hand. To show, that a good Servant is of a docible disposition, and tractable,
therefore it is said, he looks to the hands of his Master, to show that he is
ready, he is at hand, he is at his Elbow; it is his joy, and delight, and
glory, that he may do with chearfullnesse, his Masters will, therefore they
look to the hands of their Masters, for all these reasons it is said to the
hands. That is the second expression, the eyes of Servants to the hands of
their Masters.

In the third place, it is not barely said, As the eyes of Servants are to the
hands of their Masters, but it is added, As the eyes of a Handmaid are to her
Mistress. Here is mention of both Sexes, and both Governors, Master, and
Mistress, Servants, and Handmaid. What should be the reason? To take away all
scruples, and to remove all doubts.

The one to show this, that there is obedience, attendance, and respect, and
observance, and reverence due to all kind of Masters, from Servants, whither of
superior, or of inferior Servants. Apprentices think they may contemn, and
despise their Masters if they be poor men. No, if they be set in that
relation, they are their Governors, and of what sort or quality soever they
be, there is respect to be given to them. Look as it is in the other relation
of Parentage; the Scripture is careful not only to preserve the honor of the
Father, but because the Mother is more subject to be contemned, and despised,
therefore it takes care to preserve the honor of the Mother, of the weaker
Sex, therefore twice for once of honor to the Father, we read of honor to the
Mother. And as it takes order to give respect to the Master, so to the
Mistress, they must have respect, let them be of what sex, or state, and
condition soever, that are set over you.

Then, the other is doubled, Servant, and Handmaid, to show, that it is the
duty of all Servants to do this, of whar sex, or age soever, whether they be
those that are bound, or hixed, whether they be old, or young, their eyes must
be toward their Masters, not only their eyes, but their hearts, Not with
eye-service, as the Apostle says. Pleasing men, but for conscience serving the
Lord. See, it is a point of Conscience for Servants to be dutiful to their
Masters. I am glad I have the point in hand, I have often desired to have an
opportunity. It is your Scripture now, I pray think of it, you that are in that
condition. It is a point of Conscience for Servants to give respect to their
Masters, in serving them, they serve the Lord, as Serving the Lord, says the
Apostle, not with eye-service, but with the service of the heart, they must
serve them with the heart, as well as with the eye, the heart must not
entertain a hard surmise, or make an ill construction, they must not think
evil of their Masters. They serve the Lord.

There is very good reason for it, because Servants they are not their ^^^ne;
he that does either bind himself to another, or put himself to the
jurisdiction of another, (...) the time, be it more or less, he is not his
own, he part with himself, while that relation holds. There is nothing of
Servants that is their own, their Tongues are not their own, they may not
speak what they list, but what is acceptable to God. Their hands are not their
own, they may not do what they list, but their Masters pleasure: their feet
are not their own, they may not gad whither they list, but where their Masters
send them. Their eyes are not their own, they may not look as they list;
there may be wrong, and d^^obedience, in the looks, and God will reveng such
things. They have given the interest of all their strength into the hands of
their Masters, you must be Servants for Conscience sake.

Take notice of it, because this piece of the Aeconomicall body is wholly out
of frame, every man almost complains, and there is just cause. It is a very
rare, and hard thing to find a conscionable Servant. Servants have gotten now
the Reins on their own necks, they have cast off the yoke. There is no man
that has a Servant, but he must look to have half a Master. They do not
remember that they are not their own; they will not only be their own, but
the chief, their Tongues shall be their own, and their eyes their own, and
their hands their own, they will do what they list, and speak what they
list, and go where they list, and not whither their Masters send them; that
they are more servile a great deal in their manners, then in their condition,
they have evil Tongues, and evil eyes, and light fingers, and evil nurture
every way.

I know not how it comes to pass, but it is a thing complained of by all,
there is no great House especially, nor indeed no little House, but if they
have any Servants, they are those that are untoward, there are very few good
Servants. A good Servant is a great Jewel, not only because he is useful,
but because he is rare, and their Religion is like their state, there are few
of them conscionable.

Whether it be so that the fault be in your selves, or no, (it should be your
duty to look whether it be so or no) that some of you when you were Servants,
were such to your Masters, and God pays you in your kind. Generally such
Children as we are, such Parents we prove; he that has been an unfaithful
Child, shall have unfaithful Children; he that has been an unfaithful
Servant, shall have such Servants. Or whether you be not careful to Teach them
better, you instruct them in the mysteries of your Trades that they may serve
you, but never care to instruct them in the fear of the Lord, that they may
serve the Church, and serve God, and such comfort, and success you have;
because you would have them only serve you, and not God, God orders it so,
that they shall not be serviceable to you, he punishes you. That may be
another reason, you neglect them. Or whether they get these ill conditions by
your example, as indeed it falls out generally, so that Servants have a tang of
the qualities, and conditions of their Masters. Euripides speaks well, like
Maid, like Mistress, you may know the Mistress by the Maid, and the Master by
the Servant. They observe in you distempers, and do you wonder that your
Servants are so? They observe in their Masters dealing fraud, and cozenage, and
do you think that they will not cozen? The Maids see pride in the behavior of
their Mistresses, they are conscious to all, and they learn these documents
from them. What the cause is, I know not; it is some of these causes, or all,
but it is so, every man complains it was never such a World for Servants.

Give me leave Brethren to speak to you that are in that inferior condition;
it becomes you to redeem this imputation that lies on your state, and
condition, it is a good state in it self, but you make it ill by your
carriage. Remember with your selves, that though you be Servants to men, yet
you are Freemen to God; he that is man's Servant, is the Lords Freeman, if he
give conscionable service, serving God in his Master. Remember God will call
you to account for the service you have done to your Masters, as well as of
that you do to himself, and of the neglect to them, as well as of himself.
Remember how bountifully God rewarded Joseph, and Jacob, when they were
Servants. Remember how he thought on the People of Israel, when they were
Servants in a strange Land. Remember how Christ honored that condition (I
speak that it is much for your honor) Christ honored it, He took upon him
the form of a Servant. Here is an honor done to you above your Masters;
though he were Lord of all, yet here was the manifestation of his humiliation,
he took the form of a Servant: that if we account it an honor to our nature
above Angels, that Christ took humane nature, and not angelical, as indeed
it was an honor, then it was an honor done to Servants, that Christ would
stoop so low to take upon him the form of a Servant. Whatsoever place, or
state Christ took he honored it, he honored the Manger, that he made it his
Cradle; and he honored the Cross, by that death that he was pleased to
suffer, and he honored the Grave by descending into it, and he honored our
nature in assuming it, and he has honored your condition, he took on him the
form of a Servant.

Learn to answer that honor, it is not an unworthy condition; labor to bring
honor to your estate, to bring honor to God in your service, to bring credit
to your Religion, and profession, to be better then your Masters (if they go
not along with you to Heaven) to be Children of God, to be rich in grace, to be
precious to him; to give your Masters faithful service for conscience sake.
Remember these things, and stir up your selves to attain to the purity of
former times, to have the Circum volution to answer them. What was the
condition of Servants in David's time? What Servants were they? You may learn
by this Scripture; David takes it for granted, he speaks of it as a thing to be
presumed on, that Servants were good then. Unless he had known them to be
good, he would not have borrowed the similitude, no more would I, we then would
say, as Servants should be to their Masters, and not as they are. You must
labor to make the times as they have been, that we may fetch the similitude
from you, to say, As the eyes of Servants are to the hands of their Masters.
That is the second thing, the Coppie. I am loath to break off in the midst,
the end why I chose the Text was for the last part of the words, but now it
will even serve for another Sermon. There will be the duty of you that are
Masters, and it will be your shame more then of your Servants, that you do not
serve God, and there will be directions in all doubtings, and expectations to
wait on God till he have mercy upon us.

SERMON II.
PSALM. 123.2. So do our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy
upon us.


IT is a Scripture you see that runs upon similitude, and the strength, and
life of a similitude is in conformity, and proportion; and in things that are
proportionable, there are in the general but two things to be considered;
there is the skene, or tipe; and there is the draught that answers it. These
are as two lines that run along one by another, and are measured out by the
same quallity of dimension, for length, and for whatsoever else may make them
conformable. And these two lines they are very observable now in this Text.
There is the first the line from which the similitude is drawn, that is the
exemplary line, in the first half of the words, Behold, as the eyes of
Servants look to the hands of their Masters, and the eyes of a Maiden to the
hands of her Mistress; that is the line exemplary, whence the similitude is
drawn; that is the Protasis, that is the line of prescription, that is the
line regulative, the line that gives law to this other line that follows. That
is now the line that is conformable, the line that makes the proportion to the
other line, the line that has the similitude, and Image of the other stamped
on it; that is it which is the redition, the appodesis, that which answers the
former line in every proportion, in every part.

So do our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. So
here, face answers face, and bone answers bone. There is mention of
Masters, and superiors in the first; of a Heavenly Master in the second. There
is mention of Servants in the first; of the Servants of God in the second; of
looking up in the first, of waiting in the second; of eyes corporal in the
first, of eyes spiritual in the second. Only this line exceeds the other, in
this one proportion, it is drawn a little longer then the former: because Gods
mercies are of an infinite longitude, there is nothing able to parallel them,
Until he have mercy upon us.

Of the first of these I spoke in the Fore-noone, and it was but half the
Journey I meant then to have taken. I shall now speak to the second part, the
proportionable redition; it is the writing that matcheth the Coppie that was
set in the former words. If I had handled it then, it would have been but half
an hour, I shall now lengthen it to the full, and trust your memories with
that I delivered. The sum was but these two things. The duty of Christians, to
know that they must dedicate to God, as the faculties of their mind, so the
parts of their bodies, their Tongue, that is their glory, and their eyes, those
are their Lamps, and the light of their bodies; and those are their
perfections, if they shine in the presence of God, by looking up to him. That
was the first.

Secondly, the duty that concerns you that are of the lower sort, those that
are in the condition of Servants, of what sex soever, that it is a conscionable
performance that God expects at the hands of Servants, to give faithful, and
constant obedience, and conformity in all things, in a submission, and
subordination to God, in all things, to the will, and inclination, and
direction, of their Masters. So, here is the Coppie set, and that is a good
draught that must exceed it; and that must be the labor of us that are to
speak, and hear of it; and I will come directly to it, and there are but these
two parts of it, which are two of the four which I mentioned in the Fore-noone.

There is the parallel that answers the Coppie before. So do our eyes wait on
the Lord our God.

And the Date, and Duration of this duty, how long it is to be continued,
Until he have mercy on us.

So, these are the two things that now I am to speak of.

And the first of these is the Parallel that matcheth the Coppie, the
proficiency that Christians make by the documents they have from these
temporal relations; and it is set down here by a great deal of advantage,
there is never a word but has its emphasis, and there is never a word but will
require a reason to be given of it, why it stands in this place.

Why our Eyes?

Why Waiting?

Why upon the Lord?

Why another name of excellency is added, The Lord our God?

What is the extent of this So? So our eyes wait, which is the proportionable
part. I say there are reasons to be given of all these, and instructions that
will arise out of them.

First, why he mentions eyes, so our eyes wait? For he might have varied it,
so our souls wait, which is the chief scope, and intention of the Psalmist.
But because he had mentioned the eyes of Servants before, he mentions the eyes
of Christians, the Servants of God now, So our eyes wait. It shows us thus
much, that our eye is the Handmaid of the soul, that is exercised in all
those duties of piety, in which the soul is conversant. If the soul look up,
the eye looks up. So the eye is a faithful Handmaid. The eye looks not down
when the soul looks up; it not only looks, but waits. Therefore he mentions
the eye, to show, that the eye of a Christian must be indefatigable in looking
up to God. It not only bears a part with the soul in the act, but in the
constancy. If the soul be breathing, the eye will still be darting up beams
of love, and desire, to those same Hills to which the soul looks: therefore it
may be added, here the eye waits, because it is but a perfunctory performance
that is discharged by the eye, a man would think, I may appeal too to you, it
is a great part of your religion, the lifting up the eye, if religion be to be
measured by that, there is abundance of devotion. Men now, will not vouchsafe
to bow the knee in prayer. I put a difference between those that are in Pews,
and (...) are in the Isles, and between standing, and sitting, for sitting is
an (...) gesture in (...) is Heavenly, (...) you stand for that purpose, (...)
the (...) in prayer, it is (...), but they will not bow (...), it is but a
reach (...). The reason you desire to (...) you (...). It ^uts me to go on my
self (...), a^^ections, and extravagant notions, and that is that that must be
set upon the skore of repentance; it cuts me, though I love not to look about,
yet to see people in prayer look every way, is this to keep the eye waiting?
When the soul labors with God in prayer, the eye will strive in fellowship
with it, it will embrace an act of constancy, as well as f^rvency. It is an
evil Maid that leaves her Mistress, it is the highest delusion of God, and
deprivation of the comfort of our selves, when we give our selves to gadding,
and yet come to Prayer, therefore there is somewhat in this, that he says the
eye, not only the eye looking, but,

The eye waiting, the reason of the second word. Now he leaves the similitude,
the first line; for in the first line it is so, as the eyes of Servants look,
and the eyes of a Maiden look, here it is the eye waits. There is good reason,
to wait is more then to look, to wait is to look constantly, with patience,
and submission, by subjecting our affections, and wills, and desires to Gods
will, that is to wait. David in the second part, in the second line, he gives a
better word, he betters his Coppie. There is the duty of a Christian, to better
his example, the eyes of Servants look, David's eyes shall wait, So do our
eyes wait. It is true indeed, this word is not in the Original, therefore you
may observe it is in a small letter in your Bibles, to note, that it is a word
of necessity, added for the supply of the sense, because the Holy Ghost left it
not imperfect, but more perfect, that he put not in the Verb, because it is
left to every man's heart, to supply a Verb to his own comfort, and a better he
cannot then this. And that this word must be added, appears by the next words.
Till he have mercy upon us. To look till he have mercy on us, is to wait; so
there is good reason why this word is added. If we look to the thing begged
mercy, it is so precious that we may wait for it. It was Servants that he
mentioned, and it is their duty to wait upon their Masters, they wait upon
their Trenchers at meat, they wait when they go to bed, and when they rise,
they wait in every place; therefore because he had mentioned the first word, he
takes the proper duty, there is nothing more proper to Servants, then waiting,
and if we are the Servants of God, we must wait. There is good reason in that
respect, because it is a word so significant, therefore the Spirit of God
varies it, he keeps not exactly to the line, so do our eyes look, but, so do
our eyes wait.

Thirdly, why he makes another variation, so do our eyes wait upon the Lord?
He writes not after his Coppie, for there it is, As the eyes of Servants look
to the hands of their Masters. It should have run, So do our eyes wait on the
hand of the Lord; he says not so, but varies it, So do our eyes wait on the
Lord. What is the reason? It would have been too strait. Though we must wait on
Gods gracious hand, both of power, that orders all things, and of bounty, that
distributes all things; yet it would have been too strait; some would have
imagined that there were nothing in God to be waited on, but for his bounty,
and power; No, he shows that we must at large wait upon the Lord in all that
belongs to him, if we have respect to his glory, and honor, we must wait upon
his Throne, if to our vileness, we must wait on his Footestoole. If to his
bounty, we must wait on his hand: if to his wisdom, we must wait upon his
providence, if to his truth, we must wait on his promises. There is nothing in
God, but it is to be waited on, in all his attributes, and relations, not only
as our Master, but as our King, as our Father, and as our Shepherd. Therefore
that the Psalmist might better leave it for an enlarged supply as that a
Heavenly heart might intercept it, he says not as in the former, so do our
eyes wait upon the hand of the Lord, but so do our eyes wait upon the Lord.
That is the reason of the third variation.

There are but two observable besides, I shall stand a little longer on them,
they are material.

The fourth is, why he doubles this word of excellency, upon the Lord our God?
For one word would have served (but that no word can serve to set out that
excellency, but) having named Master before, one would think it should run, so
do our eyes wait upon our Heavenly Master, as our Heavenly Lord, but he adds,
the Lord our God. To show the difference between the Masters of the World, and
of him that is above. The Masters here below are Masters indeed, but they are
men like our selves, our Master above is the Lord our God. The Masters here,
that have dominion are Domini, but sub domino, under that great Master, but he
is Dominans dominantium, the Lord of Lords. They are Masters that have their
breath in their Nostrills, but he is the Master that gives life, and breath,
and motion, and all things. Therefore to show that we stand in a double
Obligation to God, in our service, and attendance, he adds two words; we wait
upon him as our glorious Lord, and as our gracious God, both ways we give him
our eyes and attendance. To show this double obligation, observe in the first
line, the prescription, the Coppie, there are both relations mentioned, and a
double notion to both relations, there is Masters, and Mistress, Servants, and
Handmaid. To note thus much, by the doubling of the one, that if there be any
better service in the one sex then in the other, we are to draw the pattern
from that, that we may give the purest service, and attendance to God. And
noting in the other, if there be any respect due to either of those, Masters,
or Mistress, they should be both drowned, and swallowed up in our respect to
God, he uses both words, to show, that we should yield all service to God.

St. Austin in his Commentary on the Psalms, propounds the Question, and so
does Jerome, if that be his, he finds a double scruple, he makes two Questions.
One Question is, why we are called Ansilla, in the Singular number a Handmaid?
Another Question is, why Christ is called not only Dominus, but Domina. As the
eyes of Servants wait on their Masters, so do our eyes upon Christ. St. Austin
gives this reason, and Jerome, and it is full of wit, both these predications
will hold for us that are Christians. It is Servi sumus, ancilla sumus, we are
both Servants, and we are the Church, we are Servants of his Handmaid. As we
are the people of God, so we are called Servants; as we are the Church of God,
so we are ancilla. So for the other predication, our Lord, and Savior is both
Dominus, and Domina. He is The Lord, Our Lord, because he is our God, and
Domina, he must have the duty of a Mistress, because he is the virtue, and
wisdom, and excellency of God. That is Austins, and Jeromes. It is full of
wit, but it is a little to adventerous. I durst hardly to mention it if it were
not theirs, their wit is sweet, and in their intentions full of piety, but I
dare not give it as a truth.

Yet there is reason to be given why both are expressed, to show the service that
we owe to God. The reason is this, both words are used, because no one word can
set out any part of Gods excellency, look in what part you will. There is no
one word can set out the glory of God in Heaven, therefore there are two words
used, the glory of both lights, the glory of the light of the Sun, and of the
Moon. There is no one word can set out to us the perfection of the robe of
Christ's righteousness, that he clothes Beleivers with; therefore two words are
used, he clothes them with double Ornaments, of the Bridegroom, and of the
Bride, Isa. 61. There is no one word can set out the propinquity of our
alliance to Christ, therefore Christ sets it out by two words. He that does the
will of my Father is my Brother, and Sister. There is no one word can set out
the tenderness of the love of God, therefore it is set out by the love of both
Parents, by the love of a Father, and a Mother. Can a Mother forget her Child?
And as a Father pirties his Child, so the Lord has mercy on them that fear
him. In Gods love there is the love of both Parents, the constant love of the
Father, and the tender love of the Mother. One word cannot set it out. So here,
because all dominion is due to God, and we are to pay him, all subjection, and
service, therefore one word cannot set it out, there are words of both sexes
used, there is a relative to be found in both superiors, Master, and
Mistress, and inferiors, Servants, and Handmaid. As the eyes of Servants,
and Handmaids, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God. There is mention of
both sexes in our propinquity to Christ, and his nearenesse to us; that is the
reason that both these are set down, So do our eyes wait upon the Lord our
God.

The fifth, and last, is that that makes the parallel, and proportion to all
the former, there hangs the meaning, So. As the eyes of Servants, So do our
eyes. And here now there is a great deal of matter in this word. It argued a
sweet temper in the Prophet David, that he that was so great a Prince, and
King, yet thought it his greatest honor to call himself by the name of Gods
Servant. Nay, there was yet a greater submission, he did not only reckon
himself in the number of Gods Servants, but he learned this lesson from the
duty that Servants give their Masters, he stooped so low as to men of mean
condition to be instructed.

It is a lesson you may learn from your Servants, see what duty they give you,
give you the same to God. So it seems to be but one argument, but there are
four in it.

First, De facto, from the thing that was done, as Servants give all respect to
their Masters, so will we to God.

Then, De jure, as Servants should give respect to their Masters, so will we.

It is an argument taken from the equality, as, so, we will do it so
cheerfully as they do, our delight shall be in the Lord, as they delight in
their Masters. We will do it so properly as they do, we will wait on him in
all things, whatsoever he Commands us, we will do; so they do to their
Masters: we will do it as plainly, and evidently. A good Christian looks on
God so plainly that he considers him as near him as the Master is to the
Servant, God is always at hand. What shall I say? So, that is, so excellently,
so constantly, and comfortably; it is an argument taken from equality.

Nay further, it is an argument that may be pressed from a greater dependence.
So, nay much more shall our eyes wait on the Lord. There is the true height of
the argument. We have more reason to wait upon God, then Servants on their
Masters. Servants have a compensation, and they deserve it for their work, and
service; we do no service for God that deserves any thing. Servants owe
obedience to their Masters, not simply, but in subordination to God; we owe
duty, and respect to God simply. Servants, their eyes are fixed upon their
Masters here on Earth, our service is to be continued in Heaven. Servants do
it for a time, our service lasts always. Servants do it for men of the same
condition with themselves; they give obedience to their Masters, and yet have
fellowship of nature with them, and have privileges, and prerogatives of
grace, commonly, they have the same title to Heaven, the same fellowship of the
Spirit, yet they give true obedience to their Masters, though they have
fellowship in the Spirit, and community of nature. There is no such community
between our great Master, and us Christians, there is an infinite distance
between God, and us, therefore we must do more. God is infinitely gracious, he
powers out more blessings, we have more good from him, so then, we should not
only do so, but more.

Therefore that is it now, that Christians will lay hold on, to force the word;
as David betters the coppie, so let us better the similitude of David, as
Servants, so we, nay more.

But I must recall the word. O it were happy if we gave so much as Servants to
their Masters. Where is the man to be found that gives more obedience to God,
then Servants to their Masters, or that gives so much? Who gives so much to God
as his Hireling does to him? Who walks so faithfully to God, as a Servant that
is hired but for one Week does to his Master? That is, who gives so much
service to God, as a good Servant to a good Master? Nay more, as a good Servant
to a bad Master? Nay further, as the worst Servant to any Master? There is not
the worst Servant, but he gives obedience to any Master generally better then
we do to God. In the fore-noone I told you it was a fault, Servants are grown
to an ill pass, they are unfaithful; but now, Masters will justify Servants,
if the Servants be ill, the Masters are worse. There is not the worst Servant
but may put us to ^lush, when we consider our selves in the obedience we owe to
God; because there is not the worst Servant but gives better, and more. Compare
the particulars.

The worst Servant can but dela^^^^^^, and wast his Masters goods, and they are
but temporal, but we do the graces of Salvation, and the Talents that God
has given us; not only the Talents of life, and health, and strength, and
ri^hes, that we wast on pleasures, but the Talents of grace, and gifts, and the
hope of Heaven, we delapidate out our Masters goods.

The worst Servants murmr when they are ill used by their Masters; we grudge,
and repine when God poures plenty in our laps.

The worst Servant sleeps when his Master is absent; we sleep in our Masters
presence, when he is speaking to us. Not thinking that it is the Ordinance of
God; we will not take off our selves. It is not only an irreligious, but an
uncivil thing. Infirmities will grow, I yield to it, but let us strive against
them, we sleep in our Masters presence.

The worst Servant can but despise, and contemn his Master, he can but neglect
his Commands, and his work, and that work is corporal, we neglect the work of
our Master, and it is a spiritual work, the great work of his glory, that
brings good to our selves. We are worse then the worst Servant: there is not
the worst Servant in the World, but may be justified by the obedience that we
give to God. Examine it by these two perticulars; we are glad to hear of God
as a Father; see if we account him a Master: put the two Questions in the
Prophet. If I be a Master, where is my fear? If I be a Father where is my
honor? If God be our Lord, and Master, where is his honor, and fear? Here
are the two Questions.

First, if God be our Master, where is our livery? Servants go in their
Masters cloth without shame. When I speak of a badge, I speak not of the
spiritual badge of Christianity, but of the temporal badge, for clothes are
of Gods bestowing.

There are the spiritual clothes, the habit of the mind, we cast off that.
For that livery, what consists it in? In righteousness, and holiness. Do we
desire to adorn our minds with these? Are we attired in our Masters livery? To
wear his colors? We cannot judge of the habit of the mind.

Look on the habit of the body, are you in your Masters livery now a days?
Does God prescribe such vanities, and follies, that Creatures should delight to
make themselves Puppits, that they must be flouted at, does God prescribe such
apparel? Rich apparel is as due to them that are great, as mean apparel to
them that are inferior. So that there be due order, and caution kept, that
they estrangenot the mind from God, that they take not up too much time, that
it be in the compass of sobriety. But this makes Christianity disdained, we
steal all from God. Is this Gods livery? Did he appoint you to go with naked
Breasts, and naked Arms? Did not he appoint apparel to cover the shame of
sin? Did any of the Apostles prescribe it so? See what the Apostle says, you
are to be adorned as becomes godliness, and the profession of Christ, modesty,
and religiously, and decently. Are you in Gods livery? Is Christ your Master?
If you be, then you may make a good account at the last day; but if there be a
distinction to be made, there it will appear who are his Servants.

Secondly, if God be your Master, where is your obedience? Obedience is the
peoper duty of Servants; take away obedience, you destroy the nature of
Servants. If we give obedienco to God, where are Gods Commands? What are Gods
Commands? St. Austin goes about to see if he can reckon them. Says he, God
might have said if his nature were capable, as other Masters say to their
Servants, wait upon me to bed, while I rest, wait upon me to the Bath, while I
wash me; wait at my Table when I take sustenance. No, God needs not these
inferior services; but then, what does he command? Wait upon me in mine
Ordinances, and in my Commands, in my service, in my love, and fear, that I
require at thy hands. Here is the rule, are these those that we keep? If God be
our Master, where are his Commands? Where is our work? Do we think the work of
Christianity, the work that God has appointed us? Do we think that that was
the end why we were sent into the World, to work out our Salvation? If we think
not of this, we are not Servants. There is not the worst Servant but he comes
into his Masters House to do service. We have entered into our Masters house,
we have taken Presse-money to be Gods Soldiers, and to be his Servants, then,
where is his work? Is that left undone? Look but what Christ will say at the
last day, when they shall be called to account. Well done good and faithful
Servant. Take away the unprofitable Servant. Certainly, if Christ be the God of
truth, and the Gospel the word of truth, these words shall be said at the last
day, where is thy work? Where is thy account? What have thou done? How have
thou behaved thy self? If we cast off Gods Commandments, we cast off our
relation: if we be not under Command, we are not under a Lord.

O Beloved, recall your selves, remember that it is that that the beam of
Christianity hangs on; it is a high honor to be Gods Servant, more then to be
the Heir of the World. O what a credit is it to retain to such a Master! To
belong to God, what an honor is it! He is such a Master that promises better
freedom then other Masters; and ties himself to us, and us to him in more
Obligations, and sets us an easier task, but to work out our own Salvation;
and pays us better wages. Take all the Princes in the World, that are so
great, and glorious, and so able to reward their Servants, put them altogether,
they are as the dust of the Balance, both they, and their rewards, in
comparison to the reward that God gives to the worst Servant of his. Stir up
your selves from the consideration of Servants. God gives you out comfort, and
blessing, stir up your selves to give true, and faithful service to Christ.
Never look on your Servants, but think you are Gods Servants. When your
Servants testify their obedience to you, make David's use of it, bring it to
this lesson, if we cannot exceed these Servants, remember to equal them, So,
So do our eyes.

The equality will appear by comparing, so you shall see, both the duty of
good Servants to their Masters, and of Christians to God.

First, good Servants delight in their Masters presence, so should we in the
presence of God.

Secondly, good Servants put on the same affections with their Masters. A good
Servant as Euripides says, rejoices if his Master be cheerful, and grieves
if his Master be sorrowful, he puts on the same affection. We must put on the
same affection with Christ, and God, do I not hate them that hate thee? Do
thou love them that God hates? We must put on the same affections with God
(though we must hate none) put on Christ's affection, walk in love, be humble,
and merciful, as he is. This is to have the nature of Servants.

Thirdly, Servants are not Sui juris, to walk where they list, and do what
they list, but they must do the will of their Masters, they are not at their
own appointment, no more are we, we are not our own, we are not Sui juris,
your Master has bought you, and redeemed you out of captivity.

Servants will greive, to hear the name of their Masters evil spoken of. He
is an unworthy Servant that can hear the name of his Master touched, and does
not as far as is modest, to his power vindicate it. So we must greive, and be
zealously affected when we hear that sacred name blasphemed, by which we are
called.

A Servant is sorry if his Masters affairs succeed not well; he labors to
accommodate his Master, and to content him in every thing. It is a great
discontent to a Servant, if things thrive not with his Master. So we should
greive, when Gods affairs go not well on (though God will make them succeed,
yet) when things go not well with the Church, and Children of God, we should
lay it to heart.

Again, good Servants wait upon their Masters for all things, for Meat, and
Drink, and Clothes, and Wages, and Provision, and Custody, and Defense, and
when they get these things, when they have Wages from them, they give them
thanks, though they have wrought hard, and they pay them upon Covenant made.
God gives plenteous wages, let us be thankful to him, and wait upon him for
all we have, as Servants upon their Masters.

Again, good Servants do not take upon them to prescribe their Masters,
either time, or manner; they will not tell their Masters what they desire to
do, and what they will have themselves, but they wait on their Masters, to
receive their direction. We must not prescribe God, leave God to his way,
though we see things improbable, God can work it out, we must leave him to his
wisdom, he will bring things to pass; we must not put trust in means, and
rules, but leave God to his prescriptions.

Lastly, good Servants bear their Masters name, and not only apply themselves
to the Commands of their Master, but to the desires of their Master. They always
consider themselves to be in that condition, that they look to give an account.
Good Servants they are not only tender of their Masters temporal goods, but
of their Masters safety. A good Servant will venture his life for his Master,
especially in a good cause.

O then, let us go, and be like minded; put all these together, and by the
consideration of these things provoke our selves to the faithful obedience,
and service that belongs to God. Let us mold our selves with these resolutions.
If we be Servants, for shame, for shame, do somewhat that belongs to Servants.
Let us not be content to equal the Coppie, but labor to exceed it; not only
to say, As the eyes of Servants, so our eyes, but as the eyes of Children to
their Parents, so are our eyes to God. As the eyes of Subjects are to their
Prince, so are our eyes on God: and as the eyes of Sheep, are fixed upon the
Shepherd, so are our eyes on God.

As the eyes of Creatures are upon their Creator, and the eyes of the redeemed
upon their Savior, so our eyes are fixed upon the Lord our God. In all these
relations we will not only labor to equal the duty, but to exceed it, and
not so only, but more. So I have done with the first thing, the parallel,
wherein David endeavors to match the Copy he had propounded, As the eyes of
Servants are toward their Masters, so are our eyes on the Lord our God. And
the reason of every word.

Now the last thing is the date, and duration.

Until he have mercy on us. There are but two words, they are not long in
pronunciation; but they are very long in signification. They are so long that
they reach to perpetuity both ways. For first, there is no end of Gods mercy,
that is one word. And then, there must be no period set of our duty, and
waiting, Until he have mercy on us. That word seems to be as long as the
other. Indeed it is true, in it self it is not long, because God is not long
in showing mercy, he is quick, if we should wait upon him only till he show
mercy, we should wait now, and no longer, we should cease presently: for he
shows mercy always. No, but it is to be continued by many enlargements,
therefore briefly, the sum of both words is this. In one word, the word mercy,
David sets down the scope at which every Christian aims after the glory of
God, in shooting up all those Arrows of love, and obedience, and fear, that he
sends up to God, the end, and aim of all is this, that he may attain mercy,
he looks up to God for mercy. Mercy that is of a larg signification, we can beg
nothing of God which is not mercy. If a man be disconsolate, he looks to God
for comfort. If there be a doubtful heart that looks up to God for resolution.
If there be a blind heart, that looks for illumination: of a wavering heart,
that looks for stablishing; all these are mercies, because they are all given
in mercy. Every good thing is a mercy, because it is given in mercy. If a man
be in persecution, peace is a mercy. If he be in trouble of Conscience, ease is
a mercy. If he be in anguish, if he be in any exigent, deliverance is a mercy.
If he be in pangs of Conscience, quiet is a mercy. All is mercy, he that waits
on God for mercy, waits for every good thing.

Secondly, the other word, Until, shows us thus much, what the period is, that
a Christian sets himself in the line of obedience. It has the same period
that Donec until, until he shows mercy. Shall we think that David did mean
to wait on God until he had mercy, and then to fix his eyes upon the Earth
again? No, much more then, therefore know that the word Donec in Scripture,
does not always signify a determinate time, but an infinite time, until
signifies eternity in two places. One in the Gospel, Joseph knew not Mary
until she had brought forth her first Borne Son; not then, nor after, because
she continued always a Virgin. But more plainly in Psalm. 110. The Lord said to
my Lord, sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy Footstool. Do
you think that Christ shall sit at Gods right hand no longer then till all
things be subdued in the end of the World, and that then he shall give over his
session, and his Kingdom cease? God forbid, but until is for ever. So here,
Our eyes wait on the Lord till he have mercy on us. Not as we should make a
cessation then, when God has showed mercy. But as St. Chrysostom very well,
he speaks not only for a short time, as long as God shows mercy, but for all
times. What do I take Chrysostom, hear David expound himself, Psalm. 62. My
throat is dry, my heart is weary, mine eyes fail with waiting. He looked on
God so long till his eyes failed, and he gives not over then, he waits still. A
Christian must wait always upon God. So that word has both an inclusive, and
an exclusive force. So shall our eyes wait on the Lord, until he show mercy.
That is, if he do show mercy, we will wait, or if he do not. If he send it
speedily, or if he do not, still God is to be waited on. We now, if God do
not send mercy, we will wait on him with contentation, or if he do show mercy
we will wait on him with acknowledgement. If God delay mercy, we will wait with
patience; if he speedily send mercy, we will wait on him with thankfulness;
we will wait on him till then, and much more, after. Until, that is, I will
wait on him then, and now, and always, we will never end this work. So the point
is this,

A^ true Christian must not let go his hold, his hope, his confidence, he
breaks not off his Service, he breaks not off waiting upon God, though God
defer to show mercy. He waits on God in his own occasions, though God
suspend, and seem to absent himself. He waits in all the occasions of the
Church. If God correct, he waits that things may be better; if God send
blessings, he still waits on him, that God may continue the mercies. Here is
the point, a Christian must not give over waiting on God, especially in cases
of extremity. When we come to beg any mercy, spiritual, or temporal, of God,
if God bestow it on us, then we are said to wait till then, because then we
obtain our desire; we wait for other mercies always, for general mercies every
day.

And it is a point now worth the considering in these times, because the state
of our times is so, that every man almost is ready to let go his confidence.
If things succeed not in every particular according to our expectations, and
desires, then we think the whole Chain of providence is dissolved, if one
linck be loosed, we think all the business is overturned, and all our hopes
disappointed, if God answer us not in our time upon every occasion. The reason
is, we know not what it is to wait on God.

Beloved, it is true, if God were tied to one way, or means, or to one time,
or to any one person, or to any one instrument, there were good cause that we
should suspect our hold in the success of the affairs of the Church at all
times, then we had good cause to be fearful. But God is not straightened so
much, he has ways that we know not, and times that we understand not of; and
persons he can make to spring out of the Ashes of them that are taken away,
that are contemptible in our eyes, and God can strengthen them, though they be
as the shaking of an Olive. God will perfect this work if we be not the
impediment, if our sins stay him not, if we wait. It is true, I confess it
pleases me exceedingly, and I congratulate, and rejoice: your desires almost
as much affect me with joy, as the other with sorrow, to see men in amazement
at such a time, It is a sign of your love to the Church beyond the Seas: yet
how unacceptable was it upon the first relation? No man knew what to speak, or
what to think? It is a sign that Religion has taken some impression. It is a
sign that you have a simpathy with the Servants of God, it is a sign that you
have the affections of Servants toward God. But for all this, take heed while
you do right to the Servants of God, that you do not injury to God himself:
because he is faithful that has promised. Remember he orders the affairs
himself. God can raise up a Josuah in Moses room; I rather use the word,
because I am very much delighted with the Simile of that noble, victorious
Prince, he was a Moses, Was, said I? O that is a wounding word that you cannot
endure: O that I could say he is, and yet I cannot say the contrary, we are
kept between hope, and fear, though it be more to be feared then hoped, in
that particular I am afraid. But whether was, or is, like Moses he was, and if
he be, Is, God was with him as he was with Moses, in the leading of his People.
He came into Germany as Moses into Egypt, with a greater band, but a small
train in respect of the Enemies, but God turned his weakness to strength. He
was faithful as Moses was, he sought not himself as Moses did not. Moses
brought the Children of Israel out of the Furnace; he brought the poor
afflicted of Germany, a good way out of the Furnace. And now that all may be
like Moses, Moses Sepulcher is not known to this day, and the life, or death of
that excellent Prince, is not yet known to this day, like Moses Sepulcher.

There is yet our perplexity, yet there is our comfort; there is some comfort
in that word that it is uncertain: for that that is uncertain may be
otherwise; O, but I think that it may be. Howsoever be it so, or otherwise, God
has done his part; he has not left us without a comfort. See but how he has
tempered sad Tidings with a mixture of comfort; he has tempered the loss with
gain, there is sorrow with joy, there is fear with hope, there is loss with
Victory.

Why then, if God do thus to us, and so feed us with his mercy, and support
our longanimity, if he ply us thus, have we not reason to wait upon him?

Let us now run to this word in the Text. Behold, as the eyes of Servants wait
on their Masters, so do our eyes wait on God till he have mercy on us, and
always, but esspecially then. For did you but know the comfort that comes by
hope, and expectation; innumerable comforts come from hope.

Hope holds life, and soul together, if things go ill; hope continues us
still in life till things go better.

Hope is the Pillar of the wavering soul; hope is the Ladder that has one end
in Earth, and another in Heaven: hope waits for all the good things that God
has promised.

Hope is the Anchor of the soul, as the Apostle compares it. Nay, not only
the Anchor says St. Chrysostom, but the Ship to that good Anchor. It must
needs be well when it is both; the Ship must ride safe, for the Anchor is hope,
it must be safe it self, for upon it is the Ship, the Ark, that carries the
Saints through the troubles of this World; it is the Anchor that makes us keep
our riding, that we dash not on the Shelves, and Rocks that encounter us.

It is a better Anchor then other Anchors, they are always below the Ship, at
the ground; but this Anchor is above, it is not fastened in Earth, but in
Heaven.

How sure would a Ship be if it were fastened aloft, to Heaven, if God had the
Tacle in his hand. God has the Cable of this Anchor in his hand. Faith is the
Cable, hope is the Anchor; the Ship will ride safe if the Anchor be in Heaven.

Let us wait, we have good cause to wait, he is powerful and can do more, he
is gracious and will do: nay further, he is faithful, and has done, and will
do abundantly, beyond our expectation, and he that has begun, will perfect it.

O therefore let us acquaint our souls with waiting. We are so impatient, that
if God give us not all at the first call, what our hearts are prompt to
suggest, we think all is lost. O, if we had hope, the nature of hope is to
abide, and stay Gods leisure. Hope is never frustrate. See it in the example of
the Saints.

David, I waited patiently on the Lord, and God heard me. It is confirmed, and
ratified by promises. Solomon sets one, Wait on the Lord, and he will save
thee. David another, Wait on the Lord, and he will preserve thy soul; Wait
patiently on the Lord, and he will bring it to pass. We have it ratified by
promise. Nay, in experience, who ever waited, and was frustrated? Our Fathers
trusted in God, and were not ashamed, he gave them their hearts desire: and he
has exceeded ours; therefore have recourse to that Anchor, and learn what it
is to wait on God, that we may say as Job, Though he kill me, I will trust in
him. Though he disappoint all, I will hope; my hope, and waiting shall be
placed on God, my trust shall be in him, he never suffered, that staid his
leisure to be ashamed; they were had in remembrance. Therefore our eyes shall
wait on him as the eyes of Servants; nay, not only so, but if that be not
enough, we will not only wait but hang upon him, and not only so, but in a
holy sense wrestle with him by Prayer, as Jacob did, that he would be merciful
to his People, that he would take care still of that little part of the Ark,
floating on the Waters. Nay, we will not only wait upon him as Servants, but
as Children; and not only with the eyes of Children, but with the Tears of
Children, with eyes fixed, and hands spread, and knees bowed, with lips
opening, and hearts mounting, we will wait upon him; that this hope may be
fixed in all our faces, and shine in all parts: thus if we do we shall make
the Text complete.

For conclusion of all. There are but two things that may perplex us,
uncertainty, and fear. Uncertainty, that is one wrack, and torment; and fear
is another. This hope, and waiting will stablish the soul in both. Take the
rule of both. For uncertainty, do as Hezekiah did, take these letters of
uncertain rumors, and spread them before the Lord. For the fear, let us take
our selves, and cast our selves before the Lord, at his Footstool. For the
uncertainty, let that be the Scripture. Habak. 2. The Vision is yet for an
appointed time, but in the end it shall speak, and shall not lie. It shall
come, and shall not tarry. Though it tarry, yet we will wait for it. For the
fear, let this be the word to fix our hearts, that David has given
opportunity to handle this day. Behold, though our fears be great, yet our
hopes are some: therefore as the eyes of Servants look to the hands of their
Masters, and the eyes of a Maiden to the hands of her Mistress, so do our
eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy on his people.

THE Geust-Chamber.

DELIVERED IN TWO SERMONS, BY That Learned, and reverend Divine RICHARD
HOLSWORTH, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Vice Chancellor of Cambridge; Master
of Emmanuel College, and late Preacher at PETER'S POOR in LONDON.

Matthew. 22.4. Behold I have prepared my dinner, my Oxen and my Fatlings are
killed, and all things are ready: Come into the Marriage.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons in Alders-gate-streete. 1650.

SERMON I.
LUKE 22.11, 12. And ye shall say to the good man of the house, the Master
says unto thee where is the Guest Chamber where I shall eat the Passover with
my Disciples? And he shall show you an upper Room furnished, there make ready.


THIS Text is not the Scripture for the day, but it is next of kin to it; it is
the Story for the day, though not the Chapter, for it is the very same Story
that out of another Evangelist is appointed for the Gospel of this day, and
you lately heard it read to you. But I chose rather to handle it out of St.
Luke, because that part which makes for my purpose is more fully set down by
him. And indeed between the two Evangelists, in the recording of the Story we
shall find that there is some difference, though it may be easily salved: For
St. Matthew in Chap. 26. he so relates it; as if the motion of preparing the
Passover, came first from the Disciples of Christ: but St. Luke in this
Chapter, he so relates it, as if the motion of preparing the Passover, came
first from Christ, but the very next words do make it plain to us, where he
shows, that the first motion of the thing came from Christ; but the first
motion of the place came from the Disciples of Christ: Therefore St. Matthew
when he tells us of the Disciples of Christ propounding to their Master
concerning the preparation of the Passover, I suppose the first precept went
from Christ, he gave them charge to go and prepare, as it is in Luke; then
they go and propound the Question concerning the place, Where will thou that
we prepare?

And both these considerations even in the entrance of this Scripture, might be
useful for us; for, in the Narration that is made by St. Matthew, we have here
propounded to us, what is the duty of a godly Servant, he will put his Master
in mind of matters that are weighty, and important, not only such as concern
the world, but such as concern Religion. If we follow the relation of St.
Luke, there is set down the duty of a godly, and religious Master, to call
upon his Servant to excite him to be frequent, and zealous, in the work of the
Lord, in the service of God. According to the method that St. Matthew follows,
there we may see the part of a religious people, of a good Flock, they will in
case even speak to their Pastor, and call upon him for the practice of those
duties that belong to him, and we will take it well at your hands. Christ
himself was pleased to suffer himself to be remembered by his Disciples: God
himself suffers himself to be remembered by us, when we call for those
things we need. But if we follow the method of Luke, so you shall see what is
the duty of a careful, vigilant Pastor, he will often stir up his People, his
Flock, his Parish, to consider what they are doing when they come to the
service of God, to whose house they come, whose Table they repair to, whose
Word they hear, before whom it is that they cast down themselves; still he
will call upon them to prepare for the Passover.

Were I guilty of any great neglect, Beloved, I would hope that some of you
would be so friendly as to call upon me, to put me in mind; and yet I have
cause to suspect that rather the most would be so negligent as to let me alone,
willing to enjoy in my idleness their own security. Therefore you shall give me
leave now to prevent you, as Christ did here his Disciples, to speak to you
that you make ready for the Passover; the Passover, why is there any Passover
now to be kept among Christians? Yes, if you do not know it the Apostle will
tell you that Christ is our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7. He that prepares himself for
the applying of the death of Christ, and the procuring of himself greater
interest in the merit of his Passion, he prepares for the Passover. You know,
as Christ said to his Disciples, that within these few days, after two or
three days, the time will come about wherein we celebrate the memorial of his
Passion, the time of his Resurrection; and this is another Passover, the
Christians Easter is his Passover: and if there were not this, yet the
remembrance of that work, about which we are conversant this day. As Christ is
the Passover in the substance of the thing, so the Sacrament that he
instituted, his last Supper, that is as the Passover, in the memorial of the
benefit, it is the Sacrament that came in the room of the other; the Lords
Supper, that is the Christians Passover also, and you know that those days of
receiving, they hasten upon you, the next Sabbath, the next Friday, this very
day.

Give me leave then, to call upon you again, that you will be pleased to make
ready, to prepare your selves for those times that are to come after, and to
come with preparation. Now for this purpose I am sent to you, and come to you
at this time, as the Disciples were sent to the good man of the house, here it
is the same word I bring to you, give me leave to ask, where is the
Guest-Chamber? It is the same Master of us all that has sent me to you, the
good Master, the great Master, the very Master, that speaks here in the Text,
go and prepare.

Say to the good man of the house, where is the Guest-Chamber, that I may eat
the Passover with my Disciples? From Verse. 14. to Verse. 21. is set down to us
the manner of the celebration, the sollemnizing, and keeping the Passover, and
the celebrating of Christ's last Supper. From Verse. 8. to Verse. 14. is set down
the preparation that was made for the keeping, and the celebrating of it. In
Verse. 13. there you have the preparation actual. In the Verse before, you have
the directions for the preparation, and they are principally two. There is one
direction that Christ gives them at their first entry into the City, they
shall meet a man bearing a Pitcher of water. The other direction that Christ
gives them, is when they shall enter into the House, they shall then speak to
the good man of the house, and say thus and thus to him, that is in Verse. 11.
and 12. So now, in these two Verses I would entreat you to consider only these
3 things.

There is the person to whom Christ sends them.

Say to the good man of the house. And there is the Message that they are to
deliver to him, a form of words that Christ prescribes them.

The Master says, where is the Guest-Chamber
That I may eat the Passover with my Disciples?
Then, the third is the Success, and the satisfaction that they shall receive
upon this motion made to him.

He will show you a large upper Room furnished, there make ready. I begin with
the first, and that is the person to whom Christ sends them; here it is in the
Greek, the Master of the house, the Latin word is, the Father of the Family;
the English Translation renders it often in the Gospel, the good man of the
house. The Greek word that sets down to us most properly the civil respect,
the Ruler of the Family; the Latin word sets down the natural respect, the
Father of the Family; the English sets out best to us the Christian respect, it
is most Christian, it sets down the religious respect, the good man, that is,
the chief, the best man in the house.

Four times in the Gospel I find this word thus translated, the good man of
the house, in Mat. 24.12. If the good man of the house (that is, the Master of
the house) kn^w at what hour the Thief would come. Likewise in Mat. 20. where
it is said that those that received the penny from the Lord, murmured; the
Servants murmured against the good man of the house, against him that paid
them, and here in this place I cannot but delight my self with the
Translation, with the Interpretation of the word, that they should so happily
light upon this word, which has the propriety only in our English tongue, as
to Translate the Master of the house, the good man of the house, the very
interpretation of the word will show us thus much: that Those that are eminent
in place, should be eminent in piety.

If there be any piety, or goodness to be found in a City, or in house, it is
to be presumed, that it is, or should be in him that is the head, and chief;
God expects it more at such men's hands, by way of thankfulness, because he
has given them more mercies, the whole is theirs, he expects it from them by
way of duty, because he has given them a greater account, they are to answer,
not for themselves alone, but for others committed to their charge, they should
be examples of piety, they should prescribe it to others. Otherwise, if the
great wheel be out of frame, it is much to be feared that the lesser wheels
will not keep a regular motion. Servants, and Children, usually tread in the
steps of those Aeconomicall Kings, and it is a rare sight to see, and to find a
sober Family, where the Master of the house is given to revelling; or a Family
that is chaste, if the Master be wanton; or a Family that is religious, if the
Master or Mistress be profane.

Therefore it will be your care Beloved, to uphold the word, and to continue to
your selves, the comfort of this excellent interpretation, that still the
Master of the house may relish the good man of the house. Indeed then goodness
came to be neglected, when man came to affect greatness most; and it is the
affectation of the words Lord, and Lady, and Sir, that makes men so far to
neglect goodness, and the name too of good man of the house.

But yet there is a way to preserve it, if you be those that govern your
Servants righteously, that teach, and nurture your Children in the fear of the
Lord, that set examples of piety to all. This name will still be preserved,
otherwise if you set evil examples to your Servants, if you read lessons of
luxury, never persuade your selves, though you have the right, yet you loose
this name, it will be the Master of the house, but not the good man of the
house; it will not be the good man, but the bad man of the house, when men
speak of you; that only by the way.

We see what the name is whereby he is expressed. There are two things that I
mean to consider in this point.

The name appellative that is expressed, the good man of the house.

His name proper that is concealed, his name is not set down, only the
Disciples are directed to the chief, go to the Master of the Family; Christ
tells not them, nor the Evangelist tells us, what the man's name was, none of
all the Evangelists set it down.

There are diverse of the Ancients, that torture themselves very much, to find
out who this man should be, notwithstanding that the Gospel does not set down
to us, neither his condition of life, or the place, or situation of his house
in Jerusalem; nay, not so much as his name, who he was. Some there are, that
would have it to be Simon the Leaper, he at whose house Christ but six days
before, was entertained. But that is impossible, for his house was at Bethanie,
and this house was at Jerusalem, that they were sent to. Nycephorus is very
earnest to have it to be the house of John the Evangelist, a house, says he,
that he changed with Cayphas the high Priest, for certain other possessions
that he had in Galilee, and this good man here spoken of, was his farmer, or
Tenant, that kept the house at that time; to him they were sent. A mere
conjecture that has no ground, or any circumstance of a ground.

Of all other, the most probable that some gives, is that it was the house of
Mark, the same house that Peter came to, when he was delivered by the Angel,
and there is this probability that indeed it seems to be the house of some
clandestine Disciple of Christ, some of those that were well-affected to
Christ, though there were some of his Disciples that durst not appear to be
so, because of the people: we read of diverse, John 12. such as Joseph, and
Nychodemus, and Mark, and to this house they think these Disciples were sent;
but yet it is probable, but no certainty; it is better to let go these
curiosities, and look to the reason. What should be the reason that Christ does
not point out the name of this man to his Disciples, nor the Evangelist to us.

In this other, the Fathers are as much different from one another, in giving
the reasons of the concealment of the name, as they are in other places very
sollicitous to find it out, and the reasons are many that are given, why at
this time Christ when he sent his Disciples, and the Evangelist when he
recorded the story, did not tell the name of the man.

St. Ambrose gives this reason, his name is therefore concealed here, of
purpose, says he, to note that he was some mean obscure man whom they had not
known ever the better, if Christ had named him, he was of inferior note, Ideo
nomen non, etc. says Ambrose, therefore, his name is not assigned, that we may
conceive him to be some such man of inferior quality; but the context will not
bear this reason: the next Verse that follows, the second Verse of the Text,
we see he provides, and makes ready a Room large, and furnished, as the word
in Mark will bear it, a Room adorned, and beautified with Hangings, and other
good Furniture, that must not be supposed to be the Room, or the house of a
man of such inferior note as Ambrose would have it.

Hillarie gives this reason of the concealment of the name, because (says he)
there was a new name to be given to all Beleivers after, therefore the notice
of the old name is not taken of this man among other Christians, he was to have
the name of Christian, Non dum Christiani nominis, etc. says he, the honor of
the christian name was not yet imposed upon Beleivers, and there was another
name after to be added, therefore because diverse of them were to lose their
old name, it was to be swallowed up, and they were to be called Christians,
therefore his name is not named; but this will not stand neither, for by the
same reason none of all the Disciples should have been named, for they were
after pertakers of the name of Christians, yea, and the name of Apostles, and
yet ever, and anon they are named.

There are others that think the reason of the concealment of the name was,
because Christ would take occasion hereby to give them a testimony of his
omniscience, that he does, by telling them of meeting a man with a Pitcher of
water, and because he meant to describe the house after this fashion, therefore
he sends them to a house in general, that they should not know whose house to
enquire for, he tells them not the name, because they should go upon that mark
that Christ had given them; go and you shall meet a man with a Pitcher of
water; this is very probable, but this gives not full satisfaction, because if
Christ had told the name of this man's house, it had been an argument of his
omniscience; notwithstanding, because he gave them such a note and mark to know
it by, that they should meet that man with a Pitcher of water. Just such a
sign as Samuel the Prophet gave Saul when he departed from him, says he, When
thou art gone from me thou shall meet in the plain going up to Mount Tabor,
three men with three Kids, and three loaves, and a Bottle of Wine. As he there
by the spirit of Prophecy, did tell him what kind of persons he should meet,
so Christ takes the same note and mark, whereby to describe this man's house to
them, therefore for all this he might have named him.

Others think the reason should be, that no man is named, to note, that all men
are invited to this new Passover, that Christ would keep, therefore no man is
named; that is the reason of St. Jerome, venerable Bede, and others, Vt omnis
sciant se, etc. that all men might know themselves invited to the communication
of those Mysteries. That this great solemnity of keeping the Passover, and
especially of the institution of Christ's last Supper, might be made open, and
plain, and manifest to all, therefore to show that all were invited, none was
named, this is a good reason, but it is not textuall, it is not substantial,
for by the same argument then, there should none of those have been named that
sat down with Christ, not he that leaned upon his bosom, none of those that
were his Auditors at any time, when he delivered the Mysteries of Salvation,
the Mysteries of the Gospel.

Therefore in the last place, others give this reason, that is the most proper,
that therefore the man is not named, because Judas should not know which was
the house where Christ kept the Passover, and so should not prevent him by
betraying him to the Pharisees, that is the reason that is given by Euthymius,
Theophilact, Cyrill, Ne Judas traderet ante celebrationem paschatis, says
Cyrill, least Judas should have betrayed him, peradventure before he had
celebrated the Passover, and made all things ready, least Judas should have
told the Pharisees. Now when Judas knew not the house, Christ that knew all
things meant to prevent him, that though he had Covenanted with the Pharisees
before to betray him, he could not tell the house till he came with Christ, and
so could not betray him so soon. This is a most proper and probable reason,
yet there may be two added to this, no less probable, and profitable.

One is, the reason why Christ did not name him to the Disciples.

And the other, why the Evangelist does not name him to us.

Why Christ did not name him to the Disciples, because he was an unknown
Stranger, Chrysostom touches upon this reason, says he, he was a man they
knew not, it was all one if he had named him, and Christ could show, that
whosoever he sent to, should condescend, he had the sway of his heart in his
hand, and he would incline him to make him give that room that he had provided
for himself. Christ would not only show his omniscience, by telling them of a
man that should meet them with a Pitcher of water, but show the greatness of
his power, that he sent to a Stranger, and yet inclined his heart to make ready
the room, even in his absence. It must needs be supposed, that if it had been
any of Christ's Followers, if it had been any of his Disciples, though of those
that were his secret Disciples, if it had been any of his Allies, or
Acquaintance, in all likelihood the name would have been set down to us, if
not declared to the Disciples. Christ that knew the house by his prescience,
knew the name. Sciebas domine Jesu nomen. etc. says Ambrose well, Lord, thou
did know the name of the man, thou did conceal it from thy Disciples,
that they might know thee the better.

And then the second is, why the Evangelist conceals it from us; that is upon
special reason, to teach us thus much, that we should not spend our time about
things circumstantiall, that we should not neglect the weighty matters of the
Gospel, that we should not take up our thoughts, and bestow our Studies so
much on times, and persons, and places, the knowledge whereof is not so
profitable, as the knowledge of the things that we should labor to be
excercised in, matters that are moral, in matters of faith, in the knowledge
of those things that sanctify the heart, and be directions to life; what will
it profit me to know the names of the two Disciples that were sent to loose
the Colt, since I have their example of obedience, though I know not their
names; what though I cannot tell who was the Woman that washed Christ's Feet
with her Tears, and wiped them with her hair, I may benefit no less by the
example of her penitence. What if I cannot tell this man's name to whom these
Disciples were sent, since I enjoy no less the example of his piety. It has
pleased the Spirit of God in wisdom to conceal from us the names of the
Authors of some Books, both in the Old, and New Testament, the Penman of the
Epistle to the Heberws is not certainly known, and diverse Books in the Old
Testament, what is the reason? God will have us believe his word, though we
know not the Authors; it is not the word of the Penmen, but of God, it is
Written by the Spirit of God, though we know not whose hand God guided, it is
not a thing material to know who was the Author, but it is our happiness that
we have the Books; what would I care much, though I had never known the name
of Peter (though I give all reverence to the memorial of Christ's Penmen) so I
have the example of Peter's Repentance, let me get that, let me be one that
treads in his steps, though I had never known him. What would it skill, or
disadvantage me, if I had never known the name of Job, if I had him but
described, the man that dwelt in the Land of Vz, so I reach to the excellency
of his patience, he is like Job, not that knows his name, but imitates his
virtues. Or what would it disadvantage me if I had never known the name of the
blessed Apostle Paul, since we have his excellent Writings that are a light to
our Feet?

Therefore let us not spend time in knowing persons, especially if they be
concealed, the same wisdom of God that reveals the names of men for our
remembrance, and imitation, in some places to teach us to look to things that
are useful, and not to the knowledge of persons, or names. So much of that,
that is, the Person to whom they were sent, considered according to his
appellative name that is set down, the good man of the house, and according to
his proper name that is concealed, and not set down, that he was Peter, or
James, or Mark, or the like, it is not set down, to teach us to study the
imitation of his virtue.

I come to the second, that is the Message they were to carry.

The Master says, where is the Guest-Chamber? That I shall consider three
ways, there are 3. things observeable.

There is the strength of the Patent, or Commission, The Master says.

Here is the enquiry after the place provided, where is the Guest-Chamber.

And the end to which it is deputed, the deputation of the end for which it was
furnished, That I may eat the Passover with my Disciples.

The first is the strength of the Commission.

The Master says. It is not one of Christ's highest names that was given him
while he was on Earth, nor simply the lowest. It is the lowest of all the
titles of reverence that are given him, and he gives direction to them to use
this word, The Master says; of all other it was most fit; both In regard of
Christ that sent. In regard of The man that received the Message. In regard of
The Disciples that were sent.


It was most fit not the God of Israel, not King Jesus of Nazzareth, or the
Lord, but the Master, it was most fit in regard of Christ, it is a name most
proper to him, the use of this word expressed great humility in Christ. It was
the most proper name, One is your Master, as One is your Father. Call no man
Master on Earth, even those that are our Masters in civil respects, are not
our Masters in regard of Christ. The Elders in the Revelation, as they cast
down their Crowns before the Lamb, so all Titles of honor, and dignity stoop
to Christ; other Masters they have the Government over some particular persons,
he it is alone that is the Master and Governor of all, other Teachers are
called Masters, but they are Disciples, says Austin well, before they be
Masters; they teach others sometimes, but they must first learn themselves,
says Ambrose well. They first receive from Christ their great Master, those
instructions that they may communicate, and impart to others, but he is such a
Master as Teucheth, and Learneth not; it is he alone that teaches all, and
learneth of none, because he is the wisdom of God, therefore most properly the
Master, because of the latitude of his knowledge, because of the latitude of
his power.

Then, it is a name of humility, that Christ he could not use any lower, but
the Son of man, that is the name usually he professes of himself. The Son of
man came to save that which was lost. But this of Master is the lowest of all
the Titles of excellency that were given him, and now he was in a state of
humility, and therefore even that name he makes choice of. It is to express
his humility, that he is pleased to call himself the Son of man: we never read
in all the Gospel that he called himself directly the Son of God. He did
hear the Confession with joy, and delight, when it was made by Peter, and the
Apostles, and Disciples, but yet in the very same place, Mat. 16. he forbids
them to tell the World, See ye tell no man that Jesus is the Christ; that is,
the Son of God. What was the reason?

Partly because he would not have the faith thereof prejudiced after, till his
Passion, and Resurrection were over, he would not have them Preach that
Doctrine; after the Resurrection they might Preach it safely, many would would
be scandalized by his suffering if they had Preached it before.

Then, another reason was out of his great humility, as he was in a state of
humility, so he takes to himself Titles of humility, the Son of man, still the
Son of man is in effect no more but this, as much as a man, for all men are the
Sons of man, even Adam himself, that was the Father of all, was the Son of
man, because he was man though he were not begotten of any, and notwithstanding
that all men may be so called, yet you shall find no man in Scripture called so,
but Christ; only Ezekiel in the Prophets. Ireneus observes, there are but two
in both Testaments, I never meet with more, that is, Ezekiell the Prophet, and
Christ; Ezekiell is so called Chap. 2. Son of man stand upon thy Feet. What is
the reason he should be called so? All men are so, and all the Prophets were
so: But why Ezekiel more then the rest, and he only?

One reason may be, because in his Visions he was conversant among Angels,
therefore to put him in mind that he should not be transported above measure,
as Paul, because he should not be elevated, a Messenger of Satan was sent to
buffet him, to take him off least he should be puffed up with revelations: So
the Prophet Ezekiel is called the Son of man; though thou be in these Visions
remember thou art but man, the Son of man.

Another reason why he is so called, may be, because he of all other of the
Prophets, had most Visions, and it is the same reason why our blessed Savior
calls himself so; for he only besides Ezekiel, and he often is called so, Dan.
7. in the Old Testament, I saw one like the Son of man, because of his
Incarnation. In the New Testament he calls himself still so, he never was
called by any else but, Jesus thou Son of David, and Jesus thou Son of God, but
he calls himself the Son of man, out of abundance of humility. In Mat. 16. he
adds this clause when it seemed superfluous, Whom do you say that I the Son of
man am? The sense had been full if he had said, whom do you say that I am, yet
he adds out of superfluity, so great was his humility, Whom do you say that I
the Son of man, am? As he there calls himself the Son of man, and in diverse
places, so here too out of abundance of humility, when he sends to this Owner,
the good man of the house, he says, not the Lord, the Son of God says, the
Lord our righteousness, the Lord our Redeemer says, but the Master says.

That Observation of Jerome concerning the man that came to Christ, and would
have followed him. Master I will follow thee where ever thou go, and Christ
would not suffer him. Jerome observes, that the reason why he repelled him,
was, because he called him Master, if he had said, Lord I will follow thee, he
had not had the repulse: that Observation I say will not hold, for Christ
himself that gives direction to call him Master, and now to call him Master
when they were to go on such a Message as showed his Authority, shows plainly
that Christ did not stomach it, he was not offended that any man should call
him Master, nay, he delighted in the name: as the name of Lord sets out his
Sovereignty, so the name of Master shows that he is the only chief Teacher,
even he himself when he sent to this man he bids them use the name, the Master
says, it was most fit in regard of himself.

And it was a most fit name in respect of the man that was to receive the
Message.

First, it was the fittest name for the Trial of his faith, it is not said,
Jesus says, then he must needs condescend, for who will not set open his house
that Jesus may come there? But Christ will have him give a testimony of his
faith, the Master says, some men would have asked presently, who is the
Master? No, but as soon as he hears the name Master, he knew they meant Christ,
there he gave a testimony of his knowledge, and faith?

Then, it was the fittest name for comfort; Christ by this adopts his
Disciples, they say, not our Master, though he was so, but the Master, the
Lord, the great Master, he that will be thy Master if thou will receive him,
and welcome him, he renders thee this privilege, that thou may be his
Disciple, it is the Master says, it was for the testimony of his faith, and
fittest for his comfort.

Lastly, it was the most fit name to persuade him to this thing, for it is a
name that has a great deal of force, and power in it: when the two Disciples
went to lose the Colt, on which Christ was to Ride to Jerusalem, and the Owner
asked them why they loosed him? All the answer they gave, was this, the Lord,
or Master has need of him, as soon as ever they heard this word, it was such
a convincing word that they parted presently from that which was their own,
and suffered him to be carried away. When Mary was in the midst of her dumps,
they were grieved for the death of their Brother Lazarus, as soon as she
heard Martha come and tell her the Master is come, it put her out of her
sorrow, presently she arose, there was so much comfort in the word, that she
thought all comfort was come, and all sorrow was forgotten, when she heard
that name, because it is so powerful, and persuasive a word in the hearts of
all that know Christ.

Lastly, it was the fittest name that they could carry, because they were
Disciples, and Christ would show them by this how much obedience he found even
in those that were not Disciples, and he would show them withal, how they were
to go into the World to Preach the Gospel, in whose name, they were not to
go in their own name. Did we Baptize in our own name, says the Apostle, or
did we preach in our own name? No, the Prophets did not so, but they came,
Thus says the Lord. Christ himself as Mediator, he came not in his own name,
therefore blessed (say the People) is he that comes in the name of the Lord.
Look, says Austin, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.
Therefore whosoever he is that comes in his own name, he is cursed, as every
man is that brings his own Dreams, and inventions, and leaves the word of
God; he comes in his own name. The Disciples did not, they came in Christ's
name, Nun quid, etc. says Ambrose, tell me when Paul, and Peter preached the
Gospel, did they use their own words, did they not speak so, as inspired,
and guided by the Spirit of God? So they said as Christ their Master said to
them, to teach us thus much, that it was not by their own words, but by the
word, and power of the Spirit of Gods grace powered upon the Gentiles, it was
not them, but he that converted by their Preaching, whose word they preached.

Is it not so with us now? Though we be as Earthen, and more earthen vessels
that speak to you now, as earthen as ever, and as weak, yet in whose name
come we? Be the instruments never so mean, of the lowest, and most inferior
note, yet there is that that adds Majesty to our word, we speak from God, we
come from the great Master, when we press upon you any Doctrine of
Exhortation, do we press the Exhortation from our selves? When we discover to
you any sin that you should leave, and forsake, is it that we call it sin, or
that the Scripture calls sin? When we entreat you to give us your attention,
do we entreat you to listen to us? No, if any man come in his own name, let
him have your neglect, stop your ears, let him be cursed, but if we come in
the name of Christ, in the name of the great Master, in the name of God; if we
tell you it is he your Redeemer, your Savior, it is he that speaks, it is the
Lord your Judge, it is the Lord your Master. O who will not melt at the hearing
of this name, The Master says, it is the word that includes in it all comfort,
he that can alone teach by his Spirit, he from whom you expect Salvation,
whatsoever this Book speaks, whatsoever it says, he says, because it was
penned by this Spirit, it is the Master that says it, that is the first thing.

Though I would have you withal, remember that it is not the Master
beseeches, but the Master says, that is, the Master ^ommands, Christ would
hereby show that all hearts, all ears they bow to him, it is the Master says,
a man would have thought this had been but a familiar form, to come, and have
made provision of a Chamber, and Lodging for Christ, to say the Master says,
nay, we come in his name not to entreat, and beseech, no, but to show that he
had the supremacy, and Government of all, they do not say the Master entreats,
but the Master Commands, that is the first thing, the Message, and the strength
of their Commission, The Master says.

The next is the enquiry after the place they are to provide, Where is the
Guest-Chamber?

In this we may observe these two things, it sets out to us two things that are
contrary.

See here both the Poverty, and Plenty of Christ.

It sets out to us, first his Poverty, he was one that stood in need of a
Lodging to keep the Passover, he had no House, nay not so much as a Chamber,
nay, neither he, nor his Disciples, for if any of his Disciples had had a
house, or a Chamber, it is very likely the Passover should have been kept at
that house, and his last Supper should there have been instituted, the word
signifies an Inn; it is so called, because men commonly when they have done
their business, and have baited sufficiently, they loose from such a place to
another, they do not abide in the place, there is a departure, a loosing, a
going away, nay more, it does not only signify the whole house, but any Room
that is hired, or taken up, or marked out; Christ had not a Room, not a
Chamber of his own in Jerusalem, no not for duties of piety, he was feign to
go, and entreat for one, he sends his Disciples to provide one. It is that
that himself says, The Son of man has not whereon to lay his head; even the
inferior Creatures in this particular had that privilege, notwithstanding all
the cunning and force of the pursuers, yet the ^oxes have Houses, and Holes,
notwithstanding the Snares of the Fowlers, yet the Birds you know how they will
keep their Nests, their houses and places of refuge, yet he that was the Lord
of the World, had not a house on Earth, nay, not to keep the Passover, he had
not a Cradle when he was Borne, he was feign to be laid in a Manger, he had not
a Tomb of his own when he suffered, he was feign to be laid in a Sepulcher
that belonged to another, he had not a Chamber now to keep his Passover in.

Let the men of the World hear this, that build to themselves stately Palaces
upon Earth, that desire to be kept stately, to lie softly, those whose delight
is as the Prophet speaks, to build fair Houses, and strong for themselves, and
think they have made themselves a name, those that dote so much upon the World,
that they build so as if they were to live for eternity, is that an argument in
us that we are men mortified to the world? If our affections run that way only
after stately Habitations, or do we think hereby we conform our selves to
Christ? Though there is a Liberty that we may take, yet if we come to set our
hearts upon such things, do we not think that they will draw so much of our
affections from Heaven.

Again, let them hear this that have no House to put their head in; here is
comfort for them, though they want a Habitation, yet they want not conformity
to Christ: it is so often times now in the World, that Christ in his Members
wants Lodging, they want a place to Lodge in, I will cease to wonder at it, if
ever I live to see it, as we may see it too often, the Saints of God wandering
abroad destitute, afflicted, tormented, driven to live in Caves of the Earth,
in Dens, and Deserts, and Woods, and secret places, that they may hide
themselves from the persecuting of Enemies, as now in those parts of the Church
beyond the Seas, I will cease to wonder, seeing that Christ their head, and
Christ their Redeemer, the Lord of our Salvation, even he himself that was
owner Possessor of all things, he would not take to himself the title of any
house, when he was below, but was feign to borrow.

If ever it shall be my own condition, or yours, I cannot tell, yet let us
cease to repine, and murmr, and grudge at Gods providence, would we not be
willing to tread in that Path, and to tread it out, and walk to the end, that
Christ has set to us in his own person? The condition of diverse of the best
Saints of God, has been the condition of Christ himself, therefore this shall
be my contentation, and comfort, though we miss a Lodging on Earth, he that
cannot get a grave in Earth, as Lazarus, we read not that he had any, yet he
found a Mansion of glory in Heaven, a Bosom prepared for him, Abraham's bosom,
though we be thrust out of all men's Doors here, yet God will set that open, if
we be of the number of those that believe in his name, and walk in the ways
of his Commandments, the path that he has set to us, there must be our
comfort, not to be ashamed of a low condition, Christ stooped to it, he had not
so much of his own possession, as to call one Chamber his, to set out his
poverty.

But withal it sets out the plenty of Christ, for though a man have nothing in
possession, yet if he have much in title, he is rich, Christ had nothing of his
own; the whole World, and every man's house, that House is his, that he would
Command, and mark out for himself, Where is the Guest-Chamber? A man would
have thought that Christ spoke not of his own, there is a house that I have in
Jerusalem, I have pointed out such a Room to eat my Passover with my
Disciples, he says not, tell us if thou have a Guest-Chamber, or we entreat
thee that we may have it by way of hire, and we will give thee so much as it is
worth for the time, or season; lend it our Master for a while, this is his
suite, and this is ours; no, but to show that Christ had right to it, Where is
the Guest-Chamber? I have a Chamber in thy house that thou call thine, If I
mark, and set it a part, it is not thine, now where is the Guest-Chamber that
I have marked out?

It tells us thus much, that God has more interest in that that is ours, then
we our selves; if he call for it, he has interest in every man's possession,
the men of the City acknowledged so much when they let the Colt go, at that
word, The Lord has need of him, so this man acknowledged as much when he let
his Chamber go at the word of Christ, Where is the Guest-Chamber?

It will be a great means to incline us (Beloved) to the right use of those
things that God has trusted us with, if we do but acknowledge that hand from
whence they come, if we can but acknowledge who is the owner if we can spy
that, we think our selves owners, we are indeed under God owners in respect of
men, Farmers to God, whatsoever we have is more Gods then ours, he lends us
Houses for the present, for our comfort, that we may do him Service, and bring
some glory to his sacred Name, but if we our selves are not our own in respect
of God, are our Houses? If we be not our own, but God has more Title to us
then our selves, what have we then? Have we a penny? God has more title to our
hearts then our selves, have we more right to our Houses then he?

It will be a great means to stablish, and comfort our hearts, when God takes
away that plenty that he has given us, he takes away his own, so long he has
trusted me with the dispensing of it, he has made me his Steward, he will see
if I will serve him in a lower condition, may I not trust him with his own?

It will be a great excitement to charity, when God presents the poor to us,
God Commands and asks, Christ begs with his mouth, he holds out his hand, he
asks, what? any thing that is mine? No, for his own. The Apostle Paul has
showed plainly, those that have Houses should be as if they had none, and those
that have Wives should be as if they had none. How is this that such as have
married Wives should be as if they had none? Because the Church is the Spouse
of Christ, Christ is the Husband, and in regard of that Marriage, the other is
not to be owned; and those that have Masters, and Servants, should be as if
they had none, because one is our Master in Heaven, and those that have Houses
as if they had none, because our Lot, and portion is above, and those that use
the World, as not using it, because whatsoever is in the World, it is nothing
to the possession that God has provided for us. If we could but once come to
this, to acknowledge God to have more right to that we have; then our selves,
if he call for it, and take it away, it will breed comfort in the one, and
contentment, in the other, liberty, and bounty, and freedom of mind. Christ
speaks often in his word, though we hear not when he calls, Where is the
Guest-Chamber? He speaks to us this word, when he tenders a miserable
Spectacle, and presents it before our eyes in a poor creature that wants the
necessaries of this life; many Saints of God there are that are Harbourlesse,
they come, and in them Christ speaks, where is the Lodging thou have provided
for this poor man, I mean to send him to Lodge with thee this night; they
have received Angels, nay Christ himself in them, Oh, Where is the
Guest-Chamber? It is that that Christ speaks to the impropriator, and
depopulator, not only of the houses of men, but of the house of God, Where is
the Guest-Chamber where my people should meet together to call upon my name,
and to be instructed in the ways of Salvation? Have thou turned it to a
Stable, or a Barn, where my People should meet together to partake of the
Mysteries of Salvation? Where is the Guest-Chamber? It is Beloved, that that
they ask here, you know what is meant when we ask where is the Guest-Chamber?
The Church in which we meet that is the Guest-Chamber, there we are to provide,
there God has promised to hear us; Where two or three are met together. Nay
yet, there is another Guest-chamber, it is the Question that God propounds to
man's heart, Where is the Guest-chamber, that I may eat, not with my Disciples,
but feast with my Spirit, that I may come, and lodge, and dwell, and Sup. It is
This Guest-Chamber that Christ enquires after, and I think he speaks to your
hearts that are to receive now, and after, that you will labor to make your
Rooms furnished there for him, the first Guest-Chamber is the Church of God,
the Furniture of that is Devotion, the second Guest-Chamber is the Table of the
Lord, the Furniture of that is repentance; the third Guest-Chamber is the
heart, the Furniture of that is the faith, and reformation of those that
believe in his name.

Be sure that thou have an Answer when God makes this Question, where is the
Guest-chamber? Lord thou know better then I, here it is, though not
prepared, not made ready as it should be, but though I cannot say it is ready,
Lord thou can make it ready; here is the Guest-chamber where thou shall
dwell, and lodge. You see I have dwelt longer upon this point then I would, I
might have handled all, but I see I am prevented, and therefore that that
serves not for the preparation of this days receiving, shall serve for the
preparation of the next days receiving; and I shall go forward in the
Afternoon.

SERMON II.
LUKE 22.11, 12. And ye shall say to the good man of the house, the Master
says unto thee where is the Guest Chamber where I shall eat the Passover with
my Disciples? And he shall show you a large upper Room furnished, there make
ready.


IT was the course of our blessed Savior in the Gospel upon some solemn
occasions to send forth his Disciples, as Noah did the Creatures into the Ark,
by pairs, two, and two. Two Disciples he sent to loose the Colt, that he rod on
in Triumph to Jerusalem. Two Disciples he sent here for the preparing of the
Passover, when he meant to keep the last, and most solemn. And he did it upon
special reason. Partly for the honor of the employment. Partly for the
comfort of the Messengers. Partly for the expedition of the work. The loosing
of the Colt was a matter of hazard, and trouble; the preparing of the Passover
was a matter of pains, and labor, he sends them therefore two. And he does
not send them at all adventure, but he gives them a mark that was infallible
for their better guidance, they should meet a man bearing a Pitcher of water.
It is either my happiness, or unhappiness, Beloved, that the employment is
the same, and the assistance less. The end of our Preaching is the loosing of
the Colt, and yet not the loosing, but the breaking of Creatures that are more
unruly. And the end of this Sermon is a preparation, but not of the Passover,
but of the Lords Supper, a Sacrament more honorable in it self, and more
comfortable in the fruit; therefore that which stands in need of a great many
more Disciples. The work is the same, or the like; you see the ability less. I
am to come to you to speak alone, there is no Disciple to be my Assistant; and
I want that guidance too that those two Disciples had. I should look long
before I should spy a man with a Pitcher of Water.

It may be observed in Scripture, that they were always fortunate, and
successful journeys that had such guidances. Abraham's Servant, when he went to
choose a Wife for Isaac, that was his happiness that God guided him to meet
Rebecka with a Pitcher of water. Saul when he went to inquire for Samuel, that
was his happiness, he met a Woman that was about the same employment, and she
told him where the Prophet was. Our blessed Savior himself John 4. was sure
of a Convert when he met the woman at the well. It is that that I would feign
do, but it will be long ere I shall find such a happy guidance. If I could
find but one man who had a Pitcher of water, I would presently find out the
Guest-Chamber. It is not the Pitcher, but the ^ountaine of water, the Tears of
repentance, that are the preparative for that performance; that was that which
Christ sought, that was that which the Disciples met with, that is the thing I
shall desire to find here, for my guidance in the prosecution of this
Scripture. It must be mine to seek, but yours to give: wheresoever there is
such a Pitcher of water in the eye, there is the Guest-Chamber in the heart;
and where the Chamber is so furnished, there Christ will come to feast, to eat,
not the Passover, not with his Disciples, but with his Spirit in the faithful
soul, not himself to eat, but to give us to feed, and that of his grace, and
of his goodness. It is the intendment of this Scripture, it is the intendment
of my weak meditations at this time. Wherein I shall fit you better to go on,
if we look first a little what we have done already.

I told you this Scripture conteins in it these 3 things.

There is the person to whom they were sent, described here, in that he is not
described. Two things were observable in him.

The apellative name which is set down, The good man of the House.

And the proper name which is concealed.

The second it is the Message which they are to carry here, these two
Disciples, when they are to prepare for the Passover. In that there are three
things.

The strength of their Commission, The Master says.

There is the enquiry of the place, Where is the Guest-Chamber?

There is the deputation of it to a peculiar end, That I may eat the Passover
with my Disciples.

Of the two first of these I have spoken already, I showed who this good man of
the house was, as far as it concerns us to know him. What was the reason why
this term was set before the Commission, The Master says, not the Lord says,
not Jesus of Nazareth says. It was the fittest name for Christ to give them,
it was the fittest for them to carry, and the ^ittest for the good man of the
house to receive.

I spoke of the inquiry after the place. Where is the Guest-Chamber? How Christ
had none of his own, he had no House, nor Chamber to Lodge in, not so much as
to keep the Passover. He had no house for civil, no house for religious
affairs.

Again, it shows his plenty, that he that had none of his own, could Command
all, that was this man's, that was not known to the Disciples, nor known
further to him, then his divine nature found him out. Thus far I went in the
Fore-noone.

Now the third thing in the second general, is the deputation of this
Guest-Chamber that they were thus to enquire after, to a holy, and religious
purpose.

Where I shall eat the Passover with my Disciples. In that you see these two
things propounded to us.

There is the end to which it is deputed, That I may eat the Passover.

And the condition of the Communicants, With my Disciples.

The first, it is the end for which it is deputed, for the eating of the
Passover. It was one end, but not the sole end, it was not the chief end;
there was a greater end that Christ mentions not, that was the celebration of
that last Supper of his, the first to him, his last to us. But he makes mention
here only of eating of the Passover, because that only was known both to the
Disciples, and to the Jews. In that we may see that of the Apostle fulfilled,
it was accomplished here. Love (says he) is the fullfilling of the Law.
Therefore love is the fullfilling of the Law, because Christ is the fullfilling
of the Law. God is love, and Christ is love, and Christ is only the fulfilling
of the Law, and the fullfiller of it. We shall not need to stand much upon
that particular, to look to the reasons why Christ would condescend to eat the
Passover, as he says in the Gospel, Then are the Children free. He said it of
Tribute, it is true^ of these solemnities that are religious, then is the Lord
himself free. Christ was the substance of the Passover, Christ was the
Institutor of the Passover, will he please to communicate? It is true indeed,
in himself he was exempted, and needed not do it, but he did it for these
reasons.

First, for the honoring of his own Ordinance, it was he that appointed that
Sacrament, by the dispensation of Moses to the Jews, to the people of Israel,
therefore to show that he was a countenancer of his own institution, he was
pleased himself to eat of it. As he was the Son of God, so he was not at all,
nor could not be subject; and as he was the Son of man, because he was a
righteous man, therefore he was free. He could have freed himself from those
afflictions, the deliverance whereof the Passover signified; and he could have
made himself free from all that injury that was offered him by the Jews, yet
he was pleased to condescend so far, says St. Ambrose well, it was thus far
appointed, he that instituted the Passover, taking the similitude of flesh, yet
true flesh, being incarnate, that he himself should observe that rite that
himself instituted. St. Austin presses it well, that is the part of a good
Pastor, or Shepherd, to go before his Sheep in his own example, and himself
to do that that he would have them to do. That he might make us zealous in
all those performances that he requires at our hands, he himself was pleased
to perform, and to condescend to the performance of that that concerned him
not, to eat the Passover. That is the first reason.

Secondly, another reason was, the preparative of his own Passion, he saw that
his own sufferings drew nigh, the Passover it self was a Type of that, to
show, that he was the true Passover, he brings into the same Room, the Passover
that was the Type, and the Passover that was the Truth. As St. Chrysostom
observes well, at the same Table, there was both the one Passover, that was the
figure, and the other that was the substance, and celebrates both. The keeping
of the Passover, was nothing else to the Children of Israel, but a remembrance
of that grace that was past, and a sealing of some other grace that was
promised. The grace that was past, was the goodness of God in making the
Angel to passe-over them when he smote the Egyptians; here then was the
conformity, Diem transitus, etc. Christ when he was to pass from death to
life, he keeps that Feast that was the solemnity of that great transcision,
that God wrought for them: and being to taste of the bitterness of death, he
would go in the eating of the sour Herbs, to the drinking of that sourer Cup
of his Passion. To show thereby, that he was the end of all the Ceremonial
Law, the end of all the Types in the Old Testament: that very Lamb which was
the most eminent of the Types, was now fulfilled in the appearance and presence
of Christ, as St. Chrysostom says, Sanguis ille, etc. that Lamb signified
Christ, the Lamb of God; and the blood of that Lamb that was then sprinkled
upon the Posts of the Door, signified, that far more precious blood of Christ
that was shed for the washing away of sin. That is the second reason, that he
might Preach to them by this Action, and show who was the Messiah, the true
Lamb, the true Passover, as the Apostle calls him, Christ our Passover is
Sacrificed for us. Therefore Christ did eat the Passover.

Thirdly, it was also for the abrogation of it, to put an end to it. He put an
end to Circumcision virtually by taking it, as he gave strength to Baptism by
assuming it; by joining these two Sacraments, legal, and Evangelicall, the
Passover, and the Supper; he put an end to the one, and gave strength of
beginning to the other. Therefore it is that Euthimius observes, that in the
celebration of the Passover, he keeps it not exactly, as it was prescribed to
the Jews. It was set them the 14. day, and he kept it the 13. day. They were to
eat it standing, he eat the Passover lying, and leaning. One reason why he kept
it the 13. day was, because he would not be prevented in his Passion. He knew
the 14. day that it should be kept, was the day of his deliverance, and
betraying; therefore to make an end of that work, that was one reason he kept
it sooner, and dispensed with his own Law.

Another reason was to show (in the different keeping of it) that the Passover
was abolished; all judaicall shadows began to vanish; now they were dead,
though their death did not appear till afterward. The Passover it was an
obscure Type, as Nazianzen speaks well, of a clearer Type, the representation
of the Lords Supper; and therefore was to give way to the better, and more
honorable Sacrament that then Christ instituted, by joining it to the former,
says Theophilact, there was blood that was taken away by blood, ceremonial
blood by the blood of Christ. There was a Sacrifice that was taken away by a
Sacrifice, the legal Sacrifice by the spiritual, and the Passover it self,
even while it was fullfilled, it was changed; that was another reason.

The third reason, therefore Christ eat the Passover that he might put an end
to it, and make it the last eating of it.

Last of all, the reason why he eat i^, and kept it, was, to show his
subjection to the Law, to set us a pattern and example of obedience, he was
obedient in every point, not only to the Law moral, but even the Law
ceremonial. For two reasons.

One was, he became obedient, because we were disobedient, that his obedience
might satisfy for our neglect. We were transgressors of the law, Christ would
be a keeper of it. Says St. Chrysostom, because thou were a Transgressor of
the Law, therefore Christ was pleased to keep it; he was made a curse to free
us from the curse; he was made sin to wash away our sins. He was made under the
Law Gal. 4. that he might free us, that his perfection might satisfy for our
infirmities. And that here now the Christians soul might find true refuge; for
however I be assured that my sins, and transgressions be washed away by the
blood of Christ, yet when it comes to my particular: God requires perfect
satisfaction to the whole Law, that I can never do in my own person; here is
our refuge, there is one in our nature that has satisfied the Law, and all
that God could require, the very extremity, and utmost letter, and period,
that is Christ; and in that he is my Mediator, and Redeemer, I have done that
that he did. I have done it in him, though I could not in my self. That he
might perfectly satisfy, and obey for us, he was obedient to the Law.

Secondly, to stop the mouths of all cavilling Pharisees, they were ready to
object to him that he was a raiser of new Sects, that he was an Enemy to the
Law of Moses, and that therefore he came not from God. No, he shows in all the
passages of his life, that he was one that honored the Law, because he was
conformable to it; the Law of Circumcision, he subscribed to it: the Law of
Dedication, and Offering in the Temple, he subscribed to that: the Law of
keeping the Passover, he subscribed to that.

Let now profane Wretches go, and think themselves eased of the yoke of the
Law of God, in that they are called to Christian Liberty. Let men that know not
the comfort of receiving the Sacrament, that is divine, of Gods institution,
sequester themselves, and think it is no comfort, or benefit at all, to come
to the Lords Table. Our blessed Savior by this very example, did lay before
their eyes, their own refutation; that if he who was not tied to the Law, yet
would please to condescend so far, he that had power of the Law, he that was
the Ordeyner of the Passover, he that appointed it, if he would stoop so far
that needed not to keep it, how much more ought we to conform to all the
precepts that God gives us, that so often transgress? We that stand in need of
so many helps of faith, and increase of comfort, that encounter with so many
temptations.

Therefore, if we will have true comfort, let us find it in applying our whole
lives to the obedience of Christ, to all those precepts that God has given us.
If Christ were so strict as even then when he abolished the Passover to keep
it; we that expect so much comfort as we need, had need be stirred up to come
to the Sacrament often: that is the reason.

The second thing is, the condition of the Communicants, that I may eat the
Passover.

With my Disciples He does not name himself alone, though indeed the proper
work of the Disciples was not to be silent, yet he might have left them out:
for it must be supposed that he would not eat it alone, for it was to be eaten
with the Family, but he puts them in by way of emphasis; that I may eat it
with them, with all them, and only with my Disciples.

There are two things especially commended to us. It is, First, general, and
then It is exclusive.


That I may eat it with my Disciples, and eat it with none else, even in this
particular he showed himself obedient not only to the substance of the Law,
but to the circumstance of it: it was the command that God gave Exodus 12. for
the eating of the passover, every one was to eat it with his Family, with his
own Family; the Disciples of Christ were the family of Christ, therefore it
is that he takes them in, they were his care, his sheep, his particular flock,
his scholars, his pupils, his servants, his children: in which, according to
what relation soever we look on it, there is true reason why he should eat
it with his Disciples.

When he went to be transfigured he took but 3. Disciples, Peter, James, and
John, because that was the manifestation of his glory, it was not to be
dispensed to all, but only to so many as were fit to be witnesses, but this was
a work of humiliation, because it was a work of obedience, the eating of the
passover, therefore there he takes all, I with my Disciples, because they had
that reference to him.

To show us how careful we should be of those that are committed to our
charge; Parents of Children, Masters of servants, Tutours of their Scholars;
Pastors and shepherds of their people, and flock. It is the high commendation
of any man in superior place that he looks to those that are under him. God
would by that Law of eating the Passover with their Family give them to
understand thus much, that in these spiritual references all are alike to him;
there is the same law for the servant as for the Master, there is neither bond
nor free; there is as free access for the servant to the Table of the Lord as
for the Master.

Secondly, he would commend thus much to them in the fourth commandment, that
it belongs to every one that is above, in superior place, to look to those
that are under them. It is that testimony that Solomon gives to a virtuous
matron, Prove. 31. She provides meat for her household, and a portion for her
Maids. It is not only to be understood of meat temporal, but of spiritual
instruction. It was a high commendation of Joshuahs resolution, I and my House
will serve the Lord. That is the testimony that God gives of Abraham, that he
would instruct his Family, he would instruct his Children, he would teach them
in the way of the Lord; and if you will make a good account for your selves,
you must look to make some account for your servants, and your Children,; that
was the reason why our blessed Saviors care manifested it self so much for
his Disciples, he had a care of all that he preached to, and taught, but a more
especlall care of them: there was never Hen so gathered her Chickins, as he
clucked his Disciples about him, they were those that had a part in his
temptation, they had fellowship with him in his sufferings; they were those
that left all to follow him, they were those that were to enlarge the Gospel,
to plant the Church, to be Witnesses to carry his name about all the World; it
was necessary he should have respect to them, to instruct them by precept, and
by example, and so he did. He did publish Parables to all, but he did Expound
them to his Disciples; he labored to gather all, he kept them still under his
wing. He healed all Diseases, but he washed his Disciples feet; he Preached
obedience to all, he practiced obedience in a more particular manner before
them: he called upon others to fulfill the Law, he fullfilled the Law to them;
that they might be instructed, he eat the Passover with his Disciples. So I
have done with the third thing, the last of the second general.

I come to the 12. Verse, and that is the third general part of this Text,
which is the principal thing to be considered in it, the success, and
satisfaction that the Disciples received when they went to the good man of the
house, to enquire for the Guest-Chamber. Christ tells them of the success
before they come there, they knew their Errand, how they should speed; he will
say thus, and thus, to you.

He will show you a large upper Room furnished, there make ready. In which
consider only these 3. things.

Here is something of Christ.

And it shows us something of the Master of the House.

And somewhat of the Disciples that were sent.

Here is the Divinity of the Sender, a manifest argument, and proof, of
Christ's Divinity that sent them, he knew before what would befall.

Secondly, here is the great benignity, and courtesy of the Master of the
House that received them; he shows them presently, upon their word, a Room,
so, and so furnished.

Then, here is the Business that is given in charge to them that went, that
were employed; they must make ready in that Room, and no other.

The first of these is the argument of the Divinity of Christ that sent them;
and not one argument only, here are three couched in it.

Here is a proof of his Divine Knowledge, Here is a proof of his Divine
Power, Here is a proof of his Divine Providence,
First, here is a proof of his Divine Knowledge; for it runs not thus, ask if
there be a Guest-Chamber, but ask, Where is the Guest-Chamber? He knew there
was one provided. It runs not thus, see if you can meet with one furnished, or
if you can induce, and persuade him to fit a Room, but he will show you a
large upper Room, so, and so furnished. Christ knew it before.

That he had all knowledge as God, all acknowledge, there was never any so bold
as to Question, he had all knowledge, incomprehensible as God, created, and
uncreated, whereby he knew the Divine nature, as Thomas Aquinas says,
Abundanter, and whereby he knew whatsoever is about the Creature, in a
super-eminent manner. Not only so, but he had all knowledge as man, by virtue
of the hypostaticall union, there is a communication from the Divine nature,
that there is nothing that is done, or to be done in any part, or age of the
World, but Christ knows it. It is the reason that Socrates in Xenophon
presses upon them in his time, to draw them to apprehend the omniscience of
God (it may be much more pressed concerning the proof of the omniscience of
Christ) do thou think that the eye of man, then which nothing is more frail,
nothing more subject to miscarry, the sight of it is so easily put out, do
thou think the eye of man can pass, can discover an object some Miles distant,
that it can look up so high as Heaven? and shall we think that the eye of the
all-seeing God does not behold every thing at the same distance? Is it so,
says he, that the soul of man, though it be in one place can think of those
things that are done in the utmost parts of the World, and at the same time can
pass along from one Country to another, from Athens to Sicilie, and from
thence to Egypt? and shall we not think that the eye of God, the eye of him
that made the eye, shall not run through the World in a moment of time? It is
plain, and evident concerning Christ: things that were distant, he saw them as
if they had been under his eye, and things that were future, as if they had
been present. Nathanael when he was under the Fig Tree when Phillip called him,
Christ saw him; he tells the Woman of Samaria, whatsoever she had done in her
life, and yet he never met with her before. He tells these Disciples that they
should meet with a man with a Pitcher of Water, and withal, what the good man
should say to them. Says St. Austin, I do not ask thee now, what is it that
thou do, or speak, but what thou think that he knows not? Nay
further, I do not ask thee what thou think, but what thou art about to
think, but he knows it better then thy self? He knows what thou will think
at the hours end; he takes notice of things that are done privately in the
House, his eye pierced as far as the Chamber, and Room of this good man, the
Owner of the House, he saw what they were doing, the Servants rubbing, and all
making ready, he discerned it. He was not in Jerusalem now, but in his passage,
yet he saw what was done in Jerusalem, in the House.

Please thy self in thy secrecy, when thou art about sin, he observes all thy
ways, and knows thy thoughts long before. Let the want on get into never so
abstruse, and dark a corner, the eye of Christ, the eye of Majesty will find
him out: he sees that very complexion that the Daughters of pride lay upon
their faces; not only whatever good it is that thou delightest in, but
whatsoever evil thou committest, it is all brought within the compass of
Christ's eye.

Secondly, as it is a proof of his omniscience, so it is a proof also of his
divine power; in that he does not only see what is done, but incline the good
man of the House to yield to their motion. Which way soever we look on it, we
shall see a beam of Omnipotency; for it must be one of these two ways. Either
the Master of the House did provide the Room on purpose for Christ, or for
himself, or for some other. If he provided it for Christ, then his power was
manifested, that being absent he could incline the heart of a man that knew him
not, to make a Room ready by the instinct of the Spirit. We read of no Message
that he sent before, nay, surely he sent none, we read not of any word that
passed before, and yet as if there had been a contract between them, he makes
the Room ready for Christ.

If you take it the other way, that he made the Room ready for himself, and
his own Friends, for the eating of the Passover, there was a became of Christ's
power too, that that which he had provided for himself by one word speaking,
by this short Message by the Disciples, he diverted his purpose, and that which
he had provided for himself, he gives it to Christ. The greatest argument of
Omnipotency, is this, to work upon an object that is most resisting, to work
upon an object that no Creature can work upon besides; and such an object there
is none like the heart of man; it is not in the Power of any Creature, nay, not
of all, to incline the heart of man, but only God; and of all other things
there is none but has less resistance in it, then the heart of man, before it
be sanctified. And yet God by his Spirit, he works even upon that to incline
it, and works sweetly as well as powerfully, to make it pliable to his own
motions. That was an argument therefore of the Omnipotency of Christ, that at
such a distance he could incline the heart of this man, either to make ready a
Room for him, or to give that Room that he had made ready for himself,
without any scruple, or dispute at all. He showed hereby, says Theophilact,
that he can even by a few infirm, vanishing words, uttered by his Disciples,
make, and incline those to receive him, that did not know him at all. So it was
that he wrought upon the heart of the Thief, when he was upon the Cross, to
make him confess him; so it was, that he wrought at the same distance upon the
heart of Mary Magdalen, to make her humble her self, and cast her self down.
So it was that he wrought on Zacheus, when he was in the Tree to behold him,
readily to give him entertainment. So he wrought upon the Pro^igall, to fetch
him out of a far Country: so he wrought upon Peter with a cast of his eye, he
looked on him. It was not the cast of Christ's eye, but the power of his Spirit,
that Omnipotent Spirit of Christ that brought him to repentance, to which
nothing is able to be resistant. That is the second thing, it was a proof of
his Divine knowledge, and of his power.

Further, it was a proof of his divine providence, for that is the chief; in
that he does incline the heart of this man, and order things of an inferior
nature, to divine purposes. Whether it were so, that this good man, the Master
of the House, had provided this Chamber for the Passover, for his own
celebration, whether it were a Room already furnished to civil respects, here
it is that the providence of Christ appears as God, that even that which was
for civil, and ordinary respects, he orders so, as it shall serve for
religious uses. It is his providence that Governs the World, that takes notice
of all things, and brings glory out of the least effect, of what kind soever:
of what condition and note soever the creature, and action be, it is within the
compass of Gods providence, and the providence of God so regulates it.

Let the Epieures, and Atheists of the World, dispute against it, that it is a
disparagement to God to know the least things. Shall his providence go so low
as to number our hairs, to take notice of the leaves of the Trees that fall? We
see not his end in it, but God knows it. Nay, in our selves we may see that it
is no dishonor to God that these things fall within his providence, how must
not he take notice of that of which he cannot be ignorant, but it is no
disparagement. A godly man can draw wise conclusions out of things of less
note. The falling of a Leaf from a Tree; the going out of a ^ubble in the
water, there is nothing of less note then this, yet a wise man will draw holy
conclusions hence; he sees the leaf of a Tree fall, thinks, he so must my
life; he sees the bubble breath out, and says he, so must my soul. If a wise
man take notice of these things, to draw them to religious purposes. Shall we
not think that God can draw infinite conclusions from such mean things.

St. Austin, in his Commentary upon the Psalms, he takes the ^pi^ures, and
reasons with them: those that disputed against Gods providence, as if it were a
disparagement for God to take notice of inferior things. One Argument that
they brought, was, what the reason was, that it should rain on the Sea? The
Sea needs no Water; there is the concourse of water; they make the argument
thus, how this should come to pass, that the Earth gapes for rain, and gets
it not, and the Sea has abundance of water, and yet it raines upon it at the
same time, where is providence? Poor Creatures (says he) that do not
consider the end of things. Is there no end that God raines upon the Sea,
though men could not find it out; but we may find it: there are Fishes in the
Sea for God to nourish, living in the salt water, how do they leap and rejoice
at the sweet rain? How do they leap at the sweet water? they can fetch it out
of the salt Sea. Then, here is the reason, says St. Austin, it raines upon the
Sea where there is water enough for the feeding of the Fishes; it raines not
upon the Earth where there is need of water for the punishment of man.

Another Argument they brought, was this, what was the reason that the
lightening should strike the Mountain, and yet not strike the Robber that is
at the foot of the Mountain, that is by the way, that takes a Purse at the
same time; where is Gods Providence? what is the Mountain the better, or the
worse, for the striking of the lightening? If Gods providence were manifested,
he would strike the Thief, the Mountain has done no evil.

See their vanity (says he) that will search into the depth of that
providence. Percutiuntur montes, etc. Therefore the Mountains are smitten that
do not fear, that men might fear that should have been smitten. Among your
selves do none of your Wives beat the ground when the Child cries, to make the
Child affrayd? Ye your selves will beat the Earth, that the Infant may be
afraid, and tremble, and will you not suffer God to make lightening to fall
upon the Mountains, to make men afraid, that they may be warned?

Another Argument was this, what was the reason that Gods judgments do
overtake, and fall upon the heads of godly persons sometimes, and do not take
the wicked, where is providence?

Nay, there Gods providence is seen, in that that seems a judgment to us,
that falls upon the head of a righteous man, God knows him to be ready, he
takes away those that are fitted, and it falls not upon the head of the
impenitent, God spares him that he may repent; here is the Argument of Gods
providence while we reason against it. But see the iniquity of these men; if
they come into a Smiths Shop and see here the Anvill, and there a Hammer, and
here the Trough, and there the Fire, they would not take upon them to dispute,
and ask the reason of the Anvile being here, or the Trough there; why? Because
they are unskillfull, and ignorant, and they would say within themselves, the
Smith knows the reason of all these things, though I do not that am ignorant.
Look but on the iniquity of these men, they will not find fault with the Smith
in his Shop, in the Mysteries of his Trade, because they know them not, yet so
presumptuous are they, as to call Gods providence in question, that they are
ignorant of. It is just so in other questions that they propound, what is the
reason that God should take notice of inferior things? Nay, all these
inferior things, God can extend them to holy purposes. What is of less moment
then a Crow, or a Raven? Yet God by his providence feeds them, and made them
feed Elias. What is of less value then a hair of ones head? Yet even from
them God draws an argument of his providence, the Hairs of the head of the
three Children were not singed in the Furnace. What is of less moment then for
a man to bear a Pitcher of water? What is a Pitcher of water to Gods
providence? Yes, God guided it to a good end, to the Disciples, showing them
hereby where they might eat the Passover. What is of less notice then the
rubbing of a Floor, then the dressing up of a Chamber? Christ by his
providence saw this, and ordered it at the same time for the place where he
would keep the Passover, and bring glory to God. So, though we see not the
reason of these inferior things God does, he can draw great conclusions out of
mean things; there is not the meanest Creature in the World, but God takes
notice of it.

But there is a difference (and so I conclude the point) Says St. Ambrose, we
are not such flatterers of Gods providence, as to think that it is equally
communicated to all. He regards other Creatures in general, but man in
special. God takes care even over the lowest Creatures, of every Worm, but it
is for the governing of them. He gives inferior Creatures no precepts, Does God
take care for Oxen, says the Apostle? That is, does he take such care for Oxen
as he does for men? Says St. Bernard, the provividence of God extends to all,
but his particular care extends to his Spouse, to his chosen. Out of those
other Creatures it is, that God draws particular conclusions of good to them.
If a man should have come into this Room, he would have thought it had been
for other purposes, Christ directs it to the glory of God, that that very Room
that was so furnished, should be employed to eat the Passover with his
Disciples. So I have done with the first.

There are two points behind, I shall be brief in them. We see concerning
Christ, here is a proof of his divine knowledge, of his power, and of his
providence.

The next thing is to consider the humanity of him that received him (and that
is more for our use) A man would have thought that there had been a contract
between this Master of the house, and Christ, that he made ready the Room
when he sent, so freely. There was but one word spoken, there was no denial
received, there was no dispute made; had it not been that the great,
efficacious power of the spirit, had wrought mightily, and strongly upon his
heart, he could not have assented so presently. Therefore I will refer it to 3
heads.

First, it was the assent of a pious heart, it makes not disputes, and says,
Who is your Master? The Master sends, Who is he? Upon what acquaintance? What
have I to do with him? How came he to know that I have a Room furnished? Must
I find a Guest-Chamber for him? It was the answer of Naball, Who is David? And
who is the Son of Jesse? Shall I take my Bread, and my Water, and my Flesh that
I have killed for my Shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not whence they
be? It is the answer of the obstinate heart to God, when he comes to knock; Who
is he that would enter? Is it the World? or the flesh, or sin? here is a
Chamber provided; if it be God, there is none at all. This good man he raises
no Scruples, why; I am to keep the Passover my self; shall not I be obedient
to the Law? Must his obedience exclude mine? Besides, I cannot do it without a
great deal of hazard, and danger of the Scribes, and Pharisees, they will
know that I give entertainment to him, I shall bring my self in danger; He is
not ignorant how they wait for him, and how they persecute this way to death,
and will he have a Room in my House? He must pardon me. He has none of these
fears, he makes none of these scruples. That is the nature of true piety, it
raises no vain fears, if there had been fears entertained in the way, we h^d
had no Martyrs. It never says, There is a Lion in the way, but leaps over all
obstacles. If Heaven, and Earth should all be crushed together, it leaps over
all impediments to come to God. So it was the Assent of a pious heart.

Secondly, it was the assent of a charitable heart, it was a motion of charity
that was made, as well as a motion of piety: therefore he makes not any
coveteous demands first, here is a room indeed that may serve your Master, but
what will you give? at this time the whole City of Jerusalem is full of
people, and I can have great allowance for my lodgings; will your Master pay
for the hire of it? he makes none of those demands; nay he pretends not any
excuse; it is true, I had a room, but it is taken up already, there are
friends in it, I am sorry you came so late, if you had come sooner, I should
have been willing to pleasure you, but now it is past: he lays in the way no
discouragements, here is a guest-Chamber, here are diverse Chambers, any of
these inferior ones, if any of these will please and content you you shall
have them, but I may not part with my best, I must not have it soiled and
wronged, it cost much pains in trimming; there are none of these objections.
Charity casts no doubts, it makes no scruples, I shall want my self: but with
a free, and large, and cheerful heart he assents to the motion, as soon as
it is made: they do but speak, Where is the guest-Chamber? and he carries
them to it, here it is, and shows them the room so furnished.

It is the property of charity, and piety to give presently, and to give the
best to God: true piety will not set the Tith-cock at the end of the land, and
it may be the worst; it will not bring the tith- pig to cling together; no, but
out of a large, and bountiful heart, it says, it is Gods portion, he shall
have it freely. This room is not mine, so much as Gods: here take it, let your
Master come, and welcome, my house shall be blessed with him.

Thirdly, it was the assent of an obedient heart that knew that his house
should be honored by the presence of Christ, he knew where Christ came, he
brought a blessing with him: he knew this room should be recompensed, that he
should have a room ten thousand times better in heaven, that he should have
one of the mansions that Christ had prepared: he knew that he cannot want a
lodging that gives Christ one, therefore he provides a large room, the best,
that was most fit for the train of Christ, a great upper room, it was most
safe for Christ to be in a loft, because of the Pharisees that lay in wait for
him, a room furnished was most answerable for so great a guest as Christ: a
room prepared, this was the room.

Shall my house be honored with such a guest thought he? will he come, and
visit me; will he tread on this floor, O welcome! welcome Savior to my House.
Must the Temple remove out of its place to my House? Shall my House be the
first Christian Church? Will Christ here keep his last Passover? Will the Son
of God come under this Roof? The very stones of the wall will leap for joy at
his presence, it is to be feared the House will fall with joy; nay, I am sure
the House will stand, because he will support it. But I am unworthy he should
come under my roof, I have no fit Lodging for so great a Guest: but if he will
needs come, why do you ask for a Chamber? Take the whole, not a Room only,
but the whole House, and not upon loan, but upon Gift. It is mine no longer,
my Servants, and Friends, and Children, and Wife, and my felfe and all will go
out, that Christ may come in. Thus it is likely he spoke, he gave no churlish
answer, he gave even that answer that Christ set down; he that inclined him to
give, inclined him thus to answer.

How can the heart deny God when he comes to beg? When he that gives all comes
to ask? He comes often to us, and goes away without his Errand. He comes ofttimes
in the habit of a Poor man, and begs a lodging, and asks for the
Guest-Chamber, and the Room, there are many that are furnished for worse uses,
and never a Corner that Christ can be thrust into. He that found a room in
bloody Jerusalem, is excluded out of the Houses of many Christians, and left in
the streets. He comes often, and solicits thy heart, and speaks to thee to pay
him his own, not thine, to pay his Tithes, to burn thy double Leases, to
Cancel thy soule-condemning Customs, to restore those things that thou have
taken away from him, by Laws as wicked as he that made them: thus he calls for
his own. The entertainment that this humble man gave Christ in the Text, he
finds it not with us; we are so far from giving him a Chamber, that we shut him
out of the House: we are so far from giving him any thing that is ours, that we
take from him that that is his. We take the Houses of God into our own
possession: Churches, and Chancells are in the power of laymen; poor
Ministers they bury, and secular men they have the fees. The Sanctum Sanctorum,
that the high Priest only might enter into, and only once a year, it is now
in the possession of lay-persons, the place that answers to that, the Chancell,
and the Church. Is this an argument of a heart that would receive Christ? Would
we part with any of our Rooms for Christ, that have taken these from him? Think
of it, think of it; it may be that little moytie of their estate, is that that
makes all moulder away when all is done; for whosoever has right to them, you
have none. It was a better resolution that this man makes to himself, and we
should practice that.

I have done with the second thing. Here is the divinity of him that sent them,
and the great benignity of him that received them; as soon as they had made
the motion, he wellcomes it.

Now thirdly, here is the last thing, and then I have done, here is the
business and employment of them that did go, There prepare, and no otherwise.
Christ, as he sent a Message to him, so he gave a Commandment to them, he made
them his Harbingers to mark out his lodging, and directs them what lodging he
would have, as though he had been acquainted in the House. Make ready, there
prepare for the Passover. It was the Command that was then given to them, but
it is a great deal better direction to us, and concerns us more then it did
them. It has a truth now, there is a Room of this nature that Christ will be
entertained in; it must be a large upper Room, and a Room furnished. St.
Bernard observes it, that there are three Guest-Chambers, there are three Rooms
in which Christ is received.

There is the Chamber of the Scriptures, that is a large Room, because there
is in it all saving Truths. That is an upper Room, because it was penned, and
inspired by the Spirit of God that came from above. That is a Room furnished,
there is a storehouse of all comforts, upon all occasions: for men in want, for
men in affliction, for men in prosperity, for young, for old, for all sorts,
there are truths to be applied, and directed. When is it that this Room is
prepared? Then the Room of the Scripture is prepared for God, when the bread
of life is rightly broken, and divided to the people, then this Room is made
ready for Christ.

Secondly, there is another Chamber, and that is the Chamber of the Church. All
the properties also meet in this Room; it is a large Room, the corners of it
spread to the utmost parts of the Earth. And it is an upper room, the upper
part of it is in Heaven, the Church tryumphant, and thence it is, that all
grace comes, and falls upon it. It is a Room furnished, says Jerome well. It
is furnished with variety of gifts, and graces, with variety of Scriptures, and
Sacraments that God has provided, and appointed. It is a dineing Room, it is
a Supping Chamber. It is a Guest-Chamber, properly, that says Jerome, because
there it is that we meet at the Lords Table, we partake of the Lords Supper,
even to the end of the World. The Church of God, it is a supping Guest-Chamber.
When is this Chamber provided, and prepared for Christ? Then when the wheat is
gathered into the Barn, then when men are gathered into the bosom of the
Church, and preserved there, then, when they are built up in this holy faith,
then this Room is prepared.

Thirdly, there is yet another, the Chamber of the Conscience, the Chamber of
the heart, that is Caenaculum too; a spiritnall supping Room, and place for
Christ, and the Spirit of Christ, I will come and sup with him, says Christ in
the Revelation, Chap. 3.20. I and my Father will come and sup with such a man.
Christ will come and Sup with that man that receives him: he will sup with the
faithful soul; that is, he will dwell there, and take up his lodging. Here is
the Room that Christ wants, and that is the Room that we must prepare. It was
a material Room that they were to provide, that Room that God calls to us
for, is the Room of the heart. Think not that it is the Room, the Chamber, as
St. Austin says. Christ alludes to it, when he says of the godly man, that in
Prayer he will get into his Chamber, and shut his Door. Every man that will
pray aright, enters into the Chamber of his Conscience. David says plainly in
Psalm. 4. Enter into your Chamber, into the Cabin of the heart, this is the
Room that we must provide. It has all the properties too, God will not feast
in any other hearts, then those that are provided.

First, it was a large Room where the Lord did institute, and eat his Supper.
A large Room is an enlarged heart, enlarged with Devotion, and thankfulness.
We must not put Christ in a corner, we must not pen him up. He will have the
whole house, and the whole heart, it is that he calls for, My Son give me thy
heart; that is as much in effect as Where is the Guest-Chamber? there I will
lodge, there I will bait, and there I will stay, and abide and dwell, make
ready that Room, let it be a large Room, and a large heart for God.

Secondly, it must be an upper Room too, the heavenly heart is the upper
Room, a heart lift up, it is the word that is used in the Psalms, I lift up
my heart, yet we keep them grovelling upon Earth. Art thou not ashamed? Look
upon thy self, why has God given thee eyes, and set them in that place aloft
(whereas he has set them forwards in other Creatures) but that they should be
often lifted up to Heaven? Why has God given man a Spirit, and not other
Creatures, but that it should be lifted up often? Is it not a shame then to have
thy head aloft, and thy heart below, grovelling upon the Earth? Is it not a
shame for thee to be upright in body, and to creep upon the Earth in thy mind?
God, that cannot away with a heart that is puffed up, he expects a heart that
is lifted up, and thus elevated to him.

Therefore in the Old Testament we find, that in all holy performances, to
signify the elevation of the heart, the Saints went up; Christ would be
transfigured in the top of the Mount; he often Preached to the People from
Mountains, to note, his Heavenly Doctrine. He did often withdraw himself for
Prayer, and he prayed upon the Mountains. So did Daniel get himself into an
upper Room. So Peter, in the Acts, he got to the top of the House, not only
for privacy, but to note, that a man that will go to meet God, he must ascend
higher in his spirit. Therefore Jacob saw a Ladder in his Dream, to note, that
every man that comes before God in Prayer, or in any holy performance, he must
ascend. Says St. Ambrose well, ascend thou in holy performances, let thy heart
be lifted up. Do that indeed that thou art incited to in receiving the
Sacrament, Lift up your hearts, it must be a Room aloft, an upper Room, We
lift them up to the Lord. Then know, if thou will be partaker of those divine
Mysteries, if thou will have true comfort of that supreme union, as St. Austin
speaks, Pietas, etc. Devotion will knit those together, that the Elements in
the World has separated; we are separated from the Saints in Heaven, but
faith, and a heavenly conversation will knit us together; we shall have union
with that society. If we will give God a Room fit to welcome him, it must be a
large Room, and an upper Room, a heavenly heart.

Lastly, it must be a furnished Room; what is the furniture? The variety of
graces wherewith the heart and Conscience of a man is to be adorned, that is
the Furniture. Careful we are to provide furniture for our bodies, and for our
Houses, and for our Chambers in which we lodge, but there is a Chamber that is
in us, that is neglected. The Saints of God had a care of this, says St.
Bernard. Every Saint provided some furniture when they came to God. Mary
Magdalen, the furniture that she provided was in humility, she laid a sure
foundation. Thomas the Apostle, he made his provision in solidity of faith.
John the Apostle, he made his provision in the enlargement of love. Paul made
his furniture in the intimate, inward secrets, and Mysteries of divine wisdom;
and Peter, his in repentance. So every one that will receive Christ, and
welcome him, must make provision. What is the provision that he requires?
Faith, and repentance; the beleiving heart, and the p^nitent heart. Let the
room be washed, let there be repentance, and then it is provided. Let the
Room be swept, let there be faith, and then it is provided. These are the
hangings, and the furniture, and much more that you may add in your own
Meditations. This is the heart where Christ will long. Remember these things
you that are to receive the Mysteries. This man that gave entertainment to
Christ, thought it a dishonor to bring him into any Room that was not
prepared, he made it ready before Christ sent, by the instinct of the Spirit,
by one word of the two Disciples. God sends to you, Disciples not so powerful
in speaking, but Disciples after Disciples, and entreats you to make ready. He
sends not a Commanding word, where is it? He asks not so; but he beseeches you
that you would make your hearts ready.

Now is the solemn time to bring furnished hearts; it was at this time, when
Christ went in triumph to Jerusalem, they cut boughs of palm, and strewed them
in the way, to show that he was the only Conqueror, it was then that they cut
down boughs of trees; to show how powerful the Evangelicall Axe was that was
laid to their consciences, to bring them to the duties of piety, they did not
only strew boughs, but their garments; that is, says St. Ambrose well, all
their glory, and dignity, they were not ashamed to lay all at Christ's feet;
it may be some of their clothes were costly; you, will not part with a
fashion, you will not consecrate one to Christ: nay, the more you are spoken
to, and entreated, the more you increase in your exorbitancie. Do you think
that ever Christ will lodge in that bosom, that is set to sale to every
ludibrious wanton eye? will Christ take his room there? judge ye; think with
your selves, will he remain in that brain, to sanctify the imaginations of
it, that is so frizled? and that he will glorify that face that is so altered
to another color then he gave it? do you furnish and provide your bodies so
for Christ? cares he for these carriages? must these be your Easter
entertainment? will ye thus prepare to come to the Lords Table? I tell you, I
am conscious to my self of worse infirmities then you have. I dare not deny to
adminster the sacrament to any man that reaches out his hand to take it; if
there be any that go on in sin, my charity shall think that there is
repentance within: but I do it with a trembling heart: I rather wish my self
No Prophet, nor the Son of a Prophet. Never come to Church and receive those
mysteries in such a habit: where the outward vanity is, I say, there is not
the inward preparation, there is not a making ready.

We had need to provide more zealously, and carefully for the eating of the
Lords Supper, then they for the Passover, it is a Sacrament of more worth and
eminency.

O that there were but the same man to guide you! the man with the pitcher of
water.

I come to you with the book, and with the word of God, follow yet that
direction; and if you will give me the other, so shall you have the approbation
here that Christ gave this man he shall not say, where is the guest-Chamber?
but I have found it, here is a heart for me to dwell in, and reside in; even
this man is he that has chosen me an upper Room, large and Furnished, there I
will prepare, and make ready. So much for this time.

Angels Inspection. DELIVERED IN TWO SERMONS, BY That Learned, and reverend
Divine, RICHARD HOLSWORTH, Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Vice Chancellor of
Cambridge; Master of Emmanuel College, and late Preacher at PETER'S POOR in
LONDON.

EPHESIANS. 3.10. To the intent that now unto the principallities and powers in
heavenly places, might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons in Alders-gate-streete. 1650.

SERMON I.
1 PETER 1.12. Which things the Angels desire to look into.


THAT the Mysteries of the Gospel are things well worthy the Study of
Apostles, I showed in the beginning of this Feast, from the Text that I handled
the first day. I then spoke of it, and I hoped then to have made an end of
these Meditations. Then I considered, that as I began this Feast with speaking
of Mysteries, so there could not be a better Subject chosen for the sealing up
of the same. And this Text that I have chosen now, will answer that first
Scripture; for indeed it is much at one, for it shows that the Mysteries of the
Gospel, are worthy not only of the study of Apostles, but of Angels.
Therefore it is that I have now made choice of this Scripture to be the
accomplishment, and fullfilling of that first days. Indeed they were very far
fetched; however they have a good dependence in this Chapter of Peter, yet they
might have as good connection to those words of Paul. That I should make known
the Mysteries of the Gospel, says St. Paul; that is the Text I began with,
and these words added to that, make it full and complete. That I should make
known the Mysteries of the Gospel, which things the Angels desire to look
into.

It is a Scripture that has some difficulty in it, and will be well worth our
study, especially since it speaks of Angels, and agrees with the solemnity
that is past, in a better, and nearer nature then the former. The first Text
told us of the Christians Christmas; this Text goes further, and tells us how
it is observed by the Angels themselves. That seeing it is the birth of Christ
that administers joy to the Angels, it is the common theme of both, let us
now see in these words the common study, and inspection, and speculation of
both.

That the incarnation of Christ, it was to be the rejoicing of the faithful,
our blessed Savior shows, in John 8. Abraham desired to see my day, and saw
it, and rejoiced. That it was the common study of the Prophets, St. Peter shows
it here, The Prophets enquired after it: that it was the common study of the
Apostles, St. Paul tells us, I desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified: that it is the common study of Saints, the same St. Paul says,
Ephesians. 3. That ye may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
height, and breadth, and length, and depth, etc. Now that it is the common
study of Angels, St. Peter tells us; after that he had mentioned the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory, and the diseent of the Holy Ghost, and the
Preaching of the Apostles; he closes all up with this honorable conclusion,
Into these things the Angels desire to look. That I may the better therefore
go on with the resolution, and full explication of these words, I will reduce
all that I am to say of them, to these three parts, that naturally rise out of
the consideration of the words.

Qui Angeli. Quae bona. Quis radix desiderij.
Who are the Angels here spoken of, whom the Apostle says They desire to
look into the Mysteries of the incarnation?

What those good things are that they desire to look into?

And what is the root of this desire, that carries them to this inspection?
These are the three things I shall consider.

First, Qui Angeli, who these Angels are, Didimus Alexandrinus in his
Commentary upon this place (it seems in his time they interpreted this place
of the evil Spirits, the evil Angels: and Lorinus the Jesuit he goes about
to show so much out of Clemens Alexandrinus, that Clemens not only (though I
find not the place) makes mention of the Interpretation, but refutes them.
Therefore here now there is good occasion given, to search well into the first
thing, to know who these Students are, these that are the glorious beholders,
and Scrutators of this heavenly mystery, that are the inspectors here spoken
of; these good Inquisitors, to know what Angels they are. Therefore briefly I
will reduce it to these Propositions.

The first, Negative, that the place cannot possibly be understood of evil
Angels, of evil Spirits, for these two reasons.

One reason is taken from the name, and appellation of Angels. Though the name
be given sometimes in Scripture to the evil Spirits, yet generally when it is
applied to them, there is some word of addition annexed, whereby it may be
known of whom the Scripture speaks. The evil Angels, the Angels of Satan,
the Angel of the bottomless Pit: the Angels that kept not their first
estate, the Angels that sinned, and the like. Or if there be not some such
clause of addition, yet there is always some circumstance of Interpretation,
that directs, and points out who those Angels are, when the Scripture calls
those evil Spirits Angels, as, The Devil and his Angels, Rev. 12. Know ye
not that ye shall judge the Angels, 1 Cor. Every one must needs be sure that
this is meant of the evil Angels, it cannot be meant of the good. There is
some circumstance always in the Text, that points it out, when they are said to
be Angels. But for the holy Angels, the blessed Spirits, they are frequently,
and generally called so in Scripture, for the most part (if not always) when
this word is simply met with, it is appliable to good Angels.

And the reason is very evident, because the name of Angel is a name of
function, by nature they are Spirits, by Office they are Angels, it is a name
of Office, and function, and employment; since the name of Angel is a name of
that holy Office, and employment that Gods puts them to, and since the good
Angels are only put by God upon such employments; the evil Angels have
only his restraint, and permission, they have not his direction; therefore the
name of Angel cannot properly be applied to evil Spirits, without abuse of
the name. Though they be Spirits, as the good Angels are, they are not Angels
properly, by nature they are spirits, but by employment, Devils, in malice
Devils. But the other, as they are in nature, Spirits, so in employment they
are Angels. Angels, that is, holy Angels, because the name is generally
applied to good Angels, when there is no such addition, that reason is
sufficient. That is one reason why it cannot be meant of evil Angels, but
that is not all.

Another reason is taken from the latitude, and measure, of the knowledge of
Devils, and evil Angels. Though their knowledge be great of natural things,
and much strengthened by experience; yet for the Divine Mysteries of
redemption, their knowledge is altogether defective in it. They are very
cunning, it is very likely, in the Scriptures, because they may have them ready
to ensnare men, but the saving Mysteries of the Gospel, I make doubt whether
they truly understand them. I am confident the Devil did not understand the
first Promise that was given so long before, how the Seed of the Woman should
break the Serpents head, before Christ's Passion. He was not sure that the Son
of God should take our nature, and that Christ was he, till after the
Resurrection; their knowledge therefore in Divine Mysteries is very short, and
they care not to better it at all, for, the more knowledge, the more is their
Torment; they care not to better it, unless it be for their own ill purposes,
that they may make that knowledge a Snare for men, and a help to temptation.
See it in two great Mysteries.

One great help of our Redemption was, the Passion of Christ; it is the
general Tenent of the Fathers (and upon good reason) that the Devil was
altogether ignorant of it, before it was accomplished. Therefore St. Austin,
and Pope Leo, give this reason why the Devil did go about to hinder it by all
means, when it drew to the consummation, because then he understood that his
power began to be abolished. If the Devil had certainly known that by the
death of Christ, his Kingdom should have been demolished, and his power
destroyed, it is probable, nay, it is certain, that he would not have gone
about to have stirred up Judas to betray his Master; or the High Priest to have
shed that innocent blood. Therefore St. Austin, and Leo, and others observe,
that that Dream that Pilats Wife had concerning our Savior, when she said to
her Husband that he should not have to do with that just man, to prevent his
Sentence; diverse of the Fathers are of Opinion, that that Dream was suggested
by the Devil (though others are of another Opinion, and upon better ground,
yet that was their Opinion) that thereby he might hinder the suffering of
Christ. And others think upon the same ground, that he was the means of
instigation, why Judas did bring back the pieces of Silver, and deliver them to
the Priests, and acknowledged that he had betrayed innocent blood, that he
might stay the Passion of Christ, after he knew, or came confidently to think
that he was the Son of God.

As he was ignorant therefore that his Kingdom should be destroyed by the
sufferings of Christ, so he was ignorant of the first Mystery, Christ's
incarnaration, and our Redemption; he was ignorant of the birth of the Son of
God, that the Son of God was borne into the World; though he confessed often,
What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus the Son of God? It was a for^ed
confession, and St. Jerome says well, he was rather forced, then confessed.
But however, at the beginning he knew it not; when Christ set upon his
ministerial function, at the first, before his Miracles were wrought, though
he had a testimony from Heaven, yet when Christ went into the Desert, one of
his Temptations was, if it were possible, to sound out whether he were the Son
of God, or no; therefore he puts it with an if, If thou be the Son of God; it
was the voice of one that would make trial, as Hillarie says. It was a
doubtful Speech, as Chrysostom says, he was in great doubt, he was at a
stand, he knew not what to think, he was blinded with the luster of the
hypostaticall union, it was a Mystery that he could not apprehend. He could not
make these two ends meet together, when he saw Christ in the Desert, his long
fasting, and that he was hungry in the end, he could not make these possibly
meet, that these two should stand together, that the Son of God should be
hungry, he understood it not, that the Son of man should fast 40. days, he
knew it not. He knew not the Mystery of the hypostaticall union, therefore he
comes, If thou be the Son of God. He labored indeed to look into the Mystery,
because he knew it not; but it was not a disquisition of piety that he might
believe, but of curiosity, that he might know. He labored to pry into it, not
out of love, or hope, that it might be so, but out of fear that it was so. He
knew well he was to have no benefit at all by the incarnation of Christ, and
therefore could have no love, and because no love, no hope, and because no
hope, he desired not to make any due inquisition into it, he could have no
desire of it.

But the desire in the Text is a holy desire, and a holy inspection, being a
holy desire, and a holy object, and a holy inspection, it cannot possibly be
understood of the evil Angels. There is the first Proposition negative, upon
these two grounds the nature of Angels, and the knowledge of Devils, it
cannot possibly be meant of evil Angels. 2ly As it cannot be meant of evil
Angels, so, it must necessarily be meant of holy, and good Angels, that is
the Affirmative Proposition. For the good Angels, their spiritual eyes are
fitted, they are made capable of such Mysteries. The Mysteries of faith, they
dazzle the eyes of evil spirits, they are not able to look on them, or if he
could, he has no desire, because he finds no sweetness at all, in the
Mysteries of Salvation. All his motion is to evil, all his contemplations are
about evil, he moves only to evil, he cannot move to good. Whereas on the
contrary, the good Angels, Nazianzen expresses it well of them, they are
altogether unmovable to evil, they have only motion to that that is good. Now
here in this place, the object spoken of, is good, the speculation spoken of,
is good, the desire is good; the intendment of these inspectors is good;
therefore these Inspectors must be the good Angels, for three reasons.

First, because the good Angels, their ministration was still used about the
Mysteries of our Salvation in Christ our head.

Their ministration was used in relation of the conception of Christ, and the
manner of it, in pointing out the name of Christ what it should be. Their
ministration was used to Christ in the Desert, after his Temptation was past:
their ministration was used to Christ in the Garden in his Agony, they came,
and comforted him: their ministration was used about the Sepulcher of Christ,
after his Resurrection. It being so, that they are employed about the Mysteries
of our Salvation, we need not wonder if they make it their study, and
speculation.

Secondly, their ministration was used in the Mysteries of Salvation, in the
Saints that are the Members, they brought news of all these things, of Christ's
birth to the Shepherds; of his Resurrection to the Women, of his Ascension to
the Apostles. Their ministration is used about the Mysteries of Salvation, as
far as it concerns the Saints. Therefore, since this is the great Errand that
is given them in charge when they are sent to the Earth; such holy Messengers
would often think of their Errand, they have great delight to contemplate these
Mysteries, because God has employed them in these, not only concerning the
head, but the Members. That is the second.

Thirdly, the Mysteries of Salvation are things that the Angels have benefit
by, their share of comfort in. It is in the glass of the incarnation of
Christ, that they read the glorious Mystery of their own confirmation in
grace, and happiness; therefore they must needs desire often to look in that
glass, they read so happy a lesson there. It must needs be the good Angels
that have benefit by these Mysteries, that are used to be Witnesses to them.
Then in this first point there are these Uses redound, besides that that
follows. When we look on the Persons, the Angels, there are two instructions
arise, I will but name them.

The first is this, that it is an honorable employment, and service, and
study, for a man to look into the Mysteries of Salvation, to be conversant
about them; we may look to them with honor, because they are speculations
that befit Angels, they are angelical notions; the Mysteries of faith, and
redemption, even those that are revealed, they are a study that befit the
speculation of Angels; therefore it is a great honor for any man ^o be busied
about them. If we had not this place to evince it by reason, the Proposition is
showed plainly in Act. 17. Those Christians that are mentioned there, the
Bereans, they are called Noble by the Spirit of God, for this very purpose,
because they searched the Mysteries of Salvation, as they were Preached by the
Prophets, and Apostles. They are called Noble Christians because they were
conversant in a noble study. For this ennobles the mind, and the whole man,
because it leads him to glory. It ennobles the mind, because it endues it with
this honorable knowledge that is so illustrious, that there can be no better.
There can be no better study in Heaven, for the Angels of God. They are called
noble Bereans, because they were conversant in this study. St. Chrysostom
tells us, they were not called noble of themselves, those Converts, they had no
outward nobility, but they are called so, for the great diligence they used,
in searching the Mysteries of Salvation.

Let profane Porphirius, and Julian the Apostate, be scandalized at the
Scriptures, because of the simplicity of them, as they speak; we know there
are these Mysteries in it that exceed the sight of Angels; and those Mysteries
that are revealed, that they call simple, they are so abstruse, and excellent,
that they are not unworthy the speculation, and study of Angels. That is the
first deduction, that the Mysteries of faith are noble things to look into,
they may be looked into with honor, the Angels make them their study.

Secondly, as the Mysteries of faith may be looked into with honor; so they
must be looked into with sobriety, and modesty: because they are angelical
speculations; that is, they are deep, and profound speculations. Men that will
be too busy to search the causes of the great Mysteries of predestination, of
the Trinity, of the incarnation of the Son of God. Men that will either spy
out all, or believe none, they will love nothing, unless they can see all. O
here is that that may stay their busy heads, we must not dive too far;
Angels cannot see to the bottom: Angels cannot see through them, he only
can see through them, that sees all things, that is, God. And the great
Counsel of God in these Mysteries, cannot be dived into, to the bottom, by
the Angels. Because they are great, sublime Mysteries, the Angels make them
their speculation.

It is with these Mysteries as it is with the Sun, as Hillarie says, it is a
good comparison of him, look as it is with the Sun, says he, there is somewhat
in the Sun that you may look on, if you will be content to see that, you may;
but there is somewhat in the Sun, that may not be looked on; if you will not see
that you may, you shall see nothing at all: for he that looks too fixedly on
the Sun, he can see nothing at all, he loses his eyes. So the Mysteries of
Salvation, there is somewhat in them that may be understood, if you will be
content to understand those things that are revealed, they may be understood;
but if you will not be content to look on those things that you may, you shall
lose the opportunity of understanding those things that you might. He compares
them to the Sun, to teach us to look on these Mysteries with sobriety. We may
well compare it with the condition of the Moon too, as well as of the Sun.
There is somewhat in the Moon that was never defined; all the Philosophers,
and Mathematicians, with all their curious inspections, and Instruments, cannot
tell what is the Mole, what is the darkness in the body of the Moon, what the
dark part is, they cannot tell exactly. There is somewhat in the Moon that
they cannot tell what it is, that is, the dark part of it; and there is
somewhat that we can tell what it is, the light part; by that it affords us
light to discern. So, in the Mysteries of Salvation, there is a dark part that
is not intelligible, and there is a part that is intelligible, that we may be
bold, and must look into; here the inspection of Christians is required, it is
a holy, comfortable study, to converse in the Mysteries of Salvation. But then,
there is the dark part, that is non-intelligible, here we must shut our eyes,
and sit down silent, and admire, and be comforted in this, that we cannot
understand; that there is something in this great work that concerns us, that
is impossible to be comprehended. For the parts that may be understood, look
on them with the eye of inspection, but the parts that cannot be looked on,
bring the eye of faith, we must not search, but believe. It is enough for us to
know that they cannot be comprehended, and God will not have them known. Quod
deus, etc. says St. Austin, let us be content to be ignorant of that that God
would have us ignorant of, and since we could have known nothing of these
Mysteries unless God had revealed them, let us be content with that part that
God has revealed, and made plain to us; because after all is done, after the
inspection of the glorious Spirits that have so much knowledge, yet still they
desire more, and more, to look into them. There is somewhat in these Mysteries
that will dazzle the Angels, at least, their best thoughts. That is the second
thing; as we may look to them with honor, so we must look into them with
sobriety, and modesty.

I have done with the first thing, who these Angels are that are spoken of
here, that have this great desire to look into these Mysteries, Which things
the Angels, that is, the holy, and blessed Spirits, the good Angels that are
about the Throne, that are confirmed in grace.

I come now to the second, and shall only go on with that at this time; that
is, to see what are these good things?

Which things. There is a great deal more difficulty in this, then the former,
because the doubt is made, to what this Pronoune relative has reference. To
which. The difficulties in this part are so many, that now I find my self in a
Labyrinth, there is no Scripture almost more difficult. And there are
variations, not only of Interpreters, but variation of Readings, that would
take up almost the whole hour for a man to name the Authors that bring out
variety of interpretations. Therefore I will not trouble you with that, I will
not so much as gather them up together (it will be but an unusefull point)
least I seem to handle Commentaries, and not the Text. I will only touch at
them in the last part, as they come in my way, and as they are useful for the
understanding of this Scripture.

Now we look to the second thing, these good things, there is no difficulty in
the rest. The desire here is an ardent desire; the inspection is an accurate
inspection, to penetrate with a man's eyes, so to look, as to look through, to
make a good inspection. The Angels that are here spoken of, I showed to you,
and made it plain, that they are the good Angels; there is no difficulty in
any of these three words. Well, the only difficulty is in this word, Into
which. The word is Plural, yet all the Latin, not only Coppies, and
Translations of the Bible, all, but some that are later; and there is no
Writing of all the Latin Fathers (excepting one, or two, that is Ireneus) it
is still read In quem in the Singular number, Upon whom. So the Rhemists
Translation reads it, following the vulgar Latin; they read, On whom the
Angels desire to look. We read, Into which the Angels desire to look.
Thereupon Gregory applies this Scripture to God himself, that the object of
the Angels inspection, it is God, understanding the three persons of the
Sacred Trinity. De deo, etc. says Gregory, these things are uttered concerning
God, that it is upon him that the Angels desire to look.

Others apply it, not to the three persons in the sacred Trinity, but to the
Holy Ghost in particular; that there is so great glory, such c^equall, and
coessentiall glory of the Holy Ghost, with the Father, and the Son, that the
Angels desire to bless their spiritual eyes, with the continual looking on
it. And indeed there is some probability for this reading, for the Holy Ghost;
for the coming of the Holy Ghost, is the immediate antecedent before the Text,
the Holy Ghost came down from Heaven, and then follows, according to their
reading, Upon whom the Angels desire to look.

Venerable Bede applies it by a way himself in particular, he applies it in
the Singular number, but to the second person in Trinity, Christ, and Christ
considered especially in his humane nature: and the reason is somewhat
probable, because in the Verse before, there is twice mention of Christ, the
Spirit of Christ, and the Sufferings of Christ; and then follows, according to
his reading, Upon whom the Angels desire to look. And if I should follow now
this reading, and take it in the Singular number, and do that injury, and
wrong to the Greek Copy; it would afford one or two very good points of
instruction; and the reading is not at all dissonant to the Articles of faith.
For certainly, the Angels desire to look upon God, and to behold the humane
nature of Christ, and to look upon the three persons in the sacred Trinity. And
if we should apply it to Christ; it would afford a good point of Instruction,
whether we apply it to his humane nature, or his divine. If to his humane
nature, so the point is this: that, Christ's humane nature, at the right hand of
God, is made so glorious, that the very Angels themselves (as venerable Bede
says) not only desire to fill their eyes with the glorious beams of his
Divine nature: but with that far transcendent excellency of glory, wherewith
his humane nature is clothed.

They desire to see the glory of his humane nature. It must needs argue a great
deal of glory, as much as it is capable of, that is laid upon the humane
nature of Christ, more then on the Angelical nature, though it be not a
Spirit, that though in it self a body is not capable of so much glory as a
Spirit, yet the humane nature of Christ, by reason of the hypostaticall union,
is capable of more glory then the Angels are. And it must needs be a greater
glory, because the Angels desire to look into it.

It is a point of great comfort to us, to consider that our nature has
received already so much glory in Christ our head.

We know that our nature is capable of beatificall glory in the Members, since
it has received already in such abundance in Christ our head, it shall receive
in an unspeakable manner; there shall be a great deal of beatificall glory
upon the Saints: our nature in Christ is capable of glory already. That is the
first point, if we apply it to the humane nature of Christ.

Again, if we apply it to the Divinity of Christ, that the Angels look on
Christ as God, it affords us a point of Instruction: that is this, There is one
essential beatitude of Angels, and Saints in Heaven, of men, and Angels.

There is no essential difference in the beatitude of Saints, and Angels.
Christ says in the Gospel we shall be like the Angels, and be as they are.
What is the essential beatitude of Angels? To look upon the Son of God.
Christ is (as Basile speaks) the delight of Angels. And what is the beatitude
of Saints? To look upon the Son of God, We know when we shall appear we shall
be like him, for we shall see him as he is. There is our happiness in looking
to Christ. What is the beatitude essential of Angels? Christ tells us Mat.
18. There Angels behold the face of your heavenly Father. The face of God, the
beatificall Vision, is their beatitude. And what is the essential beatitude of
the Saints? Christ tells us Mat. 5.6. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. Then, here is no difference at all in the essential beatitude
of the one, and of the other. Therefore the Scripture as in one place, it calls
Angels our fellow Servants, Rev. 19. See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow
Servant. Angels are fellow Servants with Apostles, and fellow Ministers, and
Ministers are fellow-Angells, for so Ministers are called. As they are called
our fellow Servants, so the Saints are their fellow Angels, Heirs of the same
Salvation. Heb. 12. We are come to the first borne that are written in Heaven,
and to an innumerable company of Angels, to enjoy the society of Angels; we
are fellow Heirs of the same Salvation: there is the same-Heaven for both, the
same happiness for both; the same glory for both, the same inheritance for
both; therefore the same happiness, because the same inheritance. There is
(says St. Austin well) one, and the same inheritance of glory, for them, and
us; that is, the Heavenly, immortal inheritance, says he sweetly, Heaven is
the inheritance of both, which is as great to every one, as to all, and as
great, and full of Room for many, as to few. Every one has all Heaven, that
is, all bliss, all the inheritance, yet every man has his share, and all
partake of it. There is but one Heaven for both, and one inheritance for both;
and that consists in the Vision of the Son of God; because the Angels desire
to look upon the Son of God; that is the second deduction that is clear; that
the Angels, and Saints have one beatitude. But I may not stand upon this,
because this is the forced meaning (yet I would not be deprived of it) for this
reading goes not upon a good bottom, because the Interpretation follows the
reading of the Singular number, and that is not to be found in any Greek
Copy. As it is not so as it may have reference to the Holy Ghost; nor so that
it may have reference to the word Christ, or to the word God, it is not
Singular, In quem, To whom, but Plural, To which things. We must find it out
as well as we can, it must be read Plurally; all the Greek Coppies are so,
though the meaning be Orthodox, and good, yet the reading will not suffer it to
be read in the Singular, there must be a plural antecedent, for this plural
relative.

Now you will ask, as the Disciples of Christ, when he told them of the famous
things that were done at Jerusalem, What things? So here, when it is said, The
Angels desire to look into these things. What things? How shall we find a
plural antecedent?

Yes, well enough; there is one plural antecedent in the Verse before, the
sufferings of Christ, which the Angels desire to behold. It stands in the
Verse before, but it may have reference to that, that the Angels, when the
sufferings of Christ were transacted, they desired to see it, and do now study
it. Not that they delighted to see the Son of God brought so low, they had no
pleasure in the sufferings of Christ, as sufferings, but to see him suffer
patiently, and victoriously, and to lay down that meritorious blood, to offer
that all sufficient Sacrifice for the whole World, that was the joy, and
delight of Angels; they desired to look to the sufferings of Christ.

Therefore St. Cyprian extends it also to the sufferings of the Members of
Christ, the Martyrs for Christ; when we are in the combat and conflict, either
of temptation, or suffering for the name of Christ: God looks on us, Christ
looks on us, the Angels look on us. The Apostle Paul alludes to it, We are
made a Theater, a Spectacle to God, to Angels, and to men. It is a great
support in all our sufferings, in all the afflictions that we undergo, that in
these afflictions the Angels are Spectators, they give their applause, and
they are delighted. It is the joy of Angels to see the Saints of God, suffer
patiently, and constantly, and with confidence, and so, as to bring glory to
the name of Christ. If we therefore refer it to the sufferings of Christ, it is
a plural antecedent, and well agrees with the plural relative. Yet this is
too strait, though this be part of the object, yet this is not all.

Come a little nearer, there is another plural antecedent in this Text, and it
is more general, and more long; the things that were Preached and reported,
the things that were spoken, Into which things the Angels desire to look.
Here now we have it, take this clause, and put it to the former clause, then
there is the latitude of the object in the full extent; the Mysteries of
redemption that the Prophets searched into, and the Apostles Preached, those
the Angels desire to look into. The things that were Preached by the
Apostles, are the same that the Angels desire to make inspection into. Of all
the Latin Fathers, Ireneus only, he pitcheth upon this; for so I call him,
though there be Greek fragments that go under his name, I know his Country,
yet I reckon him so. He comes home, and applies it thus, into which things. All
those good, and excellent things that God conveys to us by Christ, all those
things salvificall, those are the things the Angels desire to look into.

Sophronius goes further, to apply it not only to the good things of
Redemption by Christ, but circumstances, and places, and the like. Unto the
Nativity of Christ, to the death of Christ, to the place of his birth, into
these things the Angels desire to look. I will not press it so far as he,
to put forward, to go to the place of his birth. There are hardly any
footsteps left for Angels to behold or discern where that place stood, where
the Manger was. But thus far we may extend it to all those saving actions, and
passions, that are the streams, and branches of the work of our redemption. The
whole work of our redemption in the active, and passive part of it, wrought by
the birth, and death, and resurrection, and ascension of Christ; these are the
things which the Angels desire to behold.

That I may not give it barely upon trust (though there be enough said to make
it clear that these must be so understood) I will show it plainly, in Verse.
12. there is mention of it, the things Preached by the Apostles. In Verse. 1^.
the things testified by the descent of the Holy Ghost from Heaven, in Verse. 10.
the things searched into by the Prophets. What are all these things, the things
searched by the Prophets, preached by the Apostles, and testified by the Holy
Ghost from Heaven, what were they? The Mysteries of our redemption, in the
several parts of it; the Mysteries of the Gospel, as in this Verse that I
have read, and the Mysteries of our redemption, as in the two Verses before,
these are the things that the Angels desire to look into. Now we have gotten
the full meaning, we see in general, what the things are. Now to make the
point full, there are these four properties of these things that may serve for
our instruction, that the Angels desire to look into.

The first property is this, that they are sublime speculations of Angels.
Eagles stoop not to Flies, but where the Carcass is; where the Mysteries of
Christ are, there are the speculations of Angels. Angels stoop not to mean,
inferior contemplation. And are there any speculations more sublime then the
Mysteries of our red^mption? That great Mystery of Christ's incarnation, of his
Passion, of his Session at the right hand of God, of his intercession; there is
nothing that belongs to the work of redemption, but are sublime, montanous
speculations. It is Gregory's word, upon those words, Cant. 3. He comes leaping
by the Mountains, and skipping by the Hills. These leaps that are taken there
upon the Mountains, he makes to be the several passages of the work of our
redemption. There was a leap from Heaven to the Virgins womb, another to
Jordan, another to the Desert, another to the Cross, another to the Grave,
another up in the resurrection upon Earth, and then another to Heaven, there
was a leap. There is somewhat montanous, and sublime, in every passage of our
redemption. When he was conceived by the holy ghost, that is a sublime
speculation, he came then leaping on the Mountains: then, when he was Baptized
in Jordan, then, when he was tempted in the Desert, he came leaping over the
Mountains, when he laid down his life upon the Cross, and sent out that
comfortable word of Consummatum est, he came then leaping on the Mountains,
says Gregory; all these speculations are sublime. To teach us, that mankind
may learn to admire what they cannot comprehend, because that all these are
things that Angels converse about, and study; they are things transcendent,
they are beyond our reach. They are sublime speculations.

Secondly, as they are things sublime, so they are delightful speculations.
The Angels, they do not busy themselves with any sad subject; Angels they
think of no heavy subject, because the beatificall state is not capable of any
sorrow. However we read of some, writing of Angels, of the grief of Angels
for sin: and it is the Observation of Macherius, and Jerome, and Ambrose, that
as Angels rejoice at the Conversion of sinners, so they grieve at their sin,
and impenitency, and sufferings. When ever there is any sin committed by any
Christian, by any Servant of God, says Macherius, there is a great deal of
sorrow, and crying, in Heaven. And Jerome, and Ambrose, very plainly, as they
rejoice at the Conversion, and redemption of sinners, so they mourn and
lament, and weep at the miseries they suffer, and at their continuing in their
sins.

But this must be understood with a grain of Salt; for when we read of the
grief of Angels, we must so understand it, as of greiving the Spirit of God;
not that the holy Spirit is capable of such an affection as grief. so the
Angels in that beatificall estate, are not capable of sorrow in that place;
there is not one drop of sorrow comes in Heaven, there are no tears in Heaven,
they shall never see tears in their eyes. But the grief of Angels is thus
much, to express their sympathy with us, when we suffer, and their distaste,
and dislike of sin, when we continue in it, they are said to greive at it, as
we are said to greive the Spirit of God. But properly, Heaven is not receptive
of sorrow, but capable only of joy; all the objects of Saints, and Angels,
they are all objects of joy. And what could be a more delightful object for
Angels to be conversant about, what more delightful then the Mysteries of our
redemption? There is nothing answerable to this in sweetness, to this
consideration, the goodness of God revealed in Christ, there is no such sweet,
and comfortable meditation, that brings so much comfort to men, or to Angels.
It is part of the Angels happiness to think of Gods goodnesss, manifested to
man in Christ.

Christ is an object so delightful that not only Angels, but God himself
delights to look on Christ as Mediator, he looks on him a^ Mediator, and
through Christ to sinners. And that brings the delightful beams of Gods
gracious aspect upon the Church, when he looks upon sinners, in, and through
Christ. It is so delightful an object, Christ, that God never satisfies
himself with looking enough upon Christ. If God delight to look upon him,
Angels may well employ their eyes in this service, to look upon Christ. And if
Angels make it their meditation, Beloved, we may well make it ours; our eyes
may twinkle when it dazles the eyes of Angels. If Angels be employed in these
speculations, O let Christians much more, they have more particular benefit by
it. They are the most delightful speculations. That is the second property,
they are delightful.

Thirdly, as they are delightful, so they are not fruitless, but saving
speculations. The sum of all the speculation of Angels, is Salvation; they
seldom think of any other thing but Salvation. When they look upon their own
happiness, and behold it in God, their thought is of Salvation. When they
look for the happiness that ^e expect that is to be fullfilled in Heaven, and
they are employed in, in their Ministry upon Earth, they think of Salvation;
all the parts of the Angels Ministry, and their thoughts, have reference to
Salvation, because they think of the Mysteries of our redemption; there is
Salvation stamped upon all the parts of them, upon the death of Christ, upon
the birth, upon the Resurrection of Christ.

It should be an incitement to us to make it the matter of our meditation; what
should we delight in? What should our hearts run to? What should we busy our
heads with? Take it in one word, Salvation it will be our delight, and
meditation in Heaven, shall we not make it our best meditation on Earth? It
should be the only thing we should think of; Angels make it not only their
chief, but their only meditation. He that truly makes this the sum of his
thoughts, he will not be busy, he will not delight in other things. If Angels
do it, we should much more; the Angels are comprehenders, they enjoy
Salvation already, we are Viatores, Pilgrims in the way: if they in the Country
consider, and look upon these things that are to be accomplished in the way,
shall not we much more in the way make those things our speculation that belong
to the Country? That is, if Angels that have Salvation already, make it their
meditation, shall not we make it ours that want it? If Angels make their
meditations upon those things that concern men upon Earth, shall not we upon
Earth busy our thoughts about the things of Heaven? In that the Angels make
these things their study, it is a good excitement to us: as they are sublime,
and delightful, so they are saving speculations, that is the third property.

Fourthly, they are good things common to us with the Angels, they are good
things that concern them not alone, they concern us as well as them, and us
more then them. All the custody of Angels is employed about the keeping of
men, all the speculations that Angels are employed about, is, the Salvation of
men; they delight to look upon those things that concern us with them, and us
more then them, for they have it already. They are brotherly Spectators; it
shows, that as they are Creatures of happiness, so they are Creatures of love,
that make our good things their meditation. Therefore the Apostle Jude, Verse.
3. he calls this Salvation Common Salvation. He might well do so, for it has
a great extent, it is so common, that it is not only common to all men, but
common to us with Angels. It reaches very far, from the beginning of the
World, to the end of it, that is a great extent: those are the two poles of
time. It reaches from East, to West, from North, to South, that is a great
distance; those are the two Poles of local distance. It reaches to all the
Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Believers, to all, of all ages, and sexes, and
sorts of men, this is a great extent; this is the pole of Persons. Further, it
reaches not only to the Visible Earth, and the visible Heavens, but to the
invisible Heavens, not only to men, but to Angels, there are no poles of that
Heaven, there is no extent. It is Salvation common to men, with men, and common
to men with Angels; being the common work, they make it their common
beatificall, or salvificall object; these things of redemption, of Salvation;
these things that are so delectable, and salvificall, that concern our good,
as well as Angels, it is into these things that they desire to look.

Now I have done with the second thing, I have showed you who the persons are,
and what the good things are. There is only one behind, that is the maine,
what kind of desire it is, and what is the root of this desire, and the cause
of this inspection. But thus much for this time.

SERMON II.
1 PETER 1.12. Which things the Angels desire to look into.


HOWSOEVER the method of nature, and the method of Art, be justly in themselves
distinguishable, yet it falls out often times that there is the same Proceedings
in both, and as nature goes before, so Doctrine follows after: such is the
method that I have set to my self in picking out scriptures for you during the
time of this solemnity, which is still continued to me, though it be ended in
it self; if we look to the method of nature, we shall find, that the
Creatures they are so ordered, that man he is the horizon of all things
visible, and Angels they are the horizon simply of all Creatures, Angels are
the top, and man is next to them, therefore if we ascend in this order, where
man ends, there it is that the Angelical nature begins, so man is in the
confines of Angels above, and other Creatures below. In his body he partakes
of Earthly things, in his soul he has affinity with the Angelical nature,
man being the next Creature under Angels, and Angels the only Creature above
man; therefore I say, where it is the humane nature ends, there the Angelical
nature begins, in order of ascending, so in those Scriptures that I have
propounded to you, all the other Texts that I have chosen, have been for you,
that I might show to you, in what manner you are to entertain the Declaration
of these great benefits that this solemn time has presented to us, but now
where man ends, there the Angels begin, and as I showed you what your
inspection should be, so now I will show you what entertainment the Angels
give these tidings, and great blessings, and what their inspection is, that as
they desire to look upon us when we are seemly conversant in the worship of
God, so now, we may go forward to look on them in this Text, as the Scripture
presents them to us, and see how they are conversant in the admiring, and
entertaining of these Mysteries of Salvation, they (says Nazianzen) keep
Christmasse with us. I am verily persuaded, says he, the Angels keep this
Feast, this very day (speaking of the Nativity of Christ) I will go a little
further, for I am not only persuaded, but I am sure that they keep not only
one day, but every day, for this their inspection, is the keeping of the
Angels Christmas, the inspection into the incarnation of our blessed Savior;
which because it is a great Mystery in it self, and because the Text of
Scripture that I handle wants not its difficulties; therefore I am resolved to
go on in the course that the Lord set Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 20. Son of man drop thy
words. Abstruse things are not to be cast down by whole Buckets, but by drops;
so, there are three drops, three things in it, two I have gone over in the
forenoone.

First, who these Angels are.

I showed at large, Negatively, not the evil Spirits.

Affirmatively, that it must of necessity be understood of the good Angels;
the other Angels have no delight to look into the Mysteries of Salvation,
except it be for their wicked advantage, they look to Mysteries, but they are
Mysteries of iniquity, not to the Mysteries of redemption, they find no
sweetness in them, it must be the good Angels, those that were attendant, and
employed, and their service required, and their ministration used to the Law,
in the publication of it, and to the Saints of God, in the making known, and
declaring those Mysteries, they have benefit in them as well as we, it is the
good Angels,

Because these Mysteries of redemption are Angelical speculations, we need not
to be ashamed to be conversant in the study of them, it is an honorable study.

Because it is fit for Angelical study, we must look on them with sobriety,
the Angels set them bounds, we must not go too far. That was the first-drop.

The second thing was, what these things are in particular that the Angels
desire to look into.

I showed in what Coppies the Singular number is used, into whom, the Greek
into which, the same good things that are set down in the foregoing words, the
good things testified by the Holy Ghost from Heaven, certified by the Prophets
before, and reported by Christ, that is in one word summarily; the Mysteries of
the Gospel, those are the things they desire to look into.

In particular, they are high speculations that the Angels look into.

They are delightful, and plausible arguments, there are no sad thoughts come
into the Angels hearts, they study no sorrowful subject whatsoever.

Thirdly, they are all things that concern Salvation; the Angels thoughts run
upon nothing else (though they enjoy Salvation) either in the glorifying of God
for their own, or in striving to be serviceable to God in the furthering of
others, their thoughts are upon Salvation.

Lastly, they are brotherly speculations. The Angels have the good things they
look to with us, they are theirs, and ours, nay, more properly ours, then
theirs, they are not drawn by these means, they were confirmed in an instant,
we are drawn by degrees. This is the sum of the two first parts in the
forenoone.

There is but one behind, which is the maine, and will prove the longest; that
is, to see, Quae radix desiderij, what is the Original, and ground of this
holy desire, that the Angels have to look into these sublime, and glorious
Mysteries, to make them the object of their speculation; except we find out
this, we find out nothing. Because there are many things questionable, seeing
often times, inquisition comes from curiosity, or from want of desire, or from
ignorance, and the Angelical nature is not subject to these defects, they are
not curious to enquire into that that is concealed from them, and they are not
defective in the knowledge of any thing that is necessary for them to know:
therefore upon this Wheel the whole frame will turn, to find out the ground,
and Original of the desire of the Angels, why they are carried with so holy,
and impetuous motion, to look to those Mysteries, that though they be
Mysteries of Heaven, and so above them, yet as they are things tending to
Salvation, so they are beneath them; why the Angels are carried with such
affection to bestow their speculations upon these Mysteries, that is the thing
I am to speak of, at this time. That I may do it thoroughly, I will go in the
Philosophers method, he that will fill his hand must empty it, and he that will
set down the true causes, must remove all false pretended causes, there must
be a paring away of all weak, and tottering foundations, that there may be a
firm foundation laid, therefore this method I will proceed in.

I will first show those false grounds, and Originalls, that are pretended, and
there I shall touch (though I would not dwell upon them) the misconstructions
that are made of this Scripture.

And then I will set down in order, briefly, the true grounds, and Originalls,
and they are more then one. In this method I will go.

And first, I will remove that that is vile, to separate it as Jeremie speaks
to Winnow the Chafe from the Wheat.

Look first upon the Chafe, there are false grounds and Originalls pretended;
and they may be reduced to four heads, otherwise, I can hardly find a fifth, I
think.

Either curiosity, that that might be a ground to desire to look further then
was revealed to them.

Or fear, that might be the ground, they were afraid they should not be found
faithful in their service, and speculation.

Or envy, that might be the ground, that they look to them, as maligning the
happy estate of man, that he was placed in, that all this excellent provision,
should be for the Salvation of man only.

Or ignorance, that might be the cause, that because they are barred of some
knowledge, that it may be was necessary, therefore desiring to come to the
improvement of this excellent knowledge, they desire to know these things.
Look upon them once again more particularly.

The first false ground pretended, is fear that they should not be found
faithful in their ministration, that was the fancy of Origin, though a very
learned man, and of great antiquity, and of noble memorial, yet it was the
fancy he propounded to himself, in his 11. Homily on the Book of Numbers.
The Angels desire to look into the Mysteries of Salvation, for this reason,
because they fear that else they should be found negligent; and since they are
put in trust, to Minister to those that are heirs of Salvation, and that they
in their kind, were to cooperate to man's Salvation, and that the Apostles, and
Prophets had taken so great pains; the Apostles in making known the Mysteries
of the Gospel, hence came the Angels inspection, they were afraid they should
be exceeded in their service, and employment, by the Apostles, and they should
be found sloathfull, and not so dilligent every way, as God required of them,
and so they should come to be judged by the Apostles, and Saints, at the last
day, according to that place, Know ye not that ye shall judge the Angels.

I call this a mere fancy, because there are two rotten Pillars it stands on.

One, that it supposes that the Angels that are confirmed in grace, can
possibly be sloathfull, and idle in their performance.

Another, that it supposes thus much, that the holy Angels, that as they are
confirmed in grace, so in happiness, that they can be called to account at the
last day, and be subject to any judgment, these things are supposed of all,
and granted, and demonstrated out of Scripture, that gives them the title, of
holy, and elect Angels, and Angels of light, they are grounds demonstrable in
Scripture, the Angels, as they are confirmed in grace, so in happiness; being
confirmed in happiness, they are not liable to account; being confirmed in
grace, there is no fear that they should be unfaithful. Nay, howsoever, the
Prophets, and Apostles, were the most faithful Servants of Christ, and went
beyond all men whatsoever, yet their fidelity comes far short of the Angels,
for there was humane frailty mingled with them: St. Paul acknowledges it, that
labored more abundantly then all. There was no fear of the Angels, that they
should be judged by the Apostles, because they were less faithful then they.
This is a mere fancy, and dream, therefore the first ground cannot stand,
that is wrong.

Secondly, let us look on another.

The second Original, or ground pretended, is, that it might be out of
^uriosity, that being knowing Spirits, very inquisitive to know somewhat further
then was revealed to them. To this head we may refer that other fancy of
Turian, and Salmer, that were both Birds of a Popish feather, that are of
opinion, that the things that the Angels desire to look into so much, they
are the mysteries of Christ's presence in the Eucharist, they look into the
Mysteries of the Eucharist, to see Christ's Body carnally present there, under
the Elements of Bread, and Wine. Sameron the Jesuit, quotes Gregory for it;
there is nothing tending to that purpose there. Indeed, he speaks as other of
the Fathers, of the presence of the Angels in the Church of God, when we are
conversant about mysteries, but not to look to that (especially that is not)
that the Angels make the object of their speculation, a non entitie, the
Angels are not so ignorant, the Angels rejoice when they see the true
adoration, and sincere worship given to God; but one the other side, they
greive, and shut their eyes, when they see Gods glory given to Creatures, as it
is by them. The Angels are not curious, to look into things secret, they will
not greatly be delighted with superstitions that will vanish. That could not be
the ground, curiosity, I call that not only a fancy, but a folly.

A third pretended ground is, that it must be out of envy, or malignity, they
had to man; because that all this excellent provision was only for man's
Salvation. Howsoever, the Angels are confirmed in grace, and so had by one
communication, all those good things that are dispensed to us by many; yet
there is more manifestation of Gods goodness to man, then appeared to Angels,
more manifestation in regard of the effect. And that it is, that that was
Phillippus Solitarius, one of the Ancients, the reason why the Angels make
inspection into the Mysteries of Salvation, it is this, because they are not
well pleased that all those privileges should be bestowed upon man. Therefore,
says he, we must interpret it thus, they desire to look into, that is, to
enter into these things, to partake of them; they desire that Christ would
honor, and assume their nature, as he is in man's nature, they desire that they
may have the power of the keys given them, as it was to the Apostles.

This is the greatest evil of the rest, to suppose such an irregularity, that
they should desire more honor then God has given them, and that they should
envy man. No, these two, envy, and pride, were the sins of the evil Angels,
that is set down by the joint consent of all ancient Writers. St. Austin may
speak for all, they envied man standing, or raised, because themselves were
fallen. Says St. Austin again, they envied that man should be made after the
Image of God. Pride, and envy were the sins of the evil Angels; shall any be
so unworthy as to think that the good Angels are incident to those ill
affections, that did cast the bad Angels out of Heaven? Therefore the third
ground and Original falls of it self too. As it was not out of curiosity, so
it was not out of envy, at the good of man. They rejoice at the good of man,
and at the conversion of sinners, they could not have an envious disposition
for any good to him. I am almost at an end of this first part: there is one
thing behind, that is,

The fourth pretended, false Original, that it might be out of ignorance,
because these Mysteries of Salvation were concealed from the Angels a long
time before, and even now, in a great part, therefore out of the sense, and
apprehension of their want in this particular, they labor more and more, to
look into these Mysteries. As if those glorious Creatures that are, and always
have been from their first confirmation, in actual fruition of everlasting
beatitude, should be subject to any want of knowledge, and happiness, every
way answerable to their estate, and nature. Yet this misconstruction diverse of
the Fathers made of these words. Though it be an obliquity, yet there is a
little respect to be given to their obliquities, because they were such
excellent lights; yet in matter of inspection I know nothing that they err
more in. For it is worth observing, there are two Opinions concerning the
knowledge of the Angels, of the Mysteries of Salvation.

One was this, that the Angels knew not the Mysteries of Redemption, before
the things were accomplished, Jerome, Ambrose, and Chrysostom, Nulli angelo,
etc. says Chrysostom, it is a thing that was not revealed to any Angel, or
Ark-Angell, or any power created, before it was brought to pass; and they
ground it upon Ephesians. 1. and Collos. 1. Where the Apostle says, that God since
has make known the Mystery that was hid from Ages, and Generations. Whereas,
if a man consider of the place well, he shall find that place rather refutes
it, then assents to it. The Apostle says, These Mysteries were had from the
beginning of the World, from Ages, and Generations. He speaks of men, Angels
are not subject to Ages, and Generations, it is out of the Angelical sphere,
ages, and Generations, they wax not old, there is no distinction, there is no
Childhood, or old age of Angels, there are no Generations neither: every
Angel makes a species, the whole number of Angels was created at once, the
Apostle says, it was hid from Ages, and Generations, that is, from men, yet
not altogether from men, they had so much that they might ground upon; it was
not revealed fully, but that speaks not of Angels at all; but yet out of that
respect to men that were learned. Doctor Thomas Aquinas distinction will help,
that is, the Angels did not understand these Mysteries by a natural,
concreated knowledge, but by a supernatural, super-infused, they had not the
knowledge from the first instant of their Creation, but from the first instant
of their confirmation in grace, it is super-added.

Again, though they knew these things in substance, yet not every particular
circumstance, till they were accomplished; because their experimental
knowledge receives degrees, it is intended, and grows greater, they improve it
by experience, it grows greater, that is the first opinion of the Ancients,
concerning the knowledge of the Angels.

The second thing is this, as they knew not the Mysteries of redemption, so
they learned by the Church of God, that they learned the knowledge of these
Mysteries from the Apostles that Preached, and daily now from the Preachers, so
all the stream of the Ancient run. St. Chrysostom says they are Auditors
with us, and learn the Mysteries of Salvation, they learn it by the knowledge
they get in the Church, Jerome, Gregory Nycene (to name no more) they ground it
upon Ephesians. 3. where the Apostle Paul, speaking of the Mysteries of Salvation
that were hidden before, about Verse. 10. To the end, that to principallities
and powers, might be made known in the Church, the wonderful wisdom of God.
Hence they infer, that therefore, because the Apostle says, that those
Mysteries are made known to principallities in the Church, that they were
present at those Sermons, to learn further in those Mysteries, especially at
the Sermons of the Apostles, that they might be instructed in the profundity,
and height, and depth, and speculation of them, so they come to Sermons as
Auditors.

But indeed St. Austin that handles the question, and the place well, he shows
that that place cannot be wrested to such a construction, though he gives three
Interpretations. Says St. Austin (it is worth observing) that the Apostle
says, to make known to the Angels in the Church; he says not, in our
Church; In the Church tryumphant, there they make known; there is St. Austins
own interpretation.

Again, says he, one word expounds another, they were hid from men, but so,
as they were known to An-Angells, so as they were made known by God to
Angels, but not just then, when they were made known to men.

But if this will not suffice, the place it self makes it clear, that there
cannot be such a construction wrung out of those words, the Apostle speaks, of
the accomplishment of the Mysteries, they indeed are made known to Angels, by
the Church, he speaks not of the speculation, the Angels could not see Christ
borne, till he was borne, and a Sinner converted, till he be converted: so the
Angels, they see daily in the Church the accomplishment of these Mysteries, so
there is an addition to their experimental knowledge, not to their intuitive;
they saw by the Preaching of the Apostles, that the fulness of the Gentiles
was coming in, that the Mystery of Salvation was to be accomplished, that it
was done in the Church by the Apostles; they saw that sinners were converted,
and that the number of the Saints was to be consummate, because God cast out
the Net, and brought them home daily, do they therefore learn at our Sermons?
No, it is too high an hyperbole, and abasing of the Angelical nature; the
Saints in Heaven that have not that full measure of the beatitude, that they
shall at the last; the Saints that have a less measure of knowledge, then the
Angels, for they are not capable of so much, yet their knowledge is far more
perfect then ours is; nay then the knowledge of any of the Apostles, though
they had the gifts of the holy Ghost. The knowledge of the Saints in Heaven, is
such, that they need not come to learn of us, and shall the Angels? The
Angels are those, that God always used their employment in the accomplishing of
these Mysteries; they were employed by God about Christ; they were present with
Christ in the Garden, at the death of Christ, at his resurrection, and
ascension, and could they be ignorant of them, that they must come to learn of
the Apostles? The Angels were used to carry glad tidings, prophetical to the
Patriarchs, and the glad tidings of Christ after, when he came in the flesh;
the first tidings of his conception, they carried that. They were, as St.
Cyprian speaks, the first Pen men, at least the first spokes-men of the
Gospel, the very word Evangelium came from them first, it was taken out of
their name, it is but a syllable more then that that is in their own; they
were the first Evangelists, and dictatours of the Gospel, and were they
ignorant of the Mysteries of it?

It is well observed by Basile, and Chrysostom, the one is Basiles word, the
other is Chrysostomes: that the Angels are to men as Teachers, and
Instructers, as Guardians; and Keepers to men, shall they be our Scholars and
pupills? It is a dishonor to the excellent knowledge, and nature of Angels,
to come to learn at our Sermons. I the rather prosecute this, because many
Interpret it so; I take it to be a great abuse. The Angels have that measure
of knowledge, that they need not our help, nor the help of the Scripture,
though there be Mysteries in the Scripture, that they cannot sound; yet for
beatifical knowledge, they have it to the full, joy, and holiness, and all to
the full, there cannot be a drop added more to that they have already; they are
present sometimes in the Congregation, therefore the Apostle bids us carry our
selves decently, because of the Angels. Vnreverent carriage, whatsoever we
think of it, is a grief to the Angels; but they are present as Spectators,
not as Disciples, and pupills; that ground is fallen, they could not desire it
out of ignorance.

I have done with the false grounds, not out of fear, not out of curiosity,
not out of envy, not out of ignorance: Now I shall go on smoothly; when the
hand is empty, it may be filled again.

Now I come to the true cause, the true Original, whence this desire of this
speculation comes.

This must be supposed therefore, as a thing to be taken for granted, that as
it is a beatificall object, and a beatificall speculation, so they are carried
to this object with a beatificall Apetite, and desire, and a beatificall
species that excites this Apetite in these Angels. It cannot be an ill ground,
there can be no sinister respect, it must be a holy, and pure, and simply a
pious ground. As the other were four, so I will reduce this to four heads
that will afford four parts, that is the sum of that I shall speak at this
time.

The first ground of their desire is from admiration, for beholding the
Mysteries of our redemption, they admire Gods goodness, and they desire to
admire again, and always, therefore though they look into them daily, and see
what is fit to be known, yet they desire a greater rapture that they may
admire God more in them, therefore they still desire more, that they may bless
God. So Calvin interprets the words very well, Mirari dicuntur, etc. that they
look into these Mysteries, it springs from wonderment, from a holy
astonishment, and Ecstasy: the happiness of Heaven is all Ecstasy; howsoever the
Ecstasies of the Apostles, and Saints below, carried them out of themselves, yet
those Ecstasies perfect the understanding, they carry not a man beyond himself,
there is always an Ecstasy of Admiration; and always where there is admiration,
they will look, admiration and wonderment breed inspection; see it in many
instances.

The Apostles when they saw our blessed Savior ascend into Heaven, they were
stricken with astonishment, and that caused them to gaze, They looked
steadfastly to Heaven, says the Text, so the Angels apply it to them, Why
stand ye gazing? they were amazed, therefore they looked after Christ, they
followed him with their eyes. Amazement breeds looking: So in Luke 4. when
Christ was at Nazareth, and came into the Synagogue, he took the Book of
Isaiah into his hands, and it is said Verse. 20. The eyes of all that were
present, were fixed on him: And what was the reason? At Verse. 22. They wondered
at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth, therefore their eyes
were fixed upon him. Admiration breeds fixing of the eyes: Whatsoever a man
wonders at, he looks at; admiration it draws the eye always to the object; so
here, the Angels because they are taken with a holy admiration of the
excellency of these Mysteries, though they do always look into them, yet they
desire still that they may be stricken with more admiration.

See it plainly by particulars, if we speak of the Mystery of the passion of
Christ, the Angels were stricken with admiration at that, they were greatly
astonished; therefore Jerome applies that place in Isa. 63. Who is he that
comes from Edom, with died Garments from Bozra? He applies it to the admiration
of the Angels, this very Scripture was uttered when they saw Christ shed his
precious blood upon the Cross, they spoke it with admiration, Who is he that
comes from Edom, with red Garments from Bozra? They admired at the greatness
of Gods mercy in the suffering of Christ.

So they were stricken with admiration at the ascension of Christ, though they
said to the Disciples, Why gaze ye? They admired as well as the Apostles, but
they were better able to carry it, but they admired; for St. Ambrose and other
of the Fathers, say, that the 24. Psalm was made on purpose to express the
admiration of the Angels, at the ascension of Christ. Be ye set open ye
everlasting gates that the King of glory may come in. When Christ ascended, the
Angels sung this Song; and St. Ambrose is of Opinion, that they answered one
another, as in a Quire, one Quire sings, and asks the Question out of
admiration, Who is the King of glory? The other answered them, The Lord of
Hosts is the King of glory; they were stricken with admiration of Christ's
ascension, therefore they looked. So Cyril on that place, and so here being
stricken with the Amazement of Gods goodness, therefore they desire to look.

The Use that we are to make of it for our Instruction, is,

First, it tells us that the Mysteries of Salvation must needs be great
Mysteries that put the Angels into a rapture, that breeds the admiration of
Angels. It exceedingly magnifies the excellency of the Gospel of Christ, that
it must needs be an excellent Gospel that conteins in it such Mysteries, the
Angels themselves stand astonished at; it conteins such Mysteries as are most
desirable of the Angels, as draw the eyes of Angels after them, as put the
Angels to an Ecstasy.

And the Use of it in the second place is this, to imitate them in this
particular; above all things learn to admire Gods goodness, revealed to man
in Christ; we are called upon in Scripture to be thankful, and to walk
answerable to it, and they are good Uses, but we cannot make you, unless we be
stricken with admiration. If a man do not first admire Gods goodness in the
dispensation of Christ to the Church, he cannot be thankful; and the reason
why there is so little thankfulness, is, because there is so little
admiration; that that dazles the eyes of Angels, is but ordinary in our eyes,
because these things are daily propounded: therefore since the Scripture calls
upon us to celebrate Gods goodness, and we cannot celebrate it without
thankfulness, and we cannot be thankful without admiration, if we admire we
shall draw our eyes after it, if we admire Gods goodness, our eyes will be
lift to those Hills, so to bless him, and to pray that we may have the Comfort
in our own hearts. That is the first ground, and there is the first Lesson to
us, it was, and is out of admiration, the Angels desire to look into those
Mysteries, as they desired in the Apostles time, so still, and to the Worlds
end.

The second Radix whence this desire comes, is from expectation; for
expectation is the Whetstone of desire: so it is that Didimus Alexandrinus
Expounds these words, that the Angels being abundantly well pleased, and
contented, and rejoicing in the accomplishment of those Mysteries that are
already past; they look to these Mysteries still out of expectation of that is
behind, for there is somewhat to be accomplished, which till it be done, the
Angels themselves have not the highest pitch of their happiness, till all be
gathered to the tryumphant body, there is somewhat to be accomplished, and that
the Angels are in expectation of, and out of expectation, they desire, looking
to those things, says Didimus, that are to be done, and brought to pass in
the end of the World; and St. Barnard expounds these words, the Angels desire
to look, to the time of restitution, that that time may hasten, and come about,
that there may be an accomplishment of the number of the elect, and all the
gracious promises that God has revealed in his word, this they desire, and
look to, so Calvin well, they desire to see the accomplishment of all those
good things they have seen accomplished in the greatest part. In the part that
is behind, they desire the accomplishment of that, and out of that expectation
they look into these Mysteries. That is another ground.

And it goes upon good reason, for expectation will always carry the eye, as
well as admiration: always longing breeds looking: So in Judge. 5. the Mother of
Sisera she expected her Sons tryumphant return, she looked out of the
Window, and said, why is his Chariot so long in coming? Therefore she looked
to see if she could spy him: So in that place, John 8. concerning Abraham,
Abraham desired to see my day, and saw it, and rejoiced. The expectation of the
accomplishment of the promise made to Abraham, made Abraham look still to be
carried with a holy desire that it might be accomplished. So Symeon, Luke 2.
when Christ was present in the Temple; Symeon had long waited for the
consolation of Israel, therefore when he came and saw Christ, he could not
turn his eyes off him; the reason why he fixed his eyes on Christ, was,
because he had long waited for the accomplishment of that day; therefore
expectation made him set his eyes on him; so because the Angels are still in
expectation of the accomplishment of that, that is not yet finished, therefore
they look to these Mysteries: And the point is this, it shall be the
Excellency of the grace of hope, that hope, though it be the grace of the way,
yet hope in part is a grace of the Country; hope is a glorious grace in common
to us with the Patriarchs, for the Patriarchs were still in expectation of the
first coming of Christ, as we are of his second. Nay, it is a grace common to
us, not only with Patriarchs, but to us with Angels, the Angels themselves
are still in hope, there is something that is the object of hope in Angels,
that is the fullfilling of those Promises that Christ has reserved to be
fullfilled to the last times, the second coming of Christ to Judgment, that
shall put an end, and period to these secular days of misery in this World, and
turn all days into one, that glorious day, the Saints, and Angels in Heaven
are still in expectation of; therefore because that is the complement, the
Consummatum est, of all the Mysteries of Salvation, therefore the Angels
desire to look into them; that as Christ said, it is finished on the Cross,
before he gave up the Ghost to the work of our redemption, passive, so to the
work of faith, there shall be such a word pronounced at the last day; till
then we live by hope, and we need not be ashamed, Hope makes not ashamed, it
is an excellent grace, common with us, to Angels.

It is a thing to be deplored in Christianity (and I will take order to remedy
it as much as I can) that among all other graces in Christianity, the grace of
hope is so little spoken of, when did you hear in a Sermon hope spoken of to
purpose? One of the three Sisters is almost jus^led out of the World, it is the
twine ofaith, they hang upon each others shoulders, faith makes present, hope
stays with patience; all the comfort of a Christian depends upon hope; it is
lamentable that so eminent a grace should never be thought of, we know not what
it is to live by hope: faith is that grace, it is true, that is to be
magnified, but the setting up of that excellent grace of faith, has almost
drowned this grace of hope; while there is any thing to be fullfilled, we live
by hope, and we need not be ashamed, it is common to us, with Angels: Nay, it
is proper to us more then to them, for when we come to fruition, perfect
fruition, hope cease; when there is no expectation, there cannot possible be
any hope there.

Therefore here is the Use we are to make of the point, that as the Angels are
in expectation, and live by hope, so we should labor to put in this drop of
Balsome into all our comforts, to know that our life is a life of expectation,
and much more of expectation then the Angels; they are in fruition, and
perfect bliss, there are only some accessories to be accomplished for them,
yet they live by hope: If they live by hope in Vision, shall not we much more
that are in the state of mortality, and breath after fruition? But this is the
very ground of the Angels desire, and inspection into these Mysteries, hope,
and expectation, because they are in expectation of the accomplishment of the
rest that God will fulfill the remnant of the Elect, and the remainder of the
Promises that are not yet fullfilled. This is that that breeds inspection, this
is the second true ground from expectation.

The third ground, or Radix whence this desire comes, it is from contentation,
whereas in humane things, contentation makes desire to cease, in celestial
things it increases desire, and from contentation they desire to behold: they
are ravished with the great mercy of God in the work of redemption. O they
desire to be more ravished, they are satisfied, and would be more; they are
full, yet they desire as if they were empty; they have all, and yet they desire
as if they had nothing, says Gregory; they always see these Mysteries, yet they
always desire to see them.

I join these two together, least any man should have mistaken the nature of
Angelical desire, how it stands; and though this desire be a bar to
contentation, when we understand, and conceive of desire that comes from want,
we are only to limit it to humane things, so St. Austin defines desire; it is
a longing after those things that we have not, no man desires that that he
has, when he comes to fruition desire cease; but Thomas Aquinas shows well
by a good distinction, how desire may well stand with contentation, and
fruition, Desiderium habendum, etc. Desire of things that we have not, that we
may have it, that argues want, but desire of the things that we have already,
that it may be continued, that argues not a necessity, and want; so the
Appetite, and desire of the Angels, what is it? not of want, but complacency,
not an Appetite, and desire of more, but a desire of the continuance of that
they have; there is desire, and there is fruition; in their saciety, there is
no dstiast, and in their desire, there is no want, says Gregory well.

So now it shows us the excellent, beatificall estate in Heaven, in what it
consists, in that glory and joy there shall be fulness, and yet desire, there
shall be the fruition of all good things promised, and yet an earnest longing
after the continuation of it. Isidore sets it out sweetly, there shall be
thirst in Heaven, and saciety. A man would wonder that there should be thirst
in Heaven, yes, says he, the Saints shall always be full, and shall always long,
and thirst; but it is not a thirst of necessity, and there is no loathing, and
distaste in that fulness.

It shows us an excellent difference between Heavenly, and Earthly things, the
nature of Earthly things how is it? Why thus: Earthly things are always desired
when we want them, desire cease when we have them. And again, Earthly things
we love them most when we want them, and less when we have them; look over
all Earthly things, and you shall find that it is so, meat, and drink, they
na^ciate after fulness; all pleasures whatsoever, after a man has taken his
fill of pleasure, he disgusts them, they are unsavory; I, those very fashions
you are so much delighted in, that no Preaching, Heaven it self cannot fetch
you out of. If Christ himself were on Earth, I am confident he would not
prevail with you, I say, those fashions that Heaven it self, cannot fetch you
out of your folly; yet after you have used them a while, use makes you sick of
them, and your own humors make you weary; because all things Earthly make
weary, and happy we are, that when we have them we begin to loath, and distaste
them, and be sick of them: but it is otherwise with celestial things, they are
most loved when we enjoy them, and are most desired when they are had: there is
no Heavenly thing that nauciates: a man is never sick of any thing that is
Heavenly, there is no loathing of that; it is not so with grace, and glory, the
Angels, as Pe^rus Damianus, he makes the Observation, says he, they are always
full of that they always desire, and they always desire that they are always full
of; glory cannot be distasteful; nay, grace is not so, how far grace is from
being distasteful, it is of that sweetness that a man never thinks he wants
it, till he has it. O how sweet is it! that grace is of such a Heavenly
relish, that a man is so far from thinking he has too much when he enjoys it,
that he never thinks he has enough; nay, he never thinks he has it, till he
has it; this is a holy Coveteousnesse, as the Apostle says, the very temper
of a Coveteous man is, the more he has, the more he desires: it is the only
temper commendable in grace, the more a man has, the more he longs, and
thirsts. Spiritual things, the more they are enjoyed, the more they are
desired, this should more stir up our desire: O how should we long for Heaven
that are out of it, when the Angels long so that enjoy it? When they long that
are in fruition, how should not we long for the fruition? Yet Heaven we cast
behind our backs, therefore we should stir up our souls as David, As the heart
pants after the Rivers of Water; nay, let us change the phrase, and turn it
to a more sublime example, not as the heart, but as the very Angels pant and
long, and breath, and desire to look into those Mysteries, so does my soul
after thee O God, after the place where the Angels are; say again with David,
O that any would give me to drink of the Water of Bethell? Nay, save the
labor, God has given us to drink of Christ, the Water of the Well of Bethell;
say again with David, O that I had Wings like a Dove, that I might fly away
and be at rest? Nay, save the labor, he has given thee Wings of the Dove, the
holy Ghost descended in fire upon the Apostles, the gifts and graces that
descended, are the Wings of the Dove, and you may save that labor. Therefore
to shut up all with the holy desire of the Angels, they are always conversant
about spectacles of happiness, and yet never weary of their speculation, and
the more they have, the more they thirst; and the more they are satisfied, the
less they are satisfied, and though they have fulness, yet they desire to
have it continued. That is the third ground.

The fourth and last ground, that is the Radix of the desire of the Angels, it
grows from exultation, from abundance of joy, that they rejoice in the
revelation of those Mysteries, and they desire that they may always rejoice they
always desire the continuance, that they may rejoice: They rejoice, both in
respect of Themselves, and in respect of Us.

There are these two reasons of their joy, and so of their inspection, and
these are the two most proper reasons of all the rest.

One reason of their joy, is a respect they have to themselves, they rejoice in
the Mysteries of Salvation, because they have the benefit of them, the
benefit of Christ's meditorious work extends to Angels. The Apostle Paul shows
plainly, Ephesians. 1. It pleased God to recapitulate, or gather to one, to sum up
to one all things, both things in Heaven, and things in Earth; that is, men,
and Angels: The Apostle shows it more plainly, Colos. 1. It pleased him by the
blood of his Cross, to reconcile to himself, the things in Heaven, and things
in Earth: to reconcile to himself, Christ is a Medium of reconciliation to
Angels, how is it to be understood? To reconcile to himself things in Heaven,
and things in Earth, that is, men, and Angels. For howsoever, if
reconciliation be properly taken, it is only understood of men that fell,
those that were out of Gods favor, were only reconciled; reconciliation is a
bringing into the favor of God; those are said to be brought into Gods favor
that were out of it, man was out of it by sin, therefore properly it belongs to
man, but analogically it extends to Angels, their confirmation is to them as
reconciliation, they are confirmed in the favor of God, and in a beatificall
Vision, and in glory, confirmation to them is as reconciliation to us, therefore
the Apostle joins both under one word, To reconcile all things to himself,
things in Heaven, and things in Earth, that is, men, and Angels. Therefore
they desire to look into the Doctrine of reconciliation, they have benefit by
it: Therefore St. Paul, 1 Timothy 5. he calls them Elect Angels, now Election is
in Christ, in that he calls them Elect Angels, it is plain that their
confirmation in this glory, is in Christ; Christ works it; hence it is, that,
Collos. 2. the Apostle calls Christ, the head of principallities and powers. If
Christ be the head, then the Angels must needs be supposed to be part of the
body; if they be part of the body, then the other part is man; men, and Angels
make up the tryumphant body, the mystical body of Christ, and Christ is the
head of the^; then it must follow, that Christ is a Savior, even to Angels,
in respect of Confirmation, for the Apostle says, that Christ is the Savior
of the whole body, therefore he, of every one that is part of the body, and he
is head of principallities, and powers. St. Bernard lays it down clearly, and
St. Austin for all, lays that as a ground: St. Austin excellently stated this
point, that it is agreed on by all, that the Angels estate in bliss, and
confirmation, it is not connaturall to them, they brought it not into the World
in the first Creation, but they had it after, from the grace of God bestowed
upon them; if by grace, then by Christ, for he is the Pipe of all grace. St.
Bernard, I say, sets it well down, when he puts together men, and Angels, how
they come into one reconciliation; he that raised man, when he was fallen, kept
the Angels that they should not fall, and so he was a Mediator of Redemption
to them both, says Bernard, because he confirmed the one, and erected and
raised the other, he loosed our bands from us, and preserved the Angels,
therefore because the Angels have benefit in the Mystery of redemption, they
have part, and share, as well as man; therefore they rejoice in the work, and
because they rejoice, they desire to make further inspection in regard of
Exultation. That is the first reason.

Secondly, that is not all, for as their inspection comes from joy in their
own happiness; so, secondly, from the abundance of joy, that they conceive of
our happiness, because we are taken into their fellowship; whereas a gap was
in the order of Angels, now in the conversion of a Sinner, they rejoice that
he is brought in to make up that gap, for the making up of the tryumphant body,
that was without an Arm till supply be made by the Salvation of men; and that
they may show they rejoice abundantly in the Salvation of man, as well as their
own, they disdain not therefore, that men should be accounted their
fellow-heirs, and to be Keepers of the Saints, and minister to them, because
they know they are fallen Members brought into the same beatitude. And it must
needs be so; for if the Angels rejoice at the conversion of one sinner, much
more at the gathering of all, at the redemption of mankind.

The Use that we are to make of it, is this; if there be such joy in Angels
that are in these Mysteries, that are in the fruition of them; it should stir
us up if they rejoice for us, let us for our selves; we are nearer our selves
then any other, let us imitate them; we cannot have a better pattern, they are
confirmed in grace. Imitate them in admiration, admire Gods goodness in that
wondrous work, let us carry our souls out of themselves, into a holy rapture,
that we may bless God sufficiently for that; imitate them in holy expectation,
that as we have experience of Gods goodness, in fullfilling the first promise,
so rest in hope for them that are behind; rest on God, wait upon God, till he
bring all to a period, say with those under the Altar, How long Lord? How long?
Imitate them in hope; imitate them in joy, in desire, in inspection; there is
one holy knowledge, common to us with the Angels; the knowledge of Heaven, and
Salvation, there is one place of happiness common to us with them; Heaven is
the happiness, and inheritance of both. As there is then common blessedness, so
let there be common joy, and common study, and common thankfulness, and
common desire to look into there Mysteries, to cast an assiduous eye upon them,
as they do, to make all the returns that we give to God again, of praise, and
thanks, make them such as the Angels. It is well said of Turtullian, we are
those that are in Albo enrolled to the number of Angels, let us tread in their
steps, in those works in which we are to have our fellowship with them. Let us
for the great work of redemption, for the incarnation of Christ, let all that
we return to God be Heavenly, and Angelical. Our joy Angelical; when is it
so? When it is spiritual, and not carnal, secular joy, away with that, Glory
to God on high: these are Angelical Songs, and Psalms, the Songs of the
Angels; let us follow these Mysteries with Angelical Meditations; what are
those Heavenly Meditations, that are Angels Meditations? O to get Heavenly
hearts, often to think of the great Comfort that comes by Christ, and the
knowledge of Salvation.

Make these things our study, and our Meditation, matter of our studies, and
matter of our thankfulness, and desire, matter of study, we may well make it,
who would not be content to study those things that the Angels are busy
about, to be Fellow Students with the Angels? Make them the matter of our
thankfulness also, who would not bless God for that for which the Angels
admire?

Lastly, make them the matter of our desire; Who would not long to enjoy the
Union in that place where Angels are, and where Angels though they be, yet
they desire still to enjoy the comfort of the meditation of those Mysteries of
our redemption, of Salvation revealed by Christ, that we preach to you; though
we cannot look into them as the Angels look, yet they are the same for
substance, that the Apostles Preached to you. That is the last ground; you have
seen what the Angels are, what the things are, and the inspection, and the
desire.

Thus much for this Text, and this time.

An exact Alphabeticall Table, directing to the principal Truths handled in
the foregoing Work.
A Abounding
ABounding a metaphor whence taken page 339
Abrogate
Christ kept the Passover to abrogate it page 461
Account
Good Angels not called to Account page 518
Act
Habits must be brought to Act page 359 Adam, see Covenant
Admiration
Angels behold the Mysteries of the ^ospell with admiration page 526 To look
on Gods goodness with admiration page 528 Advances, see Piety
Affections
Affections in Prayer how kindled page 54
Afflictions
Why good men suffer afflictions when others escape page 472 see endure
Alike
In spiritual things all are alike to God page 465
All
All sins to be prayed against, and why page 72 All duties to have
thankfulness page 172 see Commands, Detestation, Goodness, Love,
Alliance
Aliance of Gods mercy page 113
Anchor
Hope the anchor of the soul page 423
Angels
Evil angels study not the Mysteries of the Gospel page 491 Evil angels
how called in Scripture ibid. The name of angel, what page 492 Angels have
benefit by the mysteries of Salvation page 496 Angels, what things they desire
to look into page 501 See Incarnation, knowledge
Apparel
Against vain apparel page 413
Appearing
Appearing before God double page 373
Arguments
Arguments peculiar to each Apostle page 196 Art, see nature
Assent
Assent of a pious heart page 475
Assurance
Assurance to be prayed for page 134 see Heaven Atheist, see Epicure
Attributes
Mercy has the prerogative above all other Attributes page 113
B Body
Parts of the body, interpreters of the duties of piety page 52 Eyes of the
body, how placed page 385 God to be worshipped with the body page 387 Beg, see
mercy
Behold
Behold, what it signifies page 383
Benefits
Benefits by Christ how expressed. page 159
Believe
The word of God to be believed page 287 The lifting up the eyes a testimony of
beleiving page 388
Blessedness
Blessedness the highest good page 222 Blessedness how propounded page 225
Blessedness every man's comfort page 226 Blessedness where placed by worldly
men page 227 Blessedness where placed by the Apostles page 228 Blessedness
where placed by Christ page 229 Blessedness, the way to it ibid. Blessedness
not to be severed from tribulation page 230 Blessedness why set out by variety
of names page 236 Blessedness essential of Saints, and Angels the same page
503 see Temptation, enduring, comprehensive suffering.
Bonds
Bonds of turning to God page 22
Bar^hen
Sin (...) page 105 Sin (...) a burden page ^^6
C Cal^e
Praise set out by a calf, why page 160
Carnal
Carnal love hinders love to God Carnal men's joy, what
Certainty
Certainty of Salvation abused page 69 The Crown of life certain, how page
242
Chamber
Christ had not a Chamber of his own page 449 The House of God the
Guest-Chamber page 453 What Chamber Christ will be received in page 479 see
Heart, Conscience, Church
Charity
The disposition of charity page 476
Chastisements
Afflictions of Gods Children chastisements page 103 Not to be out of love with
Gods chastisements page 252
Cheap
God requires cheap Sacrifice, and why page 162
Cheerfully
Tentations to be endured cheerfully page 210
Christ
Pardon to be begged in the name of Christ page 118 Why the Disciples were
forbid to say he was the Christ page 443 Ministration of Angels used about
Christ page 496 see Satisfaction
Christians
Admonition to Christians page 171 see moral
Church
The church Christ's Chamber page 479
Circumstances
Not to spend much time about circumstances page 440
Commands
The word of God called his commands, why page 286 Saints love Gods word when
it commands page 312 All Gods commands to be loved page 33 Love enables to keep
the commands page 314 Commands of God, what page 414 see Prayer, Duty, Promise,
Obedience, Sublime, Ever.
Common
Mysteries of ^^lvation common, to men, and Angels page 511
Comprehensive
Blessedness the most comprehensive good page 222 The Crown of life
comprehensive page 232
Condition
True obedience makes no condition page 174
Confession
Confession of sin necessary to repentance page 36 No pardon without confession
page 37 Confession an easy way to pardon page 38 Backwardness to confession
of sin page 40 Exhortation to confession page 41 Examples of pardon to
confession ibid. Confession necessary in doing good or evil page 44 Confession
of all sins page 72 see words, humble, mournful
Congruity
Bond of congruity to turn to God page 23
Conquerours
The Crown of life the reward of conquerours page 256
Contentation
Contentation of Angels page 531
Continual
Spiritual Sacrifices continual page 168
Constancy
Temptations to be endured with constancy page 211 Constancy, what ibid.
Conscience
Conscience Christ's Chamber page 480
Covenant
Different conditions of the two covenants page 39
Courage
Temptations to be endured with courage page 209
Creation
Pardon above works of creation page 112
Crown
The crown of life the reward of suffering page 226 What crowns Christians
have in this World page 227 see victory, gold, conquerours, love
Curiosity
Curiosity not in good Angels page 519
D Damnable
Going on in sin damnable page 24
Daily
Thanksgiving a daily Sacrifice page 172
David
David, his divine temper page 284
Dead
Legate Sacrifice dead page 170
Debt
Thanksgiving a debt page 138
Declare
Ministers only declare pardon page 109
Declining
Where there is not growth, there is declining page 343
Degrees
Degrees of grace to be sought after page 361 Degrees of grace numberless page
362 Encouragement to attain the highest degrees ibid.
Delightful
Mysteries of Salvation delightful speculations page 508
Depositum
The Scripture a depositum page 294
Desire
True ground of the desire of Angels page 526 Heavenly things should be the
matter of our desire page 538
Detestation
Detestation of all sin necessary page 73 Devil, see ignorance
Devout
Lifting up the eyes a sign of a devout heart page 389
Divinity
Argument of Christ's divinity page 467
Donation
The Crown of life of free donation page 239
Duration
Duration of Gods mercy page 115
E Easy
The most easy way to remove judgments page 14, 15 see confess Eminent, see
place
Enablement
A Saint depends on God for enablement page 179
Ends
God works good ends out of the least things page 473
Endure
What virtues required to endure affliction page 204 What enduring has the
promise of blessedness page 209
Enemies
Christ obeyed the Law to stop the months of his enemies page 462
Envy
No envy in good Angels page 520
Epicures
Atheist and Epicures objections answered page 471 esteem, see word
Evening
Evening, what meant by it page 257
Ever
The Scriptures an Heritage for ever page 294 Gods Commands stand for ever page
323
Every
Every grace why needful for every man page 357 see Love
Evidence
Evidence of grace to be prayed for page 133 Evidences, see inheritance
Evil
Good and evil the bounds of all duty page 127 Difference in suffering for
good and evil page 212 see confession
Examples
Examples of those that sped in prayer page 13 Examples of turning to God page
24
Excellent
The way to be excellent page 332 Excellency of Creatures by their motion page
337
Exigent
What course the Saints took in exigents page 381
Expectation
Angels desire from expectation page 528
Experience
Experience of those that have sped in Prayer page 12 Bond of experience to
turn to God page 24 Best knowledge gained by experience page 246
Eye
Hope as an eye page 268 Lifting up of the eyes a duty page 383 Eyes of body
and mind lift up to God page 385 The inward disposition will appear in the eye
page 388 What eyes we must lift up to God page 390 Servants must do service
with their eyes page 392 see body, mind, prayer, soul.
F Failings, see Ministers
Fained
Judgments diverted upon fained Humiliation page 43
Faith
Promises the support of faith page 265 From faith to faith, what page 354
Fear
^ond of fear to turn to God page 24 The word called the fear of God, why
page 286 No fear in good Angels page 518 Feeble, see hands
Fervent
Fervent words to be used in Prayer page 58
Few
There are few that will suffer Tribulation page 226 see grow
Final
Repentance a final turning page 9
Forgiveness
True repentance always meets with forgiveness page 16 see just
Formal
Formal Christions how they turn to God page 8 see universal
Forms
Forms of Prayer necessary page 64 Arguments for set forms of prayer page 65
Forms of prayer useful in public page 66 Forms in Scripture for several
duties page 67
Forcible
Forcible words to ^e used in confession of sins page 47
Free
The Crown of life a free gift page 283
Furnished
The heart a furnished Room, how page 482
G Gift, give
How we are said to give any thing to God page 147 All inferior good things are
of gift page 240 see free
Glory, glorify
Words in Prayer Glorify God page 54 From glory to glory, what page 354
God
Every grace from God page 179 Men tempt God, how page 248 God the Donor of the
Crown of life page 260 We must imitate God in our growth page 370.
Excellencies of God, how set forth page 409 see wanting, service, heart, good,
goodness Gods goodness in the pardon of all sins page 73 We must not only
shun evil, but do good page 225 Goodness of God testified in his promises
page 264 see confession, evil, pardon
Gold
Why the Elders are said to have Crowns of gold page 231
Grace, graciously
To be received graciously, what meant by it page 111 Gods grace enables us to
praise him page 178 Tribulation accompanies grace page 253 Particular graces
for particular states page 356 see imperfect, pardon, heaven, God, grow, honor
Great, greatness
Greatness makes men to neglect goodness page 435 The Mystery of the Gospel
great page 527
Grieved
How Angels are said to be grieved page 509
Grow, growth
Who they be that grow in grace page 333 Few grow in Christianity page 334
Vital motion of a Christian is his growth page 338 Several comparisons of a
Christians growth page 340 Grace compared to growing things page 342 Growth in
grace the best trial of a Christian ibid. Spiritual Strength gotten by growth
page 347 Several pleas that hinder growth page 364 Means of growth many page
366 Men desire to Grow in every thing but in grace page 367 What course we must
take to grow page 368 Motives to spiritual growth page 369 see declining, God,
soul, Guest-Chamber, see chamber, church, heart
H Habits
Christians must grow in the habits of grace page 356 see Act
Hand
Hands lift up to Gods commandments, what page 315 Hands lift up, what it
signifies, page 316 Hands feeble, what page 321 Servants eyes to the hands of
their Masters, why page 393 Hand, the instrument of government ibid. See,
heart, soul.
Happiness.
The right course to happiness page 224
Healing.
Gift of healing given to the Apostles page 110
Heart.
No sacrifice acceptable without the heart. page 161 The heart the chief in
all duties page 164 Hands, figuratively the heart page 319 The heart Christ's
guest-chamber page 453 None can work on the heart but God page 469 See
furnished, large, upper.
Heaven.
Desire of grace in heaven, how page 132 The word assures us of heaven page 292
Perseverance borders next upon heaven page 336 The lifting up the eyes a token
of a heavenly heart page 389 Difference between earthly and heavenly things
page 533 See perseverance.
Heifer.
Israelites compared to a heifer, why page 160
Heritage.
An heritage what it is page 290 Gods word an heritage, how page 291
Holy.
Holy words to be used in prayer page 58
Honor.
Mercy honors God most page 114 True honor in heaven page 229 The greatest
honor in heaven ibid. God honors every grace page 270 Growth honorable page
370 Study of the mysteries of salvation honorable page 497 See, Servants.
Hope.
The bond of hope to turn to God page 24 Promises the support of hope page 265
The use of hope page 267 Comfort that comes from hope page 422 See Anchor, eye,
watchman.
Humane.
The Angels desire to see the humane nature of Christ page 50^
Humility, humiliation.
Humble words to be used in confession page 44 Tentations to be endured with
humility page 210 see feyned.
^. Jews.
Jews mistake of Scripture page 171
Ignorant.
God does not try men because he is ignorant page 250 The Devil ^gnorant of
Christ's passion before it was page 493
Inheritance.
Heaven the inheritance of the Saints, how page 291 Evidences inheritances, how
page 292 To claim Gods word as our inheritance page 294 Inheritances how sought
after page 296
Incarnation.
The incarnation of Christ the study of men and Angels page 490 The Devil
ignorant of the incarnation of Christ till it was accomplished page 494
Impatience.
Impatience, the inconvenience of it page 215
Impenitency.
Impenitencie, the cause of it page 21 Danger of impenitencie page 25 see
pardon.
Impression.
The most lively impressions of God in his word page 309
Imperfect.
Grace imperfect page 120
Impropriators.
Against impropriators page 478
Iniquity.
Iniquity, what page 70
Intelligent.
Intelligent words to be used in prayer page 59
Instrument.
God not tied to instruments page 421
Joy.
Things prized as they bring joy page 279 A Christian in this world has his
joy page 298 The glory of heaven set out by joy page 299 Christians have the
best joy page 300 To joy aright a hard thing page 303 Angels desire grounded on
joy page 534 Reasons of Angels joy page 535 To joy in heavenly things page 537
See Carnal, within.
Journey.
Christians have a long journey to go page 349 Hindrances in that journey ib.
Judgments.
No removing of judgments without repentance page 15 Cause of fear that
judgments will continue page 20 The word of God why called his judgments page
286 See feyned, prayer, praise.
Just.
How God is said to be just in forgiving sins page 38
Justification.
Free justification misunderstood page 69
K. Knowledge.
A proof of Christ's divine knowledge page 467 Knowledge of evil Angels
de^ective in divine Mysteries page 493 Angels want no knowledge that concerns
their happiness page 521 See, practice.
L. Laborers.
The Crown of life the reward of laborers page 256
Language.
Every grace has a peculiar language page 36 99
Large.
The heart a large room, how page 481
Latitude.
Latitude of Gods mercies page 114
Lasting.
The Crown of life a lasting honor page 231
Law.
The word of God why called his law page 266 All creatures but man keep the
law set them page 323
Legal.
Thankfulness, better then legal sacrifice page 169 See Dead.
Life.
The Crown given at the end of life page 257 See comprehensive. Lifting, see
eyes, hands, mind, Religion.
Linked.
Graces linked together page 358
Lips.
Praise called the calves of the lips, why page 161 167 What lips God will be
praised with page 163 Lips put for the whole man page 165
Long.
Comfort against sufferings if they be long page 233
Lord.
Thankfulness due to God as our Lord page 148
Lov^
Why the Crown is promised to love page 269 All graces in l^ve page 271 Every
one that loves God shall be crowned page 275 Means to get love to God page 276
Meditation of Gods loveliness begets love to God page 277 To blame our selves
for want of love page 278 The greatest testimony of love to God page 310 See
commands, prayer, suffering, word.
M. Man.
The word man how taken in Scripture page 189 Woman included under the name of
man page 192 Man tempts man, how page 247 Two men in a Christian page 340 See
Incarnation.
Many.
Comfort against sufferings if they be many page 233
Master.
Obedience due to all kind of Masters page 394 Servants learn evil of their
Masters page 397 Difference between earthly, and our heavenly Master page 407
How to know whether God be our Master page 413 The duty of a good Master page
430 Christ, why called the Master page 442 Christ the great Master page 448
Means.
God not tied to means page 421
Measure.
True love keeps no measure page 275
Meditation.
Preparation to meditation necessary page 324 Meditation, what page 325
Meditation scarce in the world page ibid. Meditation improves every grace page
327
Mental.
Vocal prayer a help to mental page 53
Merit.
Merits of Saints not to be trusted page 108 No satisfaction by merit page 119
Mercy.
Antiquity of Gods mercy page 113 Mercy a motive to beg mercy page 116 The
end of all waiting is for mercy page 418 See alliance, attribute, duration,
waiting.
Metaphor.
Metaphor, what page 155 Duties in Scripture delivered under metaphors page 156
Mind.
Eye of the mind to look up to God page 386
Ministers.
Ministers to watch their people in their failings page 34 Ministers to
condescend to peoples weakness page 35 See Declare.
Mysteries.
Good Angels study Gospel-mysteries page 496 506 See Angels.
Mixed.
We have need of trials because we are mixed page 252
Monosyllable.
Masters and servants how as monosyllables to each other page 394
Moral.
Difference between Christian and moral virtues page 359
Motion.
Motion of two sorts page 334 The life of Christianity in motion page 335
Perseverance the continuance of a Christians motion page 337 Difference between
corporal and spiritual motion page 346 The continuation of a Christians
motion page 354 See standing, excellent, vital.
Mournful.
Mournful words to be used in confession of sin page 45
Mountains.
Why the lightning strikes the mountains page 472
N. Name.
Every true Christian has his name in the promise page 274 A new name given to
Believers page 437 The names of diverse Penmen of Scripture concealed page 440
Preachers not to come in their own name page 474
Nature.
To turn to God by the bond of nature page 23 Art perfects nature page 61
Necessity.
Bond of necessity to turn to God page 23
O. Obedience.
Bond of obedience to turn to God page 23 Obedience singles not out commands
page 313 Lifting up the eyes a testimony of obedience page 389 The period of a
Christians obedience page 419 Christ the pattern of obedience page 460 The
assent of an obedient heart page 476 See condition.
Object.
Faith singles not out it is object page 313
Omniscience.
Christ's omniscience showed page 437
Others.
God tries us that others may know what is in us page 250
Over.
Mercy over Gods works page 112
Outward.
God must have praise from the outward man page 164 Comfort when God takes away
outward things page 452
Own.
Servants not their own page 396
P Pardon.
Impenitency never meets with pardon page 18 Error of those that will not
pray for pardon page 68 Arguments against such as deny to pray for pardon page
71 Pardon to be begged with all blessings page 72 How the Devil hinders prayer
for pardon page 73 Several expressions of the pardon of sins page 104 God the
only author of pardon page 107 Goodness of God in the pardon of sin page 111
To beg more grace after pardon page 131 Pardon to be prayed for before removal
of judgments page 139 Thankfulness especially due for pardon page 147 See
confession, eyes.
Passe-over.
The Christians Passover page 431 All invited to the new Passover page 438
Why Christ did ^at the Passover page 459 See, Abrogate
Pastor.
The duty of a Pastor to his Flock page 431
Patience.
Patience to be labored for page 213 Praise of Patience page 214 Promises the
support of patience page 266
People
The duty of people to their Pastor page 430
Perfect, perfection.
Vocal prayer makes prayer perfect page 54 Christians to grow to perfection
page 369 Perfection, when to be sought page 374 See Soul.
Perseverance.
Perseverance carries on a christian still page 335 Excellency of perseverance
page 336 No grace carries to heaven without preseverance page 337 See heaven,
sublime.
Physic.
Repentance as Physic page 25 Suffering, as physic page 256
Piety.
Advances of piety several ways set forth page 338
Pitch.
The pitch that is set to a christians growth page 369
Place.
Duty of those eminent in place page 434
Pleasant.
Sin, why pleasant to men page 106
Plenty.
Christ's plenty page 451
Poor, Poverty.
Poverty of Chsist set forth page 448 Worldly men imitate not Christ in his
poverty page 449 Comfort for those that are poor page 450 Christ begs in the
poor page 478
Popery.
A new kind of Popery page 70
Portion.
To make Gods word our portion page 295 The most possible way to remove
judgments page 14 Pardon over Gods works of power page 112 Proof of Christ's
divine power page 469
Practice.
Practice required of Christians page 359 Knowledge without practice nothing
page 360
Prayer.
Prayer what it is page 6 Commands to pray in affliction page 11 Promise made
to prayer page ibid. Words of confession necessary in prayer page 50 Bounds of
Prayer page 128 Thankefulness must be joined with prayer page 149 Prayer begets
love to God page 277 Looking up in prayer page 387 What the eye is in prayer
page 390 See experience, ^publique, thankfulness, vocal.
Praise.
Sin hinders praise page 175 Judgments removed, occasion praise page 177 Who
are most ready to praise God page 178 See Grace.
Preparation.
Preparation to prayer necessary page 55 See meditation, present, presence.
Godly men blessed for the present page 224 Worldly men care only for the
present page 266 How to carry our selves in Gods presence page 373
Presumption.
Presumption to look for pardon without repentance page 18
Promise.
Prayer builds upon promises page 124 The Crown conveyed by promise page 261
All blessings conveyed by promise page 623 Why heaven is by promise page ibid.
To treasure up promises page 267 An implicit command in every promise page 312
See faith, prayer, support.
Providence.
A proof of Christ's divine providence page 471
Public.
Public calamities removed by prayer page 11 See Form.
Punishment.
Where sin is forgiven, punishment is removed page 102 Punishment how to be
prayed against page 141 See chastisement, pardon.
Pure.
God must have pure sacrifice of praise page 163
Q Qualification.
Promises made to qualifications page 273 Persons without qualifications have
no interest in the promise page 274
R. Receive.
To receive, what meant by it page 238
Relation.
Several relations of a Christian page 339
Religion.
Lifting up the eyes to God an act of Religion page 387
Reparation.
The blessed reparation by Christ page 245
Repentance.
Repentance, the parts of it page 4 Repentance and sin cannot stand together
page 15 Bonds of Repentance page 128 Repentance, what acknowledgment it makes
page 311 See final, forgiveness, physic, presumption, totalll, vain,
universal.
Resolution.
Resolution necessary to obedience page 144 Resolution of David to be imitated
page 320
Rest.
The rest of a Christian page 371
Restored.
To what we are restored by Christ page 244
Reward.
Rewards, encouragement to all sorts page 220 Rewards when given page 256
Right.
Christ has right to all things page 451
Righteousness.
To suffer in the cause of righteousness page 212
S. Sacrifice.
Thanksgiving a sacrifice page 167 Every duty a sacrifice page ibid.
Satan.
Satan tempts men page 247 Satan, how he tempts page ibid.
Saisfaction.
No satisfaction for sin but Christ page 103
Saving.
Mysteries of salvation, saving speculations page 510
Sea.
Why it rains sometimes on the Sea and not on the land. page 471
Self, Selves.
Our selves the best sacrifice page 166 In obedience a man sacrifices
himself. page 170 God to be loved for himself page 174 Every man should try
himself page 249 God tries men that they may know what is in themselves page
251
Servant.
The least expression to a servant should suffice page 393 All kind of servants
should be dutiful page 395 Complaint against servants page 396 Why men have
unfaithful servants page 397 Motives to servants to be faithful page 398
Christians should learn of men's servants page 410 Gods servants not so
faithful as men's page 411 Honor to be Gods servant page 415 Duties of good
servants ib. page 430 Christians to exceed other servants page 417 See Eye,
Master, own.
Service.
The best service to be given to God page 408
Sharp.
Comfort against sharp sufferings page 232
Similitude.
The strength of a similitude wherein page 401
Simple.
Simple words to be used in confession page 46
Sin.
He that will offer sacrifice must lay aside sin page 175 Single, see Object,
Obedience,
Singular.
Why blessedness is propounded in the singular page 226
Sion.
Sion, double signification of it page 372
Slothful.
Good Angels cannot be slothful page 518
Sobriety.
Mysteries of salvation to be looked on with sobriety page 489
Son of man.
Why Ezekiel was called the son of man page 444
Soul.
The hands and feet of the soul page 319 The soul the whole man page 341 All
perfections of the body in the soul ibid. Growth of the soul, what page 342
The eye the handmaid of the soul page 404
Soldiers.
Christians as soldiers need strength page 350
Speech.
Speech proper to man page 30 Why God has given man speech page 51
Spirit, Spiritual.
A form of prayer no stinting of the spirit page 66 Spiritual judgments worst
page 140 Spirituals to be prayed for before temporals ibid. Difference in
praying for temporalls, and spirituals page 148 See alike, virtue.
Stability.
Stability in the state of grace misunderstood page 69
Standing.
What standing hinders motion page 335 How a Christian does both stand, and
move page 336
Stature.
Tall stature commendable page 370
Statutes.
The word of God why called statutes page 286 Sin nullifies Gods statutes page
322
Strength.
Strength and virtue equivalent page 344 Strength, what it signifies page 346
Christians must grow to strength page 347 To see our need of strength page 348
Exhortation to get strength page 351 Strength, how gotten page 352 From
strength to strength, what page 355 See Growth, Soldier, Traveller.
Sublime.
The commands of God sublime page 317 Perseverance makes grace sublime page 336
Mysteries of salvation sublime speculations page 507
Success.
The most successful way to remove judgments page 15
Suffering.
Love enableth to suffering page 269 How Angels joyed at Christ's sufferings
page 150 See Blessedness, Crown.
Superiors.
Superiors care of Inferiors page 465
Support.
The promises support our graces page 265
Swearing.
Against profane swearing page 180
T. Take away.
To take away sin, what page 101 Why the word to take away is used page 105
Temporals, see Spirituals.
Temptation.
Kinds of temptation page 197 247 What temptations blessedness belongs to page
206 Troubles, why called temptations page 207 Temptations defined page 246 See,
Men, Satan.
Testimonies.
The word of God called his testimonies, why page 286
Thankfulness.
We should turn to God by the bond of thankfulness page 23 Bonds of
thankfulness, what page 128 Thankfulness due for all Gods mercies page 146
Thankfulness, the order of it page 148 Thankfulness to close prayer page 150
Lifting up the eyes a s^gne of thankfulness page 389 See all, daily, legal,
pardon, prayer.
Time.
The time when the Crown of life shall be given page 254 Why Christ kept not
the Passover in the appointed time page 461
Total.
Repentance a total turning page 8
Travelers.
Christians travelers page 349
Treasure.
All heavenly treasure in Gods word page 292
Tribulation.
Tribulation not to e severed from blessedness page 222 Encouragements to
suffer tribulations page 232 See, Grace, Trial.
Try, Trial.
The end of tribulation for trial page 246 Good temptations for trial page
249 Why God makes trial of men page 250 The Crown given when men are tried
page 255 See God, Ignorance, Self.
Troubles.
The good effects troubles should produce page 207 See Temptation.
Truth.
Gods truth testified in his promises page 263 See Universal.
Turning.
Different turnings to God page 6 Repentance what kind of turning it is page 7
Exhortation to turn to God page 26 See Universal.
Two.
Why Christ sent his Disciples by two, and two page 456
V. Vain.
Vain to expect pardon without repentance page 19
Virtue.
Virtue stands at a distance page 344 Virtue in the eye of good men page 345
See moral, strength, vice.
Vices.
Virtues beset with vices page 27
Victory.
A Crown the reward of victory page 230 Vi^all, see growth.
Universal.
Repentance an uniuersal turning page 7 Difference in the universality of
turning ibid.
Unprofitable.
Sin unprofitable page 106
Until.
Until, what meant by it page 419
Vocal.
Vocal prayer necessary page 51 See mental.
Voice.
The voice necessary in public prayer page 53 The voice necessary in private
prayer ibid.
Vows.
Vows necessary in duties commanded page 145
Up* Upper.
The heart an upper chamber, how page 481 See Prayer, Religion.
Use.
Men said not to have that they do not use page 360
W. Waiting.
Waiting, what it is page 405 Waiting for mercy equal page 406 All that is in
God to be waited on page 407 Waiting not to be given over, though God show not
mercy page 420 Exhortation to wait on God page 422 See Mercy.
Watchman.
Hope as a watchman page 267 Whole, see Lips, Man.
Will.
The word called the will of God, why page 285
Wisdom.
Wisdom of God showed in his promise page 264
Within.
True joy is that within page 300
Witness.
No man can sin without witness page 288
Woe.
To whom Christ pronounces woe page 229 Woman, see Man.
Word, Words.
Words to be taken in prayer and repentance, why page 32 Impediments to words
in prayer page 33 What words necessary to confession of sin page 44 What words
to be used in prayer page 58 Conversing on Gods word begets love to him page
277 Several names given the word of God page 285 The word highly to be
esteemed page 295 The joy of a Christian from the word of God page 297 301 How
to profit by the word of God page 326 See forcible, heaven, humble, impression,
glorify, mournful, prayer, simple, treasure, portion.
Work.
Work of a Christian, what page 256
World, Worldly.
To learn of worldly men to suffer page 234 The Crown given at the evening of
the world page 257 The baits of the world dangerous page 351 See Blessedness.

FINIS.

