Some OBSERVATIONS Upon a Sermon bearing the name of Mr. Astley's; Preached in
opposition to a Testimony, and Sign unto them, of their Spiritual nakedness;
Wherein he is found to Wrest and pervert the Scriptures: to be Ignorant of the
truth, as it is in Jesus; and consequently no Minister of Christ, etc.

By a lover of the truth, John Hogg.

30. Isa: 1, 2. Woe to the Rebellious children says the Lord, who take council
but not of me, and cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit.

But the way of the just, is as a shineing light, which shines more and more,
unto the perfect day. Pro. 4.18. Printed in the Year. 1675.

FRiends and Readers, of the following discourse, esteem me not your Enemy: For
behold I have no other end, then love to your Immortal souls; The Advancement
of Gods Truth, the vindication of those walking in it; and the Answering of a
good Conscience toward the Lord. I plead not for all that make a Profession of
it, knowing, that there may be a show of Godliness without the Power. Therefore
be neither hasty nor high minded, Pride goes before a Fall, and Anger rests
in the bosom of Fools. I observe that we are reflected upon, to be as
Seducers; using Lying Signs and Wonders by some who think they stand clear
thereof, 2 These:2
but let such take heed least they fall. For seeing it is said in the place
quoted against us, that the day of Christ could not come, except there was
first a falling away.

Therefore I advise such as a Friend, to consider their present standing, and
see if it be not in a fallen away state, from what the Ancients stood in, If so
(as I question not but they will confess upon examination, 1 Cor. 6.19. and
3.16, 17.
if they lay Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummit) then
consider, if the man of Sin which is to be revealed, sit not in the Temple of
God, in you. So be serious and see if it be not thus with you.

First because it is called the Mi^tery of Iniquity. Secondly because he sits
not as a man of sin, or as Satan. (Obs:) but as God, in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God. Again consider after what manner he is to be
destroyed, it is by the Spirit of the Lords mouth, and by the Brightness of his
Coming. Therefore mind you miss not of his coming, by expecting him according
to your Immaginations, like the Jews who would not accept of him, because he
came not according to their wills and Expectations. We are also Reflected upon,
to be as the False Christ's spoken of, Mat. 24. in that respect I have a certain
Testimony to bear for the Truth, which I would have you seriously to consider,
a Time was, in which I stood as it were in the mi^^lest, beholding all
Professions, hearing and observing, how every particular Persuasion called:
Saying, come Worship with us, Lo here is Christ in our Form, he is to be found
in this or that Observation. And whilst I thus considered their Plurality of
Voices, it Amazed me, because they did all appear to stand in one Ground, all
Professing but one God, and g^nerally with a like Zeal, notwithstanding their
variety of Calls, and Voices, So being uncertain with whom to join. I took up
this resolution to love all but join with no particular, Least I should thereby
disrespect the rest, now as I was in this Bewildred State; the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, ^h^el me by the Light of his Eternal Spirit shining in me,
plainly to whom I should join to walk with them in Spirit in the Light of the
Lord, And therefore I cannot but speak well of his Name, and by shis Light I
plainly saw God was a Spirit, and was not to be found in any of their dead
Forms, nor to come to by any of their Observations without, but to be Worshipped
in Spirit (Obs:) and in Truth. Therefore mind the Voice of Truth (and see how
contrary it is to all the Voices of Loe-heres and the Loe-theirs) which says
go not forth, To. 1.10 Mal. 3.1 Heb. 2.20.
what is to be known of God, is manifest in you, turn Inward and wait for the
Appearance of the Lord in his Temple, there must you obtain certainty, for his
Coming is as the Lightening which shines from the E^st unto the West, this
Testimony is true whether you will believe it yea or nay. Lastly, I would not
have you to think that because I have observed somany Errors and contradictions
(where^he is one of the Leadersy it appears, which causes the People to err,
which your selves may easily perceive by ingeniously reading my following
observations made upon his Sermon) that I have prejudice to him or to any of
you, For verily God having shed abroad his love in my heart has tought me to
love my Enemies, etc. But rather make this Ingenious construction of it, which
may answer my end in respect of you, that is, if I cannot persuade you to
receive the Truth through the love of it, then I may (by making Error and
Deceit manifest as before expressed) oblige you to a serious consideration of
your present standing, that so at least you may come to see if the Blind lead
the Blind they must both fall into the Ditch, thus I am clear of you, Giving
you this Caution, to be sure not to call true speaking Railing, or Revileing,
but if you do, So that thereby be raised up in you against me, Cain, Ishmael
or Esau's Spirit, I shall not regard knowing my peace in the Lord who is the
Portion of the Righteous, etc.

The 25th. 9. Month. 1673. Thus I am Your Friend, John Hogg.

Some Observations on Richard Astleys Sermon, etc.
FIrst, passing by much of his discourse, in the beginning, not because it
cannot be found fault with; but because it is frivillous, and not pertinent to
our purpose. So where he begins, to reflect upon Daniel Smith: as a Lying Sign
unto them, I shall observe the strength of those Reasons given by him to prove
it.

First, He says, there is but three pretenses, that he can Immagine: any make
for such a naked carriage: in the sight of others. I shall show you, says he,
the vanity of them all, etc.

Obs. It is very easy for a man, to State his own Immaginations, and then show
the vanity of them.

His first Immagination; after the Fall (says he,) they apprehend that Man by
Jesus Christ: was Restored to the same condition; from which he fell by sin,
(meaning an outward State) But he is mistaken, for we intend no more his
meaning; then those words Import an outward covering. ( Woe unto them that take
Council and not of me; and cover with a covering, and not of my Spirit, says
the Lord, Isa: 30.) because a covering, must it needs be Outward? Is there no
other? but if all be outward, spoken of in the Beginning. Tell me what day
Parradise was made on? Seeing it is said in six days God finished all his
works. And tell me also what part that wa^ to cover; The Woman which thou
gave me, gave me and did eat.

His first Argument, to show the vanity of his Assertion (which he calls ours)
but indeed is really his own Immagination: therefore must end according to his
own conclusion) is, If any man be Restored, (by Jesus Christ, which he must
intend: if he argue upon those words, he calls ours) then Adam was recovered,
etc.

Obs: By this his ignorance, is manifested, in not seeing the difference,
between the Promise, and him that was promised. Was the Man Christ Jesus in
Adams day? What no difference betwixt, he shall bruise the Serpents Head; And I
have Finished the work thou gave me to do? etc. He further says, the main
case, to be inquired into, is whether Adam being restored, did walk naked
again, etc. But he has missed the mark, for the main case of Inquiry, (in this
place should have been by him: if he would have had his Nakedness hid, for
which his discourse was intended) had truly been to have known the true
difference, betwixt the Man, drove out from God: (covered with skins) having
but the promise of the Seed; Heb. 10.20.
and the man that put on Christ which is that Seed that brings to God again, by
the New and Living way. My Assertion is thus proved. (1. Obs: The case he
Argues upon, is really an Immagination; therefore there can be no worth in the
Argument. Secondly, If he had truly known the difference as aforesaid; he might
have past at this time, not so much discovered. And lastly, that I am not
mistaken in him, he proves it himself by these words in the conclusion of his
Argument. So man recovered from his fallen Estate, is by the Lord clothed without
any difference showed as aforesaid?

His Second Argument in short runs thus: If man be restored to Innocence, and
so to comely Nakedness: he is recovered to that capacity of Body to bear it,
etc. But his conclusion is, that no man is thus restored: therefore by his
Argument, no Man is Innocent; (Obs:) Then he himself and those that take part
with him, must needs be Nocent; if so not born again; Mat. 18 3.
no new creature; not in Christ, not so converted to become as little Children;
so cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; Then alas where are you with Old
Adam, drove out from God! and that which yet seems worse, by the consequent,
wants the Covering with Skinns, by which Nakedness appears: notwithstanding the
Fig-lease Garment: and Daniel Smith yet remains, so far as I see, a true
sign unto you; thus R. A. by concerning himself with a matter so little
pertinent to his purpose, does the vanity of his undertaking appear, more then
if he had been silent, etc. However let the Reader take notice that I do not
make man's restoration to his first Innocence a prof for a common going naked
for that is not our practice, but oppose R. A.'s Immaginations against a
peculiar Sign of nakedness shown among them as also against his denial of such
a restoration into Innocence.

His Second Immagination considered; wherein he labors as for very vanity;
Fighting with his own shadow; for he acknowledges its his third Immagination,
which his Antagonist stands upon he says why others should pretend Immitation,
etc. what others he intends would be a question worth the asking: were not his
Assertion; his own Immagination, he proceeds, and bids look, what the Lord
Commanded the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 20. from 2. verse.

Secondly, he says, the Prophet did just, what the Lord commanded him; the
Lord commanded him, to loosethe Sackcloth, from off his Loins; and put a Shoe
from off his foot; (Obs:) he puts (ae) instead of (thy,) and yet bids look, as
though his deceit could not be perceived; Again he says, the Lord did not say,
take away the Sackcloth from thy Loins, but loose the Sackcloth from thy
Loins, may be not be ashamed of deceit? to pervert the Scripture in Reading,
leaving (off) out, which is in the Scripture, in contradiction to his former
reading; all this wresting of Scripture is, to make them speak Isaiah was but
part naked; But we read in the Scripture, Loose the Sackclotbh, from off thy
Loins; and put thy Shoe from off thy foot: and he did so, Walking naked and
barefoot; Again the Lord said, as a second witness, as my servant Isaiah, bath
walked Naked and barefoot. Obs: not part naked, and bare of one foot; as he
suggesteth: Surely for advantage, he would tell notable Stories: while he has
done all this for nothing; for if his end were granted, it would add nothing to
his cause in hand; seeing Immitation, is not that which they stand upon, with
whom he has to do. As he himself acknowledges; however he makes himself
manifest by presuming contrary to what is written, not to be an observer of the
Scriptures: which he sets up so high in words, but in Works denies it; by
making himself as Judge not of what they do mean, but of that they never can
intend, so wrests and perverts them; as he that preaches a man should not
steal, but found doing the same things: so inexcusable. etc.

But further to prove, Romans 2.
his false position; he brings many witnesses; which as he brings them, stand
like suborned witnesses: but if they add nothing, to his cause by confessing,
truth, upon examination, then the evil will lie at his door, that would force
them; The first is Peter, who confesses nothing of Esai in the case; but
that is not all, he says Peter took his upper garment, and girt it about him,
Importing (says he) that there was under it a Garment; thus he wrests the
Scripture, for the words are, he girded his Fishers coat (his coat to) or unto
him: Joh. 21.7
which cannot admit of his consequence, as for James and Paul, they speak
nothing of Isa. in the case, the next witneses that he brings, is one like
himself: Michal notwithstanding she can witness nothing for him, 2 Samuel 6.16.
and 20.21.
in the case he brings her for: but observe as Michael despised David in her
heart, being uncovered in the Service of the Lord, and by him was justified. So
you despised Daniel Smith, when he was uncovered, and as he told you, in the
Service of the Lord, and by the Lord is justified for any thing you have said;
who can see no further then Michal did, to that which is outward. Thus he has
brought a very fitting Subject which he and his followers may do well seriously
to consider, further he says Isa. was not commanded to put off any thing but
his Sackcloth which is contrary to the Scriptures and in contradiction to
himself, who before granted he was to put off a Shoe etc. Now there is two
things (says he) which may convince, that Isa. did not pass wholly naked:
First (says he) thereis mention made of his being barefooted; so he Argues if
by nakedness were meant altogether naked then his feet would have been Naked,
as well as the rest; (Obs:) In his first reasoning, to prove that Isa. was not
all naked, he says it is not said, put off both thy Shoes, but put off a Shoe,
which is in contradiction, to his foregoing reason, that he said might
convince; His second reason to convince, that Isa. was not all Naked, because
no necessity, for it by the sign he was to be, Egypt says he etc. was to be
led away with their Buttocks uncovered, Infersing, that this was all that
Isaiah was to be a Sign of, contrary to the Scriptures, which says like as my
Servant Isa. has walked naked and barefoot: etc. Obs: So shall the Egyptians
be led away naked and bare foot; and to express the shame more fully, even with
their Buttocks bare to the shame of Egypt, etc. Thus he has truly shown the
vanity of his own Immaginations, according to his promise, by wresting and
perverting the Scripture: and in contradicting himself, as First, Isa: was but
to put off a Shoe. Secondly, to put off nothing but his Sackcloth; And lastly
makes use of the being barefooted: all this his confused work has been to prove
Isa: was but part naked contrary to the Scriptures, etc.

3. His third Immagination considered, (which because it carries most show of
verity with it) being the case to which we both agree; though as he has stated
it verbatim, we should not, yet for brevityes sake, and avoiding wrangling,
with a Charitable allowance: Shall be willing to join Issue with him, that the
Nakedness may be truly found; they (faith he) pretend to A Divine call, unto
which (they say) they are to be Obedient: (in short thus) if this fall to the
ground, (says he) their nakedness will appear naked indeed, (Obs:) we grant
it, and therefore if it be found to the contrary, R. A. must appear according
to his conblusion of us, etc.

His first Argument stated, to prove no need of Inspiration etc. is, If the
Scriptures be able to make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished, to
every good work and word, then (says he) no need of extraordinary calls, etc.
And that the Scriptures are truth, and able to make a man perfect; this can
scarcely be denied, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. this is the substance of his Assertion,
Mostly false-yet some of it true, in some sense, so is not to be answered
fully, as it is stated altogether etc.

(Obs:) First I shall grant, that the Scriptures are able to make the man of
God wise unto salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus: (as they were Timothy,
2 Timothy 3.15.) but I affirm that that man, which is made wise unto salvation by
the Scriptures, must have the same faith that Timothy and all the Men of God
had, Col. 1.27 Gal. 1.16. John 16.13. Romans 8.14, 15, 16.
and such know that Christ is in them, read 2 Cor. 13.5. And this knowledge I
may boldly say R. A. has not, because he affirms, nothing greater then the
Scriptures to be the guide of Man; So denies the Spirit of God to guide or lead
him, and none are his Sons of God, but those who are led by his Spirit; Again,
I grant according to the Scriptures, that they being given by Inspiration, are
profitable for reproof, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16. that the man of God (mind) may be
thoroughly furnished. They do not say that of themselves they are able to
furnish him; much less to make another man perfect, to every good work, as his
words would Insinuate; For one proof of this, himself shall be the Example,
whose work by this discourse, is proved imperfect; So his Assertion that the
Scriptures, (leaving out faith in Jesus Christ) are able to make a man perfect
is false, etc.

Further (Obs:) the Scriptures, does not speak of furnishing any, but the Man
of God; but only furnish him: Then the quaery is, how they are profitable to
such a man, for if a Man of God, then has been born of God, so has ceased to
commit sin, having overcome the Evil one, John 3.9
by the Seed of God which remains in him; he is in Christ Jesus, therefore no
condemnation to him; because he walks after the Spirit; Romans 8.1.2, 3, 4.
for by walking after the Spirit, is the righteousness of the Law, fulfilled in
him; So comes to the end of the Scriptures, reproving and correcting him; To.
10.4. To. 6.14. Tit. 2.11.
thus the man of God is come to the end of the Law, for Righteousness sake; So
is not under the Law, but under Grace, Yea that grace, which has appeared to
all men, by which he has so learned, that it need not to be said unto him know
the Lord; John 2.27-29.
nor need he any man to reach him: but as that anointing teaches him; (Obs:)
the Law was added because of Transgression, until the Seed came, to whom the
promise was made, Gal. 3.19-24.
so was the Schoolmaster to bring to Christ; Again (Obs:) all gifts given to
Men by Christ, for the work of the Ministry, is to bring to him: Ephe. 4.11-14.
where they all end in him, Gal. 3.25. Heb. 5.6. Isa. 9.5, 6.
to them which is come to the true Faith; for such are come to him, whom they
know the Priest for ever; whose lips preserve knowledge, and to be their
Leader, with the Government upon his shoulder, whom they know is com'd, the
Wonderful Counselor: according to the promise of the Father, thus the man of
God is Taught (not of the Scriptures only but) of God.

But now to show how the Scriptures, do furnish the man of God: (First, they
are generally received as true: Secondly, in that respect, they are as a Law
unto the lawless.) Further, it is the man of God only, that can speak them in
due season, by the guidance of Gods Spirit; which brings them to his
remembrance, and opens them from which at first they were given forth; thus the
man of God, furnished by them now, to Reprove, Corect or Instruct; the
Apostatized Christians: that are setting up the Form of godlyness, by
Immitation of the Scriptures; being both Ignorant of the life and power, which
the Ancient Christians had, and lived in, denying the Spirit to be the Absolute
guide into all truth, preferring the Scriptures before it, like the Jews, who
preferred them before Christ; thus is your state parralel to the Jews: which
would not believe; though the Scriptures testified of him, therefore in that
State, could see him to be no more but the Carpenters Son: whilst others that
believed in him, saw him to be the Son of God.) that though now the Scriptures
testify, Joh. 1 -- 10.
That that is the true Light, which lighteneth every man coming into the World:
yet you not believing in it, can see it but to be, as a natural thing, whilst
others which believes in it, Sees it to be the Light, of the Son of God. Thus
what can be done, if you will neither believe in it, for its works sake; nor
yet the testimony of your Brethren, who in that case may be your Judges. But
again to return to the matter, we find that the Prophets, Christ, and his
Apostles, did thus make use of the Scriptures, to correct, reprove, and
instruct the backsliden, and unbelieving Jews; not but that he was perfect
without them, and his words as sure as they; (and so his Spirit, speaking
through all his servants,) but because the Scriptures was of credit and
received by them, which he and his servants was not. Therefore he says to the
Jews; Search the Scriptures, (Obs:) for in them ye think to have Eternal life;
and they are they that testify of me, (By which its manifest, the Scriptures
may be esteemed, and searched to the best of man's understanding, and yet they
miss of the Truth, for says he,) Ye will not come unto me, that ye may have
Life, John 5.39-

Further to show, that the Scriptures of themselves without the Spirit cannot
furnish to every good work; Joh. 21.25. Joh. 16.13.
for Christ says to his Disciples, (who had the Scriptures, and also more' of
his words, then was supposed could be written,) I have many things to say unto
you, which you cannot bear yet; Howbeit when the Spirit of truth is come, it
shall lead you into all truth; by which it is manifest, that Christ prefers
this his Spiritual Dispensation, above all outward Dispensations, and teachings
whatsoever: to complete, perfect, and furnish them, Joh. 14.26.
for says he, it does not only lead into all Truth, but it shall bring all
things to your remembrance: etc. And not only so, but fully to complete them
which are guided by it, (Obs:) He shall not speak of himself: but what he
hears, that shall he speak, he shall take of mine, and show it unto you; etc.
Joh. 14.17.
The Spirit was to be looked for in them, for says he, he that dwells with
you shall be in you, much might be added more, upon this Subject, but this is
sufficient to those who have an Ear to hear what the Spirit says. But, Least
any should think, those things only related to the Apostles (mind) Christ said,
I pray not for these alone, but for them also, Joh. 17.20-24.
which shall believe in me, through their word, that they may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee: that they also may be one in us; that the
World may believe, that thou have sent me; Thus R.A.s Assertion is denied, and
the Spirit of Truth, Asserted and proved to be, the only guide into all truth.

Suppose his Argument was granted; see then what would be the consequence; for
it was said to those that had Scripture, notwithstanding they had Scripture,
for lack of vision the People perish; Secondly for lack of Knowledge, my People
Perish, and knowledge or understanding, Pro. 29.18. Hos: 4.6. Joh. 32.8 Luke
10.22. 2 Thesi 1.
comes by the Inspiration of the Almighty. Thirdly, none knows the Father, but
the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him. Lastly, it is written God will
render vengeance, upon them that know him not, etc. By these things it is
manifest, there is a necessity, to know something above and beyond the the
Scriptures, namely that Spiwhence they came; for they cannot give the knowledge
of God: because they are not Christ. etc.

Again, he says there is enough in the Scriptures, God does not use to bring
his people, any thing that is useless: by which I conclude, he sees not the
true use of the Scriptures: that can find no proportion between two extremes:
what either all or nothing that's his ignorance?

Secondly, he says there is no such Spirit, to be expected, nor no such way to
be looked, beyond and above the Scripture, Io. 8.9.
etc. From this I conclude he belongs not to Christ, because he denies his
Spirit, for if he had his Spirit, for if he had his Spirit, he could not but
conclude it a more perfect guide then the Scriptures; I must from hence also
conclude he is no Minister of Christ, 2 Cor. 3.6
for the true Ministers of the New Testament, which is written in the heart,
are Ministers of the Spirit, but he of the letter, and so by all his Preaching,
cannot bring one to God, for he concludes the Scriptures is the way, and no way
above it.

But the Scriptures, h. 14.6
declare against him; saying, Christ is the way, unto the Father, and none can
come to the Father, but by him, So it is full time, for all to turn from him,
who turns all that comes to him, out of the way, His Argument prove that there
is nothing to be looked for; above or beyond the Scriptures, is from the 2 Pet.
1.19. The Scriptures are a more sure word of Prophecy; by which he concludes
them surer then a voice from Heaven, (Obs:) Scriptures at utmost are but a
declaration of those voices, which came from Heaven, So cannot be surer then a
voice from Heaven; no whut to abate his confidence I shall prove a voice from
Heaven, surer then the Scriptures, from this very place where he reposeth his
chiefest strength, (Mark) this voice was certain This is my Beloved Son hear
him, Certainer (I am sure) it was to them that heard it, then this very
Scripture, can be unto R. A. because some Translations renders it, a more sure
word of the Prophets, as well as others a more sure word of Prophecy. This
difference is very great, and by the Scriptures he cannot determine it. He
looks for nothing further, so I am sure he cannot be certain, but for brevity
sake and further satisfaction in this particular, peruse a Book of William
Pen's called Quakerisme, a new Nickname, for old Christianity, from page d82
to 191. being an answer to his Brother John Faldow. There is much builded more,
upon this foundation, but it being removed the rest must come to nothing.

Thirdly, He says there is no such thing as an Extraordinary Inspiration to be
looked for above the Scriptures, (Obs:) his notable reason for it, and that
says he is) because it must necessarily be revealed to us by the Scriptures.

Ans: Grant the Scriptures be the things of God: with respect to what they
declare of, and at utmost they can be no more: then it follows, that they are
so far from revealing things which is above them: That they cannot open the
Mystery declared of in them, to those that have them; Because the things of God
knows no man but the Spirit of God, his Ignorance and want of Gods Spirit, 1
Cor. 2.11.
is further manifest by his setting up the Scriptures, in stead of the Spirit
of God, saying it must be revealed to us by the Scriptures; his Assertion is
also, in contradiction to the Scripture, which he says is his guide, by which
it appears he is in the dark, and so knows not whither he goes, for it is
written, etc. That which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither came it into
man's heart, etc. So that is beyond the Scripture, 1 Cor. 2.9
neither is nor can be revealed by them, because God reveals them by his
Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, 1 Cor. 2.9 -- Jere. 31.33, 34.
even the deep things of God; Again it is the promise that God would write his
Law in the heart, this is that inspiration, which is to be looked for, above
and beyond the Scriptures, and that because it gives the knowledge of God. So
as that they need not to be taught, or said unto know the Lord, which the
Scripture cannot do; At utmost but pointing to it. (Obs:) God does not there
say he will write his Law in the Scriptures, but in the heart; therefore all
that looks not for it in the heart, looks for it where it is not to be found,
so must needs miss.

Thus take it home, profess what you will, if you do not thus witness it, you
are not yet in the new Covenant, So without God in the World, etc.

He further says, no Promise of a dispensation Superior to the Scriptures,
etc.

Thus his Ignorance is made manifest both of that Dispensation and also of the
Scriptures, Isai: 54.13. Jere. 31.33, 34-
for the Scriptures declare, that all shall be taught of God, is not this
greater then to be taught of man or of the Scripture.

Secondly, God said he would Write his Law it the heart, and they should all
know him from the least to the greatest,

Lastly, Joel 2.28 29.
The Prophet Joel said, the Lord would pour forth of his Spirit upon all flesh,
Sons, Daughters, and Handmaids, etc. Where this is truly known, there is nothing
to do where such an Ignorant Teacher as he is; whose words render him ignorant
of the Scripture, and of the Spirit that gave them forth.

He further says, Isa: 8.20.
To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word,
it is because there is no light in them,

(Obs:) By this his conclusion he has no light in him, or rather no morning to
him, for he has often in this discourse, spoken contrary to the Scriptures,
And as for the Law and Testimony, seeing he pleads for none but that which is
outward; It Is thereby evident, he is Ignorant of the New Covenant, and knows
nothing of the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, To. 8.2.
etc. And so at utmost declares but of that which makes not the comers
thereunto perfect, So no marvail if perfection be denied, etc.

Again, he speaks by way of reflection upon us, as though we preached another
Gospel, but its more like that he and such who preach the Letter to be the
Highest dispensation, and tell the People the Letter is the Gospel, as the
Writings of Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, when as the Gospel is the Power of God,
(and so no outward thing.) And was preached to Adam, To. 1.16. Heb. 4.2. Gal:
3.8.
to Abraham and the Israelites in the wilderness, so before the Writings of
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.

Fourthly, He says, if there be any such dispensation, to be looked for, then
there must of necessity be something to try it by, to distinguish it from false
Appearances.

(Obs:) If he intend further, then the Scripture declares of, I answer, none
further, for the Scriptures speaks of a People: that was come to City of the
Living God, New Jerusalem, to an Innumerable company of Angels, and to God the
Judge of all: Heb: 12.
this under the New Covenant. But that he is Ignorant of this, he has
sufficiently showed, and knows nothing of him that speaks from Heaven, Heb.
12.25.

But (says he) there must of necessity be something to try it by, etc. (Ans:)
So there is, Job. 28.7
but it lies hid from every Vultures eye, for the day is come that the Cananite
can be no more in the House of the Lord, Zach: 14 21.
nor can Isreal's Corn be any more meat for his Enemies, a Stranger cannot
intermeddle with his Joy, for the testimony is bound up, Isa: 8, 16
and the Law sealed among his Disciples. The Natural man cannot judge of those
things, they are foolishness unto him, It Is the Spiritual man which judges all
things, that is led by the Spirit of God, which is a more absolute guide then
the Scriptures, for they that are led by it, It bears Witness with their
Spirits, Romans 8.16. Joh. 5.10.
that they are the Sons of God, which the Scriptures cannot do particularly,
But says the Scripture, every one that believes has the witness in hi
mselfe, but to speak a little plainer for their sakes that can receive it; if
any would be made able to Judge of such dispensation they must wait to know a
measure given them, for they may read before John did measure the Temple and
them that worshipped therein, he had a measure given, but the outward Court he
was not to met etc. Re. 11.1.
And are not all here who are setting up so high outward things. When the New
Covenant is inward and the Law inward, Joh. 4.24. 2 Cor. 4.18. Joh. 12.36.
Ephe. 5.13.
and Gods worship in the Spirit and in the Truth, which are all inward, in
respect of things that are outward, what is seen is temporal, but that which is
not seen is Eternal, but no man can understand those things, except he come to
believe in the Light, for it is Light that makes all things manifest, there is
but light and darkness, and they are contrary one to another, Joh. 12.35. 2
Cor. 44. Ephesians 2.2. 1 John 1.7 Joh. 1.5.
he that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes, because the darkness has
blinded his Eye And that eye is inward which is blinded by the God of this
world, that rules in the children of disobedience, but he that comes to the
light and walks in the light as God is in the Light knows whither he goes, this
light shines in darkness but the darkness comprehends it not. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7.
And this light is to be looked for in the heart, for God that commanded light
to shine out of darkness has shined in our hearts, none can deny but the Law
of God, by which man comes to know God must be written in the heart, Heb.
8.10.11.
except they will deny the New Covenant. Thus what I have said is not contrary
to the Scriptures, but has Testimony of the Law, Prophets and Apostles, we do
not make void the Scriptures but establish them, saying the Law is for the
Lawless, and that the Scriptures are profitable for correction and Instruction,
etc. So he may correct me by them if there be occasion, etc.

But again, to pass by much of his discourse which is mostly impertinent to our
purpose, and well nigh as frivilous, I shall observe his 4 directions. Which he
says, he gives (least he should leave his Auditors in the Dark) to discover
those overcome with a Spirit of delusion. First says he there is no manner of
proportion betwixt their pretense and the reality which is in them, etc. (Obs:)
In his last direction I find that he means such are deceived themselves, for
(says he) they are deceived as well as deciving. So from his own word as most
likely to persuade him that his Asertion is false, I infer if deceived and
thereby deceiving others, there is Absolute proportion betwixt their end, and
the pretense they make, for such persuades not to what they know is false, but
to what they think is true, (Says he) they come with Esaus hand and Jacobs
voice, Jacob was not deceived for he knew what he did, therefore this is a
plain contradion to his own words in his last direction, who said they was
deceived as well as deceiving, thus his first direction his discovered his own
delusion.

His second direction reflecting upon us etc. They (says he) pretend
extraordinary calls for ordinary work as in this Example, whose work but
ordinary. That, that we might have told him, as well as he us, (Obs:) If you
might have done it as well as he, Then truth I conclude, So no sign of
delusion, And then why received he not from you such as you would have had done
to you therefore your extraordinary words and Actions, demonstrate your
Spirits, A Child he says might have told them as much, If a Child had learnt
it so he might. (Obs:) Is this saying so ordinary when true which Daniel Smith
told you. As he was naked so were you, not being covered with the Spirit of the
Lord, and that this saying was true is granted by his own confession, saying he
told us nothing but what we might have told him; this his second direction
shows his own confusion. etc.

His third direction stated, Its a sign of a Spirit of delusion (says he when
there is a Special Impropriation of Christ and all good things to themselves,
with judging and condemning others, etc.

(Obs:) Thus to reflect upon us is manifest Injury. And the effect of a Lying
Spirit as shall be proved. To. 1.19. Tit. 2.11
For Daniel Smith told you that what was to be known of God was manifest in
you, directing you to the grace of God in you, and also that Gods love was
toward you. And that he would not have any one of you to perish, with many
more Good words to this purpose. Now if you should think that those was not
good things, yet it is manifest that, Daniel Smith, and we also, are clear of
this charge. By Preaching Gods free grace unto all. (Obs:) Must not every
tongue confess truth unto God, if so, Col. 1.27 2 Cor. 13.5.
why does it offend you that we know Christ in us the hope of glory, seeing if
he be not in you, You are Reprobates, Can the Scripture confess you to the
Father, if Christ know you not, and if he be not in you is he not worthy to be
esteemed a better Leader then the Scriptures, which does at utmost but declare
of him, Joh. 5.39
and point to him that all should come to him that would have life, Was not
this the promise of the Father to give him for a Leader: Acts. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
And are not all his Disciples and followers to wait for the same?

Again, he says indeed its ordinary sometimes to say that they are Christ.
etc. (Obs:) If he intend it is ordinary for us to say that we are Christ, let
him show us who he has known say so, for indeed his words import certainty on
his part, But if he means it is ordinary for such Logicians as himself, who by
the Art of reasoning would make things appear to be that which in truth they
are not, then let him know such Reasoning is Earthly sensual Devilish, And we
pass not for it, yet we can truly see thereby that such are Natural
notwithstanding their pretenses, so cannot understand the things of God, 1 Cor.
2.14. 1 John 2.20-27. 1 John 4.4
etc. (Obs:) Because Christ signifies anointed, can none have the Anointing
but they must be counted Christ? did not the Primitive Christians acknowledge
Christ in them, and the Anointing in them, and that he that was in them was
greater then he that was in the world, So this his third direction is a true
discovery of his own condition.

Fourthly, His last direction observed, He says that a Spirit of delusion is
known by growing worse and worse, etc.

(Obs:) We are willing to leave the Issue hereof to the Trial, Being satisfied
if he be not yet made Manifest according to his own Rule, He shall be if he
repent not.

Again he says. We have a more sure word of Pomise (as though none had the
Scriptures but they) Here (says he) we have our call, and something to try it
by, (Obs:) His ignorance of him that searches the Heart and tries the Reins
and declares to man his thoughts, is plainly seen, by his seting up the
Scripture, Amo. 4.13.
as being surer then the Spirit of God, By which (Obs:) he shows us evidently
that his call is not of God, So neither does nor can Minister from the Abillity
of the grace of God, nor speak as the Oracle of God, (which is certain) which
all true Ministers are to do, 1 Pet. 4.10. That God in all things may be
glorified.

But I infer, if the Scripture be the Rule, then all that have the Scriptures
has the Rule as well as you; then I querie how comes it to pass there is so
many different persuasions, when you have all but one Rule, Can the Scriptures
have any more true meanings but one? is Christ divided, or is there any
varyablenesse with God? But if you cannot own that every one that has the
Scriptures is in the Right, but only such as practice as you are persuaded.
Then I query, How come you to be surer then others, seeing they plead
Scriptures to Justify them, as well as you: Therefore it follows, if you think
your selves surer then others, Knowing no further then the Scriptures, (as R.
A. affirms) it is a seting up your selves above others, So at best can be but
an Imagination etc. (Thus by way of conclusion) I need not Enlarge as to show
any thing further for the Justification of Daniel Smith in his naked carryage,
then the Substance of that Assertion stated by R A. as ours in his third
Immagination, seth, when he pleases, may by his Spirit, Lead whom he pleaThat
is, that the Lord And into what he pleases, now as well as he did the Prophets
of Old, For with him is no variableness nor shadow of turning, and that because
I have considered his strong Reasons, Assertions and Arguments, brought by him
to Abrogate or Invalidate the former Assertion. And they are found (Instead of
ours) to fall to the ground, And therefore is absolutely too short, and too
Narrow to Answer his End or to be as a cover. So Daniel Smith Testimony remains
firm, And consequently in measure fulfilled by the Appearing of this discourse,
wherein Lies is seen to be R. A's. Refuge, So not covered by the Spirit of the
Lord nor did he take council of him: Therefore let him and all that takes part
with him in this Antichristian work, take heed, Such as they Sow, such must
they Reap, if to the flesh then corruption, Gal: 6.7, 8. Joh. 16.13. Joh. 15.5.
To. 8.9.
but if to the Spirit life Everlasting, thus I conclude against his and all
opposers utmost Force. That their is no guide into all Truth, but the Spirit of
Truth, And that without this Spirit nothing can be done acceptable to the
Father, and that he that has it not is none of his.

This for detecting of Error, that the truth may be made manifest, and the
honest hearted Informed, who are or may be subject to be deceived by the
working of the Immaginarie Spirit. By a lover of the Truth and souls of all
men, whose eye God has opened to see the deceit, and thus far enabled to make
it manifest, 1 Cor. 27.28, 29.
let him therefore have the glory who chooses the foolish things to confound
the Wise, says John Hogg.

THis discourse occasioned by a Scandalous paper spread abroad under the name
of Mr. Astley Sermon: and being desirous to know the truth thereof, it was
conveyed unto him, according as in this letter inserted. But he refusing to
Answer our just desire, therein expressed, We could do no less for the truth
sake then publish it, etc.

The 19. of the 9. Month. 1673. Richard Astley
WHereas this Paper or Sermon, which we present to thy view, by thy Friend, R.
N. was publicly declared to be thine, Before a Priest, and diverse People, By
one glorying and boasting in it, over our Friends (whom the Scorners call
Quakers) one of them being present, heard him confidently affirm, thou would
own it; Therefore we expect, (as just and equal) that thou should give us it
under thy hand, as thine, Or not thine, if but part thine, then plainly show us
what thou owns, Or what thou disownes, that the truth (which is but one) may be
made manifest, which hurts none but its Enemies, this Ingeniously performed by
thee, will at present satisfy.

Thy Friends John Lyth. John Hogg. Anth: Wells.



Richard Astleys Answer to the foregoing letter concerning his Sermon was that
it was generally his own, except some words that was not sense which we suppose
came by the Scribe and no advantage taken of here; now having long expected a
more plain and full answer according to their Promise, which not finding in
this great length of time, we conclude they do not intend to make it public,
and therefore this is thought convenient to be published.


