An EXAMINATION Of SUNDRY SCRIPTURES alleged by our BRETHREN, In Defense of
some Particulars Of their CHURCH WAY. Humbly submitted to the Sight and Censure
of any judicious Divine: ESPECIALLY Of such of the Reverend Godly-Learned
ASSEMBLY as vouchsafe to read it.

By R. Hollingworth, M. A. of Magd. Gol. Camb.

IMPRIMATUR,

Ja. Cranford.
December. 17. 1644.
LONDON, Printed by J. R. for Tho. Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop at
Manchester. 1645.

The PREFACE to the Reader.
TRue Propositions and lawful Practices should not (much less untrue and
unlawful) be fathered on God by misinterpretation of his Word. Every false
Exposition of Scripture is a belying of God, counterfeiting of the King of
kings hand, and an addition to his Word. The Way of Independencie, pretending
to be the Way of God, the Scripturall Way, the only Way (as the most rigid
Separation, Anabaptism. Familism, also does) produces sundry Texts in
Preaching, Writing and Conference, (I conceal persons, times and places, for
reserved Reasons) to witness the right of her Claim; Which, for the most part,
she also in Print produces, upon the same or like occasion, in Answ. to 32 q.
Apol. for Church Covenant. Answ. to 9 Pos. T.W. to W.R. Mr T. and Mr M. to Mr
H. I, as the Lord has enabled me, have conferred with and examined some
special Witnesses; they answer (if I understand them aright) that they can
witness no such thing as they are produced for. If this be acknowledged, I
have my full end: If any will reexamine them, I beseech him not to put them on
the Wrack 2 Pet. 3.16.
nor to meddle with bystanders or by-matters, but to mind the thing in hand.
If he show that their Testimonies are fit and full for the purpose, he does
something: if not (whatsoever else he do) he does nothing. I publish not all
their Deposition, not all that is material; but so much as I conceive at
present sufficient. If any of the Brethren (amongst whom M. Cotton is
deservedly the chief) seem in my apprehension to come nearer the Truth then
others, I willingly take notice of it, both to honor their Ingenuity, and to
help Accommodation (if it may be) between us and them. What strength is in this
Writing, I confess it is borrowed; the weakness of it is mine own, for which
I have only this Excuse, That I am not willingly wilful, but shall be ready,
as God shall assist, to give or receive further Satisfaction.

An Examination of sundry Scriptures alleged by our Brethren in Defense of
some Particulars of their Church Way.
See almost the same Argument verbatim, in Answer to 32. q. p. 35.
1. GAthering of Churches in the name of Christ, and setting up of
Church-Ordinances cannot be unlawful for want of a Commandment from man, as
appears by the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles, Acts 4.19. and 5.29.

The Apostles never taught or practiced to gather or separate some Christians
from others, one part of this true Church, Answer.
and another part of that (especially persons which themselves converted not)
to make a purer Church, neither with nor without the Magistrates Authority. The
Apostles (being not of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.1.) This
was proper to the Apostles or Apostolic men. Answ. to 9 pas. p. 76. T.W. to
W.R. p. 67.
did preach not only without, but against the peremptory Command and Laws of
the Magistrate, Acts 4.17, 18, 21. and 5.28. But you profess not such a
Latitude of opposition against Magistracy; nor do you hold (I suppose) that
our godly nonconformable Brethren, suspended by the Bishops, or
New-England-Ministers, deposed by their Churches (to say nothing of Ministers
deprived by the Parliament for Malignancie) are bound, by the Apostles example,
to execute their Ministry in the Churches, notwithstanding such Suspension or
Deposition: or that Master Ward, deposed by the Church at Roterdam, was bound
to execute his Ministry there, before his Restoration. Had you such an
immediate Commission, sealed from heaven, and such infallible direction of the
holy Ghost, as the Apostles had, you might more boldly imitate them therein;
especially if the case of living under a Christian Magistrate, intending,
endeavoring, and consulting with Divines, about the Reformation of the Church;
and of living under a heathen Magistrate, and professed public enemy of the
Church, were not much different. Would our Brethren in New England allow a
Presbyterian Church, or but a New-Independant Church, to be erected in
New England, against the will and mind of the Magistrates and Churches there
T.W. to W.R. p. 31.
? Our Brethren at London (I hear) do hold it (at least) unreasonable, to gather
Churches now: how their opinion and yours are reconcilable, I see not. It may
be the Brownists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Familists, and other gross
Heretics and Schismatikes, in old or new- England, do also pretend the
Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles for the setting up of their Churches; yet
our godly and conscientious Divines do therein oppose them.

2. Seven, T.W. to W.R. p. 13. and 14. and Answ. to 32. q. p. 43. alleges
the same things.
eight, or nine may make a Church. In Adams and Noah's time there was not above
seven or eight; will you deny them the being of a Church? What will you make of
Christ, and of his family, which were not above twelve, besides himself: and of
the first Foundationals of the Church of Ephesus, which were about twelve? The
number, in the first beginning, of the greatest Church, was small enough in
comparison, Acts 1.15.

The case of Adam and Noah was extraordinary; there were no more in the world,
and therefore could be no more in the Church. Adam and his wife, and first
sons, yea Adam himself was the Church, if then there was any: yet you hold not
that two or three, yea one, may make a Church. Cain lawfully married his own
sister, May other men now do the like? Twelve are more then seven or eight, and
an hundred and twenty a competent number; yet it appears not that they were
called or counted a Church, till they were more increased. If there were no
more Believers in Ephesus then twelve (as there was, viz. Aquila and Priscilla,
which knew more then John's Baptism, Acts 18.26. cum 24.25. if not others) yet
there were more in Jerusalem then one hundred and twenty, even five hundred
Brethren at once 1 Cor. 15.6.
Adam and Noah, with their Families, if they were Churches, they were but
Domestical Churches, not Congregationall. What will you make of Christ and his
Disciples? a Church distinct from the Jewish? You know Christ did not make a
new Church, or gather men into it; but lived and died a member of the Jewish
Church Answ. to 32. q. p. 14.
. Had they been called a Church, as some households are in the New Testament,
Phile. 2. witness T.W. to W.R.
you had some more pretexts; and yet they had been but a Domestical Church,
many whereof may be within a Congregationall, and especially within a National
Church. It is an Argument you will not own: Seven, eight, twelve, may make a
domestical Church, ergo, they may make a congregationall. If seven or eight
may make a Church, then two hundred persons in a city may well make twenty
distinct Churches, and, by consequence, so many Independent Judicatures.

3. A visible Church in the New Testament consists of no more in number then
may meet in one place, in one Congregation, The like you have, Answ. to 32 q.
p. 9.
1 Cor. 11.20. and 14.23.

If you seek for Congregations meeting for Prayer, Answer.
hearing the Word, Sacraments, in one place, or that they were called by the
name of Church, or that all Believers in some cities and countries, when they
might, did meet in one place, I will not contend: many such Churches or
Congregations we have in England; and the Believers in every Christian Church,
even in the Church of England, and in the Jewish Church also, might and did, at
first, meet in one place. To say nothing that all the people of the Jews (being
about six hundred thousand) are called one Congregation, and are frequently in
the old Testament said to come together; and that One Myriad is ten thousand.
Myriads did come together. Acts 21.22. How will you make out this Inference?
The Church of Corinth did meet in one place, and so did Antioch, Jerusalem;
therefore no Church in the New Testament must consist of more then can meet in
one place. To say there was a Church in Adams house, and in Noah's, and also in
Philemons, Aquila's and Priscilla's houses, therefore the Church in the Old and
New Testament must be Domestical, is an inconsequent Illation, contrary to
plain Scripture. Is not the Argument as good if it run thus? All the believing
Corinthians were of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.1. cum 2 Cor. 6.11. The
Smyrnaeans and Laodiceans, of the Church of Smyrna and Laodicea, Coloss. 2.1.
and 4.16. Revel. 2.8. and 3.14. whether they were more or fewer (hence in every
City, and every Church, seem to expound one another, Acts 14.21, 23. cum Tit.
1.5. Acts 16.4, 5.) And it cannot be showed that any Church, how numerous
soever it grew, was divided into two or more Churches, or that there were more
Churches, then one in any city or town; therefore the Believers in any one
city or town may be but one Church, whether they can meet in one place or no.
Paul writes not only to them which might and did meet in one place, but to all
that in every place (not thorowout the world, as appears, 2 Cor. 1.1. written
to the same persons, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2. cum 2 Cor. 2.1, 2. neither is this a
Catholic Epistle) but in all Achaia, call upon the Name of the Lord; and
therefore these words, (...) (besides, that being but a Supposition, they put
nothing in being, and may fitly be translated, in id ipsum, for the same, or in
one, which, though they met in an hundred places, they might do, Acts 4.26. cum
Psalm. 2.2. 1 Chro. 12.17.) prove no more that those to whom Paul writ were of
one Congregation, then James calling the twelve tribes scattered abroad one
Assembly, Synagogue, or Church, James 1.1. cum 2.2. and 5.34. or Paul's
mentioning the Hebrews assembling themselves together, Heb. 10.25. does prove
that the scattered Hebrews were no more then one particular Congregation, which
might and did meet in one place; especially seeing the Apostle writes to the
Achaians, 2 Cor. 1.1. 1 Cor. 16.1. cum 2 Cor. 9.2. and 11.10. Now there were
other Churches in that Region Cotton Keys, p. 46.
at least two, Corinth and Cenchrea, Rom 16.1. which I read was the Port of
Corinth, R. M. and W. T. to C. H. p. 32.
yea oppidum Corinthiorum navium statione celeberrimum, and ideo frequens valde
and populosum Gual^ in Romans 1.
: To say nothing of the Church whereof Gaius the Corinthian was the Host, 1
Cor. 1.18. Romans 16.23. 3 John.) Hence there is mention of Churches to which the
women he writes to (for he says, Your women, not Women, or all women) did
resort; or how else could they keep silence in the Churches? 1 Cor. 14.34. yet
you hold not that two or three Churches in the New Testament must consist of no
more then may meet in one place.

4. The visible Church in the New Testament is not National, as the Jewish
was; hence we read of the Churches of Galatia, Macedonia, Judea, not Church of
Galatia, 1 Cor. 16.1. etc. 2 Cor. 8.1. etc.

We say not that the Christian Church is National, as was the Jewish Church,
viz. that it has a National Tabernacle, Temple or House of God, and solemn
Worship peculiar to it, to which all the Members, or all the Males must
sometimes resort, toward which the absent are to pray, and in which the
Priests in their courses do minister unto God: not say we that the Scriptures
do mention a National Church; for the Supreme Magistrate was an enemy to
Christian Religion, and Regis ad exemplum, etc. M-to H. teaches us thus to
answer.
many of the people were of the same mind, as it is this day in France and
Spain, and was in England in Queen Mary's days: Believers (it is like) were not
so many as to bear the name of a Land or Nation, nor could they have liberty
safely and freely to meet in such great Assemblies as National Synods. Show me
a Nation of Magistrates and people converted, and I will show you a National
Church; but if there could not then be a National Church, as in Queen Mary's
times our Church was not National, it is no wonder if there were none, (Vltra
posse, non est esse) whether National Churches be lawful or unlawful.

Arguments taken from the naked appellation of the word Church or Churches, are
very unsatisfactory, because of the various acceptations of the words Kahal,
Gnedah, Ecclesia, Synagoga, which we sometimes translate Church, but should
always translate, Convocation or Congregation, a company called out, or
gathered together.

The English word, Church; Saxon, Cyric, and Scots, Kirk, are derived from
(...), as Cambd. Rem. or (...) as Sir Hen. Spelm. which (as (...)) signifies
the place of meeting. Hence we read of Robbers of Churches or Temples, Acts
19.37. Kahal (whence our English word call) is sometimes Metanymically
understood of the place. The Heathen enter into the Sanctuary, which God had
forbidden to enter into the Church, Lam. 1.10. cum Deuteronomy. 23.3. Nehem. 13.1. To
come together (...), is (if it be rightly translated) to come together in one
place, and so Ecclesia is opposed to the buildings or houses in which they did
eat and drink, 1 Cor 11.19, 20, 21, 22, ult. Synagoga is evidently taken for
the place of meeting, Luke 7.5. Acts 18.7. Nevertheless the words Kahal and
Gnedah, do sometimes signify a dispersed multitude or company (that (possibly)
never did or could meet together) hence we read of a church of Nations, Genesis
35.11. church of evildoers, Psalm. 26.5. church of the dead, Prove. 21.16. church
of the Righteous, Psalm. 1.5. And the people of Israel, though divided into
several domestical Assemblies to keep the Passover, are called one Church,
Exodus 12.46.47. But usually an Assembly or Concio, is all one with Kahal or
Ecclesia, whether that Assembly was orderly or disorderly, good or bad, less
or greater, Jer. 50.9. a church of the Nations, Ezekiel. 32.22. Asshur and his
church, Acts 19.39, 40. lawful church dismissed the church. When all the
Israelitish men, women and children were together, they were but one
congregation, which, in the Dialect of the Translatours of the New Testament,
is all one with one church, Acts 7.38. When all the Israelites did not meet
(for all the members of the Jewish Church did never meet after their settling in
the Land of Canaan, nor all the males, save thrice every year) they that met,
though scarce the half or third part of them that were of the Jewish Faith and
Communion, were notwithstanding called all the church, the whole church, Josh.
9.18, 19. and 22.12. Ezra 2.64. And when there was a great Assembly, then the
Scripture tells us, There was a great church. I set a great church, a very
great church. Nehem. 5.7. 2 Chronicles. 7.8. and 30.13. Ezra 10.1. accounting no
more persons of the Church, but those that were then assembled, yea Simeon and
Levies assembly is called a Church unto which Jacobs honor should not be
united, Genesis 49.6. and those many that were gathered together, praying in the
house of Mary, are called the Church (though James and his Brethren were not
there, not (it may be) the tenth part of those, which (in our sense) were of
the Jewish Church.) Acts 12.12. cum 5; Yea 4 or 5. in a family, joining in the
worship of God, are called a Church, Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19. Philem. v. 2. In
this sense there were many Churches among the Jews. The Scripture calls them
Church, or congregation often, and sometimes in respect of their several
Synagogues, Tribes, and Families, Congregations, Psalm. 74.4.8. The phrase,
Churches of Judaea which were in Christ, seems to imply that some Churches in
Judaea were not in Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. Gal. 1.22. No wonder therefore if
that Christians of one Country meeting in several Synagogues, Jam 2.2. Heb.
10.25. Acts 19.8, 9. and 22.19. Acts 13.15, 16, 43. and Houses, Acts 12.12.
Romans 16.5. do receive the denomination of Churches which in Scripture phrase is
all one with assemblies, See Answ. to 2.
many whereof we confess were in Galatia, Macedonia, etc.

But more particularly, you say there were Churches in Galatia, Ergo, they were
Congregationall.

Answ. Galatia was a large Country, as is intimated Acts 18.23. The Galaetians
in Saint Paul's time, held all Paphlagonia, a part of Phrygia, Cappadocia, and
of all the neighboring Countries round about, which after their names were
called Gallograetia, or Gallatia, containing in them the Cities and Churches of
Antioch and Laodicea, (as Macedonia also did include Philippi, Thessalonica,
Berhaea etc.) In England (a far less Country then either of them) in former
times have been several Churches at once, and yet those Churches not merely
Congregationall, but National rather.

The Churches of Galatia might (for ought you allege to the contrary) be
combined one to another, as the Churches of England, Scotland, Holland, France,
are respectively combined: For the Apostle speaks of them as one lump, 1 Cor.
5.6. cum Gal. 5.9. and wishes the anathematizing or excommunicating of him
that troubles them, Gal. 1.8, 9. and 5.10.12. and the restoring with the
spirit of meekness (both which I take to be Acts of Discipline) Cott. keys v
8.9. does so take them.
of a fallen brother, Gal. 6.1. And the Churches of Macedonia were not so
several, but they joined in one to choose a brother (which I conceive was an
Authoritive act) to go with Paul for the managing of the Churches
contributions, 2 Cor. 8.18, 19. and the Churches of Judaea, consisting of
Myriads of people, did come together, Acts 21.20, 21, 22. to be satisfied of
Paul concerning an accusation they had received against him; and are called a
Church, Gal. 1.13. Acts 12.1. and an house, Heb. 3.4. which title you say is
not given to loose stones and timber, but imports knitting and joynting one to
another.

5. When a Visible Church is to be erected the matter of it should be visible
Saints and believers, This is not unlike the Answ. to 32. Q p. 8 9.
1 Cor. 1.2.

True, so it should; when an Army is to be raised, a city begun, a family set
up, much more when a Church is to be erected or continued, the matter of them
should be visible, yea real Saints, Beloved of God, elect, blessed, etc. Deuteronomy.
83.14. Isa. 1.21.26. Acts 16.34. Romans 1.7. Ephesians. 1.1, 2, 3, 4. and we heartily
wish thy were all such, yet we dare not use unscripturall ways, and means for
the procuring or preserving of Church-members-sanctity: To be wise or holy
above the rule, is to be foolish, profane, presumptuous, superstitious; could
you show us out of Scripture that the Church should examine persons that come
to be admitted, whether the work of Grace be wrought in their hearts or no; and
that they must make any other Declaration (then profession of faith and
repentance) and that the congregation ought to reject such of whose sincerity
and sanctity they are not satisfied, and that the want of this care in the
first constitution of a Church, does nullify it, or make it unlawful for men
to join to it, or continue in it, and that it is necessary to know that a
Church was constituted of visible Saints (which none but they that were present
can know) before he can in faith join to it, or continue in it, we should not
differ about the sanctity of the Members. If the Gospel and Christian Religion
was brought into England in the Apostles times, Church cov. p. 37.
then it was like it was constituted of Saints, as well as the Church of
Corinth. If we look upon the latter constitution in Queen Elizabeth's time, many
congregations of London and M: for example) had visible, yea doubtless real
Saints, which were sufferers all Queen Mary's time, to be the foundationalls
thereof.

The Text in the 1 Cor. 1. shows rather what the members of the Church of
Corinth were, at the time of Paul's writing to them, then that they were or
ought to have been visible Saints, at the first erection of that Church; yet it
shows not that all the Church Members he writes to, were visible Saints; for
many known evil livers, as the Incestuous person, Drunken communicants,
Heretics, Schismatickes, Fornicators, were known members; but the denomination
of Saints, is a part meliore, as we call a wheat-field a corn-field, though we
see weeds and tares in it: much less does it prove, that all they to whom he
writes, and the others also, were visible Saints at the first constitution of
that Church, and that it was necessary they should be such: He writes to the
Church called to be Saints, or called Saints, (not to the Saints called to be a
Church, or to the Church constituted of Saints) which expression rather of the
two, proves there was a Church before they were Saints, (See v. 1. Paul called
to be an Apostle) then that they were Saints before they were a Church, though
I maintain not the validity of either inference. But how appears it that all
the Honorable titles and Epithets given by Paul, are given with relation to
Church membership? The Corinthians were enriched by God in all utterance and
all knowledge, and did come behind in no gift, will you thence conclude that
all Church Members are or ought to be enriched by God, etc? So when he called
others Saints, beloved of God, elect, blessed, etc. or says, their life is hid
with Christ in God; if these things be spoken of them as Church Members, then
they are true of all Church Members, which you know they are not.

See for this the Answ. to 32 Q. p. 9. and Church Covenant, p. 5.6.7.
6. The form of a Church is the gathering together of these visible Saints, and
combining and uniting them into one body by the for me of an holy Covenant,
Deuteronomy. 29.1, 10, 11, 12. By which is plainly showed that a company of people,
become Gods people, that is, a Church, by entering into Covenant with God. If it
be said they were a Church before; yet that was when the Church of the Jews was
constituted in Abraham's family by Covenant.

Answ.
You intend not that this Covenant does make a true Church, but a pure
congregationall Church, as it is refined according to the platform of the
Gospel. T.W. to W.R. p. 24. so interprets you. A Church Covenant is of such
duties as the Gospel requires of every Church, and the members thereof: Apol.
for Church cov. p. 3. and p. 25. The substance of this is agreed to by Answ. to
32. Q. p. 15.
A Church Covenant is especially in relation to Church estate, and Church
duties; (as a marriage Covenant is with relation to the married state and
marriage duties.) But the Covenant here mentioned was not entered into in
reference to Church estate and Church duties, rather than to other duties of
the moral Law; and may be taken by two or three, though they be too few to
make a Church, or by persons of several Churches, in a Ship or a Journey, and
yet let leave them in the same Church State they were before, and not make them
members of a distinct Church. A Covenant in General does not make a Church
(nor a marriage, a Covenant between this man and that woman makes it) but a
Covenant with appropriation and application to this or that Pastor or people.

But the Scripture Covenants are not with appropriation and application to this
Pastor or people, (viz.) that they would serve God with this people or Pastor
rather then with that; therefore they are not Church Covenants.

To be Gods people, and Gods Church, is not alone in your sense. To be the
Kings Subjects, and to be of a Corporation, is not all one; 40 Believers of no
Church, or if 40. several Churches are the Lords people, but they are not an
instituted Church: no Covenant in Scripture was at the founding of the Jewish
Church, nor of the Christian Churches, though many be mentioned in the New
Testament, to be founded, nor at the adding of any members to them, neither did
they make a Church, more truly a Church, or politic society, or more truly
members, but did make them or show them to be more pure and holy servants of
God, even as when single persons or families do Covenant with God.

The Covenant in Genesis 17. is taken only for Gods part of the Covenant, or his
promise to Abraham, Gal. 3.16, 17. not for man's part to God, whereof we now
speak: Gods Covenanting with Abraham did not impose nor suppose an express
vocal Covenant on Abraham's part (although when God appeared visibly and spoke
vocally, there was more color for an express Covenant, then now he does not)
not always an implicit Covenant, Genesis 9.9, 10. The Birds, the Beasts, the
children not then born, could not give so much as an implicit assent.

Indeed receiving of circumcision does import a Covenant on Abraham's part, or
consent to the Covenant, as Baptism also does; but it is held they were in
Church State before they had right to circumcision; therefore you should show
they made a Covenant before circumcision, but how prove you that Abraham was
not in Church State before? Genesis 17. That Melchizedeck a Priest, and Lot, which
were not of his seed nor of his family? were out of Church State, That a
Beliver is not a son of Abraham, nor an heir of the promise and covenant made
to Abraham, if he be not in Church State by Covenant? All which you seem to
imply, when you say that Jewish Church was constituted in Abraham's family by
Church Covenant. The family of Sem was the Church of God long before this, Genesis
9.25, 26, 27.

See the like Allegation in Answ. to 9. pos. p. 73.
7. Every member at his admission does promise to give himself as to the Lord,
to be guided by him, so to the Church to be guided by them, which is no more
then the members of the Church of Macedonia did in a Parallel case, 2 Cor. 8.5.

Answ.
The givers are not the members of the Church of Macedonia, (as you for your
advantage phrase it) but the Churches of Macedonia, Apol. for Chapter Covenant, v.
12.
and therefore if this do prove Union or Covenant, it is of the members of
several Churches, and not of one only: It is not said that they gave
themselves to the Church or Churches, but to us, viz. to Paul and Timothy,
(which were not so much as set members of any particular Church) 2 Cor. 1.1,
19. which as they joined in the Epistles extant to the Macedonian Churches,
Phil. 1.1. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. 2 Thessalonians. 1.1. so they commend those Churches for
being guided by them, Phil. 2.12, 19. and 4.9, 15. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6, 7. and 3.6.
But how the case of the Churches of Macedonia is parallel with your
Church Covenant, to abide in that particular congregation you show not.

8. This particular congregation is a Church before it have Officers, Acts 2.47.

Answer.
In a general sense a few private men without Officers, yea a few women
without men, yea 20. members of several Churches, may be called a Church; but
a governing Church they are not. The Church has not received an Office of rule
without her Officers. Cotton Keys p. 16.


The Church in Acts 2. had Officers, and better Officers than any Church now
has, even the Apostles (if the Commission of the 70. was expired) which were
the Elders of all Churches. The Apostles were as the Elders and Rulers of all
Churches, Cotton Keys p. 48.
1 Pet. 5.1. 2. Cor. 11.28. and particularly of the Church of Jerusalem, and
did act therein as Elders; It is not all one to want Elders now they are
instituted as before, ordinary Elders were not appointed at that time.

9. She has also full and free power to choose her own Officers, without the
help of Synod, This (though not so fully) is asserted by R. M. and W. T. to C.
H.
Classis, or Presbytery, Acts. 1.15. Acts 6.3. Acts 14.23.

In Church affairs of weighty and difficult common concernment, as Election
and Ordination of Elders, excommunication of an Elder, it is safe and wholesome,
and an holy Ordinance to proceed with consultation and consent of the Churches,
Prove. 11.14. Cottons Keys, p. 55.
You will not take upon you hastily to censure the many notable Precedents of
ancient and later Synods, who have put forth Acts of power in Ordination and
Excommunication. Cot. Keys p. 28.
We hold it a privilege of the people, (especially if they proceed wisely and
piously) to Elect their Officers; and an injury to obtrude any on them, without
their consent; but let us view your Scripture, The assembly, Acts 1. it is
likely was not a body politic, but occasional only, no part of Church
Government being as yet set on foot; here were not all but some of the sounder
Members of the Jewish Church, and they had no Commission to separate from the
Jews before Acts 2.44. The company was not without Elders, the Apostles if not
the 70.) were present; all the Churches and Elders that were at that time in
the world, were present, in respect whereof it may be called an Aeconienicall
counsel, (the Apostles being Elders of all Churches) rather then a particular
Congregation.

If there had been any more Elders and Churches, they must have conveened upon
that occasion to choose an Apostle who is a Pastor of all Churches. The choice
was limited by the Apostle Peter: First, to the persons present; secondly, to
those that had accompanied the Apostles, all the time that the Lord Jesus went
in and out amongst them, and by God the director of the lot (to whom properly
the Election of an Apostle does belong) to Matthias; As for the Deacons and
Overseers for the poor (though people may better discern of men's fitness and
ability for that Office, then for the Ministry; and their liberty of choosing
was a good means at that time, to abate their discontentments because of
former neglect; yet at their Election, there were all the Churches and Elders
in the world, and more there could not have been in any case; such necessity
has no Law. Your selves acknowledge Synods an Ordinance of Christ, useful in
sundry cases, (as in case a Church being leavened with Popery, Arminianisme,
Antinomianisme, Libertinisme, Anabaptisme, etc. should choose a Minister like
themselves: If such a case had happened, they could have had no more of a Synod
at that time then they had; the company did nominate two, but they that prayed
(which is likely was the Apostles) did appoint them, ver. 23, 24. The people
chose seven, such as they were directed to choose, set them before the
Apostles, which did appoint them over the business, prayed and imposed hands:
In Acts 14.23. Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders by Suffrages given by lifting
up or stretching out of hands, (for so the Greek Word usually signifies, though
not always, Acts 10.41. but that the people did ordain Elders by Election,
without the Apostles, it says not, but rather the contrary (viz.) that they
stayed from Election and Ordination of Elders, till the Apostles came to advise
and assist them therein. The word (...) signifies rather to give, then to
gather suffrages: As [(...)] does imply the election of more Churches then one,
Churches do join in (...).
and yet it imports the election of no more Churches then those there spoken
of: so the phrase, [ Paul and Barnabas (...)] does not imply that any Church,
or other person besides Paul and Barnabas did elect those Presbyters.

10. The particular Congregation, This Scripture is alleged by R. M. and W.
T. to C. H. and Answ. to 32. q. p. 69.
though it want Church Officers, has power and authority to ordain Officers,
as the childr^n of Israel did put their hands upon the Levites, Numb. 8.9, 10.

Answer.
That Congregation had Officers, Aaron the High Priest, and many other Priests,
Numb. 3.4. But you hold not that people may ordain in the presence and plenty
of Officers. R. M. and W. T. to C. H. p. 52. 45.
All the children of Israel, being about 600000, and many women and children,
did not (probably) lay hands on the Levites, but some, in stead of the rest,
which were more likely to be the Elders then any other. (All the congregation,
and, All the Elders of the congregation, are all one, Exodus 12.3. cum 21) The
Levites were separated to their work, and taken from amongst the children of
Israel, cleansed and offered before the Lord by Moses and Aaron respectively,
according to Gods express appointment, v. 6 7, 8, 11, 13, 14 therefore this
laying on of hands was either only obedientiall for approbation of Gods
election, or for oblation of the Levites to God, in stead of their firstborn,
v. 16 17, 18. as they laid hands on sacrifices, v. 12. which was a special
reason, and peculiar to those times. If the people did ordain the Levites, I am
sure they did not choose them: If this be a binding pattern, you will lose
Election, while you contend for popular Ordination.

You tell us, that it is a main pillar of Popery, to proportion the Church now,
to the outward policy in Israel; and that Christ's faithfulness above Moses,
consists in as full determination of Gods Worship in the New Testament, as in
the Old; and that we are as strictly tied to the Gospel-patern, as the Jews
were to the Old Testament: Why then should we in Ordination of Officers be
guided by the Old Testament, and not by the New? And why should we follow the
Ordination of Levites, rather then of Priests, for a pattern for the Ordination
of Elders, except to gratify you?

11. When the Apostles were sent out by Christ, The words of the Answer to 32.
q. p. 71.
there was no mention of Ordination in the Commission of theirs, but only of
teaching and baptizing, Mar. 16.15, 16. and 28.19, 20. If Ordination of
Ministers had been such a special work, there would (belike) have been some
mention of it in their Commission.

Answer.
Neither is there mention of celebration of the Eucharist. Preaching and
Baptising were first to be done to the Nations, therefore they are there
mentioned. We find the Apostles did practice Ordination, and yet we suppose
not that they went beyond their Commission, Acts 6. and c. 13. and 14. And a
Commission to Elders we read, 1 Timothy 5. as well as practice, 2 Timothy 4. You
intimate, that special works, which the people might not do, are mentioned in
that Commission; which if you stand to, you must deny the people power either
to Baptize or to Preach. If these words be not a Commission to the Apostles and
Elders to ordain, I am sure they are no Commission to unoffic'd-men either to
Preach or to Ordain. If that need so require, she may admonish her Officers,
and excommunicate, etc. T.W. to W.R. p. 39.


12. The Church has power to censure her Officers, if she see just occasion,
Col. 4.17.

The Church of Colosse had other Elders besides Archippus, which might join
with the people in the Admonition. Paul bids Timothy fulfill his Ministry, 2 Timothy 4 5. Answer.
This does not suppose Timothy to be faulty, or to be under censure: and it may
be Archippus, Paul's fellow laborer, Philem. v. 2. was not faulty, and then
this Admonition was no censure; and therefore it is alleged to no purpose.
Neither does admonition always suppose Authority; for this may be an act of
charity, as well as of authority. Paul might admonish Peter; and one Brother
another of the same Church, though Paul had no authority over Peter, nor
fellow members one over another, Gal. 2.11. Matthew. 18.15, 16. Cot. Keys, p. 19.
Private members cannot censure judicially, or unchurch the Congregation,
though they be bidden, Plead with their mother, plead, Hos. 2.2

The Colossians were as well to cause that Epistle to be read in the Church of
Laodicea, as to say to Archippus, etc. yea, the word cause, seems more
authoritative then say ye: yet our Brethren hold not, that one Church has
power to cause any thing to be done in another Church. If it had been said,
Cause Archippus, etc. and, Say to Laodicea, you could have made notable use of
it. Finally, the Church cannot excommunicate their whole Presbytery, no more
then the Presbytery excommunicate the whole Church; only she may withdraw
from them Cot. Keys, p. 16.
: the Church has not received from Christ an Office of rule without her
Officers Ibid. This Text is much insisted on, and weekly contributions for the
Minister grounded on it.
.

13. These Officers are to be maintained by contribution every Lord's Day, 1
Cor. 16.1.

You do not maintain all your Officers, not your Ruling-Elders, though the
Text. 1 Timothy 5.17. does as clearly hold out the maintenance as the lawfulness
of Ruling-Elders. Answer.
The Apostles Rule was not general, but only (for ought there appears) in the
Churches of Galatia and Achaia, v. 1. nor perpetual; for those Gatherings were
to cease when Paul came, v. 2. (though Ministers maintenance did not cease when
Paul came) not for any Officers, at least not qua Officers, but for the poor,
not of their own Church neither, but of the Church of Jerusalem, many miles
distant; which was a singular and extraordinary case. You might much better
allege, Matthew. 23.23. These you ought to have done, etc. yea, Acts 2.45. and
4.34. (as the Anabaptists) for the manner of maintaining the Ministry, and
relief of the poor, then to say, that the temporary way of the Churches
extraordinary charity to the poor of another Church, is a perpetual binding
Rule to direct how Church Officers should constantly be maintained.

14. The great mountain burning with fire cast into the Sea upon the sounding
of the second Trumpet, See more of this in Answ. to 32 q. p. 77.
Revel. 8.8.9. is applied by some good Writers to those times in which
Constantine brought settled endowments into the Church.

If it be so applied by some good Writers who possibly had in their eyes the
Lordly and almost Regal riches and pomp of Prelates, Answer.
it is by as many and as good Writers applied otherwise. For my part, as I
find that Constantines Donation, the foundation of this Exposition is but a
Fiction, accounted by Gratian himself to be but Palea, (and what is the chaff
to the wheat?) so I find in the Prophecies, that Kings and States are called
mountains, Zech. 4.7. casting of mountains into the Sea implies great
commotions and troubles, Psalm. 46.2. their burning with fire, signifies their
opposition and fierceness, whereby they become destroying mountains: or, as
the Septuagint (whom the Penmen of the New Testament much follow) (...) -- a
mountain on fire, Jer. 51.25. but I find not that settled and stinted
maintenance is in any Prophecy understood by a mountain burning with fire cast
into the Sea, nor that it is unlawful either from year to year, as in
New England T.W. to W.R. p. 59.
or for certain years, or for term of life; much less do I find that it is
unlawful for one year, and not for a year and a quarter, or two, three, or
four years.

15. Thereimust be in the Church Teachers distinct from Pastors, This (for
substance) is alleged by Answ. to 32 q. p. 75. and many others.
as Apostles are distinct from Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11.

That Text proves not the same distinction between them; for he says, Some
Apostles, and some Prophets, etc. but not some Pastors, and some Teachers;
but, Answer.
but some Pastors and Teachers; or rather, These Apostles, these Prophets,
these Evangelists, these Shepherds and Teachers; which words seem but to
explicate one another, as Shepherd and Bishop do, 1 Pet. 2.25.

16. This particular Congregation is Sion which God loves, This Text is
frequently alleged, in Answ. to 32 q. and others.
and here he has promised to be present, Matthew. 18.20.

No Sir, it is not Sion, but one of the Assemblies of Sion, Isa. 4.5. The
Hebrews, Answ.
which were divided into many Congregations, are not said to be come into many
Mount Sions, but to Mount Sion, Heb. 12. The Scripture warrants not the
expression of an hundred or a thousand Sion. Have not you found God present in
our Assemblies? have not you by faith closed with the promises in the use of
Ordinances, amongst us? Speak out, I know you dare not belie your selves, us,
and God himself. Christ, in Matthew. 18. promises his presence to those that are
not a Church, for two or three will not make a Church: they (v. 17.) were to
give the second Admonition, the Church the third. If any faithful people,
though women, or not in Church Fellowship, or members of several Churches,
meet together, you dare not exclude them out of his promise, though they do not
make a congregationall Church. Christ's presence is promised to the Apostles and
their Successors, the Elders, Matthew. 28.20. and to the Assemblies of Sion, or
Churches jointly, as well as severally, Isai. 4.5. Rev. 2.1. and 21.22, 23. and
22.3, 4, 5. The new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. is many particular Churches combined,
Cot. Keys, p. 56. Answ. to 32 q. p. 38.


17. So long as a Believer does not join himself to some particular
Congregation, he is without, in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 5.12.

Those without, Answ.
of whom the Apostle speaks, were unbelievers, Pagans and Heathen, Answ. to
32 q. p. 11.
without Christ, as well as without the visible Church.

The Apostle opposes Fornicators of the world, to Fornicators that are
Brethren.

Without are dogs, Sorcerers, Rev. 12.15. such as Paul had not to do with, What
have I to do etc. v. 12. (and yet he had to do with all Christians, by his
illimited Apostolic power, Answ. to 9 Pos. p. 64.
whether they belong to that or any other Congregation or no) such as God
judges, or are left to the immediate judgment of God: But this is not the
case of Believers not joined (especially in your sense of joining) to a
particular Congregation; nor do you (I hope) judge it to be the case of
Believers in the Churches of England and Scotland.

18. The Elders are not Lords over Gods Heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. nor do exercise
authority, as the Kings and Princes of the earth do, remembering our Saviors
lesson, Matthew. 20.25, 26. Luke 22.25, 26. They are not so many Bishops A
Classical Presbytery sets up many Bishops for one M. D.
striving for preeminence, as Diotrephes did, 3 John v. 9, 10 These Scriptures
are alleged, Answer to 32 q. p. 59. and 76. though not with such tartness
against Presbyteriall Government.


To say nothing that the title (...), Dominus, sometimes translated Sir, and
sometimes Lord, Job. 12.21. 1 Pet. 3.6. is given to Christ, to Elders, and
meaner persons, 3 Job. v. 4.40. and 5.7. and 12.21. Kev. 7.14. Though Elders be
not Lords over Gods heritage, yet they are Leaders and Guides, yea Shepherds,
Rulers, Overseers, Bishops and Governors, and not only Presidents of the
Congregation, Answer.
Moderatours of her actions, or as the fore-men of the Jury. The other Text
forbids Kingly or Lordly power in the Ministers of the Gospel; for the two
Apostles still dreaming of a Temporal kingdom, and being kinsmen to Christ,
did expect some Temporal honor and advancement. Christ says not, there was
inequality amongst the Priests of the Jews, or amongst the Priests of the
Gentiles, or between the Priests and People, but it shall not be so among you;
but, very aptly and pertinently to their Petition, answers, The Princes of
the Gentiles, etc. propounding himself, v. 28. whose Kingdom is not of this
world, for an example to them; yet he had no intent to equal them to himself
in Church Power, or other Ministers to the Apostles, or the People to the
Presbyters. We make not all Church Ministers Bishops, but the Elders only, as
we are warranted by Acts 20.17, 28. Tit. 1.5, 7.

Diotrephes, being but one, was liker to a Prelate, then to a Presbytery: yet
Saint John does not blame him simply for accepting or having pre eminence, or
for taking upon him to answer in behalf of the Church to which S. John writ, or
for taking to him the power of commanding, forbidding, excommunicating; but for
loving pre eminence, (as Mat. 23.6, 7.) for not receiving the Apostles and
Brethren, and prohibiting what he should have required and encouraged, and
excommunicating such as were the best members of the Church. I will not tell
you who said, All the Church is holy; ye take too much upon you, etc.

19. The power of Government is expressly given to the Church, when we are
bidden hear the Church, which is a particular congregation, Mat. 18.

Answer.
The Church, in the first and primary intent of these words, was a Church then
in being, which did abominate the Gentiles (for Heathens and Gentiles are all
one) viz. the Jewish Church, which was not a particular congregation, but a
National Church, having graduall judicatories and appeals, of which the
Apostles were at that time, and Christ lived and dyed an actual member, Answ.
to 32. Q. p. 14.
They who presume that Christ did no more respect the Jewish Church, then they
do the Church of England, do over-skip it, and understand this only of the
Christian Church, and bring Christ in, speaking on this manner; Peter, if thy
Brother offend thee to day or to morrow, and will not be gained, keep it in thy
mind two or three years, and thou shall have a Church to which thou may
complain; tell the Church when there is one. This Gospel was writ principally
to and for the Jews (some say in Hebrew) in it the Spirit of God uses much the
language and dialect of the old Testament, in which Kahal (and Ecclesia with
the 70.) do sometimes signify the company of Elders, A subordination of the
Jewish Synagogues and courts is acknowledged by Cot. Keys, p. 24.
as well as the body of the people; and a National Church with graduall
Judicatories and appeals, as well as a particular assembly. Now there is not a
Word in the Text to show either that Church is not here taken for the
Presbitary, but for the people (seeing when Christ says, Whatsoever ye shall
bind, etc. he speaks to the Disciples, v. 1. or Apostles, which are elsewhere
said to have the power of binding and loosing, Mat. 16.19. Jo. 20.23. and were
not ordinary believers but Elders, 1 Pet. 5.1.) or that it is meant only of a
parutilar congregation without graduall Judicatories or appeals, (a Notion not
agreeable to the Jewish Church here in the first place spoken of. I read that
the promise of binding and loosing is not given to a particular congregation,
when it is leavened with error and variance, Ecclesia litigans non ligat,
clavis errans non ligat, but then a Synod of Churches or of their messengers
may Judicially convince and condemn error, fearch out truth, determine,
declare, and impose the way of truth and peace upon the Church. Cot. Keys p.
47.


20. Mat. 16.19. Christ directs his speech not to Peter alone, but to all the
Disciples also: This seems to be taken out of the Answ. to 32. Q. p. 44.
for to them all was the Question propounded by Christ, v. 15. Nor to them as
General Officers of all-Churches, for that commission was not yet given them,
but as Disciples and Believers.

Peter was an Apostle in Office and Commission, Answ.
though not yet sent out into all the world, and an Elder, Mat. 10. 1, 2, etc.
and doubtless the key of Authority and Rule, when it was promised to Peter,
and given to him with the rest of the Apostles, John 20.23. is the same
authority which is given to their successors the Elders, See Cot. Keys p. 4.
and p. 10.
whereby they are called to feed and rule the Church of God, as the Apostles
had done before, Acts 20.28. If the Keys were not given to Peter as an Elder
or Apostle, but as a Believer, then it will follow; First, that the Keys are
not given to a congregationall Church, or any visible Church, or the Members,
thereof against whom the Gates of hell may prevail; but to true believers or
members of the Catholic Invisible Church, which only are built on the rock,
and the gates of Hell, etc. So that Hypocrites (as Judas) have not to do with
them: Secondly, that they are given to all believers, making Peter's confession,
whether in Church Covenant or no, whether Church Members or no, whether males
or females, for a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia: Thirdly, that Peter as
an Apostle, and Pastors as Pastors, have no more power of the Keys, given to
them hereby, then other ordinary Believers; a groundless and senseless
tenent, which makes Church Government merely Democraticall and popular.

21. 1 Cor. 5. Paul himself, though an extraordinary Officer, yet would not
take upon him to excommunicate the Incestuous person without the Church, but
sends to them, exhorting them to do it. See also Answ. to 32. Q. p. 49.
and reproves the brethren of the Church of Corinth, as well as the Elders,
that they did no sooner put him away. Cot. Keys p. 13. Answer.


He blames them all, women as well as men, that notwithstanding the notorious
fornication which was amongst them, were puffed up and gloried, and did not
rather mourn, that he might be put away, ver. 1.2.6. Paul himself did
excommunicate Alexander and Hymaencus, 1 Timothy 1.20. and it is not mentioned
that he took the consent of any Church or Presbytery in it. Cot. Keys p. 30.
. The Apostle says, (...). I have judged or decreed already, as if I were
present to deliver, etc. which imports rather that Paul himself would deliver
him to Satan, then that he exhorted them to do it: indeed he commands them to
put him away, as he writes to them to restore him again, to see whether they
would be obedient in all things, 2 Cor. 2.9. and he would have it done when
they were gathered together, that the people might behold, approve, and execute
what was decreed. Paul bids the Colossians to cause an Epistle to be read id
Laodicea, they (it is like) did it in obedience to Apostolic Authority; yet
it will not hence follow, that a Church has ordinarily the same power over
another Church: he bids them purge out the leaven, and put away from them that
wicked person, etc. which must not be understood as if Elders and people were
equally authorized thereunto, but Quilibet in suo gradu, every man in his
place, So Numb. 5.2. The children of Israel are commanded to put out of the
camp every Leper; yet the Elders did judicially make clean or unclean, Levit.
13.3. Deuteronomy. 17.13. yea sometime they alone did put the Leper (as Vzzials 2
Chro. 26.20.) from amongst them: The allusion to the Leaven is not to be too
far strained: for every woman or child in their private house, without the
consent of the Church might cast out Leaven, but yet they cannot excommunicate.
The Apostle, 1 Cor. 14 31. bids them all prophecy one by one, yet our Brethren
do not hold that all sanctified persons which in any place call upon the Name
of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.1, 2. were by this Precept bound to prophecy.
Also, in 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. he beseeches the Thessalonians to know them that are
over them, etc. which he speaks to the Believers, and not to the Elders. So
when he speaks of acts of governing power, it is to be understood of Elders,
and not of Believers.

22. The Lord Jesus, reproving the Angel of Pergamus for suffering Balaamites,
sends his Epistle not only to the Angel, This is alleged by Answ. to 32. Q
45. and 49.
but to the Church. The Spirit says not only to the Angels, but to the
Churches, Revel. 2.11. And the Church Members are seen by John in a Vision,
sitting on Thrones, clothed with white raiment having on their heads crowns of
gold, Revel. 4.14. Now thrones and crowns are ensigns of Authority and
governing power.

The Lord Jesus, reproving the Angel of Pergamus, Answer.
sends his Epistle (say you) not to the Angel, but to the Church: I add, Not
to the Church, but to Churches. As you gather, that the suffering of corrupt
persons and practice was the sin of the Church, and not of the Angel only: so
I may gather, that it was the sin not of one Church only, but the neighboring
Churches also: But this you deny. I read in Revel. 4. that four and twenty
Elders (distinguished from Believers, c. 7.8. 11.13.14.) not four and twenty
Saints or Members) were so clothed and crowned, by which I understand the
Officers of the Church, alluding to the four and twenty Orders of the Priests,
and the four Beasts represent the Christian Churches through the four quarters
of the world, alluding to the four Camps of Israel, bearing in their Standards
the same Beasts. Cot. Keys p. 16.
By your Exposition, the Elders, which (you say) are signified by the four
Beasts, are excluded from governing power; for they sit not on Thrones, nor
have Crowns on their heads. Their Crowns and Thrones are no more Ensigns of
Power and Authority, then their white Raiments of Priesthood: Cot. Keys, p. 16.
But they are not Priests by Office, they cannot do Pastoral acts, as Baptize,
etc. neither have they authority to govern. Every Christian man or woman,
Church Members or other, has a Crown, and sits on a Throne, viz. is
Spiritually a King and Priest to God, Revel. 5.10. Finally, governing power,
properly so called, you M. and T. to C.H. Cot. Keys, and G. and N. Epistle.
acknowledge none, but in the Elders alone, 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.8. Heb.
13.17. The peoples power is more fitly called Liberty and Privilege, too mean
a thing to be represented by Crowns and Thrones.

23. The particular Congregation takes Christ for her only Spiritual Prophet,
Priest and King, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts 7.37. Psalm. 110.4. Hebr. 5.4. Isai. 9.6, 7.
Revel. 15.3.

Seven or eight (you say) are the fewest that will make a Church; Answer.
but five or six, yea any one particular Saint, though out of Church Fellowship
by Excommunication, etc. may take Christ to be his only Spiritual Priest,
Prophet and King; yea a Presbyteriall, Classical, National Church may do it;
the Jewish Church did it, the Hebrews did it, Heb. 5.4. and 4.15. yea, the
Churches of the Gentiles, which at that time were not merely Congregationall,
did acknowledge Christ their King, Revel. 15.3. What Scripture witnesses that
a Congregationall Church, rather then a Presbyteriall Church, does acknowledge
Christ to be the only absolute King, Priest and Prophet? Do your selves
believe what you would have us believe, that Christ does exercise his Kingly,
Priestly, Prophetical Office only in Churches merely Congregationall? did
Christ offer up himself a Sacrifice for all the Members of a Congregationall
Church, and only for such? If you believe it not, why do you so clearly hint
it?

24. Christ has left but one Way of Discipline for all Churches, This is found
in Answ. to 32 q. p. 82, 83. and the like in R. M. and W. T. to C. H. p. 8.
which, in the essentials of it, is unchangeable, and to be kept till the
appearing of the Lord Christ, 1 Timothy 6.13, 14.

It seems by the words, Thou, O man of God, I give thee charge that thou keep
this Commandment, Answer.
( viz. which immediately precedes) concerning faith and holiness, in the
ministry of the Word, to be directed to Timothy himself: or if to his
successors, then it it must be to the ordinary Elders (for evangelists which
succeeded him we know none) not to the Churches; for example, not to the Church
of Ephesus, to whom Paul writes nothing of Government, though in his Epistles
to Timothy he writes almost of nothing else, and charge the Elders to take
heed to the Flock, and look to the Wolves, Act. 20.28. But if you will needs
have the words, this commandment, extended to this whole Epistle, yea to every
Precept and Example of Discipline in Gods Book, you had need of good warrant
for this exposition. That the essentials of Discipline set down in Scripture
are unchangeable, I grant: but whether any essentials be in controversy, or
how many, and which they are, you tell us not: I am sure those things that some
(possibly) do make essential, are not such; as, holy kiss, anointing with
Oil, washing of feet, etc. The differences between the Apostolic Churches and
ours are observable, because they justly occasion some alteration, at least in
externals, of Discipline or Worship.

As first, the Jewish ceremonies were then scarce dead, at least, not buried:
hence we are not bound to use unleavened bread at the Sacrament, to abstain
from things strangled and from blood, to circumcise, to purify our selves, and
to shave our heads, etc. Matthew. 26. Acts 15.20. and 16.3. and 21.21, 22, 23,
26. and 23.2, 5.

Secondly, the civil customs of these countries differ much from ours: Hence
we are not bound to lie or lean on a bed at the Sacrament, Joh. 13.23, 25. and
21.20. to wash one another feet, Joh. 13.5, 14, 15. Luke 7.38. 1 Timothy 5 10. to
kiss one another, Acts 20.37. Mark 14.4, 5. Romans 16.6. 1 Cor. 16.20. 1 Thessalonians.
5.26. or to make covering of the man's head a token of dishonor, 1 Cor.
11.11.4.5.7.10.

Thirdly, the Churches were then but in gathering from amongst Heathens and
Jews: Hence we want examples (to convince refractory Anabaptists or Socinians)
of the Baptizing of Christian Infants, or of any other, though of riper years,
that was born of Christian parents, and educated in a Christian way, and was
not in person a Jew or an Heathen.

Fourthly, the Church was then under Heathenish persecuting Magistrates: Hence
they had no houses built for, or appropriated to holy Worship, they met in the
night to pray, preach, and celebrate the Supper; Ministers had no settled
maintenance; no Laws did compel men to keep the Sabbaths, to frequent the
Assemblies, to submit to the Churches Discipline; Christians bare no civil
Offices; the Magistrate did not meddle with, nor protect, but persecute the
Church.

Fifthly, there was then an extraordinary effusion of the holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, Evangelists, and sundry of the Elders and people: Hence there was no
need of Universities nor Schools to teach Tongues and Arts, Acts 2. nor of
studying for Sermons, nor using set Prayers or Psalms; for by the Spirit they
then composed both, 1 Cor. 14. no looking on Bibles (Printing being not then in
use) when the Pastor read or preached; no writing Sermons, etc.

Sixthly, The Apostles had the care of all the Churches, and without difference
taught and baptized, and ordered matters in all Churches where they came, 1
Cor. 11.28. and 4.17. and 16.1. and 7.11. (to say nothing of the Evangelists
and Prophets) Now we may not, without presumptuous tempting of God, expect such
Officers, but must be contented with ordinary Elders, amongst whom so much of
their power as God intended to be perpetual, is divided.

Seventhly, there were then some extraordinary occasional Precepts and
Practices, which bind not in ordinary; as, selling all to give to the poor,
Matthew. 19.21. having all things common, Acts 2.44.45. and 4.32, 34, 35.
anointing the sick will Oil, James 5.14. which are Apishly imitated by the
Papists, if not by others.

Finally, do but publish a full Narrative of your Churchcourses and practices,
and especially of all which you count Essentials, and prove them by Scripture;
and I shall freely, by the grace of God, either consent with you, or show
reason of dissenting.

25. The Church, or the Ministers thereof, The like words are found, Answ. to
32 q. p. 11, 15. Answ to 9 Pos. p. 76, 77, 78.
must not be (...), 1 Pet. 4. and therefore the Minister must not perform a
Ministerial act to another Congregation. Acts 10.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.

The Text in Peter speaks not of the Church, or of Elders, more then any
other man; Answ.
nor of meddling with the affairs of other Churches, but, with other men's
matters, or rather (as the word implies) other men's riches or possessions,
whether Christians or Heathens, Church Members or no: and not every meddling
with them, but such a meddling as for which they suffered from the Heathens in
those days; Let no man suffer as a busie-bodie in other men's matters: and
therefore it is of no more strength against the power of a Presbytery over
particular Congregations, then against the power of Parliament over other
Courts of Judicature. The Inference supposes, that the Flocks mentioned in
those two Texts were two particular Congregations, which is impossible to be
proved. Peter bids the Elders of Pontus, Galatia, etc. to feed the flock of God
that is amongst them: therefore, say you, the Elders of one Church of Galatia,
must not feed the people of another Church of Galatia. A communicant must
examine himself; Will you thence infer that none else must examine him? The
Thessalonians were to know them that were over them, and labored amongst them,
and esteem them very highly, in love, for their works sake; therefore they must
not hear, or at least not esteem highly for their works sake, the Pastors of
other Congregations, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Taking heed to the Flock and feeding
it, does include Administration of the Word, and prayer, as well as of
Sacraments; yet you hold he may, notwithstanding this Text, preach and pray in
another Congregation. The relation of Ministers and people is mutual: If the
people may receive the Sacrament from one that is not their Minister, then the
Minister may administer it to them that are not of his Flock. By virtue of
Communion of Churches, you may (you say) and you do receive known approved
recommended members of another Church, to the holy Communion. If you may
receive one, why not two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, which, it may
be, are the whole Congregation? Where does the Scripture allow the one, and not
the other? You grant, that Elders have a calling to ordain Elders in other
Churches, whereof themselves are neither Elders nor members, by request of that
Church where the Elders are to be ordained R. M. and W.T. to C.H. p 48.
.

26. Gifted men not called unto the Ministry, This is but a little altered
from Answ. to 3^ q. p. 80. and 73. and T.W. to W.R. p 44. and 56.
nor intended for it, may preach. They that were scattered abroad upon the
persecution which arose about Steven, were not Church Officers, at least not
all of them, yet these men did preach the Word; -- and Philip, which was but a
Deacon, preached, without the calling or privity of the Apostles, Acts 11.19.
and 8.14.

This Text cannot be understood generally of all that were scattered: Answer.
your selves explain it of men, not of women, 1 Cor. 14. of gifted men, and
called to that work by the Church, and not of ungifted and uncalled men: yet
the words, in their indefinite latitude, will prove as well the preaching of
ungifted and uncalled men, as others. Questionless there were Elders amongst
them; it may be the seventy Disciples were not quite out of Commission:
certainly Philip was amongst them, who was an Evangelist (which Office began
upon that dispersion) as well as a Deacon, Acts 21.8. and did baptize (which
your selves confess unofficed men cannot do) as well as preach. They were all
filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 2.4, 10. and 4.31. And the hand of the Lord
was with them, Acts. 11.21. cum Ezekiel. 3.14.
which made them Doctors the first day, and gave them both ability and a call
to speak the Word (which the Apostles counted their principal work, and after
it, Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, 1 Cor. 1.17. Acts 6.4. Answ.
to 32 q. p. 71.
this therefore was an extraordinary Case: Yet that these did preach ordinarily
and usually to the Churches, like to Pastors, and received maintenance for the
same, as some do in London and elsewhere, is impossible to be proved.

27. Jehoshaphat sent Princes, who were neither Ministers, See Answ. to 32 q.
nor intended so to be, to teach with the Priests and Levites; to wit, at least
to encourage the people to hearken to the Priests and Levites, 2 Chronicles. 17.7,
8, 9 as Jehoshaphat did, 2 Chro. 20.20. yea, and was their mouth to God in
Prayer, verse 25. to 13. As we conceive something in that Prophesying, 1 Cor.
14. to be extraordinary: so we conceive it to be Ordinary, that some private
men, grown Christians of able gifts, who may have received a gift of Prophecy,
need no more extraordinary Calling for them to prophecy in the Churches, then
for Jehoshaphat and his Princes to prophecy in the Church of Israel.

In the Church of Israel, Answer.
none besides the Priests and Levites did ordinarily prophecy, either in the
Temple, or in the Synagogues, unless they were either furnished with
extraorpinary gifts of Prophecy, as the Prophets of Israel; or were set apart
and trained up to prepare for such a Calling, as the sons of the Prophets: Cot.
Keys, p. 20.
but Jehoshaphat and his Princes were neither Prophets, nor sons of the
Prophets. There is a vast difference between prophesying, and encouraging the
people to hear the Priests and Levites. Had Jehoshaphat a Warrant for what he
did, or no? if he had, was it ordinary, or extraordinary? If either he had no
Warrant, or an extraordinary one, he is not to be imitated: if an ordinary
Warrant, you may produce it; for all the Books of Scripture that were writ in
his time, are extant, and many more. Jehoshaphat knew well the difference
between matters of God, and the Kings matters, 2 Chronicles. 19.11. matters
concerning the King and Commonwealth: The Princes might (as Judges, Justices,
etc. now do) teach in the Cities. Do you indeed hold, that the King may not
only preach himself, but also appoint others to preach and teach, though the
Church do not call them? If so, tell us (I pray you) whether he may preach in
the whole Nation, or only in one particular Congregation. You tell us that the
Kings of Judah (being Types of Christ; and not only their people, but their
very Land being typical, etc.) might be invested by God With a larger power in
matters of Religion, then Kings and Magistrates under the Gospel, [may not I
add, or Subjects?] have any ground or warrant to claim from Two Brethren to
A.S. p. 54.
. Those in 1 Cor. 14. had not an ordinary, but an extraordinary gift of
Prophecy, and the gift of Tongues also; yea, they composed Songs and Psalms as
the Spirit did thereunto move, enable and authorize them; yet you hold not that
a man, having attained variety of Tongues, See Cot. Keys, p. 20. and M.
Goodwin and M. Nyes Epistle.
or a Poetical vein, might then, or now may in Churches exercise the gift of
Tongues, and sing self-composed Songs or Psalms; nor can you from hence show,
that it is lawful for unofficed men to preach in an ordinary course, and to
receive maintenance for the same.

Reader, other Witnesses are come in, and more may come in: while thou art
reading these, I shall hear them. Their testimonies (as Scouts shall bring
tidings) shall be concealed or published.

FINIS.

